"x"
"1" "How  accountable are digital platforms ?"
"2" "Giles Moss and Heather Ford"
"3" "This is a draft chapter. The final version will be available in   “A Research Agenda for Digital Politics”   edited by William  H.  Dutton, forthcoming 2020, Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd."
"4" "Abstract"
"5" "This chapter focuses on the accountability of platforms  – a  key question for researchers of digital politics. We set out a research agenda for answering the question of how platform power is held accountable that is both empirical and normative. Empirically, we emphasize the need to trace how accountability actually operates in practice. What accountability mechanisms exist, how are they used by publics, how do platforms respond, and with what effects? At the same time, we outline a normative agenda to investigate what genuine accountability requires and how existing accountability practices compare to this standard. Informed by deliberative approaches to democracy, and drawing in particular on Rainer  Forst’s  work on justification, we argue that the accountability of platforms is a question of their power being justified adequately to affected publics and that this depends on the quality of the discursive processes through which decisions about platforms are justified. Focusing on the quality of discursive processes allows us to distinguish critically between cases where publics merely accept platform power, unreflectively and in contexts of limited information and choice, to cases where power is justified through good reasons tested through inclusive public discourse. "
"6" "Recent debates about the digital have been preoccupied with the power of a s mall number of platforms and  their corporate owners —  Amazon, Apple, Facebook,   Google , and Microsoft . Concerns about the power of media organizations are   not new . T here are long-standing  debates about concen trated ownership in print media and  broadca stin g . S imilar concerns   did not emerge in  the case of digital platforms because o f an assumption that they were neutral  and  mere  facilitators  of different use s   (Gillespie 2010 ). As their  neutrality has been challenged, as the way platforms shape our actions and   relationships  has become clear , questions about their power and responsibilities have  followed ."
"7" "A key question for researchers of digital p olitics , we argue here, is   how  platform  power  is  held  accountable .  We set out a research agenda for answering this question that is  both  empirical  and  normative .  On the one hand, we need to trace how accountability operates. What accountability mechanisms exist, how are they used by publics, how do platforms respond, and with what effects? At the same time, we need to reflect on what platform accountability  mean s   normatively. What does  genuine accountability  require  and how do existing accountability practices compare to this standard?   Informed by deliberative  approaches   to  democracy ,   and  drawing   in particular  on  Rainer  Forst ’s  (2014a, 2014b , 2017 )   work on  justification , we  argue   that  the  accountability  of platforms is  a question of   their   power being   justified   adequately   to  affected publics   and  that  this  depends   on the   quality of   the  discursive processes  through which   decisions about platforms are  justified .   Importantly,  focusing on the  quality of  discursive  processes  allows  us  to disting uish critically between  cases where   publics merely accept   platform power , unreflectively  and  in contexts of limited  information and  choice,   to  cases   where power is  justifi ed through   ‘good ’   reasons   tested   through  inclusive  public discourse ( Forst  2017 : 37-54 )."
"8" "1.  Platform Power,  Accountability ,  and  Justification"
"9" "There has been shift towards the ‘ platformization  of the internet’ in recent years, as a small number of platforms  have come to  dominate internet use (Flew, Martin and Suzor 2018 , p.  43 ). The term ‘platform’ is fuzzy, covering meanings from  both  computing and economics. As Flew, Martin and Suzor (2018 , p.  36 ) explain, ‘the contemporary concept of a platform brings together definitions from information engineering, where platforms are modular software architecture and economics, where they function as the meeting place for double-sided  markets’ .  V an  Dijck ,  Poell , and de Waal (2018 , p.  4) provide a us eful definition :  ‘an online “platform” is a programmable digital architecture designed to organize interactions between users — not just end users but also corporate entities and public bodies ’ .  They  explain how platforms are ‘fuelled by  data,  automated and organized through  algorithms  and  interfaces,  formalized through  ownership  relations driven by  business models , and governed through  user agreements’  ( van  Dijck ,  Poell ,  &   de  Waal 2018 , p.  9) .  Various  online sites and services fall under this definition, but particular concerns have been expressed about  the  prominent platforms  owned by  companies  like  Amazon,  Apple,   Facebook, Google ,  and Microsoft ."
"10" "Economists explain why a small number of platforms  tend to  dominate internet use, despite the open and decentralized nature of th e  internet . Barwise and Watkins (201 8 ) outline four main reasons why digital markets  are  ‘winner-takes-all’: (1) economies of scale  ( resulting from   high production costs and low distribution costs in digital content); (2) direct and indirect network effects (the value of a platf orm increases with additional  users); (3) switching costs (users  face  significant   costs when   changing  platforms) and (4) big data (pl atforms collect  user  data  that  can be  analysed  for competitive advantage). These factors  combine to  benefit  established platforms , enabl ing them to maintain a dominant   position over   would-be  competitors.  Companies may also  bolster their positio n by acquiring emerging  platforms (e.g., Facebook ’s   acquisition of  Instagram in 2012  or   WhatsApp in 2014) ."
"11" "The  implications of economically-dominant  platforms go beyond the   economic. While platforms allow us to do a range of things conveniently, from staying in touch with others to purchasing new products, they are not  just  facilitators. Platforms shape our actions and relationships in particular ways (van  Dijck ,  Poell  &  de Waal, 2018 , p.  8 ) .  As such,  platform owners   may  exercise ‘power’ —  ‘ the capacity of A to motivate B to think or do something  that  B would not otherwise have thought or done’  ( Forst  2017 , p.  40).  Whether through human or automated means, p l atforms decide what  content we receive, determining what is  acceptable  and  unacceptable  and what is promoted  or   not   (Gillespie 2018). The  fine-grained  data  platforms  have   about  their  users  may be exploited to  ‘nudge’  user  decisions  in particular directions ,  for c ommercial reasons or even  to try and influence   election  outcomes   ( Tambini  2018,  Yeung 2017 ). Since platforms penetrate our   cultural, economic, and political  lives so deeply, the consequences of their power  are  far reaching."
"12" "More  research is required to   understand  platform power  in  all  its complexity – we e mphasize the need for  transparency to facil itate  such research  below. O ur focus  here  is  on   how this power is held accountable . Where power  exists , there is the   possibility  it may be mis used.  As Baker (200 7 , p.  16 )  explains,   ‘ Concentrated media ownership creates the possibility of an individual decision maker exercising enormous, unequal and hence undemocratic, largely unchecked, pot entially irresponsible power’ . He argues  that ,   ‘ Even if this power were seldom if ever exercised, the democratic safeguard value amounts to an assertion that no democracy should risk the danger ’ (Baker 2007 , p.  16) .  Understood   this way ,  the issue is   not  so much  ho w platform power is currently used  by platform owners , but  what mechanisms, if any,   affected  publics  can use  to hold platforms  to account if required ."
"13" "Evaluating  accountability is not  straightforward . On the one han d, the fact that  platform owners   may resist   particular public demands does  not   mean  accountability  is absent . B eing accountable  does   not  mean  that  platforms always change   decisions   when faced with  public pressure ,  especially  because public s   often disagree   about  what actions are  appropriate  for platforms to take . On the other hand,   the fact that the  public  may not resist  particular  decisions   does not mean   accountability  is present . Publics might lack  adequate  information about platform governance  or  meaningful opportunities to reflect on its   consequences .  Even  if  informed , they may  feel ‘powerless’ ( Andrej e v ic  2014)   or  ‘resigned’  to the  current  situation (Draper and  Turow  2019) , believing there is  ‘no alternative’   ( Dencik  2018) ."
"14" "A ccountability is closely tied to justification .  As Giddens (1984 , p  30) explains, ‘to be “accountable” for one’s activities is both to explicate the reasons for them and supply normative grounds whereby they can be “justified”’.  The  key  question then is how we can determine  whether  justifications are adequate.  Informed by deliberative   conceptions of  democracy  (Habermas 1997,  Mansbridge  et al 201 2 ) , and drawing   in particular  on  the theory of justification developed by  Forst   (2014 a, 2014b,  2017 ;  see Moss 2018 ),  we argue that adequate justification  depends on  the   quality of the  processes   of public discourse  through which  power  is  justified   to  the  publics  it may affect .  In this view , a platform may be accountable even if it resists specific   public  demands, if platform owners  provide  reason s for  their  decisions  in line with  shared   normative  values  and  those affected  having meaningful opportunities to reflect on,  revise , and reject these reasons  (Thompson 2017) .  At the same time, a platform may not be accountable even when i ts power is seemingly accepted  by  large numbers of users, if processes of justification are inadequate and those  affected have  limited  informati on, choice, and opportunity to reflect on the implications of platform governance.   After all, there is an important difference between power being merely ‘accepted’ by publics , unreflectively and  in contexts of limited information or choice, to justifications that are based on ‘good’ reasons tested through inclusive public discourse  ( Forst  2017: 37-54) ."
"15" "We set out a n  agenda  for researching platform accountability  below that is both empirical and normative. One task is to  trace  how accountability operates . W hat opportunities for accountability exist, how are they used by publics, how do platforms and other actors respond, and with what effects?  A second task is to consider what genuine accountability requires and to evaluate accountability practices against these standards. What is the quality of the discursive processes of justification between platforms and publics and what criteria can we use to assess these processes?"
"16" "2.  Analysing accountability practices"
"17" "There is an  established literature on the accountability of print  media and broadcasters , which provide s  a useful starting point for thinking about  platform  accountability  ( Bardoel  &  d'Haenens  2004,  McQuail  2005,  Eberwein   et al. 2011). Drawing on this literature and in particular  McQuail  (2005), we can identify four broad  accountability mechanism s  relevant to platforms : a) the market, b) self-regulation, c) the public sphere, and d)  political representati ves ."
"18" "Market"
"19" "As the idea of platform neutrality has been challenged, the claim that platform power is held accountable  through  the market  has  increasingly   taken its  place . Market accountability is  based  on the idea that   competition  between companies will  ensure  they  respond  to consumer demand.  Since dissatisfied consumers will find alternative  providers , c ompanies  only   succeed   if they ‘give  consumers what they want ’  and  so they must  work hard to satisfy  consumer preferences.  From this perspective, the  fact that  people decide to  use  p latforms  indicates that  they are getting what they want   and  that they   support   the way  platforms  are governed ."
"20" "Market accountability  require s  competition . W ithout it,  companies  need  not be   responsive to consumer  demand . As already noted, however,   t he ‘winner-takes-all’ nature of digital markets  tends to  weaken  competition. Indeed,  much of the current concern abou t platform power  stems from a belief  that  particular  platforms  have become too large  and  dominant  (Moore and  Tambini  2018) .  But the market is not the  only accountability mechanism  available to publics . In a well-known  analysis, Hirschman (1970) argues  that we can try to  influence  organizations   through ‘voice’  as well as ‘exit’ .  Voice  involve s  potentially  thicker  forms of communication, where publics raise concerns   either  directly to   platform s  through  the   self-regulatory  mechanisms   platforms adopt  or indirectly through the public sphere and  political representatives ."
"21" "Self-regulation"
"22" "The s elf-regulatory  practices pla tforms voluntarily adopt  offer  another accountability mechanism . As Crawford and Gillespie (2014 , p.  3) note, ‘social media platforms generally go well beyond what is  legally required, forging their own space of responsibility’. Platforms communicate information to users abo ut their governance and  offer mechanisms for users to g ive feedback and raise concerns.  In this way, the architectures of platforms generate their own system of regulatio n (Lessig 2006), situating  owners  and users  in ways that enable different levels of control."
"23" "Self-regulation mechanisms  range from simple reporting tools to participatory discussion spaces. Crawford and Gillespie (2014 , p.  413 )  discuss the limitations  of  the commonly used method of  flagging : 'flags are a thin form of communication, remarkable more for what they cannot express than what they can'. They contrast flagging with the  thicker communication facilitated by  Wikipedia disc ussion pages, where   ‘ the quality of content is openly debated and the decisions to keep or remove content on that basis are visible and preserved over time'  (Crawford and Gillespie 2014 , p.  421) . In principle, self-regulation has the advantage of being  a  flexible,  extensive , and participatory  form of accountability  ( McQuail  2005 , p.  99). However, the  commitment of platform s to effective  self-regulation may be  questioned.  Platforms owned by private  companies ,  answerable to advertisers and sh areholders as well as users,  may  use  self-regulation  to forestall   government  regulation, but not in a way that achieves genuine accountability (Freedman 2016)."
"24" "Public sphere"
"25" "The public  sphere is another  accountability mechanism ,   insofar as  platforms may be influenced by and need to  respond to  broader  public discourses  about platform governance   (Habermas 1997 , pp.  329-388). Journalists, experts, and various digital-rights groups scrutinize  platform s and, at times,  concerns about how platforms are  governed   have  escalate d   into wider public controversies . Such controversies are significant since t hey may indicate the failure of  other acco untability mechanisms  and  may  raise public awareness  of  particular  aspects of  platform governance ."
"26" "Anan n y  and Gillespie (2017) consider the role suc h public controversies  play.  As we ll as  requiring  platforms  to justify  decisions ,  controversies may  bring changes  in  platform governance. However,  Anan n y  and Gillespie (2017) question whether public controversies ,  which  tend to be  episodic  and focused on  a  specific problem with   a  particular platform ,   enable publics to  respond  meaningfully  to longer-term ,  more s ystemic  issues  posed by  platform power.  There is also the  critical  question of  whether  concerns  expressed in the public sphere a re  p icked up by political representatives  and address e d  through  effective  policy ."
"27" "d. Political  representatives"
"28" "The  final accountabili ty mechanism is provided by  political representatives .  P ublics  may  hold platforms to account   through  political representatives in   national governments or supranational organizations such as  the European Union .  The  global  nature of platforms pose s   governance problems . While platforms  may  be subject to the authority of governments in the territories in which they operate and  governments  may  intervene to shape platform governance,  the cap acity of  different  governments varies  significantly . Furthermore, policy interventions  might ha ve impacts beyond specific territories ,  which   mean s  that   international  dialogue s   in  spaces  like  the  United Nation’s  Internet Governance Forum , which  brings together  governments, the private sector, and civil-society groups, are  especially important."
"29" "T he re is a  range of  potential  policy  responses to platform  power . Policy  can  focus on   platform  content,  seeking , for example,   to  restrict  ‘bad’ content or   promote  ‘good’  con tent. Policy might focus  instead  on  platform  practices, by, for example,   ensuring that  certain standards of   privacy and  data  protection  are met .  Po licymakers may  achieve accountability through rules  overseen by   regulatory  authorities  or through what Bunting  (2018)   calls  ‘ procedural accountability ’,  where regulators assess   the  self-regulatory  processes platforms adopt .  Finally , p olicy might  focus on  platform  structures .   For example, l arge companies  could  be divided  and  mergers and acquisitions   prevented  to promote  market  competition . Most   ambitiously ,  Andrejevic  (2013)  suggests   governments could  support  alternative  non- commercial   platforms , such as public- service social network s  or search engine s ."
"30" "Of course, to   provide   effective  accountability, political representatives  must  be responsive  to public concerns  themselves . Within representative democracies, voting  provides  a fundamental  but minimal link between publics and elected representatives. But question s   still  emerge  in formally democratic contexts  about the extent to which  all perspectives are  represented  in media policymaking   (Freedman 2008 , pp.  80 - 104 ) .   B eyond i nfrequent elections,  we need to ask  the extent to which  publics have meaningful  opportuni ties  to engage with , reflect on,  and influence  policy outcomes ."
"31" "While the four mechanisms discussed above provide a  useful  starting point,  in-depth empirical  research is required to understand how  they operate . Firstly, research needs to   understand how these mechanisms  interact to provide   affected  public s  with   accountability  opportunities .  Such research would  be comparative.  The o pportunities  for accountability that exist  will   vary between  platforms ,  not only  between priv ate and  public or non-commercial and largely volunteer-driven platforms, such as Wikipedia, but also among private platforms.  We  should also expect differences  a cross  countries and that   the  opportunities available to publics  will not   be  distributed  evenly  in  different political contexts .  As well as mapping  accountability  opportunities , research  then  needs to examine how  these opportunities  are  taken up  by publics  in   specific   accountability  practices   in relation  to particular issues . Through case- study research , focused on   tracing  concrete practices ,  we can examine how   different groups  use the  opportunities  that are  available, how platforms and other actors respond ,  and with what effects ."
"32" "3. Evaluating   relations  of  justification"
"33" "Analysing how accountability  practices operate is one thing ;  determining  whether   genuine  accountability  results   from these practices  is  another.  E valuating   accountability is  not easy.  As  noted  above ,  the fact that a  platform  may resist particular   public demands  does  not   mean it is  un accountable .  Furthermore, a  lack of  public resistance to   their   decisions  does not mean  they are  accountable .  F rom a market-based perspective,  it might be argued that  the large numbers  of  people who choose to use  platforms   prove s  that platforms give  users  what they want   and that platform  power is  there fore  ‘justified’ .  However, we may question whether platform power is justified in these circumstances if users lack adequate information, meaningful choice and opportunity to reflect on the broader implications of this power."
"34" "As we noted above,  the acc ountability of platforms is a question of  their p ower being  justified  adequately to  affected  publics. Adequate justification   depends , in turn,  on  the   quality of the  process of public discourse   by which   reasons are given and those affected may reflect on, revise, and reject these reasons – put differently, it depends on the quality of ‘relations of justification’  ( Forst  2014 b : 1-14 ).  Informed by deliberative and participatory theories of democracy (Habermas, 1997,  Mansbridge  et al., 2010), and in particular the ‘democratic goods’ identified by Smith (2009) , we can identify four key criteria that can be used to evaluate the quality of relations of justification between platforms and affected publics:"
"35" "Inclusi on"
"36" "Accountability practices  must  be   inclu sive  so that   the  perspectives   of all  affected  are   represented .  Even if   platform  decisions   are  accepted by  the  majority ,  minority  groups may be affected disproportionately   and should have an opportunity to raise concerns .   For example ,  DeNardis  and Hackl (2016 , p.  763 ) discu ss the way platform governance   affects  LGTB  rights,  describing   the impact of  Facebook’s real- name policy  on  drag communities.  Platform  power  may  also  have consequences for non-users, as this is  the case, for example, with  concerns about   the   potential  impact  of some platforms  on  electoral  outcomes .  Affected publics may therefore  be wider  than  platform users.  Where  this is the case, non-users should  be able to raise concerns,  something which , of course, is  more possible through some accountability mechanisms than others."
"37" "Transparen cy"
"38" "Affected p ublics   need   clear and understandable  information about how  platforms  are governed ,  including technical processes. T hird parties  ( civil-society organizations,  governments,  journalists,  and researchers )  can  help to  promote  public unde rstanding , but their efforts  may  be hindered by  limited  access to relevant  platform data .   Where users lack relevant  information , the ir  seeming acceptance of platform power  may  be  questioned .  Yet the details of how platforms are governed   can   be  opaque  to interested   observers, let alone  other affected groups ."
"39" "c.  D eliberation"
"40" "Publics   require  meaningful  opportunities to reflect  on the consequences of platform power .  Platforms   should   justify their decisions  in  line with  important normative  values ,  such as  fundamental  rights .  As   Thompson  (2016 , p.  847 )  has  argue d ,  platforms  should  display  ‘ normative integrity –  a   commitment of trying assiduously enough to succeed in understanding and evaluating the facts brought before them, in coherence with the central normative commitments of the communities the y inhabit’.  Normative  values  are  not always reflected  by  the   market , which may   encourage the overproduction of  ‘negative externalities’ (e.g., hateful discourses) and  the  underproduction of   ‘ positive externalities ’  (e.g. , well-informed publics )  (Baker 200 2 : 41-62 ).  If provided  with opportunities  to reflect  deliberatively   on  normative values  and consequences ,  publics may   question   the  dominant  justifications of platforms ."
"41" "Accountability  through   ‘ v oice ’  is   important  here , b ut, a s  noted above, discourse  in the public sphere  can be   episodic  rather than sustained and systematic , while  political processes   may  fail to e ngage  and respond to  publics adequately .  Gillespie  (2018 , p.  210 ) urges  platforms themselves to   do more to  facilitate the voice of users as citizens . He writes that  'platforms should be developing structures for soliciting the opinions and judgement of users in the governance of groups, in the design of new features, in the mod eration of content' . He  suggests   platforms  should   be able  to glean ‘from users their civic commitments —  not what they like as consumers, but what they value as citizens'  (Gillespie 2018 , p.  210) ."
"42" "d.  Empowerment"
"43" "Publics need to be  empowered with  effective  choice , whether through the market,  platform  self-regulation ,  or  government  policy.  Andrejevic   (2014 , p. 1685 )  argues that user s   feel  ‘powerless’ in relation to digital sur veillance : ‘People are palpably aware that powerful commercial interests shape the terms of access that extract information from them: they must choose either to accept the terms on offer or to go without resources that in many ways are treated as utilities of increasing importance in their personal and professional lives’. Lik ewise,  Draper and  Turow  (2019) refer  to  people’s   ‘digita l resignation’.  In circumstances where users have  limited choice ,  the ir   seeming  accept ance of  platform power   may be questioned ."
"44" "Where competition  exists , users  may   exit and find alternative platforms  to use .  But, even in  a competitive market,  companies  will only respond to  what  users want a s consumers  rather than citizens . P ublics  may be   empowered  in other ways .  As we have stressed , platforms  need not  always shift  position in the face  of public  pressure, but  change s  in  platform  governance as a result of pub lic discourse should  be possible,  whether this is reflected in  the policies of particular  platforms, regulations governing  platforms,  or through  alternative public platforms.  The  range of  policy intervent ions available to governments can offer   meaningful  choice s  that  dispel the  disempowering sense  that   ‘ there is  no alternative ’  ( Dencik  2018 ) ."
"45" "The responsiveness of  political representatives  in  pick ing  up public concerns  and   resol v ing  them  effective ly  is crucial. As  noted earlier, questions remain about the extent to which  all perspective s  are represen ted adequately in  policymaking .  S ome of the gravest  concerns about platform power surface  here .  Tambini  (2018 , p.  282) invites us to imagine the following :  ‘ if a party or campaign emerged that was standing on a platform of breaking up social media companies, there would be a strong incentive for social media companies to undermine the visibility of that party. This example may, or may not be far-fetched, but parties already exist that propose radical, sometimes statist solutions that would be hostile to the economic model of the  platform  companies’ .  The possibility that  platform power  may  be used to  influence  the political process,  not only  through lobbying   but by shaping   public discourse , is especially concerning ."
"46" "The four  criteria  outlined  above   provide a   framework for evaluating platform accountability. As well as  analysing  accountability  practices, researchers need to  assess the  quality o f the   relations   of justification  they enact. Are they inclusive? Are they  based on  transparent  information? Do  they promote deliberati ve reflection ? Do they  empower affected  public s ?  We can  evaluate  specific  accountability practices  using  these criteria , identifying strengths as well as weaknesses.  Since different practices  may  realize  particular  principles  but not others , w e ca n  consider  how  practices might   work together  to enact  better relations of justificat ion overall , as systemic  approach es  to deliberative democracy  advocate   ( Mansbridge  et al. 2012) . Finally,  researchers may  anticipate  better  relations  of justification   in  their  own  resear ch. Deliberative  methods, such as  focus grou ps or  deliberative workshops,  can  carve out  space s  for  publics  to reflect on platform governance   in ways  that  existing  accountability practices  may  not allow ."
"47" "Conclusion"
"48" "Fuelled by regular public controversies, t he debate  about platform  power  looks set to continue.  Of course ,  r esearchers   will  have their own views   about  platform governance ,   but  they  cannot   have the final  word  in this debate .  Ultimately, a nswers to the question of how  plat forms  are  governed can only be  arrived at  democratically  through a public discourse  that  involves  all those  who may be   affected .   But  then  researchers can  point critically to   shortcomings  ( exclusions,  information  deficits ,   and   limited opportunities for  reflection and  choice )  in current public discourse . We can also reflect on   how  these  shortcomings  may  be addressed and  genuine accountability  achieved .  The current concern  about  pl atform power  in fact   betray s   a  deeper political  problem —  how   the  ‘justificatory power’ ( Forst  2014b)  of publics in relation to the governance of the digital  can  be enhanced .  We hope the research agenda we have outlined  here  might make a small contribution to   wider  efforts to address this problem ."
"49" "References"
"50" "Ananny , M  and Gillespie , T .  2017.  Public Platforms: Beyond the Cycle of Shocks and Exceptions.  Oxford Interne t Institute.  2017.  Available from   http://blogs.oii.ox.ac.uk/ipp-conference/sites/ipp/files/documents/anannyGillespie-publicPlatforms-oii-submittedSept8.pdf ."
"51" "Andrejevic , M .  2013.  Public Service Media Utilities: Rethinking Search Engines and Social Networking as Public Goods.  Media International Australia Incorporating Culture and Policy ,  146 (1) , pp. 123–132"
"52" "Andrejevic , M .  2014.  Big Data, Big Questions| the Big Data Divide.  International Journal of Communication  8 , pp. 1673–1689 ."
"53" "Baker, C. E.  2002.  Media, Markets, and Democracy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"54" "Baker, C. E.  2007.  Media Concentration and Democracy: Why Ownership Matters . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"55" "Bardoel , J.  and d  Haenens , L .  2004.  Media Responsibility and Accountability. New Con ceptualizations and Practices.  Communications.  29 ( 1 ), pp.  5–26."
"56" "Barwise, P and Watkins , L .  2018.  The Evolution of Digital Dominance: How and Why We Go to GAFA’.  In: Moore, M and  Tambini , T ( eds )   Digital Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple .  Oxford:  Oxford University Press , pp. 21–49 ."
"57" "Bunting, M .  2018.  From Editorial Obligation to Procedural Accountability: Policy Approaches to Online Content in the Era of Information Intermediaries.  Journal of Cyber Policy   3 ( 2 ), pp.  165–86 ."
"58" "Crawford, K.  and Gillespie , T .  2014.  What Is a Flag for? Social Media Reporting Tools and the Vocabulary of Complaint.  New Media & Society  18 , pp.  410–28."
"59" "DeNardis , L and Hackl , A. M. 2016.  Internet Control Points as LGBT Rights Mediation’.  Information, Communication & Society   1 9 ( 6 ) , pp.  753–70."
"60" "Dencik , L.  2018.  Surveillance Realism and the Politics of Imagination: Is There No Alternative?  Krisis : Journal for Contemporary Philosophy , 1 , pp. 31-43."
"61" "Dijck , J van,  Poell ,  T  and de Waal , M .  2018.   The Platform Society: Public Values in a Connective World .  Oxford:  Oxford University Press."
"62" "Draper, N .  A and  Turow .  J.  2019.  The Corporate Cultivation of Digital Resignation.  New Media & Society .   21 ( 8 ), pp.  1824–39."
"63" "Eberwein , T , S   Fengler , E   Lauk , and  Leppik -Bork , T.   2011.  Mapping Media Accountability-in Europe and Beyond . Herbe rt von  Halem  Verlag Köln."
"64" "Flew, T, F  Martin, an d  Suzor , N.  2019.  Internet Regulation as Media Policy: Rethinking the Question of Digital Communication Platform Governance.  Journal of Digital Media and Policy .  10 (1), pp.  33-50."
"65" "Freedman, D .  2008.  The Politics of Media Policy . Cambridge: Polity."
"66" "Freedman, D.  2016.  The Internet of rules: critical approaches to online regulation and governance . In : Curran, J., Fenton, N .  and Freedman, D .  (eds)   Misunderstanding the Internet . London: Routledge."
"67" "Forst , R .  2014a.   The Right to Justification: Elements of a Constructivist Theory of Justice . Columbia University Press."
"68" "Forst , R .  2014b.  Justification and Critique: Towards a Critical Theory of Politics .  Cambridge:  Polity ."
"69" "Forst , R .  2017.  Normativity and Power :   Analyzing  Social Orders of Justification . Oxford University Press."
"70" "Giddens, A .  1984.  The Constitution of Society: Outline of the Theory of Structuration . Cambridge: Polity."
"71" "Gillespie, T.  2010.  The Politics of “Platforms ” .  New, Media & Society   12 ( 3 ), pp.  347–64."
"72" "Gillespie, T .  2018.  Custodians of the Internet: Platforms, Content Moderation, and the Hidden Decisions That Shape Social Media . Yale University Press."
"73" "Habermas, J.  1997.  Between Facts and Norms: Contributions to a Discourse Theory of Law and Democracy . London: Polity Press."
"74" "Hirschman, A.  1970.  Exit, Voice, and Loyalty: Response to Decline in Firms, Organizations, and States . Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press."
"75" "Lessig, L.  2006.  Code 2.0 . New York: Basic Books ."
"76" "Mansbridge , J.  Bohman , J . , Chambers, S.,  Christiano , T. ,  Fung, A. ,  Parkinson, J. ,  Thompson, D ,  and Warren, M. 2012. A systemic approach to deliberative democracy. In :  Parkinson, J and  Mansbridge , J .  (eds)  Deliberative Systems.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"77" "McQuail , D.  2005 .   Media Accountability and the Freedom of Publication . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"78" "Moore, M and  Tambini , D . 2018.   Digital Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"79" "Moss, G.  2018.  Media, Capabilities, and Justification.  Media, Culture & Society   40 ( 1 ), pp.  94–109."
"80" "Smith, G. 2009 .   Democratic Innovations: Designing Institutions for Citizen Participation.  Cambridge: Cambridge University Press."
"81" "Tambini ,  D .  2018.  Social media power and election legitimacy.  In: Moore, M and D  Tambini  ( eds )  Digital Dominance: The Power of Google, Amazon, Facebook, and Apple . Oxford: Oxford University Press."
"82" "Thompson, M .  2016.  Beyond Gatekeeping: The Normative Responsibility of Internet Intermediaries.  Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment & Technology Law  18 ,  783."
"83" "Yeung, K .  2017. “ Hypernudge ”: Big Data as a Mode of Regulation by Design.  Information, Communication & Society   20 ( 1 ), pp.  118–36 ."
