Ethnic segregation and native out-migration in Copenhagen
Marcin Stonawski, Cracow University of Economics
Adrian Farner Rogne, University of Oslo
Henning Christiansen, Statistics Denmark
Henrik Bang, Statistics Denmark
Torkild Hovde Lyngstad*, University of Oslo
*Corresponding author: T.H.Lyngstad, Dept of Socoiology and Human Geography, University of
Oslo, 0317 OSLO Norway. E-mail: torkild.lyngstad@gmail.com.
Abstract
We study how the local concentration of ethnic minorities relates to natives’ likelihood of outmigration in the capital of Denmark. In US studies, a high or increasing proportion of racial or ethnic
minorities in inner city neighborhoods is seen as the prime motivation for ‘white flight;’ White
middle-class families moving towards racially and ethnically homogeneous suburbs. The relatively
egalitarian Scandinavian setting offers a contrasting case, where inner cities are less deprived, and
where minority groups primarily consist of immigrants and children of immigrants that have arrived
over the past few decades. Using rich, population-wide, longitudinal administrative data over a
twelve-year period, linked to exact coordinates on places of residence, we document how the
geographical distribution of minorities within Copenhagen relates to native out-migration. We
observe increasing out-migration among the native majority population from areas with high and
increasing minority concentrations, largely supporting the hypothesis of a ‘native flight’ mobility
pattern.
Keywords: mobility, segregation, diversity, neighborhoods, register data.
Acknowledgements: The authors acknowledge funding from the Research Council of Norway
grant #241357.
Conflicts of interests: None.

1 Introduction
In most diverse societies, residential segregation along racial or ethnic lines is a salient issue.
The composition of the local population and the relative concentration of minority and majority
groups has been hypothesized to affect individuals’ day-to-day interaction patterns (Moody
2001), risk of poverty (Massey et al. 1987), children’s school achievements (Jensen and Würtz
2011), and a host of other social and economic outcomes.
Residential segregation can emerge as a result of several different processes. One
contributing factor is when the residential choices of majority and minority groups are
motivated in part by preferences regarding neighbourhoods’ racial or ethnic composition. In
the United States, the hypothesis of ‘white flight’ has long been part of the discussion of
continued residential segregation by race. Coined to describe the suburbanization of white
families, a pattern of migration of relatively affluent whites from racially mixed inner cities to
racially homogeneous suburbs, which contributed to the emergence of inner city areas
consisting largely of marginalized African-Americans (Crowder 2000; Crowder and South
2008; Crodwer et al. 2009)
In this article, we study whether the local concentrations of ethnic minorities in the
Copenhagen metropolitan area affect

natives’ out-migration patterns from such

neighbourhoods. We draw on longitudinal geocoded coordinate data linked to large-scale
population-wide administrative register data on the complete population of the Copenhagen
metropolitan area. This allows us to use individuals’ places of residence to form individualized
scalable neighbourhoods to define social surroundings.
Denmark has a relatively short history of large-scale international migration, with
modern labour migrants arriving first in the 1960s. The immigrant population has grown
rapidly since then, and now includes large groups of migrants who are visibly and culturally
distinguishable from the majority population. Integration of ethnic minorities in Denmark has
been a topic of much research and public debate. While there is evidence of relatively weak
socioeconomic assimilation among the first generation of immigrants to Scandinavian
countries, and particularly among refugees and immigrants from non-OECD-countries (see e.g.
Husted et al. 2001; Longva and Raaum 2003; Galloway and Aaberge 2005), their descendants
seem to some extent have become an economic success story (Hermansen 2013). To the extent
that social ties to the native population mediated through neighbourhoods serves as a resource
for integration, patterns of native out-migration and increased residential segregation may
undermine further integration of minorities.

1

2 The Copenhagen context and its migrant population
The population size of the greater Copenhagen area increased from 1.21 to 1.33 million
inhabitants between 1980 and 2019. Over the same period, the share of immigrants and their
descendants increased from 6.3% to 22.9% of the population, with the share of descendants
increasing markedly sharper than the share of immigrants.
The composition of the immigrant origin population also changed significantly in the
period 1980-2019. Table 1 shows the population sizes of the 20 largest immigrant groups and
changes in these groups from 1980 to 2019. In Copenhagen in 1980, the share of the immigrant
population coming from Western countries (defined as the current European Union/EFTA
members, USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand) was around 60%, and approximately half
of these originated from neighbouring countries. In 2019 the percentage of residents from
Western immigrant origins was lower, and people from neighbouring Sweden, Germany and
Norway made up only 8% of the immigrant origin population. The diversity of the immigrant
origin population increased in the period: In 1980 the twenty biggest country of origin groups
made up 82.6% of the immigrant origin population, while in 2019 the corresponding share was
just 66.1%. The largest groups in the immigrant origin population of Copenhagen in 2019 were
from Turkey (31.3 thousand), Pakistan (21.6), Iraq (13.6), Poland (12.4) and Germany (9.5).
The current composition of the immigrant origin population in the Copenhagen area
was shaped by migration flows starting around the second half of the 1960s, when workers
from Turkey, Pakistan, former Yugoslavia and Morocco arrived by way of the so-called
workforce-immigration program. During the 1980s and 1990s, migration streams originated
from conflict regions (Iran, Iraq, Lebanon, Somalia and Bosnia and Herzegovina). The 2000s
were dominated by flows of asylum seekers from various origins and immigrants from Eastern
Europe, who, following the enlargement of the European Union, had access to the Danish
labour market. In 2019, people of Polish origin ranked the fourth largest immigrant group in
the city.
Housing policies and housing prices, migration inflows and labour market
developments have contributed to segregation processes and outcomes in Copenhagen. It is
worth noting that Denmark has historically led an extensive policy aimed at providing
affordable housing for all residents through means such as tax deductions for mortgage interests
and direct subsidies for rented housing, as well as rent regulation (Kristensen 2002).
Approximately half of Danish residential units are owner-occupied. The proportion of owner-

2

occupied units is far lower in the Copenhagen area, where approximately two in five and one
in five residences are owner occupied in the regions ‘Københavns omegn’ and ‘Byen
København’, respectively (Statistics Denmark n.a.). For many immigrants in the urban areas,
social housing and dwellings in disadvantaged neighbourhoods have been the most easily
available housing options (Kristensen 2002), resulting in political concerns over concentrations
of social problems in such areas (Ministry of Refugees, Immigration and Integration Affairs
2004). Following the 2001 election, the Ministry of Housing was closed down and its activities
were transferred to several other ministries, as the national government took a less active role
in housing policy.
The issue of of residential segregation is a major political factor in Denmark. Its
salience stems from its link to larger, integration-related issues. The country's immigration
policy have the last decade stood out as being markedly stricter than those of neighboring
countries. Denmark has also had a more intense public debate about immigration and
integration (Green-Pedersen and Krogstrup 2008).

3 Theoretical perspectives and research on segregation and flight
As mentioned, the concept ‘white flight’ was coined in the US, and is used to describe a process
whereby white middle class families move from the central cities to suburbs within US
metropolitan areas (e.g. South and Crowder 1997; Massey et al. 1994, Crowder and South
2008). The main assumption is that white households residing in mixed neighbourhoods tend
to move out of such neighbourhoods because of the high or increasing minority share of the
neighbourhood population. As predicted by the Schelling (1971) model, such a process may
be driven by Whites’ preferences for a certain proportion of own-group members in their
neighbourhood. This argument is supported by a comprehensive literature showing that owngroup preferences exist among both majority and minority populations, though several studies
find that some minority populations tend to prefer integrated neighbourhoods (Emerson et al.
2001; van Ham and Feijten 2008; Krysan et al. 2009; Clark 2002; Clark and Coulter 2015).
Further, studies building on, expanding and modifying the Schelling model have shown that
such preferences are capable of explaining persisting patterns of segregation through selective
moving behaviour (see for instance Fossett 2006; Clark and Fossett 2008; Aldén et al. 2015),
though the model has also received criticism (Bruch and Mare 2006). Other studies suggests
that stereotypes, prejudice and negative attitudes towards other races, ethnicities and

3

immigrants are the causes of out-migration (Farley et al. 1994; 1997; Krysan 2002; Wilson and
Taub 2006), rather than mundane preferences.
However, a number of factors unrelated to the racial or ethnic composition of
neighbourhoods may also produce similar patterns. For instance, immigrants may settle in areas
where the resident natives are generally more mobile (Crowder et al. 2011). According to the
socioeconomic context thesis, conditions of the neighbourhood are more important predictors
of out-migration than ethnicity (or race) per se. An increase in the concentration of minority
groups in an area may be associated with, or even generated by, a worsening of the
socioeconomic conditions in that area. For instance, deterioration of the quality of education,
poorer employment prospects, and an increase in crime may affect the neighbourhood
composition through several mechanisms (Rathelot and Safi 2014; Crowder et al. 2011; Betts
and Fairlie 2001), including shifts in housing prices allowing relatively poor minority groups
to settle. This transformation of neighbourhoods in turn may become a push factor for
migration decisions. However, as Goodwin‐White (2018) shows, the impact of a
neighbourhood may be conditional on the characteristics of movers and stayers; people who
may benefit from moving are more likely to do so, meaning that selection processes may be
important. In a similar vein, the racial proxy hypothesis suggests that an influx of minorities in
a neighbourhood is a signal of socioeconomic deprivation, and that this is what motivates the
moving behaviour of the majority population (Clark and Coulter 2015). The housing
competition model, on the other hand, suggests that an influx of minorities can increase prices
and increase the cost of renting which can stimulate socioeconomically lower situated majority
group members to leave the neighbourhood (Crowder et al. 2011; Ley and Tutchener 2001). A
different argument is provided by the labour market competition hypothesis, which suggests
that an influx and an increasing concentration of minorities, particularly migrants, increases
competition in the local labour market. A potential response to this pressure is for the
population groups already in place to migrate out of the area (Borjas 2006; Frey 1995; 1996;
Filer 1992). Moreover, micro-level characteristics (individual and household) are important
intervening factors in the relationship between out-migration and the local concentration of
minorities. For example, there may be differences in the probabilities of out-migration by age,
sex, marital status, number of children, and household income (Crowder 2000; Sabater and
Finney 2014). Additionally, the notion that high ethnic minority concentrations are somehow
problematic, or are perceived as problematic by movers, should be accompanied by an
important caveat; ethnic segregation may in some instances yield benefits to newly arrived
immigrants. Ethnic enclaves may provide social networks, support and employment
4

opportunities, as well as a sense of cultural and lingual community for ethnic minorities
(Wilson and Portes, 1980; French 2014; Edin et al. 2003; Musterd and van Gent 2012).
Regardless of the exact mechanism producing these moving patterns, several studies
have shown robust patterns of white or native flight even after control for numerous relevant
individual- and neighbourhood-level characteristics (see for instance Crowder et al. 2011;
Crowder et al. 2012; Bolt et al. 2008; Andersen 2017).
The bulk of the literature on white or native flight stems from the United States. US
studies usually distinguish between different races, such as Blacks, Whites and Hispanics, and
studies show that the phenomenon of ‘flight’ is not solely related to the Caucasian population.
Similar patterns can be observed among African-American inhabitants in the US (Crowder et
al. 2012, Pais et al. 2009, Woldoff 2011, South and Crowder 1998). For example, Crowder et
al. (2012) indicate that the probability of out-migration is significantly associated with racial
composition of the origin neighbourhood, both for whites and blacks, controlling for other
socioeconomic characteristics of the individual and the neighbourhood. Pais et al. (2009)
document a type of out-migration that they call ‘minority flight’ in cases where the probability
of out-migration increases for minorities (e.g. Latinos) in white dominated neighbourhoods
because of, for example, real or perceived discrimination. Several studies show that the flight
thesis can be extended beyond racial segregation and be applied to the mobility of the native
and immigrant origin population in the US. For instance, Crowder et al. (2011) observe
intensified out-migration among natives (Whites and Blacks) when the share of immigrants
increases in a neighbourhood. Similarly, studying migration patterns related to the labour
market, Borjas (2006) finds that native out-migration increases with immigration-induced
increases in the supply of labour. Hall and Crowder (2014) add that the association between
the out-migration of natives (Whites and Blacks) and the concentration of immigrants is
significantly more pronounced in developing gateways of migration than in developed ones.
Above and beyond the current composition of neighbourhoods, Bråmå (2006) suggests
that the rate of the change in composition may be important for out-migration. Moreover,
Crowder et al. (2011) suggest that immigrant concentration in the surrounding areas likely also
has an effect on out-migration, by constraining the opportunities of finding nearby
neighbourhoods with more ethnically homogeneous populations.

3.1 Out-migration, flight and avoidance in Europe
Concerns over the integration of immigrants from non-Western countries and their
concentration in relatively disadvantaged urban areas has generated increasing interest in
5

residential segregation among social scientists in Europe. However, in European settings, and
particularly in the Nordic countries, the notion of ‘white flight’ as discussed in the American
literature may be less relevant. Segregation is here often conceptualized as the separation of
the native or ethnic majority population from immigrant or other ethnic minority populations,
rather than the separation of different racial groups. The relatively short history of large-scale
immigration makes the comparison with the US difficult, given the long US history of racial
oppression and discrimination, particularly of the African American population. Another
important difference is the existence of more extensive welfare states, which may attenuate
socioeconomic neighbourhood deprivation. Notably, inner cities are generally less deprived in
European countries than in the US, and even less so in Scandinavia. Despite these differences,
however, it is reasonable to assume that some of the mechanisms that produce white flight in
the American context may work similarly to produce a native flight in Denmark and other
European contexts. Particularly, one might expect the dynamics of in-group/out-group
preferences to translate into preferences for native/minority compositions of neighbourhoods,
producing patterns of native flight from neighbourhoods with high and growing proportions of
minorities. However, studies of white flight or native flight in European contexts have so far
shown mixed results.
Based on a study of four big cities in Netherlands, Bolt et al. (2008) provide evidence
that Dutch and Western immigrants have a higher probability than non-Western migrants to
move out of neighbourhoods with high concentrations of immigrants. The natives also tend to
migrate to areas with lower proportions of minorities. Van Ham and Feijten (2008) also show
that, with increases in the immigrant population, Dutch natives tend to more strongly wish to
leave their neighbourhoods. A similar study by Clark and Coulter (2015) found neighbourhood
deprivation, changes in the neighbourhood ethnic composition, and changes in housing tenure
distribution to be associated with preferences for moving, and that feeling similar to others and
the feeling of belonging in a neighbourhood was associated with a lower desire to move.
However, they found individual characteristics to matter more than neighbourhood
characteristics. In France, Rathelot and Safi (2014) showed that the probability of outmigration from Parisian neighbourhoods with a high share of immigrants is higher for natives.
However, this effect becomes small and insignificant once all fixed characteristics of the
geographic area are introduced into the regression models. Similarly, Simpson and Finney
(2009), using census data, did not find evidence of a native flight pattern in Britain. They
suggest that out-migration can be explained by aspirations to improve living conditions that
are shared by all ethnic groups. Bråmå (2006, 2008) provides evidence to reject the hypothesis
6

that the “flight” of Swedes caused further ethnic segregation and immigrant concentration in
Swedish cites, and argues that the main cause of increasing segregation is avoidance-like
behaviour of natives, i.e. natives avoid moving into areas with high proportions of minorities,
rather than move out of them. Andersson (2013) confirmed that Stockholm residents tend to
avoid multi-ethnic neighbourhoods, but found no evidence for the ‘white flight’ hypothesis.
There is evidence for native out-migration as a response to high concentrations of minorities
in urban areas of Sweden (Aldén et al. 2015), Norway (Wessel and Nordvik 2019), and France
(McAvay 2018).
In an anthology edited by Lloyd, Shuttleworth and Wong (2014), several authors shed
some additional light on residential mobility processes and how these may contribute to
residential segregation. For instance, Shuttleworth et al. (2014) show that among Protestants
and Catholics in Northern Ireland, selective moves corresponded with patterns of out-migration
and flight from neighbourhoods with high shares of out-group members. However, this did not
translate into increasing segregation, because, in addition to the effects of births and deaths,
most moves were short distances between similar neighbourhoods, and relatively few lived in
neighbourhoods dominated by their out-group. Van Ham and Manley (2014) show that social
housing market policies in England affect residential sorting between minority and majority
groups in a manner consistent with the notion of selective moves, leading minority groups to
move into deprived neighbourhoods. In a related vein, but returning to the US context, Hwang
(2014) shows how the housing market in St Louis and Cincinnati contributes to racial
segregation.
In the case of Denmark, the literature focusing on flight is scant. Ethnic minorities in
Denmark often live in less attractive areas with more social problems. The city of Copenhagen
is experiencing an increase in spatial segregation in housing and education (Møller and Larsen
2015). Moreover, in the period 2000-2008 non-Western immigrants in Copenhagen did not
improve their neighbourhood status, whereas the native group did, according to a study of
spatial integration of immigrants in Nordic cities (Wessel et al. 2016). Andersen (2017)
presents a study of residential mobility in Denmark in 1985-2008 using data on non-Western
immigrants aged 15 or older and a sample of Danes from administrative registers. Based on
information on 9.000 neighbourhoods (approximately 600 inhabitants each), he used a logistic
regression model of out-migration with control characteristics (individual, household and
neighbourhood). The study provides some evidence of native flight in Denmark, as the
probability of out-migration increases with the share of immigrants. But native avoidance
seems more important than native flight in producing spatial segregation patterns.
7

3.2 Our contribution, hypotheses, and expectations
This article contributes to the literature in several ways. First, we offer a longitudinal view of
native out-migration, where we relate neighbourhood characteristics and changes in
neighbourhood characteristics to the likelihood of an individual’s out-migration. We use
individualized scalable neighbourhoods based on high-quality register data with detailed
geographical coordinates on all residents of the Copenhagen metropolitan area. This allows us
to circumvent the problem of aggregation, an important part of the modifiable areal unit
problem (MAUP, see Nielsen and Hennerdal 2017). Second, we address several different
aspects of the dynamics of residential segregation, including the importance of the extralocal
neighbourhood composition and majority/minority group differences in moving patterns. Third,
we study not only out-migration for the whole population, but also analyse whether the
sensitivity to the local neighbourhood composition and changes in this composition is different
for individuals with and without own children, assess the robustness of our estimates to
different specifications of the minority group, and provide a discussion of the distinction
between out-migration and flight.
Based on the brief overview of the literature reviewed above, we set out several
hypotheses on how native out-migration choices are associated with the ethnic composition
and changes in the ethnic composition of the neighbourhood. First, we set out to test the native
out-migration hypothesis:

1) The likelihood of native out-migration is higher when the share of minorities is
higher, and it increases when the share of minorities increases.

Second, we also posit what we call the stronger native out-migration hypothesis,
emphasizing that the native out-migration phenomenon is not exclusively about neighbourhood
characteristics, and that the importance of the proportion of minorities in the neighbourhood
should depend heavily on whether or not oneself is a member of a minority group:

2) The probability of moving out of neighbourhoods with high concentrations of
minorities is markedly higher among natives than among descendants of immigrants.

We also want to examine the hypothesis that the concentration of minorities in the
extralocal area, the larger area beyond the immediate neighbourhood, is negatively associated
8

with out-migration decisions in the native population. According to Crowder et al. (2011) an
increase in the extralocal concentration of minorities, may lead to a reduction in the probability
of moving out for the majority group. The reason for this is that for structural reasons (e.g.
commuting patterns and family ties) most migrations take place over rather short distances,
and an increase in the concentration of minorities in the extralocal area limits the migration
options for individuals whose tolerance for minority groups is low. Thus, our third hypothesis,
the extralocal opportunities hypothesis states:

3) A higher concentration of minorities in the extralocal area is negatively associated
with native out-migration.

Finally, we also study whether having children moderates individuals' sensitivity to
local conditions. Our fourth hypothesis is thus:

4) The response to the concentration of minorities and changes in the concentration of
minorities is weaker among childless natives than among native parents.
Having own children likely increases one’s response to local conditions that otherwise would
not be given much weight, such as children’s school environments and environments for
language learning. Such factors could increase the sensitivity to the local population
composition for those with children, but likely not among the childless.

4 Data and Methods
For our empirical analysis, we use data from the administrative population registers of
Denmark, administered by Statistics Denmark. Our data consist of individual and
neighbourhood characteristics for the urban area of Copenhagen in 2007, 2011 and 2014. In
addition, we use data from 2003 to calculate changes in neighbourhood characteristics in the
period from 2003 to 2007. The urban agglomeration area in and around Copenhagen is defined
as two NUTS-3 areas: ‘Byen København’ and ‘Københavns omegn’ which in total consist of
17 municipalities: København, Frederiksberg, Dragør, Tårnby, Albertslund, Ballerup, Brøndby,
Gentofte, Gladsaxe, Glostrup, Herlev, Hvidovre, Høje-Taastrup, Ishøj, Lyngby-Taarbæk,
Rødovre and Vallensbæk. In 2014, this area had 1.26 million inhabitants and has grown by
9

around 106 thousand since 2007. Our data include all individuals who were registered as
resident in these areas in any of these calendar years. Our data include individual-level
characteristics for all these individuals (cf. section 4.2), which importantly include the
geographical coordinates of the individual’s place of residence. The individual-level data were
then complemented with characteristics of each individual’s neighbourhood.

4.1 Defining the Neighbourhood: the individualized approach
A key challenge to all research on neighbourhoods and aspects of their composition is how to
define the size of the neighbourhood (Damm and Schultz-Nielsen 2008). Most of the research
on segregation and mobility patterns use some kind of prior definition of neighbourhoods,
usually city districts or census tracts which typically are defined by historical borders, by roads
or natural obstacles (such as rivers dividing cities), or for other practical, administrative or
political purposes. Such neighbourhood definitions mean that the borders may be somewhat
arbitrarily defined, however, and they may be at odds with the actual, spatial patterns of social
interactions. Local neighbourhoods do not necessarily stop at administrative borders, and
segregation patterns may not follow the structure of the administrative units.
Individualized scalable neighbourhoods, on the other hand, are neighbourhoods defined
by the individual’s location, where each individual’s neighbourhood is defined as their k
nearest neighbours (Östh, Malmberg, and Andersson 2014; Östh, Clark, and Malmberg 2015).
The basic premise of the individualized approach is to calculate statistics over these k
individuals (or households). Thus, in this approach, the neighbourhood is defined around
individuals rather than being based on the borders of the administrative unit the individual
resides in. Our data on place of residence measure location down to a 100x100m grid. This
access to detailed geographical coordinates of residency for all individuals in the population
thus makes it possible to measure neighbourhood characteristics in a much more flexible way
than most previous studies. In our calculations of neighbourhood characteristics, we used the
specialized software EquiPop, developed by population geographer John Östh (2013).

4.2 Analysis variables
This main dependent variable is an indicator of whether an individual changed a place of living
during a calendar year. We measure this change by comparing grid cells where an individual
lived at the beginning (January 1st) and at the end of year t (December 31st). If the codes of
the two grid cells are different, we denote this situation as an ‘out-migration’ event. In a
separate analysis, described below, we also use an alternative definition, where a move is
10

counted only when the destination has a lower concentration of minorities than the origin.
Individuals that died or emigrated during a year, or have missing addresses, are excluded from
the analysis.
Mobility and segregation patterns are highly structured along demographic and
socioeconomic dimensions. Minority populations may for example be younger and more maledominated than majority populations. To avoid confusing effects of the environment with
effects of individual characteristics, we include six individual-level control variables in order
to improve comparability of individuals living in different neighbourhoods: Age is represented
by a set of dummy variables indicating three broad age groups; 25-44, 45-64 and 65 or more
years, sex as a dummy variable showing if a person is a male, marital status which indicates if
an individual does not live in a registered form of partnership, and number of children defined
as a categorical variable with levels Childless, 1-2 or 3+ children. Educational attainment is
defined as a categorical variable with levels primary or lower secondary (low), higher
secondary (medium) or tertiary level (high) education. The variable “Labour market” is a
dummy variable indicating whether the person is currently in the labour force or not. Finally,
we also include dummy variables for year to capture any secular trends in mobility.
A particular interest is to explore variation in moving patterns between people with
different origins. We construct a variable indicating any immigrant origin using information
on the individual’s country of birth and one’s own and parents’ immigration status (native,
immigrant, and descendant). Importantly, according to the definition by Statistics Denmark,
‘descendants’ are only those where neither parent had a Danish citizenship before the birth of
the child. If at least one of the parents was naturalized before the birth of the child, then the
child is treated as a native Dane. Thus, descendants are presumably individuals whose parents
were relatively less integrated in Danish society than naturalized immigrants were.
In this article, we primarily wish to investigate whether native Danes move out of
neighbourhoods with high concentrations of minorities. But defining the minority group based
on register data is not trivial and involves some difficult choices. We do not know which
characteristics of minorities are most salient, and have limited data on potentially relevant traits.
On the one hand, visual or phenotypical traits such as skin colour may be important, as
individuals with visible traits distinguishing them from the majority population may be subject
to prejudice, discrimination, racialization, avoidance etc. from the majority population. On the
other hand, recent media debates and evident prejudice and hostility towards Muslims suggest
that Muslim minorities may be particularly subject to negative stereotypes. Additionally,
research on ethnic segregation in Europe commonly focuses on divisions between people from
11

Western and non-Western origins (however defined), in part due to some notion of cultural
proximity, and in part due to the different reasons for migration that have historically been
important for different country of origin groups. Notably, refugees, asylum seekers and their
families mostly originate from non-Western countries, while immigrants from Western
countries more commonly arrive as labour migrants, particularly after the EU expansion in
2004, or as students. Other options include grouping all immigrants and descendants, regardless
of country of origin, or distinguishing between European and non-European backgrounds.
Danish register data contain information on immigration background and country of origin, but
not on other potentially salient traits such as skin colour, ‘race’, religious affiliation etc. Thus,
groupings based on such characteristics have to be proxied by country of origin, though we
acknowledge that this approach is far from ideal. In this article, we use three different groupings,
based on the notion of ‘visible minorities’, ‘non-Western’ country of origin, and
‘predominantly Muslim’ country of origin.
For the ‘visible minority’ grouping, we categorize individuals as belonging to the
minority group if they originate (i.e. are immigrants or descendants of immigrants) from
countries outside of Europe (excl. Turkey), North America and Oceania, as these groups are
likely to have phenotypical traits that distinguish them from the majority population in
Denmark. In the second grouping, by ‘Western’ versus ‘non-Western’ origin, we use a similar
grouping, but also include individuals from non-EU/EFTA countries in Europe, and Oceania
except Australia and New Zealand in the minority group. In the third grouping, we distinguish
based on the majority religion of the country of origin, defining the minority group as
immigrants and descendants of immigrants from a ‘predominantly Muslim’ country. We define
predominantly Muslim countries as countries where at least 80% of the population identify as
Muslims (in total 37 countries), according to the religious composition estimates of Pew
Research Center (2012). These groupings are used to construct the neighbourhood level
characteristics used.
To some extent, the choice of grouping is arbitrary, and we have no strong assumptions
about what groups or traits are most salient. We have opted to use the grouping based on the
‘visible minority’ concept in our main analysis, but present the main results from analyses
where we distinguish minorities from predominantly Muslim countries of origin and from nonWestern countries in the supplementary materials (S6.1).
We measure both the local concentration of minorities (immigrants and descendants of
immigrants in the minority group), change in the local concentration of minorities, and,
following Crowder et al. (2011), the concentration of minorities in the extralocal
12

neighbourhood. The local concentration of minorities is measured as the share of minority
individuals in the focal individual’s egocentric neighbourhood consisting of k = 800
individuals. The change in the local concentration of minorities is measured as the change in
this concentration between years under consideration (2007 vs. 2003, 2011 vs. 2007, 2014 vs.
2011). The concentration of minorities in the extralocal neighbourhood is measured as the
share of minorities among the 51200 nearest neighbours. We also tap into socioeconomic
characteristics of the neighbourhoods by including the neighbourhood’s educational level,
measured by share of individuals aged 25-64 that have completed tertiary education, and
neighbourhood affluence, measured as the share of people aged 25-64 who have a level of
taxable income in the highest decile of the national income distribution. Descriptive statistics
are listed in in Tables 1 and 2.

4.3 Model specifications
We estimate several logistic regression models for the individual decision to leave one’s
neighbourhood during a year. The right-hand-side of Model 1 include the concentration of
minorities, change in this concentration from the previous period, as well as a control for the
concentration of minorities in the extralocal area. Then, we add controls for other
characteristics of the neighbourhood (Model 2). Finally, we include individual-level controls
(Model 3). This set of models is estimated on the full population of natives and descendants,
and then separately for natives and descendants. In all models, we correct for the nonindependence of observations using a clustering procedure to calculate robust standard errors.
We also include supplementary analyses (S6.1 and S4.1-S4.3) where we explore to
what extent our results are dependent on the definition of the minority group, and assess
patterns of ‘flight’ (defined as moves to neighbourhoods with lower minority concentrations)
as opposed to ‘out-migration’ (moves to any other neighbourhood).

5. Results

5.1 The link between ethnic composition and out-mobility
Table 4 reports the results from our set of models estimated on the full population; natives and
descendants of immigrants. The findings suggest that the likelihood of moving out of a
neighbourhood is higher if the share of minorities in the neighbourhood is high. A one standard
13

deviation higher share of minorities is associated with approximately a 9% increase in the odds
of out-migration (sd=0.10, b=0.912) when controlling for individual and neighbourhood
characteristics (Model 3). It is also clear that a an increase over time in the share of minorities
in the neighbourhood population is also positively associated with out-migration when other
characteristics are controlled for (including the level of the minority concentration). An
increase in the proportion of minorities of one standard deviation is associated with an
approximately 3% higher odds of out-migration. The concentration of minorities in the
extralocal area is negatively and statistically significantly associated with out-migration. This
association is, however, somewhat weaker than the association with the proportion of
minorities in the local neighbourhood (k=800). Thus, net of the diversity of one’s larger city
district, the diversity of one’s neighbourhood seems to matter for migration decisions.
As mentioned above, it is reasonable to assume that the socioeconomic profile of a
neighbourhood may confound the relationship between minority representation and outmigration. We have therefore controlled for two indicators of the socioeconomic status of those
in the neighbourhood: the share of highly educated individuals and the share of high-income
individuals. These socioeconomic characteristics of neighbourhoods seem to have a strong
relationship with the likelihood of leaving the neighbourhood. A one standard deviation (17
percentage points) higher share of people with tertiary education is associated with a 26%
higher odds of out-migration, whereas a standard deviation higher share of high-income
individuals in the neighbourhood is associated with a decrease in the odds of out-migration of
close to 30%. We are unsure about how to explain the somewhat puzzling result with regard to
the neighbourhood educational level. However, we may tentatively suggest that the relatively
high out-migration from highly educated neighbourhoods reflects that such neighbourhoods
may attract more mobile people, or that it captures out-migration from relatively young
neighbourhoods (including areas with a high density of students) that people leave when they
are about to establish a family.
In sum, members of the population of Danish-born individuals (natives and descendants
of immigrants) tend to move out of neighborhoods that have high proportions of minorities.
Their odds of doing so are even higher if the share of minorities has increased over the last few
years. If the population of the larger extralocal area is more diverse, the likelihood of outmigration is a little bit lower.
In a second step, we split up this population of individuals born in Denmark into two
segments: those who have no immigrant background or naturalized parents (denoted natives),
and those who are descendants of non-naturalized immigrants (denoted descendants). The
14

separate analysis of out-migration among natives and descendants reveals that the phenomenon
of out-migration related to minority concentration is only observed among the native
population. The coefficients in the models for the native population are similar in size to those
from the models for the total population. In our sample of descendants, the coefficients for the
proportion of minorities are smaller and non-significant, while the coefficients for change in
the proportion of minorities are negative and non-significant.
In sum, members of the population of Danish-born individuals (natives and descendants
of immigrants) tend to move out of neighbourhoods that have high proportions of minorities.
Their odds of doing so are even higher if the share of minorities has increased over the last few
years. If the population of the larger extralocal area (k=51200) is more diverse, the likelihood
of out-migration is a little bit lower. Our analysis also supports the hypothesis that outmigration from neighbourhoods with high and increasing shares of minorities is higher among
natives than among descendants. In our sample of descendants, the coefficient for the
proportion of minorities is smaller and non-significant, while the coefficient for change in the
proportion of visible minorities is negative and non-significant. Only various individual and
local control variables (cf supplementary materials S3.1-3.3) are statistically significantly
associated with a descendant’s likelihood of out-migration.

5.2 The importance of parenthood
Our fourth hypothesis stated that the response to changes in the local concentration of
minorities is weaker among childless natives than among native parents. Wessel and Nordvik
(2019) suggested that parents may be more sensitive to the local concentration of minorities
than non-parents, for instance because of concerns over potential adverse effects of their
children attending schools or residing in neighbourhoods with high minority concentrations.
In order to assess this plausible interaction, we have run an analysis using native
individuals aged 25-45, who represent those who are most likely to be living with children of
school age. This subsample was divided into two groups; parents and non-parents. We have
then estimated our main model specifications on these subsamples. The main results from these
estimations are given in Table 5.
The results from our estimations largely confirm that parents do appear to be more
sensitive to the population composition of their neighbourhoods, and to changes in this
composition, than non-parents. Consider our largest model specification (Model 3) and the
coefficients for the local concentration of minorities and the change in this concentration. For
childless individuals the coefficient for the level of concentration is about one-third of the
15

corresponding coefficient for individuals who are parents (0.502 vs. 1.555), and the difference
is statistically significant. The higher sensitivity of parents becomes even clearer when we
compare the corresponding coefficients for the change in concentration of minorities. The
coefficient for childless individuals is near zero and non-significant, while the coefficient for
parents is positive (B = 1.005) and statistically significant.
These results thus support Wessel and Nordvik’s (2019) suggestion that individuals
with young children have a higher sensitivity to characteristics of the local environment and
changes in such characteristics. We do not know exactly what produces these associations,
however, and there are some important possible explanations, even when we have controlled
for some aspects of the SES composition of the neighbourhood. For example, the possibility
remains that characteristics of housing stock is correlated with the concentration of minorities.
Neighbourhoods with high minority concentrations are often characterized by a high density
of apartment buildings. Individuals with children living in such areas most likely also have a
higher and perhaps even increasing housing demand, and may be forced to look elsewhere to
be able to find larger dwellings.

5.3 Robustness check: Does the definition of migrant groups matter?
As discussed above, the definition of the minority group that we use in our main analysis is
somewhat arbitrarily chosen and delineated. We therefore find it pertinent to ask whether the
results are highly sensitive to the definition of the minority group. It is conceivable that our
results would look different had we used another grouping of individuals. We tested the
sensitivity of our results to the choice of grouping by re-estimating the same models, while
defining the minority group as individuals originating from ‘non-Western’ countries, and from
‘predominantly Muslim’ countries, respectively.
As is clear from the results presented in the supplementary materials (S6.1), we observe
the same general pattern for all the three definitions of the minority group. For all three
definitions, the coefficient for the association between the local concentration of the minority
group and out-migration is estimated at around 0.9. Evidently, the choice of grouping does not
matter very much in this case.
5.4 A discussion of modelling ‘flight’: moves to areas with lower minority concentrations
Throughout this paper, we have used the terms ‘flight’ and ‘out-migration’ more or less
interchangeably. Strictly speaking, one could argue that these are two related but separate
phenomena. While out-migration is a move to any area, we define a flight-type move as a move
16

to an area with a lower concentration of minorities. In order to make claims about flight in this
narrower sense, we have conducted an analysis similar to our main analysis, but where the
dependent variable is a dummy taking the value 1 if an individual moves to a neighbourhood
with a lower concentration of (visible) minorities, and 0 otherwise. However, such an analysis
involves a methodological problem; regression to the mean. When moving, people who live in
neighbourhoods with very high concentrations of minorities will usually move to
neighbourhoods with lower such concentrations – even if moves are completely random. The
opposite is true for people living in neighbourhoods with low concentrations. The reason is
that, closer to the top (bottom) of the distribution, there are fewer neighbourhoods one could
move to that have a higher (lower) concentration. Thus, when we define ‘native flight’ to be a
move to a lower-concentration neighbourhood, we, almost by definition, find that a higher
concentration in the local neighbourhood is strongly positively associated with native flight. In
other words, using such a definition of ‘native flight’ means that our estimates are upwardly
biased. We have included a set of results using the flight-type outcome definition in the
supplementary material. For the reasons given above, we urge the reader to be cautious when
interpreting these results.

6 Discussion and Conclusions
We found that the out-migration probabilities in our pooled sample of natives and descendants
are higher in neighbourhoods with higher proportions of minorities and neighbourhoods with
increasing shares of minorities, and that it is lower in areas with higher proportions of
minorities in the extralocal neighbourhoods. We further found that this pattern was stronger
among the natives, but weaker, partly reversed and non-significant among descendants of
immigrants. In other words, we find evidence of moving patterns that correspond with native
out-migration in Copenhagen.
Why do people leave neighbourhoods where the share of minorities in the population
is high or increasing? As mentioned above, one obvious answer is that people leave such areas
because they prefer to live in proximity of their own group. Individuals’ preferences for
neighbourhood composition may be more or less diversity-oriented, and they may prefer to live
in relatively ethnically homogeneous areas. In 2002, the European Social Survey asked
respondents about their preferences for neighbourhood ethnic composition. The opinion held
by Danes was striking: 37 per cent of Danes stated that they preferred to live in an ethnically
17

homogeneous area. This is markedly more negative to diversity than views held, on average,
by the Norwegian (23%), Swedish (20%) and Finnish populations (31%). When we restrict the
sample to those living in the metropolitan area including the capital city, levels are somewhat
lower. Danes in the Copenhagen area were less sceptical to neighbourhood diversity, but still
more than a quarter (27%) expressed negative opinions about residing in a diverse
neighbourhood, markedly higher than the populations of the Oslo and Stockholm metropolitan
areas.
Another, related, explanation is that parents may hold preferences for schools with a
low concentration of ethnic minority pupils, such that native parents of young children move
selectively to avoid schools with high minority concentrations. Analyses by Wessel and
Nordvik (2019) suggest that this may be the case in Norway, and our analysis of parents and
non-parents clearly support such an argument. Additionally, we cannot rule out alternative
explanations such as the possibility that the native out-migration we observe is primarily driven
by neighbourhood characteristics other than their ethnic composition, or by selection processes.
In other words, his study does not provide direct evidence that natives are motivated to move
by a preference for ethnically homogeneous neighbourhoods. A number of other factors besides
ethnic composition may affect the propensity to move out of neighbourhoods with high and/or
increasing proportions of visible minorities. Regardless of the exact mechanism producing
native out-migration, this study has documented that natives do tend to move out of
neighbourhoods with high minority concentrations in Copenhagen. This process likely
contributes to ethnic segregation on the urban area. In this regard, our results are consistent
with some recent studies in other countries, e.g. Aldén et al (2014), Wessel and Nordvik (2019)
and McAvay (2018), who find patterns of native out-migration in Sweden, Norway and France,
respectively.
Nevertheless, our study also has several limitations worth noting. First, our sample is
endogenously conditioned. The natives living in neighbourhoods with high concentrations of
minorities are the natives who have not already moved out. This may bias our estimates
downwards. Second, the set of control variables we include is by no means comprehensive,
and other factors (at the neighbourhood or individual level, including characteristics of the local
housing market) may drive our results. Third, we only analyse a limited number of years.
Undoubtedly, our conclusions would have been stronger if we had been able to use more finegrained panel data. Fourth, we do not have information about individuals’ preferences, and thus
cannot directly test whether our results chiefly reflect neighbourhood preferences. Fifth, we
acknowledge the fact that our analyses are sensitive to issues related to comparing logistic
18

regression coefficients across models (Mood 2010) and that the explained variance in most
models is modest. Finally, most of the theoretical discussions in this article, and in much of the
literature on residential segregation, assume that individuals interact with their neighbours or
somehow care about who resides in their neighbourhood. This may be a strong assumption
with limited validity. If neighbourhoods are not an important locus of interaction, this would
undercut several theoretical contributions to segregation research, but it would not invalidate
our conclusions. However, we do believe that this may be a valuable research topic, as several
theories about neighbourhood effects implicitly or explicitly assume that neighbours interact
and affect each other, and that neighbourhood differences are not primarily driven by selection.
These limitations notwithstanding, this study has contributed to the literature on
segregation and mobility in several ways. We have used high-quality register data and the novel
technique of individualized scalable neighbourhoods to model out-migration in Copenhagen.
Our results are the first of their kind from Copenhagen, and speaks to several salient issues in
the extant literature. Ethnic group identifies must influence migration processes in urban areas,
because our results differ sharply between natives and descendants. Our analyses also highlight
the role of children as an important aspect of people’s motivations for migration. The study
also offer discussions on how to define and operationalize out-migration and flight.
To researchers and governments who are struggling with issues related to the
integration of minorities, the evidence presented here may serve as a useful reminder that
individuals respond to their environments in ways that sometimes are in conflict with political
goals and the targets of social planners. If neighbourhood diversity is pursued as a political
goal, and there may be good reasons to pursue it, one must take into account the potential
feedback mechanisms of individuals moving away from areas with large and increasing shares
of minorities.

References
Aldén, L., Hammarstedt, M. and Neuman, E. (2015). Ethnic segregation, tipping behavior, and
native residential mobility. International Migration Review, 49(1), 36-69.
Andersen, H. S. (2017). Selective moving behaviour in ethnic neighbourhoods: white flight,
white avoidance, ethnic attraction or ethnic retention?. Housing Studies, 32(3), 296-318.

19

Andersson, R. (2013). Reproducing and Reshaping Ethnic Residential Segregation in
Stockholm: The Role of Selective Migration Moves. Geografiska Annaler: Series B,
Human Geography 95 (2): 163–87.
Betts, J. R. and Fairlie, R. W. (2001). Explaining Ethnic, Racial, and Immigrant Differences in
Private School Attendance. Journal of Urban Economics 50 (1): 26–51.
Bolt, G., Van Kempen, R. and Van Ham, M. (2008). Minority ethnic groups in the Dutch
housing market: Spatial segregation, relocation dynamics and housing policy. Urban
Studies, 45(7), 1359-1384.
Borjas, G. J. (2006). Native internal migration and the labor market impact of immigration.
Journal of Human Resources, 41(2), 221-258.
Bruch, E. E. and Mare, R. D. (2006). Neighborhood choice and neighborhood change.
American Journal of Sociology, 112(3), 667-709.
Bråmå, Å. (2006). ‘White Flight’? The Production and Reproduction of Immigrant
Concentration Areas in Swedish Cities, 1990-2000. Urban Studies 43 (7): 1127–46.
Bråmå, Å. (2008). Dynamics of Ethnic Residential Segregation in Göteborg, Sweden, 1995–
2000. Population, Space and Place 14 (2): 101–17.
Clark, W. A. (2002). Ethnic preferences and ethnic perceptions in multi-ethnic settings. Urban
Geography, 23(3), 237-256.
Clark, W. A. and Fossett, M. (2008). Understanding the social context of the Schelling
segregation model. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(11), 41094114.
Clark, W. A. and Coulter, R. (2015). Who wants to move? The role of neighbourhood change.
Environment and Planning A, 47(12), 2683-2709.
Crowder, K. (2000). The Racial Context of White Mobility: An Individual-Level Assessment
of the White Flight Hypothesis. Social Science Research 29 (2): 223–57.
Crowder, K., Hall, M. and Tolnay, S. E. (2011). Neighborhood Immigration and Native outMigration. American Sociological Review 76 (1): 25–47.
Crowder, K., Pais, J. and South, S. J. (2012). Neighborhood diversity, metropolitan constraints,
and household migration. American Sociological Review, 77(3), 325-353.
Crowder, K. and South, S. J. (2008). Spatial Dynamics of White Flight: The Effects of Local
and Extralocal Racial Conditions on Neighborhood out-Migration. American
Sociological Review 73 (5): 792–812.

20

Damm, A. P. and Schultz-Nielsen, M. L. (2008). The Construction of Neighbourhoods and Its
Relevance for the Measurement of Social and Ethnic Segregation: Evidence from
Denmark. IZ Discussion Paper #3719.
Edin, P.-A., Fredriksson, P. and Åslund, O. (2003). Ethnic Enclaves and the Economic Success
of Immigrants—Evidence from a Natural Experiment. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 118(1), 329-357. doi:10.1162/00335530360535225
Emerson, M. O., Chai, K. J. and Yancey, G. (2001). Does race matter in residential segregation?
Exploring the preferences of white Americans. American Sociological Review, 922-935.
Farley, R., Steeh, C., Krysan, M., Jackson, T. and Reeves, K. (1994). Stereotypes and
segregation: Neighborhoods in the Detroit area. American Journal of Sociology, 750780.
Farley, R., Fielding, E. L. and Krysan, M. (1997). The residential preferences of blacks and
whites: A four‐metropolis analysis. Housing Policy Debate, 8(4), 763-800.
Filer, R. (1992). The effect of immigrant arrivals on migratory patterns of native workers. In:
Immigration and the workforce: Economic consequences for the United States and
source areas (pp. 245-270). University of Chicago Press.
Fossett, M. (2006). Ethnic Preferences, Social Distance Dynamics, and Residential Segregation:
Theoretical Explorations Using Simulation Analysis∗. Journal of Mathematical
Sociology, 30(3-4), 185-273.
French, K. N. (2014). Exploring socioeconomic characteristics of ethnically divided
neighbourhoods. Chapter 16 in: Lloyd, C. D., Shuttleworth, I. G. and Wong, D. W. S.
(eds.),

Social-Spatial

Segregation.

Concepts,

Processes

and

Outcomes.

Bristol/Chicago: Policy Press
Frey, W. H. (1995). Immigration and internal migration flight from US metropolitan areas:
toward a new demographic Balkanisation. Urban Studies, 32(4-5), 733-758.
Frey, W. H. (1996). Immigration, domestic migration, and demographic balkanization in
America: new evidence for the 1990s. Population and Development Review, 741-763.
Galloway, T. A. and Aaberge, R. (2005). Assimilation effects on poverty among immigrants
in Norway. Journal of Population Economics, 18(4), 691-718.
Goodwin‐White, J. (2018). The shaping of selection: Secondary migration, scale, and changing
immigrant geographies. Population, Space and Place, 24(8), e2158.
Green‐Pedersen, C. and Krogstrup, J. (2008). Immigration as a political issue in Denmark and
Sweden. European journal of political research, 47(5), 610-634.

21

Hall, M. and Crowder, K. (2014). Native out-migration and neighborhood immigration in new
destinations. Demography, 51(6), 2179-2202.
van Ham, M. and Feijten, P. (2008). Who wants to leave the neighbourhood? The effect of
being different from the neighbourhood population on wishes to move. Environment
and Planning A, 40(5), 1151-1170.
van Ham, M. and Manley, D. (2014). Segregation, choice-based letting and social housing:
how housing policy can affect the segregation process. Chapter 11 in: Lloyd, C. D.,
Shuttleworth, I. G. and Wong, D. W. S. (eds.), Social-Spatial Segregation. Concepts,
Processes and Outcomes. Bristol/Chicago: Policy Press
Hermansen, A. S. (2013). Occupational Attainment among Children of Immigrants in Norway:
Bottlenecks into Employment––equal Access to Advantaged Positions? European
Sociological Review 29 (3): 517–34.
Husted, L., Skyt Nielsen, H., Rosholm, M. and Smith, N. (2001). Employment and wage
assimilation of male first-generation immigrants in Denmark. International Journal of
Manpower, 22(1/2), 39-71.
Hwang, S. (2014). A tale of two cities: residential segregation in St Louis and Cincinnati.
Chapter 13 in: Lloyd, C. D., Shuttleworth, I. G. and Wong, D. W. S. (eds.), SocialSpatial Segregation. Concepts, Processes and Outcomes. Bristol/Chicago: Policy Press
Jensen, P. R. and Würtz, A. (2011). “The Effect of Immigrant Concentration in Schools on
Native and Immigrant Children’s Reading and Math Skills.” Economics of Education
Review 30(6):1503-1515.
Kristensen, H. (2002). Social housing policy and the welfare state: a Danish perspective. Urban
Studies, 39(2), 255-263.
Krysan, M. (2002). Whites who say they’d flee: Who are they, and why would they leave?.
Demography, 39(4), 675-696.
Krysan, M., Couper, M. P., Farley, R. and Forman, T. A. (2009). Does race matter in
neighborhood preferences? Results from a video experiment. American Journal of
Sociology, 115(2), 527-559.
Ley, D., and Tutchener J. (2001). Immigration, Globalisation and House Prices in Canada’s
Gateway Cities. Housing Studies 16 (2): 199–223.
Lloyd, C. D., Shuttleworth, I. G. and Wong, D. W. S. (eds.) (2014). Social-Spatial Segregation.
Concepts, Processes and Outcomes. Bristol/Chicago: Policy Press
Longva, P. and Raaum, O. (2003). Earnings assimilation of immigrants in Norway–A
reappraisal. Journal of Population Economics, 16(1), 177-193.
22

Massey, D. S., Condran, G. A. and Denton, N. A. (1987). The effect of residential segregation
on black social and economic well-being. Social Forces, 66(1), 29-56.
Massey, D. S., Gross, A. B. and Shibuya, K. (1994). Migration, segregation, and the geographic
concentration of poverty. American Sociological Review, 425-445.
McAvay, H. (2018). The ethnoracial context of residential mobility in France: Neighbourhood
out-migration and relocation, Population, Space and Place, 24(6)
Ministry of Refugees, Immigration and Integration Affairs (2004). Regeringens strategi mod
ghettoisering. Copenhagen: Ministeriet for Flygtninge, Indvandrere og Integration
Møller, I. H. and Larsen, J. E. (2015). The Socioeconomic and Ethnic Segregation of Living
Conditions in Copenhagen. Revista Crítica de Ciências Sociais, (108), 7-30.
Mood, C. (2010). Logistic regression: Why we cannot do what we think we can do, and what
we can do about it. European Sociological Review, 26(1), 67-82.
Moody, J. (2001). Race, school integration, and friendship segregation in America. American
Journal of Sociology, 107(3), 679-716.
Musterd, S. and van Gent, W. (2012). Residential location and housing moves of immigrants
and natives in the Amsterdam metropolitan context. Chapter 5 in: Finney, N. and
Catney, G. (eds.), Minority internal migration in Europe. Surrey/Burlington: Ashgate.
Nielsen, M. M. and Hennerdal, P. (2017). Changes in the residential segregation of immigrants
in Sweden from 1990 to 2012: Using a multi-scalar segregation measure that accounts
for the modifiable areal unit problem. Applied Geography, 87, 73-84.
Östh, J. (2013). Introducing the EquiPop software - an application for the calculation of knearest neighbour contexts/neighbourhoods. Uppsala Univeristy.
Östh, J., Clark, W. A. V. and Malmberg, B. (2015). Measuring the Scale of Segregation Using
k-Nearest Neighbor Aggregates. Geographical Analysis 47 (1): 34–49.
Östh, J., Malmberg, B. and Andersson, E. K. (2014). Analysing Segregation Using
Individualised Neighbourhoods. Socio-Spatial Segregation: Concepts, Processes and
Outcomes, 135–62.
Pais, J. F., South, S. J. and Crowder, K. (2009). White Flight Revisited: A Multiethnic
Perspective on Neighborhood out-Migration. Population Research and Policy Review
28 (3): 321–46.
Pew Research Center (2011). The Future of the Global Muslim Population: Projections for
2010–2030. Pew Research Center. Forum on Religion and Public Life, Washington,
D.C

23

Rathelot, R. and Safi, M. (2014). Local ethnic composition and natives’ and immigrants’
geographic mobility in France, 1982–1999. American Sociological Review, 79(1), 4364.
Sabater, A. and Finney, N. (2014). Demographic understandings of changes in ethnic
residential segregation across the life course. Chapter 12 in: Lloyd, C. D., Shuttleworth,
I. G. and Wong, D. W. S. (eds.), Social-Spatial Segregation. Concepts, Processes and
Outcomes. Bristol/Chicago: Policy Press
Schelling, T. C. (1971). Dynamic Models of Segregation. Journal of Mathematical Sociology
1 (2): 143–86.
Shuttleworth, I. G., Gould, M. and Barr, P. (2014). Perspectives on social segregation and
migration: spatial scale, mixing and place. Chapter 9 in: Lloyd, C. D., Shuttleworth, I.
G. and Wong, D. W. S. (eds.), Social-Spatial Segregation. Concepts, Processes and
Outcomes. Bristol/Chicago: Policy Press
Simpson, L. and Finney, N. (2009). Spatial patterns of internal migration: evidence for ethnic
groups in Britain. Population, Space and Place, 15(1), 37-56.
South, S. J. and Crowder, K. D. (1997). Escaping distressed neighborhoods: Individual,
community, and metropolitan influences. American Journal of Sociology, 1040-1084.
South, S. J. and Crowder, K. D. (1998). Leaving the 'hood: Residential mobility between black,
white, and integrated neighborhoods. American Sociological Review, 17-26.
Statistics Denmark (n.a.). StatBank Denmark. BOL101 Dwellings by region, type of resident,
use, tenure, ownership and year of construction (2010-2017) (online database).
Retrieved from http://www.statbank.dk/statbank5a/default.asp?w=1920 [accessed
september 6th 2017]
Wessel, T. and Nordvik, V. (2019). Mixed neighbourhoods and native out-mobility in the Oslo
region: The importance of parenthood. Urban Studies, 56(5), 885-905.
Wessel, T., Andersson, R., Kauppinen, T. and Andersen, H. S. (2016). “Spatial Integration of
Immigrants in Nordic Cities The Relevance of Spatial Assimilation Theory in a Welfare
State Context.” Urban Affairs Review, 1078087416638448.
Wilson, W. J. and Taub, R. P. (2006). There goes the neighborhood: Racial, ethnic, and class
tensions in four Chicago neighborhoods and their meaning for America. New York,
NY: Knopf.
Wilson, K. L. and Portes, A. (1980). Immigrant Enclaves: An Analysis of the Labor Market
Experiences of Cubans in Miami. American Journal of Sociology, 86(2), 295-319.
doi:10.1086/227240
24

Woldoff, R. A. (2011). White flight/Black flight: The dynamics of racial change in an American
neighborhood. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.

25

List of tables
# Title
1
2
3
4
5

Population groups and sizes in the Copenhagen metropolitan area, 1980-2019
Descriptives for individual-level variables
Descriptives for neighbourhood-level variables
Main results from three models of out-migration on full population, natives and descendants
Main results from three models of out-migration by native parents and childless

TABLE 1. POPULATION GROUPS AND SIZES IN COPENHAGEN METROPOLITAN AREA 1980-2019.

#
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20

1980
Country
Sweden
Germany
Pakistan
Norway
Turkey
Yugoslavia
Poland
UK
USA
Finland
Iceland
Morocco
USSR
France
India
Italy
Hungary
Spain
Philippines
Chile

Total population
Total non-natives
Proportion of the

n
8,190
7,954
6,688
6,240
6,121
4,744
3,577
3,498
2,719
2,169
1,815
1,729
1,466
1,262
1,133
1,072
823
817
749
696
1,214,382
76,841
6.3%

2001
Country
Turkey
Pakistan
Yugoslavia
Iraq
Sweden
Morocco
Germany
Norway
Iran
Lebanon
Poland
Somalia
UK
BiH
USA
China
Philippines
Iceland
Thailand
France

n
24,048
15,863
9,027
6,718
6,648
6,552
6,075
5,616
5,308
5,259
5,181
5,137
5,049
3,131
3,037
2,612
2,491
2,286
2,220
2,192
1,205,339
167,133
13.9%

Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

2006
Country
Turkey
Pakistan
Iraq
Yugoslavia
Morocco
Sweden
Lebanon
Germany
Norway
Iran
Poland
Somalia
UK
China
BiH
USA
Philippines
Iceland
Thailand
India

n
26,519
16,635
9,297
8,614
7,271
6,501
6,095
6,084
6,023
5,880
5,693
5,158
4,962
4,597
3,460
3,370
3,211
2,906
2,865
2,833
1,211,542
189,250
15.6%

2011
Country
Turkey
Pakistan
Iraq
Poland
Yugoslavia
Morocco
Germany
Sweden
Lebanon
Norway
Iran
Somalia
China
UK
Philippines
India
USA
BiH
Afghanistan
Thailand

n
28,856
18,211
11,097
8,979
8,048
7,884
7,378
6,817
6,617
6,312
6,195
5,928
5,904
5,548
5,059
4,639
3,966
3,877
3,548
3,548
1,209,627
227,083
18.8%

2015
Country
Turkey
Pakistan
Iraq
Poland
Morocco
Germany
Yugoslavia
Iran
Sweden
Lebanon
Norway
Somalia
China
UK
India
Philippines
Afghanistan
USA
Romania
BiH

n
30,078
20,403
12,467
11,304
8,322
8,173
7,451
7,417
7,339
7,336
6,729
6,632
6,554
6,280
5,940
5,594
4,410
4,386
4,258
4,224
1,275,332
262,033
20.5%

2019
Country
Turkey
Pakistan
Iraq
Poland
Germany
India
Morocco
Iran
Sweden
China
UK
Lebanon
Yugoslavia
Norway
Somalia
Romania
Philippines
Italy
USA
Afghanistan

n
31,340
21,646
13,619
12,469
9,558
8,838
8,721
8,634
8,177
7,933
7,825
7,719
7,132
7,114
7,059
6,147
5,860
5,786
5,659
5,372
1,332,152
305,588
22.9%

TABLE 2. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF ANALYSIS VARIABLES
Variable

Definition/category

Out-migration
Flight
Migration status

Moved to new grid cell
Moved to with lower % minorities
Native
Immigrant
Descendant of immigrants
Visible minority
Non-Western
Muslim Country
Male
Female
25-44
45-64
65+
Low: Primary/lower secondary
Medium: Completed secondary
High: Tertiary education
Childless
1-2 children
3 or more children
Single
Married or cohabiting
Not currently employed
Currently employed

Minority status

Sex
Age

Education

No. of children

Union status
Labour market

Sample size (excluding all missing values)
Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

All periods
2007
2011
2014
m
s.d.
m
s.d.
m
s.d.
m
s.d.
0.117
0.321
0.113
0.317
0.114
0.317
0.123
0.329
0.060
0.237
0.059
0.236
0.057
0.232
0.062
0.242
0.826
0.379
0.852
0.355
0.823
0.382
0.805
0.397
0.161
0.367
0.138
0.345
0.164
0.370
0.179
0.383
0.013
0.114
0.010
0.097
0.013
0.113
0.016
0.127
0.097
0.295
0.082
0.275
0.098
0.298
0.108
0.310
0.113
0.316
0.097
0.297
0.115
0.319
0.125
0.331
0.059
0.236
0.052
0.223
0.060
0.237
0.065
0.246
0.482
0.500
0.480
0.500
0.482
0.500
0.484
0.500
0.518
0.520
0.518
0.516
0.464
0.499
0.469
0.499
0.463
0.499
0.460
0.498
0.333
0.471
0.335
0.472
0.334
0.472
0.330
0.470
0.203
0.402
0.196
0.397
0.203
0.402
0.209
0.407
0.220
0.414
0.241
0.428
0.219
0.413
0.201
0.401
0.381
0.486
0.396
0.489
0.380
0.485
0.368
0.482
0.397
0.489
0.360
0.480
0.399
0.490
0.429
0.495
0.678
0.467
0.690
0.463
0.676
0.468
0.669
0.470
0.277
0.447
0.266
0.442
0.279
0.448
0.284
0.451
0.045
0.208
0.044
0.205
0.046
0.209
0.046
0.211
0.433
0.495
0.436
0.496
0.432
0.495
0.431
0.495
0.567
0.564
0.568
0.569
0.102
0.303
0.033
0.179
0.132
0.338
0.138
0.345
0.898
0.967
0.868
0.862
2517583 (2369115)

811418

(770458)

836702

(787629)

869463

(811028)

TABLE 3. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF NEIGHBORHOOD VARIABLES
Scale Variable

All periods
m
s.d.

2007
m

2011
m

s.d.

2014
m

s.d.

s.d.

k = 800
% of visible minorities among kNN
% of non-western individuals among kNN
% of muslim background individuals among kNN
Change in % of visible minorities among kNN
Change in % of non-western individuals among kNN
Change in % of muslim background individuals among kNN
k = 51200
% of visible minorities among kNN
% of non-western individuals among kNN
% of muslim background individuals among kNN
% of highly educated persons among kNN
% of high income earners among kNN

Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

0.107
0.124
0.070
0.010
0.010
0.004

0.11
0.12
0.09
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.103
0.119
0.068
0.012
0.013
0.005

0.11
0.12
0.09
0.02
0.03
0.02

0.113
0.130
0.072
0.010
0.011
0.004

0.11
0.12
0.09
0.03
0.03
0.02

0.121
0.138
0.076
0.007
0.007
0.003

0.12
0.13
0.09
0.02
0.02
0.02

0.107
0.123
0.069
0.318
0.122

0.05
0.05
0.04
0.20
0.08

0.103
0.119
0.067
0.371
0.121

0.05
0.05
0.04
0.14
0.08

0.112
0.129
0.071
0.405
0.123

0.05
0.05
0.04
0.15
0.09

0.120
0.137
0.074
0.427
0.122

0.05
0.06
0.04
0.15
0.09

TABLE 4. MAIN RESULTS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD COMPOSITION FROM THREE MODELS ACROSS THREE POPULATION DEFINITIONS.
Model 1
Population
Full

Variable

b

Model 2
SE

b

Model 3
SE

b

SE

Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

1.137 ***
-4.431 ***
-0.026

0.026
0.109
0.054

1.111 ***
-0.517 ***
-0.372 ***

0.030
0.109
0.061

0.912 ***
0.271 *
-0.303 ***

0.032
0.113
0.064

Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

1.114 ***
-4.500 ***
-0.037

0.027
0.111
0.055

1.068 ***
-0.497 ***
-0.390 ***

0.031
0.112
0.062

3.32 ***
1.529 ***
-0.89 ***

0.035
0.133
0.083

Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

0.088
-1.969 ***
-0.324

0.125
0.554
0.350

0.169
-0.863
-0.333

0.145
0.567
0.367

Natives

Descendants

Controls for SES neighborhood variables
Controls for individual variables
Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

No
No

Yes
No

0.256
-0.933
-0.056
Yes
Yes

0.152
0.595
0.391

TABLE 5. MAIN RESULTS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD COMPOSITION FROM THREE MODELS FOR CHILDLESS NATIVES AND PARENT NATIVES AGED 25-45.
Model 1
Population
Childless

Variable

b

Model 2
SE

b

Model 3
SE

b

SE

Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

0.096 *
-1.075 ***
0.152

0.046
0.156
0.090

0.489 ***
-0.027
0.279 **

0.051
0.160
0.098

0.502 ***
-0.056
0.367 ***

0.052
0.161
0.099

Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

2.006 ***
-2.601 ***
-0.674 ***

0.052
0.226
0.110

1.615 ***
0.973 ***
-1.134 ***

0.062
0.230
0.123

1.555 ***
1.005 ***
-0.993 ***

0.063
0.232
0.126

Parents

Controls for SES neighborhood variables
Controls for individual variables
Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

No
No

Yes
No

Yes
Yes

List of supplementary materials for PSP manuscript #0019-0022

Supplementary tables

Supplementary figures

#
1
2
3.1
3.2
3.3
4.1
4.2
4.3
5.1
5.2
6.1

Title
Descriptives for neighbourhoods at 25th and 75th percentile concentration of visible minorities
Dissimilarity index for the Copenhagen area 2003-2014
Complete results from three models of out-migration among the full population
Complete results from three models of out-migration among the natives population
Complete results from three models of out-migration among the descendants population
Complete results from three models of flight
Complete results from three models of flight among natives
Complete results from three models of flight among descendants
Complete results from three models of out-migration among native parents
Complete results from three models of out-migration among native childless
Main results from models of out-migration using three definitions of minorities

1 Proportion of visible minorities in grid cells in the Copenhagen metropolitan area. 2014.
2 Proportion of visible minorities in individualized neighbourhoods (k=800) in Copenhagen. 2014.
3 Change in % of visible minorities in individualized neighbourhoods (k=800) in Copenhagen. 2003-2014.

Source for all tables: Own calculcations from population register data.

TABLE S1. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS BELOW 25TH AND ABOVE 75TH PERCENTILE ON PROPORTION OF VISIBLE MINORITIES
Variable

Definition/category

Out-migration
Flight
Migration status

Moved to new grid cell
Moved to with lower % minorities
Native
Immigrant
Descendant of immigrants
Visible minority
Non-Western
Muslim Country
Male
Female
25-44
45-64
65+
Low: Primary/lower secondary
Medium: Completed secondary
High: Tertiary education
Childless
1-2 children
3 or more children
Single
Married or cohabiting
Not currently employed
Currently employed

Minority status

Sex
Age

Education

No. of children

Union status
Labour market

Sample size (excluding all missing values)
Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

Below 25th percentile
m
s.d.
0.100
0.023
0.903
0.091
0.006
0.029
0.035
0.010
0.476
0.524
0.422
0.363
0.214
0.149
0.354
0.497
0.644
0.311
0.045
0.356
0.644
0.066
0.934
629884

0.301
0.151
0.297
0.288
0.079
0.167
0.184
0.100
0.499
0.494
0.481
0.410
0.356
0.478
0.500
0.479
0.463
0.207
0.479
0.249

(600068)

Above 75th percentile
m
s.d.
0.127
0.094
0.686
0.290
0.025
0.226
0.258
0.160
0.488
0.512
0.492
0.320
0.188
0.323
0.397
0.273
0.677
0.256
0.066
0.497
0.503
0.153
0.847
629289

0.333
0.291
0.464
0.454
0.156
0.418
0.438
0.367
0.500
0.500
0.466
0.391
0.468
0.489
0.445
0.467
0.437
0.249
0.500
0.360

(579203)

TABLE S2. DISSIMILARITY INDICES FOR COPENHAGEN AREA USING GRID CELLS AND kNN METHOD. 2003-2014.

Year
2003
2007
2011
2014

kNN 800
0.439
0.420
0.399
0.395

Grid cells
0.557
0.535
0.509
0.503

Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

TABLE S3.1. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF OUT-MIGRATION ON FULL POPULATION. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200
Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Female
Male
Age
25-44
45-64
65+
Education
Low educ
Medium education
High education
No. of children
None
1-2 children
3+ children
Married or cohabiting
Yes
No
Employed
Yes
No
Secular trend
2003
2007
2011
Intercept

Model 1
b
SE
1.137 ***
-4.431 ***
-0.026

Model 2
b
SE
0.026
1.111 ***
0.109
-0.517 ***
0.054
-0.372 ***
2.958 ***
-5.286 ***

-2.203 ***

0.006

-2.700 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.030
0.912 ***
0.109
0.271 *
0.061
-0.303 ***

0.032
0.113
0.064

0.022
0.043

***
***

0.025
0.046

***
***
***

0.005
0.009
0.010

***

0.007
0.008

***
***

0.006
0.016

***

0.006

0.014

1.350
-2.172
0.000
0.023
1.745
0.463
0.000
0.000
0.010
0.097
0.000
-0.288
-0.698
0.000
0.182
0.143
0.000

0.018 **
0.082 ***
-3.667 ***

2

Wald Chi
df

1161.81
3

5318.57
5

5711.54
16

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.002
2056613

0.014
2052984

0.054
2007497

0.008
0.006
0.006
0.018

TABLE S3.2. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF OUT-MIGRATION ON NATIVES ONLY. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200
Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Female
Male
Age
25-44
45-64
65+
Education
Low educ
Medium education
High education
No. of children
None
1-2 children
3+ children
Married or cohabiting
Yes
No
Employed
Yes
No
Secular trend
2003
2007
2011
Intercept

Model 1
b
SE
1.114 ***
-4.500 ***
-0.037

Model 2
b
SE
0.027
1.068 ***
0.111
-0.497 ***
0.055
-0.390 ***
2.990 ***
-5.333 ***

-2.208 ***

0.006

-2.796 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.031
3.320 ***
0.112
1.529 ***
0.062
-0.890 ***

0.035
0.133
0.083

0.023
0.044

***
***

0.026
0.047

***
***
***

0.005
0.010
0.010

***

0.008
0.008

***
***

0.006
0.016

***

0.006

***

0.008

0.015 *
-0.084 ***
-3.409 ***

0.006
0.006
0.013

0.014

1.370
-2.194
0.000
0.023
1.7432
0.461
0.000
0.000
0.008
0.094
0.000
-0.284
-0.685
0.000
0.182
0.000
0.148

2

Wald Chi
df

6748.940
3

6125.340
5

3882.810
16

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.008
2024519

0.015
2020897

0.037
1977013

TABLE S3.3. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF OUT-MIGRATION ON DESCENDANTS ONLY. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200
Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Female
Male
Age
25-44
45-64
65+
Education
Low educ
Medium education
High education
No. of children
None
1-2 children
3+ children
Married or cohabiting
Yes
No
Employed
Yes
No
Secular trend
2003
2007
2011
Intercept

Model 1
b
SE
0.088
-1.969 ***
-0.324

Model 2
b
0.125
0.169
0.554
-0.863
0.350
-0.333
1.066 ***
-2.129 ***

-2.610 ***

0.055

-2.774 ***

SE

Model 3
b
0.145
0.256
0.567
-0.933
0.367
-0.056
0.151
0.314

0.122

0.516
-0.329
0.000
-0.002
2.133
0.905
0.000
0.000
0.031
0.182
0.000
-0.421
-0.938
0.000
0.130
0.000
0.065
0.000
0.170
-0.037
-3.800

2

Wald Chi
df

4.890
3

16.810
5

43.300
16

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.001
32094

0.003
32087

0.029
30484

SE
0.152
0.595
0.391
**

0.165
0.339

***
***

0.033
0.246
0.255

***

0.042
0.042

***
***

0.043
0.080

***

0.039
0.039

***
***

0.041
0.036
0.264

TABLE S4.1. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF FLIGHT ON FULL POPULATION. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200
Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Female
Male
Age
25-44
45-64
65+
Education
Low educ
Medium education
High education
No. of children
None
1-2 children
3+ children
Married or cohabiting
Yes
No
Employed
Yes
No
Secular trend
2003
2007
2011
Intercept

Model 1
b
SE
3.358 ***
-2.345 ***
0.030

Model 2
b
SE
0.028
3.140 ***
0.131
0.796 ***
0.070
-0.779 ***
2.664 ***
-6.161 ***

-3.139 ***

0.007

-3.431 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.033
3.189 ***
0.128
1.561 ***
0.079
-0.939 ***

0.034
0.131
0.082

0.028
0.061

***
***

0.032
0.066

*
***
***

0.006
0.013
0.014

***
***

0.009
0.010

***
***

0.008
0.021

***

0.007

*

0.010

***
***
***

0.008
0.008
0.023

0.018

1.137
-3.547
0.000
0.013
1.658
0.460
0.000
0.000
0.088
0.237
0.000
-0.199
-0.658
0.000
0.048
0.000
0.020
0.000
0.031
-0.082
-4.297

2

Wald Chi
df

6980.73
3

6258.89
5

3923.49
16

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.008
2056613

0.015
2052984

0.036
2007497

TABLE S4.2. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF FLIGHT ON NATIVES ONLY. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200
Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Female
Male
Age
25-44
45-64
65+
Education
Low educ
Medium education
High education
No. of children
None
1-2 children
3+ children
Married or cohabiting
Yes
No
Employed
Yes
No
Secular trend
2003
2007
2011
Intercept

Model 1
b
SE
3.404 ***
-2.435 ***
0.074

Model 2
b
SE
0.029
3.170 ***
0.133
0.771 ***
0.070
-0.738 ***
2.686 ***
-6.177 ***

-3.139 ***

0.007

-3.431 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.034
3.320 ***
0.131
1.529 ***
0.079
-0.890 ***

0.035
0.133
0.083

0.029
0.062

***
***

0.033
0.066

*
***
***

0.006
0.013
0.014

***
***

0.010
0.010

***
***

0.008
0.021

***

0.007

**

0.011

**
***
***

0.008
0.008
0.023

0.018

1.125
-3.498
0.000
0.012
1.675
0.458
0.000
0.000
0.078
0.225
0.000
-0.194
-0.631
0.000
0.047
0.000
0.035
0.000
0.023
-0.088
-4.309

2

Wald Chi
df

6748.940
3

6125.340
5

3882.810
16

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.008
2024519

0.015
2020897

0.037
1977013

TABLE S4.3. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF FLIGHT ON DESCENDANTS ONLY. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200
Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Female
Male
Age
25-44
45-64
65+
Education
Low educ
Medium education
High education
No. of children
None
1-2 children
3+ children
Married or cohabiting
Yes
No
Employed
Yes
No
Secular trend
2003
2007
2011
Intercept

Model 1
b
SE
2.607 ***
-0.427
-2.451 ***

Model 2
b
SE
0.149
2.586 ***
0.699
0.789
0.488
-2.642 ***
1.397 ***
-3.756 ***

-2.610 ***

0.055

-2.774 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.176
2.822 ***
0.706
0.693
0.519
-2.465 ***

0.182
0.732
0.553

0.207
0.488

***
***

0.226
0.533

***
**

0.045
0.341
0.353

***
***

0.057
0.058

***
***

0.058
0.108

0.122

1.016
-2.865
0.000
0.041
1.745
1.138
0.000
0.000
0.195
0.380
0.000
-0.317
-0.851
0.000
0.070
0.000
-0.051
0.000
0.166
-0.012
-4.604

2

Wald Chi
df

126.27
3

86.05
5

38.40
16

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.010
32094

0.013
32087

0.022
30484

0.052
0.053
**
***

0.057
0.050
0.365

TABLE S5.1. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF OUT-MIGRATION AMONG CHILDLESS NATIVES. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

Model 1
b
SE
0.096 *
-1.075 ***
0.152

Model 2
b
SE
0.046
0.489 ***
0.156
-0.027
0.090
0.279 **

Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Education

Married or cohabiting
Employed
Secular trend

0.979 ***
-0.858 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.051
0.502 ***
0.160
-0.056
0.098
0.367 ***

0.052
0.161
0.099

0.036
0.074

0.802 ***
-0.720 ***

0.039
0.075

-0.062 ***

0.007

0.110 ***
0.232 ***

0.012
0.012

0.050 ***

0.008

0.112 ***

0.011

0.063 ***
-0.088 ***
-1.838 ***

0.009
0.009
0.027

Female
Male
Low educ
Medium education
High education
Yes
No
Yes
No
2003
2007
2011

Intercept

-1.321 ***

0.009

-1.722 ***

0.022

2

17.89
3

161.89
5

142.88
12

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.000
497853

0.002
497780

0.004
493221.000

Wald Chi
df

Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

TABLE S5.2. ESTIMATES FROM MODELS OF OUT-MIGRATION AMONG PARENT NATIVES. LOGIT COEFFICIENTS.

Variable
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Change in proportion of visible minorities kNN 800
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 51200

Model 1
b
SE
2.006 ***
-2.601 ***
-0.674 ***

Model 2
b
SE
0.052
1.615 ***
0.226
0.973 ***
0.110
-1.134 ***

Proportion of individuals with high education kNN 800
Proportion of individuals with high incomes kNN 800
Sex
Education

Married or cohabiting
Employed
Secular trend

2.506 ***
-5.228 ***

Model 3
b
SE
0.062
1.555 ***
0.230
1.005 ***
0.123
-0.993 ***

0.063
0.232
0.126

0.044
0.084

2.457 ***
-5.137 ***

0.048
0.086

0.108 ***

0.010

-0.062 ***
0.025

0.017
0.017

0.078 ***

0.014

0.165 ***

0.016

0.059 ***
-0.065 ***
-2.395 ***

0.012
0.011
0.034

Female
Male
Low educ
Medium education
High education
Yes
No
Yes
No
2003
2007
2011

Intercept

-2.024 ***

0.011

-2.328 ***

0.027

2

Wald Chi
df

549.47
3

1329.53
5

587.09
12

Pseudo R2
N persons

0.003
425076

0.016
425039

0.017
423332.000

Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

TABLE S6.1. MAIN RESULTS ON NEIGHBORHOOD COMPOSITION FROM MODELS OF OUT-MIGRATION USING THREE DEFINITIONS OF MINORITIES

Variable
Population
Proportion of visible minorities among kNN 800
Full
Natives
Descendants
Controls for SES neighborhood variables
Controls for individual variables
Source: Own calculcations from population register data.

Visible minorities

Non-western origins

Muslim-majority origins

b

b

b

SE
0.912 ***
0.940 ***
0.256
Yes
Yes

0.030
0.030
0.150

SE
0.856 ***
0.903 ***
0.238
Yes
Yes

0.030
0.030
0.140

SE
0.878 ***
0.941 ***
0.041
Yes
Yes

0.040
0.040
0.190

Figure S1. Proportion of visible minorities in grid cells in the Copenhagen metropolitan area in 2014.

Figure S2. Proportion of visible minorities in individualized neighborhoods (k=800) in the Copenhagen metropolitan area in 2014.

Figure S3. Change from 2003 to 2014 in the share of visible minorities in individualized neighborhoods (k=800) in the Copenhagen metropolitan area.

