AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.6

Pp. 82-106

Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism in
DeLillo's Falling Man (2007)
Harir Aamer Ahmed
College of Education for Women,
University of Baghdad, Baghdad, Iraq

Nawal Fadhil Abbas
College of Education for Women, University of Baghdad
Baghdad, Iraq
Abstract
The increase in the number of terrorist attacks, especially the shocking event of 9/11 led to the
wide coverage of topics such as terrorism and extremism. Such coverage is not only conveyed by
the media and newspaper articles, but also by creating novels. As a result, the current study focuses
on the concept of extremism. The hallmark of this study is to illustrate how such concept is
ideologically embedded within a text. Thus, this study is confined to Don DeLillo's Falling man
(2007). In this novel, DeLillo describes the trauma caused by 9/11 attacks. It is important to note
that he recruits his language to mirror Islam as an extreme religion. To access the concept of
extremism in this novel, the researchers will apply a critical stylistic approach. Therefore, the
analysis will depend heavily on the textual conceptual model that is represented by Jeffries (2010)
to uncover the hidden ideologies related to extremism. The aims of current study is to investigate
the way the linguistic meaning is used as a vehicle for constructing the ideology of extremism in
the selected novel; in addition to identify the textual meaning that underlies extremism in the
selected novel. With the aid of critical stylistic tools, the researchers find out that DeLillo employs
the use of certain linguistic choices in his novel. These choices tackle the concept of extremism
focusing on the violent attitude behind such a concept with an attempt to link this concept to Islam
and Muslims.
Keywords: 9/11 attacks, critical stylistics, extremism, Islam & Muslims, terrorism
Cites as: Ahmed, H. A., & Abbas, N. F. (2019). Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of
Extremism in
DeLillo's Falling Man (2007). Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3
(3) 82-106. DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.6

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

86

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

1.1 Introduction
The terrorist attacks of 9/11 are imprinted in people's minds inside the United States and in the
whole world in general. The shock of bombing of the World Trade Center was attributed to the socalled "Muslims" that led to numerous propagandas of depicting Islam as a religion of violence,
struggle, and extremism. This view is widely held by mass media, press, and literature. The
portrayal of the attacks has become part of the popular culture. On the one hand, the media and
press have been covering the event, its causes, and its effects. On the other hand, the literary texts
especially novels, have started to work on depicting the ‘'the other’‘or the so-called "Muslims". In
one way or another, those Muslims are associated with the attacks, the reconstruction of American
identity, and the consequences of the aftermath that arose fears of terror and extremism. While
other novels attempt at dealing with the struggle of Muslims after the attacks. This kind of fiction
makes its way to establish the era of post 9/11 novels that constitutes its own share within the
American literature and the global literature in general.
As a matter of fact, ‘extremism' as a concept has been studied from political, social, and
psychological points of view. It lies at the heart of recent studies yet dealing with this concept in
9/11 novel from a critical point of view is the goal of this study. Thus, the present study will bridge
the gap in literature by studying the linguistic choices and textual meanings that underlie
extremism in the selected 9/11 novel. The study will be of value for the field of linguistics as it
attempts at tackling the subject of extremism in literary texts. This will enrich the field of
linguistics with new understandings of the language that is recruited by the writer to establish
particular believes by using certain linguistic strategies.
It is significant to enrich the field of linguistics in general and critical studies in particular
with a study that deals with the concept of extremism in literature. Also, it reveals the employment
of this concept by the writer and how he portrays Muslims. Thus, it provides an understanding of
the language of Falling Man. This is beneficial not only to linguistics but also to the field of
literature by giving new insights about the concept of extremism.
1.2 Background
1.2.1 9/11 Fiction
The literature of 9/11 is a mixture of representations of the event, mourning, trauma, globalization,
the conflict of 'the other,' and most important the depiction of a world under terrorism and
extremism. Away from literature, the event of bombing the twin towers of the World Trade Center
is traumatic. This is due to the fact that many people died, and others suffered from the collapse
of the towers because of losing family members, friends and loved persons. The towers are
symbolic as they represent power and capitalism, and they are symbolic post their destruction as
they represent grief and mourning memories. Some literature on the event covers issues of
representing the reality and history of the event. Other works raise questions such as the war on
the terror and the meaning of the event inside and outsides the U.S. with being cautious of
misrepresentation or politicization of the event (Keniston & Quinn, 2008). The literary works on
9/11 attacks varied between poetry, plays, and novels. Falling Man is one of such works.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

87

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

It is not the only novel by DeLillo that tackles issues such as extremism and terrorism. It
is one among other novels such as Mao II, The Names (1982) and White Noise (1985). DeLillo's
previous novels also foreshadow the 9/11 attacks. This fact makes some critics to entitle DeLillo
as a prophet, and he renounces such a description (Tsiokou, 2017).
DeLillo's works set themselves within the postmodern literature supported by statements
from the critics John N. Duvall, (2008) and Peter Knight (2008) who hold this view. However,
Falling Man is not considered one of his best novels as it fails to meet his audience’s satisfaction.
Another fact about Falling Man is that it depicts the 9/11 event by intermingling facts driven by
pictures and news of the event and by the prediction made in his previous works. It is one of the
novels about 9/11 that reconsider the oppositions between us vs. them, personal vs. political,
private vs. public, the oppressor vs. the victim (Gray, 2011).
The narrative of Falling Man revolves around Keith who survives the South Tower during
the bombing. When the North Tower collapses Keith escapes to Lower Manhattan. Then, Keith's
life with his family in the aftermath continues three years later. The novel shows flashbacks to the
time before the attacks where a group of terrorist cell plans their attacks. The novel ends with the
suicide bomber inside the towers to explode them. The whole novel, from the beginning to the end
makes a full circle for the incident pre, during, and post the attacks. Falling Man follows the
mentality of the extremists themselves shedding light on their extreme viewpoint about the world.
The novel presents characters such as Hammad and Mohammed Atta to reveal the way an
extremist perceives everything around and the beliefs that identify him as an extremist. The novel
provides its readers with two different worlds and societies, the group of Muslim fundamentalists
and the American culture. All this is mixed with the novelist's comments. The novel represents
the extremists part mainly through the character of Hammad through focusing on Hammad's
confusion who is baffled between keeping the necessary human desires or adopting the false
society of al-Qaeda by struggling such desires (Rowe, 2011).
1.2.2 Critical stylistics
Critical stylistic analysis is an approach to language study by Jeffries who merges stylistic analysis
with critical discourse analysis. It has emerged as a reaction to the critical discourse analysis since
it does not provide a satisfactory set of analytical tools as Fairclough (1989) accepts this fact by
stating:
The present chapter is written at an introductory level for people who do not have
extensive backgrounds in language study…The set of textual features included
is highly selective, containing only those which tend to be most significant for
critical analysis. (p.110)
Although Fowler presents the following tools (transitivity, some syntactic transformations of the
clause, lexical structure, modality, and speech acts), Jeffries views that they do not give thorough
coverage of linguistic features. Critical stylistics acknowledges its debt to critical discourse
analysis. Hence, essential attempts of critical stylistics is to provide the analytical tools for
examining how a text affects the ideology of its recipients. Text is not a mere grammatical unit;
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

88

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

instead it is more suitable to consider it as a semantic unit because it has form and meaning (Abdul
Zahra & Abbas, 2004). According to Jeffries (2010), all kinds of texts, whether political texts,
poems, novels, newspapers have meaning and conceal a specific ideology.
Jeffries (2010) sets the objectives of critical stylistics which are similar to those of Simpson
(1993). Jeffries is concerned with the stylistic choices and textual analysis which are made by a
text producer whether intentionally or not. Such a text conveys particular ideologies that influence
the text recipient. The aim of using critical stylistics tools is to make the text recipient conscious
of these ideologies, whether they alter their viewpoints or not.
Furthermore, Jefferies (2015) makes use of Halliday's metafunctions by reproducing them.
She renames these metafunctions (textual, interpersonal, and ideational). Thus, the textual metafunction parallels the linguistic meaning in Jefferies terms in which it includes the linguistic
structure and meaning to include Phonetics, Phonology, Morphology, Syntax, and Semantics. The
ideational meta-function is called by Jefferies, the ''textual meaning,'' and it represents the cotextual effect in which the linguistic system creates certain structures. Also, it manifests the way
they work to deliver certain ideologies. It answers the question of what text is doing in creating
ideational 'world.' This textual meaning is at the core of critical stylistics as it is in the mid-way
between language structures and language system and the contextual influences and individual
responses of the situation. Finally, the interpersonal meaning which comprises pragmatics is
wholly contextual. It is related to the question of what language is doing to/with the people in the
situation.
According to Jeffries (2010), how language embodies the world is solely related to the way
the author depicts what he/she views in a linguistic form. For her, all kinds of texts have ideological
basis. She adds that it is not impossible to spell out the ideologies that a text constructs an
acceptance or a disproof by its readers. She gives an example of the far-right political group like
the British National Party and how their ideologies are evidenced in their propaganda. In addition
to how such ideologies are clear for the supporters and opponents of such a text; without indicating
that the two groups will be affected equally by the same text.
To sum up, critical stylistics is defined by Jeffries (2010) as a method of finding the
ideology in any text, whether or not you agree with it.
1.3 Methodology
1.3.1The adopted model
The present study is a critical stylistic one, and it relies on adopting the textual conceptual model
of Jeffries (2010). This model consists of ten tools (naming and describing, representing
actions/events/states, equating and contrasting, exemplifying and enumerating, prioritizing,
implying and assuming, negating, hypothesizing, presenting other's speech and thoughts, and
representing time, space and society). These are known as critical stylistic tools. Nevertheless, the
present study will limit itself to seven only (naming and describing, representing actions, states
and events, equating and contrasting, implying and assuming, negating, hypothesizing, and space,
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

89

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

time and society representation). The reason behind choosing seven tools only serves the purpose
of revealing the concept of extremism directly as they offer a thorough explanation of the
extremist's ideology in the selected extracts. The following sections will review the selected critical
stylistic tools in detail.
1.3.1.1 Textual conceptual model
Textual conceptual functions model is the model set by Jeffries for her critical stylistic approach.
The functions in this model represent the level of meaning that lies between language structure
and language in context. They are part of the ideational function of language as they create
worldviews.
At the core of critical stylistics lies the notion that there is a level of meaning which sits
somewhere between the systematic meaning and the contextual meaning of language. In other
words, they represents Saussure's 'langue' and 'parole.' Within the level of contextual meaning, the
text (or utterance) will employ language resources to show a certain view of the real-world or the
fictional world in literature. It is this level of meaning that concerns the analysts to discover what
the texts are doing in presenting the world. Here comes the role of textual conceptual functions
that help to uncover the various types of meanings created by a certain type of texts (Jeffries,
2014).
It is a mixture of textual features and ideational function. It comprises a prototypical form
which always transmits the conceptual effect, and occasionally peripheral form which also
transmits the conceptual effect. For example, negation can take the prototypical form characterized
by 'no' and 'not'; morphological negators like 'un', 'dis' etc.; grammatical items with semantic
content 'never', 'nowhere' or it takes the peripheral lexical items like 'lack', 'fail' etc. (Jeffries, 2014).
The whole idea behind the textual conceptual functions is that they attempt to seize
whatever the text is doing conceptually in presenting the world (or the fictional world in the case
of literature).
To sum up, Jeffries states that textual conceptual functions with its tools might not be a
comprehensive, but they present a coherent model. Such a model is not restricted to these tools;
tools of this kind can be added with keeping the basic model.
1.3.1.2Critical stylistic tools
1.3.1.2.1 Naming
It is believed that the text is used to name the world. For example, a person may have the name
Janie Jackson and might be called 'the beautiful girl,' or 'the worker in the factory' or any other
way of naming. Before going deep in the discussion of naming, a note for the main parts of the
sentence should be made, which are the verb phrase and noun phrase. For verb phrases, they stand
for processes, actions, or states. While for the noun phrases, they stand for entities. Such noun
phrases function as either the grammatical subject or object of a verb. Thus, its role in a sentence
is an actor when it is the subject and a goal when it is the object. However, noun phrases are
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

90

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

employed ideologically in a text to 'package up' ideas and information which are not about the
entities but actions, processes, or events.
The process of naming includes the following practices:
1-The choice of a noun
The choice of a noun refers to the selection of a noun to exemplify a referent. The selection of a
certain noun to refer to something rather than another. Such a selection denotes or enhances a
certain ideology, for instance, the choice between 'boss' and 'manager.'
2-Noun modification
Naming involves not only the choice of nouns, but it also involves the use of nouns modifiers.
These nouns modifiers are additional information that can be included to modify the noun such as
'The honest child.' Such a process of modification and the use of particular modifiers carries
particular ideological potentials.
3-Nominalization
The last technique of naming is nominalization. The use of nominalization is not newly presented
in Jeffries approach, it is used before by the critical discourse analysis. This technique involves
the transformation of a verb to a noun. For example, a verb such as 'add' becomes 'addition' or the
verb defend becomes 'defense' etc.
1.3.1.2.2 Representing actions/events/states
It is one of the tools of analysis that is presented by Jeffries in her critical stylistic approach. It
refers to transitivity choices. In other words, it refers to the choice of a verb. It criticizes the
previous models of transitivity such as the Latin-based model of transitivity. The focus of that
model only on distinguishing between the transitive verb (that requires an object) and intransitive
verb (that does not require an object). It does not label the ditransitive verbs where they require
more than one object, or the verbs which require an adverb of place, or verbs such as ''drop'' where
it is intransitive with an inanimate subject and transitive with animate. Hence, such a model
discards the meaningful aspects behind verb choice in favor of structural aspects. However, Jeffries
finds that Halliday's model of transitivity that is adopted by the critical discourse analysis is
concerned more with the meanings behind verb choices. According to this model, the choice of
verbs underlies a certain view that is essential to each clause, and it plays a role in affecting the
other parts of the clause.
According to Simpson(1993), transitivity is part of the ideational
function. This function refers to the way that meaning is exemplified in the clause. It displays the
way that language users encode their mental picture of reality and the way they exemplify their
experience of the world around them.
So far, Jeffries (2010) adopts Simpson's model of transitivity (1993). In this model, the
lexical verbs are distributed across four main categories as far as the processes they indicate are
concerned :
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

91

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

1-Material action process which consists of three subcategories as follows: intention (it comprises
conscious being i.e., The man throws the book.), supervention ( it comprises unintentional actions
i.e., The man fell on his knee.), and event(it comprises the use of inanimate actor i.e., The car
damaged.);
2-Verbalization process which describes actions that use human language and include verbs such
as 'told,' 'reported,' etc.;
3-Mental-cognition process which represents the processes that the human beings experience. It
includes three subcategories as follows, mental cognition (think, know, realize, etc.), mental
reaction (feel, like, hate, etc.), and mental perception (see, hear, taste, etc.); and
4-Relational process, which is the final category of verb processes. It refers to the stable
relationships between carriers and attributes. It includes the intensive relational process (verbs to
be), possessive relational process (have, has, etc.), and circumstantial relational process (verbs of
movement, verbs to be).
1.3.1.2.3 Equating and contrasting
This tool refers to the use of similarity construction as it is represented by equating and opposition
construction which is represented by contrasting. Both of equating and contrasting have certain
syntactic triggers or linguistic realizations that identify them. However, in each case these triggers
are not definite ones and new triggers can be added.
According to Jeffries (2010), equivalence or equating triggers are mainly included in the following
list:
1-Intensive relational equivalence x is y, x seems y, x becomes y, x appears y
2-Appositional equivalences x, y, z
3-Metaphorical equivalences x is y, x is like y
While for contrasting or opposition, Jones (2002), Davies (2008) and Jeffries (2007) set possible
linguistic realizations as the following list shows :
1-Negated opposition x not y
2-Transitional opposition turn x into y
3-Comparative oppositions more x than y
4-Replacive opposition x instead of y
5-Concessive opposition despite x, y
6-Explicit oppositions x by contrast with y
7-Parallelism He liked x, she liked y, your house is x, mine is y
8-Contrastives x, but y
1.3.1.2.4 Implying and Assuming
Implying and assuming refers to the employment of implicature and presupposition. Starting with
implying, the model of implicatures is drawn from Grice's (1975, 1978) work (as cited in Jeffries,
2010). This model is based on the notion of the cooperative principle and Grice's four maxims
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

92

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

(maxim of quality saying the truth, quantity saying as much as it is required, relation be relative
and manner avoid obscurity). Any flouting in one or more of these maxims will lead to implicature.
The implying process attempts at finding these implicatures to detect the ideological potentials
behind any implied meaning.
As for assuming, it is parallel to presupposition which denotes ''the assumptions that are
built into the text'' (Jeffries, 2010, p.94). A principle issue in presupposition is the invariable
proposition in the cases of negation and interrogation (Abbas, 2005). As far as Jeffries is
concerned, she limits presupposition to two main types as follows:
1)Existential presupposition: it is the type of presupposition that is identified by the use of definite
noun phrases. It is introduced by the use of the determiner 'the' or demonstratives 'this,' 'that,'
'those,' 'these,' or introduced by the use of possessive forms (my, our, their, his, her, its, your).
2)Logical presupposition: it is the type of presupposition that is less easy to identify than the
existential presupposition. Logical presupposition has a set of triggers as the following list:
-Changing the state of the verb which presupposes the earlier state of affairs; i.e., She stopped
smoking.
-Using factive verbs like realize, know, understand, regret, discover, with the clausal complement
usually starting with 'that' and this clausal complement carries the presupposition; i.e., He regrets
that the car has damaged.
-Using a cleft sentence which presupposes the post-modifying relative clause i.e., It was Janet that
damaged your car.
-Using iterative words such as again, yet, any more, or verbs like a rewrite, revisit, etc. These
words and verbs presuppose a process which takes place earlier or later i.e., They will not change
their office anymore which presupposes that they changed their office before.
-Using comparative structures which presupposes the comparison basis of two entities. For
example, 'Linda is as innovative as Susan' which presupposes that Susan is innovative.
1.3.1.2.5 Negating
It is the tool by which text producers create a view of a world that does not exist; in other words,
create an alternative reality which is considered to be unreal. Nevertheless, the text recipient will
conceptualize this hypothetical worldview as it has a kind of persuasive power.
It is important to note that the process of negation is realized by a set of triggers, as shown in the
list below:
1-Syntactically by adding the negative particle to the verb phrase either to the auxiliary or the
dummy auxiliary verb. If there is not an auxiliary, the negative particle can be added to the dummy
auxiliary (do;(
2-Another way of negating is through the use of pronouns such as 'nobody,' 'no one,' 'nothing,'
'none' etc. or by using the adjectival no to modify the noun such as 'nobody';
3-Lexically through the semantics of certain words having negative connotations in the openended list that consists of nouns (lack, absence), verbs (exclude, omit, reject), adjectives (absent,
scarce), adverbs (rarely, seldom); and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

93

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

4-Morphologically like the following negated adjectives irrational, unprofessional, or the negative
verbs like 'disconnect,' 'disrespect.'
1.3.1.2.6 Hypothesizing
This tool refers to the process by which the text producers do not always providing the view of the
world as it is. On the contrary, they sometimes provide their own view of the world by creating a
hypothetical reality. This falls within the system of modality, which uses a critical approaches to
language, and it is one of the major functions in Halliday's functional system (1985). For this
textual tool, Jeffries adopts Simpson's model of modality (1993) which comprises the use of modal
auxiliary verbs such as 'will,' 'would,' 'shall,' 'should,' 'can,' 'could,' 'may,' 'might,' 'must,' 'ought,'
'dare,' and 'need.' Each of these modal auxiliaries has a modal meaning or several meanings. The
first modal meaning is epistemic (likelihood), which indicates the speaker's doubt or certainty.
The second modal meaning includes either the expression of obligation known as a deontic
modality or the expression of desirability known as a boulomaic modality.
However, there are other forms of modality which includes the use of lexical verbs such as
'think,' 'suppose'/ Modal adverbs such as 'probably,' 'maybe,' 'definitely'/ Modal adjectives such as
'probable,' 'possible,' 'definite,' 'sure,' 'certain '/Conditional structures such as 'if,' 'then.'
Back to Simpson's model, in his model, he introduces a combination of person, modality,
and semantic aspects of a text. For a person, it refers to first-person narration labeled as category
A and third-person narration labeled as category B. It consists of the narration mode where the
viewpoint is expressed without the consciousness of any participant in the narrative, and the
reflector mode where the viewpoint is expressed with the consciousness of the participants. The
categories and subcategory have three shades of modality:
1-Positive deontic and boulomaic;
2-Negative epistemic and perception modality; and
3-Neutral complete absence of narrational modality.
1.3.1.2.7 Space, time and social presentation
This tool of analysis deals with how the text producers construct the world in space, time and
society dimensions, and these are known as ''text world theory''. To access such dimensions,
Jeffries relies on the model of deixis. The importance of deixis lies in the information that it yields
a particular interpretation of a particular utterance in a particular contexts of a situation, on the
contrary, the lack of this information yields misinterpretation (Abdul-Majeed, 2016). The potential
behind deictic expressions is to highlight a certain time, place, and social circumstance. The
speaker of a certain text in a certain time and place is presumed to be at the deictic center. The
English language has the following main categories of deictic expressions:
1-Place deictic which is expressed by the use of adverbs such as here and there; demonstrative
such as this, that, those, and these; prepositional structures such as in front of, opposite to, etc.
2-Time deictic which is expressed by adverbs now and then, verb tenses, demonstrative,
adverbials later, earlier, etc.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

94

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

3-Personal deictic which is expressed by personal pronouns first person, second person, and
third persons; and
4-Social deictic which includes Mr., Dr., etc.
1.3.3 Methodological procedures
The present study will make use of the previously mentioned critical stylistic tools to detect the
language and the underlying meaning of extremism in Falling Man. The analysis of data will be
based on five extracts from Falling Man. To achieve a comprehensible procedure of analysis the
researchers organize the analysis as the following list illustrates :
1. Selecting certain utterances from the extracts that manipulate a certain ideology of
extremism;
2. Figuring the linguistic meaning: this part gives an account on detecting the selected
text linguistically, and it is after the structure of each extract;
3. Uncovering the textual or ideational meaning: which is after the way that each
extract exploits the linguistic choices to deliver a particular ideology about
extremism; and
4. For a clarification purpose, the researcher attaches a table beneath each section of
the analysis of the five extracts. The tables will show each sentence, and the tools
used in uncovering the extremist ideology with its target. It is important to note that
the target represents the linguistic realization identified within each tool of analysis.
5.
1.4.1 Data analysis
The researchers have selected five extracts which are speculations of the character of Hammad in
Falling Man by DeLillo (2007) to examine extremism using Jeffries (2010) model of critical
stylistics.
Extract 1
Hammad sat crouched, eating and listening(1). The talk was fire and light, the emotion
contagious(2). They were in this country to pursue technical education but in these rooms they
spoke about the struggle(3). Everything here was twisted, hypocrite, the west corrupt of mind and
body, determined to shiver Islam down to bread crumbs for birds(4). (P.79)
Linguistic meaning
This extract describes the extremists as they are condemning the west. At the beginning of the
fourth utterance (Everything here was … hypocrite) the subject 'Everything' is described as being
'twisted' and 'hypocrite.' While the noun phrase ‘the west' is modified by 'corrupt of mind and
body.' Furthermore, the extract constructs opposition through the noun choice of 'the west' and
'Islam.'
Textual meaning
The use of the place deictic 'here' at the beginning is a place representation, and it denotes Western
society. The subject ‘Everything here' is equated with 'twisted' and 'hypocrite' to form a
metaphorical equivalence. Thus, everything in this society is twisted and hypocrite. Words such
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

95

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

as a 'hypocrite' and 'twisted' are principally used to refer to a human agent; however, it is used as
a metaphor since the subject is inanimate (everything). Thus, the process of equating reveals the
extremist's view about Western society as it holds the belief that everything in such a society is
'twisted' and 'hypocrite.' This is a generalization, as it refers to everything. In this case the
extremists leave nothing as they perceives everything related to Western society is 'twisted' and
'hypocrite.' This is an extreme way of thinking to condemn the whole society with such a
description.
Moreover, in the second part of the utterance, the naming process is apparent. The noun
phrase 'the west' is one of the labels that is always used by the fundamentalists to refer to Western
society. This choice of the noun refers to 'Everything here' mentioned at the beginning, which
means that the west refers to the Western society, which is 'twisted' and 'hypocrite.' The utterance
continues with the west corrupt of mind and body which is a metaphorical equivalence. Since 'the
west' is non-human to have a mind and a body to be corrupted, thus, this is a metaphor refers to
the Western society. Ideologically, the noun phrase and the metaphorical equivalence denote the
extremist's view of 'the west' as it is corrupted in their minds and souls. Such view considers them
to be corrupted from the inside (their thinking) and outside (their appearance). This is a pretext for
those extremists to fight and bomb the western people.
The naming process makes use of the west vs. Islam to construct a difference between the
two. The equating process deems the west to be immoral through the metaphors (twisted,
hypocrite, corrupt of mind, and body). Conceptually, extremism is built in the structure through
the naming choices as they set the difference between the West and Islam, and equating strategies
through which they make a judgment about the west immorality and corruption. All the above
tools are summarized in table (1) below:
Table 1. Tools and targets in the first extract
Utterance

Tool

Everything here was Space representation
twisted, hypocrite,
the west corruption
of mind and body,
Naming
determined to shiver
Islam down to bread
crumbs for birds
Equating

Target
Place deictic 'here'
Choice of noun
'Islam'; 'the west'
Metaphorical
equivalence

Extract 2
He was very genius, others said, and he told them that a man can stay forever in a room, doing
blueprints, eating and sleeping, even praying, even plotting, but at a certain point he has to get
out(1). Even if the room is a place of prayer, he can't stay there all his life(2). Islam is the world
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

96

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

outside the prayer room as well as the Surah in the Koran(3). Islam is the struggle against the
enemy, near enemy and far, Jews first, for all things unjust and hateful, and then the Americans(4).
(P.79-80)
Linguistic meaning
This extract displays a description of Amir, the leader of the terrorist group. The extract reveals
Amir's beliefs through the use of the indirect speech. The first utterance comprises the modality
choices of 'can ' and 'has to' beside the transitivity choices (stay, and get out). Furthermore, it
introduces a contrast using 'but.' However, the second utterance employs negation to the modal
verb 'can.' While, the third utterance starts with the subject 'Islam' and the intensive relational verb
'is' with the adverbial phrase 'the world outside the prayer room' as its complement. Also, the
subject complement 'The world' is modified using of place deictic 'outside.' Finally, the fourth
utterance also has Islam as its subject and the intensive relational verb 'is' as its main verb, the
struggle against the enemy as its complement which is modified by the apposition 'near enemy
and far.'
Textual meaning
The above extract employs a set of critical stylistic tools such as modality, transitivity, contrasting,
equating, and assuming. The subordinate clause 'that a man can stay forever in a room' in the first
utterance starts with the creation of the hypothetical world. It is introduced by the modal verb 'can'
and the rest of the clause in which a man stays forever in a room. The hypothesizing process,
which is represented by the epistemic modality through the verb 'can' foreshadows a doubt about
staying in a shell-like room. This is proved by the contrast, 'but at a certain point he has to get
out.' The contrast shows the contradictions and complexities within the extremist's mind. By
setting the contrast with the deontic modality in 'but at a certain point he has to get out,' a man is
obliged to get out for a certain purpose. This might imply that he is getting out to kill or bomb.
The final clause indicates that they are waiting something for getting out, they are getting out for
a particular purpose to be fulfilled. The next utterance consists of the main clause 'he can't stay
there all his life' and a subordinate clause introduced by 'even if the room is a place of prayer.' By
placing the negated hypothetical clause 'he can't stay there all his life' at a higher-level structure,
the speaker is prioritizing the idea of not staying over praying. Thus, the reader of the text will
become skeptical about the speaker's motifs behind getting out and will think of different scenarios
resulting after getting out. Also, the reader will construct the image that this group of people when
they are staying at a room their life is restricted to 'eating,' 'sleeping,' 'praying' and 'plotting' and
nothing else. It is as if they exclude every activity in life other than the mentioned which by itself
an extreme way of living. Thus, those extremists spend their life either isolated in a room doing
nothing except eating, sleeping, praying, and plotting or getting out when the time comes for a
particular purpose.
The next utterance 'Islam is the world outside the prayer room' is equated with the utterance
that follows 'Islam is the struggle against the enemy through the parallel structure. Both utterances
contain the carrier 'Islam,' and the intensive relational verb 'is' but with different attributes in each
sentence. The implication behind such equating is that the world outside the prayer room in the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

97

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

first utterance is the struggle in the second utterance. It implies that for those extremists, the world
outside the borders of the prayer room is only a struggle for him since the noun 'Islam' does not
refer to Islam as the holy religion. Instead, it relates to their interpretation of Islam as a struggle.
Furthermore, Amir uses at the beginning 'a man can stay.…he has to get out'; then he starts to use
Islam to make his addressee identify himself/ herself with Islam. This will make his view stronger
when it is being carried out by the label of Islam. 'The struggle against the enemy' by its own is
an existential presupposition with the definite noun 'The struggle.' It presupposes that there is a
struggle, and there is an enemy for the speaker. This raises the image of the struggle between
Islam and the enemy. This enemy represents the West in general and the American and Jews in
particular. Besides, the noun phrase 'the enemy' is identified by the contrast 'near' and 'far' with
further identification as Jews and Americans who are named as enemy. From this whole paragraph,
it becomes apparent that the motive of the speaker behind getting out is the struggle against the
enemy. Actually, this is what constitutes the ideology of extremism, which is based on having
enemies that must be struggled.
In this extract, the extreme ideology is presented a step by a step from staying at a room
then getting out to struggle against Americans and Jews as for him . All in all, the above extract
incorporates the use of transitivity choices, equating, assuming, and hypothesizing. The
transitivity choices here identify through the dynamic material action intentional verbs the main
activities of the extremists in life whether staying enclose in a room isolated from the outside world
or getting out for a particular purpose. Then, they identify Islam with the use of the stative intensive
relational 'is' as a religion of struggle. However, the equating process finds its own way in the last
two utterances to mirror the world as a struggle for Islam. While the hypothesizing process shows
the alternative realities for those extremists either to stay enclosed in a room or to get out for a
certain purpose. As far as the assumption process, it hints on the extremists' claims that they are
living in a struggle. The tools and targets of the second extract are summarized in table (2):
Table 2. Tools and targets in the second extract
Utterance

Tool

a man can stay
forever in a room,
Hypothesizing
doing blueprints,
eating and sleeping,
even praying, even
plotting, but at a
Contrasting
certain point he has
to get out
Even if the room is
a place of prayer,
he can't stay there
all his life.

Hypothesizing

Target
Epistemic modality
Deontic modality

The conjunction
'but'

Epistemic modality

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

98

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Islam is the world
outside the prayer
room as well as the
Surah in the Koran

Transitivity

Intensive relational
verb

Equating

Parallelism

Islam is the
Transitivity
struggle against the
enemy,
near enemy and
Assuming
far, Jews first, for
all things unjust and
hateful, and then the Equating
Americans

Ahmed & Abbas

Intensive relational
verb
Existential
presupposition
Parallelism

Extract 3
Hammad in a certain way thought this was unfair(1). But the closer he examined himself, the truer
the words (2). He had to fight against the need to be normal(3). He had to struggle against himself
first, and then against the injustice that haunted their lives(4). (P.83)
Linguistic meaning
The above extract exposes Hammad's inner thoughts and psychological struggles. Starting with
the third utterance, it employs the subject 'he' followed by the deontic modality through the use of
modal auxiliary 'had to' plus the material action verb 'fight' and the preposition ' against.' The rest
of the utterance represents an existential presupposition 'the need to be normal.' The fourth
utterance also employs deontic modality through 'had to' plus the verb 'struggle' with a two-part
list that identifies the things for which he had to struggle. These things are represented by him, and
the morphological negation in 'the injustice' which is modified by the relative clause 'that hunted
their lives.'
Textual meaning
In this extract, the third utterance has an existential presupposition 'the need to be normal.' It
presupposes that the need for normality exists inside Hammad. However, by using the deontic
modality (obligation) he ''had to'' fight this need, he creates an alternative world in which he bares
himself from this need of normality to be abnormal. This is an extremist ideology because being
abnormal means being an extremist as those extremists fight everything normal. The transitivity
choice of the material action intentional verb 'fight' proves this extremist world view of fighting
anything normal. He continues creating an alternative world again by using the deontic modality
'he had to struggle' two things 'himself' and 'the injustice' that haunted their lives. Moreover, he
uses the material action intentional verb 'struggle' with 'he' as an actor and himself and the injustice
as the goal of this struggle. In other words, Hammad's struggle is inside that is represented by
himself and the outside that is represented by the injustice of the Western society. Not only this;
but also this injustice is an existential presupposition. It presupposes that the speaker and his group
are living in injustice which haunts their life. He uses 'their' to generalize the idea of the injustice
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

99

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

that haunts them as Muslims. The reader of this utterance will start to think of what type of injustice
the speaker means.
Overall, the above extract makes use of assuming, hypothesizing, transitivity choices, and
negation to carry the ideational meaning of the extremist's view of fighting against the normality,
and the assumed injustice. For assuming, the existential presupposition sheds light on the fact that
Hammad confesses with his need to be normal that exists within himself. Nevertheless, the
hypothesizing process of using deontic modality (had to) with the transitivity choices of verbs
'fight/struggle,' yields an obligation to fight this need. Moreover, he uses this deontic modality to
oblige himself to struggle with the injustice that haunts their life. The negation process of adding
the prefix 'in' to justice shows that Hammad and his group live in injustice. In other words, for him
they are not treated equally because of the injustice of the Western society. Consequently, Hammad
attempts at creating a worldview in which he and his group can live in 'justice,' in that case he will
not struggle anything. Hence, he has to struggle this injustice to achieve justice. It is important to
note that Hammad tries to convince himself that he and his group are living in injustice to justify
his struggle. This is part of extremism in which the extremists attempt at convincing themselves
and finding justifications for their activities. All this happens within inside their minds, in other
words, they view the world as they like. Finally, this extract involves the struggle within one's
mind to depart against normality and adopt the extremist's views. All the above points are
summarized in the table below:
Table 3. Tools and targets in the third extract
Utterance
He had to fight
against the need to
be normal

Tool

Target

Hypothesizing

Deontic modality

Transitivity

Material action
intentional verb

Assuming

Existential
presupposition

He had to struggle
Transitivity
against himself first,
and then against the
injustice that
Hypothesizing
haunted their lives
Negation

Material action
intention verb
Deontic modality
Morphological
negation

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

100

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

Extract 4
They read the sword verses of Koran(1). They were strong willed, determined to become one
mind(2). Shed everything but the man you are with(3). Become each other's running blood(4).
(P.83)
Linguistic meaning
The present extract displays a description of the extremists. The first utterance comprises the use
of the subject 'they' referring to the group of extremists and the verb 'read' with the object
introduced by the phrase 'the sword verses of Koran.' The third utterance proceeds with the verb
'shed' and the object 'everything' with using the contrastive 'but' which excludes only their group
from this process of shedding. The extract closes with the intensive relational 'become,' and this
time, they will be each one's running blood.
Textual meaning
In the first utterance of this extract, the choice of the noun phrase 'the sword verses' underlies the
fact that as from the holy Koran the extremists made up their mind to read only the verses related
to sword which hints on their motifs for fighting. Also, the role of the noun phrase as an object
puts it in the position of a goal for the material action intentional verb 'read.' In other words, reading
only' the sword verses' hints on their willingness to fight. Such a choice of the noun phrase 'the
sword verses of Koran' foreshadows the writer's viewpoint in linking Islam, the extremist ideology,
and violence together, just to mirror Islam as an extreme religion. Another ideological potential
that can be recovered from this extract is the transitivity choice of the material action intentional
verb 'shed.' It suggests their attempt to get rid of everything except the members of their group. By
making such an implication, they go so far in their extreme world by excluding everything and
everyone outside their group.
The extract contains transitivity choices and a naming process to reinforce the extremist's
violent attitudes. The naming process through the noun choice of 'sword verses' holds the idea that
those extremists interpret and choose from Koran what they like to meet their willingness to fight.
Furthermore, the transitivity process through the material action intentional verb 'shed' with
'everything' as the affected foreshadows their determination for violence. Also, the contrasting
process through using 'but,' and the rest of the utterance, sets a contrast between insiders and
outsiders. The insiders represents the extremists group, and the outsiders represents the Western
society. As a result, the transitivity and contrasting processes emphasize the idea they are now
ready to kill and fight everything outside their extremist world. The idea of in-group and out-group
becomes apparent in this extract as it is evident in 'shed everything, but the one you are with.' By
this, the extremist's ideology reaches its peak.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

101

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

Table 4. Tools and targets in the fourth extract
Utterance

Tool

Target

They read the sword Transitivity
verses of Koran
Naming

Material action
intentional verb
Choice of noun

Shed everything but Transitivity
the man you are
with
Contrasting

Material action
intentional verb
The conjunction
'but'

Extract 5
The beard would look better if he trimmed it(1). But there were rules now and he was determined
to follow them(2). His life had structure(3). Things were clearly defined(4). He was becoming one
of them now, learning to look like them and think like them(5). This was inseparable from jihad(6).
He prayed with them to be with them(7). They were becoming total brothers(8). (p.83)
Linguistic meaning
The last extract is a description of Hammad's life within the group of extremists. It starts with a
hypothesizing process in ''The beard would look better if he trimmed it''. Then, it continues with a
contrast in the second utterance. As for the fifth utterance, it comprises the use of transitivity
choice of the intensive relational verb 'becoming' and the time representation through the adverb
'now.' The sixth utterance employs the critical stylistic choices of the morphological negation
'inseparable,' and the noun choice 'jihad.' The utterance before the last makes use of the transitivity
choice of the verb 'prayed' with the subject 'He' referring to Hammad and the prepositional phrase
'with them to be with them' as an object. Finally, the extract ends with the transitivity choice of the
verb 'becoming.'
Textual meaning
The last extract includes a set of critical stylistic tools such as presupposition, hypothesizing,
transitivity, contrasting, and equating. At the beginning of the extract, the hypothesizing process
appears in the first utterance through the epistemic modality 'would' and 'if.' By doing so, the
speaker creates an alternative world of trimming his beard to look better. The choice of epistemic
modality through 'would' and 'if' shows that he is uncertain of whether keeping this beard or not.
However, the second utterance sets a contrast to that alternative reality as it starts with the contrast
'but' in 'But there are rules now' plus the use of time representation 'now' suggests that his group
puts rules, one of them is to have a beard. Thus, the first and second utterances suggest that if
Hammad does not belong to the group, he will trim his beard to look better. The focus on the
outside look is one of the indications of extremism as they attempt to have a unified look by
growing beards. For Hammad, the first step to be an extremist is to keep his beard just like the
other extremists even if he does not like the beard. Moving to the fifth utterance, it comprises the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

102

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

use of transitivity choice of the intensive relational verb 'becoming' with 'he' as the carrier and 'one
of them' as the attribute. The transitivity choice and the time representation here show the turning
process that becomes clear through the time deictic 'now' which is a time representation indicating
that the relation between the carrier 'he' and the attribute' one of them' is a new one. The rest of the
utterance continues by identifying how he becomes one of them by learning to look like them and
think like them. So, the equating process through the parallel structure (look like them and think
like them) proves that each one of those extremists looks and thinks like the other one in the group.
In order to be one of them, Hammad has to learn to look and think like them. The next utterance
proves this by using the morphological negation 'inseparable' in 'inseparable from jihad.' Thus, for
those extremists unifying their looking and thinking is part of jihad. Through the negation,
Hammad creates an alternative reality in which looking and thinking like his group can be
separable from jihad. In such a case he would be free to think and look as he likes. He learns these
beliefs because it is part of jihad to hold his group's beliefs. Furthermore, he adds that 'he prayed
with them to be with them' using the material action intentional verb 'prayed' with the subject 'he'
as an actor and the prepositional phrase' with them to be with them' as a goal. He confines the
process and the aim of prayer to be part of the group. The last utterance makes use of the transitivity
choice of the intensive relational verb 'becoming' with 'they' as a carrier and ''total brothers'' as an
attribute to shed light on repeating the idea of the in-group. To sum up, this extract reinforces the
idea of one group holding the ideology, the beliefs, thoughts, and the look of that group. The
above-mentioned tools and targets are shown in table (5):
Table 5. Tools and targets in the fifth extract
Utterance

Tool

Target

The beard would look
better if he trimmed it.

Hypothesizing

Epistemic modality

But there were rules
now and he was
determined to follow
them.

Contrasting

The conjunction 'but'

Time representation

The adverb 'now'

He was becoming one of Transitivity
them now, learning to
look like them and think
like them.
Time representation

Intensive relational verb

This was inseparable
from jihad.

Negation

Morphological negation

He prayed with them to
be with them.

Transitivity

Material action
intentional

They were becoming
total brothers.

Transitivity

Intensive relational verb

The adverb 'now'

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

103

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

1.4.2 Results and Findings
The five extracts show that the critical stylistic tools work jointly to uncover the concept of
extremism in the selected novel. The researchers finds out that modality, transitivity and assuming,
transitivity and equating, transitivity and modality, are woven together in the text to create an
inherently extreme world view. The selected critical stylistic tools vary in their existence in the
selected extracts. Starting with the naming process, it appears twice in the first and fourth extracts
only. It denotes a process of labeling. In the first extract, it sets a diverse line between two worlds
represented by the West and Islam. In the fourth extract, it makes use of 'the sword verses of
Quran' focusing on the words 'sword verses' to link Islam in one way or another to violent attitudes.
The second tool, which is transitivity choices, it is implemented from the second extract to the
last extract. Though it is used more in the last extract than in the second, third, and fourth extracts.
It is repeated three times in the last extract while it is used only twice in the second, third, and
fourth extracts. This attributes to the fact that the last extract demonstrates on how Hammad
becomes one of the extremists by looking and thinking like them. It will make the reader of the
novel assumes of what is the next thing that Hammad will do just like them. Contrasting and
equating, both of them appear in the first, second, fourth, and fifth extracts. Assuming occurs twice
in the second and third extracts. On the one hand, it constitutes the struggle between Islam and
the West in the second extract. On the other hand, it shows Hammad's confession with his need to
be normal in the third extract. As for negation is used twice in the third and the fifth extracts. It
denotes Hammad's complaint of the life in the West in the third extract. While in the fifth extract
is used to show how following the group of extremists for him is considered as something that
cannot be separated from Islam. The hypothesizing process is used more in the second and the
third extracts than in the last extract. It occurs twice in the second and the third extracts while it
is used once in the fifth extract. Space and time representation appears in the first and the last
extracts only with space representation in the first extract and time representation, which is used
twice in the last. However, transitivity choices are highly structured in the text, particularly by
adhering material action and intensive relational verbs. Throughout the five extracts, transitivity
choices are built in the structure of the utterances and accompanied the other critical stylistic tools.
For example, in the second extract, the transitivity choice of the intensive relational 'is' in the
utterances 'Islam is the world…in Koran' and 'Islam is the struggle against the enemy…the
Americans' constitutes an equating process through parallel structure to give the ideology that for
those extremists the world outside the prayer room is the struggle against the enemy. Thus, the
transitivity choices appears to be the most recurrent tool in four out of five extracts. The total
number of transitivity choices is nine. Through using material action verbs contribute the main
actions of the extremists in life represented by fighting, struggling, and shedding everything. While
the intensive relational verbs construct certain facts that are considered to be traits of extremism.
Then, modality comes in the second place as it appears five times in the analysis by focusing on
epistemic and deontic modality. Nevertheless, the remaining critical stylistic tools ranging between
three to two times in their occurrence throughout the five extracts. Following the five extracts on
the ideological level, the extremist's ideology starts with constructing a diverse line between Islam
and the west in the first extract. Furthermore, the second extract identifies the extremist's mentality
and how it sets the idea of Islam's struggle. While the third extract follows the extreme ideology
inside one of the extremists (Hammad) as he fights against the normality. The fourth extract sets
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

104

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

the ultimate aim of extremism of fighting and shedding everything except themselves and their
group. While the last extract emphasizes the idea of in-group through becoming similar in their
look and thoughts . The notion of the extremism in this novel attempts at associating Islam with
fighting and struggling. This destroys the image of Islam and makes Islam something wrong.
DeLillo in this novel presents an Orientalist perspective of Islam through presenting extremists
Muslims who were growing beards and praying. Besides, he links the term Islam to struggle and
fight. Such linkage retains the conflict between the east and the west as Islam has enemies who
are the Western people in general and the American and Jews in particular.
Conclusion
The concept of extremism comprises a set of beliefs and notions which need to be accessed
critically. As such, the current study finds its way by applying a critical stylistic approach. The
work within this approach involves the analysis beyond the form-function relationship. Also, there
is more than one tool of analysis that can work together to unlock the key to the ideology within
each text. After analyzing each extract, it has become clear that more than one tool collaborates
for uncovering extremism. This concept is revealed by the linguistic choices or tools that reflect
the violence, struggle, abnormality, hatred, complex and contradictive nature of this concept. All
these are conceded by implications, presuppositions, hypothesizing, representing space and time,
representing actions, events, and states, equating and contrasting, negation, and naming processes.
The present study proves this in the selected novel Falling Man that fictionalizes this concept
backgrounded by DoLillo's view. The writer represents extremism as a synonym for Islam with
picturing Islam as a religion of struggle and fight. To sum up, the researchers have found that the
writer of Falling Man applies linguistic choices including nouns, verbs, conjunctions, modal
auxiliaries, negation, deictics, and presuppositions to yield the concept of extremism that is based
on struggling, fighting and hatred.
Acknowledgments: The researchers of the present study are indebted to the College of Education
for Women, University of Baghdad, Al-Jadiriyya, for carrying out this study.
About the Authors:
Harir Aamer Ahmed is an M.A. candidate at the Department of English, College of Education
for Women, University of Baghdad. Her field of study is linguistics and her specialization is
concerned with Critical Stylistic Approach. Besides, she is interested in literature, critical studies
and stylistics. ORCid ID : https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2531-2345
Nawal Fadhil Abbas got her PhD in English Language and Linguistics in 2014 from the school
of Humanities, University of Sains Malaysia. Now she is an assistant professor teaching at the
College of Education for Women, University of Baghdad. Her field of study is Semantics and
Pragmatics. Other fields of interest include Critical Discourse Analysis, Critical Stylistics and
Corpus Linguistics. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-2608-6909

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

105

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
Critical Stylistic analysis of the Concept of Extremism

Ahmed & Abbas

References:
Abbas, N.F. (2005). Presupposition in Fitzgerald's ''The Rough Crossing''. Journal of College of
Education for Women, 16(1), 175-186. Retrieved from
https://www.iasj.net/iasj?func=issues&jld=15&uiLanguage=ar
Abdul-Majeed, R.K. (2016). Taboo Words vs. Social Deixis: A Sociolinguitic Analysis of La Justice or
The Cock that Crew: A Play from the Theatre of Ridiculous. Journal of College of Education for
Women, 27(1), 400-414. Retrieved
from
https://www.iasj.net/iasj?func=issues&jld=15&uiLanguage=ar
Abdul Zahra, S., & Abbas, N.F. (2004). Cohesive Ties: Conjunctions. Journal of College of Education
for Women, 15(2), 677-691.
DeLillo, D. (2007). Falling Man. New York: Scribner.
Duval, J.N. (2008). Introduction: The Power of History and the Persistence of
Mystery. In J.N.
Duval (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Don Delillo (pp.1-10). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and Power. London: Longman.
Gray, R. (2011). After the Fall American Literature since 9/11. Chichester: Wiley
Blackwell.
Retrieved
from
http://93.174.95/main/995000/bc9302e5095435b8ff5d4c8b5991852a/Richard%20Gray%28auth.
%29%20-%20After%20the%20Fall_%20American%20Literature%20Since%209_11-WileyBlackwell%20%282011%29.pdf
Keniston, A., & Quinn, J.F. (2008). Introduction: Representing 9/11: Literature and
Resistance. In
A. Keniston, & J.F. Quinn (eds.), Literature after 9/11 (pp.1-15).
New York:
Routledge. Retrieved from
http://blogs.shu.edu/english/files/2014/12/Literature-after-911.pdf
Knight, p. (2008). DeLillo, Postmodernism, Postmodernity. In J.N. Duval (ed.), The
Cambridge
Companion to Don Delillo (pp. 27-40). Cambridge:
Cambridge
University Press.
Jeffries, L. (2010). Critical Stylistics: The Power of English. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Jeffries, L. (2014). Critical Stylistics. In M. Burke (ed.), The Routledge Handbook
of
Stylistics(pp. 408-420). Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon: Routledge.
Jeffries, L. (2015). Textual Meaning and Its Place in a Theory of Language. In Topics in Linguistics,
15(1).
Retrieved
from
http://eprints.hud.ac.uk/id/eprint/30099/1/%255BTopics%in%2520Linguistics%255D%2520Text
ual%2520meaning%2520and%2520place%2520in%a%2520theory%2520of%2520language.pdf
Rowe, J.C. (2011). Global Horizons in Falling Man. In S., Olster (ed.), DON
DELILLO Mao
II,
Underworld, Falling Man (pp.121-134). London:
Continuum International Publishing Group.
Simpson, P. (1993). Language, Ideology and Point of View. London: Routledge.
Tsiokou, K. (2017). Reading the Cityscape in Post- 9/11 Fiction: Urban Manifestation of Trauma and
National Identity in Don DeLillo's ''Falling
Man'' and Joseph O'Neill's ''Netherland'' (Master's
thesis, The Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki). Retrieved
from
http://ikee.lib.auth.gr/record/292553/files/GRI-2017-19784.pdf

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

106

