Arab World English Journal (August 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.233

Theses ID 233

Pp. 1-58

Investigating the Use of Instagram as a MALL Tool: The Case of Al-Imam University EFL
Students
Athar Yousef Abdullah Al-Garawi
Department of English Language and Literature
College of Languages and Translation
Al Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Saudi Arabia

Author: Athar Yousef Abdullah Al-Garawi
Thesis Title: Investigating the Use of Instagram as a MALL Tool: The Case of Al-Imam University EFL
Students
Subject/major: Linguistics
Institution: Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, College of Languages and Translation,
Saudi Arabia.
Degree: MA in Linguistics
Year of Award: 2016
Supervisor: Dr. Zuhair Zaghlool
Key Words: English Language, EFL, Instagram, MALL, Social Media
Abstract:
This study aimed to investigate the benefits and barriers of using Instagram in English language learning.
The sample of this study consisted of 151 randomly-selected female students enrolled in the department
of English at the College of Languages and Translation at Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University in the academic year 1436/1437– 2015/2016 in the first semester. The researcher used both a
five-point Likert scale questionnaire as a quantitative instrument and semi-structured interviews with
students as a qualitative instrument to collect the data of the study. Those instruments were validated by
ten university professors. Similarly, the reliability of the questionnaire was achieved by calculating
Cronbach Alpha formula. The findings of the study revealed that the most important benefits of using
Instagram in learning English were as follows: improving the reading, writing, and listening skills,
providing enjoyable learning experiences, enriching vocabulary, improving oral communication skills,
and enjoying a sense of freedom of time and place. Furthermore, the results of the study unveiled the
following challenges of using Instagram in English learning: distracting attention, lack of direction from
the syllabuses, lack of encouragement from instructors, embarrassment, lack of immediate feedback, the
cost of Internet access, and the difficulty of writing long passages. Finally, the findings of the study
presented the following solutions to Instagram barriers in English language learning: creating learning
accounts and posting important things in the lecture, following only specialized accounts for learning
English.
Cite as: Al-Garawi, A. Y. A. (2016). Investigating the Use of Instagram as a MALL Tool: The Case of
Al-Imam University EFL Students. Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, College of
Languages and Translation, Saudi Arabia. (Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab World English Journal
(ID Number: 233) August 2019,1-58.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.233

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

1

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Ministry of Education
Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
College of Languages and Translation
Department of English Language and Literature

Investigating the Use of Instagram as a MALL Tool: The Case of Al-Imam
University EFL Students

By
Athar Yousef Abdullah Al-Garawi

Supervised by
Dr. Zuhair Zaghlool

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Master of Arts in
Linguistics

Safar, 1437 – December, 2015
Riyadh - Saudi Arabia

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

2

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

3

Acknowledgements

All praise is due to Allah, the Almighty for His guidance, and Who blessed me
with knowledge, thoughts, power and cooperative people to assist me complete this work.
I would like to express my deep appreciation and utmost gratitude to my
respected supervisor Dr. Zuhair Zaghlool. Without his constant endless support, patience,
and efficient supervision, this research would have never been possible. He did not only
act as my advisor, but he also became my mentor, guide, and counselor. Moreover, I
would like to thank the viva committee: Dr. Rafik Ahmad and Dr. Nasser Freahat for
their insightful comments and suggestions.
My deepest appreciation goes to my beloved father, Yousef Al-Garawi, whose
care and words inspire me to achieve my academic goals. My gratitude also is forwarded
to my mother, Fawziah Al-Hudaithi ,for her love, prayers, and endless support. In
addition, I would like sincerely to thank my husband and best friend, Hamad Al-Matrudi,
for his constant unconditional love. I really could not have done this without his constant
encouragement and support. Thanks are also due to my son, Saleh, the light of my life,
whose smile gives me happiness, inspiration, and motivation to get things done.
Finally, I would like to thank my brothers Abdullah, Abdulrrahman, Muhammad,
Mouad, Faisal, and Osama for their love, help, and encouragement. I would also like to
thank my aunt Haya Al-Hudaithi, my cousins, and my friends for their help and
encouragement.

4

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Abstract
This study aimed to investigate the benefits and barriers of using Instagram in
English language learning. The sample of this study consisted of 151 randomly-selected
female students enrolled in the department of English at the College of Languages and
Translation at Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University in the academic year
1436/1437– 2015/2016 in the first semester. The researcher used both a five-point Likert
scale questionnaire as a quantitative instrument and semi-structured interviews with
students as a qualitative instrument to collect the data of the study. Those instruments
were validated by ten university professors. Similarly, the reliability of the questionnaire
was achieved by calculating Cronbach Alpha formula. The findings of the study revealed
that the most important benefits of using Instagram in learning English were as follows:
improving the reading, writing, and listening skills, providing enjoyable learning
experiences, enriching vocabulary, improving oral communication skills, and enjoying a
sense of freedom of time and place. Furthermore, the results of the study unveiled the
following challenges of using Instagram in English learning: distracting attention, lack of
direction from the syllabuses, lack of encouragement from instructors, embarrassment,
lack of immediate feedback, the cost of Internet access, and the difficulty of writing long
passages. Finally, the findings of the study presented the following solutions to Instagram
barriers in English language learning: creating learning accounts and posting important
things in the lecture, following only specialized accounts for learning English.

‫‪5‬‬

‫‪INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL‬‬

‫اﻟﻤﻠﺨﺺ‬

‫ھﺪﻓﺖ ھﺬه اﻟﺪراﺳﺔ إﻟﻰ اﺳﺘﻜﺸﺎف ﻣﺰاﯾﺎ و ﺗﺤﺪﯾﺎت إﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﺗﻄﺒﯿﻖ اﻹﻧﺴﺘﻐﺮام ﻛﺂداة ﻟﺘﻌﻠﻢ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻹﻧﺠﻠﯿﺰﯾﺔ‪.‬‬
‫ﺣﯿﺚ ﺗﻢ اﺧﺘﯿﺎر ﻋﯿﻨﺔ ﻋﺸﻮاﺋﯿﺔ ﻣﻦ طﺎﻟﺒﺎت ﻗﺴﻢ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻻﻧﺠﻠﯿﺰﯾﺔ ﻓﻲ ﺟﺎﻣﻌﺔ اﻹﻣﺎم ﻣﺣﻣد ﺑن ﺳﻌود اﻹﺳﻼﻣﯾﺔ‪ ،‬وﺑﻠﻎ‬
‫ﻋﺪدھﻦ ‪ ١٥١‬طﺎﻟﺒﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻔﺼﻞ اﻟﺪراﺳﻲ اﻷول ﻟﻠﻌﺎم اﻟﺠﺎﻣﻌﻲ ‪١٤٣٧/١٤٣٦‬ھـ ‪ .‬و ﻗﺪ ﺻﻤﻤﺖ اﻟﺒﺎﺣﺜﺔ اﺳﺘﺒﺎﻧﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ‬
‫ﻣﻘﯿﺎس ﻟﯿﻜﺮﯾﺖ )ﺧﻤﺎﺳﻲ اﻟﻨﻘﺎط( ﻛﺂداة ﺑﺤﺚ ﻛﻤﯿﺔ ‪ ،‬ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻰ اﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ اﻟﺸﺨﺼﯿﺔ ﻣﻊ ﻋﺪد ﻣﻦ أﻓﺮاد اﻟﻌﯿﻨﺔ‬
‫ﻛﺂداة ﺑﺤﺚ ﻧﻮﻋﯿﺔ ﻟﺘﺠﻤﯿﻊ ﺑﯿﺎﻧﺎت اﻟﺪراﺳﺔ‪ .‬و ﻟﻠﺘﺤﻘﻖ ﻣﻦ ﺻﺪق اﻻﺳﺘﺒﺎﻧﺔ وأﺳﺌﻠﺔ اﻟﻤﻘﺎﺑﻠﺔ اﻟﺸﺨﺼﯿﺔ ﻋﺮﺿﺘﺎ ﻋﻠﻰ‬
‫ﻣﺠﻤﻮﻋﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﻤﺤﻜﻤﯿﻦ ﻣﻜﻮﻧﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻋﺸﺮ أﺳﺎﺗﺬة ﺟﺎﻣﻌﯿﯿﻦ ‪،‬وﻟﻠﺘﺄﻛﺪ ﻣﻦ ﺛﺒﺎت اﻻﺳﺘﺒﺎﻧﺔ ﺗﻢ اﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﻣﻌﺎدﻟﺔ )ﻛﺮوﻧﺒﺎخ أﻟﻔﺎ(‪.‬‬
‫وﻗﺪ ﻛﺸﻔﺖ ﻧﺘﺎﺋﺞ اﻟﺪراﺳﺔ اﻟﻤﺰاﯾﺎ اﻟﻤﮭﻤﺔ ﻻﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﺗﻄﺒﯿﻖ اﻹﻧﺴﺘﻐﺮام ﻓﻲ ﺗﻌﻠﻢ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻹﻧﺠﻠﯿﺰﯾﺔ ‪ ،‬و ﻣﻨﮭﺎ ﻣﺎ‬
‫ﯾﻠﻲ‪ :‬ﺗﻄﻮﯾﺮ ﻣﮭﺎرة اﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻟﻜﺘﺎﺑﺔ واﻹﺳﺘﻤﺎع‪ ،‬ﺗﻮﻓﯿﺮ ﺑﯿﺌﺔ ﺗﻌﻠﯿﻤﯿﺔ ﻣﻤﺘﻌﺔ‪ ،‬إﺛﺮاء ﻣﻔﺮدات اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻹﻧﺠﻠﯿﺰﯾﺔ ‪ ،‬ﺗﻄﻮﯾﺮ‬
‫ﻣﮭﺎرة اﻹﺗﺼﺎل اﻟﻠﻔﻈﻲ‪ ،‬ﺧﻠﻖ ﺗﻌﻠﻢ ﺣﺮ وﻣﺮﯾﺢ ﻏﯿﺮ ﻣﻘﯿﺪ ﺑﺰﻣﺎن او ﻣﻜﺎن‪ .‬و أﯾﻀﺎ ﻣﻦ أﺑﺮز اﻟﺘﺤﺪﯾﺎت اﻟﻠﻲ ﺗﻮاﺟﮫ‬
‫اﻟﻄﺎﻟﺒﺎت ﻓﻲ إﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﺗﻄﺒﯿﻖ اﻹﻧﺴﺘﻐﺮام ‪ :‬ﺗﺸﺘﺖ اﻹﻧﺘﺒﺎه‪ ،‬ﻋﺪم ﺗﻮﺟﯿﮫ اﻟﻤﻨﺎھﺞ ﻹﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻹﻧﺴﺘﻐﺮام ‪ ،‬ﻋﺪم ﺗﺸﺠﯿﻊ اﻟﻄﻠﺒﺔ‬
‫ﻻﺳﺘﺨﺪاﻣﮫ ﻣﻦ ﻗﺒﻞ ﻣﻌﻠﻤﯿﮭﻢ ‪ ،‬ﺷﻌﻮر اﻟﻄﺎﻟﺒﺎت ﺑﺎﻹﺣﺮاج ﻋﻨﺪ اﻟﺘﻮاﺻﻞ ﻣﻊ اﻟﺬﻛﻮر‪ ،‬ﻋﺪم وﺟﻮد ﺗﻐﺬﯾﺔ راﺟﻌﺔ ﻣﺒﺎﺷﺮة‪،‬‬
‫ﺗﻜﻠﻔﺔ ﺳﻌﺮ اﻹﻧﺘﺮﻧﺖ‪ ،‬ﺑﺎﻹﺿﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻰ ﺻﻌﻮﺑﺔ ﻛﺘﺎﺑﺔ اﻟﻘﻄﻊ اﻟﻄﻮﯾﻠﺔ ﻋﻠﻰ‪ԩ‬ﺸﺎﺷﺎت اﻻﺟﮭﺰة اﻟﺬﻛﯿﮫ‪ .‬واﺧﯿﺮا ﻗﺪﻣﺖ ﻧﺘﺎﺋﺞ‬
‫اﻟﺪراﺳﺔ ﻣﺠﻤﻮﻋﺔ ﻣﻦ اﻟﺤﻠﻮل ﻟﻤﻮاﺟﮭﺔ اﻟﺘﺤﺪﯾﺎت اﻟﻠﻲ ﺗﻮاﺟﮫ ﻓﻌﺎﻟﯿﺔ إﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻹﻧﺴﺘﻐﺮام ﻓﻲ ﺗﻌﻠﻢ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻷﻧﺠﻠﯿﺰﯾﺔ‪ ،‬ﻣﻨﮭﺎ‬
‫ﻣﺎﯾﻠﻲ ‪ :‬اﻧﺸﺎء ﺣﺴﺎب إﻧﺴﺘﻐﺮام ﺧﺎص ﻟﻠﺘﻌﻠﻢ ﯾﺘﻢ ﻣﻦ ﺧﻼﻟﮫ ﻧﺸﺮ ﻣﻌﻠﻮﻣﺎت اﻟﺪرس اﻟﻤﮭﻤﺔ وﯾﺘﻢ ﻣﻦ ﺧﻼﻟﮫ ﻣﺘﺎﺑﻌﺔ ﺣﺴﺎﺑﺎت‬
‫ﺧﺎﺻﺔ ﺗﮭﺪف ﻟﺘﻌﻠﯿﻢ وﺗﻄﻮﯾﺮ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻹﻧﺠﻠﯿﺰﯾﺔ ‪.‬‬

6

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
Acknowledgments………….………………...……………………………..….....….3
Abstract in English………….……………...………………………………..….....…4
Abstract in Arabic………………………....…………………………....…...…...…..5
Table of Contents…………….…………..…………………………………...…..…6
List of Abbreviations and Acronyms.……………..………………………...……...9
Chapter One – Introduction
1.1 Introduction.………………………………..…………………………...………10
1.2 Statement of the Problem..………………..………………………………........12
1.3 Significance of the Study..……………….….……………...………….….........12
1.4 Objectives of the Study....……….…..……….….………………………..........12
1.5 Questions of the Study…………………....…..….……………...………..........12
1.6 Operational definitions...………………………………………………............13
1.7 Limitations of the Study………………….………….……………......….……14
1.8 Chapterization…………………..……………………………………………..14
Chapter Two – Literature Review
2.1 Introduction………………………………………………………...………….15
2.2 Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL)…......…………...….………..15
2.3 The Emergence of Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL..…….……..17
2.4 Definition of MALL……………………………….…….……....……….…...18

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

2.5 MALL in Language Learning……………….…………………..…….……….18
2.6 Social Media………………………………………………….…………….….22
2.7 Social Media and Language Learning……………………….…….…………..24
2.8 Instagram……………………….………………………….…….……………..28
2.9 Instagram and Language Learning……………………….……….……………29
2.10 Summary…………………………………………………………..………….30
Chapter Three –Methodology
3.1.Introduction.………………………………………….……………...…..…….32
3.2 Research Design………………………………….…………………….………32
3.3 Population and Sample of the Study…………….……………………….…….32
3.4 Research Instrument…………………………….……………………..……….33
3.5 Data Collection Procedure…………………….………………………..………34
3.6 Statistical Analysis……………………………………………………..………35
Chapter Four - Results of the Study
4.1 Introduction.…………………………….……………………………….…….36
4.2 Data analysis.………………………….………………………….…..…..……36
4.3 Results of the Study.………………….…...…………………….….....….........36
4.4 Summary of the Results…………………………………………..….….….....42
Chapter Five – Discussion, Conclusion, and Recommendations
5.1 Introduction …………………….……………………………………………..43
5.2 Discussion of the Results of the Study……………………………….………..43

7

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

5.3 Conclusions and Recommendations.…………….…………………...…...........46
5.4 Suggestions for Future Research………………….…….……….…....……….47
References……………………………………………….………….….……..........48
APPENDIX 1: The Questionnaire of the Study …...…………….….....…….........52
APPENDIX 2: Interview Questions……………………………………………….55
APPENDIX 3: Questionnaire Raters.….…..…....…….….…..….………..……….56
APPENDIX 4: Frequencies and Percentages of the Data of the Study…………….57

8

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

List of Abbreviations and Acronyms
CALL: Computer Assisted Language Learning
D-Learning: Distant Learning
EFL: English as a Foreign Language
E- Learning: Electronic Learning
ESL: English as a Second Language
EMASE: Empower Mobile Assisted Social E-learning
ICT: Information and Communication Technologies
M: Mean
MALL: Mobile Assisted Language Learning
M- Learning: Mobile Learning
PDAs: Personal Digital Assistances
SD: Standard Deviation
SMS: Short Message Service
SNS: Social Networking Sites
SPSS: Statistical Package for Social Science

9

10

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Chapter One

1.1 Introduction
EFL practitioners always try to integrate technology with language teaching and
learning. Consequently, with the advent of computers, the Internet, and smart phones,
two fields have emerged: CALL (Computer Assisted Language Learning) and MALL
(Mobile Assisted Language Learning). The appearance of smart phones and particularly
the mobile social media network applications in last decade such as (Twitter, Facebook,
Instagram, Flicker, Path, Snapchat, etc.) develops our lifestyle and creates an obvious
social change. These programs not only strengthen our relationships with others, but also
improve our self-knowledge and awareness. Moreover, these innovative social media
programs directed learning environment to be more interactive. Ekoc (2014) emphasizes
the role of social media as supporting tool for language classroom by concluding that
social media create interactional and interpersonal spaces where knowledge is shared
negotiated. Students’ value connecting themselves to their class community outside the
walls of language classrooms and as a result of their interactions with their peers and
instructors, their connection to learning practices strengthen. No one can deny how easy
and interesting our life becomes using these mobile social media programs. Each of these
social applications has its distinctive features although all of them are used for the social
communication purpose. One of these applications of smart phones which has gained
popularity among the new generation is Instagram.
The social media tool Instagram was introduced in 2010. It allows its users to
share pictures and 15-second videos, write comments under what they posted in their

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

11

accounts and their followers; they can also comment under each post. Therefore, there is
written and visual communication. Moreover, its users can open an account either public
or private, use picture filters, follow other users and have followers, send private pictures
or videos for certain followers, make hashtags, tag other users, share location, search for
people or hashtags. In Instagram blog, it has been announced that Instagram has more
than 400 million Instagrammers sharing real moments.
Instagram is a good means of enhancing learning a foreign language via its
interactive short videos, images, and comments. Al-Ali (2014) pointed out that due to its
popularity among students, Instagram was utilized as a mobile learning (mLearning) tool
to generate content that was used for one speaking activity, and two writing activities
reinforcing speaking, grammar, writing and vocabulary skills.

Its users can follow

language-learning accounts. Some of these accounts help their followers to learn most
basic language skills such as reading, writing, listening, grammar, and vocabulary.
Moreover, its users can follow and communicate with native language speakers and know
more about their culture and language. Using Instagram, EFL learners can learn the
language in an entertaining and spontaneous way by enjoying a great sense of freedom
concerning time and place. These fantastic features of Instagram motivate students to
achieve high level of collaborative learning. The results of Mondahl and Liana’s case
study (2014) indicate that motivation and collaboration influence the quality of students’
work; the social media enhanced platform is a facilitator for collaboration and of
knowledge sharing and that end results improve as students’ focus is targeted towards
problem-solving.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

12

1.2. Statement of the problem
MALL calls for incorporating mobile applications with language learning and
teaching. Though Instagram is very popular among EFL students, very few studies have
been conducted in this field. Besides, to the best knowledge of the researcher, this is the
first study in Riyadh to tackle this issue. Therefore, this study attempts to investigate the
benefits and barriers of using Instagram in English language learning.
1.3. Significance of the study
The results of this study are expected to be of great value for EFL teachers,
students, and curriculum developers. This study encourages teachers to use different
social media applications available to students in teaching a foreign language. Tarantino,
McDonough and Hua (2013) assure that overall student learning can increase when
educators incorporate social media into academic course content.
1.4 Objectives of the study
This study aims at
1. Investigating the benefits of using Instagram as a MALL tool.
2. Revealing the challenges of using Instagram in English Language Learning.
1.5 Questions of the study
This study attempts to answer the following questions:
1. What are the benefits of using Instagram as a MALL tool?
2. What are the barriers Saudi EFL university students face when using Instagram as a
MALL tool?

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

13

1.6 Operational Definitions
MALL: This acronym stands for Mobile Assisted Language Learning in which mobile
technology is used to facilitate Language Learning. Miangah and Nezarat (2012) stated
that in contrast to classroom learning, in MALL there is no need for the learners to sit in a
classroom or at a computer to get learning materials. In fact, MALL can be considered an
ideal solution to language learning barriers in terms of time and place.
Social Media: Social media refer to a number of networking sites or applications that
involve social interaction and communication such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram,
Foursquare, Snapchat and YouTube. These social media applications not only build
relationships among people, but also increase the motivation for developing the selfknowledge and to be updated to the society current events. Boyd (2014) defined social
media as a set of sites and services that are at the heart of contemporary culture and that
teens turn to a plethora of popular services to socialize, gossip, share information, and
hang out. He used the term social media to refer to the sites and services that emerged
during the early 2000s, including social network sites, video sharing sites, blogging and
microblogging platforms, and related tools that allow participants to create and share
their own content.
Instagram: Instagram is a social media tool introduced in 2010. Meyer (2015) defines
Instagram as “A fun and quirky way to share your life with friends through a series of
pictures. Snap a photo with your mobile phone, and then choose a filter to transform the
image into a memory to keep around forever. We're building Instagram to allow you to
experience moments in your friends' lives through pictures as they happen. We imagine a
world more connected through photos”. It was started to share photos, then from the mid

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

14

of 2013 Instagram was expanded to include both photos and 15-second videos. Under
each photo or video post, users can comment, and mention other users to this post.
Moreover, it enables its users to add location or tag some users on their post. Users can
make their account either public (accessible to everyone) or private (inaccessible to every
one). Instagram has users more than 400.000.000.
1.7 Limitations of the study
The generalization of the results of this current study will be restricted as a result to the
following factors:
1- The population of this study was restricted to the female university students enrolled in
the College of Languages and Translation at Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University in the academic year 1436/1437.
2- The study was conducted in the first semester of the academic year 1436/1437.
Therefore, the study findings were limited to that time of this year.

1.8 Chapterization
This study is presented in five chapters. Chapter I includes a brief introduction.
Chapter II is a literature review of related studies. Chapter III deals with the methodology
adopted. Chapter IV is composed of the analysis of data. Finally chapter V provides
discussion of the results, the conclusion of the study, and suggestions for further research.

15

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Chapter Two
Literature Review

2.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the theoretical literature and the empirical studies which
deal with CALL and MALL in general and Instagram in particular. In fact, there are only
very few empirical studies which tackle the issue of Instagram.
In the recent years, the rapid development of computer and mobile technologies
has changed many aspects of our lives. For example, the purpose of these technologies is
not only based on Writing, searching, communicating with others and for entertainment
as in the past, but it is also used nowadays for unlimited purposes and activities that help
all aspects of our lives. For instance, through some mobile applications especially the
social media programs such as Twitter, Instagram and Facebook etc., advertisement has
been enriched and a lot of online stores have emerged. Because education is a curial part
in our lives, these computer and mobile technologies clearly develop language learning
and teaching as well. Therefore, the researcher conducted this study to investigate the use
of Instagram as a MALL tool at Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University. This
chapter introduces the background of this study.
2.2 Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL)
CALL is a term that refers to the use of any computer technology that helps in
language learning. Computers have been used in language teaching and learning since
1950s though they were very huge. Beatty (2010, p. 18) states, “The first computers used

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

16

for language learning were large 1950s mainframes that were only available at university
campus research facilities”. Beatty (ibid, p.41) adds, “Developments in web technologies
are presenting teachers and learners with simple tools to fashion a new generation of
learning experiences.”
Lee (2000) summarizes the reasons of using Computer-assisted Language
Learning as it provides: (a) experiential learning, (b) motivation, (c) enhancement of
student achievement, (d) authentic materials for study, (e) greater interaction, (f)
individualization, (g) independence from a single source of information, and (h) global
understanding. Moreover, Han (2008) points that computer technology provides various
communicative and interactive activities that help second language learners to improve
their linguistic skills, enhance their learning attitude, and gain self-confidence. Therefore,
using computers can help both teachers and students achieve high results in language
learning and teaching because of their distinctive properties.
In contrast to the benefits of using CALL in language learning, Lee mentioned the
barriers inhibiting the practice of Computer-assisted Language Learning and classified
them in the following common categories: (a) financial barriers, (b) availability of
computer hardware and software, and (c) technical and theoretical knowledge.
AbuSeileek and Abu Sa’aleek (2012) point out that although computers have many
merits, they are still machines that could not replace the role of teachers at all “Due to the
limitations of computer’s artificial intelligence, computer technology is unable to deal
with learners’ unexpected learning problems and response to learners’ questions
immediately as the teachers do (p. 31)”. Besides, Han (2008) concluded that instructors
and learners should realize the advantages and disadvantages in current CALL programs

17

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

in order to avoid its barriers and get its maximum benefits in teaching and learning ESL.
Finally, Alsheraimy (2014, p.43) concluded, “CALL should be integrated with all EFL
courses because computers have become an indispensable part of English language
teaching and learning”.
2.3 The Emergence of Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL)
Kukulska-Hulme, and Shield (2008) clarify that MALL differs from computerassisted language learning in its use of personal, portable devices that enable new ways of
learning, emphasizing continuity or spontaneity of access and interaction across different
contexts of use. They concluded their research saying, “MALL seems to be in its infancy;
until relatively recently, MALL activities rather mirrored early CALL activities where
electronic quizzes, grammar drills and vocabulary lists dominated (p. 283)”.
Chaka (2009) shows the two main evolutionary developments that d-learning
(distant learning) passes through in the past years: from d-learning to e-learning
(electronic learning),
Ghorbandordinejad,

then

from e-learning

to

m-learning (mobile learning).

Aghasafi, Farjadnasab, and Harandi (2011, p.4) stated, “ELT

scholars have tried to use the findings and opportunities that m-Learning offers from the
early days of its emergence. The results of the studies on the application of mobile
learning into foreign/second language learning have led to evolution of the sub-field of
Mobile Assisted Language Learning (MALL) in a same line as Computer Assisted
language learning (CALL).” Finally, Alhelayel (2015) explained that the reasons why
people use mobile learning commonly are portability, connectivity, and familiarity.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

18

2.4 Definition of MALL
Trifonova, Knapp, Ronchetti, and Gamper (2004, p.3) define mobile learning as
“Any form of studying, teaching or learning that is delivered through a mobile device or
in a mobile environment. In general by mobile device we mean PDAs and digital cell
phones, but more generally we might think of any device that is small, autonomous and
unobtrusive enough to accompany us in every moment and can be used for educational
purposes.” Miangah and Nezarat (2012, p.1) define MALL as “The use of mobile
technology in language learning.” Moreover, they contrast MALL to classroom learning
by showing that in MALL learners do not need to sit in a particular classroom or at a
computer to process learning.
“As in other technology-enhanced language learning milieu, mobile learning
environments might be face- to-face, distance, or online; further, they may be self-paced
or calendar-based (Chinnery, 2006, p.9)”. Chinnery described the common features of
mobile devices as they include Internet access, voice-messaging, SMS text-messaging,
cameras, and even video-recording in which all of these features can help language
learning through providing communicative language practice, access to authentic content,
and task completion.
2.5 MALL in Language Learning
Mobile technology is a strong power that helps people acquire different
dimensions of knowledge. Chinnery (2006) stated that mobile technologies clearly assist
language learning through providing practical uses due to its availability and portability.
He added saying that mobile technologies can be just as easily utilized outside of the

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

19

classroom as they can in it in which learners can study or practice manageable chunks of
information in any place on their own time, thereby taking advantage of their
convenience.
Although MALL has numerous merits that enrich language learning, it also faces
some demerits. For instance, Chinnery (2006, p. 13) mentioned, “Inherent in the
portability of mobile media are reduced screen sizes, limited audiovisual quality, virtual
keyboarding and one-finger data entry, and limited power. Further, their availability can
be limited. While cell phone ownership may be almost universal for college-aged
individuals, this is not true for other populations or media”.
Fotouhi-Ghazvini, Earnshaw, Robison, and Excell (2009) conducted a study that
aimed at examining the possibilities of using mobile games in English language learning
classes for Iranian University students in the University of Qom. The participants of the
study were 15 students from the third year of computing Engineering whose levels of
English were as equal as possible. The researchers used in their study a mobile-based
learning game that is designed within a technical context. The study demonstrated that
mobile game-based learning could facilitate students’ learning motivation and
engagement in the interactive learning environment.
Bahrani (2011) stated that by the rapid and extensive development of information
and communication technologies such as mobile phones, everybody should be able to
learn as much English language as he/she wants at ease even without having to attend any
English classes. He confirmed that a mobile learning model that is appropriate for
language learning in informal setting requires a deep understanding of the learners and

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

20

their learning conditions and needs in addition to that a deep consideration of the relevant
environmental, cultural, and political dimensions. He also asserted, “Mobile phone-based
language learning technology, thanks to its portability, low production cost, versatile
features, and significant memory space has the outstanding potential to provide
everybody with authentic audio/visual language learning materials that could possibly
teach them to speak and read (p. 247)”.
Miangah and Nezarat’s research (2012) about the use of mobile technology in
language learning shows that learning nowadays has moved from teacher-led learning to
student-led learning and that mobile-learning (m-learning) helps the students feel using
the technology more effective and interesting than before. Moreover, though going
through language activities on mobile phones may take longer time compared to
computers, the learners feel a greater sense of freedom of time and place, so that they can
take the advantage of spare time to learn a second language when and where they are.
Moreover, Pegrum, Oakley, and Faulkner (2013) asserted that mobile learning is
the fastest growth area in the whole field of information and communication technologies
(ICT) in education and that mobile handheld devices popularity has increased noticeably
in recent years. They defined m-learning as “Any form of learning that is mediated
through a mobile or, more precisely, mobile handheld, device. These devices encompass
digital media players (including iPods and iPod Touches), smartphones (including
iPhones, Android phones, BlackBerrys and Windows phones), personal digital assistants
(PDAs), and tablet computers including iPads (p.66)”.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

21

As for the merits of using mobile apps in learning, the results of a study carried
out by Wang, Yu, and Wu (2013) indicated that students benefited from working in an ecooperative environment along with the assistance from the using of mobile apps. They
asserted that students really enjoyed themselves while using empower mobile assisted
social e-learning (EMASE) module throughout the course. They concluded students were
actively participating in their learning process individually and collaboratively. In
addition, the results showed that even without teacher’s directions, students were able to
control the use of mobile apps while working on their learning activities. They also
confirmed that students developed their skills and confidence using the multimedia and
Web apps.
Alabdulkareem (2015) conducted a study on Saudi middle school science
teachers and students which revealed that smart phones were the best possible device to
enhance the use of social media in education, where all teachers and almost three quarters
of students had smart phones in which 85% of the students had Internet access at home
vs. 95% of the teachers.
Dashti and Aldashti (2015) conducted a study that investigated the attitudes of
college English major students towards the use of cell phones in language learning
contexts. The results indicated the majority (80.3%) of students were in favour of the use
of mobile devices in the learning and teaching process and found it important and
beneficial. They also believed that it enhanced their knowledge of language in terms of
vocabulary and grammar.”(p. 19). Finally, 51.7% of students wished their instructors
would interact with them via using Instagram.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

22

Lawrence (2015) conducted a study to examine learners’ receptiveness towards
integrating smartphones in EFL learning, at a Korean university, in various manners and
contexts, exploring predictors of learner attitude towards mobile devices. The findings of
the study showed that almost half of the participants showed positive attitudes towards
smartphones both inside and outside the classroom. The findings also indicated that the
participants had positive attitudes across the four functional categories: communicating
with students and teacher using email, voice clip, and video calls as the highest one, then
accessing Internet to find language information or class materials, downloading elearning lessons and receiving or submitting homework.

2.6 Social Media
Dudeney and Hockly (2012) stated that the major shift in technology was the
transition from Web 1.0 (a static, expert-produced resource of information) to Web 2.0 (a
more creative, consumer-driven information space). They added that Web 2.0 tools
enable online users with no programming or design skills to produce resources, and this
led to more creative approaches from teachers using technology. They said not only
teachers could develop resources such as personal blogs and collaborative wiki spaces,
but also the whole classroom and this Web 2.0 tools lead to creativity in education.
Narayan (2013) explored the place of social media in contemporary civil society
by examining social media as a place in and of itself where people search for, seek, find,
use and share information for their personal, private, and public spheres. Narayan stated,
“Social media platforms have become tangible and real places where we gather in

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

23

intended and unintended ways and this has the potential to nurture democracy and civil
society, sometimes in dynamic and unexpected ways (p. 33)”. He continued describing
social media as information space through showing that it is fueled by information, just
as the Internet and other digital media before it, however, the information on social media
differs from other media in that users are not just consumers of the information on it, but
are also active producers of information within it. “One defining aspect of social media
technologies is how it has altered and made fluid our sense of time and space, more so
than previous technologies (Ibid. p. 39)”.
Nwangwa, Yonlonfoun, and Omotere (2014, p. 447) defined social media as, “A
term that is frequently used to describe different types of electronic communication
platforms. Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat, Path, Flicker and YouTube are some
examples of the most used social media applications nowadays”. They categorized social
media for simplicity purpose into eight categories, that are inter-dependent by their mode
of usage primarily for developing user-centered social interaction, as comprising online
applications for (SNS) social networking sites ( e.g. Facebook), social bookmarking and
sharing tools, social citation tools (e.g. Digg and CiteULike), blogging and
microblogging tools (e.g. Twitter), virtual worlds (e.g. SecondLife), e-conference
presentation sharing tools (e.g. SlideShare), audio and video sharing tools (e.g.
YouTube), e-project management tools (e,g. BigBlueButton and Skype), and research
and writing collaboration tools (e.g. Wikipedia and Wikispace).
Code (2015) conducted a study to examine how virtual identity influences student
relationships both within and outside of a school context. This study also explored how
personal technologies and social media use have influenced learners’ perceptions of their

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

24

own 21st century learning. The study concludes that while social media is very influential
on students’ socialization, educators should be more concerned about the lack of
guidance and support that students receive in school in terms of appropriate social media
use and the navigation of virtual identity.
Finally, Rouse, M. (2015) defined social media as
Social media is the collective of online communications channels dedicated to
community-based input, interaction, content-sharing and collaboration. Websites and
applications dedicated to forums, microblogging, social networking, social bookmarking,
social curation, and wikis are among the different types of social media.

2.7 Social Media and Language Learning
Borau, Ullrich, Feng and Shen (2009) explored how the social network Twitter
was applied in an EFL English as a Foreign Language classroom. The results of revealed
that the majority of the students frequently interacted with Twitter. Moreover, about 70%
of students stated that they found it easier to communicate after using Twitter while 24%
had a neutral opinion and 4.88% (= 4 students) disagreed. In addition, the results of the
study confirmed that Twitter was suitable to train communicative and culture competence
anytime anywhere without face-to-face interaction.
Chen and Bryer (2012) stated that collaboration is one of the most important
characteristic of social learning in which students have the autonomy to self-select what
they need to learn to gain a better understanding of the matter while teachers are there to
facilitate group interactions. They concluded their qualitative study indicating that
educators utilized social media as an instructional medium to blend informal learning into
formal learning environments within the public administration discipline this was because

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

25

social media provided them with the ability to break the limitation of course management
systems, enabled innovative and collaborative interactions, connected textbook
knowledge to real-world problems, and facilitated personalized constructive learning.
Moreover, they added that interviewees expressed a strong need for faculty support in
terms of adopting new technologies. They would like to have access to technologies and
learn more about new ways of using them, such as best practices and pitfalls. They
concluded that the interviewees looked forward to their institutions embracing
innovations and that there was a need for implementing clearly stated institutional
policies on the use of social media in the education system. In addition, they clarified that
participants suggested strategies to integrate these technologies, not only in formal class
environments, but also in social and active learning that was learner-centered and
informal.
Yunus, Salehi, and Chenzi (2012) conducted a qualitative study which aimed to
investigate the advantages and disadvantages of integrating social networking tools into
ESL writing classroom. The results showed that most students believed that using social
networking services to teach ESL writing brought a lot of benefits. Moreover, the
findings clarified that there were a lot of activities that could be planned through social
networking services.
Storz, Maillet, Brienne, Chotel, and Dang (2012) conducted a quantitative study
which included a group of 638 French-speaking university students and the study results
demonstrated that there was a strong, positive correlation between a students’ level of
English and the amount of time they spend accessing English language media and
working in social networks.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

26

Dunn (2013) summarized the benefits of social media on language learning as its
use can increase student motivation and engagement with course material, increase
collaboration among students, promote interaction between the student and the teacher,
facilitate data and information sharing, encourage self-expression and contribution and
provides students with 21st century skills which could aid their employability and
increase levels of satisfaction. Kavaliauskienė and Ashkinazi (2014) confirmed that Web
2.0 has a great potential for making changes in the Higher Education. They said that
through Web 2.0 applications students can collaborate on projects, create images, edit
videos, write blogs, and share bookmarks using web 2.0 tools. They added that the
students in the 21st century have grown up with digital technology, performing multiple
new activities. That is to say, “They have different ways of thinking and processing
materials, which make Web 2.0 technologies invaluable in helping change learning and
teaching methods (Ibid. p. 6)”.
Wang, Lin, Yu, & Wu (2013, p. 318) asserted, “Facebook assists students in
merging their social and academic lives”. Moreover, their study aimed to explore the
effectiveness of different learning environments between interactive Facebook
instructional method and non-Facebook instructional method for undergraduate students.
The students were highly engaged and expressed satisfaction with their instructors, peers,
and institution. In addition, they concluded that the use of the popular Web 2.0 artifact
strengthened learning engagement both inside and outside of the classroom. Therefore,
they requested higher education professionals to assist student in obtaining the benefits of
using technology. They concluded, “The instructor should demonstrate a positive
perspective toward Facebook communication tool when they decide to include it as a

27

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

class activity. Clear instructions and course requirements including guidelines of
Facebook participation should be addressed in the class (p. 318)”.
Moreover, Nwangwa, Yonlonfoun, and Omotere

(2014, p.447) stated, “The

availability of high speed internet broadband connection with massive use of desktop
computers, laptops, e-readers, tablets and smart phones enable millions of undergraduates
to actively engage in social networking, text messaging, blogging, content sharing, online
learning, and much more.” They added, “It is evident that three critical areas where the
use of social media affects undergraduates’ research skills are on their source of
information, generation of research ideas and creative writing skills.” They confirmed
that the reliance of undergraduates on social media tools such as Wikipedia as their major
source of information has serious effects for their researches as their source of
information becomes inadequate and inaccurate besides that using Wikipedia decreased
their research skills as they increase poor ability to use the library for conducting their
research work. However, they pointed out that undergraduates’ use of social media tools
such as Facebook for generating ideas about the research enhances their research works
through which they could meet other scholars, discuss new ideas about a specific
academic topic and make online interview with them. Then, they stated that despite the
usefulness of social media in generating research ideas, most undergraduates forget their
purpose of using the medium for research and start updating their status and chatting with
their friends. They said that diversion of attention is the biggest obstacle of using social
networking sites for research purpose. However, they confirmed that social media tools
such as WordPress and Blogger enhances undergraduates’ creative writing skills.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

28

As for the effects of social media on learners, Code (2015) asserted that his study
participants who were still in high school expressed saying that social media was more
influential in their life than school.
2.8 Instagram
Instagram is one of the most popular mobile social media applications. It was
introduced in October 2010, purchased by Facebook in April 2012. In 2015, Instagram
has celebrated more than 400 million users (Instagram.com, press page). Code (2015, p.
19) defined this application, “Instagram is a social networking site (SNS) that is based
around photo-sharing as participants upload their pictures and short videos with captions,
comments, and the newly invented hashtags; hashtags are words or phrases that are
chosen to categorize the picture that can also act as a link to other images that have been
described with the same words; hashtags also begin their words or phrases with a number
sign (#)”. Moreover, Salomon (2013,p. 408) defined Instagram by saying, “Instagram is
a mobile app (iOS and Android) that enables users to instantly turn their mobile
snapshots into visually appealing images, which are then shared with others on the
network”. She also added (p. 408), “Instagram is dedicated to the mobile experience, and
part of its growth was fueled by the rapid adoption of smartphones with high-functioning
cameras. Although it now provides a Web site where users can view posts, images still
can’t be posted from a Web interface without a workaround”.
Describing what functions an Instagram user could do, Al-Ali (2015, p. 1-2)
explained, “An Instagram user can perform a number of functions: create accounts, post
content (pictures or 15-second videos), apply filters, add captions, tag users, add

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

29

locations, add hashtags, like content, add comments, browse and follow other accounts,
check a feed generated by followed accounts, and explore (search for) hashtags/users”.
2.9 Instagram and Language Learning
Bell (2013) states that Instagram is a great way to be used in teaching and
learning. He gives some examples for using Instagram with students as a learning tool as
he said it could be used to put together photo stories or essays. Then he continued saying
“Just post the pictures and, since you can add comments to your own as well as other
images, key in a description of the place you visited and any other interesting details”.
Moreover, he suggests that all school members can share what they want using a
common school hashtag via Instagram. Salomon, (2013) provided some effective
examples of engaging Instagram in teaching and learning in which she confirmed that
Instagram has become a fun learning tool for us and our students. As an example, she
said (p. 410), “Last year we worked closely with a class studying the history of the brain.
We took a photograph of a beautiful, old phrenology map that was used in the course and
owned by the library. We posted it on Instagram with the question, “Does anyone know
what this map of the head is?” Someone guessed correctly right away, and we followed
up with some interesting facts about the history of phrenology.”
Al-Ali (2014) carried out a study to integrate Instagram as an active mlearning
tool in a language bridge program. Instagram was used as a production tool of a holiday
project and two writing activities in two pre-intermediate/intermediate ESL classes. The
results of the study showed that although students were not enthusiastic with the initiative
at first, they gradually welcomed the idea and were encouraged to be creative in

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

30

completing their writing activities. The researcher concluded, “Due to its popularity
among students, Instagram was utilized as an mLearning tool to generate content that was
used for one speaking activity, and two writing activities reinforcing speaking, grammar,
writing and vocabulary skills.” (p. 13)
Code (2015) explains the new socialization experience of the 21st century student,
particularly the use of social media application Instagram, aiming to solve any anxieties
or concerns held by teachers by that means enriching classroom practices and 21st
century pedagogy. Code (p. 145) confirms adding “The most radical piece of information
to come out of this study was that the student participants unanimously felt that school
was not preparing them for the new realities of the digital world.” Therefore, to overcome
these obstacles, Code (p. 141) states, “Students should be given the opportunity to learn
about social media use in school, and should be given the tools to think critically so that
they can make the best choices on these mediums.” Code (p.159) adds, “Students are
continuously writing and sharing their stories in these virtual spaces, and these spaces are
not like the isolated spaces of the classroom. They are reading and writing in limitless
virtual spaces every day, and most participants use their social media accounts 50 to 100
times a day on average.”
2.10 Summary
The review of literature indicates the use of Instagram as a MALL tool is an
effective tool for developing students’ language learning. It also shows that students have
positive attitudes toward the use of Instagram in language learning. They feel that
Instagram makes learning more fun. In addition, Instagram improves their learning and

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

31

social skills. However, the literature review also reveals that students face some
challenges in using Instagram as a MALL tool. Therefore, they ask teachers and learning
institutions to adopt new 21st century learning techniques like the use of Instagram.
The review of literature helped the researcher in many ways. It helped the
researcher to prepare the questionnaire of the study and the interview questions. In
addition, it provided the researcher with a deeper insight into the benefits and challenges
of using Instagram as a MALL tool. Finally, it assisted the researcher in discussing the
results of the study.

32

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Chapter Three
Methodology
3.1 Introduction
This chapter introduces the methodological procedures that are used to collect and
analyze the data in the present study. It consists of five sections mainly the research
design, the research population and the sample, the research instrument including its
validity and reliability, data collection procedure, and the statistical analysis employed in
this research.
3.2 Research Design
The current study used a descriptive analytical approach in which it tries to
describe and analyze the participants’ usage of Instagram as a MALL tool and their
attitudes towards the benefits and challenges of using the suggested application.
To describe and analyze the research issue, the researcher used both quantitative
and qualitative methods. The research design of this study is based on the questions of the
current study. The researcher raised these questions from her observation and from the
literature of previous studies.
3.3 Population and Sample of the Study
The population of the study consisted of all female students enrolled in the
department of English at the College of Languages and Translation at Al-Imam
Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University in the academic year 1436/1437– 2015/2016 in

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

33

the first semester. The sample of the study was composed of 151 randomly-selected EFL
students.
3.4 Research Instrument
The researcher used both a questionnaire as a quantitative instrument (see
appendix 1) and interviews with students as a qualitative instrument (see appendix 2) to
collect the data of the study. The questionnaire consisted of two sections with 25 items.
Section1 includes the benefits of using Instagram in English Language Learning, and
section 2 discusses the barriers Saudi university students encounter when using Instagram
in English Language Learning. The relevant literature and previous studies helped the
researcher to prepare the questionnaire. The rating scale used in this questionnaire is
Likert scale that has five ratings "strongly disagree", "disagree", "neutral", "agree", and
"strongly agree". As for the interview, the researcher met 10 university students and
asked each one of them 5 questions regarding the benefits and challenges of utilizing
Instagram in English Language Learning and their recommendations.
3.4.1 Instrument Validity
To ensure the validity, the instruments were given to a panel of raters consisting
of ten EFL university professors. The questionnaire was modified according to the
panel’s feedback and recommendations. The final questionnaire version was of 25 items
and the interview version was 5 questions. Fortunately, the researcher received positive
feedback from the panel of raters describing the questionnaire as comprehensive and
well-designed and its items as appropriate and relevant.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

34

3.4.2 Instrument Reliability
To estimate reliability, the researcher distributed the instrument on a pilot sample
consisting of 50 randomly-selected EFL students from Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud
Islamic University; and this sample was not included in the study. After that, the
researcher applied Cronbach’s Alpha tool using the SPSS (Statistical Package for Social
Science) program. The analysis of pilot study indicated that the results were considered
to be appropriate for the research purpose. Cronbach’s Alpha internal consistency test of
the pilot study showed that the questionnaire as reliable; Alpha for the whole
questionnaire items was (0.73) which is acceptable for scientific research.
3.5 Data Collection Procedure
The researcher developed the questionnaire of the study. A panel of raters
consisting of ten EFL university professors and instructors validated the questionnaire
(See Appendix 3). After that, the questionnaire was modified according to the panels’
comments and feedback (See Appendix 1). A Pilot study was carried out at Al- Imam
Muhammad Ibn Saud University on 50 EFL students; this pilot sample was not included
in the sample of the study. The researcher welcomed any questions related to the study
questionnaire to ensure that the students’ responses were accurate, and to avoid any
misunderstanding regarding the items. Moreover, Cronbach's Alpha formula was
calculated using the SPSS program to ensure the reliability of the instrument. After that,
the researcher distributed the questionnaire on the sample of study consisting of 151 EFL
students at Al- Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud University. The results were collected and
analyzed statistically using the SPSS program.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

35

Moreover, the researcher conducted face-to-face semi-structured interviews with
10 randomly-selected EFL students enrolled at AL-Imam University. The researcher
assured the students that the interview would be treated confidentially for the research
purpose, and informed them of the amount of time needed for the interview. The
researcher asked them five questions (See Appendix 2). The interviews were recorded.
The interviews were analyzed qualitatively. This qualitative instrument helps the
researcher to gain more insight into students’ thoughts and feelings regarding the issue
being investigated. Students’ comments were analyzed and reported by using quotes from
their opinions.
3.6 Statistical Analysis
To analyze the data of the pilot study, Cronbach's Alpha formula was calculated
using the SPSS program. Moreover, frequencies, percentages, means, and standard
deviations were utilized to analyze the data of the study employing the SPSS program.

36

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Chapter Four
Results of the Study
4.1 Introduction
This chapter presents the results of the current study which attempted to
investigate the use of Instagram as a MALL tool through revealing the advantages and
the challenges that EFL students face at Al-Imam University. The study questions were
as follows:
1. What are the benefits of using Instagram as a MALL tool?
2. What are the barriers Saudi EFL university students face when using Instagram as a
MALL tool?
4.2 Data Analysis
The researcher collected the statistical data of the study through a questionnaire
that was distributed to the participants. After collecting the data, the SPSS program was
used for data analysis to answer the questions of the study. To achieve this goal, means
(M) and standard deviations (SD) were calculated for students’ responses. In addition to
the quantitative data analysis, the researcher qualitatively analyzed the students’
interviews through stating their opinions and recommendations.
4.3 Results of the Study
To answer the first question of the study which was “What are the benefits of
using Instagram as a MALL tool?” the researcher calculated the means and the standard
deviations for each statement of the students’ responses. Table (1) illustrates the means
and standard deviations of students' responses on the questionnaire items.

37

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Table (1)
Means and Standard Deviations of the Benefits of Using Instagram as a MALL Tool
Part One: The Benefits of Using Instagram in English Language Learning
No.
7

5

3
9

6

4

14

8
12
2
10

11

13
1

Statement
Using Instagram English language
activities improves my reading
skills.
Using Instagram English language
activities improves my written
communication skills.
Instagram provides students with
new enjoyable learning experience.
I feel that Instagram vocabulary
activities have enriched my
vocabulary.
Using Instagram English language
activities improves my listening
skills.
Using Instagram English language
activities improves my oral
communication skills.
I like to learn English via Instagram
because I enjoy a sense of freedom
of time and place.
Instagram pronunciation activities
have improved my pronunciation.
I think Instagram encourages
independent learning.
Instagram encourages interaction
among students.
I can better construct correct
sentences after using Instagram
grammar activities.
My motivation to learn English has
been enhanced after using Instagram
English language activities.
Learning English via Instagram
saves my time and effort.
Instagram encourages interaction
between students and their
instructors.

Participants

Mean
3.42

Standard
deviation
1.22

151

Ranking
1

151

3.32

1.20

2

151

3.26

1.23

3

151

3.22

1.26

4

151

3.20

1.27

5

151

3.16

1.37

6

151

3.15

1.33

7

151

3.09

1.19

8

151

3.09

1.19

8

151

3.05

1.19

10

151

3.00

1.05

11

151

2.95

1.10

12

151

2.87

1.18

13

151

2.75

1.11

14

38

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Table (1) indicates that the most important benefit which students advocate is the
improvement of their reading skills. This result is inferred from statement number 7
“Using Instagram English language activities improves my reading skills.” which has got
the highest rank and the highest mean of (3.42). In addition, the other very important
benefits are improving of the writing skills, providing enjoyable learning experience, and
enriching vocabulary. Those results are drawn from statements 5,3, and 9 “Using
Instagram English language activities improves my written communication skills.” ,
“Instagram provides students with new enjoyable learning experience.” , “I feel that
Instagram vocabulary activities have enriched my vocabulary.” which are ranked the
second, the third, and the fourth; they have got very high means

3.32, 3.26, 3.22

respectively. Moreover, table (1) reveals other important benefits of using Instagram:
improving the listening skill, improving oral communication skills, and enjoying a sense
of freedom of time and place. Those results are taken from statements 6, 4, and 14 which
take the fifth, the sixth, and the seventh; they have got high means 3.20, 3.16, and 3.15
respectively. Besides, table (1) shows the least Instagram benefits according to Al-Imam
EFL students: enhancing motivation, saving time and effort, and encouraging studentinstructor interaction. Those findings are deduced from statements 11, 13, and 1. They
are ranked the twelfth, the thirteenth, and the fourteenth; they have scored the lowest
means 2.95, 2.87, and 2.75 respectively.
To answer the second question of the study which was “What are the barriers
Saudi EFL university students face when using

Instagram as a MALL tool?”, the

researcher calculated the means and the standard deviations for each statement of the

39

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

students’ responses. Table (2) presents the means and the standard deviations of the
students' responses on the questionnaire items associated with the second question.
Table (2)
Means and Standard Deviations of the Barriers Saudi EFL University Students
Face When Using Instagram as a MALL Tool
Part Two: The Barriers Saudi University Students Face when Using
Instagram in English Language Learning
No. Statement
N
Mean Standard Rankin
deviation g
9
The amount of images and videos in 151 3.02
1.17
1
Instagram distracts students’
attention from English language
learning activities.
2
Syllabuses do not direct me to utilize 151 2.99
0.98
2
Instagram English language
activities.
1
My instructors do not encourage me 151 2.83
1.24
3
to use Instagram English language
activities.
11
Female students feel embarrassed to 151 2.79
1.15
4
exchange posts with male students
via Instagram.
5
I am not motivated to use Instagram 151 2.71
1.13
5
because it lacks immediate
feedback.
4
The cost of Internet access makes
151 2.69
1.22
6
using Instagram in English language
learning difficult.
6
I think it is hard to write long
151 2.68
1.29
7
passages using small keypads of
mobile phones.
7
I am not motivated to communicate
151 2.62
1.18
8
with others via Instagram because I
am afraid of making mistakes.
8
I think Instagram English language
151 2.60
1.15
9
activities are not effective.
3
I find it difficult to read from the
151 2.57
1.12
10
small screens of mobile phones.
10
I think Instagram English language
151 2.46
1.11
11
learning activities are difficult to
understand.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

40

It is evident from table (2) that the most important challenge for using Instagram
in English Language Learning according to EFL students at Al-Imam University is
distracting attention. This result is taken from statement number 9 “The amount of images
and videos in Instagram distracts students’ attention from English language learning
activities.” which has scored the highest mean (3.02) and the first rank. In addition, the
second challenge is lack of direction from the syllabuses. This result is drawn from
statement number 2 “Syllabuses do not direct me to utilize Instagram English language
activities.” which has got a very high mean (2.99) and the second rank. The other
important challenges are lack of encouragement from instructors, embarrassment, and
lack of immediate feedback. Those results are drawn from statements 11, 5, and 14 “My
instructors do not encourage me to use Instagram English language activities.” , “Female
students feel embarrassed to exchange posts with male students via Instagram.”, “I am
not motivated to use Instagram because it lacks immediate feedback.” which are ranked
the third, the fourth, and the fifth; they have scored high means 2.83, 2.79, and 2.71
respectively. In addition, the other important barriers are the cost of Internet access and
the difficulty of writing long passages. Those findings are inferred from items number 4
and 6 which have the sixth and seventh order with high means 2.69 and 2.68. Moreover,
table (2) uncovers the least important barriers: ineffective Instagram activities, difficulty
of reading from small screens, and difficulty of understanding Instagram English
language learning activities. Those results are drawn from statements number 8, 3, and 10
which are ranked the ninth, the tenth, and the eleventh; they have scored the lowest
means 2.62, 2.57, and 2.46 respectively.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

41

Fortunately, the findings of the study were supported by students’ comments in the
interviews. The researcher found that all of the interviewees have accounts in Instagram
and use it for different purposes. However, only half of the interviewees like to use
Instagram in English Language learning. One of the students who likes its use in English
learning said, “It is interesting to learn through photos and videos besides it is unrelated
to specific place.” Another student said “Instagram is helpful for English Learning as it
enhances my vocabulary and reading skills. Instagram really enhances English skills
especially for people who have photographic memory.” A third student said, “Instagram
is useful for certain activities and to enhance certain skills. It enhances my writing and
communication skills.” One of the students likes to use it only for learning vocabulary as
she said “The advantage of using Instagram in ELL is to enhance the vocabulary”. One of
the students asserted, “Yes I do use Instagram in English Learning. It improves my accent
and writing skills by talking to native speakers. It is really good because I meet and
communicate with people from different countries and cultures”.
On the other hand, students who do not like to use Instagram in English language
learning expressed their own reasons. One student stated, “I could not focus, and I have
limited option for English learning. I do not think there is any advantage from learning
using Instagram.” Another student claimed, “It is useless as it is more for fun than
learning. It is good for beginner learners as there are many accounts that improve
vocabulary.” Another one said, “I do not use it because I do not know that I can learn
English through Instagram. It is a new idea for me. I think there are advantages as
learning new trending words in society besides it is easy to communicate with people.”

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

42

Another student added, “I think YouTube can give more for learning English. May be it
is good for beginners not for me as there are many accounts that improve vocabulary”.
As for the difficulties that students face when using Instagram in English
Learning, one of the students explained, “It is difficult to find accounts for learning
English.” Another student pointed out, “I get distracted by other accounts than learning
English.” Another student added, “Technical problems are the most challenge that
student face in using Instagram.”
Finally, students gave the following suggestions to overcome these difficulties:
creating learning accounts and posting important things in the lecture, following only
specialized accounts for learning English only, and downloading dictionaries.
4.4 Summary of the Results
The findings of the study revealed that the most important benefits of using
Instagram in learning English were as follows: improving the reading, writing, and
listening skills, providing enjoyable learning experiences, enriching vocabulary,
improving oral communication skills, and enjoying a sense of freedom of time and place.
Furthermore, the results of the study unveiled the following challenges of using
Instagram in English learning: distracting attention, lack of direction from the syllabuses,
lack of encouragement from instructors, embarrassment, lack of immediate feedback, the
cost of Internet access, and the difficulty of writing long passages. Finally, the findings of
the study presented the following solutions to Instagram barriers in English language
learning: creating learning accounts and posting important things in the lecture, following
only specialized accounts for learning English only, and downloading dictionaries.

43

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Chapter Five
Discussion, Conclusions, and Recommendations
5.1. Introduction
This chapter discusses the research findings and analyses the results in light of the
literature review. Furthermore, it provides some recommendations for future research
based on what is presented and analyzed so far.
5.2. Discussion of the results of the study
This study investigated the benefits and barriers of using Instagram in English
language learning. The findings of the study indicated that Instagram had a positive
impact on improving students’ reading skills and this is consistent with the study result of
Bahrani (2011) who stated that Mobile phone-based language learning technology
provides everybody with authentic audio/visual language learning materials that could
possibly teach them to speak and read. Besides, results in this study confirmed that
Instagram improved students written communication skills. This result is supported by
the study of Nwangwa, Omotere, & Yonlonfoun, (2014,p. 447) in which they added, “ It
is evident that three critical areas where the use of social media affects undergraduates’
research skills are on their source of information, generation of research ideas and
creative writing skills.” Moreover, Code (2015) supported students’ reading and writing
skills improvement using Instagram as stating that through social media applications
students are reading and writing in limitless virtual spaces every day.
Moreover, the findings revealed that Instagram application provided enjoyable
learning experience. This result goes in line with Miangah and Nezarat’s research (2012),

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

44

which revealed that the use of mobile technology in language learning helps the students
feel using the technology more effective and interesting than before. In addition, this
study confirmed that using Instagram English language activities improved students
listening and oral communication skills and this is compatible with Bahrani (2011) who
confirmed that Mobile phone-based language learning technology provides everybody
with authentic audio/visual language learning materials that could possibly teach them to
speak. In addition, this is consistent with Chinnery (2006) who described the common
features of mobile devices as they include Internet access, voice-messaging, SMS textmessaging, cameras, and even video-recording in which all of these features can help
language learning through providing communicative language practice. The results show
that using this application could provide students with better vocabulary learning. This
result is supported by Alhelayel (2015) who pointed out that MALL helped students to
improve their linguistic skills such as learning new words and keeping words in minds for
a long period.
Moreover, the results showed that students liked to learn English via Instagram
because they enjoyed a sense of freedom of time and place. This result is in harmony
with Chinnery (2006) who clarified that mobile technologies can be just as easily utilized
outside of the classroom as they can in it in which learners can study or practice
manageable chunks of information in any place on their own time. In addition, it is
consistent with Narayan (2013) who confirmed saying, “One defining aspect of social
media technologies is how it has altered and made fluid our sense of time and space,
more so than previous technologies”(p. 39). Besides, the results of this study revealed
that Instagram improved students’ linguistic skills and this is consistent with the results

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

45

of Al-Ali (2014), who confirmed that students’ use of Instagram speaking and writing
activities reinforced their speaking, grammar, writing and vocabulary skills. In addition,
this study revealed that students did not believe that Instagram could enhance their
motivation to learn English nor encouraged interaction between them and their
instructors. Those results are in contrast with the findings of Dunn (2013) who
summarized the benefits of social media on language learning as its use can increase
student motivation and engagement with course material, increase collaboration among
students, promote interaction between the student and the teacher.
Concerning the barriers of using Instagram in English language learning, the
findings of the study showed that the amount of images and videos in this application
distracted students’ attention from English language learning activities. This result
supports the claim presented by Nwangwa, Yonlonfoun, and Omotere (2014) who
asserted that diversion of attention was the biggest obstacle of using social networking
sites. Furthermore, the results revealed that neither syllabuses nor instructors directed
students to utilize Instagram English language activities. This result is consistent with the
results of Chen and Bryer (2012) who concluded that the interviewees looked forward to
their institutions embracing innovations and that there was a need for implementing
clearly stated institutional policies on the use of social media in the education system.
In addition, students showed that the cost of Internet access was a barrier for
using Instagram in English learning; this result contradicts the results of Alabdulkareem
(2015) who conducted a study on Saudi middle school teachers and students and
concluded that 85% of the students had Internet access at home vs. 95% of the teachers.
However, students did not believe that Instagram English language activities were not

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

46

effective. This result is in line with Miangah and Nezarat (2012) who clarified that
mobile-learning (m-learning) helps the students feel using the technology more effective
and interesting than before. Furthermore, the findings revealed that it was not a challenge
for students to read from the small screens of mobile phones. This result is not in
accordance with Chinnery (2006) who described the reduced screen sizes of cell phone as
one of the demerits in MALL.
5.3 Conclusions and Recommendations
To shed the light on the findings of this study, the researcher concludes that
Instagram improves student linguistic skills: reading, writing, listening and oral
communication skills. Moreover, Instagram helped students to develop their vocabulary
storage. In addition, students developed these skills while enjoying new learning
experience that gave them a sense of freedom of time and place. Although there are many
benefits of using Instagram as a MALL tool, this study revealed that students face some
challenges as the following: distracting attention, lack of direction from the syllabuses,
lack of encouragement from instructors, embarrassment, lack of immediate feedback, the
cost of Internet access, and the difficulty of writing long passages. Finally, the findings of
the study presented the following solutions to Instagram barriers in English language
learning: creating learning accounts and posting important things in the lecture, following
only specialized accounts for learning English only, and downloading dictionaries.
Instructors, students and administrators should be aware of these benefits and challenges
for providing better utilization of this popular application.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

47

To conclude, using Instagram could be an effective tool for L2 learners to learn
productively and efficiently. Language teachers should integrate Instagram activities in
language syllabuses in all stages so that students can engage in conversations with their
teachers and other students, sharing their opinions and ideas, commenting on photos and
videos in addition to asking and answering questions.
5.4 Suggestions for Future Research
The researcher presents the following suggestions for future research:
1- Conducting an empirical study on the effectiveness of utilizing Instagram as a MALL
tool on students’ achievement is highly needed.
2- Replicating this study in another university outside Riyadh is recommended to
compare its results with the current study results.
3- Using other instruments such as pre/posttests is needed to confirm the results of the
study.
4- A further study can investigate instructors’ perceptions towards using Instagram in
English language learning.
5. Replicating this study involving male and female students is recommended.

48

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

References

AbuSeileek, A. F., and Abu Sa’aleek, A. O. (2012). Computer Assisted Language
Learning: Merits and Demerits. Language in India, Vol.12, Pp. 23-36.
Al-Ali, S. (2014) Embracing the Selfie Craze: Exploring the Possible Use of Instagram as
a Language mLearning Tool. Issues and Trends in Educational
Technology, Vol.2, No.2. Pp. 1-16.
Alabdulkareem, S. A. (2015). Exploring the Use and the Impacts of Social Media on
Teaching and Learning Science in Saudi. Social and Behavioral Sciences
Vol.182. Pp. 213 – 224.
Alhelayel, A. K. S. (2015). The Effect of Mobile-Assisted Language Learning on the
Preparatory Year Students’ Vocabulary Retention. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, AlImam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University.
Alsheraimy, N. S. A. (2014). Students’ Perceptions of the Use of CALL at Al-Imam
University. Unpublished M.A. Thesis, Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University.
Bahrani, T. (2011). Mobile Phones: Just a Phone or a Language Learning Device ? CrossCultural Communication, Vol.7, No. 2. Pp. 244–248.
Beatty, K. (2010) Teaching and Researching: Computer-assisted Language Learning.
(2nd international edition) C.N. Candlin & D. Hall [series eds.] London: Pearson
Education.
Bell, M. A. (2013). Picture This! Using Instagram with students. Internet@Schools, Vol.
23, No. 4. Pp. 23-25.
Borau, K., Ullrich, C., Feng, J., and Shen, R. (2009). Microblogging for Language
Learning: Using Twitter to Train Communicative and Cultural Competence. In M.
Spaniol, Q. Li, R. Klamma, & R. Lau (2009) (Eds.), Advances in Web based
Learning – ICWL, Vol. 5686, Pp. 78–87. Retrievable from
http://www.carstenullrich.net/pubs/Borau09Microblogging.pdf.
Boyd, D. (2014). It’s Complicated: The Social Lives of Networked Teens. Yale University
Press, London.
Chaka, C. (2009). From Classical Mobile Learning to Mobile Web 2.0 Learning. In: R.
Guy, 2009. The Evolution of Mobile Teaching and Learning. Information Science
Press, Santa Rosa, USA, pp. 79-102.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

49

Chen, B. and Bryer, T. (2012). Investigating Instructional Strategies for Using Social
Media in Formal and Informal Learning. The International Review of Research in
Open and Distributed Learning, V.13, No,1.
Chinnery, G. M. (2006). Emerging Technologies Going to the MALL: Mobile Assisted
Language Learning. Language Learning & Technology, Vol. 10, No. 1. Pp. 9-16.
Code, M. (2015). Instagram, Social Media, and the “Like”: Exploring Virtual Identity’s
Role in 21st Century Students’ New Socialization Experience. Unpublished M.A.
Thesis, Faculty of Education, Brock University. Retrieved from
http://dr.library.brocku.ca/bitstream/handle/10464/7055/Brock_Code_Mary_2015
.pdf?sequence=2.
Dashti, F. A. and Aldashti, A. A. (2015). EFL College Students’ Attitudes towards
Mobile Learning. Canadian Center of Science and Education, International
Education Studies; Vol. 8, No. 8. Pp. 13-20.
Dudeney, G. and Hockly, N. (2012). ICT in ELT: How did we Get Here and Where are
we Going? ELT Journal, Vol. 66, No. 4. Pp.533-542.
Dunn, L. (2013). Teaching in Higher Education: Can Social Media Enhance the Learning
Experience? In 6th Annual University of Glasgow Learning and Teaching
Conference, Glasgow, UK. Retrieved from
http://eprints.gla.ac.uk/78491/1/78491.pdf.
Ekoc, A. (2014) Facebook Groups as a Supporting Tool for Language Classrooms.
Turkish Online Journal of Distance Education, Vol. 15, No. 3. Pp. 1302-6488.
Fotouhi-Ghazvini, F., Earnshaw, R., Robison, D. and Excell, P. (2009). The MOBO
City: A Mobile Game Package for Technical Language Learning. International
Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies, Vol. 3, No. 2. Pp. 19-24.
Ghorbandordinejad, F., Aghasafi, A., Farjadnasab, A. and Harandi, A. (2011). Mobile
Handheld Recording Devices in the General English Classroom. Retrieved from
http://www.academia.edu .
Han, W. (2008). Benefits and Barriers of Computer Assisted Language Learning and
Teaching. US-China Foreign Language, Vol.6, No. 9. Pp. 40-43.
Kavaliauskienė, G. and Ashkinazi, V. (2014). Social Networking Systems in Teaching /
Learning English for Specific Purposes. English for Specific Purposes World,
Vol. 15, No. 42.
Kukulska-Hulme, A. and Shield, L. (2008). An Overview of Mobile Assisted Language
Learning: From Content Delivery to Supported Collaboration and Interaction.
ReCALL, Vol.20, No. 3. Pp. 271–289.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

50

Lawrence, B. (2015). Learner Receptiveness towards Mobile Technology in a College
English Program: The Smart Decision? English Teaching, Vol. 70, No. 1. Pp. 328.
Lee, K. (2000). English Teachers’ Barriers to the Use of Computer Assisted
Language Learning, The Internet TESL Journal. Retrieved from
<http://iteslj.org/Articles/Lee-CALLbarriers.html>.
Meyer, A. (2015) The Evolution of Instagram for Markets. Pictures to Video.
Marketergizmo. Retrieved from
http://www.marketergizmo.com/the-evolution-of-instagram-for-marketerspictures-to-video/.
Miangah, T. M. & Nezarat, A. (2012). Mobile Assisted Language Learning. International
Journal of Distributed and Parallel Systems. Vol.3, No.1.
Mondahl, M. and Liana, R. (2014) Social Media, Collaboration and Social Learning-A
Case-Study of Foreign Language Learning. Electronic Journal of e-Learning,
Vol. 12, No. 4. Pp. 339-352.
Narayan, B. (2013). From Everyday Information Behaviours to Clickable Solidarity in a
Place Called Social Media. Cosmopolitan Civil Societies Journal, Vol.5, No.3.
Pp. 32-53.
Nwangwa, K., Yonlonfoun, E. and Omotere, T. (2014). Undergraduates and Their Use of
Social Media: Assessing Influence on Research Skills. Universal Journal of
Educational Research, Vol. 2, No.6. Pp. 446-453.
Pegrum, M., Oakley, G., and Faulkner, R. (2013). Schools Going Mobile: A Study of the
Adoption of Mobile Handheld Technologies in Western Australian Independent
schools. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology, Vol. 29, No. 1. Pp. 6681.
Rouse, M. (2015). Definition: Social Media. Retrieved from,
http://whatis.techtarget.com/definition/social-media .
Salomon, D. (2013). Moving on from Facebook Using Instagram to Connect with
Undergraduates and Engage in Teaching and Learning. College & Research
Libraries News, Vol. 74, No. 8. Pp.408-412.
Storz, C., Maillet, K., Brienne C., Chotel, L., and Dang, C. (2012). Mobile Devices
Increasing Opportunities for Informal Learning and Second Language
Acquisition. Retrieved from
http://wheberges.itsudparis.eu/limed/Documents/IADIS_MLearningPaper_2012.p
df.

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

51

Tarantino, K., McDonough, J & Hua, M. (2013). Effects of Student Engagement with
Social Media on Student Learning: A Review of Literature. The Journal of
Technology in Student Affairs. Summer Edition. Retrieved from
http://www.studentaffairs.com/ejournal/Summer_2013/EffectsOfStudentEngagem
entWithSocialMedia.html.
Trifonova, A., Knapp, J., Ronchetti, M. and Gamper, J. (2004). Mobile ELDIT:
Challenges in the Transitions from an E-learning to an M-learning System.
University of Trento, Sommarive 14. Retrieved from
http://eprints.biblio.unitn.it/532/1/paper4911.pdf.
Wang, J., Lin, C., Yu, W., and Wu, E. (2013). Meaningful Engagement in Facebook
Learning Environments: Merging Social and Academic Lives. Turkish Online
Journal of Distance Education, Vol.14, No1. Pp. 302-322.
Wang, J., Yu, W. and Wu, E. (2013). Empowering Mobile Assisted Social E-Learning:
Students’ Expectations and Perceptions. World Journal of Education.Vol. 3, No. 2, pp.
59-70.
Yunus, M. M., Salehi, H. and Chenzi, C. (2012). Integrating Social Networking Tools
into ESL Writing Classroom: Strengths and Weaknesses. Canadian Center of
Science and Education, English Language Teaching; Vol. 5, No. 8. Pp.42-48.

52

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Appendix (1)

The Questionnaire of the Study

Investigating the Use of Instagram as a MALL Tool: The Case of Al-Imam
University EFL Students

Dear participant,
This questionnaire is an important part of an M.A. study which attempts to
investigate the benefits and barriers of using Instagram in English language learning.
Your participation is highly appreciated. Your answers will remain confidential and will
be only used for academic purposes. Please, respond to each statement by putting a check
(√) in the space that represents your opinion.

The researcher
Athar Al-Garawi
ayaag1@gmail.com

Part One: The Benefits of Using Instagram in English Language Learning
1.
Instagram encourages interaction between students and their instructors.
2.
Instagram encourages interaction among students.
3.
Instagram provides students with new enjoyable learning experience.
4.
Using Instagram English language activities improves my oral
communication skills.
5.
Using Instagram English language activities improves my written
communication skills.
6.
Using Instagram English language activities improves my listening
skills.
7.
Using Instagram English language activities improves my reading
skills.
8.
Instagram pronunciation activities have improved my pronunciation.
9.
I feel that Instagram vocabulary activities have enriched my vocabulary.
10. I can better construct correct sentences after using Instagram grammar
activities.
11. My motivation to learn English has been enhanced after using
Instagram English language activities.
12. I think Instagram encourages independent learning.
13. Learning English via Instagram saves my time and effort.
14. I like to learn English via Instagram because I enjoy a sense of freedom
of time and place.
Part Two: The Barriers Saudi University Students Face When Using Instagram in English
Language Learning
1.
My instructors do not encourage me to use Instagram English language
activities.
2.
Syllabuses do not direct me to utilize Instagram English language
activities.
3.
I find it difficult to read from the small screens of mobile phones.
4.
The cost of Internet access makes using Instagram in English language
learning difficult.
5.
I am not motivated to use Instagram because it lacks immediate
feedback.
6.
I think it is hard to write long passages using small keypads of mobile
phones.
7.
I am not motivated to communicate with others via Instagram because I
am afraid of making mistakes.
8.
I think Instagram English language activities are not effective.
9.
The amount of images and videos in Instagram distracts students’

Strongly
Agree

Neutral

Disagree

Statement

Strongly
disagree

No
.

Agree

53

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

54

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

10.
11.

attention from English language learning activities.
I think Instagram English language learning activities are difficult to
understand.
Female students feel embarrassed to exchange posts with male students
via Instagram.

Thank You

55

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Appendix (2)

Interview Questions

1. Do you like to use Instagram in learning English? Why?

2. What are the advantages of using Instagram in learning English?

3. What are the difficulties you face when using Instagram in learning English?

4. What are your suggestions to overcome those difficulties?

5. Do you encourage your colleagues to use Instagram in learning English? Why?

56

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Appendix (3)
Questionnaire Raters
1. Dr. Saleh Al-Eid
2. Dr. Azmi Adel
3. Dr. Omar Na'eem
4. Dr. Hussein Rabab’ah
5. Dr. Mohammad Abedelatif
6. Dr. Yasser Gomaa
7. Dr. Ahmad Brier
8. Dr. Hind Al-Otaibi
9. Dr. Monira Almohizea
10. Dr. Reem Alsalem

57

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Appendix (4)
Frequencies and Percentages of the Data of the Study
The frequencies and percentages for the first part of the questionnaire.
Statement

1

No.

Fre

1

2

3

4

5

Per

Fre

Per

Fre

Per

Fre

Per

Fre

Per

25

16.6

33

21.9

57

37.7

27

17.9

9

6

2

20

13.2

27

17.9

46

30.5

42

27.8

16

10.6

3

16

10.6

26

7.2

35

23.2

50

33.1

24

15.9

4

25

16.6

26

17.2

30

19.9

40

26.5

30

19.9

5

13

8.6

24

15.9

44

29.1

41

27.2

29

19.2

6

21

13.9

20

13.2

43

28.5

42

27.8

25

16.6

7

13

8.6

21

13.9

39

25.8

45

29.8

33

21.9

8

20

13.2

20

13.2

56

37.1

36

23.8

19

12.6

9

21

13.9

17

11.3

47

31.1

40

26.5

26

17.2

10

12

7.9

37

24.5

50

33.1

43

28.5

9

6

11

15

9.9

36

23.8

55

36.4

31

20.5

14

9.3

12

19

12.6

24

15.9

50

33.1

40

26.5

18

11.9

13

20

13.2

42

27.8

40

26.5

36

23.8

13

8.6

14

25

16.6

20

13.2

43

28.5

34

22.5

29

19.2

Note: Statements were treated as the following:
Number (1): Strongly Disagree
Number (2): Disagree
Number (3): Neutral
Number (4): Agree
Number (5): Strongly Agree

58

INSTAGRAM AS A MALL TOOL

Frequencies and Percentages for the Second Part of the Questionnaire.
Statement

1

2

No.

Fre

Per

1

29

19.2

2

13

3

Fre

3

4

Per

Fre

Per

30

19.9

42

27.8

8.6

27

17.9

67

29

19.2

49

32.5

4

28

18.5

46

5

19

12.6

6

34

7

Per

Fre

Per

37

24.5

13

8.6

44.4

37

24.5

7

4.6

36

23.8

32

21.2

5

3.3

30.5

35

23.2

29

19.2

13

8.6

56

37.1

38

25.2

26

17.2

12

7.9

22.5

40

26.5

31

20.5

32

21.2

14

9.3

27

17.9

52

34.4

33

21.9

29

19.2

10

6.6

8

31

20.5

37

24.5

55

36.4

17

11.3

11

7.3

9

18

11.9

31

20.5

49

32.5

36

23.8

17

11.3

10

28

18.5

61

40.4

36

23.8

16

10.6

10

6.6

11

26

17.2

33

21.9

47

31.1

37

24.5

8

5.3

Note: Statements were treated as the following:
Number (1): Strongly Disagree
Number (2): Disagree
Number (3): Neutral
Number (4): Agree
Number (5): Strongly Agree

Fre

5

