Antai College of Economics & Management
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

The Theory of Humans: Dignity

Xinzhen Yu

This working paper issues to solicit valuable comments

1

The Theory of Humans: Dignity
Xinzhen Yu*

Abstract
If you lose a leg, you will feel undignified in public places; that is to say, a body
organ is a dignity of humans. If you are penniless, you will feel undignified everywhere;
that is to say, money is a dignity of humans as well. Scientifically, therefore, the word
``dignity'' should be a countable noun; you have many concrete dignities, including
your body organs, your children, your wealth, your privacy, your image, and so on; in
addition, you need to defend these concrete dignities of yours all your life. With this
scientific concept of dignity, this paper can smoothly solve a series of hard problems,
including (1) how human ancestors stood up from four-legged animals; (2) why humans
got dressed; (3) how humans acquired wisdom; (4) why humans commit suicide; and
(5) why humans have developed into what you see today.

Keywords: dignity, humiliation, face, animal mission, human mission, human origins
JEL Classifications: A10, B41, D03

*

Antai College of Economics & Management, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 1954 Huashan Road, Shang-

hai 200030, China (e-mail: xzyu@sjtu.edu.cn).

2

I

Introduction

Humans have only two root motivations: to enjoy pleasure and to defend their dignities.
To enjoy pleasure, they eat, they drink, they have sex, they play thrilling games, etc. To
defend their dignities, they exercise, they study hard, they work hard, they compete with
each other, they fight with each other, and so on.
Obviously, the first root motivation cannot make humans different from other animals.
Therefore, it is the second root motivation that makes humans unique. Yes, to defend their
dignities is exactly the reason why human ancestors stood up from four-legged animals,
why humans got dressed, why humans acquired wisdom, and why humans developed
into what they are today.
For simplicity, I start directly with animal body organs. Animal organs have two inherent
properties. (1) Each organ started as an organic large molecule, and took about billions
of years to evolve. Therefore, each organ is precious, and thus cannot be (violently) invaded. (2) Each organ started with a large molecule, experienced countless frustrations,
overcame countless difficulties, and finally evolved powerful functions. Therefore, each
organ is great, and thus should be respected; it is respectable. At the very least, each
organ cannot be laughed at (humiliated).
Obviously, animal dignities include mainly their body organs. Roughly speaking, therefore, animal dignities have two inherent properties. (1) Each dignity is precious, thus cannot be (violently) invaded. (2) Each dignity is great, thus cannot be (nonviolently) humiliated.
However, animal cognitive function has not evolved successfully. Animals only know
the first inherent property of their dignities: each dignity is precious, and thus cannot be
invaded. Therefore, animals have only one mission in life: to defend their dignities from
invasion.1
Can animals complete their only mission in life? As mentioned earlier, animal dignities
include almost always their body organs. As long as they can survive in safety, therefore,
1

Animals do not fully know the second inherent property of their dignities: each dignity is great, and thus

cannot be humiliated. Therefore, animals do not defend their dignities from humiliation. When humiliated,
specifically, they do not (really) fight back, they can suffer in silence.

3

they have almost defended their dignities from invasion, having almost completed their
only mission in life.
In order to survive in safety, consequently, animals evolved two significant instincts.
Members of the same species do not eat each other, the first instinct that protects themselves from inside invasion. Members of the same species live in groups, the second instinct
that protects themselves from outside invasion.
Indeed, most animals can survive in safety, can complete their only mission in life. Then,
what do they do in their daily life? (1) They mainly look for food and mates. (2) Occasionally, they will encounter predators, and they will confront the predators collectively. As a
result, a few members might be killed, and most members will be safe. (3) When faced
with humiliation, they do not (really) fight back, they can suffer in silence.
In other words, animals are usually idle, having little work to do. In addition, they occasionally compete for food and mates; but usually their life is harmonious and peaceful. Just
because of the idle and harmonious daily life, their bodies have not developed, their intelligence has not developed. Just because of the idle and harmonious daily life, animals
fail to stand up, and keep walking on all fours.
About millions of years ago, by chance, human ancestors emerged. Human ancestors
were of course four-legged animals. But unlike other advanced animals, their cognitive
function evolved successfully. (1) They fully understood the first inherent property of their
dignities: each dignity was precious, and therefore could not be (violently) invaded. (2)
They also fully understood the second inherent property of their dignities: each dignity was
great, and therefore could not be (nonviolently) humiliated.
Therefore, human ancestors had two missions in life. Their first mission in life was: to defend their dignities from invasion. Their second mission in life was: to defend their dignities
from humiliation.
Like other advanced animals, human ancestors could almost protect themselves from
(both inside and outside) invasion, they did not worry about their first mission in life on a
daily basis. Unlike other animals, they had to defend their dignities from humiliation. When
humiliated, they did not suffer in silence; instead, they repaid humiliators an eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth, fighting back resolutely, avenging themselves.

4

For example, an ugly male was laughed at for its ugly face and for having no females to
have sex with by a handsome male. Obviously, the ugly male was hurt badly. To avenge
itself, it crouched with its hind legs, and lifted its front legs to tear the humiliator's face,
intending to make the humiliator uglier than it. Being attacked, the humiliator also lifted
its front legs to protect its face. Finally, the two sides seriously tore each other's faces, one
side active, the other side forced, forming the shape of a herring bone ladder.
Humiliating unfortunate members (such as ugly males) could enjoy intense pleasure.
Therefore, fortunate members humiliated unfortunate members habitually. Each time they
were humiliated, unfortunate members were sure to fight back, avenging themselves. As
a result, human ancestors tore each other's faces habitually, in pairs, in the shape of a
herring bone ladder. As time went on, their hind legs became thicker and thicker; their
butts became bigger and bigger; the rear of their bodies became more and more developed; the gravity center of their bodies moved more and more backwards. In this way,
they stood up, many years later, unconsciously.
Like human ancestors, upright humans could almost protect themselves from invasion.
But, they could not protect themselves from humiliation. (1) As long as a person fell behind,
others would come and humiliate him sooner or later. If his left lower limb was disabled, for
example, a non-disabled guy possibly imitated the way he walked limply, humiliating him,
enjoying sharp pleasure. (2) Even if he killed the humiliator, avenged himself completely,
other non-disabled guys would still come and humiliate him some day.
To defend his dignities from humiliation, he had only one method: he could not fall
behind others; he had to be ahead of them, in all respects. Immediately after standing
up, therefore, humans began to compare with each other. They ran after each other,
they did not give in to each other. Unlike animals, humans did not stay idle; they did
heavy work every day. Everybody worked hard in order to run ahead of others.
No matter how hard they worked, however, they could not enlarge their penises. Just
because of this, upright humans got dressed. Unlike human ancestors, upright humans
had their own embarrassment. Human ancestors were four-legged animals, and their
penises were not directly exposed. As a result, small penis males did not suffer frequent
humiliation. But, humans stood up, their penises were directly exposed. As a result, the

5

men with a small penis were humiliated almost each time they met others.
To avoid being humiliated, those men with a small penis designed a cover-crotch ornament, covering their small penises. Then, those men with a middle penis were under great
pressure, they soon learned to cover their penises as well. Gradually, more and more men
wore cover-crotch ornaments. Over time, they also put on ornaments in other parts of
their bodies. Eventually, humans got dressed.
After putting on clothes, humans were sure to compare with each other in (terms of)
whose clothes looked nicer. Specifically, they racked their brains to modify the style of their
clothes in order to make themselves look fashionable, full of vitality, young and sunny.
The style of clothes involved many variables, including the color of an upper garment,
the color of a lower garment, the length of an upper garment, the length of a lower garment, the ``fabric'' of an upper garment, and the ``fabric'' of a lower garment. If there
were five colors available in nature, there were twenty five different color styles for a suit of
clothes. To be ahead of others, early humans had to design a plenty of styles of clothes;
then, their intelligence certainly grew a lot.
After putting on clothes, humans compared with each other more intensely. The more
they compared with each other, the smarter they became; the smarter they were, the
more they compared with each other.
Eventually, by chance, humans acquired wisdom. From then on, they started various
inventions, started human material civilization, and dominated the planet. Many years
passed, they came to today, a modern society, step by step, unwittingly.
The remaining of this paper is organized as follows. Section II dissects the concept
of dignity. Section III dissects two concepts: invasion and humiliation of one's dignities.
Section IV dissects the concept of face. Section V formulates two humiliation functions
for both sides of a humiliation behavior, respectively. Section VI introduces human two
missions in life. Section VII introduces animal mission in life. Section VIII introduces human
origins. Section IX solves a series of hard problems, including why humans got dressed,
and how humans acquired wisdom. Section X concludes.

6

II

Dignity

To begin with, let me briefly review the evolutionary process of advanced life. Life begun with a stable organic large molecule. Because the large molecule had stability, its
surrounding atoms tended to make up similar large molecules. In the process of making
up a large molecule, atoms might lack certain components (small molecules), and they
might rob another large molecule of those components.
Obviously, a stable large molecule could not allow its components (small molecules) to
be taken away. Then, it used its surrounding material to create a membrane to enclose
itself. In order to survive, namely, this stable organic large molecule evolved one step
forward, evolved into a higher level of life. Again in order to survive, then, this organic
large molecule evolved many more steps, evolved into a cell. Still in order to survive,
a few cells tended to band together, making up a multicellular organism. Similarly, a
few multicellular organisms tended to band together, making up a higher multicellular
organism. In this way, finally, advanced life evolved.
Until one day, by chance, humans were born. At that time, humans had nothing but
their body organs. To study human psychology and behavior, then, we cannot bypass
their body organs. Therefore, I am going to start with human organs and introduce a few
concepts.
IIA Two Inherent Properties of Human Organs
First, let me introduce the surface property of human organs. Human organs are all huge
achievements of biological evolution. They started as an organic large molecule, and
took about billions of years to evolve; namely, their evolutionary processes have gone
through possibly billions of years. Therefore, human organs are precious. For example,
hair is obviously precious; eyes are precious as well; arms, legs, and feet are all precious; a
heart, a liver, and a kidney are more precious. The preciousness of human organs is easy
to understand, and therefore is a surface property.
Just because of their preciousness, human organs cannot be invaded. For example,
your hair cannot be cut by others; your face cannot be scratched by others; your arms

7

cannot be cut off by others; and you yourself cannot be killed by others.
Next, let me introduce the deep property of human organs. To this end, I need to
remind you that human organs have powerful functions. For example, eyes can switch
their focal lengths at will between distant and close objects, enabling you to see both
distant and close objects clearly. For another example, a liver can recognize good nutrients and keep bad substances from the circulatory system. More surprisingly, a female
reproductive organ can actually culture a fertilized cell into an entire fetus.
Obviously, the powerful functions of human organs are hard-won. Human organs started with an organic large molecule, went through many evolutionary steps, experienced
countless frustrations, overcame countless difficulties, and finally evolved powerful functions. Therefore, human organs are great. For example, eyes are certainly great; a liver is
great as well; a female reproductive organ is very great. The greatness of human organs
is not obvious, and therefore is a deep property.
Just because of their greatness, human organs should be respected; indeed, they are
respectable. At the very least, they cannot be laughed at (humiliated). For example, your
left lower limb is disabled. Obviously, you do not allow others to laugh at your left leg. If
somebody imitates the way you walk lamely only once, you will never forgive this guy; you
will even risk your life to violently fight against him.
Finally, I want to emphasize the two inherent properties of human organs. (1) Human
organs have a surface property: each organ is precious, and therefore cannot be invaded. (2) Human organs have a deep property: each organ is great, and therefore cannot
be humiliated.
IIB

The Meaning of the Word ``Dignity''

In order to highlight the preciousness and greatness of human organs, ancient people
made two significant innovations. (1) They invented a countable noun ``dignity,'' meaning preciousness and greatness. (2) They called any human organ a dignity of humans.
For example, they said an eye was a dignity of humans to highlight the preciousness and
greatness of an eye; they said a breast was a dignity of women to highlight the preciousness and greatness of a breast; they said a penis was a dignity of men to highlight the
8

preciousness and greatness of a penis.2
Power, wealth, education, privacy, image, etc. are all products of human activities
in modern society. These products all have two inherent properties of human organs,
thus can be called analogues of human organs. In fact, modern people also regard
these products as human dignities. In every man's opinion, for example, his wife is both
precious (cannot be invaded) and great (cannot be humiliated). Namely, his wife is an
analogue of human organs, and thus a dignity of his. Therefore, a man with a wife has
this dignity, a man without a wife does not have this dignity. In everybody's opinion, for
another example, his son is both precious (cannot be invaded) and great (cannot be
humiliated). Namely, his son is an analogue of human organs, and thus a dignity of his.
Therefore, a person with a son has this dignity, a person without a son does not have this
dignity.
In addition to human individuals, human groups also have dignities. For example, every country has many dignities, including its territory, its people, its natural resources, its
scientific power, its economic power, its military power, and so on.
Now, the concept of dignity is clear, but a few additions are still helpful. (1) The word
``dignity'' should be used as a countable noun, from now forward. (2) Different people
may have different dignities. For example, the title of professor is a dignity in universities
(professors have this dignity, lectures do not have this dignity), but not a dignity in primary
and secondary schools. (3) Different times may have different dignities. For example, a
doctorate is a dignity now. But many years later, the education system may no longer
obtain; there may be no doctorates. (4) A dignity is a variable; different people have
different numerical values of the dignity. For example, hair is one dignity of humans. Young
people have thicker hair, thus having larger numerical values; old people have sparser
hair, thus having smaller numerical values. For another example, a country's territory is a
dignity of its. Some countries have larger territories, thus having larger numerical values;
the other countries have smaller territories, thus having smaller numerical values.
2

The Chinese of the word ``dignity'' has exactly two implications: preciousness and greatness.

9

IIC

Confirmation of Dignities

The above analysis of the concept of dignity is, in fact, consistent with your intuition. To see
this, a few illustrations will suffice for you. (1) If your penis is small, you may feel undignified
in the public bathhouse. This shows that a penis is indeed a dignity of men. (2) Most
people have no power, therefore it is hard to see the truth of power. But when you meet
an imperious boss, you must feel undignified. That is to say, power is indeed a dignity of
humans. (3) Each of your acquaintances have a house, but you do not. Then, you must
feel undignified in front of your acquaintances. Indeed, money is a dignity of humans.
(4) If all your high school classmates have gotten their doctorates, but you have failed to
get into college, you are sure to feel undignified. In other words, education is a dignity
of humans. (5) If your sex video gets circulated, you certainly feel undignified. Namely,
privacy is a dignity of humans. (6) If your photos or videos are used at will, you will feel
undignified. To put it in another way, image is also a dignity of humans.
At this point, the concept of dignity is completely clear, and can have a strict scientific
definition.
Definition 1. The word ``dignity'' is a countable noun; everybody has many dignities, including his body organs, his power, his wealth, his privacy, his image, and other analogues of
human organs.
Being conceptualized from human organs, human dignities have the same two inherent properties as human organs. First, human dignities have a surface property: each
dignity is precious, and thus cannot be invaded. Second, human dignities have a deep
property: each dignity is great, and thus cannot be humiliated.3

3

The concept of dignity is the most important concept of humans, and therefore has long evolved into an

innate knowledge of humans. This is a special innate knowledge, having two interesting phenomena. (1) No
body can tell exactly what dignities are. The concept of dignity emerged too early; its exact meaning had
long been forgotten by the time words appeared. (2) All people know exactly what dignities are. In fact,
they are busy everyday, just to defend their respective dignities.

10

III Invasion and Humiliation of One's Dignities
Your dignities can be neither invaded nor humiliated. However, others will not listen to you;
they will not care how you feel. That is to say, they may invade your dignities, or humiliate
your dignities, or both.
When others' force is weaker than yours, they do not dare to invade your dignities. But
when their force is stronger than yours, they dare. For example, a few people not far away
from you want to get ill-gotten money, and form a robbery gang. Obviously, their force is
stronger than yours; they dare to rob you of your property, invading your dignities.
Definition 2. To invade your dignities is to occupy, or destroy one or more dignities of yours.
When some dignity of others is inferior to yours, they do not have the qualification to
humiliate you. But when this dignity of theirs is superior to yours, they have. If you come
from a remote rural area to a big city, for example, your rural identity is inferior to city
identity. Therefore, city people around you have the qualification to humiliate you. Then,
they possibly remind you---from time to time---that you are a boor, implying that
you are dirty, you are uncultured, you are uncivilized, you are a cut below
others, you do not even deserve to be a human, and so on.
Definition 3. To humiliate you (your dignities) is to remind you, in a roundabout way: one
dignity of yours is inferior; you are useless; you are inferior; you are a cut below others; you
do not even deserve to be a human.
There is an important difference between the two concepts. (1) Usually, to invade your
dignities is not to invade you yourself. For example, a robbery gang usually does not want
to hurt you, but wants to rob you of your property. Only when you fight back hard, will the
gang be forced to hurt you then. (2) Definitely, to humiliate your dignities is to humiliate
you yourself. If you come from a remote rural area to a big city, for example, no one
wants to humiliate your rural identity. Instead, some people will employ your rural identity
to laugh at you yourself.4
4

Depending on the context, therefore, this paper sometimes uses ``humiliating your dignities,'' sometimes

uses ``humiliating you.''

11

In essence, the two concepts are complexly linked, and difficult to distinguish. Therefore, I have to define them first, and then study them in detail.
IIIA

Invasion of One's dignities

In this subsection, I explain invasion behavior in detail. First, I explain the classification of
invasion behavior. Invasion behavior includes violence invasion, power invasion, technology invasion, Internet invasion, etc. (1) Violence invasion means using violence to invade
others' dignities. Before human civilization, for example, violent gangs frequently used violence to rob others of their property. (2) Power invasion means using power to invade
others' dignities. For example, public places use their power to over-install surveillance
equipment, over-videoing passers by. (3) Technology invasion means using technology
to invade others' dignities. Internet companies, for example, use their technology to collect users' privacy, all sidedly. (4) Internet invasion means using Internet to invade others'
dignities. A large collection of people, for example, take advantage of the convenience
of the Internet to freely search, slander, abuse a single person. Not only is the person's
privacy exposed, but his physiology, psychology, reputation, etc. are all hurt severely.
Second, I explain the premise of invasion behavior. In order to invade others' dignities,
invaders usually have an overwhelming advantage over victims. To explain this premise,
the four types of invasion behavior are enough. (1) In the example of violence invasion,
a violent gang---before human civilization---had an overwhelming advantage in (terms
of) force, while an individual victim was helpless but to watch others robbing him of his
property. (2) In the example of power invasion, public places have an overwhelming advantage in the power to install surveillance equipment, while passers-by have no choice
but to watch their own image being captured, saved, and manipulated at will. (3) In
the example of technology invasion, Internet companies have an overwhelming advantage in Internet technology, while users are helpless but to watch their own privacy being searched, saved, processed, twenty-four hours a day, three hundred and sixty-five
days a year. (4) In the example of Internet invasion, Internet users---with the illusion of selfrighteousness---can easily form an online violent gang. Needless to say, an online gang
has an overwhelming advantage in online force, while an individual victim is helpless but
12

to watch himself being slandered, abused, and stigmatized.
Third, I explain the end of invasion behavior. A small number of people invade others'
dignities not for gain, but for enjoying pleasure. For example, some people like to collect
others' privacy and take others' image, but they do not sell their works for money; instead,
they hide at home to enjoy their works, enjoying the thrill of peeping. For another example,
some people do not insult others in real life; they insult others on the Internet. They certainly
do not get any gain, but can enjoy a little bit of pleasure.
Most people invade others' dignities not for enjoying pleasure, but for gain. Most invasion cases have to do with wealth, such as theft, robbery, fraud, etc. In other words,
most invaders do not want to enjoy any kind of pleasure; they only plan to improve their
wealth. When you were a child, for example, you once made a stupid mistake. That time,
you needed money urgently but could not raise the money. In desperation, you stupidly
stole some money from a shopkeeper. But you did not enjoy any pleasure; instead, you
felt guilty about your stupid behavior for a long amount of time.
Therefore, this paper makes a technical summary: usually, people invade others' dignities not for pleasure, but for gain. There are three reasons for such a technical summary.
(1) Animals invade others' dignities not for pleasure, but for gain only. Then, this summary is very handy when studying human ancestors (also four-legged animals). (2) Such a
summary could make a clear distinction between invasion behavior and humiliation behavior. (3) This paper will make a special statement when studying a few invasion cases
which pursue pleasure only.
Fourthly, I explain the link between invasion behavior and humiliation behavior. When
someone invades one dignity of yours, in fact, he also humiliates another dignity of yours.
Simply put, invasion behavior is also humiliation behavior. When you were a schoolboy,
for example, a junior middle school boy robbed you of your money one day, invading
a dignity of yours. Meanwhile, his eyes exhibited the following information, humiliating
another dignity of yours:
you have little force, thus having little corresponding dignity; you are inferior,
you are a cut below others.
For another example, the numerous surveillance devices in public places take your image
13

at will, invading one dignity of yours. Meanwhile, these surveillance devices also tell you
the following information, humiliating another dignity of yours:
you have no power, thus having no corresponding dignity; you cannot defend your image; you are useless; you are inferior.
Finally, I explain the constraint of invasion behavior. Invasion behavior leaves evidence,
can be confirmed easily, and can be banned easily by human civilization. For example,
theft, robbery, fraud, etc. appeared in ancient years, were prohibited long ago by human
civilization, and therefore are rarely seen now. However, the behavior of collecting users'
privacy and the behavior of filming passers by emerged recently, and will be prohibited
by human civilization, finally, certainly.
IIIB

Humiliation of One's Dignities

In this subsection, I explain humiliation behavior in detail. First, I explain the classification
of humiliation behavior. Humiliation behavior includes violence humiliation, power threat,
expose of others' weakness, etc. Since human civilization, violence humiliation has rarely
been heard. Now, such a type of humiliation behavior evolves only on campus, thus also
called ``campus bullying.''
Campus bullying evolves for three reasons. (1) Children do not have enough acquired
knowledge; they rely mainly upon their innate knowledge. Therefore, they have not fully
understood how the law prohibits humiliation behavior; they have not learned to control
themselves; they indulge in their own natures; they enjoy the pleasure of humiliating others. (2) Senior students are both taller and stronger; junior students are both shorter and
weaker. Therefore, one-to-one campus bullying is easy to evolve. By report, for example,
a senior middle school boy did not like a primary school boy, thus smashing his learning
utensils, punching him, kicking him, burning him with cigarette ends, and even forcing him
to eat excrement. (3) One student does well in some respects, leading other students to
hate him. Therefore, many-to-one campus bullying is more likely to evolve. As report goes,
for example, a girl looked beautiful, irritating a large number of other girls. Then, these girls
often worked together to bully the beautiful girl, pulling her hair, stripping her clothes, s14

lapping her in the face, punishing her to kneel down, cutting her face with a knife, and
even beating her whole body with a thick stick.
Violence humiliation is both humiliation behavior and invasion behavior. (1) Violence
humiliation is certainly humiliation behavior; it humiliates victims' force, the most important
dignity. In (terms of) force, humiliators have an overwhelming advantage; their violence
behavior itself is a reminder to victims:
you have little force, you have little corresponding dignity; you are useless.
(2) Violence humiliation is also invasion behavior; it hurts many body organs of victims,
invading many dignities of theirs.
Powerful people are often impatient, easily angry, and difficult to serve. Therefore,
power threat evolves everywhere. In order to show off their power, for example, some
bosses often threaten to fire their respective employees. These bosses have power, the
second important dignity; their threats give their respective employees the following reminder:
you have no power, thus having no corresponding dignity; you are inferior.
Being threatened, involved employees feel hurt badly, having a great sense of shame.
Expose of others' weakness is the most common strategy of humiliation behavior, evolving in every corner of human society.5 Expose of others' weakness, mention of others'
fault, and touch on others' sore spot---all mean the same thing; all say something to humiliate others, making them have a great sense of shame. For example, you used to be
poor. One day, you were busy in your office.
``Money cannot buy happiness,'' one of your colleagues came and touched
you on the raw, slavering nearly. ``You do not have much money, but you are
still cool, and you still have a good time.''
Obviously, this colleague was actually eager to say such a word:
you have no money, thus having no corresponding dignity; you are inferior.
5

For the sake of simplicity, this paper only studies this type of humiliation behavior. Unless otherwise stated,

therefore, the humiliation behavior that follows is exactly to expose others' weakness.

15

For another example, your left lower limb is disabled; thus, your walk incongruously. One
day in your school days, you were sunning yourself on campus.
``Oh, it's you,'' one of your classmates pretended to run into you, swallowing
his happy saliva. ``I want to experience your difficulty in walking.''
Before he had finished, he imitated the way you walk lamely, and the way you nod once
while you take a step. Apparently, the classmate actually was eager to give you such a
reminder:
you have no normal left lower limb, thus having no corresponding dignity;
you are useless; you are inferior; you are a cut below others.
Here is one more example. Suppose, in 2000, you were a man in your 50s, having no
wife, having no house. In this case, all your acquaintances grinned from ear to ear, with
great satisfaction. However, they did not grin in front of you; they hid under the covers
to grin. They grinned under the covers, every day; they grinned under the covers, day
after day. One day, finally, one of them lost control of himself; he came to you, saying the
following uncommon word:
``when you yourself eat, your whole family is not hungry.''
Meanwhile, his face flamed with excitement, his eyes twinkled with excitement, his mouth
watered with excitement. Obviously, he was actually eager to say the following words:
you have no wife, you have no house, you have no dignities; you are useless;
you are inferior; you do not deserve to be a human.
Further, expose of others' weakness can be divided into three subtypes. (1) The first
subtype is conscious expose of others' weakness, conscious humiliation of others. For example, to imitate the way that a disabled person walks limply is to consciously expose his
weakness, consciously humiliating him. (2) The second subtype is unconscious expose of
others' weakness, unconscious humiliation of others. For example, a teacher hoped parents to take care of their children. On a Friday afternoon, he asked a parent to meet at
school.
16

``Your son does not study hard, specializing in bullying his classmates,'' the
teacher said to the parent truthfully. ``In the math exam last week, your son
took the bottom of the class.''
Obviously, the teacher hoped students to get better; he did not want to expose anybody's
weakness. However, his complaint unconsciously exposed the parent's weakness, giving
the parent the following reminder unconsciously:
your son has no ability to learn, having no corresponding dignity; your son is
useless; your son is inferior; your son is a cut below others.
After listening to the teacher's complaint, the parent apparently suffered great harm, having a great sense of shame because of his disappointing son. (3) The third subtype is expose of one's own weakness, humilation of oneself. For example, you used not to do well
in your work; your boss planned to fire you. However, you had children, having many
mouths to feed; you could not lose your job. Therefore, you pleaded with your boss to
let you stay, admitting that your ability was not good enough, willing to cut salary. At this
point, you were forced to expose your own weakness; you almost said to your boss the
following words:
I have no ability to do my work well, thus having no corresponding dignity; I
am useless; I am inferior; I do not even deserve to be a human.
When you pleaded with your boss, you apparently suffered great harm, having a great
sense of shame because of your incompetence.6
Second, I explain the end of humiliation behavior. Usually, people humiliate others'
dignities not for gain, but for pleasure. In fact, all types of humiliation behavior cannot get
any real gain. However, humiliating others can enjoy sharp pleasure, indeed. (1) When
humiliators remind you that you do not have a certain dignity, you will feel in the wrong,
you will feel ashamed, and you cannot lift your head. Seeing your embarrassment and
6

Because only this type of humiliation behavior is mainly studied, this paper will use conscious humiliation

(behavior), unconscious humiliation (behavior), and self humiliation (behavior) to indicate the three subtypes
of expose of others' weakness, respectively.

17

your helplessness, humiliators enjoy great thrill, get extremely excited, feel good all over,
and secrete large quantities of saliva in mouths. In order not to let their saliva flow out,
they will turn their heads and swallow their saliva. (2) When humiliators violently humiliate
you, you will fear, tremble, and even make miserable cries. Seeing your pain and your
despair, humiliators will become sexually aroused; men's penises will unconsciously erect.
Thirdly, I explain the constraint of humiliation behavior. (1) Violence humiliation occurs
rarely. Violence humiliation leaves evidence, can be confirmed easily, and is prohibited
by human civilization. (2) Nonviolence humiliation occurs frequently. Power threat and expose of one's weakness leave no evidence, are difficult to confirm, are difficult to prohibit,
and therefore take place frequently.
Finally, I emphasize the power to humiliate. A dignity of your neighbor is of course great.
But if your corresponding dignity is greater than his, you have the power to humiliate him,
in this dignity. For example, you are both tall and big, while your neighbor is both short and
small. Then, your force is stronger than his, thus having the power to violently humiliate him.
But, he does not have the power to violently humiliate you. For another example, you are
not disabled, while your neighbor is. Then, your body shape is better than his, thus having
the power to humiliate him, in body shape. But, he does not have the power to humiliate
you, in body shape.
Even with the power to humiliate others in some dignity, you cannot really humiliate
them; you still need to have enough force. For example, you are a rich man, thus having
the power to humiliate poor men. But if you are small, having little strength, you do not
dare to use your power to humiliate them; otherwise, you will be violently humiliated by
them. For another example, you are big, strong, and good looking. Therefore, you both
have the power to humiliate ugly men, and dare to use your power to humiliate them.
Force talks, force is the first variable, force is the first dignity. Force determines whether
you can defend your dignities. If you have great strength, for example, you will be able to
defend your dignities. In this case, even if many people have the power to humiliate you
in many other dignities, no one dares to use his power to humiliate you. If you have little
strength, for another example, you will be unable to defend your dignities. In this case,
even if you look good and have money, others still dare to violently humiliate you.

18

IV Face
In this section, I use a more detailed example of humiliation behavior to introduce what
face is. This example is about a pair of old classmates who have graduated from college
for 30 years and both are over 50 years old. After college, one hoped to have a stable career, then became a middle school teacher, and has worked there all his life. He is a wage
earner, having three children to support. Then, he cannot afford to buy a house, living in a
public rental house. Also after college, the other started his own business, was repeatedly
defeated, and finally won great success. At present, two of his private companies have
gone public. His wealth exceeds 10 billions. He is a billionaire.
Their wealth status is at two extremes, and thus easy to spread among their classmates;
the pair of old classmates know each other pretty well. One day not long ago, they happened to visit another classmate of theirs---a city official---at the same time. Therefore, the
two old classmates, who had not seen each other for 30 years, met unexpectedly in the
city hall. The teacher certainly did not want to see the billionaire. When he was sure he
saw the billionaire, his face immediately turned red, and he did want to dig a hole in the
ground to get into. When the billionaire saw the poverty-stricken middle school teacher,
his superiority feeling rose sharply, and his waist straightened up in an instant. At first, he
could pretend to talk with the teacher enthusiastically. A little while later, however, he lost
control of himself.
``How many properties do you have?'' The billionaire knew the teacher had
no house, but deliberately asked this awkward question.
``I have no house, I live in a public rental house,'' the teacher reluctantly
replied, seeing the malice of the billionaire.
``What kind of luxury car do you drive?'' Seeing the teacher's head had
lowered, the billionaire was so excited that he was going to drool.
``I cannot drive at all,'' the teacher answered skillfully.
Obviously, the billionaire humiliated the teacher. His sharp questions gave the teacher
the following reminder:
you have little money, having little corresponding dignity; you are useless.
19

When he continuously touched the teacher's sore spot (poverty), a burst of sharp pleasure quickly permeated from his inner heart to his whole body; he enjoyed unspeakable
pleasure. Meanwhile, the teacher was seriously hurt, and he had a great sense of shame
because of his poverty.
Next, let me point out one of the great achievements of human evolution: the luster on
human faces. Since humans put on clothes, their skin has gradually become thin, smooth,
and hydrated. In especial, their faces are ruddy, shiny, glowing with a charming luster.
With a pair of bright eyes, their faces are full of vigor, kind, gentle, attractive.
But the luster on the teacher's face was ``torn off'' and ``stuck'' to the billionaire's face.
While his sore spot was continuously chafed, the teacher was hurt so much that the muscles in his face distorted and deformed. At this time, his eyes were not bright anymore; his
face became black and blue, dark and lackluster. Obviously, the luster on his face disappeared. Seeing the distorted and deformed face of the teacher, however, the billionaire
felt a burst of sharp pleasure spreading from his inner heart to his whole body. At this time,
his eyes were more bright; his face became ruddier, shinier, more charming. So to speak,
the luster on his face doubled.
Human faces should be lustrous, attractive, and charming, but the teacher's face was
dark, twisted, and ugly. Therefore, he deeply, instinctively, and unforgettably felt:
he lost his original face (human face), he became a monster, he was not
counted as a human, he was deprived of his right as a human.
That was how he felt when he was humiliated seriously. Then, how did he express his
humiliated experience? If he did not use any language arts, he could not be able to
express how he felt. For example, he returned to his home late that night.
``A rich classmate humiliated me because of my poverty, '' he said directly
to his wife.
In this case, he told the truth, but did not express how he felt at all, and his wife could
not estimate how much he was hurt. If he used some language arts, however, the result
would be very different. For example, he returned to his home late that night.

20

``I lost my face, my face was lost,'' he said skillfully to his wife. ``A rich classmate tore off my face.''
At this time, he told his metaphor. He likened ``humiliated me'' to ``tore off my face,''
directly expressing how he felt. Now that his face was torn off, therefore, his wife could
also imagine how seriously he was hurt.
And what is more, his metaphor has successfully evolved into an innate knowledge
of humans because (1) his metaphor is bold, vivid, and hyperbolic; and (2) his metaphor
fascinates others, resonates with others, and touch others' hearts. Now, humans rarely say
the word ``humiliate,'' but rather use the word ``face'' to make various metaphors. The
most common metaphors are listed as follows:
1. today, you tore my face;
2. today, you did not tear my face;
3. today, you peeled off my face;
4. today, you did not give me face;
5. I lost a little face, yesterday;
6. I lost a lot of face, yesterday;
7. I lost my whole face, yesterday.
In fact, humans also have another metaphor: to save face. This metaphor is used
frequently as if it hung on human mouths.
Definition 4. To save face is to protect oneself from humiliation, is to give others no chance
to tear one's own face.
Roughly speaking, whatever humans do is almost to save face. For example,
1. to drive a luxury car is to save face;
2. to live in a mansion is to save face;
3. to drink good wines is to save face;
4. to smoke good cigarettes is to save face;
5. to wear name brand clothes is to save face.
For another example,
21

1. to get rich is to save face;
2. to be an official is to save face;
3. to study for a doctorate is to save face;
4. to enter a famous university is to save face.
Heartbreakingly,
1. to kill others is to save face;
2. to kill oneself is still to save face.
Finally, let me point out that dignity and face are not the same concept; they are two
concepts. First, having a dignity, you may also lose face. For example, you have 10 million
CNY (China Yuan), of course having the corresponding dignity. But a billionaire is far richer
than you, and he may come and humiliate you. If this is the case, your face is lost. Second,
without a dignity, you can still save your face. For example, you are as poor as a church
mouse, having little corresponding dignity. But you do not associate with people who are
richer than you; you only make contact with those who are as poor as you are. Then, no
one has the power to humiliate you; you can successfully save your face.

22

V

Humiliation Functions

In this section, I build two humiliation functions for both sides of a humiliation behavior.
One is the pleasure function for humiliators, and the other is the shame function for victims. Obviously, both humiliators and victims need a computable tool, computing something
before deciding what to do next. First, humiliating others has sharp pleasure, but it can
also lead to violent retaliation. Therefore, a potential humiliator needs to assess how much
pleasure he will get before humiliating a person. (1) If the pleasure is only little, he should
give up his attempt. (2) If the pleasure reaches infinity, he probably cannot help but carry
out his humiliation behavior. Second, a victim also needs to assess how much sense of
shame he feels before fighting back. (1) If his sense of shame is only little, he should simply
give up his retaliatory act. (2) If his sense of shame is infinite but the humiliator is unconscious, he cannot use violence to fight back; he can pour a basin of cold water over the
humiliator's head. (3) If his sense of shame is infinite and the humiliator is conscious, he can
use violence to fight back.
In order to establish these two humiliation functions, I use X to denote the involved
dignity (such as hair, appearance, power, wealth, and so on). Use xi and xj to denote
the corresponding dignity values of two men i and j, respectively. When xi < xj , namely
that j's dignity is greater than i's corresponding dignity, then j has the power to humiliate
i in such a dignity.
Suppose j does use his power to humiliate, really humiliating i. Then, j's pleasure function can be defined as
(1)

Pji (t, X) := ρj t(log xj − log xi );

meanwhile, i 's shame function can be defined as
(2)

Sij (t, X) :=

1
t(log xj − log xi ).
ςi

The first function is built for j to assess his pleasure. The parameter ρj ∈ [0, ∞) points
out the extent to which he pays attention to the dignity X. The more attention he pays,
the more pleasure he enjoys. The parameter t ∈ [0, ∞) is the duration of his humiliation
behavior. The longer his humiliation lasts, the more pleasure he gets. The term (log xj −
23

log xi ) is the main source of his pleasure. If xi = 0, log xj − log xi = ∞; that is, when i does
not have the involved dignity, humiliating i can enjoy infinite pleasure. For example, every
man has a wife, but i has not. Then, he cannot control himself; he will humiliate i sooner
or later.
The second function is built for i to assess his sense of shame. The parameter ςi ∈ [0, ∞) is
his mental strength coefficient. If he is mentally strong, j's humiliation does not bring (much)
sense of shame to him. The parameter t ∈ [0, ∞) is the duration of j's humiliation behavior.
The longer j's humiliation lasts, the more sense of shame he has. The term (log xj − log xi )
is the main source of his sense of shame. If xi = 0, log xj − log xi = ∞; that is, when he does
not have the involved dignity, j's humiliation can make him have infinite sense of shame.
For example, every man has a wife, but he has not; at this point, j's humiliation will make
him ashamed infinitely.
If i is mentally strong, he has little sense of shame, indeed. For example, he is a college
teacher, but has not learned to write academic papers, and thus is still an assistant professor in his 50s. In academic qualification, certainly, he is a loser, having no corresponding
dignity. But he is mentally strong because (1) he can make money from stock markets,
having lived a rich life; (2) he is handsome, having young men's temperament in his 50s;
and (3) he is very smart, his eyes radiate a heroic strain, aggressive. If j comes and humiliates him, he cannot feel any sense of shame, and his face color will not change at all.
However, he can feel j's malice, and his aggressive eyes will keep j in disarray.
The mental strength coefficient ςi ∈ [0, ∞) depends mainly upon i's combined strength,
especially upon his force, power, and wealth. In fact, the coefficient depends also upon
whether he values the dignity X, depending reversely upon ρi ∈ [0, ∞). When he attaches
great importance to the dignity X, he could not be mentally strong. However, when he
does not pay much attention to the dignity X, he could be of course mentally strong. In
especial, when he does not value the dignity X at all, namely ρi = 0, his mental strength
coefficient reaches infinity.
The two humiliation functions can be extended to multi-person contexts. For example,
n college classmates who have graduated for 30 years are partying. They eat around a
large rectangular table that they have pieced together, and talk about how they made

24

money over the past 30 years. At the time, the dignity they focus upon is wealth, denoted
using W . And, their wealth spectrum is supposed as follows:
w1 , w2 , · · · , wn .

(3)

These old classmates at the party have different attempts. (1) A few old classmates
attend the party in order to retaliate against those who once looked down upon them.
They used to be ugly ducklings in college, and no one looked up to them. But in the 30
years after graduation, they have struggled to become rich. Therefore, they are willing to
attend this reunion; they will take this opportunity to avenge themselves. (2) Most old classmates never think of retaliating upon anybody. They just want to meet the old classmates,
talking about the old days, recalling the old experiences, feeling the old warmth.
However, a class reunion is exactly a comparison party. These old classmates are
bound to compare with each other, compare in wealth, compare in children's future,
and so on. After they compare with each other for a while, something changes in their
hearts. Huge differences in wealth make some of them feel unfair, feel depressed, and
feel humiliated.
This college reunion is really a good context. For the sake of simplicity, I select a single
old classmate, say i, to model his two humiliation functions. To save his face, i has to show
off himself to wittingly or unwittingly humiliate those poorer classmates, poorer than him.
Certainly, he also feels humiliated by those wealthier classmates, wealthier than him. Now,
his pleasure function and shame function can be defined respectively as follows:
ρi t ∑
(log wi − log wλ ), i = 1, 2, · · · , n;
n
i−1

(4)

Pi (t, W ) =

(5)

Si (t, W ) =

t
ςi n

λ=1
n
∑

(log wλ − log wi ), i = 1, 2, · · · , n.

λ=i+1

The parameter t ∈ [0, ∞) is the duration of their party. Successful old classmates hope
the party lasts as long as possible; their faces are filled with sharp pleasure. Unsuccessful
old classmates hope the party ends as soon as possible; their faces are full of sense of
shame.

25

VI

Human Mission in Life

To begin with, I need to highlight three basic concepts: motivation, mission, and mission in
life. (1) A motivation is a task, which can be accomplished or not. (2) A mission is a task of
some members, which must be accomplished. (3) A mission in life is a task of all members,
which must be accomplished.
Evidently, humans have two missions in life. Because dignities cannot be invaded, human first mission in life is to defend their dignities from invasion. When one dignity of theirs
is invaded, they must use all means to defeat the invader, protecting this dignity. For example, your house is one dignity of yours. If somebody encroaches upon your house, you
will use the law or violence to retake your house. For another example, a country's land is
exactly one dignity of its. If part of its land is encroached upon, it will resort to international
mediations, or start wars to retake the occupied territories.
Because dignities cannot be humiliated, human second mission in life is to defend their
dignities from humiliation. When one dignity of theirs is humiliated, they should respond to
the humiliator with an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth, avenge themselves. If the
humiliator is conscious, they frequently avenge themselves with violence. An honest man
of little ability, for example, was laughed at many times by a tall neighbor. He always put
up with the neighbor because the law forbids lynching. One day, he was derided once
again by the neighbor as a piece of junk. This time, he finally could not hold himself back,
picked up a wooden stick, and killed the tall neighbor with a violent blow.
If the humiliator is unconscious, they should not avenge themselves with violence. At
this time, the humiliator has no malice, does not intend to humiliate them, and even does
not know them very well. Because they themselves are inferior, in fact, they feel humiliated. Therefore, they have no reason to fight against the (unconscious) humiliator, let alone
using violence. Then, they have to fight back without violence, leading the phenomenon
of pouring cold water to evolve.

26

VIA

Pouring Cold Water

Definition 5. Pouring cold water is not an act, but a metaphor for making derogatory
remarks about others' happy events.
The remarks are used to destroy others' emotions, and can make happy persons sad in
an instant. You may not realize how a few words can chill your enthusiasm quickly, but you
can realize how cold water can chill your body quickly. Therefore, people liken ``saying
a few words to depress a pleased person'' to ``pouring cold water upon this person.''
Indeed, pouring cold water is a common phenomenon. When your family has a good
thing, you certainly smile from ear to ear. In addition, you cannot help but tell your neighbors, hoping them to share your happiness. However, they cannot do justice to the good
thing in your family, and they do not want to share your happiness either. Instead, they
may pour over you a basin of cold water, making your heart cold, making your emotion
bad, making you have no mood to talk, making you have no mood to eat, making you
change from happiness to sadness in an instant.
Being poured cold water over is really frustrating; a good thing turns into a bad thing
in an instant. For example, a couple had an only son, 15 years old, in junior middle school.
The boy was good at track and field, and thus targeted by several top universities. Having
such a promising son, the couple were certainly happy. One day, they took their only son
out to an upscale restaurant, planning to celebrate.
On the way to the upscale restaurant, they met a neighbor. They could not control
themselves, thus telling the neighbor about their celebration plan. They then expected to
hear a word of praise, but things went contrary to their wishes.
``Good grades in sports are no big deal,'' the neighbor poured a basin of
cold water over their heads. ``Good grades in sciences are considered promising; learning sciences well, one can go anywhere without fear.''
The basin of cold water completely cooled the family's good mood, making the whole
family feel depressed instantly. In the upscale restaurant, the son was unable to eat.
There was another couple. Their son was admitted to the best university in the country;
the whole family was in extreme excitement, and they could not wait to tell their good
27

thing to one of their colleagues. They expected to hear cheers and congratulations, but
their sharing behavior still backfired.
``Times have changed; there are many ways to succeed; going to college
is not of much use;'' this colleague poured cold water over their heads either.
``Now, money talks. Money is the king. You go to a good university now; you
will still be poor after graduation.''
This basin of cold water made the couple's good mood drop to the freezing point, making
them extremely disappointed.
Instinctively, people hate a person who pours cold water over others' heads, thinking
him a wicked person. But this time, the instinct is wrong. To know why the instinct is wrong,
you need to know the truth of pouring cold water. First, those who pour cold water upon
others are humiliated. For example, the first couple's son was just a junior middle school
student, but was targeted by several universities. While their neighbor's son never studied
hard, specializing in fighting and rioting; he might not graduate from middle school, let
alone went to college. The second couple's son would go to the best university in the
country, but their colleague's son could not even go to an ordinary university. In both
cases, one family's good news gave the other a reminder:
your son has no ability to go to college, thus having no corresponding dignity;
your son is useless; your son is inferior.
Second, the humiliators are unconscious. For example, the two couples mentioned previously just talked about their own good things; they never thought of humiliating anyone.
Third, to pour cold water is to nonviolently fight back. Hearing other families' good things,
for example, the neighbor and the colleague mentioned previously felt seriously humiliated, then had to fight back. Because they themselves were not good enough, however,
they could not blame the humiliators completely. Therefore, violent retaliation would be
undue; they had to pour a big basin of cold water over the humiliators' heads, fighting
back without violence.

28

VII

Animal Mission in Life

Animals and humans have two basic similarities. (1) Animals also have dignities. Each
animal has many dignities, including its body organs, its children, its strength, its territory,
etc. (2) Animal dignities also have two inherent properties: preciousness and greatness.
Therefore, their dignities can also be neither invaded nor humiliated.
Animals and humans have one basic difference. That is, animals have not developed;
while humans have developed, and they have been developing. So far, animals and
humans have shown a great difference.
The basic difference between animals and humans emerged while human ancestors
emerged. To understand this basic difference, therefore, we need to go back to an era
before human ancestors appeared. In that era, life on this planet evolved in two branches: plants and animals. In that era, no species deviated significantly from the two life
branches.
Let us bypass the plant branch, and walk into the animal branch---in that era---to take
a look. Obviously, animals had the root motivation to enjoy pleasure. To this end, they
usually did five things: eating, idling, having sex, playing thrilling games, and humiliating
companions.
As studied in Section III, humiliating companions could enjoy sharp pleasure, but required two premises. (1) Humiliators should have the power to humiliate. Namely, they
should be superior to their companions in a dignity. For example, good-looking males
could humiliate bad-looking males, not vice versa; a male with a big penis could humiliate a male with a small penis, not vice versa. (2) Humiliators should have enough strength.
Otherwise, they should be fought back violently, suffering severe harm.
In addition to enjoying pleasure, did animals have other root motivations? To answer
this question, we need to know animal cognitive level. In fact, animals were smart enough,
but their cognitive function had not evolved successfully.
Specifically, animals did not understand their own dignities properly. (1) They could fully
recognize the surface property of their dignities: each dignity was precious and thus could
not be invaded. (2) They could not fully recognize the deep property of their dignities:

29

each dignity was great and thus could not be humiliated. About this property, they were
not completely unclear, but smattering, half-conscious, not completely clear.
Therefore, animals had only one mission in life: defending their dignities from invasion.
Animals had little wealth, and their dignities included almost always their body organs. As
long as they survived in safety, roughly speaking, they could finish their mission in life.7
However, an individual was unable to protect itself from predators. To survive in safety,
it had to rely upon the power of crowds. To this end, animals evolved two significant
instincts. (1) Members of the same species did not eat each other. For example, strong
members did not prey upon weak members of the same species; a few weak members
would not work together to prey upon a strong member of the same species. (2) Members
of the same species lived in groups, facing together the challenge of predators.8
In fact, these two instincts could evolve easily, and therefore naturally became an
innate knowledge of animals. In order not to be preyed upon by predators, obviously,
animals were all willing to live in groups. First, strong members were willing to live in a group.
In this way, they were the biggest beneficiaries. When a few predators came and hunted,
the whole group would confront these few natural enemies. These natural enemies might
successfully kill one or two weak members, and then retreated. In other words, they strong
members were not dangerous, very safe. If they had not lived in a group, however, they
could have fought alone, they would have been eaten by predators sooner or later.
Second, weak members also tended to live in a group. In this way, they could rely on
strong members to repel predators. Possibly a few of them would be unfortunately preyed
on, but most of them could escape safely. If they weak members had not lived in a group,
however, they would certainly have been a meal for predators.
To live in groups, on the other hand, members of the same species had to give up
eating each other. Living in a group required a premise: group members could not hurt
each other, but helped each other. Therefore, strong members gave up preying upon
7

Such a mission in life explains why animals do not commit suicide, and why they have evolved the instinct

to avoid danger.
8
Tigers have no natural enemies, and do not need to live in groups to fight against predators. If they had to
live in groups, they would be humiliated by their peers, asking for trouble. Therefore, tigers are an exception;
tigers live alone, respectively.

30

weak members of the same species; instead, they preyed upon weak members of other species. In return, a few weak members gave up working together to prey upon a
strong member of the same species; instead, they worked together to prey upon a strong
member of other species.
Living in groups was of great significance to animal evolution. Specifically, animals
had little threat of violence, having no need to resist violence on a daily basis. (1) Living
in groups protected them from outside invasion. After living in a group, they would keep
away from their natural enemies' territories, reducing the chance to encounter predators. Occasionally, they encountered predators, and they would confront the predators
collectively. At this time, a few members might be killed, and almost all members would
be safe. (2) Simple lifestyles protected them from inside invasion. Because they had little
wealth, they would not rob each other, avoiding violent conflicts among themselves. (3)
Humiliating companions would not lead to violent counter-attacks. Their cognitive function had not evolved successfully, and they did not defend their dignities from humiliation.
When humiliated, therefore, they suffered in silence.
Roughly speaking, therefore, animals could almost defend their dignities from invasion,
and could almost finish their mission in life. Then, what did they do in their daily life? (1) They
mainly looked for food and mates. (2) Occasionally, they would encounter predators, and
they would confront the predators collectively. (3) When humiliated, they did not avenge
themselves, suffering in silence.
In other words, animals were usually idle, having little work to do. In addition, they
occasionally competed for food and mates but usually they lived a peaceful life. Just because of the idle and peaceful daily life, their bodies could not develop, their intelligence
could not develop. Just because of the idle and peaceful daily life, they failed to stand
up, and kept walking on all fours.
When humiliated, in fact, animals still had the instinct to fight back. Because they did
not highly value the greatness of their dignities, however, they did not really fight back;
they fought back symbolically. In order to survive in safety, finally, they selected to submit;
they selected to give in; they selected to accept humiliation. When a low ranking dog was
humiliated by several high ranking dogs, for example, it would not really fight back. It either

31

lowered its head, letting itself be humiliated; or held its tail, running away in dejection.
Excellent members humiliated ordinary members; ordinary members chose to submit.
For eons, this jungle law evolved steadily and orderly within each species. Excellent members surely humiliated ordinary members to show how excellent they were, so that they
could enjoy sharp pleasure. Ordinary members could only submit, so that they could survive in safety.
The strong bullied the weak; the weak chose to submit. For eons, this jungle law evolved steadily and orderly throughout the animal world. The planet thrived, indeed. (1)
Within a species, when the number of the species decreased, their food resources would
become rich; their reproduction would increase. When the number of the species increased, their food resources would become scarce; their reproduction would decrease.
Eventually, the number of the species would stabilize, depending upon the surrounding
food resources. (2) Between all species, there were many food chains; two species could
form a minimal sub food chain. In a minimal sub food chain, when the number of the
lower species decreased, the upper species would lack of food resources, thus reducing
their reproduction. When the number of the upper species decreased, they demanded
fewer food resources; therefore, the number of the lower species would increase. Eventually, the number of the two species would stabilize, depending upon the surrounding food
resources.

32

VIII *Human Origins
As time passed, by chance, a subbranch of the animal branch began to deviate from
the beaten track. This subbranch broke the jungle law of the animal world, broke the
ecological balance of the planet, and destroyed the prosperity of the planet.

9

Animals of this deviant subbranch were exactly human ancestors. When humiliated,
they no longer submitted in silence; they fought back, avenging themselves. At first, only
a few members did not put up with humiliators, but tried to fight with humiliators. These
few members were willing to bleed a little, willing to get hurt a little. Gradually, their antihumiliation behavior was approved of by other members; slowly, their anti-humiliation behavior also encouraged other members. Later, more and more members fought with
humiliators, their anti-humiliation behavior was getting more and more ruthless, they were
losing more and more blood, they were getting hurt more and more seriously. In the end,
all members reached a consensus:
(1) their dignities were great, and thus could not be humiliated;
(2) when humiliated, they had to avenge themselves; and
(3) to defend their dignities from humiliation, they were willing to get hurt,
they were willing even to die.
At that moment, human ancestors woke up; they could understand their own dignities properly; their cognitive function evolved successfully. Specifically, they completely
understood the two inherent properties of their dignities. (1) Like other animals, they already understood the surface property of their dignities: each dignity was precious, and
therefore could not be invaded. (2) Unlike other animals, they also understood the deep
property of their dignities: each dignity was great, and therefore could not be humiliated.
Therefore, human ancestors had two missions in life. Their first mission in life was: to
defend their dignities from invasion, defending the surface property of their dignities. Their
9

This subsection tells a story of human evolution, a reasonable inference. The asterisk (*) at the beginning of

this subsection is a corresponding prompt, put at the beginning of all stories of human evolution in the theory
of humans.

33

second mission in life was: to defend their dignities from humiliation, defending the deep
property of their dignities.
Like other animals, human ancestors could almost avoid the threat of violence, having
no need to resist violence on a daily basis. Namely, they could pretty much complete
their first mission in life. (1) Their cognitive function evolved successfully, but they were not
as powerful as tigers and lions, and they still had natural enemies. Thanks to the gregarious
lifestyle, however, they could almost avoid predators. (2) They had little wealth as well,
and they did not rob each other. Therefore, they could also avoid violent conflicts among
themselves.
Unfortunately, human ancestors could never complete their second mission in life. Because humiliating companions could enjoy sharp pleasure, excellent members were sure
to laugh at (humiliate) ordinary members. On the other hand, each member would inevitably be ordinary in some respects; namely, each member was inevitably laughed at.
Therefore, they could not defend their dignities from humiliation.
However, human ancestors no longer suffered humiliation in silence, they would avenge
themselves, they would repay humiliators an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. Then,
how did they avenge themselves? Because ordinary members had no power to humiliate
excellent ones, they could not laugh at (humiliate) excellent ones. They had to use violence to fight excellent ones, so that they could avenge themselves. In short, humiliation
was a nonviolent behavior, but anti-humiliation was a violent behavior, indeed.
VIIIA

Extreme Violence

Because humiliation was only a verbal behavior, would avengers use extreme violence?
Yes, indeed. In order to defend their dignities, human ancestors inevitably resorted to
extreme violence. For example, a male with a small penis was often humiliated by its
companions.
``Your dick is too small; you cannot have sex; you are disabled.'' One day,
a male companion came and muttered.

34

Its sore spot was poked so maliciously that it was too angry to control itself. Therefore, it
instinctively pounced upon the humiliator, and it would retaliate upon the humiliator with
extreme violence.
The small penis male could use three extreme ways to realize its extreme violence. The
first extreme way was to kill the humiliator, avenging itself once and for all. As long as it was
not significantly weak in strength, in fact, it would resort to the power of anger to smoothly
kill the humiliator. Of course, the humiliation behavior had to be supposed to take place
near a steep cliff.
``Shit! Do not you dare humiliate me! I kill you son of a bitch.''
It grunted angrily, while suddenly used its head to push the humiliator down to the cliff. It
killed the humiliator on the spot.
The second extreme way was to die with the humiliator, avenging itself with its death.
In this case, it was weak enough in strength, it could not kill the humiliator smoothly, it had
to die with the humiliator, killing itself to avenge itself. Of course, the humiliation behavior
had to be still supposed to take place near a steep cliff.
``Fuck you. You pissed me off! You push me too far! I do not want to live
anymore, I want to die with you, I want to die with you.''
It creaked, then suddenly used its sharp teeth to desperately bite one of the humiliator's
hind legs, and chose a favorable terrain to drag the humiliator down to the cliff. Because
of pain, the humiliator lost half its strength immediately; because of a sudden, the humiliator's brain went blank. Before figuring out what to do with the sudden, the humiliator was
dragged down to the cliff by the small penis male. They both died.
The third extreme way was to kill itself. In this case, its strength was too weak, being
at an overwhelming disadvantage. Therefore, it was unable to use the first two extreme
ways. (1) It was unable to kill the humiliator. It could not beat the humiliator at all; it could
not even hurt a hair of the humiliator. (2) It was unable to die with the humiliator. When
it bit---by chance---the humiliator with its sharp teeth, it could only drag the humiliator to
move one or two steps. Soon, the humiliator recovered from pain, and then angrily shook
it off.
35

This was not the first time it was humiliated. In fact, it was humiliated almost everyday.
Each time it was humiliated, it would try to kill or die with humiliators. However, it was
always beaten black and blue; it was always beaten half to death.
It was too weak, it had no way to fight against those humiliators, and it had no way
to avenge itself. Then, it felt it was good for nothing. As time passed, the small penis
male came to a helpless conclusion: being alive was not better than being dead. Being
alive, it gave other males chances to humiliate it, and it could not defend its dignities from
humiliation. Being dead, other males could never humiliate it, and it could fulfil its second
mission in life.
After a long mental struggle, it finally made a difficult decision. In order not to be
humiliated, it selected the worst way: to kill itself.

10

In fact, the small penis male would rather die not for one reason, for two reasons. The
first reason came from it itself; it had to defend its dignities from humiliation. The second
reason came from its environment; its quality of life was very poor.
Obviously, its poor quality of life strengthened its decision to kill itself: living a poor and
humiliated life was not better than completing a mission in life. Its poor quality of life was
reflected in many respects. First, it lived a tough life. For example,
1. it had no heating system against severe cold;
2. it had no air conditioner to protect it from intense heat;
3. it had difficulty in walking on rainy days; and
4. it ate its last meal but did not know where its next meal came from.
Second, it had no way to kill boring times. For instance,
1. it had no songs to warm its heart; and
10

To kill itself was an error. To kill itself invaded (killed) all its own dignities, running counter to its first mission in

life. Then, why did it make such a fatal error? When badly humiliated, it suffered severe hurt; but it could not
avenge itself, thus having a great sense of shame. To resist the double pressure, its endocrine system secreted
excess stress hormones, including cortisol, epinephrine, and norepinephrine. To this aim, its body suppressed
partial physiological functions of other systems, including its metabolic system, its immune system, and its
cognitive system. Therefore, it made such a fatal error only because its cognitive system was suppressed.

36

2. it had no movies to entertain its brain.
Thirdly, it had nothing to worry about. For instance,
1. it had no lovers to look after; and
2. it had no children to protect.
Finally, it did not have any knowledge. For instance,
1. it did not know the past;
2. it did not know the future; and
3. it did not know the outside world.
VIIIB

Suitable Violence

But extreme violence was rarely used for two reasons. (1) If a guy was humiliated, the guy
usually had difficulty in killing humiliators. Compared to the guy, the humiliators' strength
was not at an overwhelming disadvantage; otherwise, they did not dare to humiliate the
guy. (2) If a guy was humiliated, the guy usually did not dare to kill humiliators. Otherwise,
the humiliators would desperately fight back, and they might kill the guy, instead.
If a guy was humiliated, therefore, the guy usually used suitable violence. It did use
violence to fight against humiliators, but did not kill them. It did not get things into an
impasse, did not push itself to the wall. As long as it gave humiliators a good beating,
in fact, it could calm down, and felt that it had avenged itself. In other words, suitable
violence just achieved its purpose of an eye for an eye.
Then, could suitable violence be smoothly used? To answer this question, specific examples would be helpful. Similar to other species, human ancestors focused their attention
mainly upon mating, thus focusing mainly upon two variables: good or ugly face, and penis size. Hence, a male was sure to be humiliated if it had one of the two weak spots: ugly
appearance and small penis. For example, a handsome male and an ugly male met by
chance.

37

``You are too ugly,'' the handsome guy was driven by its nature to mumble
consciously. ``You will not find a female to mate with; you are going to die
son-less.''
``Do not you dare laugh at my ugly face!'' The ugly guy growled at the
handsome guy. ``I tear your face apart, making you uglier than me.''
Then, the ugly guy squatted on its two hind legs, and lifted its two front legs to tear the
handsome guy's face. Frightened by this, the handsome guy also instinctively squatted
on its back legs, and lifted its front legs to protect its face. Because it was in the wrong,
the handsome guy only protected itself at first; it did not attack the ugly guy. But, the ugly
guy did not stop; it kept on tearing. Finally, the handsome guy was irritated, it also took
the initiative to tear the ugly guy's face.
For another example, a few males were playing together. Among them, one had a
big penis, another had a small one. Unconsciously, they had played for a long time, very
tired; they planned to lie on the ground, resting for a while. At this point, the ``big'' male
used its right front foot to touch the ``small'' male's penis from behind the butt.
``Your dick is too small,'' the big male mumbled as it touched the small male's
penis. ``Females are not interested in you; they are not going to have sex with
you.''
``Do not you dare mock at my dick!'' Outraged by this humiliation, the small
male quickly turned around and yelled at the big male. ``I tear your big dick
off, turning you into a guy without a dick.''
Then, the small male ran clockwise and stopped behind the big male's butt, planning to
rip up the big male's big penis. The big male would certainly protect itself; it then quickly turned around also in clockwise direction, keeping face to face with the small male,
keeping its big penis far away from the small male.
In this way, they circled around each other, again and again, sometimes clockwise,
sometimes anticlockwise, always face to face.
``Cannot I subdue you?'' The small male found difficult to tear the big male's
penis, becoming angrier, yelling louder. ``I tear your face to pieces, instead; I
38

make you the ugliest male; then females will not have sex with you either.''
Then, the small male crouched with its two hind legs, and lifted its two front legs to tear
the big male's face desperately. Eventually, the big male also squatted on its both hind
legs, and also lifted its both front legs to tear the small male's face.
In both the two examples, the strategy of an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth
led directly to a tear-face fight. Human ancestors had four long legs; they had thin and
flexible bodies; they did not weigh much. However, they were muscular; they were very
strong; they had much strength. When two individuals tore each other, they propped up
each other, taking the shape of a herring bone ladder. Each side used its two hind legs
to support most of its weight, and borrowed other side's strength to shore up the rest of its
weight.
Such a tear-face fight was unusual, indeed. Because of anger, the two sides would
not flinch; because of anger, the two sides completely forgot the fatigue of their hind
legs; because of nip and tuck, the two sides had difficulty in winning or losing. As a result,
the longer they fought, the angrier they became; the angrier they became, the longer
they fought. The first tear-face fight did not end until they were exhausted. The next time
they met, the hatred between them was ignited once again; they would tear each other
once again.
Humiliating companions could enjoy sharp pleasure, and therefore occurred frequently. Each time they were humiliated, they had to fight against humiliators, avenging themselves. Therefore, tearing each other's faces became one of their habits. When two old
companions met, they might tear each other; when two middle-aged companions met,
they might tear each other; when two young companions met, they might tear each other. When two males met, they might tear each other; when two females met, they might
tear each other. Early in the morning, they might tear each other in pairs; at noon, they
might tear each other in pairs; at dusk, they might tear each other in pairs; late at night,
there might be still a few companions tearing each other in pairs.
Thus, human ancestors deserved the name: the tear-face group. And, their tear-face
fight was significant. When two companions tore each other, each side had to lift its two
front legs above other side's, in order to dominate the fight, to smoothly tear other side's
39

face, and to smoothly protect its own face; therefore, the two sides' four front legs lifted
higher and higher. In this way, the whole tear-face group tore each other in pairs, habitual,
for tens of thousands years, standing up eventually.
Yes, the tear-face group evolved from four-legged animals into two-legged humans.
(1) During each tear-face fight, two hind feet had to support most of the weight of an
entire body, thus becoming wider and wider, becoming longer and longer, eventually
evolving into a pair of big feet. (2) During each tear-face fight, a pair of big hind feet had
to grip the ground to stabilize an entire body. To this end, the toes and heels of the pair of
big hind feet held on to the ground, but the middle parts unconsciously arched and left
the ground. In this way, the arch of foot evolved eventually. (3) During each tear-face
fight, each side had to move up and down quickly and flexibly, leading its butt to move
up and down quickly and flexibly. In this way, its hind legs became thicker and thicker; its
butt became bigger and bigger; the rear of its body became more and more developed.
Therefore, the gravity center of its body moved more and more backwards.11
They stood up. A few tear-face members that failed to stand up were, of course, gradually eliminated. On the other hand, upright humans no longer needed tails to keep their
balance, thus eliminating their tails soon. Eventually, the tear-face group disappeared
from the planet, and upright humans were born instead.

11

Indeed, upright humans had a unique big butt, unique because a big butt was involved in supporting the

weight of and maintaining the stability of an entire body.

40

IX *Early Humans
In this section, let's see what humans did immediately after standing up. Specifically, we
will get the answers to a few hard problems, including (1) why humans were eager to be
number one; (2) why humans got dressed; (3) why humans acquired wisdom; and (4) why
humans developed into what they are today.
IXA To Be Number One
Humans and the tear-face group were not two different species, but the same species.
Therefore, humans were essentially the same as the tear-face group. First, humans also
had two missions in life: to defend their dignities from invasion, and to defend their dignities from humiliation. Second, humans could also almost complete their first mission in life,
and they did not worry about the threat of violence on a daily basis because (1) gregarious humans were able to repel their natural enemies, thus having little threat of violence
from outside; and (2) early humans also had little wealth, and therefore they did not rob
each other, thus avoiding violent conflicts among themselves. Thirdly, humans were also
unable to complete their second mission in life because humiliating companions could
enjoy sharp pleasure, thus occurring frequently. Fourthly, when humiliated, humans also
used violence to fight against humiliators, avenging themselves.
Unfortunately, using violence to avenge themselves made them complete neither their
first mission in life nor their second mission in life. (1) Using violence made them fail to defend their dignities from invasion. When they fought violently with humiliators, they themselves might get hurt, and might even get killed. Even if they avenged themselves, therefore, their bodies---including many dignities---were invaded. (2) As long as they fell behind,
they could never defend themselves from humiliation. Even if they killed a humiliator and
avenged themselves thoroughly, others would still come and humiliate them some day.
In order to complete their two missions in life, therefore, upright humans did two things.
(1) When humiliated, they still used violence to fight against humiliators, avenging themselves. (2) When not humiliated, they would not be idle; they would make efforts to prevent others from humiliating them in the future.

41

Then, how could a person prevent people around him from humiliating him in the future? (1) To this end, he could not at the bottom; otherwise, all people around him could
come and humiliate him. (2) Also, he could not rank penultimate; otherwise, only one
person could not come and humiliate him, but the rest all could. (3) He could not rank antepenultimate either; otherwise, only two persons could not come and humiliate him, but
the rest all could. (4) By induction, he could not rank number two; otherwise, the number
one person could come and humiliate him. (5) As a result, he had no choice, he could
only rank number one; only in this case, could no one come and humiliate him.
He could not be number two; he had to be number one. Only being number one,
could he be sure that no one would come and humiliate him. Only being number one,
could he guarantee that no one would tear his face. Only being number one, could he
lift his head anywhere. Only being number one, could he have the corresponding dignity
no matter whom he met. Only being number one, could he complete his second mission
in life.
Then, there was a more specific version of human second mission in life: to be number
one in all dignities. Human ancestors (the tear-face group) of course would also want to
be number one, but their wishes did not make much sense. For example, males had mainly
two natural comparison variables: good or ugly face, and penis size. While, appearance
and penis size were fixed, unchangeable; they could not be number one. However, upright humans soon had man-made comparison variables, they could make efforts to be
number one, indeed.12
Immediately after standing up, therefore, humans formally began to compare with
each other. At that time, however, there were only a few comparison variables: the
number of prey, the number of women, the number of offspring, how they looked, penis
size, etc.
Immediately after standing up, humans began to work hard, expecting to run ahead
of all others. Only by working hard, could they catch more prey, thus winning more women's favor, getting more opportunities to mate, having more children. Only by working
12

In real life, we prefer to use the term ``human root motivation'' instead of the term ``human second mission

in life.'' For example, we prefer to say simply ``human root motivation to be number one. ''

42

hard, could they make themselves stronger and smarter, thus winning more women's favor easily, getting more opportunities to mate easily, having more children easily.
However, working hard could not change penis size and how they looked. In order
to be number one in these two variables, they had only a single method: to kill the best
people. For example, a man with a large penis had a mating advantage, and other men
could not weaken his advantage; then, these men would unite to kill this large-penis man.
Similarly, a handsome man had a mating advantage, and other men would unite to kill
this handsome man; a beautiful woman had a mating advantage, and other women
would unite to kill this beautiful woman.
IXB

Wearing Clothes

A man with a large penis might be killed, but a man with a small penis would be absolutely
safe. However, small penis men had a difficulty that their ancestors did not have. Human
ancestors the tear-face group were four-legged animals. Their penises were covered with
their respective large egg pouches, thus were not directly exposed. As a result, small
penis males did not suffer frequent humiliation; they and other guys could happily find
food together, play together, and watch scenery together. But, humans stood up. Their
penises were directly exposed, and the size of their penises was clear at a glance. As a
result, men with small penises were humiliated almost each time they met other guys.
To avoid being humiliated, small penis men designed a cover-crotch ornament, covering their small penises. In this way, others knew their penises were in fact small, but did
not know exactly how small their penises were, and therefore did not know how to humiliate them. Over time, nobody would humiliate the men wearing cover-crotch ornaments.
Eventually, small penis men and other guys could happily find food together, play together, and watch scenery together.
As time went on, all men, including those with large penises, were dressed in covercrotch ornaments. After the men with small penises covered their penises, the men with
middle penises were under great pressure, and they soon learned to cover their penises
as well. Later, more and more men wore cover-crotch ornaments, and only a handful of
men with large penises kept naked. These handful of men with large penises did not want
43

to wear cover-crotch ornaments, they needed to show off their capitals, they needed to
show their advantages. But they were in a minority, they did not have discourse power.
``Their dicks are exposed to the light of day, swinging around.'' Men with
small penises started muttering, mocking at them. ``They are silly, shameless.''
``Dick is developed; brain is simple.'' Men with middle penises started chattering, stigmatizing them.
Eventually, the handful of men with large penises ended in failure, and they had to wear
cover-crotch ornaments, covering their large penises.
Cover-crotch ornaments were mostly woven from tender grass, tender vines, tender
leaves, and so on. Some ornaments were beautifully woven, another were ordinarily woven, and the rest were uglily woven. Finally, the first man-made comparison variable was
born: the extent to which a cover-crotch ornament is beautiful. Those wearing beautiful
ornaments were very proud; they could not help but laugh at those wearing ugly ornaments.
``You are so stupid, stupid as a pig,'' they might murmur like this.
``Your ornament is so ugly that women have no desire to touch you,'' they
might murmur something more hurtful like this.
In order not to be laughed at, therefore, all people diligently practiced their skills, and
cover-crotch ornaments became more and more beautiful. Naturally, the second manmade comparison variable was born: weaving technology.
Obviously, cover-crotch ornaments were too small to show their weaving technology.
Therefore, they began to weave larger ornaments, to cover not only their crotches but
also other parts of their bodies. As comparison between them was getting more and
more intense, their weaving technology became more and more superb; ornaments grew
larger and larger, more and more complex. Eventually, they were able to weave the
greatest ornaments, covering their entire bodies.
At this point, humans began to wear clothes and shoes. Before getting dressed, they
also had heavy fur on their bodies, just like other animals. The heavy fur was used to shelter
their bodies from wind, cold, branches, thorns, debris, etc. However, clothes and shoes
44

provided a better shelter. Therefore, the heavy fur of their bodies was no longer useful, and
degenerated slowly. Meanwhile, the skin of their bodies certainly became thin, delicate,
and lustrous.
The heavy fur of human face evolved differently. Since wearing clothes, their face
was no longer very cold. Then, the thick fur of their face was not very useful, and also
degenerated slowly. Because the skin of their bodies had been delicate, on the other
hand, they found that delicate skin looked better than rough skin; then, women preferred
to mate with men with nicer skin of face. As a result, the skin of their face became nicer
and nicer, and eventually as delicate as the skin of their bodies.
Why did human hair become graceful? Brain tissue was of special importance, and
therefore needed special protection. Naturally, hair was both thick and long. Obviously,
thick and long hair made humans look young and sunny, playing an important role in
human temperament and appearance. Therefore, early humans did not wear hats; they
did want to show off their ever-changing hairstyles. In addition, they also spent a lot of
time taking great care of their hair. Of course, women preferred to choose men with more
graceful hair to mate with. As a result, human hair became more and more graceful.
IXC

Getting Wisdom

After putting on clothes, humans were sure to compare with each other in whose clothes
looked better. Namely, the third man-made comparison variable was born: style of clothes.
As a result, they racked their brains to modify their clothes in order to make themselves
look fashionable, full of vitality, young and sunny. When summer came, for example, they
might design a suit of light and loose clothes, both cool and good-looking. When winter
came, for another example, they might look for a light and soft grass to weave a set of
winter clothes, both light and warm. No matter what season, in fact, they would design
clothes for upper body and lower body, respectively. Therefore, they had a lot of choices
for the style of clothes.
It was comparison in the style of clothes that human intelligence grew rapidly. The style
of clothes involved many variables, such as the color of an upper garment, the color of
a lower garment, the length of an upper garment, the length of a lower garment, the
45

``fabric'' of an upper garment, the ``fabric'' of a lower garment. If there were five colors
available in nature, there were twenty five different color styles for a suit of clothes. Combined with the length and ``fabric,'' there would be a plenty of options for the style of a suit
of clothes. Early humans had such a plenty of styles of clothes to design, their intelligence
certainly grew rapidly.
In addition to the style of clothes, obviously, early humans also compared in other aspects. For example, they were sure to compare with each other in athletic ability. In this
case, comparison variables included running speed, swimming speed, climbing height,
throwing distance, ability to resist heat, ability to resist cold, etc.
Since they put on cover-crotch ornaments, covering their own penises, humans formally separated from the animal world. From then on, they began to create comparison
variables, one after another. The more they compared with each other, the more their
intelligence grew; the smarter they became, the more comparison variables they would
create. This cycle went on forever, endlessly.
Eventually, by chance, humans acquired wisdom. From then on, they started various
inventions, started human material civilization. For example, they built a house by a lake
with plenty of sunshine. In this way, they no longer lived in a damp cave. For another
example, they invented how to make fire artificially. In this way, they could eat cooked
food anytime, anywhere; they could keep warm in cold seasons; and, they were easier
to fight off their natural enemies.
Before having wisdom, humans were as poor as a church mouse, robbery and murder
happened rarely. Since humans had wealth (such as houses, furniture, etc.), killing, arson,
robbery, invasion of dignities began to occur in large numbers. For example, a strong man
might wound or kill a weak man, and occupy his house. To defend their houses, then,
weak persons would band together and kill some stronger ones in advance to eliminate
potential risks. In this way, an once harmonious and stable crowd would split into a few
hostile gangs. These hostile gangs were constantly at war with each other, and therefore
all members' life and wealth were invaded, more or less.
Like other animals, the first function of living in a group was simply: to defend the group
members from predators, and defend their dignities from outside invasion. But when they

46

had wealth, the group members killed each other, hurt each other, causing everybody
to suffer greatly. As time passed, they realized that living in a group should have the second function: to prohibit themselves from killing each other, defending their dignities from
inside invasion.
Finally, the legal culture of a life for a life and money for money evolved successfully.
As a result, humans once again lived in harmony and stability; they once again strove
to become number one in all comparison variables, reentering into the endless cycle of
running after each other. A long time passed, then, humans came to today, a modern
society, step by step, unwittingly.

47

X Conclusions
This paper is the first part of the scientific research upon the concept of dignity, the most
important concept of humans and all advanced animals. Happily, this paper is able to
solve a series of hard problems, including how human ancestors stood up from four-legged
animals, why humans got dressed, how humans acquired wisdom, why humans commit
suicide, and why humans developed into what they are today. The second part will come
soon, and will answer a few hard questions, including (1) why teenagers blush easily; (2)
why people blush when they tell a lie; (3) why a person can feel others staring at him
behind his back; and (4) why a couple do not say to each other the very three words: I
love you.

48

References
Dawkins, Richard. 1989. The Selfish Gene, 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
Fisher, Ronald A. 1930. The Genetical Theory of Natural Selection. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Perrin, Porter G. 1955. ```Pecking Order' 1927--54.'' American Speech, 30(4): 265--268.
Smith, Adam. 2002. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. (Edited by Knud Haakonssen) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Yu, Xinzhen. 0001. ``The Theory of Humans: Basic Formulation.''
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1966318.
Yu, Xinzhen. 0002. ``The Theory of Humans: Complete Formulation.''
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1968350.
Yu, Xinzhen. 0003. ``The Theory of Humans: Sefishness.''
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1974395.
Yu, Xinzhen. 0004. ``The Theory of Humans: Cooperation.''
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1965373.
Yu, Xinzhen. 0005. ``The Theory of Humans: Altruism.''
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1969719.
Yu, Xinzhen. 0006. ``The Theory of Humans: Spite.''
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1974410.

49

