On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College
&
Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA1

Abstract
Sociologists have long been taken by certain pithy expressions from the founders of the
discipline. We propose here both a new explanation for the endurance of these statements
as well as an analysis of the power, limitations, and possibilities of aphorisms. By
drawing from the critical scholarship concerned with aphorisms, we demonstrate that
some of the allure of the classical sociological texts derives from their form, and
particularly their reliance on the relative autonomy of the aphorism. Through examining
Marx’s “opiate of the people,” Weber’s “iron cage,” and, briefly, two more contemporary
sociological aphorisms, we suggest that aphorisms have an ambivalent role in
sociological theory: they make claims memorable even as they potentially oversimplify
complex arguments. Yet that very simplification can provide a point of focus for
productive misreading and reinterpretation.
Keywords
Aphorisms; classical sociology; rationality; rhetoric; social theory; Weber; Marx

1

This article is fully co-authored.

1

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory

Abstract
Sociologists have long been taken by certain pithy expressions from the founders of the
discipline. We propose here both a new explanation for the endurance of these statements
as well as an analysis of the power, limitations, and possibilities of aphorisms. By
drawing from the critical scholarship concerned with aphorisms, we demonstrate that
some of the allure of the classical sociological texts derives from their form, and
particularly their reliance on the relative autonomy of the aphorism. Through examining
Marx’s “opiate of the people,” Weber’s “iron cage,” and, briefly, two more contemporary
sociological aphorisms, we suggest that aphorisms have an ambivalent role in
sociological theory: they make claims memorable even as they potentially oversimplify
complex arguments. Yet that very simplification can provide a point of focus for
productive misreading and reinterpretation.

Keywords
Aphorisms; classical sociology; rationality; rhetoric; social theory; Weber; Marx

2

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Introduction
Many leading figures in the history of modern social thought have expressed some or
even most of their reflections in brief epigrams rather than elaborated arguments (e.g.
Pascal [1669] 1995; La Rochefoucauld [1678] 1981; Nietzsche [1878] 1994; Benjamin
[1972] 1999; Bacon [1620] 1999). We are especially interested in a subclass of these
epigrams that many have labeled “aphorisms.”1 We argue in this article that the
endurance of sociological slogans like Marx’s concept of the “opiate of the masses” or
Weber’s “iron cage” of rationality are partly explained by their formal properties and that
these formal properties indicate a modality of social thought that is too often ignored.
Some sociological aphorisms have received thoughtful treatment, for example
Garfinkel’s (1996) discussion of one of Durkheim’s key aphorisms, and Swedberg and
Reich’s (2010:27-8) analysis of Simmel’s aphorisms. Yet the formal properties that drew
Durkheim and Simmel (not to mention Pascal, Nietzsche, Bacon, Benjamin and many
others) to write in the formal register of quite ancient wisdom traditions has not been
thoroughly examined (though see Davis 1999). Nor has our discipline considered the
impact aphorisms might have on the reception of a theorist’s broader work and later
intellectual currents.
This article unfolds in four sections. First, we explore the kind of intellectual
work aphorisms accomplish, demonstrating that aphorisms are fundamentally ambivalent
in sociological theory: they allow for powerful and transportable encapsulations of
arguments, yet precisely because of their capacity for relative autonomy, these pithy
sayings can lead to misreading and misrecognitions. However, it is these very
misreadings and changes in focus that can drive productive new lines of inquiry. We then

3

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

consider case studies of Marx’s “opium of the peole,” Weber’s “iron cage,” and two more
recent sociological aphorisms. We end by considering what this means for sociologists
today in a discussion section and brief conclusion.

How Aphorisms Works
The definition of an aphorism varies widely, but many scholars of the modern aphorism
point to Francis Bacon’s emphasis on aphoristic writing as a means of counteracting the
orthodoxy of medieval scholarship (Stephenson 1980:3). For Bacon, the purpose of an
aphorism was to get readers thinking on their own, absent a long string of arguments
whose forward movement can distract from its potential errors. The impetus was not
dissimilar from Plato’s goals in situating his thought in dialogues, forcing readers to
consider which speaker makes more sense. Much scholarly work on aphorisms returns to
Francis Bacon’s faith that aphorisms force an immediacy that can counteract earlier
scholarly errors (Snider 2008, Stephens 1970).
While there is tremendous debate about what unites all aphorisms, Snider
(2008:63), worries that too much of a focus on paradox (as seen in La Rochefoucauld) or
on playfulness-as-an-end-in-itself (as seen in Barthes’s analysis of La Rochefoucauld),
can miss “something important: almost invariably, aphorists see their work as embodying
positive truth in form, not merely a hermeneutic meditation on form, or a free play of
signifiers.” We focus here on this embodiment of a positive truth, and add to this a
critical insight from Davis’s theorizing about the role of the aphorism in sociological
theory: it must be interesting, and it is that quality of interest that allows it to live outside
its original context. His insights could be read as revealing another sociological aphorism,

4

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

one we coin here: that there are only two kinds of arguments: the boring and the wrong.
As Davis (1999:246) argues, “The interesting is more interesting than the true because
Truth, as the final goal of knowledge, is static, whereas the Interesting, as the revelation
of a potential understanding that propels the mind toward Truth, is dynamic.”
But what makes aphorisms interesting? An important preliminary observation is
that this must first be explained by reference to form, rather than content, since so many
wisdom statements contradict one another in content, and since their formal
characteristics have endured for so very long (Daniel et al 1987:482; Basgöz 1993). As
Hayden White argues, any given form has a certain content, or at least provides a space
through which certain content works in a way that it would not in another form. To the
extent possible, we are concerned with this “content of the form” (White 1987). Our
question, then, is what role does the aphorism’s form play in the history of social
thought? And further, how does aphoristic writing work in our discipline?
When Colonial American families read to each other from Poor Richard’s
Almanack (Franklin [1733-1758] 2004), Anabaptist Dissenters argued about sermons in
English public houses, or French aristocrats mocked their fellow Salon members, they
were often making sense of the world through the use of aphorisms, not through logical
reasoning. Of course, the advent of social science has not meant the end of popular
wisdom statements; nor indeed are social scientists free from the appeal of these nonrational devices. Aphorisms are often used to “stand in” for more complicated arguments.
A pithy saying can therefore not only overpower a more intellectually compelling
argument, it can also replace an argument, reducing its complicated steps to the
parsimonious pieces of a formula. Herein lies the problem: an aphorism’s very power can

5

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

lead to the oversimplification of the argument from which it is drawn. Yet aphorisms are
also immensely productive, both because of their relative transportability (Davis
1999:267-269) and their potential for creating new kinds of conversations and creative
misreadings. Further, aphorisms can function in Bacon’s sense of calling people to think
with a freshness and immediacy not possible in other rhetorical forms. Along these lines,
Simon Reader (2013:454) studies how Oscar Wilde’s early aphorisms work as “a form of
writing that treats pieces of information as actors rather than functional facts in
methodological arguments.” When aphorism become actors, their power becomes
ambivalent: they can cross-pollinate but they can also misrepresent. Yet even that
misrepresentation might be helpful. We call these mixed blessings “the ambivalence of
the aphorism.”
We explore three perspectives on the aphorism in the cases that follow. First,
following Bacon, aphorisms can be understood as intellectual heuristics that generate
interest and intensify focus, often to the effect of undermining confidence is accepted
truths. From another, more critical perpsective, aphorisms can have precisely the opposite
effect, crystallizing complex ideas into distortions of themselves that give rise to either
strawmen that are easy to attack or indeed dogmas that are all too eagerly defended. A
third perspective, explored throughout our discussion, threads between Baconian
Enlightening and conceptual atrophy: sometimes, aphorisms give rise to productive
misreadings.
As others have noted (Ermakoff 2017), even the most scientistic social science is
rife with indeterminacy and communicative failures which often go unnoticed. We are
therefore not arguing that aphorisms in sociology are utterly unique. Instead, in the

6

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

tradition of reflexive sociology (Bourdieu and Wacquant 1992; Buroway 2003), we
provide here an opportunity for sociologists to be thoughtful about how they use others’
wisdom statements and how they develop their own. 2

Examples of Aphorisms
What contemporary statements are aphorisms?3 At the pithy end of the spectrum,
we might include “don’t ask, don’t tell”; “if you break it, you buy it;” and Senator Joseph
McCarthy’s “better dead than red”. These share a quality of repetition (of a letter, word,
or phrasing) that sets them apart from more prosaic articulations. Consider these
alternatives: “don’t ask about sexuality or talk about it”; “if you break anything, you must
pay for it;” and “better to die than be a communist”. The repetition of the originals is
pleasing to the ear and makes the statement more likely to be repeated and remembered;
in effect, they are more interesting (Davis 1999).
Slightly less mellifluous contemporary wisdom statements might include: “it
takes a village to raise a child” and “there are no atheists in foxholes”. These are phrases
without any conspicuous rhythmic or sonic characteristics to set them apart, yet they
include odd turns of phrases and evocative symbols that make them more memorable. “It
takes many people to raise a child” might be viewed as an obvious and uninteresting
truth. By saying “village” in place of “many people,” the speaker triggers images of
community and belonging that hint at something more profound than merely “many
people.” Yet the two statements make essentially the same claim. Similarly, “there are no
atheists in foxholes” is likely to be viewed as a more elevated and resonant statement
than “there are no atheists in moments of great stress.” Neither is literally true, yet the

7

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

former seems more profound to the degree that it taps into our shared notions of the
horror endured by soldiers in foxholes. Each of these differences ties into Davis’s helpful
distinction between the boring and the interesting in his study of the aphorism: as we
suggest here, echoing Davis, the form is actually more important than the content in
making something compelling rather than cliched (1999).
Our examples are not intended to sketch hard and fast categories of aphorisms.
Rather, we introduce this variety of utterances to convey the sense of the tools that
authors can and do draw upon to grant their statements a sort of cultural power that
elevates them from the mundane and imparts some relative separability and with that
separability, as Reader describes it, a kind of agency. In this sense, our understanding of
the aphorism is not quite the same as that laid out by Davis. “The thoughtful aphorist,” to
use Davis’s arresting image, might have intended to “[take] the reader’s notes”
(1999:253), yet the simplicity and arresting form of such encapsulations make them much
more powerful than summaries.4 An aphorism’s formal qualities make it more attractive
to engage as a thing in itself, thereby also making it more vulnerable, and more
powerful— and interesting.

The Ambivalence of Aphorisms
From Bacon to Murray, the power of aphorisms to challenge and provoke has
long been attested. A second, more critical perspective on the power of the aphorism
stresses the way these utterances subtly form our thinking. Most troublingly for social
scientists concerned with leading their readers toward truth and reason, the apparent truth

8

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

of an aphorism is often intimately connected, not to the authority of the speaker, nor to
the individual who first composed it, but rather to its ability to perform its truth.
The “trap” of the aphorism is its very interestingness and the self-fulfilling nature
of its arresting qualities. And this danger has long been recognized by the masters of
traditional wisdom literature. For example, the author of the Book of Proverbs develops a
conceit around the image of personified “Wisdom” and “Folly.” Wisdom encourages
those passing by to “eat of my bread, and drink of the wine which I have mingled” (9:5).
Folly entices the simpleminded with the anti-social aphorism, “stolen waters are sweet,
and bread eaten in secret is pleasant” (9:17). While Wisdom speaks in unadorned and
honest terms, Folly’s language, sensuous and aphoristic, is itself enticing (Perry,
1993:56). The source of wisdom in general is explicitly defined as “the fear of the Lord”
(9:10), while the contrast between the two reveals folly to emerge from the selfinterestedness that leads to conceit and the refusal to learn through communication.
Ironically, this is the exact opposite of Bacon’s intended use of the aphorism,
which is to free readers from the shackles of authoritative knowledge. And while it seems
fair to argue that aphoristic writing can drive readers either into arguments-by-authority
or into a creative reckoning with what they read, the most important piece that we take
from both readings of aphorisms’ purpose is their relative separability and with that
separability, a form of agency. That agency makes the fundamental ambivalence of
aphorisms all the more powerful: they can function as autonomous authorities or they can
compel further thought.
Here we arrive at the third perspective on aphorisms that we mentioned above.
The relative agency of aphorisms can be understood in a slightly different way through

9

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Harold Bloom’s study of “misreading.” In The Anxiety of Influence (1973) and A Map of
Misreading (1975), Bloom draws on Nietzsche and Freud to describe how great poets
deal with the anxiety of earlier poets’ talents by creatively “misreading” their mentors’
work “so as to clear imaginative space for themselves” (1973:5).In a Bloomian sense,
when a pithy expression is itself not only the subject of debate but actually the agent to
which actors respond, then the various potential caveats that could temper that aphorism
are no longer relevant: they are uninteresting. This emphasis on unpacking what is
interesting might well lead to a more “fractal” and cyclical understanding of social
science than the more orthodox teleological and positivist framings (Abbott 2001:3-33),
but whether sociology is actually a positivist science moving ever closer to the Truth is
itself a subject of much debate (Eckberg and Hill 1979; Steinmetz 2004), even if Abbott
would argue the differences are more fractal than absolute (2001). Nonetheless, what is
important for our argument here is that aphorisms’ arresting formal qualities and relative
separability can make them both fertile grounds for reinterpretation and also make their
original arguments vulnerable to misreading, yet that very misreading is precisely the
source of some of the greatest fertility.

Sociology and Aphorisms
Alongside Bacon’s Novum Organum, the first publication of the Maximes of
François de la Rochefoucauld is often cited as the entry-point of the modern aphorism.5
The Maximes are a series of aphorisms detailing various forms of human behaviour and
characterised by its distinctly misanthropic tone.6 La Rochefoucauld’s significance for
the present argument rests in the way he establishes the authority of his insights into

10

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

human nature (in essence, an early form of sociological analysis). For La Rochefoucauld
and the salon circles of the mid-seventeenth-century, the aphorism’s unique power lay in
its ability to deflate anyone pretending to those most ephemeral and subjective of virtues,
tastefulness and propriety. La Rochefoucauld’s authority, accordingly, rests on two
things: first, his insight being interpreted as a sociological faculty informed by his status
as a participant-observer; and second, the ungrounded belief that his taste and values are
coextensive with the social milieu he describes, making him wise in the ways of
contemporary fashions. Yet there is an additional, formal authority beyond that of La
Rochefoucauld, one described in Barthes’s ([1981] 2009) study, and, additionally, in
examinations of the aphorisms of Francis Bacon and Oscar Wilde (Reader 2013), among
others: aphorisms are bon mots, well-placed words that work and carry on their own.
In what follows, we will consider famous aphorisms by Marx and Weber as well
as, more briefly, two more recent sociological aphorisms. In each case, we argue that
these aphorisms provide their progenitors with greater authority through the
attractiveness, separability, and relative agency of the form while also potentially
weakening their rhetorical positions, given that their arguments can then be proven or
disproven by simply engaging with the wisdom statement itself. However, these
aphorisms each also provide for an important point of leverage for creative misreading,
allowing theory to move forward precisely because of the power of the aphorism.
It is worthwhile, briefly, to examine our methodological choices here. Our
intention, in providing these examples of misreading and adaptation is not to provide a
systematic study of how aphorisms have been used and adapted in sociology, a study we
would encourage but for which we have insufficient space here. We identified four

11

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

prominent sociological aphorisms—two classical and two modern—and we used various
academic search engines, especially Google scholar and JSTOR, to check how often and
when these aphorisms were engaged. Our study here is not intended as a systemic study
of how and when sociological aphorisms are coined, adapted, and used, but rather a
theoretical argument about a set of sociological and rhetorical processes. Similarly, we
recognize that Google Ngram is a deeply imperfect method for gauging the relative
popularity of a phrase (Pechenick, Danforth, and Dodds 2015). We intend these Ngram
views as we intend our qualitative dips into the use of aphorisms in sociological theory:
as illustrations of sociological processes that can later be checked using more robust
quantitative methods. We believe the processes we identify here are broadly
representative, but we leave it to other scholarship—including some we are working on
ourselves—to provide more systemic analysis of adaptation and usage.

Karl Marx’s “opium of the people” / “opium des volkes”

Marx on Religion
Marx was famous for many important aphorisms, including “Workers of the
World Unite!” (Proletarier aller Länder, vereinigt euch!) and “all that is solid melts into
air” (“Alles Ständische und Stehende verdampft”), both from the Communist Manifesto
([1888] 1978f). Yet, within sociology, Marx is perhaps most famous for his declaration of
religion as the “opium of the people” in his “Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right”
([1843] 1978b). Of course, Marx declared religion to be a lot of things:
Religion is the general theory of this world, its encyclopedic compendium, its
logic in popular form, its spiritual point d’honneur, its enthusiasm, its moral
12

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

sanction, its solemn complement, its general basis of consolation and justification.
It is the fantastic realization of the human being inasmuch as the human being
possesses no true reality. ([1843] 1978b:54-55)
Not much later is his famous critique of religion, that “sigh of the oppressed creature,
…sentiment of a heartless world,…soul of soulless conditions” and, of course, “opium of
the people” ([1843] 1978b:54). Religion is an “illusory sun about which man revolves so
long as he does not revolve about himself” ([1843] 1978b:54), an error soon to be
corrected by history itself.
But what is the source of these illusions? Why would people have a religion at
all? A benefit of aphorisms is that their pithiness can make for easy transportability and a
kind of agency relatively separate from the original text, which has certainly been the
case with the wide-ranging use of Marx’s phrasing. Yet, within its context, Marx’s phrase
is not as transportable as it might appear.
If we only have the phrase, “opium of the people,” it might seem obvious that
religion is primarily a means of preventing revolution, a creation of cynical capitalists
who encourage the poor’s reward in the next world to reap their own in this one. Yet can
Marx’s paean to “moral sanction [and] fantastic realization” be so easily dismissed? His
praise of religion echoes the remarkable compliments he provides the bourgeoisie in The
Communist Manifesto, which are often about religious artifacts like pyramids and
cathedrals ([1888 1978f:476; see also Berman, 1987). Of course, there is more than one
Marx, and this plurality of voice is nowhere more obvious than in his descriptions of
religion. Observe, for example, the contrast between Marx’s tolerance of religious
tolerance in On the Jewish Question ([1843] 1978a:32, 41) and his much later
unapologetic contempt for “religious freedom of conscience” in Critique of the Gotha
13

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Program ([1875] 1978e: 540). For Marx, religion is the apex of early human intellectual
creation: the fact that it is an illusion does not negate its creative power.
And neither its historical importance. As one element of consciousness, religion is
a central element in the third of Marx’s four stages of history ([1845-1846] 1978d:156159). Indeed, consciousness of nature forms a “natural religion” that “is determined by
the form of society and vice versa” ([1845-1846] 1978d:158). This natural religion is
formed, at first, by humanity’s “consciousness of nature, which first appears to men as
completely alien, an all-powerful and unassailable force, with which men’s relations are
purely animal and by which they are overawed like beasts” ([1845-1846] 1978d:158).
Whatever natural religion’s referent actually is, Marx seems just as comfortable using
terms like herd or tribal consciousness (Guhin 2014).
The effort to control the natural world is now the province of industry, and Marx
appears to discredit any normative commitment to a certain human relation to the natural
world. After all, if it is social conditions and not ideas that drive revolutions, then why
should one idea of relating to the natural world be any more correct than another? The
answer is simple enough, even if the late Marx did not want to be troubled by the
normative bother of it: humans ought to relate to nature through spontaneous creation
([1844] 1978c:75). This anthropological claim provides a useful prism though which to
view Marx’s comparison to religion in the same section. Marx is concerned, quite
explicitly, with how both religion and modern capitalism rob workers of their own
consciousness: “it belongs to another; it is the loss of…self” ([1844] 1978c:74). As Guhin
(2014: 583) puts it, “Under natural religion humans are nothing but a herd; under modern

14

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

capitalism humans are nothing but animals.” Just as the proletariat needed the
bourgeoisie to conquer, so the self needed a religion to supersede.

On the Use of Marx’s Aphorism
While those who use opium might do so for complicated reasons, and while the
drug might well produce certain kinds of creativity, the analogy that religion is to people
what opium is to opium-users simply cannot contain the complexity of Marx’s many
nuanced positions on religion. Yet there is also something incredibly effective about the
phrasing and its imagery, particularly within the political and economic context that Marx
intended it: as various scholars of religion have shown, religion can, in fact, lead to
quietism—even if it can also lead to revolution (for overviews, see Appleby 2000 and
Norris and Inglehart 2004). It seems easy enough both to translate the phrase to other
possible opiates of the people and to think that, through disagreeing with the phrase itself,
one can disprove Marx on religion. McKinnon challenges such readings by showing how
the complicated, multivalent nature of opium in Marx’s era helps to make Marx’s
metaphor dialectical rather than indexical: “the ‘traditional’ readings of religion as
‘opium of the people’ … neglects the context and dialectical movement, in which opium,
as a condensed signifier, brings together both expression and protest in one moment”
(2005:25). Yet we are arguing something subtly different here: the problem is not only
that readers lack a historical context to understand Marx’s aphorism; the problem is at
least partially that the very form of the aphorism can encourage an argument’s too
simplistic encapsulation.

15

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Because of the ease with which “opium des volkes” can be translated, there have
been four dominant translations, each a different mixture of opium/opiate and
masses/people for the phrase’s two nouns. As an Ngram here indicates, their relative
popularity was at their highest between the 1930’s and 1970’s as the Cold War peaked.

<< Figure 1 about here >>

<< Figure 2 about here >>

Another Ngram found that the phrases “another opium of the people” and “new
opium of the people” were common articulations, with various alternative “opiates”,
including radio, television, media more generally, tourism, capitalism, images, sports,
consumerism, nationalism, family, and a host of other possibilities becoming religion’s
replacement. While these other elements of life might well provide the same sort of
respite from life’s cruelty that opium could provide, it is not clear that they are able to
substitute for religion in the way that Marx describes it. While we do not have the space
to engage all the uses of these phrases—which, a quick Google scholar search will reveal,
continue to the present—we will examine one of them to show how the form of the
aphorism has allowed a relative separation from Marx’s larger argument.
As one quick example, consider Sherry Turkle’s pathbreaking book on computer
users in the 1990’s, Life on the Screen. In it, she cites a concern she had even earlier,
quoting a piece she had written in the 70’s: “It would certainly be inappropriate to rejoice
at the holistic and humanistic relationship that personal computers offer if it turns out

16

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

that, when widespread, they replace religion as an opiate of the masses” (1995:244). Note
that no context is given to the maxim—not even a reference to Marx himself. This is both
the strength and the weakness of the aphorism: it is easily transportable and seemingly
self-evidently true. Yet to argue that computers could function in the same way as Marx’s
conception of religion is an ambivalent rhetorical move: it is a compelling and
provocative transposition of a powerful image, yet it also at least potentially
misunderstands the function and role of both religion and opium in Marx’s broader
argument about social change.
The use of this pithy phrase was effective for specifically sociological work as
well, although, within the top sociology journals (American Sociological Review and
American Journal of Sociology), the phrase was used less as a replacement for other
supposed opiates than as a means of critiquing Marx’s argument, with the authors often
believing that showing how religion was not necessarily an opiate was sufficient to prove
Marx wrong (Billings 1990; Heirich 1977; Hoult 1950). For example, perhaps because of
the necessary challenges of simplifying the many moving parts of Marx’s argument for
large quantitative studies, certain well-published statistical analyses have tended to use
Marx’s maxim as a short hand for religion’s relationship to class consciousness. In their
1963 study of “correlates of class consciousness among textile workers,” Manis and
Meltzer exemplify exactly this sort of simplification, describing how “various historical
events combined with Marxist ideology to provide a perception of religion (‘the opiate of
the masses’) as an ideological force operating to minimize class consciousness and class
conflict” (1963:180). They then use reported frequency of church attendance as a
potentially important correlate to explain class consciousness, which is potentially even

17

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

more problematic as an engagement with Marx’s argument, given that church attendance
references a particular practice while Marx’s work on religion—even his famous
metaphor—is much more centered on a phenomenological orientation to the world.
Similarly, Stark’s contemporaneous quantitative study of “class, radicalism, and religious
involvement” (1964) is a more nuanced study of how religion competes with and
interacts with political radicalism, yet his engagement with Marx (1964:699) is ultimately
similar, rooting much of his interpretation in one simple question: does religion keep
people from political action or not?
In both cases—whether using the phrase “opium of the people” as a catch-all to
describe anything that mollifies the masses, or as a means of representing Marx’s larger
argument—the aphorism’s simultaneous power and weakness are in view. “Opium of the
people” gives Marx’s larger argument about religion an impressive pithiness with
arresting imagery and apparently universal translatability, yet it also renders the argument
simple and therefore easier to attack.
However, there have also been important developments of Marx’s work precisely
because of this “misreading.” Acknowledging the complicated nature of religion in
Marx’s though is perhaps more academically honest; however, thinking of religion as
primarily an opiate allows for a straightforward and bright-colored heuristic, a way to
think with or against the aphorism towards other kinds of work. For example, much of
the theology of liberation literature, even if quite well-versed in Marxist theory, has
focused on the opiate aphorism as a synecdoche for Marxism writ-large, a misreading in
the Bloomian sense, but also a means through which a different kind of activist theology
can develop in explicit contrast to a soporific faith (Candeleria 1990). The aphorism

18

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

might encourage a misreading, but such a misreading is not always a problem. Indeed, it
can be productive.

Weber’s “Iron Cage” / “stahlhartes Gehäuse”

Weber and Prophecy
Some readers may be unsurprised to find that Marx integrated aphorisms into his
work, especially given his famed skills as a journalist and polemicist. It is more
surprising to see the same impulse emerge in the work of Max Weber, a scholar famously
wary of charismatic leadership.7 Nevertheless, we see in his writing the occasional use of
aphorisms, and nowhere more evidently than in the concluding chapter of The Protestant
Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism.8 Although there are multiple instances of wisdomwriting in that chapter, ironically, for American sociologists, it was not Weber but rather
his early translator, Talcott Parsons, who crafted his most enduring saying. According to
Parsons’s translation, Weber writes: “In Baxter’s view the care for external goods should
only lie on the shoulder of the ‘saint like a light cloak that can be thrown aside at any
moment.’ But fate decreed that the cloak should become an iron cage” (1992:125). The
last chapter concerns the breaking apart of the links tying one’s calling with one’s
worldly acquisition or ascetic practices. Near the beginning of the chapter, Weber quotes
Benjamin Franklin’s famous aphorism, “time is money,” disagreeing that this is always
the case but affirming that “the proposition is true in a certain spiritual sense” (1992:104)
for the individuals Weber is discussing.

19

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

It is worth pausing here to acknowledge that this potential misreading of
Franklin’s aphorism is exactly the kind of productive, creative misreading we have been
describing. Franklin himself was not nearly the kind of earnest money-grubber Weber
and others describe: thinking, after his retirement, more “like a genteel aristocrat, not a
tradesman” (Wood 2005:9). Yet Weber takes Franklin’s aphorism as emblematic not only
of Franklin himself, but also of a new economic order. That misreading led to one of the
classic books of sociology: a productive misreading if ever there was one.
In his final chapter, on page 122, Weber switches tones, moving from analyst to
“prophet.” He enters this prophetic mode by summarizing his argument thus far. We
quote Parsons’ translation of this passage at length to demonstrate the place Franklin’s
aphorism plays at this pivotal moment of the text:
One of the fundamental elements of the spirit of modern capitalism, and
not only of that but of all modern culture: rational conduct on the basis of
the idea of the calling, was born—that is what this discussion has sought
to demonstrate—from the spirit of Christian asceticism. One only has to
re-read the passage from Franklin, quoted at the beginning of this essay, in
order to see that the essential elements of the attitude which was there
called the spirit of capitalism are the same as what we have just shown to
the content of the Puritan worldly asceticism, only without the religious
basis, which by Franklin’s time had died away. (Weber 1992:122-3)
Just as the Franklin aphorism serves as an entryway to the deep structures of capitalist
thought, so too it is now revealed to serve as a link from capitalism to the Protestant
ethic. This revelation is seized by Weber as the opportunity to consider the meaning of an
acquisitive ethic for his own age. His language becomes more emphatic, noting, “The
Puritan wanted to work in a calling; we are forced to do so” (1992:123). There is no
evidence presented that Weber or his reader are “forced” to work in a “calling.” The
concepts flow together through the power of the aphorism itself, which is used to stand in
20

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

for a whole line of reasoning. Drawing on the image of the Puritan and this sorry state of
indentured servitude, Weber describes the “tremendous cosmos” and “irresistible force”
of the modern capitalist order, one that he warns may endure “until the last ton of
fossilized coal is burnt” (1992:123). And it is at this point that Weber (according to
Parsons) writes of “an iron cage” (1992:123). But let us move on before returning to
consider this peculiar phrase.
In the two pages that remain, Weber writes in a consistently elevated and poetic
tone. He describes “the rosy blush of [capitalism’s] laughing heir, the Enlightenment”
(1992:124), returns twice to the concept of the “cage,” and then transitions into his most
prophetic statement, a prediction of three possible futures. One future would include the
rise of new prophets, which would in turn generate new orders of meanings that would
look different to us but would grant a similar degree of psychological stability as enjoyed
by our Puritan ancestors. A second possible future would simply be a return to the old,
discarded Puritan order. The third future would be something very alien indeed, which
Weber describes as “mechanisierte Versteinerung,” or “mechanized petrification” (in all
translations). And to define this third, nightmarish scenario, Weber includes a very
traditional sort of wisdom statement: “Fachmenschen ohne Geist, Genußmenschen ohne
Herz” (1992:124).
Note first the formal traits, which can be detected even without translation. The
two phrases repeat the form “X-menschen ohne Y”; and the two end nouns, Geist (spirit)
and Herz (heart) share a rhythm. Parsons translates this as “specialists without spirit,
sensualists without heart”. The third prophesied future thereby poetically suggests some
broader societal malaise which remains unstated. From this elevated perch, Weber walks

21

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

his reader back down to earth: “But this brings us to the world of judgments of value and
of faith, with which this purely historical discussion need not be burdened. The next task
would be rather to show the significance of ascetic rationalism…” (1992:124). In this
way, the aura of scientism is reasserted over the text, and the prophetic moment is said to
have passed, even as its dramatic power lingers, coloring the reader’s experience of
everything that preceded it.

On the Use of Weber’s Aphorism
Ironically, despite Weber’s own disavowal of this “world of judgments of value
and of faith”, it is precisely this short section that has captured the imagination of so
many of his readers and informed important aspects of his sociological reputation. To that
end, we will briefly move backward in his text to consider the fate of the pivotal image of
the “iron cage.”
Parsons’s translation of Weber has been interrogated by several commentators
(see especially Baehr 2001). What seems beyond dispute today is that his translation of
the key phrase, “stahlhartes Gehäuse,” is very loose, and yet the concept of the “iron
cage” is repeatedly associated with Weber. To get a sense of the popularity of the term,
we include here comparison Google Ngram of “iron cage” and “bureaucratic rationality,”
the latter being a more literal and more accurate description of Weber’s ideas. We find
Parsons’s formulation barely registered in the database for its first two decades (19301950), picking up a bit through the 1950s to 1970, and then taking off, with a steady rise
through the 1970s and 1980s to level off at the beginning of the 1990s, declining in the

22

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

2000s. At no point was the more descriptive term “bureaucratic rationality” cited more
frequently than “iron cage”.

<< Figure 3 about here >>

A richer source of information is the use of the two terms in the American Journal
of Sociology (the only American journal that has been consistently ranked at the top of
the field for the entire period in question). Only six articles used the term “bureaucratic
rationality,” while 91 articles included the term “iron cage.” The first work that included
the term in its title, Mitzman’s ([1969] 2002) The Iron Cage: An Historical Interpretation
of Max Weber, was published at about the time that the Ngram begins to show increased
references being made to the term. Similarly, DiMaggio and Powell’s “The Iron Cage
Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields”
(1983), the fourth article in our sample to cite the term, likely inspired the naming of
several of the other articles. The spike of interest in 1998 followed the publication of two
articles by the same authors that used the title (Feldmann and Kelsay 1996; Feldmann and
Kelsay 1997). Finally, the decline of interest throughout the 2000s may be associated
with Baehr’s (2001) forceful intervention and the two translations that followed, one by
Baehr and Wells (Weber 2002), who prefer the term “shell as hard as steel,” and the other
by Kalberg (Weber [2001] 2012), who substitutes “steel-hard casing” for “iron cage”.
Regardless of the specific numbers and pathways of influence, our point here is
quite simple. Despite only occupying three pages of a 125-page document, and despite
Weber’s own dismissal of this section in the text itself, these pages of The Protestant

23

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Ethic have had enduring resonance for his audience and profound impact on his
sociological reputation. The quotation within which “iron cage” appears is both ungainly
in form and not attributable directly to Weber, yet this image has haunted the discipline.
The poetic Weber, the prophetic Weber, is indexed through this turn of phrase, and from
this we gain access to the other aphorisms and sayings in this section. It is our argument,
then, that Weber wrote the concluding pages of The Protestant Ethic to serve as both a
conventional conclusion, summarizing the key argument of the book, but also as a means
of helping to counter the very phenomenon he describes. He counters the loss of prophets
by writing prophetically.
For sociologists writing after Baehr’s correction, the term “iron cage” has a
strange indeterminacy. On one hand, there appears to be a general recognition that using
it as a straightforward translation is inaccurate, and yet the power of Parsons’s particular
translation remains. For example, when Ahram and King (2012:171) question why
Weber rather oddly viewed the term war lord as an analytical rather than normative
category, they conclude that it is because Weber was “dubious of the virtues of the ‘iron
cage’ imposed by acceptance of the seemingly rational and impartial state apparatus”.
The quotation marks around the term seem to suggest that the authors are aware that the
term is contested and yet still prefer to use it – presumably because they prefer its
resonance. Foster and Holleman (2012:1660), writing about Weber’s views on the
environment, similarly hedged when they used the term, writing “some commentators …
have recognized that it [disenchantment] is also connected to his references, at the end of
The Protestant Ethic, to an iron cage (steel casing)”.

24

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

In its most extreme form, Weber’s “iron cage” has become a standalone symbol
of global capitalism. This development has been aided by the extraordinary influence of
DiMaggio and Powell’s (1983) article, which describes the sorts of isomorphism in
organizational forms which are associated with globalization. Hence Sallaz (2012:101)
titles one quadrant of a two-by-two table “The Iron Cage” to describe instrumental
mechanisms that have convergent outcomes in organizational forms.
Indeed, DiMaggio and Powell’s 1983 article merits special attention here in that
their focus on revisiting the iron cage accomplishes much the same intellectual work we
earlier described for liberation theologians’ engagement with the “opium of the people.”
Their focus on one particular aspect of Weber’s argument—the “haunting” “imagery of
the iron cage” (1983:147)—parallels Weber’s focus on Franklin’s aphorism, even if, like
a liberation theologian’s engagement with the “opiate of the masses,” this focus is not
because they lack knowledge of the aphorism’s context. It is instead as much a creative
refocus as a creative misreading. The aphorism, taken as relatively separable from the
rest of the text (because of its memorable qualities) can function as a prism through
which to refract other theories, including those theories that build on “trends to which he
[Weber] called attention” (1983:158). Indeed, the concept of isomorphism—in addition
to its alliterative relationship to “iron cage”—has a nice conceptual connection as well,
with the hardness of iron and the fixity of a cage helping to capture the durability and
strength of isomorphic processes within organization, a process perhaps not as well
described in later translations of Weber’s phrase. The creative application of the iron cage
aphorism not only helps DiMaggio and Powell; it at least potentially makes us read
Weber through DiMaggio and Powell.

25

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

As with liberation theologians’ knowledge of Marxism, it is not that DiMaggio
and Powell’s knowledge of Weber is lacking. Rather, they use a certain aphorism to stand
in for a broader argument, thereby providing a more circumscribed, and thereby
potentially more productive, view of the social world. Just as “rational choice” theorists
do not actually believe that that all people are rational but rather use that model as a
heuristic through which to develop theories about social life, so certain scholars can use
aphorisms as a way to simplify and thereby better theorize the social world. Even
Weber’s potential lack of knowledge about Franklin is not necessarily a problem in terms
of knowledge production, as a certain positivist critique might claim. The question is not
what Weber got wrong about Franklin because of the aphorism but rather whether his
potential (mis)reading of the aphorism led to a productive intellectual contribution with
important and justifiable claims about the world.

On Modern Sociological Aphorisms
In a recent book chapter, Philip S. Gorski has critically engaged with a more
recent sociological aphorism, Charles Tilly’s “war makes the state, and the state makes
war” (Gorski 2011:1). This phrase, often called the Tilly thesis, seems to have appeared
first in Tilly’s mid-career work The Formation of National States in Western Europe
(1975:42) as “War made the state, and the state made war.” There, it referred to the
mutual development of the Western European state’s coercive and extractive capacities.
It was amended by Tilly ten years later to take on the present tense, where it was also
shorted to simply “Wars make states” (1985:170). By the time Tilly wrote Coercion,

26

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Capital and European States, it was well-know enough that Tilly would title a chapter
simply “How Wars Made States, and Vice Versa” (1992:68-95).
As with Marx’s “opium of the people” and Weber’s “iron cage,” the Tilly thesis
has been enthusiastically taken up by scholars as a point of discussion and citation, with
hundreds of references to the variations of the term showing up in searches of scholarly
material.9 At least three scholarly pieces have adopted Tilly’s phrase in their titles (e.g.
Cohen 1984; Kroenig and Stowsky 2006; Morgan and Reiter 2013). In short, the
aphorism is as close to a sociological success story as we encounter. And yet, as Gorski
argues, the concept was not original to Tilly, and Tilly’s revision, “a lightly modified,
second-order derivative” (Gorksi 2011:2), did not resolve many of the challenges that had
undermined those earlier articulations.
Nonetheless, the aphorism has been immensely productive, not least because of
this ambiguity: in this sense, Tilly’s aphorism could be said to functions in the Baconian
sense, a relatively detachable quotation that forces people to consider particular empirical
and theoretical questions, focusing the conversation in a particular way without
compelling any hard orthodoxy. Of course, these conversations are not always positive.
Orthodoxy about an aphorism can take shape in ways authors and groups of experts
would rather they do not: for example, Bortolini has shown how Bellah’s use of
Rosseau’s evocative paradox, “civil religion,” has taken on a life that Bellah did not at all
intend for it (2012).
Similarly, a recent article in Sociological Methods and Research (Jerolmack and
Khan 2014) uses the provocative aphorism that “talk is cheap” in its title and as a central
conceit throughout the article to downplay the importance of the interview methodology

27

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

and to emphasize the importance of ethnographic study of in-situ interaction. The article
received an incredibly wide response, prompting a set of responses in the journal itself
and many follow-up articles, blog posts, and conference panels. Many of the responses
defended the value of talk, emphasizing the various ways interview methods are not, in
fact, cheap. Yet, a careful reading of both the article itself and the separate publications of
both Jerolmack and Khan will show that they do not really think talk is cheap either: both
take advantage of interviewing respondents, and not all of the interviewees are totally
entrenched in their field sites (Jerolmack 2013, Khan 2010). Some could read this as bad
faith—which we do not believe it is, not least because Jerolmack and Khan are primarily
critiquing a specific kind of interview methodology which, to our knowledge, neither
practices. Instead, the aphorism “talk is cheap” functions as a kind of creative misreading
of interviews in general, one that people are then forced to take on its own terms, in the
Baconian sense. A more straightforward claim—that interviews can be good, but you
have to be careful with them—would be more accurate but less interesting, and probably
also less productive. If all arguments are either boring or wrong, then “talk is cheap” is
wrong, but it is wrong in interesting and productive ways.

Discussion
Few sociologists would hold that our discipline is strictly rational, and our
proximity to literature have been well-documented (e.g. Coser, 1972). Lepenies (1988)
and Zald (1991) both make the stronger case that sociology is partly (but profoundly)
humanistic in its distinctive content and forms, while Abbott (2001:6) describes the
discipline as “irremediably interstitial,” spilling over into the scientific and humanistic

28

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

realms in equal degree. We add to these discussions by describing the way that the
literary qualities of aphorisms can both distort and potentially move forward intellectual
history, in both scientific and literary senses. When Weber reads a Franklin aphorism a
certain way, or DiMaggio and Powell read a Weber aphorism another way, they are both
moving intellectual life forward and also, in some sense, doing a kind of interpretive
violence to it: in the first case, by claiming Franklin’s maxim is actually representative of
America, and in the second case, by using what is potentially a bad translation to reread
Weber through the concept of institutional isomorphism. But as much as these might be
misreadings, they are also, to use Bloom’s term, creative, not only in the sense of
cleverness, but in the sense of creating something. These misreadings help us to focus our
intellectual energies in different ways, powered by aphorisms, that, in Bacon’s sense,
make us think about the world in innovative and exciting ways.
To conceptualize social theory as driven by “seeing differently” might rub some
positivists the wrong way, especially those who would prefer what Abbot calls a more
“Hegelian model” (2001:15). Yet, following Abbot’s model of interstitial social science,
it actually makes sense that aphorisms are ambivalent, capable of both fertility and
debility (2001:55). On one hand, they can be seen to strengthen and aptly summarize an
analytically rigorous and value-neutral argument. Yet, precisely because of their power,
they can also be taken apart from the argument itself, made to do work that might be
productive and might not. The aphorism might compel a certain kind of careful
reflection, a la Bacon, but it also might function as an attractive argument by authority,
accomplishing exactly the opposite of what Bacon intends.

29

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Rather than ask whether or not people should use aphorisms, a more interesting
question might be simply to reflect on what happens when they do. Most of us want our
research to interest our readers, and the judicious use of aphorisms offers authors a highly
effective means of focusing long and complex arguments. We might compare this to the
drive for sound bites and talking points that has followed alongside global mediatization
processes (e.g. Hjarvard 2008). The value in distinguishing one’s work in a crowded
marketplace can hardly be ignored, and it behooves authors to draw on a variety of
formal devices to make their research connect with their audience.
Unlike a standard soundbite, however, sociological aphorisms can trigger very
positive forms of intellectual engagement and discussion which can in turn result in a
much richer conversation. Here we may recall the arguments Abbott (2001:10-15) has
advanced concerning the fractal character of sociological distinctions generally. From
this perspective, the use and misuse of aphorisms allows entrepreneurial authors to scale
up or down from the original subject matter to create powerful new insights into social
life given additional potency by virtue of their unexpected sycresis (Abbott 2001:43).
Nonetheless, aphorisms can sometimes also lose something important about their
context, especially when they are removed entirely from the arguments from which they
are drawn (Braddon-Mitchell 2001). Such loss is itself ambivalent: it can, à la Bacon,
compel people to think on their own with and through the aphorism. But aphorisms can
also efface this loss, appearing complete, and indeed authoritative. In this sense,
aphorisms are prone to the problems of indeterminacy, severing what Ermakoff
(2017:135) describes as the connection between concepts and claims. Aphorisms might
well function within the ultimate “unnoticed” setup, engendering “merry-go-round types

30

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

of critical exchanges” (Ermakoff, 2017:135) rather than advancing our knowledge of
social life. Yet we would suggest that such cynicism is not merited, at least not as a
global claim. As we hope to have shown here, aphorisms can often be quite productive,
precisely because of their separability from their original contexts and the creative
misreadings they engender.

Conclusion
Aphorisms are elements in the sociological repertoire, and they—along with other
rhetorical devices—might serve as a valuable point-of-entry to the study of rhetoric
within sociology. While it is certainly the case that good arguments are not only effective
because of rhetoric, rhetorical work is much more important than a certain scientific selfimage some sociologists might hold. For that matter, rhetoric is more important to the
work of “hard” scientists than they might want to admit. Indeed, studies of scientific
expression could be especially instructive for future studies of rhetorical form in
sociological theory, helping to show how various sciences—social, biological, and
physical—produce knowledge that is “not special but social; the result not of revelation,
but of persuasion” (Gross 1990:20). Again, Bacon is a paradoxical figure here, in that his
aphorisms are meant at once to persuade and to persuade against easy persuasion,
encouraging people to think on their own (Gaukroger 2001).
To the degree that science is communicated linguistically between people, then of
course it is necessarily a rhetorical enterprise, and also a social, political, and sociological
one. Yet, acknowledging all of this, Kitcher nonetheless warns that rhetoric’s focus on
the “surface may distort a scientist’s vision of the depths” (1995:48).

31

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Rather than make so grand a point about how sociologists ought to talk, we
instead suggest that sociologists take note of how we talk, especially our use of the
aphorism. These memorable phrases can aptly summarize or give new insight into a
social process. They can beget a creative misreading of earlier work, developing a new
discussion or effacing earlier arguments or, sometimes, both at once.
Furthering the aims of a reflexive sociology, we have built on Davis (1999) to
identify and describe the aphorism in the sociological tradition. In doing so, we have
noted the role aphorisms play in the reception, interpretation and creative misreading of
social theory. We have traced two important aphorisms (“opium of the people” and “iron
cage”) in some detail and coupled those studies with shorter descriptions of two more
contemporary aphorisms (“war makes states and states make war” and “talk is cheap”).
We have looked at these four aphorisms from three perspectives: first, from a Baconian
perspective that highlights the power of aphorisms as a stage for positive truths; second,
from a critical perspective that highlights the coercive and distorting effect of aphorisms;
and finally from a Blooming perspective that emphasizes the creative and transformative
aspects of the form. This theoretical project may provide a pathway for subsequent
empirical investigations, and we would encourage future studies that take advantage of
various big data methodologies, as well as projects more similar to the present article that
could trace other key sociological aphorisms. We also hope this article helps to encourage
a broader commitment to a study of the rhetoric of sociology within sociology. Many
questions remain. For example, do other aesthetic and rhetorical choices by social
thinkers have equivalent effects?

32

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Taking notice of aphorisms could also help us to focus on what we—or those we
read—are using aphorisms to do. Is this about obfuscating a lack of data or creativity
with a catchy phrase? Or is an aphorism actually a new way to think about the world, all
the more alluring because of something in its form, whether a powerful image, a clever
turn of phrase, or an unexpected analogy? Two or three lines of good writing should not
be allowed to stand for judgements better rendered as entire arguments. A sentence
should not be a savior. Even if it often is.
Yet even if a sentence should not be a savior, it is often quite helpful for a
sentence to be a stopper, to arrest us, in Bacon’s sense, and make us think differently
about the world or ourselves or the relationship between the two. Take our own aphorism,
which we have been repeating throughout this text, that there are only two kinds of
arguments, the boring and the wrong. Of course, this is not true: there are many
arguments that are both boring and wrong or that are neither. But the pithy phrasing
might force us to examine whether this claim is really true, and how. The best
sociological aphorisms have this kind of agency, often with a relative separability from
their original contexts. An aphorism might be wrong, but it is by definition never boring.
And working out why it is wrong might well lead to something right. There is not much
more you can want from words.

33

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Figures

Figure 1: Google Ngram of “opium of the people,” “opium of the masses,” “opiate of the
people” and “opiate of the masses,” 1900-2010.

Figure 2: Google Ngram of “new opium of the people” and “another opium of the
people,” 1900-2010.

34

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Figure 3: Google Ngram of “iron cage” and “bureaucratic rationality,” 1930-2010.

1

We leave aside the subcategorization that has interested others, e.g. Perry 1993:1-4. See also Morson, who
would classify what we are calling aphorisms as dicta. For him, dicta help simplify our understanding of
the world while aphorisms “share a sense that that what is most valuable to grasp lies beyond our reach.”
(Morson 2004:260).
2
It is also worth noting that many aphorisms are metaphors or similes, including two for which we provide
a more in-depth analysis here (iron cage and opiate of the people). Yet, for the purposes of this paper, we
bracket questions of the role of metaphor in argument and social science, which would be an entirely
separate analysis and has, at any rate, been well examined elsewhere (Kuhn 1993; Sayer 1992:62-65;
Ricoeur [1975] 2003). We instead focus on the role of the aphorism itself, even if we agree with Davis, in
his study of aphorisms, that “the cognitive process that creates the most insightful thoughts and effective
actions, is analogy” (1999:262, italics in original).
3
These wisdom statements are taken from The Dictionary of Modern Proverbs (Doyle et al 2012).
4
On this point, aphorisms operate analogously to scandals. The word scandal derives from “stumbling
block”: successful scandals like successful aphorisms are arresting and agentic. See Girard (1984), Adut
(2008) and Crosbie (2015).
5
The original full title is Réflections; ou, sentences et maximes morales, and it was originally published
1665, and republished in slightly altered forms in 1665, 1666, 1671, 1675 and 1678 (quotations are taken
from a translation based on the 1678 edition). Following convention, we use the shortened names of the
writer and the work (La Rochefoucauld and Maximes respectively).
6
These are more often called maxims in reference to La Rochefoucauld, although the terms are generally
interchangeable. These should not be confused with “Reflections,” a different genre in which La
Rochefoucauld also distinguished himself. His Reflections are longer pieces, often resembling short prose
poems or mini-essays.
7
Wilkie (1976) argues that Marx’s use of language was expressly intended to engineer a transformation of
proletarian consciousness, actualized in part through painstaking research and in part through lofty rhetoric
(including, as we have seen, the use of wisdom statements). González García (2011) has sketched the ways
in which Weber drew from earlier generations of German Romantic poetry in the articulation of his ideas.
8
Weber’s saying first appeared as an essay in the publication Archiv für Sozialwissenshaft und
Sozialpolitik, published in two parts in 1904 and 1905 (Swatos and Kaelber 2005:xiii). Several other pieces
were added to the original text until, in 1920, Weber published most of the pieces together in what became
the definitive imprint. The 1904-5 essay and 1920 book-length edition both bore the title “Die
protestantische Ethik und der Geist des Kapitalismus,” which we shorten here as The Protestant Ethic.
9
A jstor.org search yielded 85 references to [“war made the state” OR “war makes the state”]. A Google
Scholar search yielded 438 results for [“war made the state”] and 100 results for [“war makes the state”].

35

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

References
Abbott Andrew. 2010. Chaos of Disciplines. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Adut Ari. 2008. On Scandal. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ahram Ariel I., and Charles King. 2012. “The warlord as arbitrageur.” Theory and
Society 41(2):169-186.
Appleby, Scott. 2000. The Ambivalence of the Sacred: Religion, Violence, and
Reconciliation. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Bacon, Fracis. ([1620] 1999) The New Organon. In Francis Bacon: Selected
Philosophical Works. Ed. Rose-Mary Sargent. Indianapolis, IN: Hackett.
Baehr, Peter. 2001. “The ‘iron cage’ and the ‘shell as hard as steel’: Parsons, Weber, and
the stahlhartes Gehäuse metaphor in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism.” History and Theory 40(2): 153-169.
Barthes, Roland. 1981 [2009]. “La Rochefoucauld: Reflections or sentences and
maxims.” In New Critical Essays, trans. Richard Howard. Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press.
Basgöz, İlhan. 1993. Proverb image, proverb message, and social change. Journal of
Folklore Research, 30(2/3): 127-142.
36

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Benjamin, Walter. [1972] 1999. The Arcades Project. trans. Howard Eiland and Kevin
McLaughlin. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Berman Marshall. 1987. All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity.
New York: Verso.
Billings Dwight B. 1990. “Religion as opposition: A Gramscian analysis.” American
Journal of Sociology 96(1): 1–31.
Bloom Harold. 1983. Agon. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bloom Harold. 1975. A Map of Misreading. New York: Oxford University Press.
Bloom Harold. 1973. The Anxiety of Influence: A Theory of Poetry. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Bortolini Matteo. 2012. “The trap of intellectual success: Robert N. Bellah, the American
civil religion debate, and the sociology of knowledge.” Theory and Society 41(2):
187–210.
Bourdieu Pierre, and Loïc Wacquant. 1992. An Invitation to Reflexive Sociology.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Braddon-Mitchell, David. 2001. "Lossy laws." Noûs. 35(2):260-277.
Buroway Michael. 2003. “Revisits: An outline of a theory of reflexive ethnography.”
American Sociological Review 68(5):645-679.

37

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Coser Lewis. 1970. The Masters of Sociological Thought: Ideas in Historical and Social
Context. New York: Harcourt Bruce Jovanovich.
Crosbie, Thomas. 2015. “Scandal and military mediatization.” Media, War &
Conflict, 8(1):100-119.
Daniel, Jack L., Geneva Smitherman-Donaldson, and Milford A. Jeremiah.1987.
"Makin'a way outa no way: The proverb tradition in the Black
experience." Journal of Black Studies 17(4):482-508.
Davis Murray S. 1999. “Aphorisms and clichés: The generation and dissipation of
conceptual charisma.” Annual Review of Sociology. 25:245-269.
DiMaggio Paul J., and Walter W. Powell. 1983. “The iron cage revisited: Institutional
isomorphism and collective rationality in organizational fields.: American
Sociological Review 48(2):147-160.
Doyle, Charles Clay, Wolfgang Mieder, and Fred R. Shapiro, eds. 2012. The dictionary
of Modern Proverbs. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Eckberg Douglas Lee, and Lester Hill Jr, L. 1979. “The paradigm concept and sociology:
A critical review.” American Sociological Review 44(6):925-937.
Feldmann John, and John Kelsay. 1996. “Inside the iron cage: Notes on rationality and
global capital markets.” Soundings: An Interdisciplinary Journal 79(3/4):385397.
Feldmann John, and John Kelsay. 1997. “Unlocking the iron cage: The hidden risks of
formal rationality.” Soundings: An Interdisciplinary Journal, 80(2/3):201-240.

38

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Foster John Bellamy, and Hannah Holleman. 2012. “Weber and the environment:
Classical foundations for a postexemptionist sociology.” American Journal of
Sociology 117(6):1625-1673.
Franklin, Benjamin. [1733-1758] 2004. Poor Richard’s Almanack. Andrew S. Trees
(ed.). New York: Barnes and Noble Publishing.
Garfinkel Harold. 1996. “Ethnomethodology’s program.” Social Psychology Quarterly
59(1):5-21.
Gaukroger Stephen. 2001. Francis Bacon and the Transformation of Early-Modern
Philosophy. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Girard, René (1984) “Scandal and the dance: Salome in the Gospel of Mark.” New
Literary History 15(2):311-324.
Gorski Philip. 2011. The Protestant Ethic Revisited. Philadelphia: Temple University
Press.
Gross, Alan. 1990. The Rhetoric of Science Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Guhin, Jeffrey. 2014. “Religion as site rather than religion as category: On the sociology
of religion's export problem.” Sociology of Religion 75(4):579-593.
Heirich Max. 1977. “Change of heart: A test of some widely held theories about religious
conversion.” American Journal of Sociology 83(3):653–680.
Hjarvard Stig. 2008. “The mediatization of society: A theory of the media as agents of
social and cultural change.” Nordicom Review 29(2):105-134.
39

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Hoult, Thomas Ford. 1950. “Economic class consciousness in American Protestantism”
American Sociological Review 15(1): 97–100.
Hurowitz Victor Avigdor. 2013 “Wisdom literature, Ancient Near East.” The
Encyclopedia of Ancient History. Malden, MA: Blackwell-Wiley.
Kitcher Philip.1995. “The Cognitive Function of Scientific Rhetoric.” In Krips, Henry,
J.E. McGuire, J E, and Trevor Melia. Science, Reason, and Rhetoric Pp. 47-66.
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Kuhn, Thomas S. 1993. “Metaphor in Science” in Ortony, Andrew. Metaphor and
Thought. (pp. 533-542). New York: Cambridge University Press.
La Rochefoucauld F de ([1678] 1981) Maxims, trans. Leonard Tancock. New York:
Penguin.
Manis Jerome G. and Bernard N. Meltzer. 1963. “Some correlates of class consciousness
among textile workers.” American Journal of Sociology 69(2):177–184.
Manzo, Silvia. 2006. Francis Bacon: Freedom, authority and science. British Journal for
the History of Philosophy 14(2):245-273.
Marx Karl [1843] 1978a. “On the Jewish question.” In The Marx-Engels Reader. Tucker,
Robert C. (ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Marx K [1843] 1978b. Contribution to the critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Right. In The
Marx-Engels Reader. Tucker, Robert C. (ed.). New York: W. W. Norton &
Company.
40

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Marx K [1844] 1978c. Economic and philosophic manuscripts of 1844. In The MarxEngels Reader. Tucker, Robert C. (ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Marx K [1845-1846] 1978d. The German ideology. In The Marx-Engels Reader. Tucker,
Robert C. (ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Marx K [1875] 1978e. Critique of the Gotha program. In The Marx-Engels Reader.
Tucker, Robert C. (ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Marx K [1888] 1978f. The Communist manifesto. In The Marx-Engels Reader. Tucker,
Robert C. (ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.
Maxim [Def 2b] 1989. Oxford English Dictionary. Second Edition.
McKinnon Andrew M. 2005. “Reading ‘Opium of the People’: Expression, Protest, and
the Dialectic of Religion.” Critical Sociology 31(1-2):15-38.
Mitzman Arthur [1969] 2002. The Iron Cage: An Historical Interpretation of Max
Weber. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Morson Gary S. 2004. “The Rhetoric of the Aphorism” pp. 248-265. In Jost, Walter and
Wendy Olmstead. (eds.) A Companion to Rhetoric and Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Nietzsche Friedrich. [1878] 1994. Human, All Too Human. trans. Marion Faber with S
Stephen Lehmann. London: Penguin.
Norris, Pippa and Ronald Inglehart. 2004. Sacred and Secular: Religion and Politics
Worldwide, New York: Cambridge University Press.
41

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Pascal, Blaise. [1669] 1995. Pensées, trans. A.J. Krailsheimer. New York: Penguin.
Pechenick, Eitan Adam, Christopher M. Danforth, and Peter Sheridan Dodds 2015.
“Characterizing the Google Books corpus: Strong limits to inferences of sociocultural and linguistic evolution.” PloS one 10(10):e0137041.
Perry Thedor Anthony. 1993. Wisdom Literature and the Structure of Proverbs.
University Park, PA: The Pennsylvania State University Press.
Ricoeur Paul. [1975] 2003. The Rule of Metaphor: The Creation of Meaning in
Language. trans. R Czerny with K McLauglin and J Costello. New York:
Routledge Classics.
Sallaz Jeffrey J. (2012) Politics of organizational adornment: Lessons from Las Vegas
and beyond. American Journal of Sociology, 77(1):99-119.
Sayer Andrew. 1992. Method in Social Science, 2nd Edition. New York: Routledge.
Shapin, Steven. 1991. “’A Scholar and a Gentleman’: the problematic identity of the
scientific practitioner in early modern England.” History of Science 29(3):279327.
Snider, Alvin. 1988. “Francis Bacon and the authority of the aphorism.” Prose
Studies11(2): 60-71.
Stark Rodney. 1964. “Class, radicalism, and religious involvement in Great Britain.”
American Sociological Review 29(5): 698–706.

42

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Steinmetz, George. 2005. (ed). The Politics of Method in the Human Sciences: Positivism
and its Epistemological Others. Durham: Duke University Press.
Stephens James. 1970. “Science and the Aphorism: Bacon’s Theory of the Philosophical
Style.” Communication Monographs 37(3):15-171.
Stephenson, R. H. 1980. “On the Widespread Use of an Inappropriate and Restrictive
Model of the Literary Aphorism.” The Modern Language Review 75(1):1-17.
Swatos, William H. Jr, and Lutz Kaelber. (2005) (eds.) The Protestant Ethic Turns 100:
Essays on the Centenary of the Weber Thesis. Boulder: Paradigm Publishers.
Swedberg, Richard, and Wendelin Reich. 2010. “Georg Simmel’s aphorisms.” Theory,
Culture & Society 27(1): 24-51.
Thomas, Paul. 1991, “Critical reception: Marx then and now.” In The Cambridge
Companion to Marx. T Carver (ed.). Pp. 23-54. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Tilly Charles. 1975. The Formation of National States in Western Europe. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Tilly, Charles. 1985. “War and state making as organized crime.” In P Evans, D
Rueschemeyer, and T Skocpol (eds). Bringing the State Back In. pp. 169-191.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Tilly, Charles. 1992. Coercion, Capital and European States, AD 990-1992. Cambridge:
Blackwell.
43

On the Ambivalence of the Aphorism in Sociological Theory
Thomas Crosbie, Royal Danish Defence College and Jeffrey Guhin, UCLA

Weber Max. [1922] 1968. Economy and Society: An Outline of Interpretive Sociology.
Guenther Roth and Claus Wittich (eds.). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Weber, Max. [1905] 1992. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism, trans.
Talcott Parsons. London: Routledge.
Weber Max. [1905] 2002. The Protestant Ethic and the “Spirit” of Capitalism and Other
Writings, trans. Peter Baehr and Gordon C. Wells. New York: Penguin Books.
Weber M [1905] 2010. The Protestant Ethic & the Spirit of Capitalism, trans. Stephen
Kalberg. New York: Oxford University Press.
Weeks, Stuart. 2010. An Introduction to the Study of Wisdom Literature. New York: T&T
Clark.
White, Hayden. 1987. The Content of the Form. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press.
Wood, Gordon S. 2005. The Americanization of Benjamin Franklin. New York: Penguin.

44

