The Incommensurables:
The arduous art of making a regulatory
indicator
shirley kempeneer 1 & wouter van dooren 2

Full reference:
Shirley Kempeneer & Wouter Van Dooren (2019): The incommensurables:
the arduous art of making a regulatory indicator, Critical Policy Studies,
DOI: 10.1080/19460171.2019.1594328

Abstract
The stress test of the European Central Bank has become one of the primary regulatory tools for the European banking system. In order to make such a regulatory
indicator, different national banks need to be commensurated. They need to be
made comparable according to a common metric. Despite a substantive literature,
little empirical work has been done to further our understanding of the social and
political processes through which these indicators are made. We use Actor-Network
Theory (ANT) to enrich the existing literature with an in-depth account of how commensuration is negotiated. We find that despite a preference for commensuration,
regulators allow ‘incommensurable’ categories to exist due to largely unrecognised
regulatory benefits.

Keywords
Regulatory Indicators, Commensuration, Capture, Gaming, Actor-Network Theory
(ANT), transnational knowledge controversies

1

Shirley Kempeneer (corresponding author) is a PhD fellow at the University of Antwerp. She is
affiliated to the Department of Political Sciences in the Research Group Politics & Public Governance.
Her dissertation deals with the regulatory implications of knowledge production through indicators.
Contact: shirley.kempeneer@uantwerpen.be
2 Wouter van Dooren is a Professor of Public Administration at the University of Antwerp and the
Antwerp Management School. He is affiliated to the Department of Political Sciences in the Research
Group Politics & Public Governance. His main research interests are performance measurement and
management in the public sector, accountability, participation, and citizen state interactions.
Contact: wouter.vandooren@uantwerpen.be

1

contents

2

contents
1
2
3
4

5
6
7

How to make a regulatory indicator: the case of the stress-test
Commensuration and the production of regulatory indicators
Methodology
How to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action
4.1 Problematisation: should banks be commensurated? . . . . . . . . . .
4.2 Interessement and enrolment: To commensurate, or not to commensurate? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.1
Commensuration at any cost? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.2.2
Claiming incommensurability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4.3 Mobilisation: designing for results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
How a regulatory indicator is made: lessons learned
Notes
References

3
5
7
7
8
8
9
10
13
14
16
17

list of tables
Table 1

Stress test results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

3

how to make a regulatory indicator: the case of the stress-test

1

how to make a regulatory indicator: the case
of the stress-test

Mid-October 2013, 130 banks received a letter from the European Central Bank
(ECB). Congratulations were in order; the banks were selected as ‘significant financial institutions’ in Europe. As such, they would fall under the ECB’s Single
Supervisory Mechanism as of November 2014. This meant that from now on they
would be reporting to the ECB, instead of their own country. But before being admitted to the top league of European banking, the banks had to prove that they were
healthy. To do so, the ECB conducted a ‘Comprehensive Assessment’, scrutinizing
all 130 banks to test their financial resilience. A key part of the Comprehensive
Assessment was a stress test. The ECB announced it would be the toughest stress
test to ever be conducted in the European financial sector. ‘There will be blood’ a
top official allegedly said1 .
The stress test assesses how well banks would cope during a three-year crisis
scenario. More specifically, the test shows how much capital a bank still holds
against its risk weighted assets after three years of crisis. The figure below (Table
1) shows an excerpt of the results (EBA, 2014). Even without a good understanding
of how the indicator is made, it is possible to infer which banks are healthy (high
percentages) and which are not (low percentages). The results made headlines
globally. The reputational impact was significant, even before the results had any
legal consequence. In the run-up to the stress testing exercise banks were seen to
raise significant amounts of capital to increase their score, conscious that financial
markets would be judging their results (Titcomb, 2014). In subsequent rounds of
stress testing, the indicators were also formally linked to regulatory interventions,
such as banks’ Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP), which amongst
others determines how much capital banks are legally required to hold.

2013 capital ratio
(AQR adjusted)

Projected baseline capital
ratio 2016

Projected adverse capital
ratio 2016

Austria
BAWAG PSK
Erste Group Bank AG

14.3%
10.0%

11.9%
11.2%

8.5%
7.6%

Belgium
AXA Bank Europe SA
Belfius Banque SA

14.7%
13.5%

12.7%
11.0%

3.4%
7.3%

Name / capital ratio

Table 1: Stress test results
Regulatory indicators, such as the stress test, pervade transnational governance.
Indicators and rankings play an important role in the way governmental and nongovernmental organizations distribute attention, make decisions, and allocate scarce
resources (Rottenburg & Merry, 2015). The OECD’s Programme for International
Student Assessment steers decision making in education policy (Gorur, 2016); the
Human Development Index informs the United Nations Development Program
(Davis, Kingsbury, & Merry, 2012); and the EU’s Open Method of Coordination
helps policymakers monitor and measure progress in various policy domains across
member states (Marlier & Atkinson, 2010). We define an indicator, following Davis
et al. (2012: 75), as:

3

how to make a regulatory indicator: the case of the stress-test
A named collection of rank-ordered data that purports to represent the past
or projected performance of different units. The data are generated through a
process that simplifies raw data about a complex social phenomenon. The data,
in this simplified and processed form, are capable of being used to compare
particular units of analysis (such as countries or institutions or corporations),
synchronically or over time, and to evaluate their performance by reference to
one or more standards.

We emphasise the regulatory character of such indicators, as they can steer behaviour even without legal enforcement. The reputational pressure that indicators
exert with their potential to rank performances, is often effective in in securing compliance or behavioural change (Grabosky & Braithwaite, 1986; Tervonen-Gonçalves,
2012; van Ostaijen & Scholten, 2017).
Several reasons present themselves to study this process of how transnational
indicators are made. First of all, commensuration, the need to homogenize across
contexts, reaches its pinnacle in the European context (Bruno, Jacquot, & Mandin,
2006; Mügge, 2016). Despite the diversity in national contexts, Member States, and
their policy issues, are intricately connected in many ways, calling for an overarching European regulatory system (and legislation) (Jurgen Habermas & Derrida,
2003; Kohler-Koch, 1996). This became especially clear in the financial crisis where
the interconnectedness of the banking system caused risk to spill over national borders and contaminate the entire European sphere (De Bruyckere et al., 2013). The
complexity of transnational policy issues simultaneously enhances both the need
for clear-cut indicators to regulate, as well as the difficulty to create such indicators
across varying contexts. As such, efforts towards, as well as struggles with commensuration will likely play a pivotal role. Discussions on transnational commensuration and standardization tie in with Barry’s (Barry, 2012)work on transnational
knowledge controversies. One of the critical difficulties in governing transnational
issues, such as financial policy, is a lack of transnational consensus on matters of
fact, or how evidence should be interpreted.
Secondly, Welsh (2017) calls for a more critical and political analysis of rankings. Likewise, Mügge (2016) explicitly calls for political scientists in particular to
pay more attention to the forces that determine indicators’ design. Since the 1960s,
political scientists have used theories of regulatory ‘capture’ to explain regulatory
outcomes and designs. It conveys a sense of illegitimate expropriation, performed
by one powerful group over others (Baxter, 2011). A substantial body of literature
studies the privileged interactions between industry and public authorities (Bunea,
2013; Hanegraaff, Beyers, & De Bruycker, 2016; Klüver, 2013; Lowery, 2013). When
indicators paint a predominantly positive picture of regulated entities, this is often
ascribed to regulators designing a less critical performance measure (Woll, 2014). In
the case of the ECB’s banking stress test, such accusations were echoed in public debate as well. The crisis scenario that the ECB banks were subjected to was deemed
far less severe than that of the Federal Reserve or the Bank of England, leading to
misleadingly positive results for the European Banking Sector (Cecchetti & Schoenholtz, 2016). Beyond ‘capture’, public administration scholars criticize indicators for
their susceptibility to ‘gaming’ (Bevan & Hood, 2006). Aware of which behaviour
would be measured by the indicator, organisations or countries are seen to manipulate performance outcomes to their advantage, painting an overly optimistic picture.
However, it is yet to be studied how these mechanisms come into play in designing
regulatory indicators.

4

commensuration and the production of regulatory indicators
In what follows we build on literature in quantification (Desrosières, 1998; Espeland & Sauder, 2007; Espeland & Stevens, 1998; Hacking, 1990; Peeters, Verschraegen, & Debels, 2014; Porter, 1995) to improve our understanding of how indicators
are designed. This is increasingly important, because they affect our understanding
of the world in subtle and often unrecognised ways (Rottenburg & Merry, 2015).
As such, before we can use these numbers in policy and public debate, we need
to understand precisely where they come from. We conduct in-depth interviews
with stakeholders in risk departments in Belgian banks, consultants, and the ECB,
to better understand how the stress test is made, and to which consequence.
We find that although these design choices are politically motivated, there is
more to the story than mere gaming or regulatory capture. Introducing incommensurability can be seen as a manifestation of a critical epistemological attitude that
is objected to a rationally calculable reality. In the concluding section, we reflect
on what these findings mean for broader academic and public debate, relating it to
the Frankfurt School’s critique of instrumental reason (McCarthy, 1990) and more
specifically to Habermas’ notion of communicative rationality as an alternative to
instrumental rationality (Habermas, 1990).

2

commensuration and the production of regulatory indicators

Commensurating systems, means taking diverse qualitative systems and homogenizing them on a common metric, facilitating comparison (Espeland & Stevens,
1998). Literature on commensuration pays particular attention to the socio-political
forces that lie behind this standardization process. Regulatory indicators used in
transnational governance, commensurate systems over national contexts. They assume that is it possible and desirable to compare complex systems across countries
according to uniform measures. In our case, the ECB stress test aims to make a
standardized comparison of banks’ risk across Europe. Commensuration literature
stresses that things ‘are’ not comparable, but that they need to be made comparable. It thus proves interesting to pay special attention to how this commensuration
process feeds into transnational indicator design, and how indicators make diverse
systems comparable.
Commensuration is a social process. It begins with the idea that it is meaningful to compare a set of things. For example when estimating the costs of a large
infrastructure project, we now believe that it is important to take into account the
potential loss of natural resources, and other costs to the environment (Vickerman,
2007). To do so, we need to find a way to compare these costs and benefits. This
is often done by putting a price on the loss of land, or the quality of air, that we
then can compare to the cost of traffic congestion or employment. However, practically finding ways to value and compare diverse inputs is no small feat (Patterson,
1998). As such, commensurability is not only a social construction, but a social accomplishment that requires substantial efforts. Entire agencies, industries and even
disciplines are dedicated to finding ways to compare (the value or performance of)
different systems (Jasanoff, 1986). In our case, it was only after the crisis that the
urge arose to create a standardized pan-European comparison of banks, before this,
each National Competent Authority had its own method of assessing banks’ health.
These different national strategies were then also tailored to the local context and
banks’ business models. Finding a way to compare these banks on a Level Playing
Field across Europe was thus a challenging task for the stress test. Especially when
it comes to big, systemically important, banks. Standardised reporting requirements

5

commensuration and the production of regulatory indicators
can make it seem as if banks are easily compared across contexts. However, when
you take a closer look, the financial products that these big banks hold are so disparate and complex, making it very difficult to calculate and quantify their value
and risk. How much an asset in a big bank is worth, or what its risk is, can be an
as vexing question as how much a human life is worth (at least in terms of all the
different parameters that can be taken into account2 ). A wide range of qualitative
properties of the asset need to be transformed into quantities, and this can happen
in a variety of ways, according to various assumptions, theories and models.
Just as things can be seen as commensurable, they can also be seen as ‘incommensurable’, or undesirable to compare. For example, Ackerman and Heinzerling
(2005) argue that it is morally wrong to compare the value of human lives, health,
or the environment to economic gains, especially not by reducing them to ‘cold
dollars’. These things are seen to be ‘priceless’, and thus incommensurable. Incommensurability is as much a social construction as commensurability, and also
requires work (Espeland & Stevens, 1998). Incommensurability claims are often supported by moral arguments, that for example, human life should be valued above
anything else, or the environment should be protected at any cost (Ackerman &
Heinzerling, 2004). In the case of the stress test, banks argue that it is not fair to
compare one portfolio to another at face-value. They claim that their assets are
simply too different in nature to be assessed according to the same standards.
A more substantive critique comes from the Frankfurt School, who condemn
the wider economic, political and social effects of commensuration (for a good
overview see Smulewicz-Zucker, 2017). In the Dialectic of Enlightenment for instance, Horkheimer and Adorno (1947) discuss the standardising effects of mass
media, akin to a ‘culture industry’ producing uncritical identical individuals, locking in power relations, and reproducing dominant discourses. In a similar fashion,
indicators (and other technologies) can act as a standardising instrument for control
and domination (Marcuse, 1941). Treating banks as incommensurable would then
be the only way to allow critical rational debate to triumph over manufactured information. Here incommensurability is not defended from a moral point of view,
but from an emancipatory one.
Regulators are typically in favour of commensuration (Gorur, 2016; Porter, 1995;
Scott, 1998). The illegibility of local contexts is an administrative headache for regulators. Without comparable units of measurement, it proves almost impossible to
monitor, compare, or regulate performance in various policy domains. Regulators
need tools like standardised indicators to understand and manage the large and
complex reality. On the other hand, regulated sectors typically fight these commensuration efforts. They see their unique qualities stripped away and do not feel
accurately represented by these standardised measures. They often have their own
distinct view and contextual interpretation of the categories that are taken into account (Peeters et al., 2014)
In what follows we analyse this process of commensuration empirically, with
the case of the ECB’s banking stress test. To do so we use a framework borrowed
from Actor-Network Theory (ANT), Callon’s (1984) ‘Sociology of Translations’. We
elaborate on this approach in the methodological section.

6

methodology

3

methodology

Our case study is the stress test of the European Central Bank (ECB). The stress
test has earned its place in the centre of financial regulation. As it is a relatively
new indicator, the design is still in full development. This makes it an ideal case
to understand how and why design choices are made. We conducted 32 in-depth
narrative interviews with risk experts in all four of the Belgian banks included
in the ECB stress test, the consulting firms assisting the banks, as well as with
ECB officials in Frankfurt. We contacted the Chief Risk Officer in each bank and
snowballed from there, we also asked banks to refer us to consultants they worked
with. As risk teams in banks were fairly small, we were able to speak with the most
relevant people on several occasions. At the ECB, we contacted respondents from
both the macro- and micro-prudential fields, who were working on stress-testing,
only one respondent that we contacted refused an interview. We recorded all but
two interviews and transcribed them verbatim3 . We used a semi-structured topic
guide, based on Callon’s (1984) framework of translations. We began with open
ended coding close to the text and then analysed and structured our data according
to key concepts.
As a research heuristic we use Actor-Network Theory (ANT), and more specifically Callon’s (1984) ‘sociology of translations’. A basic assumption of ANT is that
everything we see in the world is built up from a set of relationships between people
and things, a so called ‘Actor-Network’ (Latour, 1999; Law, 1999). Callon uses the
notion of ‘translation’ to explain how an Actor-Network, comes to be represented by
a single thing, in our case an indicator of health. The linguistic metaphor of translation emphasizes the manner in which interests, goals, or desires are represented,
simplified, and transformed in the production and mobilization of artifacts.
The logic of translations is helpful in studying processes of commensuration. Callon (1984) distinguishes four key moments of translation: problematisation, interessement, enrolment, and mobilisation. To untangle the concept of (in)commensurability, it is helpful to unpack it according to the various stages. For instance, during
problematisation we can look into why and for whom commensuration is necessary,
interessement and enrolment give us an understanding of how commensuration is
negotiated in practice, and mobilisation can help us understand how commensuration ties into wider societal processes. This analytical framework thus gives us a
more multi-facetted and critical understanding of commensuration and claims of
incommensurability.

4

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action

We will structure this empirical section using Callon’s four key moments of
‘translation’: problematisation, interessement, enrolment, and mobilisation (Callon,
1984). Looking at commensuration as a process of translations, gives us a more
in-depth understanding of the role of incommensurables. The inability to commensurate is often written off as a failure in a process, rather than a deliberate
action. Throughout the different translations, we gain a better understanding of
what drives (in)commensurability and how.

7

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action

4.1 Problematisation: should banks be commensurated?
In the first step of the assembly of an actor-network, a given actor analyses a
situation and provides a specific problem definition. An important requirement is
that this problem definition, and the subsequent proposed solution, rings true to
other actors: What is the problem that needs to be solved?
In the case of the stress test, the 2008 financial crisis made clear that something
was wrong in financial regulation. But what? National supervisors, along with the
rest of the world, failed to see the crisis coming. A risk director in a bank noted:
Before the crisis a lot of banks used quantitative models (. . . ) but then people
saw that a lot of banks failed and had issues during the crisis even if the models
said everything was ok.

This illustrates how old indicators of banks’ health showed significant shortcomings during the crisis. Moreover, there was a rising distrust towards national regulators. They were said to be ‘captured’ by the banks, no longer safeguarding the
public interest but preoccupied with national interests and ‘their banks’ looking
good. Banking supervision was concentrated at the national level before the crisis,
because national authorities stood closer to banks and were seen as better equipped
to understand the complex legal and socio-political context they operated in. A risk
expert noted:
You cannot take an asset in this bank, and just compare it to an asset that might
look the same in another bank. You have to understand what’s underneath this
asset. For example, credit quality, we have clients with good savings accounts.
That’s typically Belgian actually. This is going to affect the PD [Probability of
Default] and the LGD [Loss Given Default] and such.

This shows that comparing banks is not so straightforward. Before the crisis banks
across Europe were treated as ‘incommensurable’ from a regulatory perspective:
Banks were seen as too different in terms of business models, activities and portfolios, to be compared in a uniform way. Although there were general guidelines,
banking supervision differed across countries. This changed after the crisis. The
crisis revealed how interconnected banks in Europe were, and that despite their
differences, it would be meaningful to compare the systematically important institutions. The problem shifted from a localised national issue, to an integrated
European issue. This led to the establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism
(SSM) in 2014,4 that transferred supervisory power to the ECB. And as such, finding
a way to commensurate these different, yet interconnected European banks became
a key priority for the stress test.

4.2

Interessement and enrolment: To commensurate, or not to commensurate?

The next translations are interessement and enrolment. In interessement actors
seek to lock other actors into specific roles. Actors, in ANT can be both people and
things. To make this interessement successful, Callon speaks of enrolment: these
are the negotiations that accompany the interessements and enable them to succeed
(Callon, 1984). Think of interessement as writing up a script, and enrolment as negotiating everyone’s part. In this section, we discuss the different actants that were
‘interested’ and ‘enrolled’ into the stress test, and the role they played in commensurating banks. In the stress test the process of interessement and enrolment embody
how the ECB wrote up the methodology (or script). By looking at which rules (or
roles) were instated and how, we can understand how they play into processes of
commensuration and claims of incommensurability.

8

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action
4.2.1 Commensuration at any cost?
The starting point for the stress test is banks’ balance sheet. Balance sheets give
an overview of banks’ assets and liabilities, these can be categorised in different
sub-groups with specific characteristics. The stress test projects the impact of a
three-year crisis scenario on banks’ balance sheet. In reality, banks would make
changes to the items on their balance sheet during a crisis, such as selling off bad
assets. However, in the name of the LPF, banks’ balance sheets were kept static over
the three-year scenario. Some banks might make bigger changes than others, and it
would be hard to compare the end results. The management decisions that a bank
would make were not ‘translated’ into the stress-testing exercise, because they were
impossible to predict and/or standardise. Keeping a static balance sheet was thus
the only way to keep banks commensurable. This came at a cost. As we saw during
the financial crisis, banks are intricately interrelated. The only way to map these
interrelations, and understand their effects, is through a dynamic balance sheet. A
respondent at the ECB explained:
Say a bank’s balance sheet is hit, maybe they’re going to be selling off corporations, so that’s going to spill over to other countries, maybe, who knows. But
this is what we would like to know. But without a dynamic balance sheet, we
cannot know.

A static balance sheet makes it possible to make a fair comparison between banks,
but it stands in the way of predicting how a crisis would affect the banking system
in its entirety. Here we see clearly that commensuration, and comparability, limits
the questions that indicators can answer. An indicator design that focusses on comparing how banks react to a crisis scenario, will not be able to thoroughly answer
questions about how these banks, and the banking system in Europe, would react
to the scenario. The choice for a static balance sheet is a pragmatic one, that has
little to do with steering results in any direction. Respondents in banks and at the
ECB agreed that a dynamic balance sheet would be more adept at gauging a bank’s
true risk. However, respondents understood the choice to keep the balance sheet
static to facilitate fair comparisons.
A next important design choice is the adverse scenario that the banks have to face.
The stress test was designed with a common scenario, meaning all banks would be
subjected to the same macro-economic turbulences. This was – again - motivated by
the LPF. The ECB wanted to compare banks under the same scenario to eventually
assess which banks performed better or worse. At first sight, a common scenario
would facilitate the commensuration of banks. However, a respondent at the ECB
criticized this choice:
What you want is a similar degree of pressure applied to all banks. But that
does not happen with this single scenario. Banks are complex institutions, and
each bank is sensitive to different things – it’s like putting the same weight on
different bridges.

So, on the one hand, it would seem fair to expose the sample of banks to the same
scenario, but on the other it would also be fair that each bank would be exposed
to the same amount of stress. This hints at the complexity of the questions that
commensuration raises: Is it possible or even helpful to compare how different
banks react to a crisis? The result of the commensuration might have less to do
with the actual health of the bank, and more with inadvertent sensitivities that a
bank might have to a specific scenario, or even sheer luck.
Another important design feature is the ‘common methodology’. The common
methodology describes in detail how banks are supposed to calculate and report
the impact of the scenario on their balance sheet. This document was a key in the

9

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action
commensuration process. It forced banks to enter their balance sheet data according to standardized reporting standards and implement common definitions and
assumptions to calculate asset values and risks. All banks filled in identical excel
sheets with hundreds of data points, in identical columns and rows, that could easily be compared. Moreover, caps and floors were added to data points to further
restrict large divergences in results. We asked where these caps and floors came
from, and if they favoured any particular bank. A risk expert explained:
No, I don’t think they favour anyone. They really are just put in place to keep
the results conservative, to make sure the results of the banks are not too far
apart. They don’t make any economic sense either, in my opinion. They just
‘assume’ for all banks that for example some results cannot be positive, or that
you have to calculate something according to [a set of rules]. And in our case,
we have some exceptions to these rules, and we can explain this. For some
assets we provide an extra insurance or so. But we’re not allowed to take that
into account. We have to calculate everything the same.

We pushed the respondents in banks on their ability to influence the design in their
favour, the response was:
Well we talked with [an association of banks] but the thing is, it’s hard to align
interests, something that would be good for us is, is not necessarily good for
another bank. So, it’s not like you can press on these issues together. Even
within Belgium. We did make the same arguments on some points, I called [a
risk expert from another Belgian bank] to ask how are you going to interpret
this rule, so we took a similar approach there. But these opportunities are
limited

This shows that ‘capture’ becomes more difficult when the interests of a group are
not aligned, and the group sees its interests as ‘incommensurable’.
The common methodology with the caps and floors seems to point in the direction of more commensuration efforts by the ECB. However, the fact that there is a
common methodology, and banks are allowed to calculate the exercise themselves
is quite remarkable. The ECB could have just conducted the stress-test themselves
and left banks out of it completely. This is called a top-down stress test, where the
central bank uses their own data or data delivered by banks, to calculate the impact
of the scenario on banks. Using top-down models would take away any leeway
banks would have to manipulate or game the exercise. Given the importance of the
LPF, this would not have been a strange decision. Yet, the ECB opted for a bottomup stress test, where banks were given some freedom to calculate the impact of
the scenario themselves (albeit according to strict methodological guidelines). The
question is: why?
4.2.2 Claiming incommensurability
We can be fairly sure that the reason is not technical infeasibility. The ECB
has already developed top-down models to calculate the impact of the scenario
on a bank. They just choose to solely use them for benchmarking purposes. A
respondent at the ECB explained:
The supervisors use the top-down results as a benchmark to judge the banks’
results. And then there is a back and forth process with the banks. They can
try and explain why their results are different from what we expect.

In this, the design allows some room for incommensurability. Banks are given the
room to argue that their assets are incommensurable with seemingly similar assets
in other banks. They can explain why their risk should be calculated differently
than risk in other banks5 .

10

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action
During interviews three reasons came up for designing the exercise bottom-up.
The first had to do with banks being able to give the best representation of their risk
themselves. A respondent at the ECB noted:
Well I think banks should manage their own risk, I don’t think supervisors need
to do this. We really, and this is important, we want to foster the development
of banks’ own risk management capabilities. It is normal that banks should
have a much better understanding of their risk. That is a big argument for a
bottom-up stress-test. (. . . ) From banks, it is not just a wilful act to spin figures,
it’s important to have a close discussion with institutions.

A risk expert in a bank added:
You can’t just take an asset class and treat it the same in different countries.
When you discuss this in international committees sometimes it looks as if each
country is just defending their interest. But for example, mortgage lending, in
some countries you can give back the keys, in others you still have to pay, you
are still liable. So historically the defaults on the loans are very low. So, there
is an argument to be made that these banks do have safe portfolios and you
should not apply the same risk weight globally.

This shows that supervisors at the ECB and banks agree that banks’ assets should
be treated as ‘incommensurables’. Here, an accurate understanding of the risk
of a bank’s asset, is valued higher than the commensurability of the asset. It is
agreed on that it is not always desirable to compare the risk of even seemingly
similar assets. To be sure, we’ve seen that accuracy has been sacrificed before in
the name of commensuration. So, this still leaves us with the question of why
the incommensurability is granted this time. Technically, it would be possible for
regulators to run the whole exercise themselves. Yet, banks were allowed to use
their own internal models. This can be better understood by the second reason that
was given for granting incommensurability.
The second explanation for the bottom-up stress-test had to do with accountability and responsibility. Commensuration can shift responsibility away from regulated systems, onto regulators. A respondent at the ECB stated:
The team is great, but to do a top-down for all the banks in the comprehensive
assessment, that’s about 130 banks [in 2016]. I’m not sure that will happen. The
inherent danger of using the same models for 130 institutions, that’s a risk in
itself.

A risk expert in a bank elaborated:
The regulators can do this top-down exercise. But I feel that supervisors are a
bit apprehensive that if they do everything themselves, calculate it, publish it,
then they are accountable. If a bank gets a good score but gets in trouble the
year after, well the supervisor will be blamed fully.

This suggests that supervisors do not want to be completely responsible for assessing what will happen to banks’ assets in a stress-scenario. Especially, because supervisors see a danger in banks using these top-down models, instead of developing
their own models. A respondent at the ECB worded this carefully:
We never give all the information about our top-down models. Just enough
to understand the model, but not enough to replicate it. We don’t want banks
to just take the models and use them. Then we would lose the bank-specific
models, which are obviously valuable. We do not want a mono-risk culture.
There is a big top-down, bottom-up discussion globally. It is good if banks
use our models as inspiration, but to replicate, no. you want to keep some
uncertainty, because you have model uncertainty. You cannot say ‘this is the
one model’, you can’t put all the eggs in one basket. This should never become
some unilateral guidance to banks.

11

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action
This shows that even when commensuration is technically feasible, regulators choose
to treat banks as ‘incommensurables’. These reasons tie into Barry’s (2012) notion
of transnational knowledge controversies. Regulators cannot seem to choose one
standard model to assess how banks’ assets would perform under stress. There is
no pan-European consensus regarding how much risk assets hold and how they
would be affected under crisis situations. A consultant explained the trend over the
past years:
The idea was at first to apply standard risk weights to standard asset categories.
But as banks and their financial instruments became more complex, these standard risk models did not reflect the true risk anymore. A few years ago, there
was a clear direction to more sophisticated models, giving more flexibility to
the bank to develop internal models that would really make the bank able to
simulate the exact risk of their bank and business model. But we’ve seen that
banks are a bit using or playing with these models to go around the rules. So,
we are seeing a clear trend towards more standardized models, and more simple models. Because the big problem with all these complex internal models
is that you get results from the different banks and you cannot compare easily. When you see that for the same exposure, banks have different RWA [Risk
Weighted Assets], that’s not normal.

This shows that regulators are struggling with building transnational knowledge,
and a transnational consensus on how to gauge the risk of banks’ assets. In order to
commensurate banks across Europe, transnational guidelines need to be established
regarding how risk should be perceived and calculated. However, as each bank is
developing its own complex financial products, it becomes even more challenging
to create a homogenized understanding and calculation of risk. This ties in with
the third reason for the bottom-up stress test: the quest for evermore data. A
respondent in a bank elaborated:
Each time, the data requirements are even more granular. We’re at what, 395
000 data points now? It’s clear that the ECB wants this data. We saw that
last time we were in Frankfurt, the apparatus that they’ve designed there is so
sophisticated. They take this data and they do all these different things with it.
I’m not sure what they’re doing exactly, but they’re doing a lot of calculations.

This shows that regulators are interested in gaining as much information as possible
about the different banks. If they would conduct a standardized top-down stress
test themselves they would lose this valuable information.
In conclusion, this section shows us that on the one hand regulators go through
a lot of effort to commensurate systems, but on the other that commensuration is
no regulatory panacea. To be able to compare banks on a level playing field, concessions are made in terms of accuracy. However, commensuration is not pushed at
any cost. Despite the possibility of designing a completely standardised top-down
stress test, regulators consciously opt for a bottom-up exercise, treating banks assets
as incommensurable. By allowing banks to use their own models, regulators create
room for potential gaming efforts, where banks could try to make their portfolio
look as good as possible. Designing a ‘gameable’ indicator may seem like a concession to industry interests, showing weakness from regulators side. However, this
analysis shows that regulators consciously treat banks as incommensurable because
of the regulatory benefits this entails, such as shared accountability, information access, and improved internal risk management capacity. Regulators are apprehensive
in establishing transnational guidelines on how risk should be interpreted and calculated, because there are still controversies regarding the right way to calculate
and measure financial risks. As such, if regulators were to establish a transnational
norm, they would be fully responsible for the consequences in case the norm would
prove erroneous. Moreover, they believe in the benefits that come from leaving the
debate open, and continuously reconsidering how risk should be understood and

12

how to make a policy indicator: commensuration in action
calculated. This can again be related to a more critical epistemological stance, where
regulators choose to treat banks as incommensurables from an emancipatory point
of view.
4.3 Mobilisation: designing for results
The final step in Callon’s framework is mobilisation: The actor-network starts to
operate. This is the moment of truth, the final translation. Will the story hold, will
all actors stick to their roles? The alliances made and consensuses agreed upon can
be contested at any moment. Translation can become treason.
It is important to note that the result of the stress test needs to be able to ‘hold’ in
the real world. It needs to be able to interact with other actors. As such, it’s shaped
by these possibilities for interaction. The stress-test is not created in a vacuum. In
the mobilisation stage, it needs to be translated into the real world, and work there.
A respondent at the ECB summarised this well with the sentence: ‘you’re stuck
with what you can afford’. The scores on the stress test become a new fact and
other actors will interact with this fact, they will make decisions based on this fact.
So, you pre-emptively need to take into consideration what decisions these actors
might make, and which decisions you can ‘afford’. The respondent elaborated with
a concrete example of how financial markets would react to the stress test, and
which reactions the US could afford, and which reactions Europe could afford, he
finished off stating:
So, it’s obvious that the stress test results were mild. But this is not because the
people who do these things are incompetent, or captured by banks, or are weak
intellectually or whatever. There is also the dimension that it would have been
irresponsible to come out with a cap request of 100 billion in such a situation
[a conservative fiscal stance in Europe]. You’re stuck with what you can afford.

A risk expert in a bank agreed:
It’s politically motivated, an exercise like this. They know exactly how severe
the stress will be on the banks. They developed it like that. Those hundreds of
pages of rules, they know approximately what the outcome will be. They know
perfectly, with the exercise they drafted now, they know that is the message
they want to be spreading. And they do so in everyone’s best interest.

As such, the message was clear from the beginning: the stress test would have to
say banks overall were healthy. Indicators have important performative functions,
they can become real in their consequences. If the ECB would come out with the
message that banks were unhealthy, financial markets would have reacted this, only
aggravating the situation. As such, the design of an indicator does pre-emptively
need to take this performativity into consideration, especially when making results
public.
We confronted respondents with this. If the results were decided on from the beginning, why did we need such an elaborate exercise? Here the notion of credibility
came up a lot. A consultant phrased this well:
The ECB needed to show that they really knew what was going on in the
banks. They needed to take a deep dive. And they needed to set common
ground rules for all the banks. We saw this in the early CEBS exercise. It was
worth nothing, and nobody believed it. Banks were still all doing whatever
they wanted with all the national discretions. It said the banks were all fine,
and then after publication we saw banks failing. That’s why the ECB needed
this elaborate rule book for banks to follow.

13

how a regulatory indicator is made: lessons learned
This shows that in order to be a credible indicator, commensuration plays an
important role. Supervisors cannot just produce a list of numbers, and hope that the
wider public will believe them. These numbers need to be made credible through
processes of commensuration.

5

how a regulatory indicator is made: lessons
learned

The production and use of policy indicators in global governance is increasing
rapidly. Indicators have the unique power to simplify policy issues and rank performances according to a simple numerical scale. As such, they have important
regulatory effects, even when they lack any legal mandate. In order to make a regulatory indicator, different (national) systems need to be commensurated, i.e. be
made comparable according to a common metric. Despite a burgeoning literature,
little empirical work has been done to further our understanding of the social and
political processes through which these indicators are made, and units are commensurated (Davis et al., 2012; Huault & Rainelli-Weiss, 2011; Peeters & Verschraegen,
2013). As such, we conducted a case-study of the European Central Bank (ECB)
stress test, interviewing people at the ECB, consulting firms and Belgian banks.
Where it is often assumed that regulators have a blind preference for commensuration, and standardisation at any cost (Gorur, 2016; Scott, 1998), we show how
regulators allow ‘incommensurable’ categories to exist due to largely unrecognised
regulatory benefits.
This work draws on and contributes to the analytic tradition of quantification
and governance by numbers, as developed by Desrosières (1998), Power (2003), and
Rose (1991), and more closely to literature on commensuration (Espeland & Stevens,
1998; Kolk, Levy, & Pinkse, 2008). At the same time, it is located in relation to STS
accounts, such as ANT and Callons’ sociology of translations (Bijker & Law, 1992;
Callon, 1984; Latour, 1987; Latour & Woolgar, 1979). What we add to this literature
is an in-depth empirical understanding of how commensuration is done in practice,
and why, giving us a better understanding of where the numbers we use come
from. The bulk of the literature so far focusses on either how commensuration can
be achieved technically, or why it is problematic and should be avoided. In this
paper we use Callon’s (1984) framework of translations to unpack commensuration
as a multi-faceted process. This gives us a more detailed notion of the motives
underlying the commensuration process, as well as its benefits and drawbacks.
For starters, The results of the ECB stress test were seen as ‘mild’ and biased
in favour of banks (Cecchetti & Schoenholtz, 2016). In both public and academic
debate, regulation is seen to be routinely ‘captured’ and manipulated to serve the
interest of regulated entities (Dal Bo, 2006; Etzioni, 2009). However, we find that
regulatory capture proves to be difficult where interests of the regulated sector lie so
far apart, and the sector sees itself as incommensurable. Additionally, we find that
although regulators could have made a more ‘game-proof’ indicator, their choice to
abstain from doing so did not result from industry pressure but was a conscious
choice. This adds an important nuance to theories that use regulatory capture to
explain regulatory outcomes and designs (such as Bunea, 2013; Hanegraaff et al.,
2016; Klüver, 2013; Lowery, 2013; Woll, 2009).
Secondly, we challenge the idea that some things ‘are’ more commensurable
than others. Banks across Europe are not automatically comparable, they need to
be made so. This is often overlooked in policy fields like the financial sector, where

14

how a regulatory indicator is made: lessons learned
quantification is taken for granted. Our findings emphasise that commensurating
systems is a socio-political construction that requires a lot of effort. In this vein, we
argue claims of incommensurables can be made, and should be heard, in all policy
fields. Allowing political actors to make claims of incommensurability, is a way to
emancipate them and give them a critical voice. As such this argument ties into
critiques of instrumental reason (for instance, see Smulewicz-Zucker, 2017).
Moreover, we find that commensuration can contribute to credibility. A large
part of the credibility of the stress test results from the extensive commensuration
efforts, as proof that the ECB is assessing European banks on a Level Playing Field,
subjecting them to extensive uniform rules. As a key policy indicator, it was imperative that the stress test was taken seriously by market participants. If the ECB
would have published a list of banks’ health that was not taken seriously by the
wider public, this could have aggravated the crisis.
Finally, however, we find that banks are still treated as incommensurable to some
extent. The ECB does not assess banks’ assets according to standardised models.
Rather, banks are allowed to use internal models for calculation. This may seem as
if regulators are giving banks free play to game the indicator, and make their results
look as good as possible. However, this choice for incommensurability is informed
by other regulatory benefits, such as shared accountability, information access, and
improved internal risk management capacity. Although literature usually promotes
the design of game-proof indicators (Bevan & Hood, 2006; Hood & Peters, 2004;
Politt & Talbot, 2004; Smith, 1995), we argue that allowing room for gaming can
have regulatory benefits that have largely gone unrecognised.
This ties into Barry’s ( 2012) notion of knowledge controversies in transnational
governance. Regulators shy away from establishing an extensive transnational consensus on how risk should be understood and calculated. On the one hand, they
are apprehensive of bearing the responsibility of establishing a standard model of
measuring risk. On the other, they seem to believe that knowledge controversies,
to a certain extent, allow for innovation, as they maintain a continuous reconsideration of how to understand and measure risk. This goes to show that technological
instruments, such as the stress test, play a critical part in developing regulatory
spaces (as also argued in Barry, 2001). This non-instrumentalised conception of
knowledge is also reminiscent of Habermas’ (1984) notion of communicative rationality as an alternative to instrumental rationality. The former focusses more on
increasing understanding through open communication, while the latter is more
strategic and results-oriented. Processes of commensuration tie in closely with instrumental rationality; as they both aim to manipulate the world in order to control
it. Following this, indicators can act as a standardising instrument for control and
domination (Marcuse, 1941). Treating banks as incommensurables then reconceives
knowledge making as an ongoing exchange among critical equals, rather than a
fixed outcome of a so-called rational process imposed by dominant actors. Allowing incommensurability establishes discursive conditions that offer a more critical
and understanding-oriented space for the regulatory exchange. Rather than trying
to merely measure and control risk by imposing ‘rational’ knowledge, regulators
here make a more critical attempt to understand risk. Recognising banks as incommensurables thus marks a noticeable shift from an instrumental to a more critical
epistemology in financial regulation.

15

notes

6

16

notes
1. According to respondents, Daniele Nouy, the chair of the Supervisory Board
at the ECB, made this statement while announcing the stress test.
2. And when you hear experts talking about this it often seems as if there is as
much at stake.
3. Two respondents at the ECB did not want our conversation to be recorded,
but we were allowed to take notes, which we subjected to the same coding as
the transcribed interviews.
4. For more on the SSM see the website of the ECB:
https://www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu/about/thessm/html/index.en.html.
5. To be sure, the ECB is quite strict when it comes to granting exceptions. In
discussions the ECB does often still have the upper hand and can force banks
to comply with the results they projected.

references

7

references
• Ackerman, F., & Heinzerling, L. (2004). Priceless: On Knowing the Price
of Everything and the Value of Nothing.
New York: The New Press.
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.330.7499.1091
• Barry, A. (2001). Political Machines : Governing a Technological Society. London:
Bloomsbury Academic. https://doi.org/10.5040/9781474213110
• Barry, A. (2012).
Political situations:
knowledge controversies
in transnational governance.
Critical Policy Studies, 6(3), 324–336.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19460171.2012.699234
• Baxter, L. G. (2011). Capture in Financial Regulation: Can We Channel It toward the Common Good. Cornell Journal of Law and Public Policy, 211(January),
175–200.
• Bevan, G., & Hood, C. (2006). What’s measured is what matters: Targets and
gaming in the English public health care system. Public Administration, 84(3),
517–538. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9299.2006.00600.x
• Bijker, W. E., & Law, J. (1992). Shaping technology/building society : studies in
sociotechnical change. Massachusetts: MIT Press.
• Bruno, I., Jacquot, S., & Mandin, L. (2006). Europeanization through its instrumentation: benchmarking, mainstreaming and the open method of coordination . . . toolbox or Pandora’s box? Journal of European Public Policy,
13(4), 519–536. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501760600693895
• Bunea, A. (2013). Issues, preferences and ties: determinants of interest groups’
preference attainment in the EU environmental policy. Journal of European
Public Policy, 20(4), 552–570. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2012.726467
• Callon, M. (1984). Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St Brieuc Bay. The Sociological Review,
32(1_suppl), 196-233. https://doi.org/10/1111/j.1467-954X.1984.tb00113.x
• Cecchetti, S. G., & Schoenholtz, K. L. (2016). Are European Stress Tests Stressful Enough? Moneyandbanking.Com.
• Dal Bo, E. (2006). Regulatory Capture: A Review. Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 22(2), 203–225. https://doi.org/10.1093/oxrep/grj013
• Davis, K. E., Kingsbury, B., & Merry, S. E. (2012). Indicators as a Technology
of Global Governance. Law & Society Review, 46(1), 71–104.
• De Bruyckere, V., Gerhardt, M., Schepens, G., & Vander Vennet, R. (2013).
Bank/sovereign risk spillovers in the European
debt crisis.
Journal of Banking & Finance, 37(12), 4793–4809.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.JBANKFIN.2013.08.012
• Desrosières, A. (1998). The politics of large numbers : a history of statistical reasoning. Harvard University Press.
• EBA. (2014). Results - European Banking Authority. Retrieved February
27, 2018, from https://www.eba.europa.eu/risk-analysis-and-data/eu-widestress-testing/2014/results
• Espeland, W. N., & Sauder, M. (2007). Rankings and Reactivity: How Public
Measures Recreate Social Worlds. American Journal of Sociology, 113(1), 1–40.
https://doi.org/10.1086/517897
• Espeland, W. N., & Stevens, M. L. (1998). Commensuration as a social process.
Annual Review of Sociology, 24, 313–43.

17

references
• Etzioni, A. (2009). The Capture Theory of Regulations—Revisited. Society,
46(4), 319–323. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12115-009-9228-3
• Gorur, R. (2016a). Seeing like PISA: A cautionary tale about the performativity of international assessments. European Educational Research Journal, 15(5),
598–616. https://doi.org/10.1177/1474904116658299
• Gorur, R. (2016b). Seeing like PISA: A cautionary tale about the performativity of international assessments. European Educational Research Journal.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1474904116658299
• Grabosky, P., & Braithwaite, J. (1986). Of Manners Gentle - Enforcement strategies
of Australian business regulatory agencies. Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
• Habermas, J. (1984). The theory of communicative action, volume one: Reason and the rationalization of society. Boston: Beacon Press. Retrieved from
http://www.dphu.org/uploads/attachements/books/books_2795_0.pdf
• Habermas, J. (1990). Moral consciousness and communicative action. MIT Press.
• Habermas, J., & Derrida, J. (2003). February 15, or What Binds Europeans Together: A Plea for a Common Foreign Policy, Beginning in the Core of Europe.
Constellations, 10(3), 291–297. https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8675.00333
• Hacking, I. (1990). The taming of chance. Cambridge Univeristy Press.
• Hanegraaff, M., Beyers, J., & De Bruycker, I. (2016). Balancing inside
and outside lobbying: The political strategies of lobbyists at global diplomatic conferences. European Journal of Political Research, 55(3), 568–588.
https://doi.org/10.1111/1475-6765.12145
• Hood, C., & Peters, G. (2004). The Middle Aging of New Public Management:
Into the Age of Paradox? Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory,
14(3), 267–282. https://doi.org/10.1093/jopart/muh019
• Horkheimer, M., & Adorno, T. W. (1947). Dialektik der Aufklärung: Philosophische Fragmente. Amsterdam: Querido.
• Huault, I., & Rainelli-Weiss, H. (2011).
A Market for Weather
Risk?
Conflicting Metrics, Attempts at Compromise, and Limits to Commensuration.
Organization Studies, 32(10), 1395–1419.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840611421251
• Jasanoff, S. (1986). Risk Management and Political Culture: A Comparative Study
of Science in the Policy Context. (S. Jasanoff, Ed.) (1st ed.). New York: Russel
Sage Foundation.
• Klüver, H. (2013). Lobbying as a collective enterprise: winners and losers of
policy formulation in the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy,
20(1), 59–76. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2012.699661
• Kohler-Koch, B. (1996). Catching up with change: The transformation of
governance in the European Union. Journal of European Public Policy, 3(3),
359–380. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501769608407039
• Kolk, A., Levy, D., & Pinkse, J. (2008). Corporate Responses in an
Emerging Climate Regime: The Institutionalization and Commensuration of Carbon Disclosure. European Accounting Review, 17(4), 719–745.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09638180802489121
• Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: How to follow scientists and engineers through
society. Harvard University Press.
• Latour, B. (1999). On recalling ANT. The Sociological Review, 47(1), 15–25.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-954X.1999.tb03480.x

18

references
• Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (n.d.). Laboratory Life: The Construction of Scientific
Facts. Princeton University Press.
• Law, J. (1999). After Ant: Complexity, Naming and Topology. The
Sociological Review, 47(1_suppl), 1–14.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467954X.1999.tb03479.x
• Lowery, D. (2013). Lobbying influence: Meaning, measurement and missing.
Interest Groups & Advocacy, 2(1), 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1057/iga.2012.20
• Marcuse, H. (1941). Reason and Revolution: Hegel and the rise of social theory.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
• Marlier, E., & Atkinson, A. B. (2010). Indicators of poverty and social exclusion in a global context. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 29(2),285304. https://doi.org/10.1002/pam.20492
• McCarthy, T. (1990). The Critique of Impure Reason. Political Theory, 18(3),
437–469. https://doi.org/10.1177/0090591790018003005
• Mügge, D. (2016).
Studying macroeconomic indicators as powerful ideas.
Journal of European Public Policy, 23(3), 410–427.
https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2015.1115537
• Patterson, M. (1998). Commensuration and theories of value in ecological economics. Ecological Economics, 25(1), 105–125. https://doi.org/10.1016/S09218009(97)00166-3
• Peeters, H., & Verschraegen, G. (2013). Governance by numbers: risico’s
verbonden aan de internationale benchmarking en ranking van pensioensystemen. Beleid En Maatschappij, 40(2), 133–155.
• Peeters, H., Verschraegen, G., & Debels, A. (2014). Commensuration and
policy comparison: How the use of standardized indicators affects the rankings of pension systems. Journal of European Social Policy, 24(1), 19–38.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0958928713511279
• Politt, C., & Talbot, C. (2004). Unbundled Government: A Critical Analysis of the
Global Trend to Agencies. London: Routledge.
• Porter, T. M. (1995). Trust in numbers : the pursuit of objectivity in science and
public life. Princeton University Press.
• Power, M. (2003). Auditing and the production of legitimacy. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 28(4), 379–394. https://doi.org/10.1016/S03613682(01)00047-2
• Rose, N. (1991). Governing by numbers: Figuring out democracy. Accounting, Organizations and Society, 16(7), 673–692. https://doi.org/10.1016/03613682(91)90019-B
• Rottenburg, R., & Merry, S. E. (2015). A world of indicators: The
making of governmental knowledge through quantification.
In R.
Rottenburg, S. E. Merry, S.-J. Park, & J. Mugler (Eds.), The World
of Indicators (pp.
1–33).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781316091265.001
• Scott, J. C. (1998). Seeing like a state : how certain schemes to improve the human
condition have failed. Yale University Press.
• Smith,
P. (1995).
Performance indicators and outcome in
the public sector.
Public Money & Management, 15(4), 13–16.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09540969509387889

19

references
• Smulewicz-Zucker, G. (2017). The Frankfurt School and the Critique of Instrumental Reason. In M. Thopson (Ed.), The Palgrave Handbook of Critical Theory.
Political Philosophy and Public Purpose. (pp. 185–206). New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
• Tervonen-Gonçalves, L. (2012). From averages to best performers: use of
comparisons in identity formation. Critical Policy Studies, 6(3), 304–323.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19460171.2012.717784
• Titcomb, J. (2014).
Eurozone banks rush to fill black hole ahead
of stress tests - Telegraph.
Retrieved February 27, 2018, from
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/banksandfinance/1115
5339/Eurozone-banks-rush-to-fill-black-hole-ahead-of-stress-tests.html
• van Ostaijen, M., & Scholten, P. (2017). The politics of numbers. Framing
intra-EU migrants in the Netherlands. Critical Policy Studies, 11(4), 477–498.
https://doi.org/10.1080/19460171.2016.1224725
• Vickerman, R. (2007). Cost — Benefit Analysis and Large-Scale Infrastructure Projects: State of the Art and Challenges. Environment and Planning B:
Planning and Design, 34(4), 598–610. https://doi.org/10.1068/b32112
• Welsh, J. (2017).
Ranking academics:
toward
itics of academic rankings.
Critical Policy
https://doi.org/10.1080/19460171.2017.1398673

a critical polStudies,
1–21.

• Woll, C. (2009). Who Captures Whom? Trade Policy Lobbying in the
European Union, 268–288. Retrieved from https://hal-sciencespo.archivesouvertes.fr/hal-00972851/
• Woll, C. (2014). The power of in action : bank bailouts in comparison. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press

20

