Data Fabrication in Accounting and Business Studies:
A Legal Approach

F. E. Guerra-Pujol
University of Central Florida
fegp@ucf.edu

Data Fabrication in Accounting and Business Studies:
A Legal Approach

ABSTRACT
The general problem of research fraud by accounting and business researchers has received
significant scholarly attention of late. Most of the descriptive work on data fraud is concerned with
diagnosing the causes of fraudulent and deceptive research practices or with measuring their
extent, while on the normative side, most calls for reform in academic publishing rely largely on
more rigorous data policies and renewed calls for observational awareness. Alas, it remains to be
seen whether such methods of self-regulation will be effective at reducing the incidence of research
fraud. This paper thus proposes a different approach to data fraud, one that is more likely to reduce
the incidence of data fabrication. Specifically, I propose that alleged serial academic fraudsters
like James Hunton be charged with criminal wire fraud. My previous work in this domain explored
the possibility of imposing civil liability for data fraud committed by academic researchers. This
paper, by contrast, will explore the possibility of criminal liability when an author knowingly
fabricates data in his research.
DISCLAIMER
This is a working paper and hence represents research in progress. This paper presents the opinions
of the author and is not meant to represent the positions of the University of Central Florida or of
any of the participants of the Florida Accounting Symposium. Do not cite or circulate without the
author’s permission.
Keywords: Academic Fraud, Hunton, Wire Fraud
JEL Classification: K42, M49
Date: July 23, 2019

I. INTRODUCTION
Although questionable research practices such as p-hacking and post hoc hypothesis testing (or
HARKing) are allegedly quite common in many research fields, including academic accounting
and business studies generally (see, e.g., Butler, et al., 2017), there is some controversy about the
extent of outright data fraud or data fabrication (see, e.g., Martin, 2015). For instance, is the
egregious example of disgraced accounting professor James E. Hunton a rare extreme outlier-one bad apple in an otherwise good barrel of research apples? Or is Dr. Hunton just the tip of a
massive research fraud iceberg--the one academic accountant who was unlucky enough to get
caught?
The general problem of research fraud has received significant scholarly attention of late
(see, e.g., Grienensen and Zhang, 2012). Moreover, according to one scholar (Dennis Tourish),
“the existing level of retractions [in business studies] is likely understate the level of research
misconduct” (see Oransky, 2018). Most of the descriptive work on data fraud in academic
accounting is concerned with diagnosing the causes of fraudulent and deceptive research
practices or with measuring their extent (see, e.g., Bailey, 2015), while on the normative side,
most calls for reform in academic publishing rely largely on more rigorous data policies, such as
those adopted by the Journal of Accounting Research (2014/1016), and on renewed calls for
observational awareness (see, e.g., Stone, 2015). For their part, Tourish and Craig (2018, pp. 1012), propose a plethora recommendations for reducing the incidence of data fraud and data
deception (11 recommendations in all). Alas, their recommendations are addressed solely to
authors, editors, and publishers, as well as to the “broader scientific community.” (Ibid. at p. 12.)
Given the incentive structure of academic publishing (see, e.g., Butler, et al., 2017), it remains to

be seen whether such methods of self-regulation will be effective at reducing the future incidence
of data fraud in such fields as accounting.
This paper thus proposes a different approach to fraudulent research, one that is more
likely to reduce the incidence of data fabrication. With rare exceptions (see, e.g., Guerra-Pujol,
2017), the existing literature on data fraud and data fabrication views these bad practices through
a purely ethical lens (see, e.g., Tourish & Craig, 2018; Bailey, 2015). This paper, by contrast,
will explore the possibility of criminal sanctions against academic researchers who fabricate
data. My previous work in this domain explored the possibility of imposing various forms of tort
and contract liability for data fraud committed by academic researchers. See Guerra-Pujol, 2017.
Building on my previous work, I will explore the possibility of criminal liability when an author
knowingly fabricates research data in a published paper. In a word, the fabrication of data--the
attempt to publish fake data, to be more precise--should be treated as a crime.
The remainder of this normative paper is structured as follows: Section 2 revisits the
recent case of one notorious serial academic fraudster, former accounting professor James
Hunton, and explains why the measures taken by the American Accounting Association (AAA)
and the Journal of Accounting Review (JAR) in response to Professor Hunton’s alleged
misconduct are unlikely to be effective. Section 3 summarizes the federal wire fraud statute, and
Section 4 explains why the wire fraud law is sufficiently broad to include misconduct consisting
of data fabrication, while Sections 5 and 6 explore the application of wire fraud to co-authors and
journal editors and to lesser forms of data fraud, such as p-hacking and other questionable
research practices. Section 7 concludes with a call to action: Hunton should be charged with the
crime of wire fraud.

II. THE CASE OF JAMES HUNTON
To motivate this paper, I will refer to the example of James E. Hunton, a former award-winning
accounting professor whose entire body of work has now been called into question. See Malone,
2014. For a summary of Professor Hunton’s alleged misdeeds, see Horton, et al. (2018, pp. 8-9),
and for a complete compilation of Hunton’s retracted papers, see Meckfessel and Moehrle (2017,
table 2). Professor Hunton’s case is emblematic of most cases of alleged fraudulent academic
research: a few bad apples in a given field are responsible for the lion’s share of retractions in
that field (see, e.g., Dickens & Schneider, 2016).
Should Professor Hunton be charged under the federal wire fraud statute? In summary,
the first sign of trouble in the case of James Hunton was a vague, two-sentence retraction notice
published in the online version of The Accounting Review in late 2012. (The published version of
the retraction notice appears in Hunton & Gold, 2013.) This initial retraction led to an 18-month
investigation by Judith A. Malone, an ethics officer at Bentley University, Professor Hunton’s
home institution before his resignation in December of 2012.1 Malone uncovered a pattern of
serious research misconduct and concluded (Malone, 2014, p. 5) that “[t]he whole body of Dr.
Hunton’s extensive research … must now be considered suspect.” Based on the findings of
Malone’s investigation, the American Accounting Association retracted an additional 25 papers
published by Professor Hunton. See AAA, 2015. To date there have been 38 retraction notices
issued on research papers published by Hunton as either a sole or co-author. See Meckfessel &
Moehrle, 2017, table 2.

1

At the time of his resignation, Professor Hunton cited “family and health reasons.” See Healy,
2012.

The American Accounting Association also took additional actions to prevent future
cases of research fraud. It established a Publication Ethics Task Force and assigned it the
responsibility of developing new standards and policies governing plagiarism, data sharing, and
the fabrication of data. In addition, some top-tier accounting journals now require additional
assurances and disclosures from its authors. By way of example, the editors of the Journal of
Accounting Research adopted and then updated a “data and code sharing policy,” although this
policy does not require authors to make their data publicly available. See JAR, 2014/2016.
How effective are these feeble methods likely to be? It remains to be seen whether such
forms of self-regulation will stem the research fraud tide. To the extent these symbolic or
spineless reforms rely on ethical constraints and self-policing, I am highly skeptical of their
effectiveness. This paper thus proposes a different approach. In brief, if there is sufficient
evidence to support the conclusion that Hunton submitted fabricated data to various accounting
journals, then Hunton and other alleged serial academic fraudsters should be charged with the
crime of wire fraud.

III. THE FEDERAL WIRE FRAUD STATUTE AND RELATED CRIMES
The federal wire fraud statute (18 US Code, Section 1343, as amended) is exceptionally broad
and “has been invoked to impose criminal penalties upon a staggeringly broad swath of
behavior.”2 The penalties for wire fraud can be severe: a term of imprisonment of up to 20 years,

2

Sorich v. United States, 555 U.S. 1204, 1205 (2009) (Scalia, J., dissenting), quoted in Doyle,
2019, p. 1.

followed by a term of supervised release. In addition, convicted offenders also face the prospect
of fines, orders to make restitution, and forfeitures of their property.3
As an historical aside, wire fraud is closely related to the federal offense of mail fraud (18
US Code, Section 1341, as amended), which proscribes any fraudulent scheme committed with
the use of the U.S. mail or other interstate carriers. The U.S. Congress enacted the first mail
fraud statute in 1872 and then enacted a companion wire fraud statute eighty years later (1952) in
order to extend the prohibitions on mail fraud to newer communications technologies, and courts
have generally held that wire fraud is identical to mail fraud under federal law, except for the
means of communication used.4 Also, in the leading case of McNally v. United States, 483 U.S.
350 (1987), the U.S. Supreme Court held that the mail fraud statute--and, by implication, the
wire fraud statute as well--applies to any act “designed to defraud by representations as to the
past or present, or suggestions and promises as to the future.” 5
In addition, some State criminal codes may also contain specific provisions that are
applicable to acts of wire fraud. By way of example, Section 502(c)(1) of the California Penal
Code makes it unlawful for any person to “[k]nowingly access[] and without permission alter[],
damage[], delete[], destroy[], or otherwise use[] any data, computer, computer system, or
computer network in order to either devise or execute any scheme or artifice to defraud, deceive,
or extort, or wrongfully control or obtain money, property, or data.”6 The language of the federal

3

The text of the federal wire fraud statute is set forth in the Appendix to this paper. For an
excellent overview of the federal wire and mail fraud statutes as well as the leading cases, see
Doyle, 2019.
4 See, e.g., United States v. Frey, 42 F.3d 795 (3d Cir. 1994).
5 McNally, 483 U.S. at p. 357, quoting Durland v. United States, 161 U. S. 306, 313 (1896).
6 Section 502 of the California Penal Code is available at https://codes.findlaw.com/ca/penalcode/pen-sect-502.html (last visited on July 23, 2019).

wire fraud statute, by contrast, is more general and broad, so the focus of the remainder of this
paper will be on the federal crime of wire fraud.

IV. DATA FABRICATION AS CRIMINAL WIRE FRAUD
It is generally up to State and federal prosecutors to decide what charges to bring and how to
pursue each case; when prosecutors decline to a bring a criminal case, this exercise of authority
is referred to as “prosecutorial discretion” (see, e.g., Bibas 2010; Melilli, 1992). The practice of
prosecutorial discretion, however, poses an intriguing question in the context of research fraud.
Although federal prosecutors have charged researchers for making false statements on federal
research grant applications, 7 they have yet to charge serial academic fraudsters like James
Hunton or Diederik Stapel with wire fraud. Why not? This paper will invite federal prosecutors
to reconsider their excerise of prosecutorial discretion in the domain of research fraud, for it is
beyond question that the outright fabrication of data--like the research misconduct that Hunton is
alleged to have committed--not only calls into question the integrity of academic accounting; a
strong case can also be made that fraudulent research constitutes the crime of wire fraud.
In summary, wire fraud is a criminal offense under federal law. Wire fraud involves any
scheme to defraud another person that uses electronic communications, either across State lines
or internationally. Moreover, although the federal wire fraud statute specifically mentions wire,
radio, and television communications, courts and prosecutors have interpreted the scope of the

7

At least one scientific researcher, Doug Pyou Han, who was affiliated with Iowa State
University, was charged in 2014 by federal prosecutors with making false statements to procure
a research grant from the National Institutes of Health (see Dyer, 2014). Dr. Han pled guilty to
making false statements and was sentenced to 57 months in federal prison on July 1, 2015. See
USAO, 2015. Note that the crime of making false statements (18 US Code, Section 1001) is a
different crime than wire fraud (18 US Code, Section 1343). This paper will focus on wire fraud.

wire fraud statute broadly to includes any scheme to defraud involving computers and the
Internet (see, e.g., Rodriguez, 2015). Also, since a key element in criminal wire fraud cases is the
means by which fraudulent statements are transmitted, the crime of wire fraud includes almost
any type of fraudulent scheme, including bank fraud, tax fraud, and insurance fraud. See Doyle,
2019, pp. 20-28.
Specifically, in the context of fraudulent academic research, the prosecution would have
to prove the following legal elements beyond a reasonable doubt in order to obtain a conviction
for wire fraud:
(1) Scheme to obtain something of value: the researcher must be part of a scheme to
defraud another person, such as by obtaining money or something else of value
through false pretenses;
(2) Intent: the researcher must have acted knowingly or with the intent to defraud when
he use the fake data;
(3) Materiality: the researcher must have made false representations that were material
to his scheme; and
(4) Transmission: the researcher must have transmitted a material misrepresentation or
misstatement (i.e. his fabricated data) by wire, radio, or television communications in
interstate or foreign commerce.8
All four of these essential elements could potentially be met in cases involving data
fabrication and other forms of research fraud: scheme to obtain something of value, intent,
materiality, and transmission. As an aside, I will consider separately below the problem of

8

This element is the “jurisdiction hook” of the wire fraud statute, i.e. what authorizes the
Congress to make wire fraud a federal crime.

“innocent” co-authors and journal editors under the wire fraud statute (Section V; cf. McCook,
2018) and whether the wire fraud law applies to lesser but more common forms of research
fraud, such as p-hacking, HARKing, self-plagiarism etc. (Section VI).
Scheme to obtain something of value. The first legal element requires a scheme to defraud
in order to obtain money or “something of value.” As a result, this element would be met in cases
of fabricated research data only if the researcher were attempting to obtain a research grant, a
scholarly publication, or something else of value. Courts, however, have ruled that the
“something of value” (whatever it is) must have value to victim of the scheme, 9 so it is an open
question whether a research publication, standing alone, would count as something of value
under the wire fraud statute. Nevertheless, one could argue that the direct victims of fabricated
data--in particular, journals and innocent co-authors--have a property interest in their
publications. Also, although academic authors do not generally receive direct compensation for
their scholarly publications, their academic careers often depend on their ability to publish in
respected academic journals.
Intent to defraud. The second element, intent, is often referred to as scienter in the case
law. How does one prove intent? Is the use of fake data, by itself, sufficient to infer a “intent to
defraud” one’s co-authors, journal editors, and the larger academic community? If so, a
prosecutor would only have to prove that a researcher’s data was fabricated and that the
researcher knew that the data was fake or doctored in some significant way. To the extent the
researcher’s co-authors and journal editors are the direct victims of his research fraud, the
scienter requirement would most likely protect such innocent co-authors and journal editors from

9

See, e.g., Cleveland v. United States, 531 U.S. 12 (2000).

a wire fraud prosecution. (I will explore the possibility of criminal liability of co-authors and
journal editors for wire fraud in Section V below.)
Materiality. Courts have read a materiality requirement into the federal mail and wire
fraud statutes.10 That said, who can doubt whether the use of fabricated data would constitute a
material misrepresentation for purpose of proving wire fraud, since the integrity of a researcher’s
data is always going to be material to the decision whether to publish the author’s work? At the
same time, it is an open question whether lesser forms of data fraud such as p-hacking would
constitute a material misrepresentation. (I will explore the possibility of criminal liability for
lesser forms of research fraud or so-called “questionable research practices” in Section VI
below.)
Transmission. Given that most scholarly journals utilize electronic submission systems,
the fourth essential element of wire fraud would be the easiest to meet in the context of research
fraud. Furthermore, it’s worth noting that a person may be found guilty of wire fraud even if he
did not personally send a fraudulent transmission. The prosecution must only prove that the
defendant either (i) intended to defraud someone or (ii) acted with knowledge that wire
communications were being used to transmit fraudulent representations. In the leading case of
Pereira v. United States, 347 U.S. 1 (1954), for example, the U.S. Supreme Court held that, even
if a defendant did not intend the specific transmission, he could still be convicted of wire fraud if
the transmission was reasonably foreseeable “in the ordinary course of business.”11

10
11

See, e.g., Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1 (1999).
Pereira, 347 U.S. at p. 8.

V. CRIMINAL LIABILITY OF CO-AUTHORS AND EDITORS?
[This section will explore the potential liability of innocent co-authors and journal editors under
the wire fraud statute and will be added at a later date, but before the Florida Accounting
Symposium scheduled for September 13-14, 2019 at the University of Florida, Warrington
College of Business.]

VI. CRIMINAL LIABILITY FOR LESSER FORMS OF DATA FRAUD?
[This section will explore whether the wire fraud statute could apply to lessor forms of data fraud
and will be added at a later date, but before the Florida Accounting Symposium referred to
above.]

VII. CONCLUSION
Some business and accounting journals have adopted new and more rigorous data policies, such
as those recently adopted by the Journal of Accounting (Editors of JAR, 2014/2016). Similarly,
some accounting scholars have called for new “contemplative practices” and “observational
awareness” (Stone, 2015), while others have called for the adoption of clear language, such as
use of the phrase “deceptive research practices” in place of “questionable research practices”
(Tourish & Craig, 2018, p. 12). I, however, remain skeptical of the efficacy of such feeble
measures. Mere words, contemplation, and data policies that do not call for the disclosure of data
will be ineffective in reducing the incidence of research fraud given the perverse “publish or
perish” incentive structure of academia. Instead, serial academic fraudsters like James Hunton
and others should be prosecuted for wire fraud to the full extent of the law.

APPENDIX
The relevant text of the federal wire fraud statute (18 US Code, Section 1343, as amended)
states: “Whoever, having devised or intending to devise any scheme or artifice to defraud, or for
obtaining money or property by means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or
promises, transmits or causes to be transmitted by means of wire, radio, or television
communication in interstate or foreign commerce, any writings, signs, signals, pictures, or
sounds for the purpose of executing such scheme or artifice, shall be fined under this title or
imprisoned not more than 20 years, or both. If the violation occurs in relation to, or involving
any benefit authorized, transported, transmitted, transferred, disbursed, or paid in connection
with, a presidentially declared major disaster or emergency …, or affects a financial institution,
such person shall be fined not more than $1,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 30 years, or
both.”

REFERENCES
American Accounting Association (AAA). 2015. Retraction of articles related to James E.
Hunton. AAA press release, available at http://aaahq.org/Portals/0/documents/WebsiteFinalListofRetractedArticles-6-25-15.pdf (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Bailey, Charles D. 2015. Psychopathy, academic accountants’ attitudes toward unethical research
practices, and publication success. The Accounting Review, 90(4): 1307-1332.
Bibas, Stephanos. 2010. The need for prosecutorial discretion. Temple Civil and Political Rights
Law Review, 19(2): 369-375.
Butler, Nick, Helen Delaney, and Sverre Spoelstra. 2017. The grey zone: questionable research
practices in the business school. Academy of Management Learning & Education, 16: 94-109.
Doyle, Charles. 2019. Mail and wire fraud: a brief overview of federal criminal law.
Congressional Research Service, CRS Report No. R41930 (Version 8), available at
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R41930.pdf (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Dyer, Owen. 2014. Researcher is arrested for falsifying his results. BMJ 2014, 348: g4249,
available at https://www.bmj.com/content/bmj/348/bmj.g4249.full.pdf (last visited on July 23,
2019).
Dickens, Denise, and Douglas K. Schneider. 2016. Academic research in accounting: a
framework for quality reviews. Current Issues in Auditing, 10(1): A34-A46.
Editors of the Journal of Accounting Research (JAR). 2014/2016. Data and Code Sharing Policy.
Journal of Accounting Research, available at https://research.chicagobooth.edu//media/research/arc/docs/journal/updated-data-policy-forjar.pdf?la=en&hash=CD1D669E679E9649CEA9F89948F616E84989DEE4 (last visited on July
23, 2019).
Guerra-Pujol, F. E. 2017. Legal liability for data fraud. Statistical Journal of the IAOS, 33(3):
755-761.
Healy, Beth. 2012. Bentley professor resigns after his research is retracted. The Boston Globe
(Dec. 12, 2012), available at https://www.bostonglobe.com/business/2012/12/21/bentleyaccounting-professor-james-hunton-amid-controversy-over-retractionresigns/y4JtNvlr1SwNnFcpBFcY4J/story.html (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Horton, Joanne, Dhanya Krishnakumar, and Anthony Wood. 2018. Detecting academic fraud in
accounting research: the case of Professor James Hunton. SSRN working paper, available at
https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3164961 (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Grienensen, Michael L. and Minghua Zhang. 2012. A comprehensive survey of retracted articles
from the scholarly literature. PLoS One, 7(10): e44118, available at

https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0044118 (last visited on July
23, 2019).
Hunton, James E., and Anna Gold. 2013. Retraction: a field experiment comparing the outcomes
of three fraud brainstorming procedures: nominal group, round robin, and open discussion. The
Accounting Review, 88(1): 357-357, available at https://aaajournals.org/doi/abs/10.2308/accr10326 (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Malone, Judith A. 2014. Report of Judith A. Malone, Bentley University ethics officer,
concerning Dr. James E. Hunton. Bentley University, available at
https://aaajournals.org/doi/suppl/10.2308/accr10435/suppl_file/bentley+report+republish+permission.pdf (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Martin, Alan. 2015. The elephant in the lab: how much science is fabricated? Alphr, available at
http://www.alphr.com /science/1001618/the-elephant-in-the-lab-how-much-science -is-fabricated
(last visited on July 23, 2019).
Klinefeldt, Nicholas A. 2015. Former Iowa State researcher pleads guilty to making false
statements. DOJ press release, available at https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/usaosdia/legacy/2015/02/25/Han%20-%20Plea%202-%2025-15.pdf (last visited on July 23, 2019).
McCook, Allison. 2018. Fallout for co-authors. Science, 362(6413): 394-395.
Meckfessel, Michele, and Stephen Moehrle. 2017. Self-regulation of the academic accounting
literature: the case of James Hunton. Research in Accounting Regulation, 29(1): pp. 10-18.
Melilli, Kenneth J. 1992. Prosecutorial discretion in an adversary system. BYU Law Review,
1992(3): 669-704.
Oransky, Ivan. 2018. Legal threats, opacity, and deceptive research practices: a look at more than
100 retractions in business and management. Retraction Watch (interview of Dennis Tourish
dated November 23, 2018), available at https://retractionwatch.com/2018/11/23/legal-threatsopacity-and-deceptive-research-practices-a-look-at-more-than-100-retractions-in-business-andmanagement/ (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Rodriguez, Diego. 2015. Nine people charged in largest known computer hacking and securities
fraud scheme. DOJ press release, available at: https://www.fbi.gov/contact-us/fieldoffices/newyork/news/press-releases/nine-people-charged-in-largest-known-computer-hackingand-securities-fraud-scheme (last visited on July 23, 2019).
Stone, Dan N. 2015. Post-Hunton: reclaiming our integrity and literature. Journal of Information
Systems, 29(2): 211-227.
Tourish, Dennis, and Russell Craig. 2018. Research misconduct in business and management
studies: causes, consequences, and possible remedies. Journal of Management Inquiry, available

at https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/pdf/10.1177/1056492618792621 (last visited on July 23,
2019).
Word count: 3919 words, excluding footnotes

