Socioeconomic variation in child educational and socioeconomic attainment after parental
death

Kieron Barclay† 1,2,3 and Martin Hällsten‡ 3
February 21, 2020

Abstract
In this study we use Swedish population register data to examine whether parental death
differentially affects educational and occupational attainment according to the socioeconomic status
of the parent who dies, and the socioeconomic status of the surviving parent and extended kin. That
is, we examine whether parental death has an equalizing or exacerbating effect on offspring
socioeconomic attainment, and also whether the socioeconomic status of the rest of the family plays
a meaningful role in compensating for parental death. Using data on cohorts born 1973 to 1982 we
examine five different outcomes, which are grade point average (GPA) at age 16 in high school, the
transition from lower to upper-secondary education, the transition to tertiary education, overall
educational attainment, and occupational status by age 30. We match families based upon
antemortem parental socioeconomic trajectories. Overall, we find mixed results in our betweenfamily regression analyses adjusting for observables, with inconsistent evidence suggesting that
losing a parent with very high socioeconomic resources is worse, and some evidence for a protective
effect if the socioeconomic resources of the surviving parent and extended family members are at the
top of the distribution. Using sibling fixed effects models that adjust for unobservable factors shared
within the family, we see zero results for moderation by parents’ occupations, but find consistent
evidence that it is worse to lose a father at a younger age if grandparents have higher ranked
occupations. We discuss possible interpretations of our findings.

†

barclay@demogr.mpg.de
martin.hallsten@sociology.su.se
1
Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research
2
Department of Social Policy, London School of Economics and Political Science
3
Department of Sociology, Stockholm University
‡

1

Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a surge of interest in the potential compensatory role that
socioeconomic resources can play in moderating the negative effects of adverse life events (Erola
and Kilpi-Jakonen, 2017), such as parental divorce or parental death. The potential role of
socioeconomic resources in compensating for disadvantage is only one part of a much broader
research landscape concerning processes of social mobility and social stratification. Socioeconomic
resources in the family of origin are demonstrably extremely important for shaping the life course
trajectories that individuals follow, including the type and level of education that individuals will
achieve (Breen, 2010; Triventi, 2011), the occupations and social class they will settle into in
adulthood (Erikson and Goldthorpe, 1992; Jonsson et al. 2009; Bloome 2017), as well as their longterm health and lifespan (Elo and Preston, 1992). Studying the potential moderating role of
socioeconomic status in response to adverse life events has the potential to be particularly insightful
because it allows us to understand whether and how levels of resources enable different social groups
to respond to acute setbacks differently, but also whether the transmission of advantage is dependent
on exposure to parental resources, or if this transmission takes other forms.

Producing clear answers about how parental socioeconomic resources may or may not compensate
for adverse experiences can be difficult due to complex endogenous processes related to who
experiences an adverse event, and how they are able to respond to it. Previous research has
consistently and extensively documented the clear negative main effect of parental loss, through
either divorce or death, on the attainment of children (for reviews see McLanahan and Percheski
2008; McLanahan et al., 2013). We therefore focus upon a related question that has received much
less attention in the literature, namely the moderating role of socioeconomic status in this process.
We ask: (1) is it worse to lose a parent with high levels of socioeconomic resources than low levels
of socioeconomic resources; and (2) do the socioeconomic resources of your surviving family
members, including extended kin, play any meaningful role in moderating the negative effect of
parental loss on achievement and attainment. Only a handful of studies have previously examined
2

socioeconomic variation in child outcomes following parental divorce (e.g. Biblarz and Raftery,
1993; Bernardi and Radl, 2014; Mandemakers and Kalmijn, 2014; Grätz, 2015), and even fewer
studies have examined this in relation to parental death (Kalil et al., 2016; Prix and Erola, 2017,
Kailaheimo-Lönnqvist and Erola, 2020).

In this study, we extend previous research on SES differentials in the effects of parental death on
offspring attainment in several ways. First, we separately examine the effects of maternal death
versus paternal death. Previous research (except Kailaheimo-Lönnqvist and Erola, 2020) has focused
on paternal death, presumably due to small cell sizes, but we are not constrained by such issues when
using the Swedish population data. Furthermore, the effects of maternal death might differ in
meaningful ways from the death of the father, with subsequent consequences for how socioeconomic
status is able to compensate for parental loss or not (Adda, Björklund and Holmlund, 2011). We also
examine a wide range of different outcomes, including high school GPA, dichotomous outcomes
related to educational transitions, as well as long-term educational attainment and occupational status
by age 30. Given that previous research has separately examined a diverse group of outcome
measures ranging from reading and mathematics test scores during adolescence, to educational
transitions, to overall attainment, with limited comparison across outcomes, our study will shed light
on whether the choice of outcome variable has any meaningful effect on the measurement of loss and
compensation processes. This is important because parental death may have acute effects that are
distinct from long-term effects. We further extend this research by examining the potential
compensating role of extended kin, such as aunts, uncles, and grandparents. Finally, we also extend
research on this topic by using a sophisticated research design, implementing a matching-based
analysis to identify the correct time-point for measuring SES in order to reduce confounding from
factors jointly related to parental SES, parental death, as well as child attainment. This is a particular
problem in previous research, and may explain the inconsistencies previously documented in SES
differences in loss and compensation processes. Finally, we contrast the results from these between-

3

family analyses with estimates from a sibling fixed effects estimator that has its own strengths
conditional on a set of assumptions.

Previous Research on Socioeconomic Variation in Child Outcomes Following Parental Loss
Recent years have seen the emergence of a growing body of research that attempts to understand the
extent to which the effects of parental loss vary by parental SES. Given that the role of parental SES
in both loss and compensation processes is likely to vary according to the national welfare context as
well as localised cultural dynamics in regards to how family and kin systems work (Bernardi and
Boertien, 2017), we make efforts to note the countries where this previous research has been
conducted. To our knowledge, two studies have examined socioeconomic variation in child
outcomes following parental death. Kalil et al. (2016), applying a sibling fixed effects approach to
data from Norway to study child educational attainment, found that the marginal effect of losing a
father is greater at higher levels of paternal education, while the educational level of the surviving
mother did not exert a statistically significant effect. Prix and Erola (2017), examining the effects of
parental death in Finland, found that high levels of education amongst mothers did successfully
compensate for the death of the father for educational transitions to upper-secondary education and
tertiary vocational education, but not for the transition to university education. KailaheimoLönnqvist and Erola (2020) use sibling fixed effects models and found that parental death for
younger children was associated with lower transitions into university, but that the influence of
parental death did not vary by family background.

The literature examining socioeconomic variation in response to parental loss from divorce is much
larger, but has produced mixed findings. Most recent research examining compensation differences
in response to parental divorce has found that the children of parents with high levels of education or
socioeconomic resources do not suffer negative effects, while those whose parents have lower
socioeconomic resources do. This has been documented using data from Germany (Grätz, 2015), the
UK (Mandemakers and Kalmijn, 2014), the Netherlands (Kalmijn, 2015), and Italy (Albertini and
4

Dronkers, 2009). Other research, however, has documented an ‘equalizing effect’ of parental
separation, where children of highly educated or high SES parent suffer more from parental divorce.
For example, Bernardi and Radl (2014), using data on 14 countries (not including Sweden) from the
Gender and Generations Survey and examining likelihood of attaining a tertiary degree as the
outcome, found that children of higher educated parents suffer relatively less from divorce in
countries with academic streaming and school stratification, but not in countries with a
comprehensive education system, presumably because there is no compensatory effect of the school
environment in the latter. An equalizing effect of parental divorce has also been reported for Finland
(Erola and Jalovaara, 2017), and the United States (Biblarz and Raftery, 1993; McLanahan and
Sandefur, 1994; Martin, 2012). However, we hesitate to generalize the findings from the literature
focusing on parental loss from divorce to parental loss from death given the important differences
between these two types of events.

Theoretical Explanations and Socioeconomic Variation
An examination of socioeconomic variation in child outcomes following parental death requires an
engagement with several related literatures. One is the literature on how family structure affects child
outcomes. Parental death leaves the surviving parent as a single parent, and may induce a period
where family life is characterised by instability and complexity as the surviving parent tries to cope
alone, or rebuild his or her life with a new partner who may or may not bring stepchildren into the
new household. The empirical literature shows that family structure, instability, and complexity each
exert an independent effect on child outcomes (Thomson, Hanson and McLanahan 1994; Thomson
and McLanahan 2012; Jackson, Kiernan and McLanahan 2017). A second important literature is the
direct effect of grief attributable to parental loss on child outcomes, since studies have shown that
parental loss increases the risk of depression, self-harm, and suicide for the child (Rostila and
Saarela, 2011; Berg et al., 2016; Rostila et al., 2016), as well as trauma for the surviving parents
(Shor et al., 2012). Finally, questions about how child outcomes are related to the education and
socioeconomic status of the deceased and surviving parents speaks directly to the literature on the
5

transmission of human capital from parents to children (Laband and Lentz, 1983; Jonsson et al.,
2009; Holmlund, Lindahl and Plug, 2011). Although each of these three perspectives are important
for explaining the direct effect of parental loss on child outcomes, each is also relevant for
understanding socioeconomic variation in response to parental loss.

Family Structure, Instability, and Complexity
Since the 1980s a large literature has grown demonstrating that family structure is related to child
outcomes, and this has been observed consistently across a wide variety of institutional contexts
(Chapple, 2009; Låftman, 2010). The presence or absence of a partner, as well as other dimensions
of household composition, condition the time and money that parents can direct to their children
(Thomson, Hanson and McLanahan, 1994; McLanahan and Percheski, 2008). Research suggests that
lower levels of economic resources are the key factor behind the disadvantage of children with single
mothers, though dilution of parental time and attention also play an important role (Thomson,
Hanson and McLanahan, 1994). In recent years scholars have shown that family instability, meaning
regular changes to family structure, has an independent negative effect on child outcomes, and that
greater family complexity also reduces the educational attainment of children (McLanahan and
Percheski, 2008). Family instability means that children face greater competition from factors such
as work, partner search, and stepsiblings for the time and resources that parents might otherwise have
devoted to them. We argue that parental death can be seen as a trigger for family instability and
complexity as the bereaved parent attempts to put his or her life back together. This perspective is
complicated by the possibility that parental attention diverted towards work and partner search may
be detrimental for the children in the short-term, but beneficial in the long-term if it results in a
greater parental happiness.

An important nuance found in the family structure literature is the degree to which parental
education can moderate the negative effects of non-optimal family structure. This literature has
consistently shown that higher levels of maternal education can compensate for single motherhood
6

(Beck et al., 2010; Augustine, 2014). Studies suggest that the protective effects of higher levels of
maternal education can be attributed to parenting style, where highly educated mothers are better
able to stimulate the development of human capital in their children than are mothers with lower
levels of education (Kalil, Ryan and Corey, 2012). This is important for understanding potential
socioeconomic variation in child outcomes following parental death, as a surviving parent with high
levels of education or socioeconomic status should be able to limit the negative impacts of parental
death on his or her children, though this may vary according to whether the surviving parent is the
mother or the father. Since parental death is more common amongst families that already experience
multidimensional forms of disadvantage, this should lead to wider socioeconomic disparities in a
macro-perspective. In this study we also examine whether the education and socioeconomic status of
extended kin such as aunts, uncles, and grandparents have a compensating effect against parental
death, reducing the negative impacts on child educational and socioeconomic attainment.

Trauma and Grief
The trauma and upheaval caused by parental death may have both short- and long-term consequences
for both the child and the surviving parent. In Sweden parental death has been shown to have a
negative effect on school grades and increase the risk of dropping out of school (Berg et al., 2014).
Furthermore, parental death is associated with an increased risk of depression and self-harm,
differential fertility (Dahlberg, 2018), and even an increased risk of mortality for the children
(Rostila and Saarela, 2011; Berg et al. 2016; Rostila et al., 2016). The death of a partner is naturally
also a critical event for the surviving parent, who is also subject to an increased risk of depression
and mortality (Umberson, Wortman and Kessler, 1992; Shor et al., 2012). It is very possible that part
of the negative effect of parental death on child outcomes flows through the effect on the surviving
parent, as this traumatic event could lead to changes to parenting style and the relationship with the
child. As a consequence, it is possible that the negative effects of parental loss stemming from grief
overwhelm the potential compensatory socioeconomic resources of surviving family members even
if they are abundant. We might therefore anticipate that if grief is the main mechanism for the effect
7

of parental death on child educational and socioeconomic attainment, the negative effects of parental
death should be neutral in regards to the socioeconomic status and education of the parent who died.
On the other hand it is still possible that the socioeconomic resources of the surviving kin are
important in compensating for that loss, as more highly educated and higher SES kin might be more
likely to understand the kind of support that both the child and the surviving parent would need, and
how to ensure that they received that support.

Intergenerational Human Capital Transmission
Parental death may also affect the educational and socioeconomic attainment of children by
interrupting the intergenerational transmission of human capital from the deceased parent. Parental
death interrupts the transmission of interaction styles that are differentially rewarded by educational
institutions, knowledge about navigating and succeeding in the educational system, and attitudes and
expectations surrounding educational engagement and educational ambition (Bourdieu and Passeron,
1990; Lareau, 2011). Parental death would also interrupt the transmission of specific skills that
facilitate occupational and class reproduction (Jonsson et al., 2009; Adda et al., 2011). Parental
social capital, conceptualised as a network of social ties and the resources available through those
ties, also plays an important role in socioeconomic attainment; social networks of both the parent and
child may moderate the transmission of information about educational opportunities as well as
information about how to take advantage of those opportunities. The interruption of this human
capital transmission suggests that losing a parent with a higher level of education, more money, and
higher status social networks would constitute a greater loss of experience, advice, and future
opportunities for a child than the loss of a parent without those resources (Jonsson and Gähler, 1997).
Likewise, the education, money, and social capital of the surviving parent and extended kin should
play an important role in filling in for the loss of the deceased parent if this mechanism is important,
as the literature on the potential compensatory role of parental education for limiting the negative
impacts of non-optimal family structure has suggested (e.g. Augustine 2014).

8

However, given that the literature also reports null findings, it is worth considering potential
arguments for why socioeconomic variation might be limited.

For example, transmission of

advantage may not be dependent on actual exposure to parents if the deceased parent became an
enduring role model that could be invoked by the surviving family members, if the dying parent had
created a persistent normative environment that was kept intact after his or her death, or if genetic
transmission of underlying advantage plays an important role in educational attainment (Okbay et al.,
2016). Mechanisms such as these would limit the impact of the death itself, and thus also any
socioeconomic variation in the effects of parental death on child outcomes. For example, if the role
model effect of a high SES parent persists, the loss of a high SES parent will not have a larger impact
than losing a lower SES parent. Research on the effects of grandparents on children’s outcomes
suggest that these may be independent of physical exposure to the grandparents since they are not
dependent on actual overlap in generations or on physical proximity (Anderson, Sheppard and
Monden 2018).

Analytical Strategy
A key concern for researchers trying to understand the relative importance of the socioeconomic
resources of the dying and surviving parents is selection. It is very plausible that there is a common
predictor of parental socioeconomic status, parental death, and also the educational and occupational
achievements of the child. For example, underlying parental health, or propensity to engage in risk
behaviors such as smoking, which are clearly linked to the SES and risk of death for the parent,
could also be linked to the child’s educational attainment through socialization processes in the
household, or some underlying genetic component (McLanahan et al., 2013).

In order to address this, some studies use various types of fixed effects methods. While these are
powerful, they also carry specific limitations and risks. First, with individual fixed effects models,
one can only study short-term effects (i.e., a before-after estimator, Amato and Anthony 2014).
Second, with standard sibling fixed effects, what identifies the effect is the age difference between
9

siblings. This means that the difference in children’s age at the time of parental death is perfectly
collinear with children’s birth years. With sibling fixed effects, the effect of parental death will be
confounded with cohort trends that happen to be specific to families experiencing parental death, but
also generic cohort trends.

Another concern is that in order to address compensation or reinforcement, we must rely on observed
parental SES in order to identify the heterogeneous effects. This is an underappreciated problem
because, if one focuses on parental death before the child turns 16, most parents will themselves be
relatively young, and are unlikely to have reached their peak socioeconomic status. As a result, we
are typically only able to observe parental SES at a relatively early point on the parents’ attainment
trajectory, creating a distorted view of their SES. This also denies us the possibility to average
parental characteristics to get closer to their latent or permanent social status (Solon 1992). If a
parent dies, the family will experience income loss, so their SES will be lower in effect. To examine
how children of different SES respond differently to parental death, it becomes a problem that SES
itself is an outcome of parental death. When we assess moderation, we are interested in SES prior to
death (or the parents latent SES), not endogenous postmortem SES. But we will also measure dying
parents at an earlier age meaning that they would not have realized their full SES potential. These
problems may confound the attempts to identify how important the SES of the dying parent is for the
child’s outcomes. Some previous research has noted this problem, for example Prix and Erola
(2017), but their solution was limited to checking for non-linear associations.

This is complicated further by the additional dimension that couples tend to pair off homophilously
(McPherson et al., 2001), and therefore whatever underlying factor was associated with parental
SES, parental death, as well as offspring educational attainment may persist in the household with
the surviving parent. Another concern is that the SES measurement itself is endogenous to parental
death, for example, that the death was preceded by ill health, limiting career and education
investments as well as outcomes. This negative feedback loop where death causes (lower) SES is
10

hard to mitigate. An extreme version of this potential problem is that the poor health of the dying
parent would also limit the SES of the non-dying parent, and cause distress and negative effects for
the whole nuclear family.

Our strategy to address compensation effects is based on three approaches: a) standard betweenfamily regressions with adjustment for observables where we match families based upon parental
socioeconomic trajectories prior to death in order to get rid of endogenous measurement time-points
for SES; b) we look for compensation outside the nuclear family, such as compensation by
grandparents and aunts or uncles; and c) using sibling fixed effects augmented with a correction for
cohort drift, as applied by Kalil et al (2016).

Antemortem Socioeconomic Trajectory Matching
In order to handle endogenous measurement of SES, we use a pre-matching technique, where each
dying parent for a certain year (of death) is matched to non-dying individuals with similar
characteristics. We run this for separate years, and use this information to define the time-point for
SES measurement in the control group. We measure SES in the preceding year both for dying and
non-dying parents. 4 The dependence of SES on age may also cause later dying parents to have
reached higher SES than younger dying parents. Any interaction between SES and parental death
may to some degree be age in disguise. Controlling for age of death is not viable since this is
undefined for the control group. However, our matching strategy allows for explicit control of age of
SES measurement (i.e., for each cluster of matched treated and control cases). Since the matching
procedure secures that treatment and control are balanced in age, controlling for age of measurement
will also not eschew the estimation of the effect of parental death itself. Once we have the SES
measure in place, our standard setup is to estimate the effect of parental death conditional on the SES
of the dying and surviving parent, and then interact parental death with these two types of SES.
4

An alternative would be to use measure SES before or at childbirth. However, this will delimit the sample to slightly
older parents, since some young parents might would still miss information e.g., income of occupation, or in some cases
even education.
11

Compensation by the Extended Family
Another strategy to handle endogeneous SES measurement is to focus on compensation by the
extended family (grandparents and aunt/uncles). We can be more confident in assuming that these
extended kin are relatively unaffected by any endogeneity related to the dying parent. However,
since these compensatory resources would be a further degree of separation away, one would also
tend to expect weaker compensatory effects.

Sibling Fixed Effects with Adjustment for Cohort Drift
Although fixed effects models have been applied in previous research in order to attempt to identify
the effect of parental death and divorce on offspring outcomes, only a few have applied it to parental
death (Kalil et al 2016, Kailaheimo-Lönnqvist and Erola 2020). The problem with the fixed effects
specification in the context of this particular study is that the within-sibling demeaning that is central
to the fixed effects calculations causes age at parental death differences across siblings to be
collinear with the difference in birth years. This is a serious problem as differences between siblings
in the age at parental death will capture and reflect period trends in educational expansion, or grade
inflation, for example.

Kalil et al (2016) stand out in comparison to other studies by offering a tractable alternative
specification. In their sibling fixed effects model, they enter two terms that capture differences in
birth years/age between siblings: relative age and age at death. These are collinear for children that
experience parental death. However, in their approach, they also include families that do not
experience death, and this group will contribute only to the relative age parameter (and due to sample
size differences across groups, will also strongly drive this effect). The age difference at death is thus
estimated conditional on the overall sibling age difference effects in the population. The effect of
relative age is expected to be negative, since earlier-born siblings will miss opportunities linked to
educational expansion, skill upgrading, or real income growth. The effect of age at parental death is
expected to be positive, as earlier-born sibs will have had greater exposure to their parent relative to
12

later-born siblings. Note that we also control for child birth order. The approach of Kalil et al. is
potentially very power demanding since they interact both relative age and age at death with (fathers)
SES, allowing for compensation effects but also SES specific drift in the outcome.5

Data
We use population data for Sweden up until year 2012, the latest point for which we have data. Age
30 is approximately the earliest age that one can claim to measure long-term effects of childhood
events. We therefore define the birth cohorts to be born 1973 to 1982 so that we can measure
outcomes at age 30 for 10 full birth cohorts.

Outcomes
We measure two long-term outcomes: education (in years of highest completed) and occupation (in
ISEI scores) based on the population-wide education register and the occupation register (based
mainly on employers reports of employees ISCO-88) at age 30 between 2003 and 2012. We also
measure GPA at graduation from elementary school, graduation from upper-secondary school, and
entry into and graduation from tertiary level education as a series of shorter- and medium-term
outcomes. We define the educational transitions as leaving the level with the relevant educational
credential (i.e., not just entering). These three measures of educational transitions use school
registers on graduates from elementary schools at age 16, upper-secondary schools at age 18/19, and
graduation from tertiary education. These data are available for our entire sample (and start in 1988,
1972 and 1960, respectively).
Parental death
We are able to link parents to children using the Swedish multigenerational kinship register.
Unfortunately, we do not have consistent data over time on co-residence of parents and children
because there was no dwelling register for the period of our study. We measure parental death as any
5
They do not discuss the timing of SES measurement in detail, and the timing of measurement seems to be eclectic,
which allows them to maximize sample size. Again, this comes at the cost of measurement precision.

13

recorded death between the year of the 1st birthday and the year of the 16th birthday of the child (the
underlying data comes both from the tax authority and cause-of-death hospital register). We omit
deaths in the first year of life (or for fathers, before birth). In the between-family regression analyses
where age of measurement is defined using matching techniques, we omit individuals whose parents
died between the years of their 17th and 32nd birthdays in order to provide a cleaner control group.

Matching Algorithm for SES by Parental Age
In order to measure SES at an age that is uninfluenced by parental death, we match parents on
observed characteristics to determine the year at which we make the measurement. We use birth
year, gender, education and social class measured in the year prior to death as exact matching
covariates, and then choose the nearest neighbors based on mahalanobis distances in disposable
income rank in the three preceding years to the death (Kantor 2006). This means that we can match
on income trajectory, which to some extent should help to reduce the endogeneity bias. After some
experimentation, we decided to match each dying parent to up to 45 controls in the first step. The
controls were not necessarily unique, however, and we dropped non-unique matches.6 Some cell
sizes were also very small and did not allow for anything near 45 matches. For these cells, common
support is very limited, and we dropped any cell where we could not match dying parents to at least
two controls. After these operations, the relation was around 1:30.

SES Measures
The SES measures are matched to each parent using the matched year. For parents, we measure their
SES as their occupation, coded to the ISEI scale (Ganzeboom and Treiman 1992). We get the
occupation information from quintennial censuses (1960-1990) and from the occupation registers
(2001-). We can measure occupation only in 1960, 1970 and then every fifth year until 1990. For

6

Through our model specification search, we realized that the identification of interactions in our case has extreme
power demands. With a lower number of matched controls per dying parent for the time-point of SES measurement, i.e.,
a smaller sample size, we get essentially the same results but with wider standard errors.
14

every matched SES measurement time-point, we will use the previously known occupation as the
measure.

In supplementary analyses (results shown in the Supplementary Appendix), we also measure their
education in censuses and income in tax registers. These measures produce similar, but weaker,
findings. Our choice of occupation is motivated by some specific limitations in the data on education
and income that we have access to. For education, a problem is that any cumulative measure of
highest attained education is missing from the censuses between 1970 and 1985. In between these
time points, we only have information on graduation from upper-secondary school (1972-) and
tertiary education (1960-) from within Sweden. Education from abroad and other types of schooling
will be missing. From 1985, with the establishment of the education register, we have good annual
information with very high precision, but this is will be very late for parental deaths that may start in
1974. We are thus forced to work with a crude education measurement. For income, the tax records
goes back to 1968, which means that we can use averages of income in the five years prior to death
to reduce year-to-year measurement error (Solon 1992). This is, however, a limited time-period, and
so much measurement error will still prevail. In comparison, occupation is a more stable measure
that is less subject to year-to-year variations. Compared to education, our occupation measure also
has high precision throughout our study period.

For aunts/uncles and grandparents, we first measure their individual highest observed education and
occupation in life, and their average lifetime income (measured from 1968 to 2012). We then
average across all aunts/uncles, and grandparents. The average is a more realistic measure than
taking the highest value across the extended family, since the latter reflects more heterogeneity
(Thaning and Hällsten 2018). Since aunts, uncles and grandparents are only indirectly affected by
their siblings or children’s death, we see no reason to focus on a specific age at measurement, not
least since previous research suggests that generational overlap does not seem to matter (Andersson,
Sheppard and Monden 2018).
15

Results
Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 provides descriptive information on the sample used in our analyses, focusing on the child’s
generation. Note that this is the matched sample. As can be seen, 3.2% of our sample lost a father to
death before age 16, while only 1.2% lost their mother to death before age 16. It should be noted that
these numbers are higher than in the reference population due to our matching strategy. In the
population, around 3 percent of children lose any of their parents up to age 16 (see Table A1).

Between-family Comparisons Adjusting for Observables: Parental Socioeconomic Resources
Table 2 shows the results from our between-family comparison in models examining how the
negative effects of parental death on each of the six different outcomes that we study amongst the
children are related to parental occupational attainment, and how the occupational quartile of the
surviving parent may or may not moderate the negative effects of the death of the other parent. The
specification includes a main effect of parental death, and its interaction with parental ISEI quartiles,
with the lowest quartile as the reference group. As can be seen, the main effect of parental death,
whether it is the mother or father, is clearly negative on all measures of children’s educational and
occupational attainment (note that the main effect here refers to parents in the lowest of quintile
groups, but even without interactions, the main effect is negative; not shown). When we focus on the
occupational quartile of the parent who died, we can see that losing a father with occupational status
in the third quartile reinforces the negative effect of parental death on educational and occupational
attainment at age 30, though the magnitude of this association is small; for example for educational
attainment this corresponds to less than 5% of one standard deviation (0.101/2.10). We also see some
similar evidence for entering tertiary education, but this effect does not stay on through tertiary
graduation. We see no other significant differences across SES quartiles for father’s death. We can
also see some tendencies of compensation by the surviving mother’s SES. The interactions are
generally positive, and some of them are also significant, i.e., for GPA and having any uppersecondary education, where the negative effect of parental death is reduced in the fourth (and in one
16

case also the third) quartile. The magnitude of this association corresponds to a difference of ~7% of
one standard deviation in GPA (0.022/0.29), and an increase in the probability of upper-secondary
graduation relative to the mean by ~4%.

For mother’s death, we can observe a similar reinforcing effect for mothers in the third or fourth
quartile of SEI for children’s occupational attainment (~8% of 1 SD) and entry into tertiary
education (decrease of ~13% in the relative probability), and one case of compensation from the
surviving father for having any upper-secondary education (increase of ~5% in the relative
probability). To sum up our results, we find only marginal evidence that the effect of parental death
varies by either of the parents’ SES. There are some weak indications that it is worse to lose a high
SES parent, and that having a high SES surviving parent can compensate, but this is found only for
very few outcomes, and the pattern does not form any clear gradient.

Between-family Comparisons Adjusting for Observables: Socioeconomic Resources of Aunts,
Uncles, and Grandparents,
In Table 3, we examine whether the socioeconomic resources of extended kin in the form of aunts
and uncles plays any moderating role in compensating for the death of a mother or father. Our results
strongly suggest there is no moderation. Across both father’s and mother’s death, we have two
significantly positive interaction coefficients, and one negative; the rest is not significant. In Table 4,
we run the same analyses but for grandparents. Again, we find no evidence of moderation. We have
one significant and one negative interaction coefficient, with the rest non-significant. In both of the
tables, when we examine patterns in the interaction across the quartiles, there is little evidence of any
gradient. In all of these analyses shown across Tables 2 through 4, we use around half a million
cases, and so power and type II errors should not be the explanation of these results.7

7

These zero results are also found with parents’ education and (five year averaged) income (see Supplementary
Appendix Tables S1, S4, S5, S8, S11, and S12).
17

Within-family Comparisons Adjusting for Unobservables: Parental Socioeconomic Resources
We follow our between-family comparisons with the application of sibling fixed effects models
following the specification of Kalil et al (2016). These results can be seen in Tables 5 and 6. In
essence, these models contain an interaction for parent’s age at death with parents’ SES, where
parents age at death has been set to an ad hoc number for those children that do not experience this
(the within difference used for estimation will thus equal 0), and with children’s birth year * parents’
SES as a very important control that is valid for all children. It should be noted that we fail to find a
baseline gradient (that is, ignoring parental SES) by parental death once we include the relative age
correction suggested by Kalil et al (see Table S15 and S16 in the web appendix). This suggest that
simple sibling models are indeed misleading. Nonetheless, we proceed to examine how timing of
parental death affects the period of exposure to mothers and fathers with varying levels of education,
occupational status, and income. Table 5 shows the results from models for father’s death. First, the
age of the death of the father, for the lowest reference quartile, has no impact on children’s
outcomes. Second, we find no evidence of moderation: none of the interaction coefficients are
significant. In Table 6 we run the same analyses but for mother’s death, and the results are very
similar.

Within-family Comparisons Adjusting for Unobservables: Socioeconomic Resources of Aunts,
Uncles, and Grandparents
In Table 7, we focus on the role of aunts and uncles with the interaction of father’s or mother’s age at
death with the average SES among aunt/uncles, coded into quartiles. It should be noted that these
models also control for mother’s and father’s SES * parent age at death as in Tables 5 and 6 (and of
course, the control term children’s birth year * parents’ SES). For age at father’s death in the upper
panel, we find that those children that have aunts/uncles in the third (and in one case fourth) quartile
have higher GPA, higher upper-secondary graduation rates, and higher level of tertiary entry (and
graduation). These coefficients show significant but small effects. For example, five more years of
exposure to one‘s father leads to 0.02 (0.004*5) higher GPA rank, or 2.5 percentage points higher
18

upper secondary graduation rates if you have aunt/uncle’s in the third instead of the first quartile of
occupation. The strongest effect is found for entry and graduation from tertiary education, where 5
years exposure gives 3.5 and 4 percentage point’s higher rates if you have more privileged
aunt/uncles. This means that if you have aunt/uncles with low SES, the length of exposure to the
father who later dies does not matter much, whereas among the more privileged, exposure is more
important. This suggests that the negative effect is stronger in high SES families, i.e., parental death
has an equalizing effect on educational and occupational achievement and attainment. For mothers,
we find no significant moderation.

In Table 8, we analyze the role grandparents with the same setup. For fathers, we find very consistent
evidence that having grandparent in the third and fourth quartile of occupational ISEI is associated
with better outcomes the longer the exposure to one’s father. We find significant interaction for all
outcomes for the fourth quartile of grandparents ISEI, and for all but one interaction in the third
quartile. The effect size are slightly stronger: a five year difference in exposure leads to 2.5
percentiles higher education, 5 percentage points higher graduation rates from upper-secondary
schools, and 4.5 percentage points differences in tertiary graduation rates, to give some examples.
Again, for children in the first or second quartile, there is no effect of exposure, which suggests a
negative effect that is limited to high SES families. For mothers, we find little evidence, only one
interaction coefficient is significant, but goes in the same direction as for father’s age of death. The
absence of significant results for mother may be explained by power since we have less almost 2/3
fewer maternal deaths.8

Discussion
In this study we have examined whether parental death has an equalizing or exacerbating effect on
socioeconomic differences in offspring attainment, and whether the socioeconomic status of the rest
When we examine models with aunt/uncle’s and grandparents’ education and (permanent)
income, we find no effects for education and similar effects for income (See Supplementary
Appendix Tables S2, S3, S6, S7, S9, S10, S13 and S14).
8

19

of the family plays a meaningful role in compensating for parental death. Overall the results of our
analyses suggest that neither the socioeconomic status of the deceased or surviving parent plays any
important or consistent moderating role in regards to the educational and labor market outcomes of
the children in Sweden. Although we find scattered evidence that suggests that it is worse to lose a
father or mother who has a high level of education, occupational status, or income rather than a low
level of any of these three attributes, these patterns are not consistent across the various educational
and labor market outcomes that we study. Furthermore, we do not observe any consistent gradient
where it is steadily worse to lose an increasingly high SES parent, or monotonically more
advantageous to have a surviving parent with higher levels of SES. This conclusion that the
socioeconomic status of the parents, either deceased or surviving, plays little role in moderating
offspring educational and occupational outcomes holds across both our between- and within-family
comparison based results. The overall picture strongly suggests that there is no consistent effect of
parental loss on offspring attainment. While these mixed results deny the possibility of a simple
narrative or conclusion, we believe that it is important to present this mosaic of findings as a whole
rather than cherry picking our conclusions by focusing on one outcome or another.

Regarding our analyses of the potential compensatory role of the socioeconomic resources of the
extended kin, the results are mixed. The results from our between-family comparisons do not suggest
that the socioeconomic status of aunts/uncles, or grandparents plays any moderating role. However,
the results from our within-family analyses point towards the perplexing conclusion that suffering
the death of a father is worse if your aunts, uncles, and grandparents have higher levels of
socioeconomic status. One way of explaining this pattern is that the measures of socioeconomic
status that we have of aunts and uncles, and grandparents is a more accurate reflection of parental
socioeconomic status than the early life measure that we have of parental SES prior to death. That is,
grandparental SES is parental SES in disguise, capturing the eventual socioeconomic status potential
of the parent with less measurement error than the measure that we can derive directly from the
deceased parent him or herself. This same logic applies to the socioeconomic status of aunts and
20

uncles, though this should have larger measurement error than the SES of the grandparents. If the
socioeconomic status of extended kin can indeed be considered a more accurate proxy for precluded
parental socioeconomic status attainment, then our analyses of extended kin would point towards the
conclusion that parental death has an equalizing effect on offspring educational and labor market
attainment; that is, it is worse to lose a high SES father than it is to lose a lower SES father.

Our findings contribute to a literature that has produced mixed findings on how the socioeconomic
status of parents moderates parental loss. A number of previous studies examining SES differentials
in the effects of parental divorce have found that the negative consequences are greater for children
who have a low SES parent than for children who have a high SES parent (e.g. Albertini and
Dronkers, 2009; Mandemakers and Kalmijn, 2014; Grätz, 2015; Kalmijn, 2015). However, other
work has observed an equalizing effect of parent divorce more similar to what we observe in this
study (e.g. Biblarz and Raftery, 1993; McLanahan and Sandefur, 1994; Martin, 2012; Bernardi and
Radl, 2014; Erola and Jalovaara, 2017). The most comparable studies to our own examined register
data in order to measure SES differentials in the loss and compensation processes surrounding
parental death in Finland (Prix and Erola, 2017, Kailaheimo-Lönnqvist and Erola, 2020). Prix and
Erola (2017) found that high levels of education amongst mothers did successfully compensate for
the death of the father for educational transitions to upper-secondary education and tertiary
vocational education, but not for the transition to university education. Another related study, by
Kalil et al. (2016), found that the marginal effect of losing a father was greater at higher levels of
paternal education. Although we use a different specification, our findings are similar to KailaheimoLönnqvist and Erola (2020), who found that either parental SES does not play any moderating role
following parental death, or that losing a higher SES parent has an equalizing effect on offspring
attainment, based on our analyses of extended kin.

Excluding our results that suggest that the socioeconomic status of extended kin may serve as a
proxy for parental SES, the fact that we only observe small and inconsistent socioeconomic
21

differences in the long-term impact of parental death may be explained by explanations related to the
data and our statistical analysis, as well as several substantive theoretical explanations. For example,
it is possible that the reason why we fail to find any evidence for moderating effects by parental SES
is because it is so difficult to calculate a value for parental socioeconomic status when mothers or
fathers die at a young age. Even after adjusting for age at measurement, much of the important
variance will remain hidden for those parents that die. It is perhaps impossible to measure the
socioeconomic status of this group at any higher level of precision. However, this issue is endemic to
any study of this research question rather than one that applies only to this particular study. Even the
fixed effects study design cannot deal with this unobservable problem, because deceased mothers
and fathers are not necessarily assigned to the correct quartile of socioeconomic status for the
interaction analyses. The age of the child at the time of parental death may also play an important
role, but it is not statistically possible to isolate the relative importance of this factor within the
family from other highly or perfectly collinear variables such birth year, relative age at the time of
parental death, or period effects.

Further potential reasons for why we do not observe any consistent variation in how parental SES is
associated with offspring attainment after parental death include the possibility that parental death
may only have a largely temporal grieving related effect. This should naturally attenuate over time.
However, the consequences of grieving will in some cases, for example in terms of lower school
grades, be permanent. In turn this may point to a related explanation: individuals may attempt to
compensate for short-term losses themselves, without the support of parents. Following the same
example, individuals with poor grades due to the shock of a parental death may realize this problem
and attempt to complement their education. Compensatory agency could thus minimize the role of
compensatory SES. This is also related to a further explanation, which is that the weak long-term
effects may be contingent on the Swedish context of our study. One might anticipate that the
observable effects of loss and compensation processes would be weakest in the Nordic context,
where the SES of the parents is relatively less important than in the United States or the United
22

Kingdom for offspring attainment, and where surviving family members may expect the state to pick
up the slack in providing economic and financial support to the grieving family. Given the relatively
high levels of support for single parents, and the highly subsidized educational system without dead
ends and with ample opportunities for re-education, one might expect parental loss to be less
consequential in Sweden than in other contexts. Another potential explanation has to do with the
control group. Over time, individuals are continuously exposed to further experiences, both good and
bad. Even though the loss of a parent is very negative, the groups will become more similar over
time as experience cumulate. This should then attenuate the main effect of parental death, which
would also proportionally attenuate compensation effects. However, we still observe substantial
negative long-term main effects of parental death, and to what extent our weak findings for
compensation are due to the potential moderating aspect of the passage of time is difficult to
evaluate.

In this study, we have extended previous research on SES differentials in the effects of parental death
on offspring attainment in several ways, by examining the effects of both maternal and paternal
death, by examining a wide range of different educational and occupational outcomes, by examining
the potential moderating role of the socioeconomic resources of extended kin, and by implementing
both an antemortem socioeconomic trajectory matching-based design that attempts to take care of
selection processes related to who experiences parental death and when, as well as a sibling fixed
effects approach. Ultimately, producing simple answers to the research questions that we address in
this study is challenging, because the questions themselves cannot be readily addressed using
standard causal identification strategies. Instead, we try to provide a broad picture of how
socioeconomic resources moderate the loss of a parent to death, and how socioeconomic resources
have the potential to compensate for parental loss. As we have discussed, the role of socioeconomic
resources in loss and compensation processes in relation to the effects of parental death on offspring
attainment in Sweden is far from clear, but points towards either a null effect or an equalizing effect
on child educational and labor market outcomes.
23

References
Adda, J., Björklund, A., & Holmlund, H. (2011). The role of mothers and fathers in providing
skills: evidence from parental deaths. IZA Discussion Paper No. 5425. http://ftp.iza.org/dp5425.pdf
Albertini, M., & Dronkers, J. (2009). Effects of divorce on children's educational attainment in a
Mediterranean and Catholic society: Evidence from Italy. European Societies, 11(1), 137-159.
Amato, Paul R. & Anthony, C. J. (2014). Estimating the effects of parental divorce and death
with fixed effects models. Journal of Marriage and Family, 76, 370-386.
Anderson, L., Sheppard, P. & Monden, C. W. S. (2018). Grandparent effects on educational
outcomes: a systematic review. Sociological Science 5, 114-142.
Augustine, J. M. (2014). Maternal education and the unequal significance of family structure for
children's early achievement. Social Forces, 93(2), 687-718.
Beck, A. N., Cooper, C. E., McLanahan, S., & Brooks‐Gunn, J. (2010). Partnership transitions
and maternal parenting. Journal of Marriage and Family, 72(2), 219-233.
Berg, L., Rostila, M., Saarela, J., & Hjern, A. (2014). Parental death during childhood and
subsequent school performance. Pediatrics, 133(4), 682-689.
Berg, L., Rostila, M., & Hjern, A. (2016). Parental death during childhood and depression in
young adults–a national cohort study. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 57(9), 10921098.
Bernardi, F., & Boertien, D. (2017). Explaining conflicting results in research on the
heterogeneous effects of parental separation on children’s educational attainment according to social
background. European Journal of Population, 33(2), 243-266.
Bernardi, F., & Radl, J. (2014). The long-term consequences of parental divorce for children’s
educational attainment. Demographic Research, 30, 1653-1680.
Biblarz, T. J., & Gottainer, G. (2000). Family structure and children's success: A comparison of
widowed and divorced single‐mother families. Journal of Marriage and Family, 62(2), 533-548.
Biblarz, T. J., & Raftery, A. E. (1993). The effects of family disruption on social
mobility. American Sociological Review, 58(1), 97-109.
24

Bloome, D. (2017). Childhood family structure and intergenerational income mobility in the
United States. Demography, 54(2), 541-569.
Bourdieu, P., & Passeron, J. C. (1990). Reproduction in Education, Society and Culture. London:
Sage.
Breen, R. (2010). Educational expansion and social mobility in the 20th century. Social
Forces, 89(2), 365-388.
Chapple, S. (2009). Child Well-Being and Sole-Parent Family Structure in the OECD: An
Analysis. OECD Social, Employment and Migration Working Papers, No. 82, OECD Publishing,
Paris. DOI: 10.1787/225407362040.
Dahlberg, J. (2018). Death is not the end: a register-based study of the effect of parental death on
adult children’s childbearing behavior in Sweden. OMEGA - Journal of Death and Dying.
DOI: 10.1177/0030222818756740
Elo, I. T., & Preston, S. H. (1992). Effects of early-life conditions on adult mortality: a
review. Population Index, 186-212.
Erikson, R. & Goldthorpe, J. H. (1992) The Constant Flux: A Study of Class Mobility in
Industrial Societies. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Erola, J., & Jalovaara, M. (2017). The replaceable: The inheritance of paternal and maternal
socioeconomic statuses in non-standard families. Social Forces, 95(3), 971-995.
Erola, J. & Kilpi-Jakonen, E. (2017). Social Inequality Across the Generations: The Role of
Compensation and Multiplication in Resource Accumulation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Ganzeboom, Harry B. G., De Graaf, P. M. & Treiman, D. J. (1992). A standard international
socio-economic index of occupational status. Social Science Research, 21(1), 1-56.
Grätz, M. (2015). When growing up without a parent does not hurt: Parental separation and the
compensatory effect of social origin. European Sociological Review, 31(5), 546-557.
Holmlund, H., Lindahl, M., & Plug, E. (2011). The causal effect of parents' schooling on
children's schooling: A comparison of estimation methods. Journal of Economic Literature, 49(3),
615-51.
25

Jonsson, J. O., & Gähler, M. (1997). Family dissolution, family reconstitution, and children’s
educational careers: Recent evidence for Sweden. Demography, 34(2), 277-293.
Jonsson, J. O., Grusky, D. B., Di Carlo, M., Pollak, R., & Brinton, M. C. (2009). Microclass
mobility: social reproduction in four countries. American Journal of Sociology, 114(4), 977-1036.
Kailaheimo-Lönnqvist, Sanna, and Jani Erola. (2020). The effect of early parental death on
children’s university education. European Societies, DOI: 10.1080/14616696.2020.1719179
Kalil, A., Mogstad, M., Rege, M., & Votruba, M. E. (2016). Father presence and the
intergenerational transmission of educational attainment. Journal of Human Resources, 51(4), 869899.
Kalil, A., Ryan, R., & Corey, M. (2012). Diverging destinies: Maternal education and the
developmental gradient in time with children. Demography, 49(4), 1361-1383.
Kalmijn, M. (2015). How Childhood Circumstances Moderate the Long‐Term Impact of Divorce
on Father–Child Relationships. Journal of Marriage and Family, 77(4), 921-938.
Kantor, D. (2006). MAHAPICK: Stata module to select matching observations based on a
Mahalanobis distance measure. Boston College Department of Economics.
Laband, D. N., & Lentz, B. F. (1983). Like father, like son: Toward an economic theory of
occupational following. Southern Economic Journal 50(2), 474-493.
Lareau, A. (2011). Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Låftman, S. B. (2010). Family Structure and Children’s Living Conditions. A comparative study
of 24 countries. Child Indicators Research, 3(1), 127-147.
Mandemakers, J. J., & Kalmijn, M. (2014). Do mother’s and father’s education condition the
impact of parental divorce on child well-being? Social Science Research, 44, 187-199.
Martin, M. A. (2012). Family structure and the intergenerational transmission of educational
advantage. Social Science Research, 41(1), 33-47.
McLanahan, S., & Percheski, C. (2008). Family structure and the reproduction of
inequalities. Annual Review of Sociology, 34, 257-276.
26

McLanahan, S., & Sandefur, G. (1994). Growing Up with a Single Parent. What Hurts, What
Helps. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
McLanahan, S., Tach, L., & Schneider, D. (2013). The causal effects of father absence. Annual
Review of Sociology, 39, 399-427.
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather: Homophily in social
networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27(1), 415-444.
Okbay, A., Beauchamp, J. P., Fontana, M. A., Lee, J. J., Pers, T. H., Rietveld, C. A., ... &
Oskarsson, S. (2016). Genome-wide association study identifies 74 loci associated with educational
attainment. Nature, 533(7604), 539.
Prix, I., & Erola, J. (2017). Does death really make us equal? Educational attainment and
resource compensation after paternal death in Finland. Social Science Research, 64, 171-183.
Rostila, M., & Saarela, J. M. (2011). Time does not heal all wounds: Mortality following the
death of a parent. Journal of Marriage and Family, 73(1), 236-249.
Rostila, M., Berg, L., Arat, A., Vinnerljung, B., & Hjern, A. (2016). Parental death in childhood
and self-inflicted injuries in young adults-a national cohort study from Sweden. European Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 25(10), 1103-1111.
Shor, E., Roelfs, D. J., Curreli, M., Clemow, L., Burg, M. M., & Schwartz, J. E. (2012).
Widowhood and mortality: a meta-analysis and meta-regression. Demography, 49(2), 575-606.
Solon, G. (1992). Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States. American Economic
Review, 82(3), 393-408.
Thaning, M., & Hällsten, M. (2018). The end of dominance? Evaluating measures of family
background in stratification research. Stockholm University Department of Sociology Working Paper
Series, #34. DOI: 10.17045/sthlmuni.5896522.v1
Triventi, M. (2011). Stratification in higher education and its relationship with social inequality:
A comparative study of 11 European countries. European Sociological Review, 29(3), 489-502.
Umberson, D., Wortman, C. B., & Kessler, R. C. (1992). Widowhood and depression: Explaining
long-term gender differences in vulnerability. Journal of Health and Social Behavior, 33(1), 10-24.
27

Table 1. Descriptives for Age‐Matched Sample.
mean
1977.14
0.49
1.74
2.41
0.031
0.012
24.67
24.95

(SD)
(2.90)
(0.50)
(0.88)
(1.06)
(0.17)
(0.11)
(8.94)
(8.69)

Min
1973
0
1
1
0
0
1
1

Max
1,982.00
1
16
18
1
1
39
39

Valid
cases
566,661
566,661
566,661
566,661
566,661
566,661
38,559
18,444

Birth year
Female
Birth order
Number of sibs
Father dies age 1-16 a
Mother dies age 1-16 a
Child’s age at father’s death b
Child’s age at mother’s death b
Outcomes
12.95
(2.10)
6
19
566,661
Education, years (age 30)
44.06
(16.94)
16
88
529,472
Occupation, ISEI (age 30)
0.5
(0.29)
0
1
552,390
GPA rank, 9th grade (age 16) c
0.83
(0.37)
0
1
566,661
Upper-secondary graduation (up to age ≈ 23)
0.49
(0.50)
0
1
566,661
Tertiary education, entry (no age limit)
0.28
(0.45)
0
1
566,661
Tertiary education, graduation (no age limit)
Parents’ SES
F: Elementary
0.38
(0.48)
0
1
566,661
F: Up. sec. (short)
0.16
(0.36)
0
1
566,661
F: Up. sec.
0.24
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
F: Postsec.
0.07
(0.25)
0
1
566,661
F: Tertiary
0.11
(0.31)
0
1
566,661
F: Missing
0.05
(0.21)
0
1
566,661
F: Occ (Q1)
0.24
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
F: Occ (Q2)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
F: Occ (Q3)
0.26
(0.44)
0
1
566,661
F: Occ (Q4)
0.25
(0.44)
0
1
566,661
F: Inc (Q1)
0.24
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
F: Inc (Q2)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
F: Inc (Q3)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
F: Inc (Q4)
0.26
(0.44)
0
1
566,661
M: Elementary
0.34
(0.48)
0
1
566,661
M: Up. sec. (short)
0.23
(0.42)
0
1
566,661
M: Up. sec.
0.18
(0.39)
0
1
566,661
M: Postsec.
0.09
(0.28)
0
1
566,661
M: Tertiary
0.11
(0.31)
0
1
566,661
M: Missing
0.05
(0.23)
0
1
566,661
M: Occ (Q1)
0.14
(0.35)
0
1
566,661
M: Occ (Q2)
0.3
(0.46)
0
1
566,661
M: Occ (Q3)
0.22
(0.42)
0
1
566,661
M: Occ (Q4)
0.24
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
M: Occ missing
0.09
(0.29)
0
1
566,661
M: Inc (Q1)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
M: Inc (Q2)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
M: Inc (Q3)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
M: Inc (Q4)
0.25
(0.43)
0
1
566,661
Note: a NB! these proportions refers to the matched sample, where children with dying parents are over‐sampled; b valid
cases refers children with experience of parental death at age 1 to 39 (missing will be replaced by ad hoc 0 in sibling fixed
effects model), c parents dying in ages 15/16 are removed from valid cases to avoid short term effect.

28

Table 2. Between‐family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Parents’ Occupation.
Father dies
Education,
years
Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Occ (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Occ (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Occ (Q4)
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Occ missing
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Occ (Q2)

Mother dies
Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.356***

-1.617***

-0.065***

-0.081***

-0.052***

-0.047***

-0.348***

-1.451*

-0.050***

-0.069***

-0.052**

-0.030*

(-8.56)

(-4.76)

(-10.23)

(-8.14)

(-5.25)

(-6.09)

(-4.89)

(-2.49)

(-4.55)

(-4.31)

(-3.14)

(-2.17)

0.076

0.101

0.013

0.013

0.006

0.009

-0.056

-0.587

0

-0.005

-0.007

-0.012

(1.71)

(0.28)

(1.93)

(1.24)

(0.58)

(1.12)

(-0.75)

(-0.96)

(-0.02)

(-0.28)

(-0.39)

(-0.81)

0.045

0.308

0.017*

0.011

0.005

-0.002

-0.097

-1.320*

-0.022

-0.024

-0.028

-0.022

(0.91)

(0.76)

(2.23)

(1.02)

(0.43)

(-0.21)

(-1.20)

(-1.98)

(-1.75)

(-1.38)

(-1.46)

(-1.35)

0.09

0.023

0.022**

0.031**

0.011

0

-0.137

-0.875

-0.008

-0.011

-0.029

-0.036*

(1.78)

(0.05)

(2.87)

(2.84)

(0.95)

(0.03)

(-1.67)

(-1.27)

(-0.65)

(-0.65)

(-1.53)

(-2.17)

-0.042

-0.1

0.004

-0.005

-0.017

-0.002

-0.185*

-2.027**

-0.016

-0.024

-0.046*

-0.03

(-0.72)

(-0.21)

(0.46)

(-0.35)

(-1.25)

(-0.21)

(-1.96)

(-2.58)

(-1.08)

(-1.09)

(-2.10)

(-1.70)

-0.007

0.141

0.003

-0.005

0.001

0.012

0.061

0.156

0.008

0.008

0.004

0.004

(-0.19)

(0.44)

(0.57)

(-0.50)

(0.13)

(1.61)

(0.93)

(0.29)

(0.76)

(0.54)

(0.23)

(0.35)

-0.101*

-1.224***

-0.006

0.002

-0.024*

-0.015

0.036

-0.021

0.013

0.018

0.011

-0.005

(-2.45)

(-3.61)

(-0.90)

(0.24)

(-2.49)

(-1.91)

(0.52)

(-0.04)

(1.32)

(1.19)

(0.68)

(-0.34)

-0.009

-0.299

0.012

0.014

0.004

0.002

0.067

-0.392

0.004

0.042**

0.008

-0.023

(-0.20)

(-0.78)

(1.78)

(1.55)

(0.40)

(0.20)

(0.99)

(-0.68)

(0.38)

(3.00)

(0.50)

(-1.60)

Observations

559,705

523,094

547,029

559,705

559,705

559,705

549,008

513,405

538,469

549,008

549,008

549,008

Adjusted R2

0.203

0.137

0.213

0.067

0.177

0.128

0.203

0.136

0.211

0.066

0.176

0.127

Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Occ (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Occ (Q4)

Linear combinations
Father/Mother dies=1 , mother in Q4

-0.266

-1.594

-0.043

-0.049

-0.041

-0.046

-0.485

-2.326

-0.058

-0.08

-0.082

-0.066

t-value

-6.003

-4.27

-6.509

-5.475

-3.925

-4.97

-6.956

-3.954

-5.596

-5.528

-4.966

-4.498

p-value

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

-0.365

-1.916

-0.053

-0.066

-0.048

-0.045

-0.282

-1.843

-0.046

-0.027

-0.044

-0.053

Father/Mother dies=1 , father in Q4
t-value

-7.221

-4.522

-7

-6.17

-4.054

-4.359

-3.655

-2.803

-3.765

-1.667

-2.386

-3.273

p-value

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.005

0.000

0.095

0.017

0.001

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth
order. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

29

Table 3. Between‐family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Aunt/Uncles’ Occupation.
Father dies

Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Occ (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Occ (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Occ (Q4)
Observations
Adjusted R2
Father/Mother dies=1 , A/U in Q4
t-value
p-value

Mother dies

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

-0.326***
(-11.21)
-0.038
(-0.86)
0.014
(0.31)
0.034
(0.76)
490,360
0.216
-0.292
-8.384
0.000

-1.367***
(-5.72)
-0.298
(-0.84)
-0.484
(-1.32)
-1.063**
(-2.76)
460,486
0.149
-2.429
-8.014
0.000

-0.047***
(-10.53)
-0.011
(-1.73)
-0.004
(-0.62)
0.006
(0.97)
480,724
0.229
-0.04
-7.977
0.000

-0.070***
(-10.10)
-0.016
(-1.62)
0.015
(1.57)
0.021*
(2.25)
490,360
0.069
-0.048
-7.324
0.000

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.050***
(-7.38)
0
(-0.02)
0.003
(0.26)
0.007
(0.62)
490,360
0.189
-0.044
-5.528
0.000

-0.042***
(-7.66)
-0.001
(-0.17)
0.001
(0.10)
-0.01
(-1.02)
490,360
0.134
-0.051
-6.522
0.000

-0.367***
(-6.76)
0.041
(0.53)
0.006
(0.08)
-0.003
(-0.04)
480,666
0.215
-0.37
-6.396
0.000

-2.203***
(-5.02)
-0.231
(-0.36)
0.227
(0.35)
0.198
(0.29)
451,658
0.148
-2.006
-3.818
0.000

-0.056***
(-6.78)
0.021
(1.70)
0.012
(0.97)
0.004
(0.38)
472,858
0.228
-0.051
-5.996
0.000

-0.066***
(-5.26)
0.011
(0.64)
0.012
(0.72)
0.016
(1.00)
480,666
0.068
-0.05
-4.691
0.000

-0.063***
(-4.99)
0.01
(0.55)
-0.007
(-0.35)
0.012
(0.69)
480,666
0.189
-0.05
-3.876
0.000

-0.036***
(-3.51)
-0.005
(-0.33)
-0.032*
(-2.03)
-0.026
(-1.55)
480,666
0.133
-0.062
-4.623
0.000

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth
order. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table 4. Between‐family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Grandparents’ Occupation.
Father dies

Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Occ (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Occ (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Occ (Q4)
Observations
Adjusted R2
Father/Mother dies=1 , GP in Q4
t-value
p-value

Mother dies

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

-0.274***
(-8.60)
-0.05
(-1.10)
-0.063
(-1.37)
-0.001
(-0.03)
485,557
0.215
-0.276
-8.103
0.000

-1.532***
(-5.82)
0.213
(0.56)
-0.386
(-1.02)
-0.576
(-1.46)
456,055
0.144
-2.108
-7.153
0.000

-0.045***
(-9.34)
-0.005
(-0.72)
-0.001
(-0.19)
0.006
(0.85)
476,050
0.23
-0.039
-7.836
0.000

-0.051***
(-7.40)
-0.029**
(-2.79)
-0.007
(-0.73)
-0.003
(-0.35)
485,557
0.075
-0.055
-8.001
0.000

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.045***
(-5.90)
0.001
(0.06)
-0.013
(-1.19)
0.004
(0.37)
485,557
0.184
-0.041
-5.214
0.000

-0.035***
(-5.55)
-0.006
(-0.64)
-0.007
(-0.73)
0
(-0.01)
485,557
0.133
-0.036
-4.904
0.000

-0.433***
(-8.55)
0.121
(1.67)
-0.055
(-0.77)
0.169*
(2.34)
477,438
0.214
-0.264
-5.121
0.000

-1.981***
(-4.61)
-0.135
(-0.22)
-1.338*
(-2.19)
0.218
(0.35)
448,672
0.144
-1.762
-3.965
0.000

-0.048***
(-6.25)
0.001
(0.06)
-0.016
(-1.48)
0.016
(1.44)
469,524
0.229
-0.032
-4.144
0.000

-0.070***
(-6.25)
0.016
(1.05)
-0.003
(-0.17)
0.028
(1.85)
477,438
0.073
-0.043
-4.287
0.000

-0.070***
(-5.79)
0.012
(0.73)
-0.019
(-1.12)
0.028
(1.66)
477,438
0.184
-0.042
-3.613
0.000

-0.058***
(-5.82)
0.018
(1.24)
-0.012
(-0.84)
0.017
(1.09)
477,438
0.133
-0.042
-3.611
0.000

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth
order. * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001
30

Table 5. Within‐family Analysis of Age of Father’s Death by Father’s and Mother’s Occupation.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # F: Occ (Q2)
Age when father dies # F: Occ (Q3)
Age when father dies # F: Occ (Q4)
Age when father dies # M: Occ (Q2)
Age when father dies # M: Occ (Q3)
Age when father dies # M: Occ (Q4)
Age when father dies # M: Occ (Missing)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Linear combination: Age when father dies in father’s Q4
Linear combination: Age when father dies in father’s Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when father dies in father’s Q4, p-value
Linear combination: Age when father dies in mother’s Q4
Linear combination: Age when father dies in mother’s Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when father dies in mother’s Q4, p-value
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0.000
(0.16)
0.001
(0.45)
0.000
(‐0.04)
0.003
(1.53)
0.000
(0.18)
‐0.001
(‐0.63)
‐0.001
(‐0.76)
0.004
(1.66)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.445
0.003
1.509
0.131
‐0.001
‐0.727
0.467

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.60)
0.001
(0.67)
‐0.002
(‐0.89)
0.001
(0.57)
0.002
(0.76)
0.000
(‐0.13)
‐0.001
(‐0.48)
‐0.002
(‐0.77)
Yes
Yes
320,117
162,724
0.288
0.002
1.029
0.303
0
0.033
0.974

GPA, rank
0.001
(0.89)
0.000
(0.32)
‐0.002
(‐0.96)
0.000
(‐0.10)
0.000
(‐0.20)
‐0.002
(‐1.17)
0.001
(0.41)
0.001
(0.60)
Yes
Yes
335,827
177,818
0.523
0.001
0.673
0.501
0.002
1.342
0.18

Uppersecondary,
graduation
0.001
(0.51)
‐0.001
(‐0.35)
0.002
(0.61)
0.004
(1.58)
0.002
(0.67)
‐0.003
(‐0.85)
0.001
(0.26)
0.005
(1.56)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.223
0.006
1.858
0.063
0.002
0.795
0.426

Tertiary,
entry
0.002
(0.67)
0.000
(0.06)
0.001
(0.45)
0.001
(0.23)
‐0.003
(‐0.76)
‐0.001
(‐0.36)
0.000
(‐0.10)
0.000
(0.03)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.385
0.003
0.784
0.433
0.002
0.54
0.589

Tertiary,
graduation
0
(‐0.01)
0.001
(0.23)
0.003
(1.10)
0.004
(1.16)
‐0.001
(‐0.36)
‐0.003
(‐0.83)
‐0.006
(‐1.61)
‐0.001
(‐0.29)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.29
0.004
1.034
0.301
‐0.006
‐1.868
0.062

31

Table 6. Within‐family Analysis of Age of Mother’s Death by Father’s and Mother’s Occupation.

Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # F: Occ (Q2)
Age when mother dies # F: Occ (Q3)
Age when mother dies # F: Occ (Q4)
Age when mother dies # M: Occ (Q2)
Age when mother dies # M: Occ (Q3)
Age when mother dies # M: Occ (Q4)
Age when father dies # M: Occ (Missing)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in father’s Q4
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in father’s Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in father’s Q4, p-value
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in mother’s Q4
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in mother’s Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in mother’s Q4, p-value
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0.002
(0.65)
‐0.001
(‐0.54)
‐0.002
(‐0.69)
‐0.003
(‐1.15)
0.002
(0.79)
0.004
(1.31)
0.000
(‐0.01)
0.002
(0.66)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.445
‐0.001
‐0.448
0.654
0.002
0.632
0.527

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.22)
‐0.003
(‐1.15)
‐0.002
(‐0.79)
‐0.001
(‐0.37)
0.003
(0.92)
0.005
(1.63)
0.002
(0.59)
0.000
(‐0.04)
Yes
Yes
320,117
162,724
0.288
0
‐0.141
0.888
0.003
0.893
0.372

GPA, rank
0.002
(0.82)
0.000
(0.08)
0.001
(0.27)
‐0.001
(‐0.56)
0.000
(‐0.07)
0.002
(0.63)
0.001
(0.28)
‐0.002
(‐0.70)
Yes
Yes
335,827
177,818
0.523
0.001
0.225
0.822
0.003
1.125
0.261

Uppersecondary,
graduation
0.006
(1.69)
‐0.003
(‐0.75)
‐0.002
(‐0.60)
0.000
(‐0.08)
‐0.002
(‐0.42)
0.003
(0.76)
‐0.001
(‐0.18)
‐0.008
(‐1.69)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.223
0.006
1.428
0.153
0.005
1.45
0.147

Tertiary,
entry
0.003
(0.76)
0.000
(‐0.04)
‐0.007
(‐1.56)
0.000
(‐0.06)
0.006
(1.34)
0.006
(1.21)
0.004
(0.69)
0.004
(0.59)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.385
0.003
0.621
0.535
0.007
1.54
0.124

Tertiary,
graduation
‐0.002
(‐0.43)
0.003
(0.63)
‐0.001
(‐0.34)
0.001
(0.25)
0.006
(1.34)
0.000
(‐0.08)
‐0.002
(‐0.39)
0.005
(0.86)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,586
0.29
‐0.001
‐0.164
0.87
‐0.004
‐0.868
0.386

32

Table 7. Within‐family Analysis of Age of Father’s and Mother’s Death by Aunts/Uncle’s Occupation.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # A/U: Occ (Q2)
Age when father dies # A/U: Occ (Q3)
Age when father dies # A/U: Occ (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Linear combination: Age when father dies in Q4
Linear combination: Age when father dies in Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when father dies in Q4, p-value
Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # A/U: Occ (Q2)
Age when mother dies # A/U: Occ (Q3)
Age when mother dies # A/U: Occ (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in Q4
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in Q4, p-value

Years of
education,
rank
0
(‐0.19)
0
(‐0.29)
0.003
(1.93)
0.003
(1.93)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.444
0.003
1.359
0.174

ISEI, rank
0.002
(0.90)
0.001
(0.29)
0.002
(0.74)
0.001
(0.61)
Yes
Yes
Yes
283,373
144,193
0.288
0.004
1.243
0.214

0.002
(0.78)
‐0.003
(‐1.12)
0
(0.16)
0.003
(1.15)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.444
0.005
1.581
0.114

0.001
(0.20)
0
(0.10)
0.003
(0.98)
0.004
(1.09)
Yes
Yes
Yes
283,373
144,193
0.288
0.004
1.046
0.296

GPA, rank
0.001
(0.37)
‐0.001
(‐0.46)
0.004*
(2.42)
0.001
(0.36)
Yes
Yes
Yes
296,543
156,830
0.525
0.001
0.594
0.552

Uppersecondary,
graduation
0
(0.15)
0.001
(0.57)
0.005*
(1.98)
0.001
(0.49)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.216
0.002
0.508
0.611

Tertiary, entry
0.002
(0.59)
0.001
(0.18)
0.008*
(2.57)
0.005
(1.58)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.386
0.008
1.738
0.082

Tertiary,
graduation
‐0.002
(‐0.52)
0.002
(0.59)
0.005
(1.57)
0.007*
(2.16)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.289
0.005
1.255
0.209

0.003
(1.30)
‐0.003
(‐1.24)
‐0.002
(‐0.64)
0.002
(0.85)
Yes
Yes
Yes
296,543
156,830
0.525
0.006
1.791
0.073

0.007
(1.66)
‐0.002
(‐0.60)
0
(‐0.08)
0.006
(1.46)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.216
0.013
2.583
0.01

0.004
(0.71)
‐0.004
(‐0.84)
‐0.006
(‐1.27)
0.001
(0.29)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.386
0.005
0.84
0.401

‐0.004
(‐0.85)
‐0.003
(‐0.76)
0
(‐0.07)
0.003
(0.65)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.289
‐0.001
‐0.206
0.837
33

Table 8. Within‐family Analysis of Age of Father’s and Mother’s Death by Grandparents’ Occupation.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # GP: Occ (Q2)
Age when father dies # GP: Occ (Q3)
Age when father dies # GP: Occ (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Linear combination: Age when father dies in Q4
Linear combination: Age when father dies in Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when father dies in Q4, p-value
Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # GP: Occ (Q2)
Age when mother dies # GP: Occ (Q3)
Age when mother dies # GP: Occ (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in Q4
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in Q4, t-value
Linear combination: Age when mother dies in Q4, p-value

Years of
education,
rank
‐0.002
(‐0.87)
0.004*
(2.41)
0.004*
(2.47)
0.005**
(2.87)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.443
0.003
1.463
0.144

ISEI, rank
0
(‐0.07)
0.004
(1.95)
0.005**
(2.58)
0.006**
(2.65)
Yes
Yes
Yes
302,530
153,798
0.288
0.006
1.991
0.046

0.001
(0.56)
0.001
(0.48)
0.003
(1.24)
0
(‐0.07)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.443
0.001
0.42
0.674

0.001
(0.43)
‐0.002
(‐0.59)
0.004
(1.31)
0.002
(0.63)
Yes
Yes
Yes
302,530
153,798
0.288
0.003
0.858
0.391

GPA, rank
0
(0.01)
0.002
(1.59)
0.003
(1.83)
0.005**
(2.93)
Yes
Yes
Yes
316,747
167,442
0.524
0.005
2.261
0.024

Uppersecondary,
graduation
‐0.003
(‐0.98)
0.008***
(3.51)
0.007**
(2.89)
0.010***
(3.77)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.216
0.007
2.06
0.039

Tertiary, entry
0
(0.03)
0.005
(1.72)
0.009**
(3.08)
0.007*
(2.25)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.386
0.007
1.758
0.079

Tertiary,
graduation
‐0.001
(‐0.40)
0.002
(0.58)
0.006*
(2.03)
0.009**
(2.77)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.289
0.007
1.788
0.074

0.002
(0.71)
0.002
(0.71)
0.003
(1.19)
0.003
(1.45)
Yes
Yes
Yes
316,747
167,442
0.524
0.005
1.737
0.082

0.004
(1.00)
0.006
(1.61)
0.007*
(2.00)
0.004
(0.99)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.216
0.008
1.624
0.104

0.003
(0.57)
0.004
(0.90)
‐0.002
(‐0.35)
‐0.002
(‐0.34)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.386
0.001
0.225
0.822

‐0.005
(‐0.93)
0.004
(1.02)
0.006
(1.48)
0.003
(0.78)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,159
171,460
0.289
‐0.001
‐0.196
0.845
34

Table A1. Case selection.
No.
Individuals
1,370,171
1,056,594
1,039,825
1,039,702
1,039,176
1,028,485
706,707
669,317
638,369
637,841

No. w/ parent
dying age 0‐
16

No. w/ parent
dying age 0‐
39

No. cases after selection on…
Cohort cut (born 1973‐82)
Match to both parents
Only biological parents
32,346
167,734
Negative age of death
32,223
167,611
Both parents die 0‐16
31,697
167,085
Children die before age 32
31,105
164,596
30,439
134,240
After matching for SES measurement age a
28,650
127,639
No valid information on parents’ SESb
Valid information any outcomes at age 30
27,261
122,584
Drop any parent dies age<1
26,733
122,056
Cross sectional analysis
Drop any parents dying age 17‐32
566,661
24,609
Fixed effects analysis
Drop singletons
341,139
53,790
Note: Any deviations from the last figure to the estimated model are due to further internal missing on outcomes; a this
delimits the data to have common support across treated and controls b except for education for mother and fathers, and
occupation (ISEI) for mothers, where missing are included as a separate category; c we dropped cells where treated where
matched to less than 3 controls since common support then is limited.

35

Online Appendix Part I: Education
Table S1. Between-family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Parents’ Education.
Father dies

Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Up. sec. (short)
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Up. sec.
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Postsec.
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Tertiary
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Missing
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Up. sec. (short)
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Up. sec.
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Postsec.
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Tertiary
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Missing

Mother dies

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.342***

-1.793***

-0.065***

-0.084***

-0.051***

-0.040***

-0.382***

-2.604***

-0.054***

-0.068***

-0.073***

-0.040***

(-13.25)

(-8.64)

(-16.96)

(-13.61)

(-8.37)

(-8.44)

(-8.88)

(-7.37)

(-8.31)

(-6.63)

(-7.21)

(-5.00)

0.083*

0.447

0.019**

0.022**

0.011

0.014

-0.135*

-0.339

-0.009

-0.023

-0.011

-0.026*

(2.07)

(1.37)

(3.23)

(2.59)

(1.19)

(1.82)

(-2.13)

(-0.65)

(-0.97)

(-1.69)

(-0.68)

(-2.07)

-0.013

-0.178

0.014*

0.019*

-0.006

-0.005

-0.048

0.024

0.004

-0.009

0.014

0.001

(-0.29)

(-0.49)

(1.99)

(1.97)

(-0.53)

(-0.58)

(-0.67)

(0.04)

(0.34)

(-0.61)

(0.84)

(0.05)

0.112

0.921

0.019*

0.040***

0.022

0.011

-0.261**

-1.585

-0.012

-0.016

-0.037

-0.044*

(1.76)

(1.69)

(2.03)

(3.33)

(1.46)

(0.77)

(-2.67)

(-1.84)

(-0.84)

(-0.87)

(-1.61)

(-1.99)

0.194**

0.487

0.025**

0.041***

0.040**

0.002

-0.162

-1.348

-0.025

0.002

-0.025

-0.046*

(3.10)

(0.86)

(2.64)

(3.62)

(2.84)

(0.15)

(-1.78)

(-1.65)

(-1.81)

(0.15)

(-1.19)

(-2.12)

0.031

0.444

0.008

0.006

0.003

0.005

-0.145

0.051

-0.021

-0.035

-0.046*

-0.025

(0.45)

(0.81)

(0.78)

(0.42)

(0.17)

(0.43)

(-1.42)

(0.06)

(-1.42)

(-1.48)

(-2.00)

(-1.32)

-0.05

-0.285

0.003

0.005

-0.014

-0.01

0.028

-0.657

0

0.015

0.013

-0.006

(-1.15)

(-0.80)

(0.43)

(0.52)

(-1.36)

(-1.17)

(0.40)

(-1.16)

(-0.05)

(1.02)

(0.77)

(-0.39)

-0.063

-0.364

0.009

-0.003

-0.015

-0.017*

0.151*

1.601**

0.018

0.025

0.014

0.002

(-1.57)

(-1.11)

(1.48)

(-0.39)

(-1.61)

(-2.12)

(2.41)

(3.06)

(1.85)

(1.84)

(0.91)

(0.17)

-0.214**

-0.968

0.02

0.003

-0.019

-0.022

0.143

1.051

0.018

0.02

0.025

0.015

(-2.79)

(-1.49)

(1.74)

(0.22)

(-1.06)

(-1.33)

(1.29)

(1.09)

(1.11)

(1.00)

(0.96)

(0.62)

-0.072

-0.976

0.007

0.025*

-0.030*

-0.029

0.198*

1.326

0.029*

0.040*

0.049*

-0.014

(-1.12)

(-1.64)

(0.70)

(2.22)

(-2.09)

(-1.90)

(2.23)

(1.67)

(2.12)

(2.54)

(2.48)

(-0.69)

-0.003

-0.285

0.012

0.026

-0.008

0.003

-0.013

0.901

0.007

0.006

0.042

0.016

(-0.04)

(-0.51)

(1.11)

(1.65)

(-0.49)

(0.25)

(-0.11)

(0.99)

(0.42)

(0.23)

(1.62)

(0.80)

Observations

559,705

523,094

547,029

559,705

559,705

559,705

549,008

513,405

538,469

549,008

549,008

549,008

Adjusted R2

0.203

0.137

0.213

0.067

0.177

0.128

0.203

0.136

0.211

0.066

0.176

0.127

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S2. Between-family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Aunt/Uncles’ Education.
Father dies
Education,
years
Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Edu (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Edu (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Edu (Q4)

Mother dies
Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.374***

-1.650***

-0.061***

-0.083***

-0.056***

-0.047***

-0.380***

-1.736***

-0.057***

-0.067***

-0.057***

-0.033**

(-12.60)

(-6.91)

(-13.31)

(-11.67)

(-7.94)

(-8.49)

(-6.75)

(-3.81)

(-6.68)

(-5.25)

(-4.32)

(-3.05)

0.108*

0.456

0.017*

0.016

0.025*

0.023**

0.08

-0.022

0.011

0.019

-0.01

-0.013

(2.30)

(1.20)

(2.44)

(1.47)

(2.30)

(2.66)

(0.98)

(-0.03)

(0.82)

(1.01)

(-0.50)

(-0.79)

0.034

-0.161

0.013*

0.021*

-0.006

-0.003

0.021

-1.126

0.008

-0.003

-0.011

-0.023

(0.81)

(-0.47)

(2.10)

(2.25)

(-0.60)

(-0.41)

(0.28)

(-1.78)

(0.69)

(-0.16)

(-0.59)

(-1.48)

0.079

-0.855*

0.018*

0.037***

0.018

-0.004

0.005

-0.349

0.023

0.03

0.014

-0.036*

(1.72)

(-2.18)

(2.56)

(3.84)

(1.66)

(-0.40)

(0.07)

(-0.50)

(1.89)

(1.87)

(0.74)

(-2.08)

Observations

490,360

460,486

480,724

490,360

490,360

490,360

480,666

451,658

472,858

480,666

480,666

480,666

Adjusted R2

0.216

0.149

0.229

0.069

0.189

0.134

0.215

0.148

0.228

0.068

0.189

0.133

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S3. Between-family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Grandparents’ Education.
Father dies
Education,
years
Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Edu (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Edu (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Edu (Q4)

Mother dies
Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.317***

-1.659***

-0.048***

-0.068***

-0.050***

-0.043***

-0.411***

-2.435***

-0.046***

-0.079***

-0.069***

-0.054***

(-13.31)

(-8.44)

(-13.53)

(-12.81)

(-8.88)

(-9.09)

(-11.02)

(-7.77)

(-8.16)

(-9.58)

(-7.75)

(-7.18)

0.008

-0.086

0.011

-0.001

0.011

0.019

0.057

0.471

-0.012

0.046**

0.004

0.001

(0.17)

(-0.22)

(1.54)

(-0.11)

(0.98)

(1.94)

(0.74)

(0.74)

(-1.04)

(2.86)

(0.21)

(0.04)

0.014

-0.289

-0.003

0.012

-0.004

0.005

0.069

-0.084

0.009

0.037*

0.014

0.014

(0.32)

(-0.76)

(-0.46)

(1.25)

(-0.33)

(0.53)

(1.00)

(-0.14)

(0.81)

(2.52)

(0.82)

(0.92)

0.055

0.033

0.013*

0.025**

0.012

0.003

0.079

0.472

-0.006

0.026

0.007

-0.005

(1.23)

(0.09)

(2.00)

(2.66)

(1.18)

(0.30)

(1.15)

(0.80)

(-0.59)

(1.87)

(0.47)

(-0.33)

Observations

485,557

456,055

476,050

485,557

485,557

485,557

477,438

448,672

469,524

477,438

477,438

477,438

Adjusted R2

0.215

0.144

0.23

0.075

0.184

0.133

0.214

0.144

0.229

0.073

0.184

0.133

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S4. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s Death by Father’s and Mother’s Education.
Years of
Uppereducation,
secondary,
Tertiary,
Tertiary,
rank
ISEI, rank
GPA, rank
graduation
entry
graduation
Age when father dies
0.001
0.001
0.002
-0.001
0.002
0
(1.24)
(1.11)
(1.75)
(-0.73)
(0.79)
(0.14)
0
0
0.001
0
0.004
0
Age when father dies # M: Up. sec. (short)
(0.11)
(-0.02)
(0.31)
(-0.08)
(1.16)
(-0.07)
Age when father dies # M: Up. sec.
-0.002
-0.002
-0.002
0.003
0
-0.004
(-1.01)
(-1.26)
(-1.33)
(1.21)
(-0.07)
(-1.33)
Age when father dies # M: Postsec.
-0.001
0
-0.001
-0.001
-0.006
-0.001
(-0.43)
(0.09)
(-0.36)
(-0.30)
(-1.11)
(-0.13)
Age when father dies # M: Tertiary
0.002
-0.003
-0.002
0.001
0.002
0.001
(0.80)
(-1.03)
(-0.97)
(0.18)
(0.46)
(0.15)
Age when father dies # M: Missing
0
-0.005
0
-0.004
-0.002
-0.004
(-0.06)
(-1.52)
(-0.13)
(-0.94)
(-0.32)
(-0.80)
Age when father dies # F: Up. sec. (short)
-0.002
0.003
-0.002
0.004
-0.005
0
(-1.04)
(1.31)
(-1.23)
(1.63)
(-1.68)
(-0.10)
Age when father dies # F: Up. sec.
0.002
-0.001
0.001
0.010***
0.003
0.002
(1.24)
(-0.51)
(0.31)
(3.82)
(1.02)
(0.59)
Age when father dies # F: Postsec.
-0.001
-0.001
-0.002
0.004
-0.003
-0.003
(-0.59)
(-0.18)
(-0.90)
(1.10)
(-0.73)
(-0.71)
Age when father dies # F: Tertiary
0
0.007*
0.001
0.005
0.002
0
(-0.17)
(2.54)
(0.64)
(1.49)
(0.36)
(0.03)
Age when father dies # F: Missing
0.003
0
0.003
0.009*
0.006
0.008
(1.31)
(0.10)
(1.13)
(2.35)
(1.18)
(1.74)
Gender, birth order
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Relative age interactions
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
341,139
320,117
335,827
341,139
341,139
341,139
Clusters
182,580
162,718
177,812
182,580
182,580
182,580
0.446
0.288
0.523
0.223
0.385
0.291
Adjusted R2
Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S5. Within-family Analysis of Age of Mother’s Death by Father’s and Mother’s Education.

Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # M: Up. sec. (short)
Age when mother dies # M: Up. sec.
Age when mother dies # M: Postsec.
Age when mother dies # M: Tertiary
Age when mother dies # M: Missing
Age when mother dies # F: Up. sec. (short)
Age when mother dies # F: Up. sec.
Age when mother dies # F: Postsec.
Age when mother dies # F: Tertiary
Age when mother dies # F: Missing
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0.004**
(2.97)
-0.001
(-0.27)
-0.003
(-1.60)
-0.007
(-1.95)
-0.003
(-0.81)
-0.002
(-0.41)
-0.002
(-0.70)
0
(-0.07)
-0.002
(-0.73)
-0.001
(-0.23)
-0.006
(-1.40)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,580
0.446

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.73)
-0.001
(-0.42)
0.004
(1.30)
0.001
(0.18)
0
(0.01)
-0.003
(-0.57)
0.001
(0.29)
-0.002
(-0.52)
-0.008*
(-2.00)
0.005
(1.18)
-0.002
(-0.43)
Yes
Yes
320,117
162,718
0.288

GPA, rank
0.002
(1.27)
-0.002
(-0.73)
-0.002
(-1.12)
-0.002
(-0.70)
0
(0.07)
-0.008*
(-2.01)
0.003
(1.32)
0.003
(1.10)
0.001
(0.40)
0.003
(0.83)
0.003
(0.67)
Yes
Yes
335,827
177,812
0.523

Uppersecondary,
graduation
0.007**
(2.84)
0
(0.10)
-0.008*
(-2.42)
-0.007
(-1.33)
-0.002
(-0.32)
-0.011
(-1.76)
-0.002
(-0.64)
0.003
(0.82)
0.002
(0.34)
0.002
(0.43)
-0.002
(-0.32)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,580
0.223

Tertiary,
entry
0.009**
(3.10)
0.002
(0.51)
-0.001
(-0.20)
0.004
(0.61)
0
(-0.04)
0.003
(0.35)
-0.008
(-1.85)
-0.005
(-1.14)
-0.005
(-0.83)
-0.003
(-0.42)
-0.002
(-0.33)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,580
0.385

Tertiary,
graduation
0.003
(1.06)
0.003
(0.75)
-0.003
(-0.86)
-0.001
(-0.09)
-0.008
(-1.27)
0.002
(0.34)
0
(-0.08)
-0.004
(-0.94)
-0.003
(-0.42)
0
(-0.01)
-0.004
(-0.54)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,580
0.291

Table S6. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s and Mother’s Death by Aunts/Uncle’s Education.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # A/U: Edu (Q2)
Age when father dies # A/U: Edu (Q3)
Age when father dies # A/U: Edu (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # A/U: Edu (Q2)
Age when mother dies # A/U: Edu (Q3)
Age when mother dies # A/U: Edu (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0
(0.02)
0.003
(1.50)
0.002
(1.07)
0.003
(1.47)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.445

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.33)
0.003
(1.41)
0.002
(0.93)
0.004
(1.56)
Yes
Yes
Yes
283,182
144,097
0.288

0.003
(1.63)
0
(0.03)
0.002
(0.91)
0.005*
(1.97)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.445

0
(0.12)
0.002
(0.79)
0.004
(1.24)
0.003
(0.89)
Yes
Yes
Yes
283,182
144,097
0.288

GPA, rank
0.002
(1.44)
-0.001
(-0.36)
0.001
(0.34)
-0.001
(-0.43)
Yes
Yes
Yes
296,344
156,726
0.525

Uppersecondary,
graduation
-0.004*
(-2.17)
0.006*
(2.21)
0.004
(1.70)
0.002
(0.72)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.217

Tertiary, entry
0.001
(0.55)
-0.003
(-0.98)
0.004
(1.23)
0.006
(1.59)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.386

Tertiary,
graduation
0
(-0.12)
0
(0.13)
0
(0.11)
0.004
(1.02)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.289

0.003
(1.56)
-0.002
(-0.66)
0.001
(0.45)
0.001
(0.42)
Yes
Yes
Yes
296,344
156,726
0.525

0
(0.16)
0.007
(1.71)
0.008*
(2.16)
0.010*
(2.44)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.217

0.011**
(2.91)
-0.002
(-0.35)
-0.004
(-0.97)
0.007
(1.28)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.386

0.002
(0.49)
-0.002
(-0.37)
0.005
(1.19)
0.008
(1.59)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,293
160,346
0.289

Table S7. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s and Mother’s Death by Grandparents’ Education.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # GP: Edu (Q2)
Age when father dies # GP: Edu (Q3)
Age when father dies # GP: Edu (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # GP: Edu (Q2)
Age when mother dies # GP: Edu (Q3)
Age when mother dies # GP: Edu (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0.001
(0.41)
0.001
(0.83)
0.001
(0.47)
0.003
(1.78)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.442

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.59)
0.003
(1.44)
0.002
(0.94)
0.004
(1.81)
Yes
Yes
Yes
284,162
144,553
0.286

0.004*
(2.19)
-0.001
(-0.36)
0.002
(0.95)
0.001
(0.55)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.442

0.002
(0.90)
0
(0.14)
0.002
(0.50)
0.002
(0.74)
Yes
Yes
Yes
284,162
144,553
0.286

GPA, rank
0.001
(0.86)
0.001
(0.73)
0
(-0.07)
0.002
(1.45)
Yes
Yes
Yes
297,377
157,217
0.522

Uppersecondary,
graduation
-0.003
(-1.73)
0.006*
(2.32)
0.002
(0.69)
0.004
(1.53)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.217

Tertiary, entry
0.001
(0.35)
0.005
(1.51)
0.004
(1.10)
0.003
(0.83)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.384

Tertiary,
graduation
0
(0.14)
0.001
(0.29)
0.002
(0.64)
0.003
(0.98)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.288

0.002
(0.95)
0.002
(0.80)
0.003
(1.42)
0.002
(0.67)
Yes
Yes
Yes
297,377
157,217
0.522

0.005
(1.77)
-0.003
(-0.67)
0.005
(1.37)
0
(0.06)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.217

0.007*
(2.27)
0.005
(1.12)
0.009*
(1.97)
0.004
(0.82)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.384

0.002
(0.61)
0.001
(0.23)
0.001
(0.32)
0.005
(1.15)
Yes
Yes
Yes
301,371
160,867
0.288

Online Appendix Part II: Income
Table S8. Between-family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Parents’ Income.
Father dies

Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Inc (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Inc (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # M: Inc (Q4)
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Inc (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Inc (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # F: Inc (Q4)

Mother dies

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.344***

-2.126***

-0.061***

-0.075***

-0.043***

-0.037***

-0.339***

-1.872***

-0.048***

-0.077***

-0.054***

-0.044***

(-9.11)

(-6.81)

(-10.96)

(-8.79)

(-4.81)

(-5.01)

(-5.49)

(-3.61)

(-5.34)

(-5.49)

(-3.68)

(-3.60)

-0.033

-0.245

0.005

-0.001

-0.023*

-0.011

-0.101

-0.362

-0.019*

-0.018

-0.011

-0.007

(-0.74)

(-0.66)

(0.76)

(-0.10)

(-2.22)

(-1.18)

(-1.52)

(-0.66)

(-1.98)

(-1.29)

(-0.71)

(-0.50)

-0.057

0.14

-0.002

-0.01

-0.021*

-0.007

-0.142*

-1.082*

-0.025*

-0.01

-0.031*

-0.016

(-1.30)

(0.38)

(-0.35)

(-1.08)

(-2.04)

(-0.78)

(-2.18)

(-1.97)

(-2.53)

(-0.76)

(-1.99)

(-1.17)

0.01

0.244

0.013*

0.008

-0.011

0.002

-0.128

-0.95

-0.01

-0.017

-0.028

-0.032*

(0.25)

(0.72)

(2.04)

(0.85)

(-1.13)

(0.29)

(-1.91)

(-1.70)

(-1.02)

(-1.18)

(-1.78)

(-2.32)

0.076

0.661*

0.009

0.012

0.016

0.008

0.021

-0.051

0.016

0.023

0.001

0.01

(1.93)

(2.07)

(1.57)

(1.35)

(1.71)

(1.06)

(0.30)

(-0.09)

(1.55)

(1.45)

(0.03)

(0.75)

0.022

0.226

0.007

0.01

-0.002

-0.016*

0.021

0.224

0.014

0.016

-0.007

0

(0.55)

(0.67)

(1.22)

(1.12)

(-0.25)

(-1.96)

(0.32)

(0.40)

(1.34)

(1.05)

(-0.43)

(0.01)

-0.003

-0.077

0.011

0.022*

0

-0.018*

0.093

0.084

0.009

0.055***

0.022

-0.003

(-0.08)

(-0.21)

(1.70)

(2.45)

(-0.00)

(-2.05)

(1.44)

(0.15)

(0.96)

(3.98)

(1.44)

(-0.21)

Observations

559,705

523,094

547,029

559,705

559,705

559,705

549,008

513,405

538,469

549,008

549,008

549,008

Adjusted R2

0.203

0.137

0.213

0.067

0.177

0.128

0.203

0.136

0.211

0.066

0.176

0.127

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S9. Between-family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Aunt/Uncles’ Income.
Father dies
Education,
years
Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Inc (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Inc (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # A/U: Inc (Q4)

Mother dies
Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.350***

-1.660***

-0.054***

-0.073***

-0.053***

-0.040***

-0.451***

-2.537***

-0.065***

-0.069***

-0.079***

-0.054***

(-11.91)

(-6.92)

(-12.21)

(-10.58)

(-7.67)

(-7.26)

(-8.26)

(-5.70)

(-7.56)

(-5.49)

(-6.22)

(-5.14)

0.025

0.253

0.004

-0.006

0.003

-0.002

0.188*

0.668

0.027*

0.019

0.029

0.022

(0.57)

(0.71)

(0.67)

(-0.64)

(0.31)

(-0.24)

(2.42)

(1.04)

(2.24)

(1.06)

(1.59)

(1.43)

0.043

-0.18

0.009

0.009

0.014

-0.004

0.128

0.224

0.027*

0.021

0.03

-0.004

(0.95)

(-0.49)

(1.38)

(0.86)

(1.32)

(-0.40)

(1.64)

(0.34)

(2.26)

(1.22)

(1.60)

(-0.26)

0.045

-0.687

0.007

0.031***

0.002

-0.011

0.065

0.627

0.017

0.013

0.024

-0.009

(1.00)

(-1.81)

(1.05)

(3.30)

(0.18)

(-1.18)

(0.81)

(0.92)

(1.35)

(0.80)

(1.31)

(-0.51)

Observations

490,360

460,486

480,724

490,360

490,360

490,360

480,666

451,658

472,858

480,666

480,666

480,666

Adjusted R2

0.216

0.149

0.229

0.069

0.189

0.134

0.215

0.148

0.228

0.068

0.189

0.133

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S10. Between-family Analysis of Parents’ Death by Grandparents’ Income.
Father dies
Education,
years
Father/Mother dies=1
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Inc (Q2)
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Inc (Q3)
Father/Mother dies=1 # GP: Inc (Q4)

Mother dies
Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

Education,
years

Occupation,
ISEI

GPA 9th
grade, rank

Uppersecondary
graduation

Tertiary,
entry

Tertiary,
graduation

-0.313***

-1.762***

-0.049***

-0.066***

-0.044***

-0.043***

-0.399***

-2.094***

-0.058***

-0.070***

-0.073***

-0.061***

(-9.42)

(-6.27)

(-9.65)

(-9.09)

(-5.52)

(-6.39)

(-7.83)

(-4.82)

(-7.61)

(-6.48)

(-6.03)

(-5.81)

0.004

-0.065

0.004

0.004

-0.006

0.004

-0.008

-0.261

0.015

0.015

0.003

0.003

(0.09)

(-0.17)

(0.59)

(0.37)

(-0.57)

(0.46)

(-0.12)

(-0.43)

(1.39)

(0.96)

(0.17)

(0.23)

0.047

0.147

0.005

0.004

0.003

0.016

0.041

-0.454

0.013

-0.002

0.009

0.017

(1.01)

(0.38)

(0.78)

(0.34)

(0.30)

(1.67)

(0.57)

(-0.74)

(1.19)

(-0.11)

(0.52)

(1.12)

-0.009

0.085

0.007

0.012

-0.008

-0.001

0.07

-0.055

0.014

0.030*

0.022

0.013

(-0.19)

(0.21)

(0.98)

(1.20)

(-0.76)

(-0.09)

(0.97)

(-0.09)

(1.31)

(1.99)

(1.31)

(0.85)

Observations

485,557

456,055

476,050

485,557

485,557

485,557

477,438

448,672

469,524

477,438

477,438

477,438

Adjusted R2

0.215

0.144

0.23

0.075

0.184

0.133

0.214

0.144

0.229

0.073

0.184

0.133

Note: the model includes controls for parents’ SES (education, occupation, income), and birth year, gender, age at SES measurement, family size, parents' age at birth, and birth order. *
p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Table S11. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s Death by Father’s and Mother’s Income.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # F: Inc (Q2)
Age when father dies # F: Inc (Q3)
Age when father dies # F: Inc (Q4)
Age when father dies # M: Inc (Q2)
Age when father dies # M: Inc (Q3)
Age when father dies # M: Inc (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0.001
(0.40)
0.001
(0.66)
0.002
(0.97)
0
(0.17)
-0.001
(-0.67)
-0.001
(-0.64)
0
(-0.14)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.445

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.48)
0
(0.07)
0
(0.09)
-0.002
(-0.86)
0.001
(0.30)
0.001
(0.33)
0.001
(0.68)
Yes
Yes
320,117
162,726
0.287

GPA, rank
-0.001
(-0.92)
0.001
(0.80)
0.003
(1.79)
0
(-0.15)
0.002
(1.31)
0
(0.20)
0.002
(1.38)
Yes
Yes
335,827
177,820
0.523

Uppersecondary,
graduation
0
(-0.05)
0.002
(0.90)
0.004
(1.53)
0.001
(0.30)
0.001
(0.37)
0
(0.11)
0.005*
(2.00)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.223

Tertiary,
entry
-0.001
(-0.22)
0.005
(1.78)
0.002
(0.50)
0.003
(1.11)
-0.001
(-0.46)
-0.001
(-0.21)
0
(-0.06)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.385

Tertiary,
graduation
0
(0.01)
0.001
(0.39)
0.001
(0.44)
-0.001
(-0.29)
-0.002
(-0.73)
-0.003
(-0.96)
0
(-0.01)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.29

Table S12. Within-family Analysis of Age of Mother’s Death by Father’s and Mother’s Income.

Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # F: Inc (Q2)
Age when mother dies # F: Inc (Q3)
Age when mother dies # F: Inc (Q4)
Age when mother dies # M: Inc (Q2)
Age when mother dies # M: Inc (Q3)
Age when mother dies # M: Inc (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
0.001
(0.64)
0
(0.10)
0.001
(0.30)
-0.001
(-0.24)
0.002
(1.09)
0
(0.02)
-0.002
(-0.70)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.445

ISEI, rank
0.002
(0.81)
0
(-0.10)
-0.001
(-0.49)
0
(0.07)
0.002
(0.55)
-0.001
(-0.18)
-0.003
(-0.90)
Yes
Yes
320,117
162,726
0.287

GPA, rank
0.001
(0.35)
-0.001
(-0.24)
0.002
(0.99)
0.002
(1.09)
0.004
(1.87)
-0.001
(-0.56)
-0.002
(-1.06)
Yes
Yes
335,827
177,820
0.523

Uppersecondary,
graduation
0.003
(1.08)
-0.003
(-0.85)
0.002
(0.62)
0
(0.03)
-0.001
(-0.17)
0.003
(0.72)
0.001
(0.36)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.223

Tertiary,
entry
0.005
(1.17)
0.004
(0.84)
0.007
(1.54)
0.002
(0.43)
0.003
(0.67)
-0.005
(-1.07)
-0.006
(-1.33)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.385

Tertiary,
graduation
0.001
(0.16)
0.003
(0.73)
0.002
(0.46)
-0.001
(-0.29)
0.004
(0.93)
-0.007
(-1.63)
-0.002
(-0.41)
Yes
Yes
341,139
182,588
0.29

Table S13. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s and Mother’s Death by Aunts/Uncle’s Income.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # A/U: Inc (Q2)
Age when father dies # A/U: Inc (Q3)
Age when father dies # A/U: Inc (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # A/U: Inc (Q2)
Age when mother dies # A/U: Inc (Q3)
Age when mother dies # A/U: Inc (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
-0.002
(-1.21)
0.002
(1.22)
0.005**
(2.73)
0.005**
(2.93)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,949
160,700
0.444

ISEI, rank
-0.001
(-0.65)
0.003
(1.50)
0.003
(1.49)
0.006**
(2.73)
Yes
Yes
Yes
283,790
144,407
0.288

0.001
(0.32)
-0.002
(-0.96)
-0.002
(-1.00)
0.001
(0.60)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.444

-0.002
(-0.48)
0.003
(1.16)
0.003
(0.86)
0.005
(1.69)
Yes
Yes
Yes
283,373
144,193
0.288

GPA, rank
-0.003
(-1.46)
0.002
(1.35)
0.002
(1.54)
0.002
(1.10)
Yes
Yes
Yes
296,984
157,065
0.525

Uppersecondary,
graduation
-0.002
(-0.60)
0
(-0.04)
0.001
(0.40)
-0.001
(-0.33)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,949
160,700
0.216

Tertiary, entry
-0.006
(-1.93)
0.007*
(2.19)
0.009**
(3.00)
0.007*
(2.07)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,949
160,700
0.386

Tertiary,
graduation
-0.005
(-1.67)
0.006*
(2.06)
0.008*
(2.45)
0.009**
(2.77)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,949
160,700
0.289

0
(-0.01)
-0.002
(-0.93)
0
(0.13)
0.003
(1.34)
Yes
Yes
Yes
296,543
156,830
0.525

0.001
(0.18)
0.003
(0.92)
0.002
(0.51)
0.001
(0.40)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.216

0.003
(0.53)
-0.002
(-0.36)
0.002
(0.47)
0.002
(0.45)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.386

0.001
(0.12)
-0.003
(-0.61)
0.004
(0.87)
0.002
(0.54)
Yes
Yes
Yes
300,497
160,455
0.289

Table S14. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s and Mother’s Death by Grandparents’ Income.

Age when father dies
Age when father dies # GP: Inc (Q2)
Age when father dies # GP: Inc (Q3)
Age when father dies # GP: Inc (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Age when mother dies
Age when mother dies # GP: Inc (Q2)
Age when mother dies # GP: Inc (Q3)
Age when mother dies # GP: Inc (Q4)
Gender, birth order
Relative age interactions
F M age dead SES interactions
Observations
Clusters
Adjusted R2
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001

Years of
education,
rank
-0.001
(-0.59)
0.001
(0.55)
0
(-0.18)
0.005***
(3.33)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.443

ISEI, rank
0.001
(0.55)
-0.001
(-0.65)
0
(0.12)
0
(-0.08)
Yes
Yes
Yes
302,418
153,758
0.288

-0.001
(-0.61)
0.002
(0.74)
0.004
(1.85)
0.004
(1.76)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.443

-0.002
(-0.52)
0.010***
(3.58)
0.004
(1.29)
0.003
(1.06)
Yes
Yes
Yes
302,418
153,758
0.288

GPA, rank
-0.003
(-1.64)
0.001
(0.79)
0.002
(1.09)
0.004**
(2.71)
Yes
Yes
Yes
316,670
167,428
0.524

Uppersecondary,
graduation
-0.004
(-1.62)
0.002
(0.91)
0.008***
(3.42)
0.006*
(2.54)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.217

Tertiary, entry
-0.003
(-0.91)
0.003
(1.05)
0.001
(0.43)
0.006*
(1.97)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.386

Tertiary,
graduation
-0.003
(-0.92)
0.003
(1.04)
0.004
(1.48)
0.008**
(2.72)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.289

-0.002
(-0.65)
0.004
(1.67)
0.003
(1.36)
0.003
(1.22)
Yes
Yes
Yes
316,670
167,428
0.524

-0.001
(-0.20)
0.004
(1.28)
0.008*
(2.41)
0.010**
(2.69)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.217

-0.001
(-0.27)
0.009*
(2.15)
0.007
(1.60)
0.007
(1.55)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.386

-0.003
(-0.70)
0.003
(0.64)
0.005
(1.12)
0.011**
(2.61)
Yes
Yes
Yes
321,103
171,464
0.289

Online Appendix Part III: Analyses Corresponding to Kalil et al. (2016).
Table S15. Within-family Analysis of Age of Father’s Death, Baseline specification.
Female
Age when father dies
Relative age

Education rank, years
0.078***
0.078***
(79.43)
(79.48)
-0.002*** 0
(-4.27)
(0.61)
-0.003***
(-13.98)

Occupation rank, ISEI
-0.004**
-0.004**
(-3.15)
(-3.16)
0.005***
0.001
(7.09)
(1.00)
0.004***
(17.50)

GPA 9th grade, rank
0.118***
0.118***
(124.11)
(124.44)
0.006***
0
(11.51)
(0.52)
0.006***
(31.45)

Upper-secondary
graduation (0/1)
0.035***
0.035***
(23.25)
(23.36)
0.016***
0.003***
(19.10)
(3.72)
0.013***
(43.39)

Tertiary, entry (0/1)
0.163***
0.163***
(88.25)
(88.32)
0.007***
0.001
(7.21)
(0.90)
0.006***
(17.82)

Tertiary,
graduation (0/1)
0.160***
0.160***
(88.38)
(88.56)
0.009***
-0.001
(8.60)
(-1.19)
0.010***
(28.11)

Individuals
341,139
341,139
305,435
305,435
332,719
332,719
341,139
341,139
341,139
341,139
341,139
341,139
Families
182,616
182,615
162,754
162,753
177,848
177,847
182,616
182,615
182,616
182,615
182,616
182,615
Adjusted R2
0.443
0.444
0.283
0.285
0.516
0.518
0.215
0.223
0.383
0.384
0.287
0.29
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Sample contains both individual experiencing parental loss and those that do not in order to net of relative age effects following Kalil et al. (2016).
For those that do not experience parental loss, their value for age at parental death is set to an ad hoc value.

Comment: for each outcome, two sets of models are estimated: with and without relative age (i.e., each siblings age in 2012). The control for relative age
renders the age at parental death gradient non-significant, except for upper-secondary graduation, and entry into tertiary education (for mother’s death), but
even in those cases, most of the effect gradient is lost. This shows how sibling fixed effect models can be misleading if not birth cohort differences (relative
age) are accounted for.

Table S16. Within-family Analysis of Age of Mother’s Death, Baseline specification.
Female
Age when mother dies
Relative age

Education rank, years
0.078***
0.078***
(79.44)
(79.47)
-0.001
0.001
(-1.74)
(1.66)
-0.003***
(-14.60)

Occupation rank, ISEI
-0.004**
-0.004**
(-3.17)
(-3.17)
0.005***
0.001
(5.31)
(1.07)
0.004***
(18.13)

GPA 9th grade, rank
0.118***
0.118***
(124.05)
(124.43)
0.007***
0.002
(9.53)
(1.95)
0.006***
(32.17)

Upper-secondary
graduation (0/1)
0.035***
0.035***
(23.17)
(23.34)
0.017***
0.004**
(13.89)
(3.20)
0.013***
(45.30)

Tertiary, entry (0/1)
0.163***
0.163***
(88.22)
(88.32)
0.012***
0.005***
(7.92)
(3.61)
0.006***
(17.87)

Tertiary,
graduation (0/1)
0.160***
0.160***
(88.34)
(88.56)
0.010***
0
(6.83)
(0.11)
0.010***
(28.57)

Individuals
341,139
341,139
305,435
305,435
332,719
332,719
341,139
341,139
341,139
341,139
341,139
341,139
Families
182,616
182,615
162,754
162,753
177,848
177,847
182,616
182,615
182,616
182,615
182,616
182,615
Adjusted R2
0.443
0.444
0.283
0.285
0.515
0.518
0.214
0.223
0.383
0.384
0.286
0.29
Note: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Sample contains both individual experiencing parental loss and those that do not in order to net of relative age effects following Kalil et al. (2016).
For those that do not experience parental loss, their value for age at parental death is set to an ad hoc value.

Comment: for each outcome, two sets of models are estimated: with and without relative age (i.e., each siblings age in 2012). The control for relative age
renders the age at parental death gradient non-significant, except for upper-secondary graduation, and entry into tertiary education (for mother’s death), but
even in those cases, most of the effect gradient is lost. This shows how sibling fixed effect models can be misleading if not birth cohort differences (relative
age) are accounted for.

