Seminar Paper

Advanced Topics in Social Network
Analysis

Learning from 2016:
predicting elections
through Twitter
Submitted by:
Daniel Stroh
Sebastian Reiserer

1

Table of contents

1. Abstract

Page 3

2. Introduction

Page 4

3. Literature Review

Page 6

4. Research Question & Hypotheses

Page 10

5. Methodology

Page 12

6. Results

Page 14

7. Discussion

Page 17

8. Conclusion

Page 20

9. References

Page 21

2

1. Abstract
What happened during the news coverage for the 2016 election cycle(s) is
a case study that will be studied for years to come. The failure to accurately
predict Brexit or Donald Trump’s success in the US presidential election left
everybody perplexed as neither, especially the latter, was ever predicted to
occur. This research investigates the failures of the media to predict Trump’s
election and investigates whether Twitter can be used in the place of existing
procedures to correctly predict elections. Data obtained through this research
shows that online discussion of Trump by Twitter users was higher than
discussion of Hillary Clinton during four critical events leading up to election
day. This paper argues that this data can be used to make successful
predictions for election outcomes. The findings and conclusion help
underscore the importance of this type of research, not only in terms of
predicting elections via Twitter, but also in terms of how such insights might
benefit the media and its audiences.

3

2. Introduction
In the year 2016 two major election upsets occurred that went contrary to
the popular belief held by experts, traditional mainstream media and the
general populace alike. Despite the upset that was ‘Brexit’, no shock was
bigger than Donald Trump’s victory in the 2016 US presidential election. After
continuous media coverage suggesting that he had no chance of winning, we
ask ourselves how the media could have gotten it so wrong.
Learning how and why the media, particularly television and online media,
was unsuccessful in accurately predicting the elections is essential to
preventing similar blunders in the future. Being able to predict elections
creates stability in economic, political and policy aspects while also ensuring
that people have realistic views and expectations formed by correct media
coverage. The collective failure of the media to correctly predict recent
elections also means that the techniques they use to make predictions must
be insufficient. We therefore want to see if there is another way to accurately
predict elections.
With the emergence and rapid rise of social media in our everyday lives
we want to know if it is possible to research these users to help determine
voting patterns to help predict elections. We are not the only ones seeing the
potential of social media to predict elections; other researchers are already
conducting research into this phenomenon. Through the use of prior papers
such as Tumasjan’s 2009 paper on the German federal elections, or the
research of Colleoni et al. into echo chambers, we will form our bedrock of
understanding for this research paper.

4

In section three we will investigate and learn from previous research
looking into the prediction capacity of both social media and news media. In
the following section we will present our arguments, leading us to the
research question. The method(s) that we will employ to answer the research
question will be clearly defined in section five, titled ‘Methodology’. The next
part (section six) will be used to present our research data results, which we
will thoroughly analyze afterwards in section seven. At this point we will also
examine how our findings relate to and help answer our research question. In
the final part, section eight, we will provide a brief overview of the steps taken
to answer our research question.

5

3. Literature Review
Research on social media

Rapid developments in society and technology are causing an everincreasing presence of online activity. During the 2008 US presidential
election campaign, Barack Obama’s strategies focused on incorporating and
utilizing social networking platforms such as MySpace, Twitter, and Facebook.
The 2008 campaign represents a watershed moment for social networks, as it
was their first large-scale application in US presidential primaries. As
Tumasjan et al. point out, “Twitter has become a legitimate communication
channel in the political arena as a result of the 2008 campaign” (Tumasjan,
Sprenger, Sander, & Welpe, 2010). Every subsequent election has heavily
focused on developing strategies for social media, making it an indispensable
part of any modern election. Of course, social media can be used for a variety
of purposes besides being used as a political platform (e.g., Hayat &
Hershkovitz, 2018; Hayat, Hershkovitz & Samuel-Azran, 2019). As important
as social media is in getting elected, can it also become a way to predict
elections? To find out we will examine research addressing this inquiry.
The paper ‘Predicting Elections with Twitter: What 140 Characters
Reveal about Political Sentiment’ (Tumasjan et al., 2010) researched the
2009 parliamentary elections in Germany. This paper is useful to help us
understand the potential of Twitter for predicting elections. 104,003 tweets
were gathered in this research to analyze the correlation between Twitter and
voting. The research by Tumasjan et al. showed that nearly 70% of these
tweets referred to six major parties, with the remaining tweets (approximately
30%) referring to politicians. The data was divided to find which party and
their respective politician was tweeted about, with what sentiment, and how
often. Tumasjan et al. concluded that the mere amount of tweets “mentioning
a political party can be considered a plausible reflection of the vote share and
its predictive power even comes close to traditional election polls.” The paper
concludes by stating that, according to its findings, mention of politicians and
their parties on Twitter reflects their popularity as measured via polling by the
6

traditional media. Furthermore the research concluded that Twitter activity
prior to the election seems to “validly reflect the election outcome.” This
research is in support of our view about Twitter’s capacities to predict
elections, but do more research papers come to the same conclusion? To test
the validity of this research, more papers must be studied to cultivate an
informed opinion.
Dhiraj Murthy investigates the role tweets play in elections in the paper
‘Twitter and elections: are tweets predictive, reactive, or a form of buzz?’
Based on the 2012 US Republican presidential primaries, the paper explores
whether Twitter sentiment and a candidate’s Twitter use correlate with
electoral success. Sentiment towards every candidate was separated into
positive and negative categories, with the aggregated results indicating an
almost neutral overall sentiment score for everyone. Candidates Ron Paul
and John Huntsman employed buzz marketing to gain online popularity; they
had the highest tweet frequency which resulted in them having the highest
sentiment score. Despite heavily using social media, their social media
presence was not significantly correlated with winning debates or primaries
(Murthy, 2015). Romney, on the other hand, had among the lowest cumulative
sentiment score during primaries and ultimately won the nomination. The
differences between candidates’ sentiment scores and their actual
performance during voting indicates that online ‘sentimental’ political capital
does not in fact relate to how voters end up voting.
At this point we must also ask ourselves what discussion on social
media sites such as Twitter is like. How do users communicate and interact
with one another, and is the online Republican presence underestimated, as it
was by traditional polls? Colleoni, Rozza, and Arvidsson discuss echo
chambers and homophily (meaning the tendency of similar individuals to form
ties with each other) on Twitter. Unlike previous studies, they used the entire
population of Twitter users in their study. This gave them a much larger
sample size, thereby preventing sampling bias of the population. Their goal
was to see if Twitter encourages discussions between people with different
views on politics or if Twitter users only interact with like-minded people,

7

indicating homophily.
Their findings indicated that, in general, Democrats have an
overwhelming amount of ties with other Democrats and Republicans have a
high amount of outbound ties with Democrats. Running more tests, they
tested both Republicans and Democrats separately and saw that Democrats
had an even higher homophily rate, and Republicans a lower homophily rate,
than expected. These results were similar to those of previous studies like
Pennacchiotti and Popescu (2011), which found that “Democrats tend to
consistently have a large percentage of friends with the same affiliation. For
Republicans, the political affiliation of the neighbors is more mixed”. But these
results were also the opposite of what some other previous studies found,
such as Boutyline and Willer, who found “that conservatives are more
homophilous than liberals.” Colleoni, Rozza, and Arvidsson’s second
experiment assumed that users’ political stance was reflected by which official
account (Democrat or Republican) they were following. When they did this,
their own prior results were reversed, with Republicans yielding a higher rate
of homophily than Democrats. Though the studies cited above do not allow us
to point to a conclusive difference in Democrats’ and Republicans’ rates of
homophily, the findings do suggest that Twitter acts both as an open public
sphere for participation and as an echo chamber with reciprocal ties (e.g.,
Hayat, Samuel-Azran & Galily, 2016).

Research on traditional media

To understand how the traditional media was inaccurate in its
predictions regarding Brexit and Donald Trump’s election, we must first
understand how it makes its predictions. In the paper ‘The Evolution of
Election Polling in the United States’, Hillygus investigates how the media
acquires its election predictions.
The traditional media uses professional survey companies to make
initial predictions for elections. However, as these require long-term research
and analysis Hillygus concludes that this form of prediction cannot account for

8

any of the unexpected events that occur during an election. Predictions that
are made using past voter patterns can also suffer from the same problem, as
these models “rarely engage the most up-to-date scholarly research on
political participants” (Hillygus, 2011).
Hillygus says that in order to make updated predictions throughout the
election cycle, the media as well as pollsters use data gained from surveys,
interviews, third party sources, and on- and offline opinion polls. Hillygus finds
many problems associated with this, as this data, and the methodologies used
to obtain it, are often – unsurprisingly – unreliable.
The paper found that despite the high demand for accurate predictions
for elections, there is a "decline in the prominence of polls in election politics."
This deterioration might be related to a current trend in traditional reporting
which prioritizes sensationalism over the detached presentation of facts, as
well as a general lowering of standards caused by financial pressures.

9

4. Research Question & Hypotheses
In the aftermath of the 2016 US presidential election, many were left
wondering how this could have happened after constantly being told by the
media that Hillary Clinton was going to win. Hillygus’s research found how
misguided the media was in dismissing Trump’s chances, estimating at one
point that “the presidential candidate has a 1% chance to win” (Diaz, 2015).
This trend continued through the last few days leading up to the election, with
some predictions giving Trump a mere 15% chance to win two days before
election day (Katz, 2016). The media’s inability to accurately predict election
outcomes on numerous occasions throughout the year is of great concern to
us. We therefore want to conduct our own research to find out why traditional
media failed in its predictions and to discover if social media can be used as
an alternative to accurately predict elections.
Several of the studies mentioned above support the notion that social
media such as Twitter can be used as tools to predict elections, which is
something we want to investigate ourselves. Intriguingly, research conducted
by Murthy led him to the insight that social media sentiment for candidates
does not in fact help researchers predict voters’ actual intentions at the polls.
This helps shape our research procedure, as sentiment will not be used in this
investigation. Meanwhile, the research by Tumasjan et al. found that
popularity on social media could be indicative of both candidates’ and political
parties’ electoral success. The findings of these prior studies help shape our
own inquiry into traditional and social media.
As the issues of inaccuracy in the media and the potential of social
media to predict elections are interconnected, we decided to focus our
research on both. Thus, our research question asks: ‘Is the media’s
traditional way of predicting political election results obsolete, and can
we use online social media (Twitter) in its place, to more accurately
predict election results?’

10

We have seen that the media was consistently inaccurate in predicting
the 2016 US election, and we therefore hypothesize that at least some of their
methods of predicting elections are outdated. Based on our preliminary
understanding of social media research, gained through the literature review,
we also hypothesize that social media does in fact possess the capacity to
predict elections.

11

5. Methodology
Empirical analytical methods will be used in our paper in order to
answer our research question. We will focus on testing the research question
by analyzing Twitter to see if this particular social media network can support
our theory, or provide alternative insights. After acquiring the relevant data,
we will analyze, discuss, and explain our findings and relate them back to our
research question.
To help us analyze Twitter we will use Buzzilla, an online tool that
monitors, analyzes, and tracks social media conversations. This tool will
provide us with the ability to obtain quantitative information based on tweets
from the 2016 US election cycle. Taking a quantitative approach means that
we will obtain numerical data on which candidate is more frequently discussed
on Twitter, information which will then be compared to actual poll results.
The population used for the research encompasses all Twitter users of
voting age (18 years old and over); this means that we will assume that the
people tweeting about either candidate will participate in the voting process.
In order to address our research question we will conduct nonprobability sampling of Twitter across four major election dates. These dates
are:

Date

Event

September 26th, 2016

First presidential debate

October 9th, 2016

Second presidential debate

October 19th, 2016

Third presidential debate

November 8th, 2016

United States presidential election day

While we will be using non-probability sampling to gain data for these for
dates, it does mean that we will unfortunately not be able to randomize the
population and users of Twitter within our research. The downside of this
sampling method is that researchers are unable to accurately represent the
entire population of Twitter, meaning that results may not be entirely reflect
the actual voting population. However, as our research focuses on obtaining

12

unobtrusive insight into a sample of Twitter users, representative of the
population as a whole, we believe bias won’t impact our findings. Additionally,
non-probability sampling is used to conduct our research as it offers benefits
such as ease of availability of data (via Buzzilla), cost effectiveness,
efficiency, and establishing so-called pilot data.
We will collect tweets referring to both the Republican and Democratic
presidential candidates, i.e., Trump and Clinton, within our specified dates. On
Buzzilla we will look at Twitter discussion of these two candidates by
searching for keywords relating to each. This will then be used to see if the
amount of discussion on Twitter translates into real life popularity.
Since our research paper hypothesizes that the media’s traditional way
of predicting political elections is obsolete, we will also be conducting our own
investigation of said media’s predictions about the 2016 US election. This will
be accomplished by reviewing election forecasts and polling numbers relating
to the four above-mentioned event dates. To get an accurate representation
of predictions made by the media, we will use a variety of sources from
different media networks and combine them into an average polling forecast
to gain a general overview.

13

6. Results
In our research we collected 555,993 tweets that discussed Trump
(52%) or Hillary (48%) within our specified time period, mentioned in our
methodology section. Depicted in figure 1, one can see the ongoing
relationship between the number of tweets discussing Republican candidate
Donald Trump (in red) and Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton (in blue).

T
w
e
e
t
#

Date of Tweets

Figure 1
By including data which ranges from our first date to our last date,
figure 1 provides additional insight into the relationship being studied. A very
noticable takeaway from this data is that following any one of the four
specified dates the amount of tweets increases significantly compared to any
other day. The day after the first date, discussion of Trump increased by
approximately 50.8%, with discussion of Clinton increasing slightly more, by
54.2%. This trend continued throughout the three remaining dates and their
following day, with discussion of Trump increasing by 72.3%, 25.6%, and
234.9% after each respective date, and discussion of Hillary increasing by
84.4%, 8.3%, and 145.1% respectively.
To improve our understanding of the amount of traffic that occurred for
each candidate on our targeted dates, we highlighted the amount of
discussions, and their corresponding makeup of overall Twitter, in table 1.

14

Date

Candidate

% of Twitter

Discussion #

Discussion %

26.09.16

Donald

1.94%

6,801

51.6%

Trump
26.09.16

Hillary Clinton

1.82%

6,371

48.4%

09.10.16

Donald

2.20%

6,646

56.8%

Trump
09.10.16

Hillary Clinton

1.67%

5,054

43.2%

19.10.16

Donald

2.41%

7,848

52.0%

Trump
19.10.16

Hillary Clinton

2.23%

7,247

48.0%

08.11.16

Donald

4.71%

14,730

50.1%

4.68%

14,642

49.9

Trump
08.11.16

Hillary Clinton

Table 1
As shown in table 1, Trump consistently has a higher percentage of Twitter’s
population posting about him. The amount of discussion related to Donald
Trump is higher on all four dates compared to his counterpart Hillary Clinton.
Although Donald Trump does have higher discussion, on three out of four
dates there is no significant difference between the two candidates as
discussion traffic is within a 0.05% and 7% range. The one outlier date is the
second debate in which Trump received 24% more discussion.
The tweets obtained in this research discussing both candidates are
calculated into percentages in the last column of table 1. This simplification of
the sampling data shows how much relative discussion the candidates
received from the total sample population.
Trump had 51.6% of the population discussing him during the first
debate compared to Hillary’s 48.4%. During the second debate, Trump was
even more popular at 56.8% while Clinton fell to 43.2%. During the third
debate discussions of the candidates once more became more even, with
discussion of Trump making up 52% of traffic compared to Hillary’s 48%. On
election day both candidates were nearly identical as Clinton’s 49.9%
narrowly lost out to Trump’s 50.1% advantage.

15

In actuality, Donald Trump and Hillary Clinton were not the sole
candidates participating in each event, meaning that polling numbers aren’t
split solely between them and their numbers do not by themselves make up
the full 100% recorded. The averaged data collected from media forecasts for
both candidates anticipated Hillary Clinton winning on every single date, both
in the debates and the actual election.
For the first debate Hillary’s average polling numbers were 43.0%, with
Trump receiving 40.4% (First debate: Clinton & Trump, 2016). For the second
debate, averages of media predictions saw Hillary winning by 44.8%
compared to Trump’s 40.8% (Second debate: Clinton & Trump, 2016). During
the third debate Hillary increased her margin to 45.8%, ahead of Trump
whose average polling rating decreased to 40.4% (Third debate: Clinton &
Trump). With the help of the statistical analysis website FiveThirtyEight we
obtained the odds given to each candidate to win on our fourth research date
(election day). FiveThirtyEight’s forecast gave Clinton a 71.4% chance of
winning, with Trump’s chance of winning being estimated at a mere 28.6%.
In the end Donald Trump won the 2016 US Presidential election after
securing 306 Electoral College votes (270 are needed to win), with Hillary
achieving 232. This essentially means that while Clinton was 16.3% away
from reaching the minimum 270 Electoral College votes, Donald Trump’s 306
votes made him a decisive winner with 15.5% over the required amount (an
overall difference of 31.9% between the two candidates). The general election
results saw Trump receive a lower percentage of the popular vote (45.9%)
than Clinton, who received 48.0% of votes (Presidential election results,
2017).

16

7. Discussion
To address and answer our research question we will take a look at
both facets of the question. First, we will examine whether ‘the media’s
traditional way of predicting political election results is obsolete’. We
also will discuss if Twitter is able to predict elections, and subsequently
conclude if we can ‘use online social media (Twitter) in the place of
traditional media, to more accurately predict election results.’
Through our research we unintentionally found a pattern in which
discussion increased significantly the day after our research dates. This
increase in the volume of traffic represents the highest fluctuation in
discussion within our data range. A possible reason for this is that the buzz
surrounding the event dates caused an inflation of the traffic the following day.
Despite this, the data collected on these days does not indicate a deviation
from Twitter users’ normal discussion patterns, merely an increase in volume.
The research dates show that Donald Trump consistently received
more discussion, which according to our hypothesis would predict Trump’s
victory. This was partially true, because although he received 2.1% fewer
votes in the popular vote, the decisive electoral vote was 31.9% in his favor.
This data shows that Trump’s popularity was much higher than was predicted
by the traditional media. The dates that we researched also suggest that
Trump’s popularity superseded Hillary’s, with Twitter discussions on election
day indicating a 0.2% advantage for Trump (50.1% to Hillary’s 49.9%). This
evidence both supports and undermines the claim that social media can be
used to more accurately predict election results as it incorrectly predicted the
popular vote, but correctly predicted the president. A possible interpretation of
this outcome is that because the election was extremely close, more dates
should have been sampled to improve the observable popularity trends.
Another factor that influences the findings is that the US election system is not
based on overall popularity, but rather on the Electoral College system. The
prediction capacity of Twitter is supported by the findings of Tumasjan et al.
wherein they also discovered that mentions of politicians (and their parties)
are reflective of the voting outcome. Our research did successfully predict the

17

overall popularity of Trump among voters, and that this would lead to his
election.
Speaking in terms of traditional media, the results clearly indicate that
throughout the election the media failed to accurately predict the real support
Trump had at every stage. The media’s own opinion polls conducted after
each debate showed a trend of Hillary’s support growing over Trump’s,
supporting their coverage that predicted her election victory. This trend is not
supported by our data, which shows it was Trump who gained popularity after
each debate leading up to the election. This only helps underscore how the
traditional media’s reluctance to use social media to predict elections results
in inaccurate reporting.
Regardless of how the media collected its predictive data regarding the
2016 US presidential election, the undeniable fact is that they failed to give an
accurate picture of Trump’s popularity. This failure should not however mean
that the media’s traditional way of predicting political elections has become
entirely obsolete. Rather, the outcome of the 2016 election should present the
traditional media with a watershed moment, one that should motivate them to
incorporate social media as an additional way of predicting elections to more
accurately predict the popularity of candidates in future elections.
Twitter has been shown to have some capacity to predict elections,
which combined with the constant increase in social media usage overall,
makes it both an attractive and essential avenue for further research. While
such research does not impact Twitter users themselves, it does influence
other researchers and, possibly, the media and other related institutions.
Every researcher (us included) tries to be as accurate and objective as
possible throughout their research process. We should however also be able
to reflect on our research and acknowledge any limitations, which is why we
will offer a few ways the research could be improved. If this research were to
be repeated, we would suggest that a larger sample size population be used.
Another way to improve on our research would be to increase the sampling
scale by collecting data from more than four dates. An in-depth study of the
historical accuracy of the media’s ability to predict elections should be
performed in order to contextualize the media’s current predictions.
Furthermore, the results of this research also raise the question of whether,
18

and how, other types of social media may help predict elections. Another
question that arises from our research is unrelated to elections, namely: what
other practical uses might Twitter’s prediction capacities have?
In accordance with our hypothesis we have established and clearly
demonstrated the media’s failure to predict the 2016 US presidential
elections, although we did conclude that this does not entirely invalidate their
prediction methods. Our research into social media and its prediction capacity
did yield results in support of our hypothesis that it possesses the qualities to
accurately predict elections, which should be used as an additional tool
employed by the traditional media.

19

8. Conclusion
In our research we have shown that the current way the media predicts
elections is outdated, inaccurate, and needs to adopt new approaches,
approaches that social media such as Twitter are capable of fulfilling. The
findings show distinctive advantages that researching and analyzing Twitter
has with regard to predicting elections. Our research findings provide benefits
to a variety of fields, such as social and news media, politics (pollsters and
campaigns), fellow researchers, and more. Our research informs them about
the extent of Twitter’s prediction capacity and in doing so will make them
better equipped to predict candidates’ success in future elections.
From our original interest in how the media could be so mistaken in
predicting the 2016 US presidential election and how this could be resolved,
we researched and developed our own understanding that led us to our
research question. With a strong understanding of the matter at hand we
hypothesized what our data would later confirm (i.e., the media’s inaccuracy
and social media’s successful prediction ability). To test our hypothesis we
developed a strategy, using Buzzilla to determine candidates’ popularity
among Twitter users. This information highlighted the limitations of traditional
prediction methods, while also demonstrating that Twitter could have been
used to gain a more accurate picture of Trump’s popularity, and consequently
could have helped to successfully predict his electoral success.

20

9. References
(2016, September 16). CPD Invites Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump to
Debate. Retrieved from http://debates.org
(2016, October 4). CPD Invites Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump to
Debate. Retrieved from http://debates.org
(2016, October 14). CPD Invites Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump to Third
Presidential Debate. Retrieved from http://debates.org
(2016, November 8). Who will win the presidency?. Retrieved from
https://projects.fivethirtyeight.com
(2016, November 8). 2016 General Election: Trump vs. Clinton. Retrieved
from elections.huffingtonpost.com
(2017, August 9). Presidiential Election Results: Donald J. Trump Wins.
Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com
Bialik, C., & Enten, H. (2016, November 9). The Polls Missed Trump. We
Asked Pollsters Why. Retrieved from https://fivethirtyeight.com
Boutyline A., & Willer, R. (2013). e social structure of political echo chambers:
Ideology and political homophily in online communication networks. Working
paper, University of Berkeley.
Colleoni, E., & Rozza, A., & Arvidsson, A. (2014). Echo Chamber or Public
Sphere? Predicting Political Orientation and Measuring Political Homophily in
Twitter Using Big Data. Journal of Communication. 64(2), 317-332. DOI:
10.1111/jcom.12084
Crespi, I. (1988). Pre-election polling. USA: Russell Sage Foundation.
Diaz, Daniella. (2015, July, 9). Think Trump has a chance to snag GOP
nomination? Analysis gives him just 1%. Retrieved from http://edition.cnn.com
Hayat, T., Samuel-Azran, T., & Galily, Y. (2016). Al-Jazeera Sport’s US
Twitter followers: Sport-politics nexus?. Online Information Review, 40(6),
785-797.
Hayat, T., Hershkovitz, A., & Samuel-Azran, T. (2019). The independent
reinforcement effect: The role diverse social ties play in the credibility
assessment process. Public Understanding of Science, 28(2), 201-217.
Hayat, T., & Hershkovitz, A. (2018). The role social cues play in mediating the
effect of eWOM over purchasing intentions. Journal of Customer Behavior. 17
(3), 173-187.

21

Hillygus, S. D. (2011). The Evolution of Election Polling in the United States.
Public Opinion Quarterly, 75(5), 962–981.
Katz, J. (2016, November 8). Who Will Be President?. Retrieved from
https://www.nytimes.com
McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Cook, J. M. (2001). Birds of a feather:
Homophily in social networks. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 415–444.
Metaxas, P., & Gayo-Avello, D., & Mustafaraj, E. (2011). How (Not) to Predict
Elections, IEEE Third International Conference on Social Computing, Boston,
2011, IEEE Publications.
Murthy, D. (2015). Twitter and elections: are tweets, predictive, reactive, or a
form of buzz?. Information, Communication & Society, 18(7), 816-831.
(n, d). What Consumers Really Need Retrieved from
http://www.buzzilla.com/solutions/overview/
Pennacchiotti, M., & Popescu, A. (2011). A machine learning approach to
Twitter user classi cation, Proceedings of AAAI Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, 2011.
Pollster. (n.d.) In Oxford Dictionaries. Retrieved from
https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/pollsters
Tumasjan, A., & Sprenger, TM., & Sander, PG., & Welpe, IM. (2010).
Predicting Elections with Twitter: What 140 Characters Reveal about Poltiical
Sentiment, Fourth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social
Media, Washington, 2010.

22

