Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019

Pp.287-298

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.19

The Use of Images for Teaching Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words: A Semiotic
Study
Adil Mohammed Hamoud Qadha
Department of English, College of Arts and Science, Balqarn
University of Bisha, Bisha, Saudi Arabia
&
Hodeidah University, Yemen
Hassan Saleh Mahdi
Department of English, College of Arts and Science, Balqarn,
University of Bisha, Bisha, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Semiotics has been investigated in the literature to enhance second language vocabulary
acquisition. The previous studies have examined how semiotics could aid second language (L2)
learner to learn concrete words. This study aims at investigating the effect of semiotics on
learning abstract words. Fifty-five Arab learners of English as a foreign language (EFL)
participated in the study and assigned into three groups. The first group was taught abstract
words using semiotics. The second group was taught concrete words using semiotics. The third
group was taught the same words using a traditional way, i.e., without semiotics. Results of the
post-test indicated that participants in semiotics groups (either concrete or abstract) outscored
the participants who did not use semiotics to learn new words. The study concluded that
semiotics is a useful tool to enhance learning new words. Also, semiotics can be more helpful
in learning concrete words than abstract words.
Keywords: abstract words, concrete words, semiotics, vocabulary learning

Cite as: Qadha, A. M.H., & Mahdi, H. S. (2019). The Use of Images for Teaching Abstract Words
Versus Concrete Words: A Semiotic Study. Arab World English Journal, 10 (3)287-298.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.19

287

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

Introduction
In recent years, semiotics, as an independent discipline, has started gaining increasing
importance in the field of research. Many researchers began writing about this significant area of
study from different angles and perspectives. In terms of Jacobson (1974, p. 32), there is an
inevitable relationship between semiotics and linguistics. In this relationship, Jacobson argues that
semiotics provides the communication of any message whatever or the exchange of any message
whatever and the system of signs, which underlies them. According to Zamani (2016) concerning
the role of semiotics in language teaching, it helps the learners develop their cognitive facilities at
all levels of perception.
Semiotics can play a very vital role in the field of language learning and teaching.
According to Senel (2007), semiotics provides a practical teaching/learning process by using body
language, pictures, visuals, film-strips, video, photography, etc. With the help of semiotics,
language learning becomes more productive and exciting. Semiotics can enhance the performance
of the students in all the four skills and aspects of language learning. In the literature, some studies
have been conducted to examine the effect of semiotics on vocabulary (Mahdi & Gubeily, 2018;
Hismanoglu, 2006) and pronunciation (Cimenli, 2015). Based on the knowledge of the authors, no
study has been conducted to examine the effect of semiotics on learning L2 vocabulary, primarily
abstract words. Therefore, this study explores the potential of using semiotics to help English
Foreign Language (EFL) learners learn new L2 words.
Review of literature
Theoretical background
Semiotics is an extensive area, which is used in many fields, including education.
Semiotics, according to Eco, (1979) is concerned with everything that can be used as a sign. A
sign is everything which can be taken as significantly substituting for something else. Thus, it can
be argued that semiotics is associated with anything that can be considered or interpreted as a sign.
There are two models of semiotics, the dyadic model of Saussure, and the triadic model of Charles
Sanders Peirce. In terms of De Saussure (1983), a sign must have both a signifier and a signified.
The signifier refers to the form which a sign takes, whereas the signified indicates the concept
which it represents. The relationship between the signifier and signified is known as signification.
Saussure points out that the two concepts cannot be separated from each other and cannot work
individually.
Opposing Saussure's model, Peirce (1965) formulates his triadic model of semiotics,
consisting of three elements: i) sign or representatum or ground, ii) purpose which has been
referred to as referent, and iii) interpretant. Peirce's representatum is equal to Saussure's signifier,
whereas the concept of signified is divided into two parts, object, and interpretant. The object is a
representation of sign, whereas the interpretant refers to the meaning conveyed by sign or
representatum about the object (Zoest, 1991; Leedz- Hurwitz, 1993; Masinambow, 2001, and
Chandler, 2002). In terms of Peirce, a sign must be able to represent something according to the
person's perception and interpretation.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

288

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

The basic difference between the views of Saussure and Peirce is that Saussure's
semiotics focuses on the linguistic aspects that primarily focus on establishing a relationship
between the vocal part of the sign, that is the signifier, and the actual part of it, that is the signified.
On the other hand, we find that Peirce deals with semiotics from a philosophical perspective that
is concerned with creating a kind of association between reality and nature (Massinbow & Rahayu,
2001). Semiotics has been utilized in many fields and areas, such as marketing, media, movie
industry, education, etc. With respect to education, semiotics has been used in most of the field of
education, particularly language learning and teaching.
Semiotics and language learning and teaching
Semiotics can play a very vital role in the field of language learning and teaching. Sert
(2006) suggests that the implementation of semiotic theories to learning has recently gained
noteworthy importance and led to the advent of a new field of study called educational semiotics.
The semiotic approach, it can be argued, helps a great deal in making students learn a language in
a very effective and interesting way. This issue has been dealt by Senel (2007) who points out that
the Semiotic Approach helps a great deal in offering a useful teaching and learning process through
using body language, pictures, visuals, film-strips, video, photography, etc. With the help of
semiotic materials such as visual aids, pictures, flashcards, realia, body language, language
learning, and teaching become more effective and exciting. The semiotic approach can enhance
the performance of the students in all the four skills of language learning.
There are some significant studies done in the field of semiotics and education. For
example, Lier (2004) attempted to give a clear idea about the principles of a semiotic and
ecological approach to language learning, and the practical consequences for classroom teaching
and learning that follow from taking such an approach. In his work, Lier stressed that a semiotic
and ecological view of language and of learning entails that the context– physical, social and
symbolic– is a central element in teaching and learning. Similarly, Erton (2006) highly supported
the use of semiotics in the language teaching/ learning process. Erton (2006) stated that both the
teacher and students could utilize the semiotic techniques in the classroom because semiotics is
the mixture of signs and symbols to communicate the information. The students and the teacher
make use of a number of signs. It is clear that Erton prefers Peirce's model of semiotics, given the
fact that the icon, index, and symbol are three concepts presented by Peirce in his theory of
semiotics. Senel (2007) did another crucial contribution in this field. He investigated the relation
of foreign language teaching with the semiotic approach. He also tried to shed light on the strong
and weak sides of the semiotic approach in teaching the second language. With reference to the
strong sides, Senel (2007) claimed that the semiotic approach plays a dominant role in the teachinglearning process through the use of verbal, non-verbal, and visual communication in the target
language. He further stressed that vocabulary, intonation patterns, or functions of the second
language could be more successfully taught by using body language. In addition, Senel (2007)
highlighted the strong side of the semiotic approach in the second language (L2) teaching. Senel
(2007) emphasized that by gestures, mimes, eye contact or tactile communication, teachers of
English provide students with not only useful learning but also cultural aspects of the second
language. Senel went further in his argument, comparing the semiotic approach with the
communicative approach of language teaching:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

289

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

In short, the Semiotic Approach facilitates the English learning by providing the second
language learners with verbal, non-verbal, and visual communication, while the
Communicative Approach motivates them to use the target language by emphasizing
independence learning and encourages them to communicate in the target language fluently
and accurately as much as possible in pair/group works. The Semiotic Approach provides
with an effective teaching/learning process through using body language, pictures, visuals,
film-strips, video, photography, etc. (p. 125).
This comparison between the semiotic approach and the very well-known and widely used
approach such as the communicative approach proves that the former has started occupying a very
prominent place in the field of language teaching and learning. As for the weak sides of the
approach, Senel argues that avoiding linguistic correction in English language classes remains the
weak side of the semiotic approach. However, he tried to justify this weakness, claiming that
students, listening to live radio or TV broadcast focus primarily on what massage a native speaker
aims to convey rather than how he utters the words. Thus, in terms of Senel, avoiding linguistic
correction should not prevent teachers from using the semiotic approach, given the fact that
students can gain many benefits from using it, which is more significant and useful than linguistic
correction.
One more vital contribution in this area was conducted by Cimenli (2015). His study was
about the effect of using semiotics on pronunciation teaching. He emphasized the importance of
using semiotic elements in language teaching and learning, as he clearly stated that using signs,
visuals, and body language in a language class has a number of invaluable effects that cannot be
underestimated. Cimenli concluded that applying semiotics to teaching pronunciation depends on
the mutual relationship between semiotics, culture and language teaching. Thus, it has been seen
that the issue of using semiotics in language teaching and learning is not new. Even if it is not used
as a full approach, it is inevitable to be used as a teaching aid in a language class. One of the most
critical aspects of language learning is vocabulary learning. It is an aspect where semiotics can
provide great help and play a significant role in its teaching/ learning process.
Semiotics and vocabulary learning/teaching
Learning vocabulary is one of the most essential components of learning a second/foreign
language. Vocabulary helps us to communicate with others, expressing our thoughts, ideas,
feelings, emotions, etc. during communication. Semiotics is concerned with all types of
communication, which entails that the relationship between vocabulary and semiotics is inevitable.
The role of vocabulary in language learning is essential. Therefore, language teachers should make
maximum efforts in teaching this crucial part of a language and select the most appropriate
approaches and methodologies in their vocabulary teaching.
In fact, there have been several approaches and methodologies used by teachers in teaching
vocabulary. The grammar-translation method, which is the most traditional method of foreign
language teaching, has been used in teaching vocabulary. The teacher, using this method, provides
his students with lists of literary vocabulary and asks them to learn them through translation, using
a bilingual dictionary. The direct method, which does not allow the use of the students' native
language in the classroom, has also been used in teaching vocabulary through teaching aids, such
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

290

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

as mime, drawings, realia, pictures, etc., (Rivers, 1981). The situational language teaching method
has also contributed to vocabulary teaching. In this method, the meaning of a word is not directly
given to the students; instead, it is induced from the situation in which the word is used (Richards
& Rodgers, 2001, pp. 36-38). The cognitive approach, on the other hand, has also been utilized in
teaching vocabulary. The proponents of this approach stress that no successful communication in
the second language can take place without acquiring adequate vocabulary. The audio-lingual
method was also used in teaching vocabulary. In this method, vocabulary is kept to a minimum
(Thornbury, 2002). Ironically, this method emphasizes that having too much vocabulary makes
students feel unsecured in communication (Zimmerman, 1997)
Besides, there have been some significant studies conducted on vocabulary learning. For
example, Segers and Forhoeven (2003) conducted a study in which they studied the impact of
using a computer on preschoolers' vocabulary learning. The study concluded that vocabulary
training through computer had positive effects on preschool children's vocabulary learning. In
addition, Silverman and Hines (2009) conducted a study in which they tried to make a comparison
between the classical and multimedia-enhanced read-aloud vocabulary instructions concerning
their effects on vocabulary gain of English language learners (ELLs) and non-English language
learners (non-ELLs). The study came up with results showing that there was a positive effect for
ELLs on a researcher- designed measure and a measure of general vocabulary knowledge. The
results also showed that the ELLs did not get considerable benefits from the multimedia-enhanced
instructions. Collins (2010) attempted to explore the influences of detailed description and
elucidation; elementary level vocabulary gain and home reading practices on preschoolers to find
out whether storybook reading is beneficial in their sophisticated learning. The study concluded
that well-explained texts and initial L2 vocabulary, with the help of repetitive home reading
activities, contribute a great deal to advanced-word-learning through stories. Gonzalet et al. (2011)
conducted a study in which they trained preschool teachers how to teach vocabulary through
pictures, definitions, and discussions of target words. The results showed that children in the
experimental group performed better than the children in the control group. The difference was
not only on measures of expressive and receptive vocabulary but also on a standardized measure
of receptive vocabulary. Another study was carried out by Coyne et al. (2009) to compare teaching
target words within the read-aloud experience to teaching them through read aloud with children
having an opportunity to interact with target words outside the context of the story. They called
the former embedded instruction and the latter extended instruction. The study concluded that
learning words through extended instruction were more effective than learning them through
embedded instruction. Aghlara and Tamjid (2011) examined the effect of using a digital computer
game on preschoolers’ vocabulary gain, it was noticed that children in the experimental group did
better than in the control group. The study discussed the positive effects of using digital computer
games on vocabulary gain at the preschool level.
With respect to the semiotic approach, it can be claimed that it is one of the most significant
and effective approaches that can be used in teaching vocabulary. Senel (2007) stressed this issue,
stating that the Semiotic Approach helps teachers of English in teaching vocabulary and grammar
in English language teaching (ELT). The students easily get the meaning of vocabulary items or
grammar rules with the help of visuals and body language. Not only vocabulary that can be taught
through the semiotic approach, but all the four skills, listening, speaking, reading, and writing in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

291

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

ELT. In fact, semiotics is no longer counted as an unfamiliarized approach in the field of education;
instead, it has recently achieved some significance as a theoretical foundation for foreign language
learning/ teaching (Basoz & Can, 2016). There are a few studies done on the effect of semiotics
on vocabulary learning and teaching. Hismanoglu (2006) emphasized the importance of the
semiotic elements and difficulties in teaching vocabulary items. He particularly focused on
teaching color names, idioms, onomatopoeic words, and compound words. The study concluded
with stressing that Semiotic elements provide students with a better understanding of the
vocabulary items and help them develop sociopragmatic and socio-semiotic competence in the
target language. Also, Basoz and Can (2016) conducted a study on the effectiveness of computers
on vocabulary learning among preschool children from a semiotic perspective. The study
illustrated the effect of using a semiotic-based electronic technique in teaching vocabulary for
preschool children. It showed that the use of this technique in vocabulary teaching makes the
learning environment more motivating and interesting. The study also proved that this type of
teaching had a promoting effect on preschoolers' vocabulary knowledge.
Learning Concrete vs. Abstract Vocabulary
Abstract vocabulary is more difficult to learn and remember than concrete vocabulary for
foreign or second language learners (de Groot & Keijzer, 2000; Ellis & Beaton, 1993). The reason
is that concrete words can be easily created and coded in the learner’s mind. This can be explained
using Paivio’s dual-coding theory which provides a reasonable interpretation of this issue based
on learners’ self-reported strategies for encoding these two types of words. The theory attributes
the superiority of concrete words to their easiness of arousing mental images. That is, while
concrete words (e.g., car) have relatively direct relations with their referents in the observed world,
abstract words (e.g., knowledge) do not—their meanings have to be inferred from the group of
words that they are closely associated with (Noppeney & Price, 2004). Thus, studying concrete
words involves using both verbal and imagery subsystems and, as a result, creating dual retrieval
routes (word-word and word-image) in long-term memory.
On the other hand, studying abstract words is assumed to depend more on the verbal
processing channel and hence result in the creation of verbal memory traces. The supplementary
image-based memory codes for concrete words are considered extremely useful to vocabulary
retrieval because image information is believed to be more memorable than verbal information
(Paivio, 1971, 1986). Some brain-imaging studies show that distinct regions of the brain are
engaged in the processing of concrete versus abstract words. Specifically, processing abstract
concepts involve higher activations in the left hemispheric areas known for language-based,
semantic processing. By contrast, processing concrete concepts are associated with stronger
activations in a bilateral network of multimodal association areas (Paivio, 2007, 2010). Previous
studies examined the effect of semiotics in vocabulary learning using “concrete” words. For
example, Bosoz and Can (2016) introduced 20 concrete words including animals, fruit and action
verbs. As far as the authors know, there is no study that has examined the use of semiotics in
learning “abstract” words. Therefore, this study is an attempt to fill in this gap and examine the
effect of integrating semiotics in learning abstract words.
Research questions
What is the effect of semiotics on learning L2 words in comparison to the traditional way of
learning vocabulary?
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

292

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

What is the effect of semiotics on learning abstract words in comparison to concrete words?
Method
In this study, the pre-and post-test results of the three groups were compared to find out if there
are any significant differences between groups. The present study was conducted with the
participation of 55 EFL university students in the academic year 2018-2019.
Participants and Design
Fifty-five students participated in this study. All of the students were Saudi students
enrolled in a first-semester advanced English class in the Department of English Language at
University of Bisha in Saudi Arabia. They were enrolled in the BA English program. The students’
ages ranged from 19-23. All of the students were males due to cultural values that support
segregation of males and females in classes. The students were randomly assigned to either
semiotics groups (two experimental groups) or traditional vocabulary instruction group (control
group). There were no significant differences in the mean scores of the participants in these groups
in the pre-test. All participants in the three groups used the same material.
Tests
One week prior to the treatment, the participants took a paper-based vocabulary pretest in which
they reported their existing knowledge of 40 potentially new words. They were asked to translate
40 words from English into Arabic. The pretest also contained five nonsense (nonexistent) words
made up by the researchers, which were used as a simple measure of test validity. That is if a test
taker claimed to know a nonsense word, the validity of his knowledge would be questionable. The
words used in the pre- and post-tests were selected from the Academic Word List of Coxhead
(1998). Each correct response received one point, with a maximum test score of 40.
Procedures
The study was conducted in regular classrooms in the Department of English Language at the
University of Bisha. The study was carried out for 4 weeks. Before the experiment, the participants
were given a pre-test. They were randomly assigned to one of three groups; two experimental
groups and a control group. The data were obtained from a vocabulary test based on Coxead’s
(1988) Academic Word List. The vocabulary test included 40 target words plus five nonsense
words. Following the pre-test, the three groups were taught the target words by the researcher. In
every session, students studied 20 words, which were followed by a vocabulary test. In the control
group, the instructor presented the words with their translations into Arabic. In the experimental
groups, the instructor presented the words with images (semiotics). In the first experimental group,
the participants were taught abstract words presented with images. The second experimental group
was taught concrete words presented with images. The experiment was conducted in two weeks
for all groups. At the end of the treatment, all participants in the three groups were given the posttest immediately. The procedures are summarized in Table 1
Table 1. Procedures
Step 1
Pres-test

1st session

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

A pre-test was administered to all groups at the same
time. The test consisted of 40 target words. The
293

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Step 2

Treatment 2nd and 3rd
sessions

Step 3

Post-test

4th session

Qadha & Mahdi

participants were asked to translate these words into
Arabic.
The three groups were taught the target words by the
researcher. In the control group, the instructor
presented the words with their translations into Arabic.
In the two experimental groups, the instructor
presented the words with images (semiotics).
Post-test was administered to all groups at the same
time. The test consisted of 40 target words. The
participants were asked to translate these words into
Arabic.

Data Analysis
The data were analyzed descriptively using the SPSS 20 Software. Means and standard
deviations of students’ overall scores on the vocabulary test were computed. A paired-sample ttest was used to analyze the test scores of students in the experimental groups versus those in the
control group. Tukey HSD post hoc test was conducted to compare any differences among the
different groups.
Results
To answer the first research question, the means and standard deviation of the pre- and
post-tests were shown in Table 2. Results showed that a significant main effect of semiotics existed
from the pre- and post-test designs. Results from ANOVA revealed that a significant main effect
existed among the three groups. The use of semiotics for abstract words and concrete words groups
significantly outscored the control group in the post-test (M = 29.15, 30.05, SD =5.49, 5.13
respectively). The performance of the concrete words group over time was slightly higher than
that of semiotics for abstract words group but the difference was not significant (MD = ̵.89, p=.85)
as shown in Table 4.
Table 2. Descriptive statistics of the students' performance of L2 pronunciation tests
Abstract (N = 19)
Concrete
Control (N = 18) All Groups
(N=18)
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
M
SD
Pre-test
10.10
4.01 10.66
3.27
11.83 3.82
post test
29.15
5.94 30.05
5.13
21.27 4.05
Table 3. ANOVA results for L2 pronunciation tests
Df
MS
F
Between groups
2
422.51
16.09
Within groups
52
26.25
The level of sig. =.05

10.85
26.87

3.72
6.39

P
.000*
.000*

Post-hoc pairwise comparisons using Tukey HSD yielded significant differences among the three
groups over time (Table 4).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

294

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Table 4. Tukey HSD post hoc test
Dependent
(I) Semiotics
variables
Semiotics
Abstract
post-test

(J) Semiotics

Mean Differences (I-J)

Sig.

Concrete

-. 89

.85

7.88
.89
8.77
-7.88
-8.77

.000
.85
.000
.000
.000

Control group
Abstract
Control group
Control group
Abstract
Concrete
The mean difference is significant at the.05 level
Concrete

Qadha & Mahdi

Discussion
Research Question 1: What is the effect of semiotics on learning L2 words in comparison to the
traditional way of learning vocabulary?
This study sought to examine the effects of semiotics on vocabulary learning. Three groups
were engaged in this study to find out the potential effect of semiotics on vocabulary learning. The
results revealed that there is a positive impact of using semiotics on vocabulary learning, either for
abstract or concrete words. Both groups that used semiotics as a technique to aid learning
vocabulary outperformed the students in the control group where no semiotic materials were used.
The study results are in line with Paivio’s (1971, 1986) dual coding theory, which assumes that
information is coded dually in the human mind either verbally (i.e., text and sounds) or nonverbally (i.e., picture and objects). These two systems are interconnected when words are
represented by one system and can be activated by the other system or vice-versa (e.g., verbal
activated by non-verbal).
The findings of this study are in line with the findings of Hismanoglu (2006) who
concluded that semiotic elements provide students with a better understanding of the vocabulary
items and help them develop sociopragmatic and socio-semiotic competence in the target
language. They also in line with the findings of Gonzalet et al., (2011) who found that students in
the experimental group scored higher than the students in the control group in the standardized
measure of receptive vocabulary. In addition, the study supports the findings of Basoz and Can
(2016) who stated that the use of this technique in vocabulary teaching makes the learning
environment more motivating and interesting.
Research Question 2: What is the effect of semiotics on learning abstract words in comparison to
concrete words?
This study also attempted to examine the effects of semiotics on learning L2 abstract words
in comparison to concrete words. Although no significant difference between the scores of the two
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

295

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

groups was observed, the scores of the students in the concrete words group were slightly higher
than the abstract words group. This indicates that semiotics can be more useful and effective in
learning concrete words. The study showed that students’ scores in concrete words group were
slightly higher than the scores in the abstract words. This is because visual information (image)
was coded with verbal information (word). However, the students learning vocabulary with no
semiotic materials performed worse on the post-tests, as information was only presented
traditionally. This study’s findings demonstrate the significant benefits of using semiotics to assist
in learning English vocabulary. The findings of this study are in line with Bosoz and Can (2016)
who examined the effect of semiotics in learning concrete words. The study found that using
semiotics was more effective in learning concrete words than abstract words. However, the study
clearly showed that using semiotic materials could be well utilized in teaching vocabulary, either
abstract or concrete.
Conclusion
This study explored the effectiveness of semiotics on vocabulary learning. In general,
semiotics had been found an effective tool to aid learning L2 words either abstract or concrete.
However, using semiotics for concrete words was found slightly superior to using semiotics for
abstract words. The participants remembered L2 words better when they used semiotics than when
they used the traditional way of learning. This study has generated several pedagogical
implications for foreign language teachers. Second language instructors might benefit from the
results of this study to present new L2 words in a way that enhances learning new words and
increases retention of new words. There were several limitations to the current study. First, the
small number of participants may threaten the validity of the study findings. Thus, a study with a
large sample size would yield stronger evidence to generalize the findings. In this study, only one
mode for presenting semiotics was used (i.e., images). Therefore, the study recommends that
further studies investigate the impact of different modes (e.g., video) on learning new words. The
study suggests that further research explore the effect of semiotics on learning new words among
young learners because age is a crucial factor for learning vocabulary.
About the authors:
Adil Mohammed Qadha is working as an assistant professor of linguistics in the department of
English, College of Arts and Science, Balqarn, University of Bisha, Saudi Araba. His research
interests include stylistics, semiotics, and learning a second and foreign language.
ORCID https://orcid.org/0000-0002-0967-5448
Hassan Saleh Mahdi is an assistant professor of applied linguistics in the Department of
English, University of Bisha, Saudi Arabia. His research interests are computer-assisted language
learning (CALL), Mobile-assisted language learning (MALL), second language vocabulary
acquisition. He has published a number of articles related to these topics.
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4023-8219

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

296

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

References
Aghlara, L., & Tamjid, N. H. (2011). The effect of digital games on Iranian children's vocabulary
retention in foreign language acquisition. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 29,
552–560.
Basoz, T., & Can, D. T. (2016). The Effectiveness of Computers on Vocabulary Learning among
Preschool Children: A Semiotic Approach. Cypriot Journal of Educational
Sciences, 11(1), 2–8.
Cimenli, B. (2015). On pronunciation teaching and semiotic. Procedia-Social and behavioral
sciences199(2015) 634-640.
Collins, M. F. (2010). ELL preschoolers’ English vocabulary acquisition from storybook reading.
Early Childhood Research Quarterly, 25, 84–97.
Coyne, M. D., McCoach, D., Betsy, L.S., Zipoli, R. Jr., & Kapp, S. (2009). Direct vocabulary
instruction in kindergarten: Teaching for breadth versus depth. Elementary School
Journal, 110(1) 1–18.
de Groot, A. M. B., & Keijzer, R. (2000). What is hard to learn is easy to forget: The roles of
word concreteness, cognate status, and the word frequency in foreign language
vocabulary learning and forgetting. Language Learning, 50(1), 1–56. DOI:10.1111/00238333.00110
Eco, U (1979). A theory of semiotics. Bloomington: Indiana University Press
Ellis, N. C., & Beaton, A. (1993). Psycholinguistic determinants of foreign language vocabulary
learning. Language Learning, 43(4), 559–617. DOI:10.1111/j.14671770.1993.tb00627.x
Erton, I. (2006). Semiotic nature of language teaching methods in foreign language learning and
teaching. Journal of Language and Linguistic Studies, 2(1), 73–86.
Gonzalez, J.E., Pollard-Durodola, S., Simmons, D.C., Taylor, A.B., Davis, M.J., Kim, M., &
Simmons, L. (2011). Developing low-income preschoolers’ social studies and science
vocabulary knowledge through content-focused shared book reading. Journal of Research
on Educational Effectiveness, 4(1), 25–52.
Hişmanoğlu, M. (2006). Semiotic Elements and Difficulties in Teaching Vocabulary
Items. International Journal of Applied Semiotics, 5(1-2), 121-136.
Jacobson, R. (1974). Main trends in the science of language. New York: Harper and Row.
Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (1993). Semiotics and communication: Sign, codes, cultures. New Jersey:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Lier, L. (2004). The semiotics and ecology of language learning perception, voice, identity, and
democracy. Utbildning & Demokrati, 13(3), 79-103.
Mahdi, H. S. & Gubeily, M. A. (2018). The Effect of Using Bizarre Images as Mnemonics to
Enhance Vocabulary Learning. Journal of Social Studies, 24(1), 113-135.
https://doi.org/10.20428/JSS.24.1.5
Masinambow, E.K.M. & Rahayu S. H. (2001). Semiotik: Mengkaji tanda dalam artifak. Jakarta:
Balai Pustaka.
Noppeney, U., & Price, C. J. (2004). Retrieval of abstract semantics. NeuroImage, 22(1), 164–
170. DOI:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.12.010 PMID:15110006
Paivio, A. (1971). Imagery and verbal processes. New York: Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

297

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Qadha & Mahdi

Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Paivio, A. (2007). Mind and its evolution: A dual coding theoretical approach. Mahwah, NJ:
Erlbaum.
Paivio, A. (2010). Dual coding theory and the mental lexicon. The Mental Lexicon, 5(2), 205–
230. DOI:10.1075/ml.5.2.04pai
Peirce. C. P. (1965). Basic Concepts of Peircean Sign Theory. In Gottdiener, M., BoklundLagopoulou, K. & Lagopoulos, A.P. (2003). Semiotics. London: Sage Publications.
Richards, J. & Rodgers, T. (2001). Approaches and Methods in Language Teaching: A description
and analysis. Cambridge: CUP.
Rivers, W. M. (1981). Teaching Foreign-Language Skills. Chicago: The University of Chicago
Press.
Saussure, Ferdinand de. (1983). Course in General Linguistics. Trans. Roy Harris. London:
Duckworth
Segers, E., & Verhoeven, L. (2003). Effects of vocabulary training by the computer in
kindergarten. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 19(4), 557–566.
Senel, M. (2007). The semiotic approach and language teaching and learning. Journal of
Language and Linguistic Studies, 3(1), 117–132.
Sert, O. (2006). Semiotic approach and its contributions to English language learning and
teaching Hacettepe Üniversitesi Egitim Fakültesi Dergisi, (31), 106-114
Silverman, R., & Hines, S. (2009). The effects of multimedia-enhanced instruction on the
vocabulary of English-language learners and non-English-language learners in prekindergarten through second grade. Journal of Educational Psychology, 101(2), 305–314.
Thornbury, S. (2002). How to Teach Vocabulary. Essex: Longman.
Zamani, S. (2016). Semiotics and language teaching (teaching English to Kurd students).World
Scientific News, 42, 293–305
Zimmerman, C. (1997). Historical Trends in Second Language Vocabulary Instruction. In Coady,
J. and T. Huckin (Eds.), Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition: A Rationale for
Pedagogy, Cambridge: CUP. 5–19.
Zoest, A. V. (1996). Interpretasi dan semiotika. In. Panuti Sudjiman & Zoest, A.V) Serba-serbi
semiotika. Jakarta: PT Gramedia

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

298

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Use of Images for Abstract Words Versus Concrete Words

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Qadha & Mahdi

299

