This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Three Horizons for the Sustainable Development Goals: A
Cross-scale Participatory Approach for Sustainability
Transformations
Authors: David Collste1,2*, Ana Paula Aguiar1, 3, Zuzana V. Harmáčková1,4, Diego Galafassi1,
Laura Pereira5 , Odirilwe Selomane1,6 and Sander van der Leeuw7
1

Stockholm Resilience Centre, Stockholm University
CERDI, Université Clermont Auvergne, Clermont Ferrand, France
3
INPE, Brazilian Institute for Space Research, Brazil
4
Global Change Research Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Brno, Czech Republic
5
City, University of London
6
Centre for Complex Systems in Transition, Stellenbosch University, South Africa
7
ASU-SFI Center for Biosocial Complex Systems, Arizona State University, USA
*Corresponding author: david.collste@su.se
2

Abstract
One of the current challenges of human society lies in navigating the safe operating space defined
by the planetary boundaries while reaching the aspirational Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs). This is not a challenge that can be tackled everywhere in the same way. It is thus vital to
ground the pursuit of the SDGs in locally prevalent worldviews and reflect specific contexts in
developing coherent pathways. In addressing the need to couple global concerns with local
aspirations and conditions, this paper introduces a stakeholder-based approach for visioning and
exploring sustainable development pathways to meet the SDGs, inclusive to marginalized voices
and facilitating a context-sensitive exploration of alternative futures. The approach departs from
the Three horizons framework, a participatory approach developed for groups to think about
transformative change. We present the benefits and challenges of the adapted approach in relation
to an illustrative case study, the 2018 African Dialogue on The World In 2050, deliberating future
pathways for agriculture and food systems in Africa. The key contribution of the paper is twofold.
First, we detail the premises and steps of the Three Horizons for the SDGs (3H4SDG) approach.
Second, we summarize the results of a pilot application of the approach - four alternative pathways
for how food systems and agriculture can contribute to meeting the SDGs in Sub-Saharan Africa,
integrated with the worldviews entangled in the narratives of the participating stakeholders. We
conclude that participatory approaches grounded in systems thinking represent a promising way
to link local aspirations with global goals.

1

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Introduction
The United Nations’ 2030 Agenda (2015), agreed by all governments, represents an unprecedented
global framework for human and ecological well-being, but requires transformative changes for
its implementation (Randers et al. 2018, O’Neill et al. 2018, Linnér and Wibeck 2019). Despite
the 2030 Agenda’s aspiration of inclusiveness in the goal formulation process (Caballero 2019), it
inevitably represents a top-down approach to global agenda setting. The agreement of 17 SDGs
can therefore be seen as risky, especially as the agenda has been argued to include a uniform vision
that is dominated by a single idea of what a “progress” entails (van der Leeuw 2019a),
predominantly reflecting the economic discourses of Keynesianism and neoliberalism and
neglecting alternative economic visions (Carant 2017). At worst, the uniformity of the agenda
could cause a backlash in societies that do not accept its premises.
The Agenda 2030 can however be seen as a broad framework for transformative strategies that
inherently need to be designed differently in radically different contexts. Therefore, a crucial
challenge for research and practice is how to couple the global concerns enshrined in the Agenda
2030 with local aspirations, visions, cultures and values. Although the number of studies that focus
on the interactions between SDGs has been growing (Obersteiner et al. 2016, Pradhan et al. 2017,
Nilsson et al. 2018), incorporating stakeholder perspectives in SDG implementation processes in
a participatory manner has been identified as a key policy challenge. Only a few studies on SDG
planning incorporate participatory approaches (e.g. Kanter et al. 2016, Glover et al. 2016, Hodes
et al. 2018); furthermore, there is an urgent need to incorporate an integrated perspective and
promote systems thinking in participatory processes (Bennich et al. 2020).
In this paper, we present a participatory approach designed to explore diverse future narratives on
reaching the Sustainable Development Goals of Agenda 2030 through sustainability
transformations at different scales.

Sustainability narratives
The 2030 Agenda invites a search for paths forward that are grounded in the biophysical reality as
well as anchored in the multidimensional narratives that shape societies and cultures (van der
Leeuw 2019b). Here, we define narratives as accounts of series of related events that are used for
sense-making (according to the definition used by Linnér and Wibeck (2019)). Narratives can
explicitly incorporate framings of the system and its dynamics, as well as how development or
transformations can look like for a desired outcome to be realized (Leach et al. 2010). All
individual and collective decisions are framed by the context of locally predominant narratives
(van der Leeuw 2019b). The 2030 Agenda, while grounded in global policy discourse on
sustainability, does not necessarily feature in different narratives prevalent in varying contexts
around the world, which may hamper its influence on regional and local dynamics. This study is
an empirical exploration of how the 2030 Agenda can be meaningfully integrated into narratives
of different contexts (van der Leeuw 2019b).

Sustainability Transformations: beyond silos
Transformation has been defined as “a fundamental change in the structures, cultures and practices
of a societal system, profoundly altering the way it functions.” (de Haan and Rotmans 2011). It
thereby contrasts the so-called ‘business as usual’, which is an extension of current often
undesirable trajectories. The ‘business as usual’ course of development is no longer an option as a
2

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
course of future development for many reasons. One is the highly unsustainable and thereby
unstable state and trends of current society, as has been manifested by large-scale sustainability
assessments (e.g. IPBES 2019). Another is that looking backward, one realizes that societal
development has historically been characterized by shocks and major transitions. ‘Business as
usual’ is thereby unlikely to unfold (Vergragt and Quist 2011). Furthermore, technological
advances alone do not include the fundamental changes necessary for sustainability (Page et al.
2016) and reaching the 2030 Agenda requires transformations (Randers et al. 2018, Sachs et al.
2019, Linnér and Wibeck 2019).
As a response to the need for transformations, the sustainability science discourse has moved from
describing problems, to identify and propose ‘solutions’ and better understanding pathways
(Patterson et al. 2017). This is illustrated by the concepts of ‘safe operating space’ (Rockström et
al. 2009, Steffen et al. 2015, Downing et al. 2019) and social boundaries, (Raworth 2017) which
both set frames for such sustainability pathways. Transformational sustainability science ought to
mitigate complex sustainability problems and “to directly contribute to real-world sustainability
transitions” (Wiek and Iwaniec 2014 p. 498). Given this task for sustainability science to
contribute to and suggest solutions, the discipline has also moved towards ‘facilitating’ decisionmaking processes and engage with stakeholders, where it was earlier only ‘informing’ (from a
‘pacification’ to a ‘facilitation’ strategy as termed by Hanssen et al. (2009)). Such facilitation
processes can include creating ‘transformative spaces’ in which stakeholders discuss and envision
futures, designed to enable transformative change (Pereira et al. 2018).
Transformations to sustainable societies requires going beyond silos, and having integration at
the core, as highlighted by the 2030 Agenda resolution through formulating the SDGs as “universal
and indivisible”(United Nations 2015, Stafford-Smith et al. 2017, Scoones et al. 2019). Siloed
approaches may oversee system complexity - with the risk of unintended consequences, policies
not sufficiently accounting for synergies or trade-offs (Pedercini et al. 2019) and goal spill-overs
on temporal and spatial scales (Engström et al. 2019). While there are many ways of integrating,
including e.g. rating connections (Nilsson et al. 2016, 2018), using cross-impact matrices (Weitz
et al. 2018), and tracing and quantifying causal connections across policies and targets (Collste et
al. 2017, Pedercini et al. 2018), few take the systems perspective needed to grasp the
transformation of domains and dimensions of sustainability that we are arguing for. To grasp the
complexity of transformations, there is a need to dive deep into the current challenges, their
underlying causes and transformations already going on (van der Leeuw 2019b).

Multiple perspectives: Combination of knowledge and ethical dimensions
Local and cultural knowledge is also critical to find context-appropriate solutions (Cvitanovic et
al. 2019) that are grounded in culture-contingent narratives (van der Leeuw 2019b). We argue that
shared, transformative, understanding can be enhanced through stakeholder methods that include
multiple perspectives. Integrating multiple perspectives through the engagement of stakeholders
has the potential to create shared understanding , and to initiate grounded processes of change by
overcoming knowledge barriers (Voinov and Bousquet 2010, Voinov et al. 2016). Future visioning
can provide a platform for developing such integrated perspectives. One critical question however
is who participates and what contesting values and narratives are brought together (Vergragt and
Quist 2011). Vergragt and Quist (2011) ask the rhetorical question “Can [visioning] it be left to
experts, or should it be a democratic or a deliberative process involving stakeholders and

3

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
citizens?” (Vergragt and Quist 2011 p. 749). Envisioning the future can lift voices not heard or
deprived, including the local voices and voices of indigenous, gender and ethnic minorities
(Cvitanovic et al. 2019) play an emancipatory role for the involved through the exploration of
potential futures and discovering of leverage points previously not acknowledged (Meadows 1997,
Ulrich 2003, Leach et al. 2010).
In line with the need to include multiple perspectives, the approach we propose in the paper puts
an emphasis on exploring and formulating alternative pathways grounded in narratives that may
be missing in the debates on futures relating to the SDGs. Without alternative pathways,
sustainability futures may be uniform and only reflect the views of a limited group of people, often
privileged who have access to the forums where these are being discussed. In the world of global
modelling, for example, these are often universities and research institutions among which western
institutions are clearly dominating. As a consequence, futures for Africa, for example, are often
predicated upon western ideals and conceptualizations of development with a lack of local
groundings (Pereira et al. 2018). This may impact on the worldviews that are acknowledged and
the information that is included in the uncovering of pathways. As worldviews influence how we
act and thereby how futures unfold, missing critical voices comes with the risk of missing critical
information on how the future may look like, or values about what may be desired futures. This
involves considering governance and politics as central in shaping sustainability transformations
(Patterson et al. 2017), acknowledging structural elements, and understanding transformations
from material forces and the features of systems from a social-ecological systems approach (Folke
et al. 2010, Scoones et al. 2019).
In this context, we developed an adapted participatory approach for the 2030 Agenda - Three
Horizons for the SDGs (3H4SDG). 3H4SDG aims at providing relevant insights to practitioners
and policy makers involved in SDG implementation processes by shedding light on the option
space, including tensions, around alternative sustainability pathways. In the following sections we
present and detail the participatory approach and illustrate it using the 2018 African Dialogue on
The World In 2050 (Aguiar et al. 2019) as a pilot case study.

A method to explore Sustainable Development Pathway narratives: Three
Horizons for the SDGs (3H4SDG)
Reflecting the context introduced above, in developing our approach for transformative, integrated
perspectives on the 2030 Agenda, we embarked from the following premises:
A. Systems perspective and SDG integration
○ We wanted the approach explicitly to embrace a systems perspective to address a
spectrum of transformational challenges related to achieving the 17 SDGs, so as to
minimize potential conflicts among them and to reap the benefits of potential
synergies among them.
B. Multiple perspectives
○ As systems look different from different perspectives, we wanted the approach to
facilitate the exploration of multiple and alternative pathways, including nondominant voices and narratives from different contexts and scales. In addition, we
wanted the approach to use Agenda 2030 as a boundary object to deliberate
4

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
differences between pathways to achieve multiple sustainability goals emerging
from global and lower scales, without imposing prevalent top-down global
perspectives.
C. Participant’s ownership of the pathway narratives
○ We wanted the participants to feel ownership over the pathway narratives so that
the envisioned pathways and change processes would actually matter to them,
thereby increasing the likelihood of implementation.

The Three Horizons
Our approach departs from the Three Horizons framework (Sharpe and Williams 2013, Sharpe et
al. 2016), providing the overarching systematic and integrated structure to our approach (premise
A). Three Horizons is a future-oriented transformation practice that simultaneously handles
complexity, multiple and contrasting perspectives and values (premise B, C) and still allows for
imagination, creativity and emergence (Sharpe et al. 2016, Fazey et al. 2018). It can assist in
bringing increased understanding of how to move from what is known to new ways of thinking
and acting (Colloff et al. 2017), thereby increasing ‘future literacy’ (Miller 2011). We appreciate
the Three Horizons framework as an intuitive tool to engage stakeholders in discussing change.
We, however, adapted the approach and refer to it as- The Three Horizons Framework for the
SDGs (3H4SDG) - combining the Three Horizons framework with multi-scale backcasting
methods as applied in Aguiar (2015) and Folhes et al. (2015). We were also inspired by SwedBio’s
Multi-Actor Dialogue Seminars as presented in Schultz et al. (2016), as well as systems thinking
and approaches (Meadows 2008, Reynolds and Holwell 2020).
Participants need to be divided into groups of around 6 people each, with each group undertaking
the exercise in parallel. To allow for diverse views and narratives through which to discuss the
2030 Agenda, there needs to be a variety of perspectives represented in each of the groups and so
we suggest pre-allocating people into groups to maximise diversity. In this approach, the Three
Horizons framework is used as a device to facilitate conversation between the participants and for
capturing their ideas. As such, the participants have the diagram in front of them in all sessions
and gradually populate the three lines representing the horizons with their contributions in the form
of post-it notes (Figure 1).
We suggest using a color scheme that accounts for the spectrum of transformational challenges
related to the 17 SDGs. In our case, the four colours represent the “five SDG P’s”: People (SDGs
1-6), Planet (SDGs 13-15), Prosperity (SDGs 7-12), and Peace and Partnership (SDGs 16-17)
(Development 2015, United Nations 2015). T: The color categories are chosen to enable
facilitators to keep an overarching view and ensure that different domains are covered.

5

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Figure 1: The Three Horizons diagram showing the different horizons, steps and post-it notes colors used during Step
1 and Step 2 of the process. The framework consists of three Horizons, representing respectively: The system we want
to transform from (Horizon 1), the changes that are needed to break the current dominant patterns that are undesirable
and to reach desirable alternative patterns (Horizon 2); and the system we want to transform to (Horizon 3). Pink postit notes represent people (SDGs 1-6), Yellow represents Prosperity (SDGs 7-12), Green represents Planet (SDGs 1315), Orange represents Peace and Partnerships (SDGs 16-17) and Blue represents changes (only used during Step
3).

Building the diagram in three steps
The approach is divided into three main steps. In each step, facilitators ask the guiding questions
that the participants answer by writing down their ideas on the color-coded post-it notes and adding
these to the appropriate place on the Three Horizons diagram (Figure 2, Outcome 1).
Step 1 of the process focuses on visions for the future (Horizon 3). Starting from a future focus
can avoid anchoring the discussions in today’s concerns and norms and supports the exploration
of what may be currently non-dominating visions. Guiding Questions: “What are our visions for
the future of agriculture and food systems?” and “What do you see of the desired future already
existent in the present (initiatives, project, proposals etc.)?
Step 2 focuses on present concerns (Horizon 1). This step includes clustering notes into related
issues to enable a focused discussion on root causes to their concerns. Guiding Question: “What
concerns do we have about the present agriculture and food system?”
Step 3 focuses on how to achieve the desired future through either incremental or transformational
change actions (Horizon 2). Guiding Question: “How do we change the present system to
6

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
transform to the desired futures? and Which measures and actions are required (consider the root
causes)?”. During step 3, only one color of the post-its is used as the focus is on integrative change
and not of specific domains.

Figure 2: The outcomes from each step of the 3H4SDG process
During the diagram-populating process, facilitators take notes of points of disagreement or
different views among participants, on a flip chart (Figure 2, Outcome 2).
At the end of each step, a synthesis activity takes place. This synthesis represents an artistic part
of the process in which the groups develop a creative product, such as letters, drawings, newspaper
headlines or hashtags. (Figure 2, Outcome 3). During this phase of the discussions, facilitators
leave the groups to encourage participants’ ownership of the outcomes in line with the process
followed in Folhes et al. (2015) and Aguiar et al. (2015).
Implementing the 3H4SDG approach
Figure 3 illustrates the complete process, combining the construction of the 3HSDG diagrams in
parallel groups, with integrative larger group activities. A key aspect of the 3H4SDG approach is
highlighting the convergences and divergences among the pathways. Convergences are common
elements among different pathways. Divergences may entail branching points annotating different
future pathways as seen differently by participants. An example of branching points may be a
society where a big part of the population remains in rural areas versus a future with massive
urbanization, or a future in which community relations stay important with extensive local trade
transactions versus a future in which an extensive part of products are exported and imported.
Convergences can indicate points where agreement prevails and which may mandate specific
actions, while divergences are the points which need to be further discussed.
There are three proposed integrative cross-group activities:
● A ‘World Cafe’ session, in which group participants rotate between the groups allowing
the sharing of results and taking note of contrasting perspectives. Thereby participants are
exposed to issues they may not have considered.
● A ‘Global Perspectives’ session exposes participants to assumptions underpinning recent
global scenario studies and their implications for the context under discussion. This step is
carried out through a presentation prepared by the facilitators. This session takes place after
Step 2 to avoid constraining the thinking of participants as they brainstorm their preferred
future system. During Step 3, participants discuss and take note of possible divergences
between their perspectives and global scenarios.
7

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
● A ‘Final plenary’: In the final plenary group results are presented. Convergences and
divergences within and across the groups and in relation to the global perspectives are
discussed in the context of narratives.
A facilitated evaluation session at the end provides participants with time to reflect upon the
dialogue process, and gives organizers feedback to improve the dialogue process.

8

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Figure 3: The complete process to uncover multiple pathways using the 3H4SDG.

9

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

An illustrative case study: The 2018 African Dialogue on The World In 2050
The 2018 African Dialogue On The World In 2050 was held in Kigali, Rwanda, October 2018.
The Dialogue theme was attaining the SDGs within planetary boundaries in agriculture and food
systems. The event was organized with financial support from the Swedish International
Development Cooperation Agency, Sida, through SwedBio at Stockholm Resilience Centre.
The Dialogue had 40 participants (31 stakeholders and 9 facilitators) from 11 different countries,
including representatives of national governments, UN organisations, civil society and local
communities, academia and research. The stakeholders were selected based on their expertise and
experience (relevant to African agriculture and agro-biodiversity); and for having understanding
and influence over related policy processes (e.g., social and economic development strategies,
spatial planning, research-development-innovation, conservation and resource management). The
Dialogue took place over a span of two days, with the first two steps of the process and the World
Cafe taking place on the first day, and the presentation of global perspectives, the third step and
the synthesis, taking place the second day.
The participants were divided into four regionally focused sub-groups, geographically determined
based on Sub-Saharan African regionalization from the African Union, including:
(i) West and Central Africa (combining the two African Union zones),
(ii) East Africa,
(iii) Southern Africa, and
(iv) (Sub-Saharan) African continent.
The goal of such division was to increase the multiplicity of perspectives and enrich the crossscale comparison (regional, Africa wide and global). The division of participants among the groups
considered various aspects such as the location of the participant, professional background, and
the practical requirement of having manageable groups (in line with Pereira (2018). Also diversity
within groups were sought, to include a variety of competencies, values and narratives, in the
respective groups. Each group incorporated around eight stakeholders and two facilitators.
Facilitators were trained to guide the process, and not to contribute with expertise in the themes
being discussed.
The presentations of global perspectives about pathways to reach multiple goals were based on
IIASA’s The World in 2050 report (International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA)
et al. 2018) and is further deliberated and compared to the outcome of the 2018 African Dialogue
in Aguiar et al. (2019).
At the end of the dialogue, an evaluation form was provided for all the participants (see Appendix
B) and after the Dialogue, results were shared and compiled in a report (Aguiar et al. 2019).

10

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Results and Discussion of the 2018 African Dialogue on The World In
2050
In this section, we extract results of the case study we deem relevant for the goal of this paper: to
provide practitioners and policy makers involved in SDG implementation processes with guidance
in approaches applicable to explore a variety of pathways towards SDGs. Other aspects of the
results providing input to scenario building processes are detailed in Aguiar et al. (2019) and
Aguiar et al. (unpublished manuscript).

Process outcomes
The 3H4SDG process resulted in future visions for the respective groups, lists of current challenges
and their root causes (in some cases transferred to a systems diagram), and lists of changes needed
for transforming to sustainability. The process also resulted in narrative drafts and a diversity of
visual and creative products such as “tweets” from the future.
To illustrate the process outcomes, we below provide a brief description of the resulting visions.

Figure 4: An illustrative photo from the 2018 African Dialogue. The Three Horizons diagram is in
the middle of the group discussion.
The West and Central Africa group named their pathway the Ubuntu pathway after the word in
Nguni (a group of Bantu languages spoken in Southern Africa) for the quality of human interdependence and connectivity. The Ubuntu pathway describes a future of African agriculture and
food systems dominated by farmers associations and cooperatives. Africa embraces its diversity
and the right to land is inclusive. Agroecology takes the lead and the farming systems are fully
organic. In the pathway developed by the group focusing on Eastern Africa, the Peaceful and
Prosperous East Africa Pathway, food security is assured through either small-scale agriculture or
large-scale commercial farming as this is one of the divergences that emerged from the process.
Investments in agriculture and education enable a prosperous future. Agriculture is private-sector
led and gender-balanced. Farmers are secured financial resources. The Southern Africa group
named their pathway after the Swahili and Kinyarwanda word for pathway or direction: the
Urugendo pathway. In the Urugendo pathway, agriculture provides livelihoods and drives the
economy. Agriculture is private-led and peace is emphasized as a precondition for a prosperous
future. Both cooperatives and private businesses are participating and the government provides
preconditions through enabling credit and enabling legal frameworks. The final group had an
11

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
overarching focus on Sub-Saharan Africa and was named the Rainbow pathway. In their pathway,
an aware and educated society empowers its citizens and promotes home-grown and local
knowledge. States are capable, with strong institutions that can deliver and be accountable to their
citizens. Citizens are actively participating in society and collaboration platforms are provided.
The pathways are presented in Table 1 below and detailed in Aguiar et al (2019).
Core present concerns convergent among all groups included the impacts of climate change, land
degradation, food insecurity, inadequate governance, inadequate infrastructure, low level of
financing and issues related to technology (including the dichotomy between modern and
indigenous knowledge), and youth migration/brain-drain. Furthermore, the overall vision of a
peaceful and prosperous Africa capable of feeding itself and the world emerged convergently
across the groups. Other convergent themes that emerged across all groups were: a strong emphasis
on education/skills, youth, women and population empowerment, the consolidation of
cooperatives and cooperation between farmers, the need for infrastructure, generation and sharing
of reliable data, structuring of local to global markets, financing and insurance for agriculture,
independence from foreign donors, regional cooperation, transparency and accountability of
governments – and not least, political will.
Divergences identified within and across groups included five themes: (i) Population growth; (ii)
Consumption patterns; (iii) Actors involved in the agriculture of the future; (iv) Dominating
agricultural practices; (v) Governance - Role of the State and Private sector. No clear regionspecific aspects emerged – except in the language, names and places chosen to synthesize the work
in the summaries. Nevertheless, the African Continent group, when compared to the sub-regional
groups, emphasized more aspects related to regional cooperation, including data
generation/sharing and the importance of alliances for change (across Africa and with the other
continents).

12

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Pathway and unique
features

Future visions

Present concerns & seeds
of the positive future

Change actions

Ubuntu (West and
Central Africa)

Agriculture and food
systems dominated by
farmers’ associations and
cooperatives. Future
characterized by
diversity, inclusiveness,
and agroecology.

Environmental
degradation, the low
interest in agriculture
among youth, growing
inequalities and the
collapse of social values
in communities are main
concerns. Seeds of a
positive future lie in
organic farming systems.

Building dynamic
movements through
empowered farmers’
organizations and
cooperatives and intensify
farmers’ relations and
interaction for better
communal agriculture.
Leaving fossil resources in
the ground.

Food security assured
through either smallscale agriculture or largescale commercial
farming- divergences in
group. The scientific
community collaborates
with the local community
to solve problems and
community is important.

East African countries
suffer from food
insecurity because
production is low as a
consequence of low
technology adoption and
inadequate investments
and research.

Investments in agriculture
and education enable a
prosperous future. Farmers’
financial resources are
secured and mobilized.

Agriculture provides
livelihoods, drives the
economy and is run by
young people.
Agriculture is private-led
and peace is emphasized
as a precondition for a
prosperous future.
Farmers are organized in
cooperatives and there is
no hunger.

Lack of investments in
agriculture, many
governance problems
within cooperatives and
governments are
constraining a positive
development.

Both cooperatives and
private businesses are
participating and the
government provides
preconditions through
enabling credit and enabling
legal frameworks.

An aware and educated
society empowers its
citizens and promotes
home-grown and local
knowledge. States are
capable with strong
institutions that can
deliver and are
accountable for their
citizens. Citizens are
actively participating in
society and collaboration
platforms are provided.

Low human capital as a
consequence of poor
educational quality and
brain drain causes high
population growth.
Climate change and
environmental
degradation threaten
production and wellbeing.

Building infrastructure,
implementing education
programs, and promoting
local solutions stimulate the
necessary innovation. Agroforestry is promoted and
upscaling programs
emphasized. Long-term
cultural and behavioral
changes powered by
synergies, cooperation and
coordination, and increased
access to finance and
insurances, spur the
development.

Fully organic and
cooperatives dominating.

Peaceful and Prosper-ous
East Africa (East Africa)
Divergence between
whether small-scale
agriculture or large-scale
commercial farming is
dominating.

Urugendo (Southern
Africa)
Focus on peace as
precondition.

Rainbow (Sub-Saharan
Africa)
Strong focus on the role
of the governments in
providing institutional
frameworks and regional
partnerships.

Table 1: A summary of the four pathways explored during the 2018 African Dialogue on The World In 2050.

13

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Reflections on the 3H4SDGs approach: Participants’ evaluation
Evaluating participatory approaches is challenging and there is a risk of over-focusing on
quantitative measures. In addition, when assessing the outcomes of participatory approaches, the
complexity of the context makes it difficult to trace the causal relationships between actions and
outcomes (Norström et al. 2020).
In the context of our overarching project aim to provide alternative perspectives on the 2030
Agenda implementation, grounded in locally prevalent narratives, much of the value of the
approach lies in the communication of the alternative perspectives after the Dialogue, and of the
identified divergences and convergences. Thus, the participants’ opinions expressed in the
evaluation can indicate if the approach is perceived as contributing to narrative groundedness,
brings a transformative systems perspective and incorporates multiple perspectives or not.
An evaluation of the Dialogue in the form of a written survey was submitted by 58 % of the
stakeholders. Some participants had to leave early and could not participate in the evaluation, and
this may have skewed the results. The results nevertheless indicated that the approach was received
positively and perceived as useful, discussing relevant questions and worth applying in different
contexts (median 4 on a scale between 1 and 5). Most of the respondents would also recommend
the process used to others (median 5 on a scale 1 to 5).
In the following subsections, we detail selected qualitative details of the participants’ responses,
related to the three above-mentioned premises of the study: Systems perspective and SDG
integration, Multiple perspectives and Participants’ ownership of the pathway narratives.
Systems perspective and SDG integration
The overall process, including the colored post-it notes, assisted the coverage of various
sustainability dimensions throughout the case study process. This facilitated integration of diverse
issues in the explored pathways. Participants emphasized the value of ‘holistic’ and ‘multi-sectoral
approach’ (indicated by the answers to the survey question ‘What was the most important
moment(s) for you during this workshop?’, including “Holistic approach in addressing SDGs;
Interdependence of SDGs”)
The uncovered pathways succeeded in maintaining an integrative perspective and not overfocusing on specific details at the cost of losing the broader picture. This is well in line with our
premise, as well as Bennich et al. (2020) call for SDG interaction studies to engage stakeholders
in integrated perspectives.
In support of the integrative perspective, participants also noted that agriculture can enable
transformations of other sectors (responses to the evaluation question “What ideas or insights do
you look forward to share at work?” included: “Pathways [...] to sustainable social-economic
transformation through modernizing agriculture” and “That transforming agriculture requires a
multi-sectoral approach”). This wider focus on linkages across sectors has been missing in SDG
interaction studies so far (Bennich et al. 2020).

14

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
Multiple perspectives
The approach not only strives to represent a diversity of stakeholders, but also to make it explicit
for the participants that including multiple perspectives is beneficial for the exploration of
pathways towards SDGs.
In this respect, the systems lens central to the 3H4SDG approach represents a beneficial addition
because it can facilitate an overarching view of systems and allow for explorations of multiple
perspectives, which in turn can reveal novel future alternatives. In future iterations of the 3H4SDG
approach, an explicit focus on power relations, both in the design of the process and in terms of
the focus on power as a factor influencing decisions and actions in systems, may provide useful
insights into which and whose perspectives are more likely to be represented.
A systems lens combined with a diversity of participant backgrounds, incorporated innovative
thinking about change and transformations. This may be exemplified by the widespread use of the
scope and details of the future regional pathways, and was a recurring theme in the evaluations.
Participants highlighted this in their answers to the question ‘What ideas and insights do you take
home from this workshop?’ with the following responses: “Embracing our diversification;…”;
“The group work was nicely formed with different range of expertise which helped the discussion
among the group members.”; “It is possible to achieve something tangible if we bring people
together”.).
Participant’s ownership of the pathway narratives
Participants’ evaluations also suggest that the alternative futures were not felt as imposed from
outside but as emerging from the realities experienced by the participants (for example, one
respondent referred to the dialogue as a “People-led initiative”). That the futures emerged from the
participatory process may have facilitated participants’ ownership of the pathways (one participant
referred to as the main insight to bring from the dialogue that “communities need to be empowered
[through participative processes]”). Participants further highlighted the future deliberations as
important because it created shared understanding among participants (similar sentiments are
discussed in Voinov and Bosquet (2010); Voinov et al. (2016); for instance, one of the participants
answered the question ‘What was the most important moment(s) for you during this workshop?’
by stating ”All the interesting discussions and sharing knowledge”). The aspects focusing on
creativity may have increased participants’ feeling of ownership (several of the participants
mentioned the letters from the future as main highlights). Participants were also invited to read the
workshop report before it was published.

Relation to similar approaches
From the perspective of scenario planning, the suggested approach contributes to the wellestablished field or participatory scenario building (Carpenter et al. 2015, Harmáčková and Vačkář
2018). It builds on the approach of Three Horizons, widely used in business management and
increasingly embraced in academic literature on scenario building and visioning (Sharpe et al.
2016, Pereira et al. 2018). Nevertheless, the proposed 3H4SDG approach develops the Three
Horizons further both thematically (by focusing explicitly on the SDGs and sustainability
pathways in an integrative way instead of general future visioning) and formally (by proposing an
array of group/plenary activities allowing the participants to explore novel aspects of sustainability
pathways).

15

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

From the perspective of participatory approaches to explore the SDGs, there have been multiple
calls to increase stakeholder involvement and engagement, which the 3H4SDG approach reacts
on. For instance, a study focusing on the water-energy-food nexus argues that participation is
needed to avoid unintended consequences in SDG implementation (Yillia 2016). Others emphasise
the need to incorporate “all actors in society” when identifying interactions between SDG targets
and ecosystems, e.g. urban ones (Maes et al. 2019 p. 181), the value of combining integrated
simulation modelling and exploring policy options with stakeholders to better incorporate contextspecific knowledge has been emphasised (Collste et al. 2017). In all these cases, it is important to
design carefully facilitated workshops with stakeholders with a focus on SDG interactions and
provide tools for interaction analysis (Weitz et al. 2018).
Nevertheless, the evidence shows that processes meeting these needs have been scarce so far
(Bennich et al. 2020), and that the 3H4SDGs approach fills several important gaps identified by
the literature. Hitherto examples of SDG studies involving stakeholders include Hutton et al.
(2018) who combine integrated SDG modeling in coastal Bangladesh with stakeholders. Kanter et
al. (2016) provide an example of an integrated SDG study with a focus on the Uruguayan beef
sector using a backcasting approach that incorporates stakeholders. Hodes et al. (2018) use visual
methods with the participation of marginalized groups (HIV-affected adolescents). Glover et al.
(2016) use foresight methods and imaginative storytelling involving development scholars in
discussing the interactions between inequality, security, and sustainability. Although the
stakeholder approaches in the mentioned SDG studies are promising, our approach furthers them
by combining systemic thinking and by an overarching perspective of what a sustainable future
entails that is anchored in multidimensional narratives. This approach to adopt an overarching
perspective has been called for elsewhere in the literature (e.g. Costanza et al. 2016, Reyers et al.
2017)

Limitations
Reaching a desirable level of diversity of pathways may prove difficult due to various constraining
factors, including time, financial capacity, language barriers, etc. (Turcotte and Pasquero 2001,
Reed 2008).
One of the disadvantages of our particular adoption in the case study was the poor representation
from many African regions. Although the group was diverse when it came to the type of
organizations, East Africa was clearly overrepresented and none of the participants were from
Southern Africa, despite invitations having been sent out to different regions. This implied that the
regional representativeness of the pathways that were uncovered may not represent a diversity of
regions in Africa.
In future case studies, a better design of the invitation process and much more considerations of
who to invite would be recommended. Alternatively, the process could be repeated in different
locations, later synthesizing the convergences and divergences across multiple Dialogues. Future
case studies would also benefit from including follow-up workshop(s) in connection to the
dialogue, in which the results can be presented and further discussed and related to existing
governance processes.

16

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
The overarching frame and systems perspective was for us mainly seen as a strength of the
approach as called for elsewhere (e.g. Bennich et al. 2020). It facilitates the visualization of
alternatives to the prolongation of societal trends - which has been identified as an asset in future
studies (Andersson and Westholm 2019). From another perspective however, this strength can be
seen as a weakness as there is no clear receiver that will implement the suggestions, and the impact
is difficult to measure, and often result in ‘small wins’ (Turcotte and Pasquero 2001). Nevertheless,
this process has to start somewhere and our approach contributes to further development of
participatory methods and techniques.

Future use of the approach
Can the process we have developed contribute to real-world sustainability transitions? The Agenda
2030 negotiations have been hailed for having been inclusive and providing civil society with
possibilities to engage as few other international negotiation processes (Chasek et al. 2016). It has
furthermore been referred to as an agenda “proposed and championed by a country from the Global
South [and] for the first time defined development as a universal agenda” (Caballero 2019 p. 138).
A question that still remains is however how this inclusive process and universal agenda can be
translated to the implementation phase of the 2030 Agenda and grounded in the prevalent
narratives. We argue that the 3H4SDG approach can contribute. It can serve as a meaningful way
to provide stakeholder inputs and visioning to implementation, that does not only offer advice on
a detailed level but enables a systems view of development. We see the approach as very adaptable
to different circumstances and with different themes and questions, and it has already been taken
up and adopted in different settings by the Dialogue participants (Graziani 2019).
In the future application of the approach, we want to note a few points. We designed the dialogue
as a pilot but argue that the approach can efficiently be used as a part of an existing decision, or
governance, process with an implementation agency. It is up to the future users to what extent the
process is led by topic- and region-wise focus of the groups. In a way, this is the stakeholder-based
aspect of the approach: that the stakeholders can diverge from the original focus and go broader if
they wish.

17

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Conclusions
This study presents a novel approach providing a structure for discussing the SDGs and uncovering
pathways to reach them, Three Horizons for the SDGs (3H4SDG), which democratizes visioning
for SDGs and can be easily adapted to other contexts, and at the same time can efficiently
complement existing decision or governance process. As a pilot case study, we applied this
approach in the 2018 African Dialogue on The World In 2050.
The approach has proved to have multiple assets. First, it facilitates deliberation, collaboration and
shared understanding and visioning in a diverse group of stakeholders. Second, it provides a novel
way of looking at the SDGs from a systems perspective in which the agenda is seen as a coherent
whole, as a direction for the uncovering of sustainability pathways, while integration is being put
at the core. Third, it fosters ownership and creativity as it motivates participants to develop
different forms of artistic syntheses. Finally, it can benefit practitioners and policy makers by
allowing a systems perspective and bird’s eye view of uncovered pathways and thereby assist in
the planning of coherent SDG policies and actions.
One of the key aspects of the proposed approach is its ability to identify alternative pathways in a
stakeholder-based, bottom-up way, by focusing on convergent and divergent opinions and issues
identified by the participants. The convergences and divergences identified by this approach can
be used both as points for deliberation among diverse voices and for further specification of
sustainability pathways. Furthermore, it allows for comparisons with global pathways and
facilitates their integration even at sub-global scales. The African Dialogue case study provides
examples of both convergent and divergent topics, including the commonly raised need for
infrastructure investments and improved governance, and the divergent issues of whether
population growth should be seen as an asset or a barrier for the well-being of African societies.
We envision the method to be used in policy making in the future as a strategic tool that allows for
inclusive discussions and thereby assists in the direction towards more sustainable and just futures.

18

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb

Literature cited
Aguiar, A. P., D. Collste, D. Galafassi, Z. Harmáčková, K. Houngbedji, M. Mesfin, D. Ndahiro, L.
Pereira, O. Selomane, and S. van der Leeuw. 2019. The Second African Dialogue on the World In
2050 - How to attain the SDGs within planetary boundaries: Agriculture and food systems. Report
on a Multi-Actor Dialogue for TWI2050, 30 - 31 October 2018, Kigali, Rwanda. Sustainable
Development Goals Center for Africa and SwedBio/Stockholm Resilience Centre at Stockholm
University.
Andersson, J., and E. Westholm. 2019. Slaget om framtiden: Forskningens roll i konflikten mellan tillväxt
och miljö. Santérus förlag, Stockholm.
Bennich, T., N. Weitz, and H. Carlsen. 2020. Deciphering the scientific literature on SDG interactions: A
review and reading guide. Science of The Total Environment.
Caballero, P. 2019. The SDGs: Changing How Development is Understood. Global Policy 10(S1):138–
140.
Carant, J. B. 2017. Unheard voices: a critical discourse analysis of the Millennium Development Goals’
evolution into the Sustainable Development Goals. Third World Quarterly 38(1):16–41.
Carpenter, S. R., E. G. Booth, S. Gillon, C. J. Kucharik, S. Loheide, A. S. Mase, M. Motew, J. Qiu, A. R.
Rissman, J. Seifert, and Others. 2015. Plausible futures of a social-ecological system: Yahara
watershed, Wisconsin, USA. Ecology and Society 20(2).
Chasek, P. S., L. M. Wagner, F. Leone, A.-M. Lebada, and N. Risse. 2016. Getting to 2030: Negotiating
the Post-2015 Sustainable Development Agenda. Review of European, Comparative & International
Environmental Law 25(1):5–14.
Colloff, M. J., S. Lavorel, L. E. van Kerkhoff, C. A. Wyborn, I. Fazey, R. Gorddard, G. M. Mace, W. B.
Foden, M. Dunlop, I. C. Prentice, J. Crowley, P. Leadley, and P. Degeorges. 2017. Transforming
conservation science and practice for a postnormal world. Conservation biology: the journal of the
Society for Conservation Biology 31(5):1008–1017.
Collste, D., M. Pedercini, and S. E. Cornell. 2017. Policy coherence to achieve the SDGs: using
integrated simulation models to assess effective policies. Sustainability Science 12(6):921–931.
Costanza, R., L. Fioramonti, and I. Kubiszewski. 2016. The UN Sustainable Development Goals and the
dynamics of well-being. Frontiers in ecology and the environment 14(2):59–59.
Cvitanovic, C., M. Howden, R. M. Colvin, A. Norström, A. M. Meadow, and P. F. E. Addison. 2019.
Maximising the benefits of participatory climate adaptation research by understanding and managing
the associated challenges and risks. Environmental science & policy 94:20–31.
Development, U. N. S. 2015, September 25. 2030 Agenda for #SustDev is officially adopted!! 4 People,
Planet, Prosperity, Peace, Partnership! #SDGs #Globalgoalspic.twitter.com/BPL2U5mcnt.
Downing, A. S., A. Bhowmik, D. Collste, S. Cornell, J. F. Donges, I. Fetzer, T. Häyhä, J. Hinton, S. J.
Lade, and W. Mooij. 2019. Matching scope, purpose and uses of planetary boundaries science.
Environmental research letters: ERL [Web site].
Dutra Aguiar, A. P. 2015. Transition to sustainability: are participatory multi-scale scenarios a useful
tool? Transition to sustainability: are participatory multi-scale scenarios a useful tool?(11).
Engström, R., G. Destouni, M. Howells, V. Ramaswamy, H. Rogner, and M. Bazilian. 2019. Cross-Scale
Water and Land Impacts of Local Climate and Energy Policy—A Local Swedish Analysis of
Selected SDG Interactions. Sustainability: Science Practice and Policy 11(7):1847.
Fazey, I., N. Schäpke, G. Caniglia, J. Patterson, J. Hultman, B. van Mierlo, F. Säwe, A. Wiek, J.
Wittmayer, P. Aldunce, H. Al Waer, N. Battacharya, H. Bradbury, E. Carmen, J. Colvin, C.
Cvitanovic, M. D’Souza, M. Gopel, B. Goldstein, T. Hämäläinen, G. Harper, T. Henfry, A.
Hodgson, M. S. Howden, A. Kerr, M. Klaes, C. Lyon, G. Midgley, S. Moser, N. Mukherjee, K.
Müller, K. O’Brien, D. A. O’Connell, P. Olsson, G. Page, M. S. Reed, B. Searle, G. Silvestri, V.
Spaiser, T. Strasser, P. Tschakert, N. Uribe-Calvo, S. Waddell, J. Rao-Williams, R. Wise, R.
Wolstenholme, M. Woods, and C. Wyborn. 2018. Ten essentials for action-oriented and second

19

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
order energy transitions, transformations and climate change research. Energy Research & Social
Science 40:54–70.
Folhes, R. T., A. P. D. de Aguiar, E. Stoll, E. L. Dalla-Nora, R. Araújo, A. Coelho, and O. do Canto.
2015. Multi-scale participatory scenario methods and territorial planning in the Brazilian Amazon.
Futures 73:86–99.
Folke, C., S. Carpenter, B. Walker, M. Scheffer, T. Chapin, and J. Rockström. 2010. Resilience thinking:
integrating resilience, adaptability and transformability. Ecology and Society 15(4).
Glover, D., K. Hernandez, and A. Rhydderch. 2016. A Foresight Scenario Method for Thinking About
Complex Sustainable Development Interactions. IDS bulletin 47(4).
Graziani, G. 2019, February 16. In prima linea per lo sviluppo sostenibile! #Agenda2030 #SDGs
#pontassieve @ASviSItalia @JacopoBencini @ItalianClimatepic.twitter.com/dOqlOxVrjA.
de Haan, J. (hans), and J. Rotmans. 2011. Patterns in transitions: Understanding complex chains of
change. Technological forecasting and social change 78(1):90–102.
Hanssen, L., E. Rouwette, and M. M. van Katwijk. 2009. The Role of Ecological Science in
Environmental Policy Making: from a Pacification toward a Facilitation Strategy. Ecology and
Society 14(1):art43.
Harmáčková, Z. V., and D. Vačkář. 2018. Future uncertainty in scenarios of ecosystem services
provision: Linking differences among narratives and outcomes. Ecosystem Services 33:134–145.
Hodes, R., J. Doubt, E. Toska, B. Vale, N. Zungu, and L. Cluver. 2018. The stuff that dreams are made
of: HIV-positive adolescents’ aspirations for development. Journal of the International AIDS Society
21(S1):e25057.
Hutton, C. W., R. J. Nicholls, A. N. Lázár, A. Chapman, M. Schaafsma, and M. Salehin. 2018. Potential
Trade-Offs between the Sustainable Development Goals in Coastal Bangladesh. Sustainability:
Science Practice and Policy 10(4):1108.
IPBES. 2019. Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem
services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services.
IPBES secretariat, Bonn, Germany.
Kanter, D. R., M.-H. Schwoob, W. E. Baethgen, J. E. Bervejillo, M. Carriquiry, A. Dobermann, B.
Ferraro, B. Lanfranco, M. Mondelli, C. Penengo, R. Saldias, M. E. Silva, and J. M. S. de Lima.
2016. Translating the Sustainable Development Goals into action: A participatory backcasting
approach for developing national agricultural transformation pathways. Global Food Security 10:71–
79.
Leach, M., I. Scoones, and A. Stirling. 2010. Governing epidemics in an age of complexity: Narratives,
politics and pathways to sustainability. Global environmental change: human and policy dimensions
20(3):369–377.
van der Leeuw, S. 2019a. Social Sustainability, Past and Future. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. Open access: https://www.cambridge.org/core/services/aop-cambridgecore/content/view/811395DC3A8D82EAD39C45657B2FD1AD/9781108498692AR.pdf/Social_Sus
tainability__Past_and_Future.pdf?event-type=FTLA.
van der Leeuw, S. 2019b. The role of narratives in human-environmental relations: an essay on
elaborating win-win solutions to climate change and sustainability. Climatic change
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-019-02403-y.
Linnér, B.-O., and V. Wibeck. 2019. Sustainability Transformations Across Societies: Agents and Drivers
across Societies. Cambridge University Press.
Maes, M. J. A., K. E. Jones, M. B. Toledano, and B. Milligan. 2019. Mapping synergies and trade-offs
between urban ecosystems and the sustainable development goals. Environmental science & policy
93:181–188.
Meadows, D. 2008. Thinking in Systems: A Primer. Chelsea Green.
Meadows, D. H. 1997. Leverage Points: Places to Intervene in a System. Page 21. The Sustainability
Institute, Hartland VT.
Miller, R. 2011. Futures literacy: embracing complexity and using the future. Ethos 10(10):23–28.

20

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
Nilsson, M., E. Chisholm, D. Griggs, P. Howden-Chapman, D. McCollum, P. Messerli, B. Neumann, A.S. Stevance, M. Visbeck, and M. Stafford-Smith. 2018. Mapping interactions between the
sustainable development goals: lessons learned and ways forward. Sustainability Science
13(6):1489–1503.
Nilsson, M., D. Griggs, and M. Visbeck. 2016. Policy: Map the interactions between Sustainable
Development Goals. Nature News 534(7607):320.
Norström, A. V., C. Cvitanovic, M. F. Löf, S. West, C. Wyborn, P. Balvanera, A. T. Bednarek, E. M.
Bennett, R. Biggs, A. de Bremond, B. M. Campbell, J. G. Canadell, S. R. Carpenter, C. Folke, E. A.
Fulton, O. Gaffney, S. Gelcich, J.-B. Jouffray, M. Leach, M. Le Tissier, B. Martín-López, E. Louder,
M.-F. Loutre, A. M. Meadow, H. Nagendra, D. Payne, G. D. Peterson, B. Reyers, R. Scholes, C. I.
Speranza, M. Spierenburg, M. Stafford-Smith, M. Tengö, S. van der Hel, I. van Putten, and H.
Österblom. 2020. Principles for knowledge co-production in sustainability research. Nature
Sustainability.
Obersteiner, M., B. Walsh, S. Frank, P. Havlík, M. Cantele, J. Liu, A. Palazzo, M. Herrero, Y. Lu, A.
Mosnier, H. Valin, K. Riahi, F. Kraxner, S. Fritz, and D. van Vuuren. 2016. Assessing the land
resource-food price nexus of the Sustainable Development Goals. Science advances 2(9):e1501499.
O’Neill, D. W., A. L. Fanning, W. F. Lamb, and J. K. Steinberger. 2018. A good life for all within
planetary boundaries. Nature Sustainability 1(2):88–95.
Page, G. G., R. M. Wise, L. Lindenfeld, P. Moug, A. Hodgson, C. Wyborn, and I. Fazey. 2016. Codesigning transformation research: lessons learned from research on deliberate practices for
transformation. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability 20:86–92.
Patterson, J., K. Schulz, J. Vervoort, S. van der Hel, O. Widerberg, C. Adler, M. Hurlbert, K. Anderton,
M. Sethi, and A. Barau. 2017. Exploring the governance and politics of transformations towards
sustainability. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions 24:1–16.
Pedercini, M., S. Arquitt, D. Collste, and H. Herren. 2019. Harvesting synergy from sustainable
development goal interactions. PNAS [online] URL: https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1817276116.
Pedercini, M., H. M. Kleemann, N. Dlamini, V. Dlamini, and B. Kopainsky. 2018. Integrated simulation
for national development planning. Kybernetes. The International Journal of Cybernetics, Systems
and Management Sciences 48(1):208–223.
Pereira, L. M., T. Hichert, M. Hamann, R. Preiser, and R. Biggs. 2018. Using futures methods to create
transformative spaces: visions of a good Anthropocene in southern Africa. Ecology and Society
23(1):art19.
Pradhan, P., L. Costa, D. Rybski, W. Lucht, and J. P. Kropp. 2017. A Systematic Study of Sustainable
Development Goal (SDG) Interactions: A SYSTEMATIC STUDY OF SDG INTERACTIONS.
Earth’s Future 5(11):1169–1179.
Randers, J., J. RockstrÖm, P. E. Stoknes, U. Golüke, D. Collste, and S. Cornell. 2018. Transformation is
feasible: How to achieve the sustainable development goals within planetary boundaries. A report to
the Club of Rome, for its 50 years anniversary 17.
Raworth, K. 2017. Doughnut Economics: Seven Ways to Think Like a 21st-Century Economist. Random
House Business, London.
Reed, M. S. 2008. Stakeholder participation for environmental management: a literature review.
Biological conservation 141(10):2417–2431.
Reyers, B., M. Stafford-Smith, K.-H. Erb, R. J. Scholes, and O. Selomane. 2017. Essential variables help
to focus sustainable development goals monitoring. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability
26:97–105.
Reynolds, M., and S. Holwell. 2020. Systems Approaches to Making Change: A Practical Guide.
Springer London.
Rockström, J., W. Steffen, K. Noone, Å. Persson, F. S. I. Chapin, E. Lambin, T. M. Lenton, M. Scheffer,
C. Folke, H. J. Schellnhuber, B. Nykvist, C. A. de Wit, T. Hughes, S. van der Leeuw, H. Rodhe, S.
Sorlin, P. K. Snyder, R. Costanza, U. Svedin, M. Falkenmark, L. Karlberg, R. W. Corell, V. J. Fabry,
J. Hansen, B. Walker, D. Liverman, K. Richardson, P. Crutzen, and J. Foley. 2009. Planetary

21

This is a non-peer reviewed preprint submitted to SocArXiv: https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/uhskb
Boundaries: Exploring the Safe Operating Space for Humanity. Ecology and Society 14(2):Art. 32.
Sachs, J. D., G. Schmidt-Traub, M. Mazzucato, D. Messner, N. Nakicenovic, and J. Rockström. 2019. Six
Transformations to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals. Nature Sustainability 2(9):805–814.
Schultz, M., T. Hahn, N. Hällström, and C. Ituarte-Lima. 2016. The biggest single opportunity we have is
dialogue-Dialogue seminars as a methodology for transformative social learning and conflict
resolution in international environment negotiations, SwedBio at Stockholm Resilience Centre. This
is a modification of a paper with a similar name under review in International Journal of
Biodiversity Science, Ecosystem Services & Management.
Scoones, I., A. Stirling, D. Abrol, J. Atela, L. Charli-Joseph, H. Eakin, A. Ely, P. Olsson, L. Pereira, and
R. Priya. 2019. Transformations to Sustainability:20.
Sharpe, B., A. Hodgson, G. Leicester, A. Lyon, and I. Fazey. 2016. Three horizons: a pathways practice
for transformation. Ecology and Society 21(2).
Sharpe, B., and J. Williams. 2013. Three horizons - the patterning of hope.
Stafford-Smith, M., D. Griggs, O. Gaffney, F. Ullah, B. Reyers, N. Kanie, B. Stigson, P. Shrivastava, M.
Leach, and D. O’Connell. 2017. Integration: the key to implementing the Sustainable Development
Goals. Sustainability Science 12(6):911–919.
Steffen, W., K. Richardson, J. Rockström, S. E. Cornell, I. Fetzer, E. M. Bennett, R. Biggs, S. R.
Carpenter, W. de Vries, C. A. de Wit, C. Folke, D. Gerten, J. Heinke, G. M. Mace, L. M. Persson, V.
Ramanathan, B. Reyers, and S. Sörlin. 2015. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human development on
a changing planet. Science:1259855.
Turcotte, M.-F., and J. Pasquero. 2001. The Paradox of Multistakeholder Collaborative Roundtables. The
Journal of applied behavioral science 37(4):447–464.
Ulrich, W. 2003. Beyond methodology choice: critical systems thinking as critically systemic discourse.
The Journal of the Operational Research Society 2003(54):325–342.
United Nations. 2015. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 25 September 2015. Page 35.
Vergragt, P. J., and J. Quist. 2011. Backcasting for sustainability: Introduction to the special issue.
Technological forecasting and social change 78(5):747–755.
Voinov, A., and F. Bousquet. 2010. Modelling with stakeholders☆. Environmental Modelling & Software
25(11):1268–1281.
Voinov, A., N. Kolagani, M. K. McCall, P. D. Glynn, M. E. Kragt, F. O. Ostermann, S. A. Pierce, and P.
Ramu. 2016. Modelling with stakeholders – Next generation. Environmental Modelling & Software
77:196–220.
Weitz, N., H. Carlsen, M. Nilsson, and K. Skånberg. 2018. Towards systemic and contextual priority
setting for implementing the 2030 Agenda. Sustainability Science 13(2):531–548.
Wiek, A., and D. Iwaniec. 2014. Quality criteria for visions and visioning in sustainability science.
Sustainability Science 9(4):497–512.
Yillia, P. T. 2016. Water-Energy-Food nexus: framing the opportunities, challenges and synergies for
implementing the SDGs. Osterreichische Wasser- und Abfallwirtschaft 68(3):86–98.

22

