AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019

Pp. 68-81

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.5

On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English

Haitham (Mohd Khair) Ahmad ALYousef
Translation for professional department, School of Languages, Literacies and
Translation, Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia
Tengku Sepora Tengku Mahadi
Translation for professional department, School of Languages, Literacies and
Translation, Universiti Sains Malaysia
Penang, Malaysia

Abstract
The translators constitute facing a challenge in the translation of Arabic verbal emphasis structure.
Therefore, this study investigates the translation of Arabic verbal emphasis category and its
subcategories into English from semantic and pragmatic perspectives. It draws upon an
examination of several translations of these emphatic devices and structures into English.
Specifically, it draws upon the translations of Naguib Mahfouz’s novels The Thief and the Dogs
(1961), Children of Gebalawi (1988) and the Harafish (2013) and Ghassan Kanafani’s short
stories Palestine’s Children (2000). The study highlights the erroneous strategies adopted by the
translators of these literary works and suggests more suitable alternative translations. As a result
of several mismatches between Arabic and English leads to such errors. This study attempts to
handle a gape in literature and help translators to overcome the obstacles they may face in
rendering such Arabic structures in English. The article concludes that translating Arabic verbal
emphatic structure into English would be affected by the syntactic, semantic and pragmatic
symmetries and asymmetries between the two languages.
Keywords: Arabic verbal emphasis, repetition, translation
Cites as: ALYousef, H. A., & Mahadi, T. S. T. (2019). On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis
into English. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 68-81.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.5

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

68

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
Introduction
The translator has to concentrate on the message s/he transfers; since the core of translation
is to transfer a text with its connotations and denotations from a source language (SL) into a target
language (TL). Furthermore, translators must be faithful and sensitive to the semantic meanings
of the source language text (SLT) i.e., the different meanings represented in the content of the
message is called “the expressive meaning” related to “the speaker’s feelings or attitudes” (Baker,
2018, p.13). Naturally, different users of a language can express their feelings and attitudes
differently depending on a variety of syntactic devices which are available in that language. Users
of language resort to language devices as emphatic devices which are intended to highlight
primarily verbal emphasis type.
The present study examines the translation of Arabic verbal constructions into English, and
it also addresses the effectiveness and contributions of the strategies that translators have adopted
to convey the variable emphatic structures.
Quirk and Greenbaum assert that emphasis refers to the additional stress given to a sentence
or part of it indicate prominence or importance in the utterance. It is generally used to highlight
one or more of the sentence components to draw the addressee’s attention to its importance relative
to other constituents. Emphasis can be expressed by either stressing a particular element or using
certain structural forms such as the emphatic pronoun and other particular syntactic structures
(1973, p.312). Therefore, an emphatic structure is a syntactic technique used to highlight a certain
form or part of a sentence for a particular pragmatic purpose. Emphasis structures, in both English
and Arabic, have pragmatic functions (emphasis, focus, and theme prominence), and there are
different ways to express such functions in the two languages.
Emphasis in Arabic
Emphasis is an ongoing process that restricts its follower by the direction of its report to
raise the doubts which attach the mind of the listener. By emphasis, the speaker bases his speed in
the attention of the listener in the course of the sentence systems (Albayati, 2003, p.260). Many
different devices can express emphasis in Arabic. There two main categories of emphasis in Arabic
(a) verbal and (b) meaning. This study confines to Arabic verbal emphasis category and its
subcategory.
Verbal Emphasis
Repetition is the most common form of verbal emphasis. It is, in essence, a stylistic
technique used to achieve specific pragmatic purposes such as reinforcement, explanation,
concentration, illustration, drawing attention, and threat. Repetition is considered the most
important and most proper strategy by Arab writers and speakers when trying to draw the attention
of their addressees to the focal point of the discourse. Shunnaq (1989), for example, calls repetition
indicating emphasis “emphatic repetition.” Thus, emphatic repetition in Arabic discourse can take
many forms. Repeating the same item or the item with its synonymous as in noun, verb, particle,
sentence, phrase, clause, pronouns (attached and independent) adjective and adverb can achieve
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

69

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
Arabic verbal emphasis. The researchers explain this kind of emphasis in detail in the findings and
discussions section below.
Meaning Emphasis
Al-Gharanawi (2005) considers it to refine the meaning, without pronouncing it, by some
words which are established for that such as nafis (‫)نفس‬, ain (‫)عين‬, kela (‫)كال‬, kelta (‫)كلتا‬, jamei’
(‫)جميع‬, a’ama (‫)عامة‬, kul (‫( )كل‬p.279).
Emphasis in English
Mcarthur (1992) defines emphasis as a use of language to mark importance or significance
through either intensity of expression or linguistic features such as stress and intonation. Means
can achieve the emphasis in general that draw attention to a syllable, word, phrase, idea, event or
social situation such as the increase of intensity and volume on of once when someone says: Do it
once! (p.348). Celce-Murcia and Larson-Freeman (1983) point out that emphatic structures
function overlaps with other structures such as exclamation and intensification. Besides, since the
emphasis is mostly a semantic notion, it is likely to be signaled in many ways, including stress and
intonation, choice of words, selection of grammatical patterns (p.408).
Arabic has its own syntactic devices of emphasis, so does English. Some of the emphatic
tools available in English correspond to those of Arabic, while others do not.
Ways of adding emphasis
The auxiliary verb
One can add emphasis to a sentence by stressing the auxiliary verb or the be verb such as
“I will write you a letter as soon as I arrive.” In sentences where there is no auxiliary or be verbs,
add do and stress it for emphasis such as “I do believe in miracles.”
Emphatic do
Frodeson and Eyring (2000, p.402) indicate that emphatically do add emphasis to a whole
sentence such as “You really do have a good thesis.” It adds emphasis to an imperative. This use
of emphatic do softens a command and shows polite encouragement such as “Do come in!.” It
contradicts a negative statement, and it is widespread in arguments such as “A: you didn’t lock the
door. B: you’re wrong. I did lock it.” It adds emphasis to a verb used in connection with an adverb
of frequency such as never, seldom, rarely, often or always.
Adverbs
Gleason (1966) considers that some adverbs called “emphatic adverb” or “proverb adverb”
used to add some kind of general emphasis to the sentence or to express some kind of reservation.
They include some words as usual, certainly. For example: I certainly will go.
Previous Studies
Hassan (2015) examines the translation of verb repetition from Arabic into English, where
it is mostly avoided. The repetition of a verb in Arabic indicates to an assertion, a specific situation,
or a reminder of a previous event. Hassan works on translation media and literary texts; he
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

70

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
concludes that the repetition of the Arabic verb is best deleted in English. Fathi (2004) examines
repetition as a method of emphasis or reinforcement to speech in both languages i.e. Arabic and
English. Repetition is used in different fields to pay the attention of a listener or reader. The study
shows this phenomenon through the differences and similarities between the structures in Arabic
and English. Mohammed (2013) considers emphasis in Arabic and its particles ways to emphasize
the speech in Qur’an. The study shows ways of emphasizing particles in Arabic and indicates to
some challenges that a translator may face when translating Qur’anic texts. It concludes that
rendering of emphatic verses is not emphatic as the original. AlAubaidi (2013) considers the
rhetorical function of repetition of sentences. It concludes that different methods of repetition
indicate to different functions as assertion and the effects which emphasis adds to the sentence.
Most Arab grammarians agree that emphatic structures are syntactic techniques applied to
focus on particular linguistic units to express a specific pragmatic function (Nahr, 2004 ;
Maghalisah, 1997). Emphatic structures are known in classical and modern standard Arabic as
verbal emphasis (al-tawkid al-llafthi) and meaning emphasis (al-tawkid al-ma’nawi). Most
classical Arab grammarians consider that verbal emphasis happens only when the same item is
repeated twice or more in sequence, and nothing separates it from the preceding one i.e., lexical
repetition has only one form that is a repetition of the same item or literal repetition. Some modern
Arab grammarians such as Deeb (1984), Nahr (2004) and Maghalisah (1997) insist that emphatic
repetition also happens when an item is paraphrased by another synonym, and the repeated item
can be separated by particular particles. Deeb (1984) considers some of the lexical emphasis
functions such as reminding, warning, threatening, or calling attention to some feelings like
sadness and happiness.
Alhrout (1983) examines Arabic emphatic structures on the semantic and syntactic levels.
He mentions three primary strategies to express emphasis in Arabic discourse: (a) emphasis by the
pronoun of separation, (b) emphasis by particular particles and (c) emphasis by additional particles.
He concludes that emphasis can be expressed in different ways other than lexical devices.
Johnston (1991) investigates repetition as an emphatic style in mot cases in Arabic
discourse and regards it as a persuasive device. She discusses two kinds of repetition at the
morphological level: (a) repetition of patterns and (b) repetition of roots as in the cognate
accusative. She concludes that repetition in English is a deviation from the norm, while in Arabic,
it is not ornamental because it affects the structure of Arabic discourse. Farghal (1993) conducts a
study on the translation of Arabic cognate accusatives into English. He states three major goals for
using Arabic cognate accusative as follows: (a) to evaluate the action of the preceding verb, (b) to
show the number of actions expressed by the verb, (c) to show the quality of the action expressed
by the verb. Farghal concludes that Arabic and English include such symmetries as in sing a song
and asymmetries regarding the cognate accusatives, so it would not be easy to translate them
straightforwardly. The translator would have to employ different kinds of equivalence. The
translators may opt for both formal and functional equivalences in the case of symmetries.
Functional equivalence is due to the absence of one-to-one correspondence in the case of
asymmetries.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

71

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
The Study
This research is a qualitative descriptive study investigates the translation of Arabic verbal
emphasis from semantic and pragmatic perspectives. The data of this research stems from the
translation of three novels of Naguib Mahfouz (Children of Gebalawi, The Thief and the Dogs and
the Harafish) and short stories of Ghassan Kanafani (Palestine’s Children. The researchers choose
36 examples purposefully from the novels and short stories. They encompass the Arabic verbal
emphasis structure, and they are classified into certain categories and subcategories. They are
analyzed alongside their translations in English. To achieve the purpose of this study, appropriate
and representative data were collected from the novels and short stories to exemplify and illustrate
the translation of verbal emphatic structures and devices. The analysis of the collected data is
comparative between Arabic and English texts to shed light on the strategies adopted by the
translators and check whether they serve the same level of emphasis that source language texts
suggest. The researchers collect Several English emphatic examples, and they comprise the
corpora for the classifications of verbal emphasis. There are illustrative examples of each category
are chosen purposefully from the novels and short stories and discussed. Finally, the researchers
attempt to suggest the reasons for the erroneous translation in the discussion. Then they propose
better translations of the source language as well as the strategies employed by the translators.
Findings and Discussions
The findings of the present study relate to Arabic verbal emphasis and its categories and
the strategies of the novels and short stories translators. The focus of discussion is on the erroneous
translation where the translators have failed to render quite adequately in English the clauses that
include Arabic verbal emphatic structures. Therefore, better translations are proposed.
1. Repetition of the same item
One of the most essential linguistic styles in Arabic is repeating the same item as a noun,
a verb, a pronoun, an adverb, a particle, a sentence, a phrase or a clause for the sake of emphasis
(Deeb, 1984; Johnston, 1991). Shunnaq (1993) suggests that verbal repeition should be translated
literally. Thus, the translator would be able to maintain its significant function in the SLT. Because
of the fact that using Arabic verbal emphasis for specific purposes, most emphasis, so paraphrasing
is not successful traslation strategy in rendering it. Thus it would affect the original pragmatic
meaning.
1.1 Noun Repetition
The speaker usually uses this kind of emphasis to praise, warn, assert an exact idea to reinforce an
idea in the text, and delete any doubts. It is evident in the following four examples that the speaker
tries to praise the listener as in example (1), assert an exact idea to eliminate any doubts for the
listener as in (2, 3 & 4) and warn the listener as in (5). The translator in examples (1 & 2) opts the
functional meaning by using the repeated word in SLT once which fails to express praise in (1)
and emphasize the meaning in (2) besides the emphatic function. It would be better if the
translation is as follow:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

72

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
Amazing! Amazing! As handsome as your grandpa (1). And Cleanness. . cleanness (2). The
translator does the same in examples (3), but by using the paraphrasing strategy, which fails to
express the emphasis. The translation would be better if it is as follows:
If he had died, the fault would have been your fault.
To express a strong warning in (6), it is better to translate as follow: Be careful, be careful
of violence that leads to feud. Thus, it is better to use literal translation in the examples to express
the function of the sentences as in example (7).
‫( مثال‬1))219‫ ص‬،‫ ما اشبهك بجدك! (اوالد حارتنا‬،‫ بديع بديع‬:
TT: Amazing! As handsome as Gebelawi! (Children of Gebelawi, p.141)
)56‫ ص‬،‫ النظافة (الحرافيش‬. . ‫ والنظافة‬:)2( ‫مثال‬
TT: And Hygiene! Always remember to take precautions. (The Harafish, p.34)
)64‫ص‬،‫ (ابو الحسن يقوص على سيارة انكليزية‬.‫ لو مات لكان الذنب ذنبك‬:)3(‫مثال‬
TT: If he had died, it would have been your fault. (Abu Al-Hassan ambushes an English car, p.80)
)97‫ ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫ اللمسة كافية لتحقيق النصر والحذر الحذر من العنف ال يورث اال الضغينة‬:)4(‫مثال‬
TT: A touch is enough to decide the winner, Avoid violence at all costs. It only causes ill feeling.
(The Harafish, p.67))
‫( مثال‬5) ‫ (الصغير‬.‫ تصور بادئ االمر ان مهمة القائد هي أن يدور على المقاتلين واحدا واحدا ويرشدهم الى ما يتوجب فعله‬:
)25‫ ص‬،‫يستعير مرتينة خاله‬
TT: First of all, he imagined that the importance of the leader must be to go around to all the
fighters one by one guide them in what they had to do. (The Child borrows his uncle’s gun, p.53))
1.1.1 Repetition of the same nouns after words
The repetition of the same nouns after words is used to assert and strengthen the meaning.
The translator should translate the repeated words literally as in example (8). Therefore, the
translations of examples (6 & 7) would be better as follows: Legally, you know: a piaster by
piaster. In example (7); the words bastard is not appropriate; the word villain should be used
instead. It should be repeated three times as follow:
The villain was challenging him. The villain was testing him, the villain was having his revenge.
( ‫مثال‬6)20‫ص‬،‫ (الصغير يستعير مرتينة خاله ويشرق الى صفد‬.‫ قرش فوق قرش‬:‫ أنت تعرف‬،‫ حاللي‬:)
TT: Legally, you know, every single piastre. (The Child borrows his uncle’s gun, p.50)
)291‫ ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫ الوغد ينتقم منه‬.‫ الوغد يمتحنه‬.‫ الوغد يتحداه‬:)7( ‫مثال‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

73

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
TT: The bastard was challenging him, putting him to the test, having his revenge. (The
Harafish, p.194)
)335‫ص‬،‫ (البنادق في المخيم‬.‫ الفقر يا ابن العم الفقر‬:)8( ‫مثال‬
TT: The poor, cousin . . the poor. (p.132, Guns in the camp)
1.2

Verb Repetition
The verb is repeated to reinforce the action and no need to repeat the subject. The translator
should use a strategy to express this emphasis regardless of kinds of the used verb by using literal
translation or adding words to reinforce the intended meaning. Therefore, the translator translates
the repeated imperative verbs literally in examples (9 & 10), which expresses the intended
emphasis. The verbs (‫ انكسر‬،‫ )جئت‬are repeated to assert the meaning of coming and feeling crushed
consequently in examples (11 & 12). The repetition is dropped which means that the translator
opts for omission as a translation strategy to render the verbal repetition in the ST. This caused the
English sentence to lose its forceful effect and subsequently its emphatic connotation that is
indicated by the repetition of the original (‫ جئت‬،‫)انكسر‬. Therefore, the translator should provide
literal translation or use verbs to do to express the intended emphasis as follow:
I remembered the festival because you were late so I did come and just on time.
Suddenly he felt so crushed, so crushed by a sense of a total loss.
)126‫ ص‬،‫ (اوالد حارتنا‬.‫ اخرجوا دون تردد‬، ‫ اخرجوا‬:)9( ‫مثال‬
TT: Get out! Get out at once! (p.81)
)75‫ ص‬،‫ (اللص والكالب‬.‫ واصبر اصبر حتى تعود نور‬:)10( ‫مثال‬
TT: Just keep cool, keep patient, until Nur comes back. (The thief and the dogs, p.41(
( ‫مثال‬1)156‫ ص‬،‫ (اوالد حارتنا‬.‫ جئت في الوقت المناسب‬،‫ تذكرت المولد لتأخيركما فجئت‬:)1
TT: I remembered the festival because you were late so I came and just on time. (p.100)
)14‫ ص‬،‫ (اللص والكالب‬.‫ انكسر حتى لم يبق فيه اال شعور بالضياع‬،‫ ولكن قلبه انكسر‬:)12( ‫مثال‬
TT: suddenly, he felt crushed by a sense of total loss. (The thief and the dogs, p.10)
1.3

Particle Repetition
The repetition of particles, whether it is for answering or not, is for emphasis. It resembles
the speaker’s reaction i.e., it reflects the speaker’s impatience or irritation to assert his/her point.
The translator should repeat the particle to keep its emphatic function as in example 13 and 15.
The translation would be better, in example 14 if the translator repeats the particle “no” twice as
in TT.
)92‫ ص‬،‫ (الصغير وابوم والمرتينه‬.‫ لم ينسحب‬،‫كال‬،‫ كال‬:)13(‫مثال‬
TT: No, no, he didn’t retreat. (the child, his father, and the gun go to the citadel, p.96)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

74

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
)359‫ص‬،‫(عائد الى حيفا‬.‫ال اريد الذهاب الى حيفا‬.‫ ال‬:)14( ‫مثال‬
TT: No, I don’t want to go to Haifa. (Returning to Haifa, p.159)
)343‫ص‬،‫ (عائد الى حيفا‬.‫ ولكن ابدا ابدا لم اتصور انها ستفتح من الناحية االخرى‬:)15( ‫مثال‬
TT: But I never, never imagined that it would be opened from the other side. (returning to Haifa,
p.150)
1.4

Sentence, phrase or clause repetition
1.4.1 Nominal sentence
In the following example, the speaker admits that his girlfriend Noor is very kind, so he
does love her. Repetition here is used to express an evident love feeling i.e. to declare the speaker’s
feeling or point of view to pay the listener attention. The translator ignores the repetition of the
nominal sentence by paraphrasing the semantic connotation. Therefore. The translator fails to
render the message in TLT, so the intended meaning is ignored. The translation would be better as
follows: You are so kind, so kind to me Noor. I want to admit that to you.
)116‫ ص‬،‫ (اللص والكالب‬.‫ أحب أن اعترف بذلك‬.‫ انت طيبة جدا يا نور‬،‫ انت طيبة جدا‬:)16(‫مثال‬
TT: You are really very good to me. I want you to know I admit you grateful. (The Thief and The
Dogs, p.128)
1.4.1 Repetition the same nominal sentence after words
The repetition here is used to assert the idea or for persuading purposes, so the translator
should repeat the same sentence to reinforce what the speaker wants. As what the translator does
in example 17 by repeating the same nominal sentence after words, but he should use the same
subject of the sentence so it would be better as follows: This child loves the fields . . . the child
loves the fields.
)29‫ ص‬،‫ (الصغير يستعير مرتينة خاله‬.‫ الصغير يحب الحقول‬. . .‫ هذا الصغير يحب الحقول‬:)17(‫مثال‬
TT: The little one loves the fields . . . the child loves the fields. (The Child borrows his uncle’s
gun, p.56)
1.4.2 Verbal sentence
The repetition here is also used to assert the speaker’s idea to persuade the listener about
the speaker’s idea. The following examples (18 & 19) repeats the verbal sentences to reinforce the
idea. The translation in 18 is suitable by repeating the sentence as in TT to assert the intended
meaning, but in 19 the translator ignores the repeated sentence and depends on semantic
connotation. Therefore, the translator omits the emphasis in the sentence, and that is what the
writer wants so the translation would be better as follow: He was on the brink of madness . . he
was on the brink of madness, but refused to despise his mother.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

75

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
‫ ( الصغير وابوه والمرتينة يذهبون الى قلعة‬.‫ كما تعرف وهو لم يقل‬،‫ أنا لم أسأله‬،‫ لست ادري‬،‫ لست أدري‬:)18(‫مثال‬
)76‫ص‬،‫جدين‬
TT: I don’t know, I don’t know. I didn’t ask him, and he didn’t say. (the child, his father, and the
gun go to the Citadel, p.87)
)131 ‫ ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫يعانق الجنون ويرفض أن يحتقر أمه‬. . ‫ انه يعانق الجنون‬:)19(‫مثال‬
TT: He was on the brink of madness but refused to despise his mother. (The Harafish, p.87)
1.5

Pronoun repetition
The three examples below represent the repetition of the same independent pronoun in each
example (‫ هم‬،‫)انت‬. The speakers address the listeners in the example whether to praise them or
curse them in different ways. Therefore, the speaker repeats the independent pronouns, probably
with intonation to emphasize the fact. The translator of 20 repeats the independent pronoun to keep
the emphasis function. The translator of 21 & 22 does not repeat the pronouns (‫ )هم‬and (‫)انت‬
consequently, thus the sentence loses its emphatic source. The emphatic function is appeared in
ST by repeating the pronouns, so the TTs are not forceful as the original as a result of ignoring the
emphatic function. The speaker in 21 & 22 uses the definite Arabic article (al-) to specify his sons
in 21 and his counterpart in 22. Better translations would be:
You, you are the rabble.
You, you are filthy.
)268‫ ص‬،‫ (اوالد حارتنا‬.‫ انت انت سر سعادتنا‬:)20(‫مثال‬
TT: It’s you; you’re the secret of our happiness. (the children of Gebalawi, p.173)
)36‫ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫ هم األوباش‬. . ‫ هم‬:)21(‫مثال‬
TT: My sons are the rabble. (The Harafish, 21)
22(‫) مثال‬298‫ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫ انت انت القذر‬:)
TT: You ought to talk! Filthy son of a bitch. (The Hrafish, p.198)
1.5.1 Attached pronoun with independent one
The use of independent pronoun (‫ )نحن‬to emphasize the attached pronoun (‫ بيتنا‬in example
23 and the independent pronoun (‫ )انت‬to emphasize the attached pronoun (‫ )اليك‬in 24. The
independent pronouns in the two mentioned examples are used to assert and reinforce the idea
the speaker when they talk to the addressee. The speaker, in example 23 wants to emphasize that
the house is theirs and in example 24 the speaker wants also to emphasize that he resorts to her.
Therefore, the translation would be better as follows in 23 and 24 consequently:
I mean, your presence here, in this house, our house . . ours . . Safiyya’s and my house.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

76

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
That’s why I resort to you . . you
)368‫ص‬،‫ عائد الى حيفا‬.‫ بيتنا انا وصفية‬،‫ بيتنا نحن‬،‫ في هذا البيت‬.‫ اقصد ان وجودك هنا‬:)23(‫مثال‬
TT: I mean, your presence here, in this house, our house, Safiyya’s and my house, (returning to
Haifa, p.164)
)70‫ ص‬،‫ لذلك لجأت اليك انت! (اللص والكالب‬: )24(‫مثال‬
TT: That's why I came to you instead of anybody else.
1.6 Adjective Repetition
The repetition of the same adjectives in the following examples (25 & 26) seems to
emphasize the speaker’s intended idea. The speaker wants to assert that the door opened all the
time in 25 and to emphasize that Abu Saad is really crushed in 26 so he repeated the adjective to
show to what extent he is crushed. So, the translation or repeated adjectives should be translated
as in 26 because it is deliberate. The translation in 25 would be better: at the opened door, open all
the time.
)58‫ص‬،‫ (ابو الحسن يقوص على سيارة انكليزية‬.‫ المفتوح دائما‬،‫ أمام الباب المفتوح‬:)25(‫مثال‬
TT: At the door which was, as always, open. (Abu Al-Hassan ambushes an English car, p.76)
‫ مدعوسا بالفقر ومدعوسا بالمقاهرة ومدعوسا بكرت االعاشة ومدعوسا تحت سقف الزينكو‬،‫ كان أبو سعد مدعوسا‬:) 326(‫مثال‬
)335‫ص‬،‫ (البنادق في المخيم‬.‫ومدعوسا تحت بسطار الدولة‬
TT: Abu Saad had been crushed. Crushed by the poor, crushed by the victors, crushed by the ration
card, crushed under a tin roof. Crushed under the domination of the country. (Guns in the camp,
p.132).
1.7 Adverb Repetition
The examples below describe the situation of action exactly or a habit. Therefore, the
adverbs are repeated to indicate the action exactly which are difficult to omit. The translators in
27 & 28 look unaware of the function of repeated adverbs, so they ignored them in the translations.
Though they translate with good grammatical sentences, but they do not express the emphatic
function indicated by Arabic sentences i.e. omission does not serve the function. Translations
would be better:
Zaynab was always, always ahead of him.
Watching his father dying slowly, slowly without any single movement.
The translator keeps the emphatic function by repeating the adverb as in 29.
)22‫ ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫ دائما دائما تتقدمه زينب‬:)27(‫مثال‬
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

77

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
TT: Zaynab was always ahead of him. (The Harafish, p.14)
)95‫ص‬،‫ ( الصغير وابوه والمرتينة يذهبون الى قلعة جدين‬.‫ وهو يرى أن أبيه يموت رويدا رويدا دون حركة واحدة‬:)28(‫مثال‬
TT: Watching his father slowly dying, impotent and unmoving. (the child, his father, and the gun
go to the Citadel, p.98)
)123‫ص‬،‫ (صديق سلمان يتعلم أشياء كثيرة في ليلة واحدة‬.‫ ولكنها جاءت ببطء شديد ببطء شديد‬:‫واعترف بينه وبين ذاته‬:)29(‫مثال‬
TT: He admitted to himself: “it’s coming very slowly.” “very slowly.” (Suliman’s friend learns
many things, p.116)
2. Repetition with synonyms
Emphasizing a particular form by a synonymous word, phrase, or a sentence is very
common in both Arabic and English discourses. Shunnaq (1989, p.43) states that this phenomenon
is very natural in Arabic discourse while in English, it might be tautological.
2.1 Noun repetition with its synonymous
The speaker wants to emphasize the idea and eliminate any doubts, so the speaker uses the
noun with its synonym to pay the listener attention and to eliminate any doubts for the listener too.
Therefore, the translator opts literal translation in example (30) which keeps the emphatic function,
but the translator paraphrases the meaning of the word and its synonym as “never been” in example
(31) ignoring the emphatic role by omitting them. It would be better if the word and its synonym
were rendered literally as in:
I’ve never worked as a porter a single hour in my life.
)92‫ص‬،‫ (الصغير وابوه والمرتينه‬.‫ ال تتحرك خطوة واحدة‬:)30(‫مثال‬
TT: Don’t move a single step. (the child, his father, and the gun go to the citadel, p.96)
)17‫ ص‬،‫ (الحرافيش‬.‫ لم اشتغل حماالً ساعة واحدة في حياتي‬:)31(‫مثال‬
TT: I’ve never been a porter in my life. (the Harafish, p.7)
2.2 Adjective repetition with its synonymous
The use of the adjective and its synonymous to emphasize the idea and make it more
expressive, emotive and communicative. The words (‫ المع‬، ‫ )براق‬in 32 are synonymous, indicating
that the speaker describes the students’ way of focus and admiration. However, the translator
paraphrases the shared meaning of the two words ignoring the emphatic function by using both
synonyms (bright, gleaming) together in the same context. It would be better if the two synonyms
are rendered literally as in:
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

78

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
the pupils clapped when the child returned to his seat, where he sat quietly. Sixty staring eyes,
bright and gleaming, but Muhsin
The translator is aware of emphatic function in 33, so the adjective and its synonymous are
used in the translation (anguish, desperation) to keep its expressive and emotive roles.
‫ باالستاذ محسن‬،‫ براقة المعة‬،‫ وعادت العدسات الستون تحدق‬،‫ وعاد الطفل الى مكانه فجلس بهدوء‬،‫ صفق التالميذ‬:)32(‫مثال‬
)65‫ ص‬،‫(المنزلق‬
TT: The pupils clapped when the child returned to his seat, where he sat quietly. Sixty
staring eyes, a twinkle, but Muhsin. (The Slope, p.34)
.‫ وارتفعت من هنا وهناك بعض االحتجاجات اليائسة البائسة‬:)33(‫) مثال‬46‫ ص‬،‫(ورقة من الرملة‬
TT: and from here and there cries of anguish and desperation arose. (Paper from Ramleh,
p.38)
2.3 Verb repetition with its synonymous
The use of a verb and its synonym is to reinforce the intended meaning and to assert the
connotation emphasis. Therefore, the translator opts literal translation as in examples (34, 35, 36).
The translation for the underlined words would be better as follow: abusing and cursing, rant and
rage, threating and swearing consequently.
‫) مثال‬269‫ص‬،‫ (اوالد حارتنا‬.‫ وتغيظ بطيخة فقام من مجلسه بالقهوة وهو يسب ويلعن‬:)34(
TT: Batikha was annoyed and get up from his place in the café, cursing and swearing. (p.174)
)299‫ص‬،‫ اوالد حارتنا‬.‫ وغادرت الربع وهو يرغي ويزبد‬:)35(‫مثال‬
TT: He talked out fuming with rage. (p.194)
)302‫ ص‬،‫ (اوالد حارتنا‬.‫ يسب ويلعن ويهدد ويتوعد‬:)36(‫مثال‬
TT: cursing and swearing and uttering threats. (p.196)
Conclusion
This study concludes that to some extent, there is some kind of formal-functional
correspondence of particular Arabic and English emphatic structures and devices, but not all. In
other words, there are some symmetries and asymmetries in this regard. Regarding symmetries,
there are several Arabic emphatic structures and devices which have equivalents in English such
as synonyms and verbal repetition. Regarding asymmetries, there are several Arabic emphatic
devices, and structures which are untranslatable into English; they have no parallel equivalents in
English. Among these are the pronouns and emphatic particles. To sum up, the translation process
is an integrated one. It overlaps with several linguistic aspects: semantic, syntactic and pragmatic.
Therefore, translating Arabic verbal emphatic structures into English would be affected by the
syntactic, semantic and pragmatic symmetries and asymmetries between the two languages.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

79

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
About the Authors:
Haitham ALYousef is a PhD student in School of Languages, Literacies and Translation at
Universiti Sains Malaysia. He is interested in teaching linguistic and translation courses. His
research interests in interpreting, intercultural communication, language and culture. More
specifically, his work examines linguistic aspects of translating humor. ORCID ID:
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-7495-3563
Professor Dr. Tengku Sepora Tengku Mahadi is a teaching staff at MA Translation for
Professional Department in School of Languages, Literacies and Translation. Universiti Sains
Malaysia. She was the former dean for the school. Her research interests are in linguistics and
translation fields. She has many researches in the fields. ORCID ID: http://orcid.org/0000-00033302-0078

References
ALAubaidi, N. H. (2013). A Rhetorical Study of Emphasis in English with reference to Arabic.
ADAB AL-FARAHIDI, 15, 60-78.
Albayati, S. (2003).‫) قواعد النحو العربي في ضوء نثريات النظم‬Qawaed alnahw alarabi fi dhoue
nathariyyat alnudhum(. Dar Wael for publishing: Amman, Jordan.
Al-Gharanawi, H. (2005).‫) الخالصة في النحو‬Alkhulasah fi alnahw(. Dar Al-Wafae for publishing:
Alexandria.
Alhrout, A. (1983). ‫( أسلوب التوكيد بين البمنى والمعنى‬Osloub Altawkid bayn almabna wa alma’ana).
Unpublished MA Thesis, Yarmouk university, Jordan.
Baker, M. (2018). In other words: A coursebook on translation. London: Routledge.
Celec-Murica, M. & Larsen-Freeman, D. (1983). Grammar Book. NewBury House Publishers.
INC: USA.
Deeb, E. (1984). ‫( اساليب التأكيد في اللغة العربية‬Asaleeb al-ta’akeed fi allughati alarabiyya). Dar alfikr
allibnani: Beirut.
Fathi, Y. H. (2004). Reinforcement by repetition in English and Arabic. ADAB AL-RAFIDAYN,
38, 23-46. Retrieved from http://search.mandumah.com/Record/660334.
Farghal, M. (1993). The Translation of Arabic Cognate Accusatives into English. Turjuman, 2,
77-92.
Frodesen, J. & Eyring, J. (2000). Grammar Dimension: from meaning and use. 4th edition Heinel
& Henel, a division of Thomas learning Inc.
Gleason, H. A. (1966). Linguistics and English Grammar. New York: Holt, R nehart and Winston.
Hassan, A. (2015). Translating Arabic Verb Repetition into English. Arab World English Journal,
6(2), 144-153. doi:10.24093/awej/vol6no2.11.
Johnston, B. (1991). Repetition in Arabic Discourse. John Benjamins: Amesterdam.
Kanafani, G. (2000). Palestine's Children: Returning to Haifan and Other Stories. London: Lyne
Rienner.
Maghalisah, M. (1997). ‫( النحو الشافي‬Alnahw alshafii). Dar alshrouq: Amman.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

80

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019
On Translating Arabic Verbal Emphasis into English
ALYousef & Mahadi
Mafouz, N. (1961). The Thief and The Dogs. Maktabat Misr: Cairo.
Maḥfūẓ, N. (1988). Children of Gebelawi. Washington, D.C.: Three Continents Press.
Mahfouz, N. (2013). The Harafish. London: Transworld Digital.
Mcarther, T. (1992). The Oxford Companion to the English Language. Oxford University Press.
Mohammed, M. J. (2013). A study of Some Emphatic Arabic Particles in the Glorious Qur'an with
Reference to Translation. College of Basic Education Researchers Journal, 3(1), 935-948.
Retrieved from http://search.mandumah.com/Record/632179.
Nahr, H. (2004).‫) التراكيب اللغوية‬Altrakeeb allughaweyah(. Alyazouri: Amman.
Quirk, R. & Greenbaum, S. (1973). A Concise Grammar of Contemporary English. Seminar Press:
New York.
Shunnaq, A. T. (1989). Repetition in Arabic With Special Reference to Political Discource
(Unpublished doctoral dissertation). The Victoria University of Manchester.
Shunnaq, A. T. (1993). Lexical Incongruence in Arabic-English Translation due to Emotiveness
in Arabic. Turjuman. 2(2): pp. 37-63.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

81

