Digital Public Relations Through the Lens of Affordances:
A Conceptual Update of the “Ease of Interface” Dialogic Principle∗
Alvin Zhou†1 and Sifan Xu2
1

2

Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania
School of Advertising & Public Relations, University of Tennessee, Knoxville

This Preprint is Citable As:
Zhou, A., & Xu, S. (2020). Digital public relations through the lens of affordances: A conceptual
update of the “ease of interface” dialogic principle. Available at SocArXiv. doi:
10.31235/osf.io/uzhk9
Abstract
Connecting the affordance framework in computer-mediated communication to public relations theories, this conceptual paper proposes an affordance perspective on dialogic communication and digital public relations in general. We argue that the enactment of dialogue on digital platforms requires certain combinations of media affordances, and that affordance theory provides a more systematic, holistic, and theoretical
framework to investigate digital public relations practice. Additionally, we question the
relevance of the fifth dialogic principle — “ease of interface” — in the Web 2.0 and
Web 3.0 era, and propose “favorable affordances” as a conceptual update to re-imagine
dialogic principles on social media, answering the call of Sommerfeldt and Yang (2018).
We recommend using affordance theory to rephrase heated discussions on the tension
between digital media and dialogic communication, to improve the relevance of dialogic theory for the digital age, and to re-examine relevant concepts in digital public
relations.

Keywords: Affordances, Digital Media, Dialogue, Dialogic Communication, Dialogic Principles

∗

Pre-print currently under review. The manuscript’s previous version, circulated as “Remaking Dialogic
Principles for the Digital Age: The Role of Affordances in Dialogue and Engagement,” was presented at the
69th annual meeting of the International Communication Association as the Top Faculty Paper of the Public
Relations Division and the recipient of the Robert Heath Award.
†
Corresponding Author, alvinyxz@upenn.edu

Social media has dramatically changed the landscape of public relations practice
and spawned much interest from public relations scholars in recent years (e.g., Bortree &
Seltzer, 2009; Kent & Saffer, 2014; Sommerfeldt & Xu, 2017). The plethora of research
has contributed to many areas such as nonprofit public relations (e.g., Lovejoy, Waters, &
Saxton, 2012), digital activism (e.g., Xiong, Cho, & Boatwright, 2019), and socially mediated
discourses (e.g., Xu & Zhou, 2020). Dialogic theory and dialogic principles, initially proposed
to reconsider public relations ethics (Kent & Taylor, 2002) and address digital public relations
via website communication (Kent & Taylor, 1998), have long been adopted and adapted to
evaluate organizations’ communication practice on social media (e.g., Men, Tsai, Chen, &
Ji, 2018; Theunissen, 2015; Wirtz & Zimbres, 2018). However, the adaptation of dialogic
concepts proposed at the dawn of the World Wide Webs to social media is anything but a
triumph.
On one hand, the fifth dialogic principle — ease of interface — has received almost no
scholarly attention (Sommerfeldt & Yang, 2018). Many studies on digital dialogic communication completely ignored the principle, because the interface remained “indiscriminate and
by default” (i.e. constant) throughout the study (e.g., Men et al., 2018; Rybalko & Seltzer,
2010; Wang & Yang, 2020; Watkins, 2017). With the advancement of digital technology
and infrastructure, the ease of interface has lost its traction also because it is taken as a
given. On the other hand, on top of the “technical” difficulty of adapting this principle for
empirical studies, the conflation of dialogic principles with dialogue theory in social media
research has led to philosophical debates on the oxymoron of “digital dialogues,” the belief
that social media is simply not suitable for genuine organization-public dialogues to take
place (see Kent & Theunissen, 2016).
Opportunities to advance dialogue theory, dialogic principles, and the broader public
relations research in digital contexts thus reside in the reconciliation of these theoretical conflicts. Through affordance theory developed in psychology and human-computer interaction
research, the purpose of this conceptual piece is to first examine and update the “ease of interface” principle to “favorable affordances” for the current media environment, and discuss
new ways forward for mediated dialogue in the digital space. Going beyond dialogue theory,
this conceptual piece also aims to unpack affordance theory to further theorize digital public
relations.
The paper is structured as follows. In the first section, we briefly review two camps
of public relations research on dialogic communication — one focusing on the enactment
of dialogue as a relational orientation (Kent & Taylor, 2002) and the other focusing on the
principles for communication practice (Kent & Taylor, 1998) — and differentiate them to
provide some background for our arguments. In the second section, we explicate the problem
this conceptual paper tries to address — the incompatibility of dialogic concepts with digital
media. In the third section, we invoke the affordance theory and summarize how the concept
has been used in recent research to understand the role of technology in communication.
In the fourth section, we provide suggestions on how to incorporate affordances into the
discussion of digital dialogue. In the last section, we articulate our ultimate goal of bringing
affordance theory into the agenda of digital public relations research.

1

1

Dialogue, Dialogic Communication, and Digital Dialogic Principles

Public relations scholars started writing about dialogue around the early 1990s (Pearson, 1989b), but the development of its formal theory mostly took place around the 2000s
(Kent & Taylor, 2002). The concept of dialogue emphasizes the relational orientation of
communicative activities and is based on a different set of underlying philosophies from the
then-dominant paradigm of two-way symmetrical communication (Grunig & Hunt, 1984;
Theunissen & Wan Noordin, 2012). It advances the idea that, by building mutual understanding and promoting ethical communication between organizations and their publics,
public relations practice can create dialogue as a product that contributes to beneficial relationships and social capitals that are desirable for publics, organizations, and the general
society (Kent & Lane, 2017; Kent & Taylor, 1998; Taylor, 2011; Taylor & Kent, 2014).
The ubiquity of the term “dialogue” at that time was seen as a signal of the public relations paradigm shift, as scholars increasingly considered public relations as a communication
tool for relationship negotiation rather than a mere management function. Kent and Taylor (2002) contended that genuine dialogue follows the features of mutuality, propinquity,
empathy, risk, and commitment. Mutuality means that organizations and publics should
collaborate with intersubjectivity and maintain a relationship with mutual equality; propinquity addresses the rhetorical process of dialogic exchanges, and contends that organizations
and publics should consult each other before decision making; empathy alludes to the atmosphere of support and trust that is a requirement for successful dialogic communication
between organizations and publics; risk denotes the unpredictability of dialogic communication and the vulnerability of organizations and publics as dialogic entities; commitment
refers to organizations’ and publics’ commitment to their relationship, conversations, and
interpretations, which oftentimes requires physical resources devoted by each party.
Therefore, dialogue, the somewhat abstract concept rooted in moral philosophy, interpersonal communication, and rhetoric literature (e.g, Buber, 1970; Kent & Taylor, 2002;
Stewart, 1978), is an orientation and should be considered an ideal that guides ethical public
relations practice, although it might be difficult or even impossible to achieve the ideal in the
real world (Botan, 1997; Ciszek, 2020; Lane & Bartlett, 2016; Theunissen & Wan Noordin,
2012). Dialogic communication, accordingly, refers to communication practice that carries
the dialogic orientations and builds and sustains dialogues between organizations and their
publics.
Along with the conceptual development, in another article (Kent & Taylor, 1998),
these authors also drafted five digital dialogic principles that they argue could help online
relationship building between organizations and publics, on one hand to help scholars empirically examine possible traits of dialogic communication, and on the other hand to address the
increasing use of the World Wide Web among public relations practitioners. The five principles are: (a) dialogic loops, which refer to the use of communication channels through which
organizations ask for opinions, solicit feedback, and address questions from their publics;
(b) useful information, which requires organizations to provide valuable information that
is wanted by their publics; (c) return visit generation and (d) visitor conservation, which
refer to communication strategies that encourage repeated visits and keep visitors on-site
for a longer time; and (e) ease of interface, which taps into the technical aspect of dialogic
communication and suggests that websites should be easy to navigate and user-friendly.
2

3

Buber (1970)
Stewart (1978)
Pearson (1989a, 1989b)
Kent and Taylor (2002)
Heath et al. (2006)
Theunissen and Wan Noordin (2012)
Kent and Lane (2017)

A communicative orientation
that features risk, mutuality
propinquity, empathy, and commitment.

Communication practice that
builds and sustains dialogues
between organizations and publics.

Dialogic Loops
Useful Information
Visitor Conservation
Return Visit Generation
Ease of Interface

Dialogue

Dialogic Communication

Digital Dialogic
Principles

Kent and Taylor (1998)
McAllister-Spooner (2009)
Wirtz and Zimbres (2018)
Ao and Huang (2020)

Key References

Explication

Concept

- Critical assessment of platform use in digital public
relations practice from an affordance perspective

- Conceptual update of the “ease of interface” principle

- Construct platform-agnostic dialogic principles

- Do affordances interact to affect relational
outcomes of digital public relations practice?

- What affordances support and impede relationship
building through digital channels?

- What affordances support and impede the communication
of risk, mutuality, propinquity, empathy, and commitment?

Inquiries from an Affordance Perspective

Table 1: Dialogic Concepts Examined from the Lens of Affordances

However, the dialogic public relations theory (Kent & Taylor, 2002) should not be
conflated with the five digital dialogic principles (Kent & Taylor, 1998) analyzed by numerous studies throughout the years (see Ao & Huang, 2020; McAllister-Spooner, 2009; Wirtz &
Zimbres, 2018, for summaries). The five principles — dialogic loops, useful information, visitor conservation, return visit generation, and ease of interface — are merely communication
strategies suggested for organizations to use on the Internet. Online communication that
fulfills these five principles is not necessarily dialogic communication, and digital dialogic
communication does not have to fulfill all these five principles. As later critiqued by the
original authors and others, the five digital dialogic principles spawned the “fairly common
functionalist orientations toward dialogue” (Kent & Lane, 2017, p. 572) and it is time to
consider the 2002 article as a theoretical revision to the 1998 proposal and move forward the
development of dialogue as a public relations theory instead of a set of communication rules
(Lane, 2018). Given that publications on how organizations use digital dialogic principles on
websites and social media platforms clearly outnumber those devoted to the theoretical development of dialogue, it is indeed unfortunate that a set of strategies for digital practice —
proposed at the dawn of the Internet age to recognize its potential for relationship building
— overshadowed theoretical arguments about genuine dialogue and stifled the development
of dialogic theory in public relations research (Sommerfeldt & Yang, 2018; Theunissen &
Wan Noordin, 2012; Wirtz & Zimbres, 2018).
Nonetheless, guided by these five communication principles, researchers have contributed a huge amount to our understanding of how digital public relations practice has
been carried out by professionals. Their empirical assessments seem to reach the consensus
that organizational communication on digital outlets, such as websites, Facebook, and Twitter, did not utilize the full potential of these platforms for potential dialogic communication.
For instance, Lovejoy et al. (2012) found that, although nonprofit organizations were utilizing hyperlinks, hashtags, retweets, and other communication tools to engage with publics,
the sampled organizations mostly used Twitter as a one-way communication channel, with
little evidence of using dialogic features or building relationship. These studies — mostly
content analyses of organizations’ websites and social media posts — constitute such a large
portion of existing knowledge of digital public relations that it will be remiss to neglect this
body of literature and the original five dialogic principles, if we are about to discuss the
implications of affordances for digital public relations research. Therefore, in the following sections, we divide our discussions into two separate but interrelated arguments about
how the affordance framework can help public relations researchers grapple with difficult
questions on both dialogic theory and the five digital dialogic principles.
In short, the five digital dialogic principles are practical suggestions made by Kent
and Taylor (1998) that could be helpful for the enactment of genuine dialogues between
organizations and their publics theorized by Kent and Taylor (2002). Or as Sommerfeldt
and Yang (2018) simply put it, dialogue is a promise, while dialogic communication is the
procedural steps and communicative conduct that fulfills and precedes that promise (Taylor
& Kent, 2014), and the five digital dialogic principles are a set of suggested strategies to
build dialogues in the specific setting of the World Wide Web.
The current article argues that the affordance theory developed in psychology and
popularized by sociology and computer-mediated communication literature has profound
implications for all these dialogic concepts and the general field of digital public relations,
4

and that using the affordance framework can help release some tensions between the term
“dialogue” and “digital” which will be discussed in the following section. In Table 1, we
summarize our arguments for easy reference.
[Insert Table 1 Here]
2
2.1

The Incompatibility of Dialogic Concepts with Digital Media
Dialogue and Dialogic Communication with Digital Media

The incompatibility of dialogic communication — the communication practice that
builds and sustains dialogues between organizations and publics which feature the orientation
of risk, mutuality, propinquity, empathy, and commitment — with digital media stems from
the fact that dialogue is a concept deeply rooted in interpersonal communication and that
dialogic communication as an ideal for public relations ethics was initially modeled for faceto-face practice (Buber, 1970; Pearson, 1989a). Dialogue was not theorized for computermediated communication from its very beginning, and to adapt the concept for the digital
age, we need new theoretical frameworks.
Some scholars, when reviewing studies that conflated dialogue with digital dialogic
principles, have argued that it might be completely unsuitable to discuss dialogue and dialogic communication in the context of digital media. For example, Kent and Theunissen
(2016) provided a pessimistic view of enacting dialogue through social media. Since YouTube,
Twitter, and Instagram do not provide sufficient reciprocal self-disclosure that is a requirement for dialogue, Kent and Theunissen (2016) argued that dialogue might not be even
possible on these channels. Just as suggested by its title — Elegy for Mediated Dialogue,
Kent and Theunissen’s (2016) critique seems to claim that “mediated dialogue” is a selfcontradictory concept, that there is no way out of the conflict between genuine dialogue
and computer mediation, and that researchers should not talk about dialogues in studies on
social media or other digital public relations topics.
In response, we offer two arguments, on one hand to engage in the continuing scholarly
debate on dialogue and computer-mediated communication, and on the other hand to set the
stage for our central argument of incorporating affordance theory into the discussed public
relations paradigm.
First, the absence of dialogue on social media is not a sufficient reason to cease the
discussion of dialogue in digital space. Dialogues between organizations and publics are hard
to find, not only in online settings but also in offline practice. For example, drawing from
interviews with Australian professionals, Lane and Bartlett (2016) found that features of
dialogue didn’t usually take place in the real world, an example being that the empathy
required by dialogue was hard for practitioners to communicate when the stakeholder refused to be respectful. Similarly, Ciszek (2020) focused on LGBTQ publics in organizational
communication, and concluded that dialogues with historically marginalized publics such as
sexual minorities require trust as a precursor, which in turn needs substantial organizational
investment beforehand to build cultural competency and authenticity. These institutional
and interpersonal limitations inhibited offline practice from achieving the best possible outcome of dialogue. However, these scholars substantially contributed to the development of
5

dialogic theory by asking why dialogue doesn’t take place in these face-to-face settings. In
the same vein, we argue, instead of repeatedly asserting that dialogue is impossible on social
media platforms and altogether rejecting attempts at dialogue on digital media, scholars
should ask why dialogue doesn’t take place in these digital settings.
Second, dialogue, as reviewed in former sections, is an ideal or a promise that guides
the practice of public relations as a set of communication ethics. In other words, dialogic
theory should be considered as a normative theory, instead of a positive theory (Kent &
Li, 2020). The lack of empirical evidence of digital dialogue thus calls for inquiries on what
types of digital actions make public relations practice closer to the ideal outcome of dialogue.
Other than the lack of education for practitioners (Lane, 2018) and the power imbalance of
organizational communication (Russmann & Lane, 2020) commonly cited as the reason for
dialogue’s absence, some of digital media’s inherent attributes might have also been playing
a role, which has not been carefully and systematically examined by scholars. In other words,
the incompatibility of dialogue and dialogic communication with digital media can be, at least
partially, attributed to some characteristics of digital media, and public relations scholars
are recommended to use theoretical frameworks in computer-mediated communication to
address this incompatibility.
Tensions between theories and practice create opportunities for the entry of new
conceptual frameworks, and we argue that the incompatibility of dialogue and dialogic communication with digital media is one of such tensions. To address this tension, researchers
need insights from other fields that have not been extensively referenced by public relations
scholarship, such as computer-mediated communication and human-computer interaction
(c.f., Pang, Shin, Lew, & Walther, 2018). By examining this tension both critically and
empirically with interdisciplinary inquiries, scholars can improve the dialogic theory’s compatibility and provide more concrete suggestions for the increasingly digital practice of public
relations. In later sections, we provide one of the first attempts at addressing this tension,
by considering how different affordances of digital media affect the enactment of dialogue.
Moreover, we believe that the discussion of digital dialogue provides possibilities for public
relations researchers to contribute back to the development of digital media theories at large.
2.2

Digital Dialogic Principles with Digital Media

The incompatibility of digital dialogic principles — dialogic loops, useful information,
visitor conservation, return visit generation, and ease of interface — with digital media
manifests itself by the fact that the “ease of interface” principle gets largely ignored by
emerging scholarship.
Kent and Taylor (1998) initially devised the five principles for the Web 1.0 era, which
was characterized by the monopoly of power in content creation with website communication
representing its notable features (Cormode & Krishnamurthy, 2008). At that time, the majority of organizational stakeholders simply visit a website address and consume information
designed by the organization’s website programmers. In contrast, the concept of Web 2.0,
proposed in the mid-2000s (O’Reilly, 2005) and enabled by new programming technologies
such as JavaScript (Allen, 2013), comes way later than Kent and Taylor (1998). Though the
term Web 2.0 and its relationship with Web 1.0 are constantly contested (see Allen, 2008),
it is mostly agreed upon that Web 2.0 is distinct with its democratic and social nature by
6

enabling mass participation from all Internet users, prominent examples being social media
platforms such as Facebook and Twitter (Barassi & Treré, 2012; Cormode & Krishnamurthy,
2008; Jarrett, 2008). This development of communication technology is particularly interesting for the practice of dialogic communication because it enables publics to voice their
opinions on organizations in interactive platforms and seems to grant more communicative
power to stakeholders that were not represented in website communication. Accordingly,
scholars have been trying to adapt these five principles to their studies situated in the Web
2.0 era. However, it is exactly during this adapting time that the “ease of interface” principle gradually lost its relevance, evident in scholars’ operationalization strategies of the five
principles.
When examining digital dialogic principles on the World Wide Web, scholars mostly
used content analyses and counted dialogic features on organizations’ websites (Wirtz &
Zimbres, 2018). For example, Taylor, Kent, and White (2001) analyzed activist organizations’ relationship-building strategies on websites with a 32-item questionnaire which coded
the occurrences of dialogic features. The “ease of interface” principle was operationalized by
four items, each capturing whether the website displayed a site map, had major links to the
rest of the site, incorporated a search engine boxes, and had minimal reliance on graphics.
This set of operationalization was adopted by later studies on the use of dialogic principles
in website communication (e.g., Ingenhoff & Koelling, 2009; Seltzer & Mitrook, 2007).
When examining dialogic digital principles on social media, scholars clearly had some
struggles adapting these principles. One of the earliest studies looked at Fortune 500 companies’ stakeholder engagement on Twitter (Rybalko & Seltzer, 2010). To examine the use
of dialogic principles in Twitter profiles and individual tweets, they gauged organizations’
implementation of “dialogic loops” by evaluating their responsiveness to user requests, and
“useful information,” “visitor conservation,” and “return visit generation” by coding links
and media content presented in theirs tweets, with later articles following this operationalization on Twitter, WeChat, and other social media platforms (e.g., Qu, 2020; Yue, Thelen,
Robinson, & Men, 2019).
One major defect of this operationalization is the neglect of the “ease of interface”
principle. Starting from Rybalko and Seltzer’s (2010) study on Twitter, scholars have completely discarded the principle from their studies because social media interfaces remain the
same across users and throughout their studies (e.g., Gálvez-Rodríguez, Sáez-Martín, GarcíaTabuyo, & Caba-Pérez, 2018; Linvill, McGee, & Hicks, 2012; Men et al., 2018; Watkins,
2017), as noted by Wirtz and Zimbres’s (2018) review.
“Ease of interface” might fit well with the Web 1.0 era, back when public communication on official websites was not always user-friendly. But two decades later, websites have
been designed to near perfection, malfunctions are much less likely to happen, but different
platforms (e.g., official websites, social media sites, etc) still have dramatically different user
experiences that are affecting the practice of dialogic communication in the digital space.
Facebook, for instance, seems to be a better social media platform to fulfill the dialogic
loop principle than Twitter (e.g., Briones, Kuch, Liu, & Jin, 2011), and there is accumulating evidence showing that the differences of organizations’ communication practices across
platforms might stem from platforms themselves (e.g., Auger, 2013). These cross-platform
differences and nuances brought by emerging media cannot be reduced to an issue caused
by mere interface, and the “ease of interface” principle apparently falls short of a meaningful
7

suggestion for public relations practice. Editors Sommerfeldt and Yang (2018) shared the
same viewpoint in a recent special issue on digital dialogic communication theory:
Many studies utilizing the principles choose to simply omit the “ease of interface”
principle, as digital platforms like Facebook and Twitter provide the same interface for all
users. A substantial extension of dialogic communication theory might, therefore, come from
a deeper consideration of the unique characteristics of the social media communication context and their match or mismatch with dialogic principles ... In any case, scholars should
begin to question the applicability of the principles to the social media environment, and
adapt—or even remake—them accordingly. (p. 61)
We echo with them and argue that the irrelevance of the “ease of interface” principle is
concerning, to say the least, and it is not helping scholars theorize digital public relations or
helping practitioners understand the influence of communication technology on their work.
The moot “ease of interface” principle should be updated to deliver a contemporary understanding of digital dialogic communication’s technical requirement, and its decreasing
relevance in recent studies is inviting new proposals that go beyond existing theoretical
frameworks in public relations. Responding to Sommerfeldt and Yang’s (2018) call to address the incompatibility, we provide a conceptual update of the “ease of interface” principle
and expand it to “favorable affordances” in the following sections.
3

Affordance Theory

The theoretical framework of affordances was initially developed by James J. Gibson
(1979) for an interactionist view of perception and action in ecological psychology (Greeno,
1994). While reviewing and summarizing Gibson’s work, Greeno (1994) defines affordances as
a property of the environment that interacts with agents in such a way that activities can be
supported. Evans, Pearce, Vitak, and Treem’s (2017) interpretation is more straightforward:
an affordance means “an action possibility available in the environment” (p. 37).
The concept has been adapted into many other disciplines, especially product design
and human-computer interaction. Communication scholars have used the term “affordances”
to illustrate the distinguished and socially constructed characteristics of various communication channels and explicate the effects of their interactive features on human communication.
For example, generally speaking, portable technologies and mobile communication are affording flows of information free from geological restrictions, and social media are affording
interactive and networked communication behaviors that could not be realized before (Campbell, 2013; Humphreys, 2007). More empirically in the literature on organizations, Fulk and
Yuan (2013) connected affordance theory and knowledge sharing literature, and argued that
enterprise social networking systems could afford better social connections, create and sustain social capital, and improve knowledge sharing among employees. Treem and Leonardi
(2013) compared social media with other workplace communication technologies, such as
emails, instant messaging, and teleconferencing, and concluded that social media afforded
better organizational communication with higher levels of visibility, editability, persistence,
and association.
As platform affordances are granting organizations and individuals abilities to commit
certain communicative actions, there also comes the discussion of platforms’ constraints and
the consequent inabilities. One notable example of social media’s affordance constraints is
8

the character limit set by Twitter, where users were unable to post tweets longer than 140
characters. Studies have found that the constraint limited the possibility of in-depth political
deliberation (Jaidka, Zhou, & Lelkes, 2019), thorough user self-presentation (Evans et al.,
2017), and engaging organizational communication (Lovejoy & Saxton, 2012). However,
constraints are not necessarily negative for mediated communication. In fact, constraints
can sometimes grant distinguished characteristics to media platforms, and contribute to
their commercial success. For example, messages disappear after a few seconds on Snapchat,
which indeed is a restraint, but it makes the platform unique and popular among millennials.
Some recent publications also argue that constraints can encourage individual creativity and
improve content quality (Gligorić, Anderson, & West, 2018; Joyce, 2009).
Some public relations scholars have implicitly used the concept of affordances in their
studies. For example, in a review of literature on organizational social media use, Paek,
Hove, Jung, and Cole (2013) conclude that “practitioners are not taking full advantage of the
interactive and dialogic capabilities afforded by new media platforms” (p. 527). The phrase
“interactive and dialogic capabilities” is close to the meaning of affordances. However, the
concept is still largely scant in public relations scholarship and it has not been extensively
discussed in regard to the theory of dialogue or the practice of dialogic communication.
We believe a critical assessment of how different affordances interact to regulate individuals’ and organizations’ action possibilities on digital media platforms and how they
positively or negatively affect communication outcomes can inform theory building in public
relations. Moreover, the relational outcome of communication actions, which is paramount
to public relations research, has been left unattended by previous digital media scholarship.
By studying how affordances affect dialogic outcomes (i.e., the communication of the risk,
mutuality, propinquity, empathy, and commitment orientations) and dialogic principles (i.e.,
dialogic loops, useful information, visitor conservation, and return visit generation), public relations scholars can not only have a deeper understanding of how dialogue works (or
why dialogue does not work) on digital media, but also inform the general digital media
scholarship by providing insights on how affordances affect relationship building.
4

Suggestions from an Affordance Perspective of Dialogic Communication

In response to Kent and Theunissen (2016), we specify how the affordance perspective
of dialogic communication provides new insights to dialogic public relations theory (Kent &
Taylor, 2002) and how scholars can push the field forward with empirical studies that incorporate the affordance theory. In response to Sommerfeldt and Yang (2018), we propose a
conceptual update of the “ease of interface” dialogic principle (Kent & Taylor, 1998) to “favorable affordances,” argue that it provides a more complete and critical understanding of how
affordances affect digital public relations, and encourage practitioners to assess affordances
of emerging digital media platforms before utilizing them for public relations purposes.
4.1

Communicating Dialogic Orientations with Digital Media Affordances

We argue that the enactment of dialogue in the online space requires certain kinds
of digital media affordances. However, what affordances help enact digital dialogue and

9

what affordances inhibit it remain open questions, and public relations scholars are particularly equipped and suited to answer these research questions at the intersection of digital
technology and relationship building.
In a scale development study, Fox and McEwan (2017) considered media affordances
in terms of their social functions in human communication, and proposed a typology of
affordances commonly found in real-world digital channels: accessibility, bandwidth, social
presence, privacy, network association, personalization, persistence, editability, conversation
control, and anonymity. Inquiring which affordance, among the proposed ten, facilitates the
communication of risk, mutuality, propinquity, empathy, and commitment could be a good
start of incorporating affordance theory into digital public relations research.
It should be noted that the literature on digital media affordances is still nascent, and
that proposals of its typology are bound to be contested. For example, Evans et al. (2017)
argued that privacy should not be considered an affordance, and Sundar (2008) contested another typology — consisting of modality, agency, interactivity, and navigability — to explain
why digital media platforms cue cognitive heuristics differently. The typology of affordances
is beyond the scope of the current piece and will remain an open debate, as communication
technology evolves and new affordances get proposed to theorize digital media’s effects on
communication outcomes.
One critical advantage of using the affordance framework to empirically examine the
enactment of digital dialogue, compared to other approaches such as the channel repertoire
approach (e.g., O’Sullivan, 2000; Park, Boatwright, & Avery, 2019; Schultz, Utz, & Göritz,
2011; Sommerfeldt, Yang, & Taylor, 2019; Yuan, 2011), is that the affordance approach is
platform agnostic and easily applicable to different digital media channels currently employed
by public relations practice. In other words, the framework focuses on the communicative
properties of digital media, rather than its technical aspects (c.f., Carr, 2020). Thus, empirical insights on the effect of one affordance on relationship building can be applied to multiple
digital channels with that specific affordance, which can contribute to our general understanding of how digital media affects organization-public relational efforts such as dialogic
communication, rather than our knowledge about one specific communication channel.
For example, Kent and Theunissen (2016) proposed the idea that self-disclosure might
be a requirement for forming relationships and building dialogues. By employing the affordance framework and empirically testing if anonymity, the opposite of self-disclosure, inhibits
the communication of dialogic orientations (e.g., empathy and propinquity) through experiments or survey studies, scholars might be able to generalize their findings and argue existing
communication channels that afford anonymity will all curb the enactment of dialogue. Similarly, the requirement of physical presence in dialogue (Kent & Theunissen, 2016) corresponds
to the social presence affordance, mentioned multiple times by public relations scholars but
outside of the affordance framework (e.g., Men et al., 2018). Though social presence might
never amount to the normative requirement of physical presence drafted by moral philosophers on dialogue, we believe how the level of social presence afforded by digital channels
makes organization-public interactions closer or further from organization-public dialogue
is still a worthy question to ask, in order to understand the role of new media technology
in public relations. By empirically establishing that, for instance, social presence facilitates
the communication of mutuality and risk, we can better pinpoint why video conferencing
platforms (e.g., Zoom and Skype) should be used to achieve the dialogic ideal during organi10

zational crises. By studying how media affordances influence these relational outcomes, we
can also inform the design of new media technologies, such as how we can better program
intelligent organizational tools (e.g., chatbots) for public communication purposes.
In other words, instead of making platform-specific claims such as Twitter is not
dialogic (e.g., Kent & Lane, 2017), scholars should delve more deeply into the question
of why dialogue does not emerge on digital platforms, ask what properties of the studied
platform make it dialogic or not dialogic, and attribute it to affordances — the building
blocks of digital media pertaining to their action possibilities. We believe these affordancebased findings provide more theoretical insights about the role of information technology in
dialogic communication than those platform-specific claims presented by existing literature.
In fact, employing the scale developed by Fox and McEwan (2017), scholars have
started explicitly examining affordances in organizational settings that are of great interest
to public relations research, and yielded theoretical insights that can be applied to multiple
digital channels. By experimentally manipulating participants’ perceived levels of anonymity
and visibility, Mao and DeAndrea (2019) evaluated the effects of the two affordances on employees’ intention to voice work-related concerns, and found that these two affordances can
significantly alter employee behavior through their influences on channel safety and individual efficacy. Though the main finding is confirmative and intuitive, their study also found
counterintuitive results such as the visibility affordance decreases individual efficacy, which
opens up new space for future research on the causal effect of affordances in employee communication. Similarly, scholars working in the field of digital public relations can connect
the social affordance scale with measurements on dialogic communication (e.g., Romenti,
Valentini, Murtarelli, & Meggiorin, 2016; Yang, Kang, & Cha, 2015) and investigate these
affordances’ (and their interactive) effects on relational outcomes. While much digital media
scholarship has theorized or examined outcomes such as psychological perceptions, organizational resources, political representation, civil engagement, and online discussions (e.g.,
Deseriis, 2020; Jaidka et al., 2019; Lelkes, 2020; Rice et al., 2017; Wohn, Carr, & Hayes,
2016), affordances’ effects on relationship building have been largely unattended. This lacuna presents itself as a great opportunity for public relations scholarship to contribute back
to the general study of digital media effects.
There are two other advantages of using affordances to examine digital dialogue.
First, the theoretical framework is a promising candidate for a general theory of emerging
media, as it has been successfully employed to dissect media effects spawned by newly developed technologies, such as virtual reality and augmented reality (e.g., Barreda-Ángeles,
Aleix-Guillaume, & Pereda-Baños, 2020; Scholz & Smith, 2016; Steffen, Gaskin, Meservy,
Jenkins, & Wolman, 2019). Using a somewhat future-proof concept to understand the influence of communication technology on dialogue can provide more theoretical consistency
throughout the literature. Second, the term is ubiquitous across fields that are related to
public relations, not only in the communication literature referenced above, but also in fields
such as management, marketing, and information system (e.g., Anderson & Robey, 2017;
Argyris & Monu, 2015; De Luca, Herhausen, Troilo, & Rossi, 2020; Leidner, Gonzalez, &
Koch, 2018; Leonardi & Vaast, 2017). By using the same theoretical framework, public
relations scholarship can better engage with the wider social science literature.
In summary of this section, we encourage scholars to examine the mediated communication of dialogic orientations (i.e., mutuality, propinquity, empathy, risk, and commitment)
11

through the lens of affordances, to address the incompatibility between the normative theory
of dialogue and the increasingly digital practice of public relations. How a normative theory
— developed to conceptualize offline practice ideals — can be adapted for a digital world has
presented many challenges for communication scholars. Just like how the literature on political deliberation is getting adapted to accommodate digital channels with the affordances
framework (e.g., Halpern & Gibbs, 2013; Jaidka et al., 2019; Maia & Rezende, 2016; Rossini,
2020), we contend that scholars should also start speaking the language of affordances and
examining the effect of digital media channels on the communication of dialogic ideals with
this platform-agnostic approach.
4.2

From “Ease of Interface” to “Favorable Affordances”: A Conceptual Update

In light of the decreasing relevance of the “ease of interface” dialogic principle in the
Web 2.0 era, we propose using “favorable affordances” instead to help practitioners assess
the action possibilities of media channels and reevaluate their digital dialogic communication
practice.
“Ease of interface” is a part of “favorable affordances,” which incorporates all facets
of the human-computer interaction in digital dialogic communication. Interface is a small
part of the affordance framework, incorporated as the “accessibility” affordance in Fox and
McEwan’s (2017) typology. Without ease of interface, a said platform must not have the
affordances needed to provide smooth experiences for dialogic communication to materialize.
But the ease of interface does not necessarily translate to the platform having a favorable
condition for the conduct of dialogic communication.
As previously discussed, platforms in the Web 2.0 era offer organizations the same
set of features and interfaces, and organizations build upon them to communicate and build
relationships with publics. It is indeed how organizations utilize these features (i.e., the
other four digital dialogic principles), rather than whether the interface is easy to use, that is
yielding different public relations outcomes. By conceptually updating the “ease of interface”
principle to “favorable affordances” and considering it as the technical requirement for digital
dialogic communication, we believe the set of dialogic principles for mediated communication,
visualized in Figure 1, can provide more relevant suggestions to the real-world practice. In
line with the original authors’ intent of guiding communication strategies (Kent & Taylor,
1998), we deliver this conceptual update as a long-overdue revision to the dialogic principles
that no longer fit the current media landscape but are still widely consulted.
[Insert Figure 1 Here]
This conceptual update is needed to equip practitioners with the necessary knowledge
to differentiate popular social media platforms for organizational purposes, which the “ease
of interface” principle fails to do. For example, the three major social media platforms —
Facebook, Twitter, and Reddit — all have interfaces that are easy to use, and following the
“ease of interface” principle does not contribute any meaningful understanding to why these
platforms differ. Instead, examining dialogic communication practices with a “favorable affordances” principle, practitioners can have a better understanding of how these platforms’
affordances lead to different digital experiences. Facebook, with its high social presence and
12

Figure 1: Conceptual Update: Dialogic Principles for Mediated Communication

A. Dialogic Principles (Kent and Taylor, 1998)
Dialogic
Loops

Useful
Information

Return Visit
Generation

Visitor
Conservation

Ease of
Interface

B. Dialogic Principles for Mediated Communication
Dialogic
Loops

Useful
Information

Return Visit
Generation

Visitor
Conservation

Favorable Affordances

network association affordances and low anonymity affordance, offers organizations a better chance to execute “return visit generation” and create close-knit communities through
repeated interactions (e.g., Kim, Chun, Kwak, & Nam, 2014; Shin, Pang, & Kim, 2015).
Twitter’s low personalization, bandwidth, and editability affordances make it suitable as a
broadcasting tool for organizations, where “useful information” is paramount for eliciting
interactions and building relationships that go beyond clicks and likes (e.g., Watkins, 2017;
Yue et al., 2019). Reddit, with its high conversation control and persistence affordances,
uses discussion posts as its content units and can hold in-depth conversations between organizations and their online publics (e.g., Le & Mao, 2018). Though understudied in public
communication research, the platform seems to easily fulfill the “dialogic loops” principle
since organizations can easily engage in back-and-forth conversations with stakeholders, but
also expose organizations to more risks and manipulations due to its high bandwidth affordance (see Gaudette, Scrivens, Davies, & Frank, 2020). Due to its nature of being the
precedent of digital public relations practice, we place the “favorable affordances” principle
as the base of the new model, in a way to inform practitioners that platform opportunities
should be critically gauged as the technical requirement for dialogic communication before
the stage of communication strategy development.
The point is, to conduct dialogic communication and thus foster dialogue in the contemporary media environment, “ease of interface” is a minimum requirement, not an ideal
principle. The ideal principle should be that the digital platform, chosen by practitioners to
host dialogic communication, should provide favorable affordances to support such organizational efforts. Different affordances can invoke different communication behavior, and it
is time to update the principle and equip practitioners with the knowledge of affordances to
help them understand the role of technology in their practice. We believe the conceptual
update delivers a better framework for the digital age, not only for websites and social media
but also for newer communication possibilities.

13

5

Implications of Affordances for Other Areas in Public Relations Research

Authentic dialogic communication is crucial to building mutually beneficial relationships between organizations and publics (Kent & Taylor, 2018). Although dialogic communication does not necessarily need to be mediated by communication technology, we cannot
ignore the fact that digital public relations practice is fast-growing and much of what we do
today has been mediated.
We have so far identified and reviewed the struggle of adapting dialogic concepts to
the current media landscape, and discussed how the affordance framework can improve the
theoretical development of dialogue as a public relations theory and can inform the practical
suggestions of dialogic principles as communication strategies. From a normative standpoint,
it seems that mediated communication can never lead to genuine dialogues and that “digital
dialogue” is a self-contradictory concept. Yet, fixating on this tension overshadows promising
research directions — if digital dialogues cannot take place, why so? Instead of claiming
dialogic theory no longer applicable to digital contexts, a change of direction may bring
serendipities. Affordance theory, in our quest to further understand dialogues in today’s
technology-mediated environment, is the vantage point direly needed to not only renew and
expand dialogue theory but also unpack opportunities in many public relations research areas.
The paper’s ultimate goal, despite its heavy focus on dialogue, is to bring the affordance
theory into the general agenda of digital public relations research.
First and foremost, affordances can help to further research at the intersection of digital media and crisis communication. For example, scholars recently renewed their interests
in a repertoire approach to study how channel choices affect crisis communication effectiveness (e.g., Liu, Xu, Lim, & Egnoto, 2019; Park et al., 2019; Schultz et al., 2011). So far,
these studies have been limited to the platforms chosen by the researchers, and rarely touch
upon the fundamental differences among these platforms that are actually yielding these
results. By connecting the affordance measurement of each platform to crisis-relevant communication outcomes, an affordance approach with platform-comparison research designs
can create valuable insights for theory development related to platforms/channels combination and choices in crises. Such research agendas also better reflect crisis communication
practices in the real world, where a combination of channels and platforms is utilized.
Secondly, at the intersection of digital media and issue management, affordance theory also provides an excellent opportunity to understand why certain channels are preferred
over others in certain circumstances, and what affordances are utilized in those circumstances
to fulfill strategic purposes. Results from these studies can help theorize the accumulating
evidence on multi-platform digital media use in relationship building, in research areas such
as nonprofit advocacy (e.g., Ihm, 2019), public diplomacy (e.g., Zhang, 2013), and corporate social responsibility (e.g., Reilly & Hynan, 2014). More importantly, as affordances
constitute the underlying principles upon which certain channels are selected, insights from
such research are evergreen and applicable to future emerging platforms, and can be used to
understand the temporal changes of digital strategic management efforts throughout issue
stages (see Sommerfeldt & Yang, 2017) and how intended effects can be maximized based
on platform affordances.
Finally, engagement is another quickly developing agenda in public relations research
that can benefit from an affordance perspective, specifically as to what and how engagement
14

outcomes can be achieved in socially mediated contexts (Chewning, 2018; Johnston, 2018).
The mediating digital technologies provide different action possibilities for engagement processes, which in turn translate to different engagement possibilities for organizations and
stakeholders. Extending literature on socially mediated engagement, Xu and Xiong (2020)
recently proposed four parameters to further theorize engagement in digital contexts. These
parameters took notice of platform affordances, which affect moderation and control, typologies of networks, and degrees of participation and interactivity. Their technical parameter
resembles the model proposed in Figure 1, where affordance is the foundation upon which
the meso-level factors determine the nature and outcomes of engagement.
The general theory of affordance is by no means promoting technological determinism,
but it highlights the point that communication platforms’ technical infrastructure is crucial to
any mediated communication, including digital dialogic communication. Previously, when
scholars discussed dialogic communication, they mostly focused on the humanity side of
the story. For example, real-world communication has power imbalance and time constraint
(Lane & Bartlett, 2016; Wirtz & Zimbres, 2018), which usually leads to sub-optimal dialogue
in the end (Lane, 2018). The affordance perspective focuses on the infrastructure side of
the story, in that digital dialogic communication, regardless of on which communication
platform it takes place, is mediated by inhuman objects, and these inhuman objects can
affect dialogue. We encourage public relations scholars to start meaningful discussions on
how to better understand the term “digital” in digital dialogic communication, and using the
affordance framework for these inquiries, as we argue, is one of the preferred approaches.
6

Concluding Remarks

Affordance, an underlying principle affecting many facets of social media platforms
and mediated interactions, provides a promising framework to address emerging tensions
in public relations theories. We contend that dialogic theory can still hold its relevance to
today’s socially mediated landscape, once it receives some overdue re-examinations informed
by interdisciplinary insights based on affordances. The shift from “ease of interface” to
“favorable affordances” not only is a needed update to dialogic principles, but also signals a
new way forward to consider the possibility of communicating dialogic orientations digitally.
On a grand scale, the theory also presents new directions to further theorize digital public
relations, particularly related to cross-platforms adaptation and utilization, an emerging
area in public relations research that acknowledges and emphasizes the benefits of engaging
various (mediated) communication channels to achieve strategic purposes.

15

References
Allen, M. (2008). Web 2.0: An argument against convergence. First Monday, 13 (3). doi:
10.5210/fm.v13i3.2139
Allen, M. (2013). What was Web 2.0? Versions as the dominant mode of internet history.
New Media & Society, 15 (2), 260–275. doi: 10.1177/1461444812451567
Anderson, C., & Robey, D. (2017). Affordance potency: Explaining the actualization of
technology affordances. Information and Organization, 27 (2), 100–115. doi: 10.1016/
j.infoandorg.2017.03.002
Ao, S. H., & Huang, Q. S. (2020). A systematic review on the application of dialogue in
public relations to information communication technology-based platforms: Comparing
English and Chinese contexts. Public Relations Review , 46 (1), 101814. doi: 10.1016/
j.pubrev.2019.101814
Argyris, Y. A., & Monu, K. (2015). Corporate use of social media: Technology affordance
and external stakeholder relations. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic
Commerce, 25 (2), 140–168. doi: 10.1080/10919392.2015.1033940
Auger, G. A. (2013). Fostering democracy through social media: Evaluating diametrically
opposed nonprofit advocacy organizations’ use of Facebook, Twitter, and YouTube.
Public Relations Review , 39 (4), 369–376. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2013.07.013
Barassi, V., & Treré, E. (2012). Does Web 3.0 come after Web 2.0? Deconstructing theoretical assumptions through practice. New Media & Society, 14 (8), 1269–1285. doi:
10.1177/1461444812445878
Barreda-Ángeles, M., Aleix-Guillaume, S., & Pereda-Baños, A. (2020). Virtual reality storytelling as a double-edged sword: Immersive presentation of nonfiction 360°-video
is associated with impaired cognitive information processing. Communication Monographs. doi: 10.1080/03637751.2020.1803496
Bortree, D. S., & Seltzer, T. (2009). Dialogic strategies and outcomes: An analysis of
environmental advocacy groups’ Facebook profiles. Public Relations Review , 35 (3),
317–319. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.05.002
Botan, C. (1997). Ethics in strategic communication campaigns: The case for a new approach
to public relations. The Journal of Business Communication, 34 (2), 188–202.
Briones, R. L., Kuch, B., Liu, B. F., & Jin, Y. (2011). Keeping up with the digital age:
How the American Red Cross uses social media to build relationships. Public Relations
Review , 37 (1), 37–43. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.12.006
Buber, M. (1970). I and thou (W. Kaufmann, Trans.). Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Campbell, S. W. (2013). Mobile media and communication: A new field, or just a new journal? Mobile Media & Communication, 1 (1), 8–13. doi: 10.1177/2050157912459495
Carr, C. T. (2020). CMC Is dead, long live CMC!: Situating computer-mediated communication scholarship beyond the digital age. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 25 (1), 9–22. doi: 10.1093/jcmc/zmz018
Chewning, L. V. (2018). Virtual engagement: A theoretical framework of affordances,
networks, and communication. In K. A. Johnston & M. Taylor (Eds.), The handbook
of communication engagement (pp. 439–452). Wiley-Blackwell.
Ciszek, E. L. (2020). “We are people, not transactions”: Trust as a precursor to dialogue
with LGBTQ publics. Public Relations Review , 46 (1), 101759. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev
16

.2019.02.003
Cormode, G., & Krishnamurthy, B. (2008). Key differences between Web 1.0 and Web 2.0.
First Monday, 13 (6). doi: 10.5210/fm.v13i6.2125
De Luca, L. M., Herhausen, D., Troilo, G., & Rossi, A. (2020). How and when do big data
investments pay off? The role of marketing affordances and service innovation. Journal
of the Academy of Marketing Science. doi: 10.1007/s11747-020-00739-x
Deseriis, M. (2020). Rethinking the digital democratic affordance and its impact on
political representation: Toward a new framework. New Media & Society. doi:
10.1177/1461444820929678
Evans, S. K., Pearce, K. E., Vitak, J., & Treem, J. W. (2017). Explicating affordances: A
conceptual framework for understanding affordances in communication research. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 22 (1), 35–52. doi: 10.1111/jcc4.12180
Fox, J., & McEwan, B. (2017). Distinguishing technologies for social interaction: The
perceived social affordances of communication channels scale. Communication Monographs, 84 (3), 298–318. doi: 10.1080/03637751.2017.1332418
Fulk, J., & Yuan, Y. C. (2013). Location, motivation, and social capitalization via enterprise
social networking. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 19 (1), 20–37. doi:
10.1111/jcc4.12033
Gálvez-Rodríguez, M. d. M., Sáez-Martín, A., García-Tabuyo, M., & Caba-Pérez, C. (2018).
Exploring dialogic strategies in social media for fostering citizens’ interactions with
Latin American local governments. Public Relations Review , 44 (2), 265–276. doi:
10.1016/j.pubrev.2018.03.003
Gaudette, T., Scrivens, R., Davies, G., & Frank, R. (2020). Upvoting extremism: Collective
identity formation and the extreme right on Reddit. New Media & Society. doi:
10.1177/1461444820958123
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Houghton Mifflin.
Gligorić, K., Anderson, A., & West, R. (2018). How constraints affect content: The case of
Twitter’s switch from 140 to 280 characters. In Proceedings of the Twelfth International
AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM 2018) (pp. 596–599).
Greeno, J. G. (1994). Gibson’s affordances. Psychological Review , 101 (2), 336–342. doi:
10.1037/0033-295X.101.2.336
Grunig, J. E., & Hunt, T. (1984). Managing public relations. Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Halpern, D., & Gibbs, J. (2013). Social media as a catalyst for online deliberation? Exploring the affordances of Facebook and YouTube for political expression. Computers in
Human Behavior , 29 (3), 1159–1168. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2012.10.008
Heath, R. L., Pearce, W. B., Shotter, J., Taylor, J. R., Kersten, A., Zorn, T., . . . Deetz,
S. (2006). The processes of dialogue: Participation and legitimation. Management
Communication Quarterly, 19 (3), 341–375. doi: 10.1177/0893318905282208
Humphreys, L. (2007). Mobile social networks and social practice: A case study of dodgeball.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 13 (1), 341–360. doi: 10.1111/j.1083
-6101.2007.00399.x
Ihm, J. (2019). Communicating without nonprofit organizations on nonprofits’ social media:
Stakeholders’ autonomous networks and three types of organizational ties. New Media
& Society, 21 (11-12), 2648–2670. doi: 10.1177/1461444819854806
Ingenhoff, D., & Koelling, A. M. (2009). The potential of Web sites as a relationship
17

building tool for charitable fundraising NPOs. Public Relations Review , 35 (1), 66–73.
doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2008.09.023
Jaidka, K., Zhou, A., & Lelkes, Y. (2019). Brevity is the soul of Twitter: The constraint
affordance and political discussion. Journal of Communication, 69 (4), 345–372. doi:
10.1093/joc/jqz023
Jarrett, K. (2008). Interactivity is evil! A critical investigation of Web 2.0. First Monday,
13 (3). doi: 10.5210/fm.v13i3.2140
Johnston, K. A. (2018). Toward a theory of social engagement. In K. A. Johnston &
M. Taylor (Eds.), The handbook of communication engagement (pp. 19–32). WileyBlackwell.
Joyce, C. K. (2009). The blank page: Effects of constraint on creativity (Doctoral Dissertation, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, CA). Retrieved from http://
dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1552835
Kent, M. L., & Lane, A. B. (2017). A rhizomatous metaphor for dialogic theory. Public
Relations Review , 43 (3), 568–578. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2017.02.017
Kent, M. L., & Li, C. (2020). Toward a normative social media theory for public relations.
Public Relations Review , 46 (1), 101857. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2019.101857
Kent, M. L., & Saffer, A. J. (2014). A Delphi study of the future of new technology
research in public relations. Public Relations Review , 40 (3), 568–576. doi: 10.1016/
j.pubrev.2014.02.008
Kent, M. L., & Taylor, M. (1998). Building dialogic relationships through the world wide
web. Public Relations Review , 24 (3), 321–334. doi: 10.1016/S0363-8111(99)80143-X
Kent, M. L., & Taylor, M. (2002). Toward a dialogic theory of public relations. Public
Relations Review , 28 (1), 21–37. doi: 10.1016/S0363-8111(02)00108-X
Kent, M. L., & Taylor, M. (2018). Understanding the rhetoric of dialogue and the dialogue of
rhetoric. In Ø. Ihlen & R. L. Heath (Eds.), The handbook of organizational rhetoric and
communication (pp. 315–327). John Wiley & Sons, Inc. doi: 10.1002/9781119265771
.ch22
Kent, M. L., & Theunissen, P. (2016). Elegy for mediated dialogue: Shiva the destroyer and
reclaiming our first principles. International Journal of Communication, 10 , 4040–
4054.
Kim, D., Chun, H., Kwak, Y., & Nam, Y. (2014). The employment of dialogic principles
in website, Facebook, and Twitter platforms of environmental nonprofit organizations.
Social Science Computer Review , 32 (5), 590–605. doi: 10.1177/0894439314525752
Lane, A. B. (2018). If it’s so good, why not make them do it? Why true dialogue cannot
be mandated. Public Relations Review , 44 (5), 656–666. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2018
.10.001
Lane, A. B., & Bartlett, J. L. (2016). Why dialogic principles don’t make it in practice—and
what we can do about it. International Journal of Communication, 10 , 4074–4094.
Le, P. H., & Mao, Y. (2018). Reddit as a new platform for public relations: Organizations’
use of dialogic principles and their publics’ responses in the subreddit IAmA. First
Monday, 23 (11). doi: 10.5210/fm.v23i11.8131
Leidner, D. E., Gonzalez, E., & Koch, H. (2018). An affordance perspective of enterprise
social media and organizational socialization. The Journal of Strategic Information
Systems, 27 (2), 117–138. doi: 10.1016/j.jsis.2018.03.003
18

Lelkes, Y. (2020). A bigger pie: The effects of high-speed Internet on political behavior.
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 25 (3), 199–216. doi: 10.1093/jcmc/
zmaa002
Leonardi, P. M., & Vaast, E. (2017). Social media and their affordances for organizing: A
review and agenda for research. Academy of Management Annals, 11 (1), 150–188. doi:
10.5465/annals.2015.0144
Linvill, D. L., McGee, S. E., & Hicks, L. K. (2012). Colleges’ and universities’ use of
Twitter: A content analysis. Public Relations Review , 38 (4), 636–638. doi: 10.1016/
j.pubrev.2012.05.010
Liu, B. F., Xu, S., Lim, J. R., & Egnoto, M. (2019). How publics’ active and passive
communicative behaviors affect their tornado responses: An integration of STOPS and
SMCC. Public Relations Review , 45 (4), 101831. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2019.101831
Lovejoy, K., & Saxton, G. D. (2012). Information, community, and action: How nonprofit
organizations use social media. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 17 (3),
337–353. doi: 10.1111/j.1083-6101.2012.01576.x
Lovejoy, K., Waters, R. D., & Saxton, G. D. (2012). Engaging stakeholders through Twitter:
How nonprofit organizations are getting more out of 140 characters or less. Public
Relations Review , 38 (2), 313–318. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2012.01.005
Maia, R. C. M., & Rezende, T. A. S. (2016). Respect and disrespect in deliberation across
the networked media environment: Examining multiple paths of political talk. Journal
of Computer-Mediated Communication, 21 (2), 121–139. doi: 10.1111/jcc4.12155
Mao, C. M., & DeAndrea, D. C. (2019). How anonymity and visibility affordances influence
employees’ decisions about voicing workplace concerns. Management Communication
Quarterly, 33 (2), 160–188. doi: 10.1177/0893318918813202
McAllister-Spooner, S. M. (2009). Fulfilling the dialogic promise: A ten-year reflective
survey on dialogic Internet principles. Public Relations Review , 35 (3), 320–322. doi:
10.1016/j.pubrev.2009.03.008
Men, L. R., Tsai, W.-H. S., Chen, Z. F., & Ji, Y. G. (2018). Social presence and digital
dialogic communication: Engagement lessons from top social CEOs. Journal of Public
Relations Research, 30 (3), 83–99. doi: 10.1080/1062726X.2018.1498341
O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models for the next generation of software. Retrieved from https://www.oreilly.com/pub/a//web2/archive/
what-is-web-20.html
O’Sullivan, B. (2000). What you don’t know won’t hurt me: Impression management functions of communication channels in relationships. Human Communication Research,
26 (3), 403–431. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-2958.2000.tb00763.x
Paek, H.-J., Hove, T., Jung, Y., & Cole, R. T. (2013). Engagement across three social media
platforms: An exploratory study of a cause-related PR campaign. Public Relations
Review , 39 (5), 526–533. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2013.09.013
Pang, A., Shin, W., Lew, Z., & Walther, J. B. (2018). Building relationships through dialogic
communication: Organizations, stakeholders, and computer-mediated communication.
Journal of Marketing Communications, 24 (1), 68–82. doi: 10.1080/13527266.2016
.1269019
Park, S., Boatwright, B., & Avery, E. J. (2019). Information channel preference in health
crisis: Exploring the roles of perceived risk, preparedness, knowledge, and intent to
19

follow directives. Public Relations Review , 45 (5), 101794. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2019
.05.015
Pearson, R. (1989a). Business ethics as communication ethics: Public relations practice and
the idea of dialogue. In C. H. Botan & V. Hazleton (Eds.), Public relations theory (pp.
111–131). Erlbaum.
Pearson, R. (1989b). A theory of public relations ethics (Doctoral Dissertation, Ohio University, Athens, OH). doi: 10.4324/9781351225748
Qu, Y. (2020). Engaging publics in the mobile era: A study of Chinese charitable foundations’
use of WeChat. Public Relations Review , 46 (1), 101815. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2019
.101815
Reilly, A. H., & Hynan, K. A. (2014). Corporate communication, sustainability, and social
media: It’s not easy (really) being green. Business Horizons, 57 (6), 747–758. doi:
10.1016/j.bushor.2014.07.008
Rice, R. E., Evans, S. K., Pearce, K. E., Sivunen, A., Vitak, J., & Treem, J. W. (2017).
Organizational media affordances: Operationalization and associations with media use.
Journal of Communication, 67 (1), 106–130. doi: 10.1111/jcom.12273
Romenti, S., Valentini, C., Murtarelli, G., & Meggiorin, K. (2016). Measuring online dialogic
conversations’ quality: A scale development. Journal of Communication Management,
20 (4), 328–346. doi: 10.1108/JCOM-11-2015-0090
Rossini, P. (2020). Beyond incivility: Understanding patterns of uncivil and intolerant discourse in online political talk. Communication Research. doi: 10.1177/
0093650220921314
Russmann, U., & Lane, A. B. (2020). Mandating dialogue? International perspectives on
differences between theory and practice. Public Relations Review , 46 (1), 101819. doi:
10.1016/j.pubrev.2019.101819
Rybalko, S., & Seltzer, T. (2010). Dialogic communication in 140 characters or less: How
Fortune 500 companies engage stakeholders using Twitter. Public Relations Review ,
36 (4), 336–341. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.08.004
Scholz, J., & Smith, A. N. (2016). Augmented reality: Designing immersive experiences that
maximize consumer engagement. Business Horizons, 59 (2), 149–161. doi: 10.1016/
j.bushor.2015.10.003
Schultz, F., Utz, S., & Göritz, A. (2011). Is the medium the message? Perceptions of
and reactions to crisis communication via twitter, blogs and traditional media. Public
Relations Review , 37 (1), 20–27. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2010.12.001
Seltzer, T., & Mitrook, M. A. (2007). The dialogic potential of weblogs in relationship
building. Public Relations Review , 33 (2), 227–229. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2007.02.011
Shin, W., Pang, A., & Kim, H. J. (2015). Building relationships through integrated online media: Global organizations’ use of brand web sites, Facebook, and Twitter.
Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 29 (2), 184–220. doi: 10.1177/
1050651914560569
Sommerfeldt, E. J., & Xu, S. (2017). Making a “difference” with digital media? The
evaluation perspectives, practices, and challenges of Chinese NGOs. Chinese Journal
of Communication, 10 (1), 89–107. doi: 10.1080/17544750.2016.1210184
Sommerfeldt, E. J., & Yang, A. (2017). Relationship networks as strategic issues management: An issue-stage framework of social movement organization network strategies.
20

Public Relations Review , 43 (4), 829–839. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2017.06.012
Sommerfeldt, E. J., & Yang, A. (2018). Notes on a dialogue: Twenty years of digital dialogic
communication research in public relations. Journal of Public Relations Research,
30 (3), 59–64. doi: 10.1080/1062726X.2018.1498248
Sommerfeldt, E. J., Yang, A., & Taylor, M. (2019). Public relations channel “repertoires”:
Exploring patterns of channel use in practice. Public Relations Review , 45 (4), 101796.
doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2019.101796
Steffen, J. H., Gaskin, J. E., Meservy, T. O., Jenkins, J. L., & Wolman, I. (2019). Framework of affordances for virtual reality and augmented reality. Journal of Management
Information Systems, 36 (3), 683–729. doi: 10.1080/07421222.2019.1628877
Stewart, J. (1978). Foundations of dialogic communication. Quarterly Journal of Speech,
64 (2), 183–201. doi: 10.1080/00335637809383424
Sundar, S. S. (2008). The MAIN model: A heuristic approach to understanding technology
effects on credibility. In M. J. Metzger & A. J. Flanagin (Eds.), Digital media, youth,
and credibility (pp. 73–100). MIT Press.
Taylor, M. (2011). Building social capital through rhetoric and public relations. Management
Communication Quarterly, 25 (3), 436–454. doi: 10.1177/0893318911410286
Taylor, M., & Kent, M. L. (2014). Dialogic engagement: Clarifying foundational concepts.
Journal of Public Relations Research, 26 (5), 384–398. doi: 10.1080/1062726X.2014
.956106
Taylor, M., Kent, M. L., & White, W. J. (2001). How activist organizations are using the
Internet to build relationships. Public Relations Review , 27 (3), 263–284.
Theunissen, P. (2015). The quantum entanglement of dialogue and persuasion in social
media: Introducing the per–di principle. Atlantic Journal of Communication, 23 (1),
5–18. doi: 10.1080/15456870.2015.972405
Theunissen, P., & Wan Noordin, W. N. (2012). Revisiting the concept “dialogue” in public
relations. Public Relations Review , 38 (1), 5–13. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2011.09.006
Treem, J. W., & Leonardi, P. M. (2013). Social media use in organizations: Exploring
the affordances of visibility, editability, persistence, and association. Annals of the
International Communication Association, 36 (1), 143–189. doi: 10.1080/23808985
.2013.11679130
Wang, Y., & Yang, Y. (2020). Dialogic communication on social media: How organizations
use Twitter to build dialogic relationships with their publics. Computers in Human
Behavior , 104 , 106183. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2019.106183
Watkins, B. A. (2017). Experimenting with dialogue on Twitter: An examination of the
influence of the dialogic principles on engagement, interaction, and attitude. Public
Relations Review , 43 (1), 163–171. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2016.07.002
Wirtz, J. G., & Zimbres, T. M. (2018). A systematic analysis of research applying ‘principles of dialogic communication’ to organizational websites, blogs, and social media:
Implications for theory and practice. Journal of Public Relations Research, 30 (1-2),
5–34. doi: 10.1080/1062726X.2018.1455146
Wohn, D. Y., Carr, C. T., & Hayes, R. A. (2016). How affective is a “like”?: The effect of paralinguistic digital affordances on perceived social support. Cyberpsychology, Behavior,
and Social Networking, 19 (9), 562–566. doi: 10.1089/cyber.2016.0162
Xiong, Y., Cho, M., & Boatwright, B. (2019). Hashtag activism and message frames among
21

social movement organizations: Semantic network analysis and thematic analysis of
Twitter during the #MeToo movement. Public Relations Review , 45 (1), 10–23. doi:
10.1016/j.pubrev.2018.10.014
Xu, S., & Xiong, Y. (2020). Setting socially mediated engagement parameters: A topic modeling and text analytic approach to examining polarized discourses on Gillette’s campaign. Public Relations Review , 46 (5), 101959. doi: 10.1016/j.pubrev.2020.101959
Xu, S., & Zhou, A. (2020). Hashtag homophily in twitter network: Examining a controversial
cause-related marketing campaign. Computers in Human Behavior , 102 , 87–96. doi:
10.1016/j.chb.2019.08.006
Yang, S.-U., Kang, M., & Cha, H. (2015). A study on dialogic communication, trust,
and distrust: Testing a scale for measuring organization–public dialogic communication (OPDC). Journal of Public Relations Research, 27 (2), 175–192. doi: 10.1080/
1062726X.2015.1007998
Yuan, E. (2011). News consumption across multiple media platforms: A repertoire approach.
Information, Communication & Society, 14 (7), 998–1016. doi: 10.1080/1369118X.2010
.549235
Yue, C. A., Thelen, P., Robinson, K., & Men, L. R. (2019). How do CEOs communicate
on Twitter? A comparative study between Fortune 200 companies and top startup
companies. Corporate Communications: An International Journal , 24 (3), 532–552.
doi: 10.1108/CCIJ-03-2019-0031
Zhang, J. (2013). A strategic issue management (SIM) approach to social media use in
public diplomacy. American Behavioral Scientist, 57 (9), 1312–1331. doi: 10.1177/
0002764213487734

22

