Characterization of Pre- and Recession Periods for
Indiana’s Workforce
Kent Sellers
Department of Mathematical Science
Purdue University Fort Wayne
sellwk01@pfw.edu
Research and Analysis
Indiana Department of Workforce Development
wsellers@dwd.in.gov

Abstract
This paper studies the impact of The Great Recession period and the time period
prior on the Indiana labor force. Specifically, it aims to show the impact across a
variety of demographic, categorical variables (e.g. sex, age, and race)

1

Introduction

The United States have experienced six economic recessions. The Great Recession was the latest
recession and lasted longer than any recession since World War II (Rich, 2013). There were many
effects that the Great Recession had on the labor force. While some states were affected more than
other, Indiana faced many hardships.
1.1
1.1.1

Literature Review
How recessions impact unemployment

"Early on, the nature of labor market adjustment displayed a notable resemblance to that observed
in past severe downturns. During the latter half of 2009, however, the path of adjustment exhibited
important departures from that seen during and after prior deep recessions. Recent data point to two
warning signs going forward. First, the record rise in long-term unemployment may yield a persistent
residue of long-term unemployed workers with weak search effectiveness. Second, conventional
estimates suggest that the extension of Emergency Unemployment Compensation may have led to a
modest increase in unemployment" (Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin, 2010).
During recessions, the economy suffers. The long-run consequences (or "scarring) of recessions
include: educational achievement, opportunity, private investment, and entrepreneurial activity and
business formation (Irons, 2009).
One of the biggest lost opportunities are a result of job loss. Underlying trends appear in all recessions,
the number of individuals that experience joblessness increases, along with an increased duration of
joblessness. This can be costly for individuals and families. "In the most recent period (2001-03),
about 35% of job losers are not employed at the subsequent survey date; about 13% re-employed
full-time job losers are holding part-time jobs; full-time job losers who find new full-time jobs earn
about 13% less on average on their new jobs than on the lost job. . . ” (Farber,2005). Specifically, the
Great Recession has been unique both in its depth and duration.
Unemployment and income loss can have long-term opportunity costs. "There is substantial evidence
that economic outcomes are passed across generations. As such, economic hardships for parents will
mean more economic hurdles for their children... For example, job loss and falling incomes can force
Preprint. Under review.

families to delay or forgo a college education for their children" (Irons, 2009). The impact of job
loss goes well beyond income and earnings, and can even impact one’s mental health (Murphy and
Athanasou, 1999).
1.1.2

How recessions impact demographics

Work has been done to examine how different types of workers in 17 middle-income countries were
affected during The Great Recession. "Among active workers, youth experienced by far the largest
adverse impacts on employment, unemployment, and wage employment, particularly relative to older
adults. The percentage employment reductions, for example, were greatest for youth in each sector
of the economy, as firms reacted to the shock by substituting away from inexperienced workers.
Employment rates, as a share of the population, also plummeted for men. Larger drops in male
employment were primarily attributable to men’s higher initial rate of employment, although men’s
concentration in the hard-hit industrial sector also played an important role. Within each sector,
percentage employment declines were similar for men and women. Added worker effects among
women were mild, even among less-educated workers. Differences in labor market outcomes across
education groups and urban or rural residence tended to be smaller"(Cho and Newhouse, 2011).
1.1.3

How recessions impact Indiana’s economy

Indiana has a strong concentration in manufacturing, which has made the impacts of the Great
Recession profound. "At the height of total unemployment in the state, more than 414,000 Hoosiers
were without work at some time in the year, and almost one in four (103,000) saw their extended
benefits exhausted. In two years, the share of displaced workers who were unable to find employment
prior to their benefits running out rose from 15 percent to 25 percent. While a portion of these workers
may be simply unable to find work due to low demand, data on the industries from which unemployed workers previously worked paint a clear picture of structural unemployment. Manufacturing
alone accounted for 10 percent of displaced workers, while the related industries of transportation,
warehousing, and wholesale trade accounted for another 10 percent of displaced workers. Among
those unemployed who lost benefits, a larger share of workers in manufacturing and related industries
were represented" (Hicks, 2013).
By 2013, the recovery of the Great Recession in Indiana had shown that industries like health care,
hospitality and food service were on the rise, while goods-producing industries like manufacturing
and construction were down. These key industries that were hit led to the loss of many high-paying
jobs. However, even though there are weaknesses within Indiana’s economy, there are certainly
competitive advantages if we can capitalize on the steady and balanced growth that Indiana has been
experiencing (Kinghorn, 2014).
1.2

Dataset

Two primary sources of data were used: (1) IPUMS-CPS, University of Minnesota, www.ipums.org
and (2) the monthly and annual state unemployment rates from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’
Local Area Unemployment Statistics.
1.2.1

IPUMS-CPS

The Integrated Public Use Microdata Series, Current Population Survey (i.e. IPUMS-CPS), is data
that comes from the Current Population Survey by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. The Minnesota
Population Center at the University of Minnesota integrates this data over time and assigns uniform
codes to variables. IPUMS is composed of microdata, meaning that each record corresponds to a
person.
The IPUMS-CPS was the main source used to run the statistical analyses.
1.2.2

LAUS

The Local Area Unemployment Statistics (i.e. LAUS), is data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics
and Indiana Department of Workforce Development. This data program is a federal-state partnership
in which monthly estimates of total employment and unemployment are calculated for the many types
of geographies.
2

Figure 1: Indiana’s monthly unemployment rate with reference periods, "pre-recession" and "recession".
LAUS monthly and annual rates for Indiana were used to determine the impact periods of the
recession that were labeled as "pre-recession" and "recession." Figure 1 is a graph for Indiana to show
how the annual unemployment rates have changed over the past couple decades, while showing how
"pre-recession" and "recession" periods were calculated.
1.3

Research question

The impetus for this research was to better understand how economic recessions affect Indiana’s
labor force. The recession had many impacts, many of which revolved around the workforce. For the
purposes of this study, the research question is as follows:
How can we characterize the "pre-recession" and "recession" periods for Indiana’s labor force?
Specifically, how are Indiana’s working age population (18 and older) affected by The Great Recession
across a variety of demographics?
Much of this analysis can be addressed in the IPUMS-CPS dataset. The Current Population Survey
was a survey designed in the midst of the Great Depression, and a variety of labor force and
demographic questions are asked to over a thousand households in Indiana.
Based on previous analysis on The Great Recession in the United States, a probable hypothesis would
be that the demographics of workers most affected were young, male, lower education attainment,
and ethnic minorities

2

Methods

Group analysis was the primary method used in this research. This characterization was done in two
ways:
1. Populate sample counts of the categorical variables by the labor force status and fixing them
on the different time periods (i.e. "pre-recession," "recession," and the combination of both
periods)
2. Populate sample counts of the different time periods by the labor force status and fixing
them on each label of categorical variables.
Re-coding certain labels within categorical variables were instrumental in having interpretive findings.
Grouping labels into fewer labels made it easier to comprehend as well as working with larger sample
sizes for each label.
With the populated samples of the labor force status, we can now see the labor force participation rate.
Now that the counts and rates were populated, some basic grouped bar plots to help visualize the data
3

Figure 2: Categorical variable by labor force status fixed on time period
were supportive in discovering those differences. In order to determine whether those differences
were significant or due to random variation, chi-squared (χ2 ) tests were performed across all the
groups within both characterizations.

3

Results

The following tables reflect the results of the group analysis that was done. Similar to Figure 1, the
colors in the table reflect "pre-recession" and "recession" periods. A darker salmon color was used to
reflect where the p value of the chi-squared tests were greater than 0.05.
As seen below, many of the chi-squared tests did result in low p values signifying that most of the
differences were not due to random variation.
Figure 2 is a table that characterizes the categorical variables by the labor force status, while being
fixed on the time periods:
Figure 3 is a table that characterizes the time periods by the labor force status, while being fixed on
each label of a categorical variable:

4
4.1

Discussion
Insights

The age group with the largest negative effect on the labor force during The Great Recession were
college age (18 to 24 years). This would make sense given that there is a positive relationship between
unemployment rates and college enrollment (Long, 2004).
Despite there being less opportunities in the labor market, the only age group that were found to
increase their labor force participation rate were seniors (65 years and older). Again, this would seem
to directly correlate to the fact the retirement portfolios took a hit as the stock prices fell during the
4

Figure 3: time period by labor force status fixed on an individual label of a categorical variable
5

financial crisis. "Stock prices fell roughly 50 percent from peak to trough from October 2007 to
March 2009. These drops in stock prices are large relative to those associated with earlier recessions
since World War II" (Dwyer, 2009).
Following national trends mentioned earlier, Hoosier men and women were affected by the recession
at a similar rate in the labor force.
Metro areas also seemed to be affected at a similar rate. However, the differences between metro
status and labor force status had high p values signifying a good chance that the differences were due
to random variation. However, when looking at the differences between labor force status and time
period fixed on the metro status label, the p values were low. Although one can’t say with certainty
that the metro areas were affected the same, it would interesting to follow up in that topic due to the
fact that typically communities will attempt to diversify through many industries in order to lessen the
impacts of a recession. In Indiana, many of the metro areas have diversified industries, while the rural
areas are heavily concentrated in manufacturing and agriculture. Are the affects that recessions have
on the labor force the same in Indiana? Or are communities lessening other effects of a recession?
Although those that have any difficulty (i.e. disabled) is a demographic that has some of the lowest
labor force participation, their participation rate in Indiana increased during a recession. It would be
interesting to do more research to find out why this is, and what disabilities are affected the same.
This can be done within the IPUMS-CPS dataset, but one would have to either re-code the variables
to make sure one isn’t double counting individuals that have multiple disabilities, or you would have
to study the disabilities themselves rather than the connection to the individual.
4.2

Limitations

The biggest limitation of the analysis is a repeated measurement error. It was not taken into consideration that the same person could take the survey more than once. In the CPS, a household that receives
the survey will take the survey for four consecutive months, then will be off for 8 consecutive months,
and then will take again for another four consecutive months.
4.3

Future Analysis

The first thing that would need to be done, would be to restrict the repeated measurement error as
described in the limitations section. One possible way to get around this error is to create a unique
identifier for each person within the IPUMS-CPS data by combining the "SERIAL" label (which
identifies a unique household) and the "PERNUM" label (which numbers the persons within each
household). Then one can restrict the dataset with the first time the unique identifier for an individual
appears.
Where there were unexpected high p values, one could apply more advanced statistical techniques,
especially where p values were unexpectedly high, such as part of the metro status tests.
In future work, it would be interesting to do predictive analysis by using the categorical variables and
labor force status to determine if one is in a recession period.
As previously mentioned, it could be enlightening to do some future analysis as to why metro and
not metro areas seemed to be affected the same. Also, one could research why individuals with
difficulties increased in the labor force, and how those different disabilities are affected.

References
[1] Rich, R. (2013). The Great Recession. Federal Reserve Board at https://www.federalreservehistory.
org/essays/great_recession_of_200709
[2] Elsby, M., Hobijn, B., and Sahin, A. (2010). The Labor Market in the Great Recession. Retrieved from
https://www.nber.org/papers/w15979.pdf
[3] Irons, J. (2009). Economic scarring: The long-term impacts of the recession. Economic Policy Institute, at
https://www.epi.org/publication/bp243/

6

[4] Farber, Henry S. (2005). What Do We Know about Job Loss in the United States? Evidence from the
Displaced Workers Survey, 1984-2004. Working paper #498, Princeton University, 2005, at http://www.irs.
princeton.edu/pubs/pdfs/498.pdf
[5] Murphy, G.C., and Athanasou, J.A. (1999). The effect of unemployment on mental health. Journal of
Occupational and Organizational Psychology. Vol. 72, pp. 83–99.
[6] Cho Y. and Newhouse, D. (2011). How Did the Great Recession Affect Different Types of Workers?
Evidence from 17 Middle-Income Countries. The World Bank, at https://openknowledge.worldbank.
org/bitstream/handle/10986/3401/WPS5636.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y
[7] Hicks, M.J. (2013). Labor Markets After The Great Recession: Unemployment and Policy for Indiana
Ball State University Center for Business and Economic Research, at https://projects.cberdata.org/
reports/StructuralUnemp.pdf
[8] Kinghorn, M.R. (2014). Indiana Jobs: Recession, Recovery. Indiana Business Review, at https://www.
ibrc.indiana.edu/ibr/2014/fall/article1.html
[9] Long, B.T. (2004). How Have College Decisions Changed Overtime? An Application of the Conditional
Logistic Choice Model.” Journal of Econometrics 121 (1–2): pp. 271–96.
[10] Dwyer, G.P. (2009). Stock Prices in the Financial Crisis: Notes from the Vault. Federal Reserve Bank of
Atlanta, at https://www.frbatlanta.org/cenfis/publications/notesfromthevault/0909.aspx

7

