AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number2.May 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.2

Pp. 14-21

The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern Fiction
Nariman LARBI
Abdelhamid Ibn Badis University of Mostaganem, Algeria

Abstract:
Postmodern literature, fiction in particular, is, according to Barth (1984), a literature of exhausted
possibility due to its entangled thematic and technical approach which defies the conventional
modern fictional form. It reflects the zeitgeist or the spirit of postmodernism which is regarded as
a revaluation of the modern enterprise; an enterprise that embodies universality and coherence.
The present research paper attempts to address the recurrent thematic element that postmodern
fiction revolves around: that of the presence of the historiographic element in postmodern fiction
which reflects in itself the evaluation of past history; such a fictional preoccupation reflects the
major postmodern philosophers’ and thinkers’ concerns, such as those of Lyotard and Baudrillard,
on the impossibility for the existence of a universal coherent history. This criterion is one amongst
other criteria that justify the exhaustion of postmodern fiction.
Keywords: John Barth, Postmodern Fiction, Postmodernism, Post-historicism, Historiographic
Metafiction, Jean Baudrillard, Fredric Jameson, Jean-François Lyotard

Cites as: LARBI, N. (2019). The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of
Postmodern Fiction. Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (2)14-21.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no2.2

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

14

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

Introduction
Postmodernism is essentially that movement which grew out of a reaction against
modernism, the roots of which find their impetus in the revolutionary Age of Enlightenment. It
was first coined and used in the 1870s with different connotations, and its usage differed from a
field into the other. It was first used in the art field by the English painter John Watkins Chapman
for the ascription of any form of art that went beyond the conventional impressionism. At a similar
accordance, Cuddon (1999) postulates that post-modernism is a controversial term that started to
reach its peak in the 1950s, and is ascribed to anything revolutionary to modernist tendencies.
Postmodernism is more of an attitude than a historical period that started to emerge right after the
Second World War, by the time of the Berlin Wall was erected. It came with the disillusionment
to the modern enterprise which promised positivism, progress, and a general emancipation to the
horrors and digression of human values to the detriment of economic, political, and geographical
enlargement by the colonial rule. The major events that stressed the turning point against
modernism are the Holocaust and the atomic bombings of the 40s.
The characteristics of postmodernism tend to be disintegrative to the modern structuralism,
adopting an after structuralism, or what is known as post-structuralism; deconstructivism, thinkers
of such a stream of conductive thoughts are: Baudrillard, Jameson, Lyotard, Habermas, and
Derrida to name some. It is viewed as a solid historical and cultural reaction to the shortcomings
of modernity, i.e., the Enlightenment enterprise, the death of the previous held options of a given
structural uniformity.
This uniformity or what is termed as Universality, is rejected by postmodernists and is clearly
reflected in the relevant postmodern literature. The criteria of such literature will be clarified in
this article from the historicity of the emergence of postmodernism as a stream of thought to its
reflection in literature, mostly fiction, along with the prominent elements that form its exhaustion.
Postmodernism
Any philosophical or literary movement tends to be either a reaction against the one which
precedes it or an extension and an exaggeration of it. Postmodernism, a tendency which started to
emerge by the late twentieth-century, from 1970s, is regarded to be both a transitional period and
a self-critical evaluation of not only the transition in itself but mostly of the modernist enterprise
of its yesteryears. The latter actually lasted for more than two centuries harking back to the
Enlightenment project. Postmodern thinkers, such as Lyotard, Habermas, and Jameson to name
some of the most prominent ones, tend to have a sceptical attitude to anything that belongs to the
past. Lyotard’s definition of anything postmodern in his: The Postmodern Condition, A Report on
Knowledge (1984), as “incredulity towards metanarratives” (p. xxiv). All of the past knowledge
that was held as being The truth; absolute fixed narratives, came to be reacted upon, displaying a
distrust to past narratives.
Postmodernism is essentially that movement which came as a reaction against modernism.
The latter was influenced by the Enlightenment project and rejected tradition while it championed
reason and science. Postmodernists, henceforth, ignore and reject the modernist belief that the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

15

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

contemporary Man could reach an understanding of the world through rational reasoning. In this
respect, Klages (2011) pontificates that:
Modernity is fundamentally about order: about rationality and rationalization, creating
more order out of chaos. The assumption is that creating more rationality is conductive to
creating more order, and that the more ordered a society is, the better it will function (the
more rationally it will function). (para. 12)
Postmodernism, is most often than not, attributed to the term alienation; facing a turn down upon
the notion of the world and human operations. Man is alienated due to the exile of the world’s
modern cultures, and the westernization of societies. Man has become dehumanized due to the
materialistic and capitalistic systems, leading him to a state of disillusionment in relation to the
ideas and notions of existence. Individualism has thereafter played a major role in alienating and
dehumanizing Man. It originated from the utilitarian character of the spirit of modernity.
Postmodernism is the new zeitgeist or l’ésprit du siècle representing a post-historical reaction
against the uniformity and fundamentalism of modernism. It came as a counter-reaction to the
structural view of human history progress, the basis of which is built upon a hyper-sceptical distrust
of the past, and anything reported about it as being linear and integrative. The postmodern zeitgeist
could be understood by its extent of measuring and evaluating the authenticity along with the
legitimacy of the past historical records.
Historiographic Metafiction: The Entanglement of Postmodern Fiction
The postmodern sceptical attitude towards the past is what could sum up this transitional
period. This scepticism veiled upon most fields, at least the philosophical, literary, and artistic
ones. Most apparent this scepticism appears is when it comes to the literature of the age - in
particular novelistic productions - as a literature of resistance that favors the implementation of
historiography within a fictional account. That is to say the fabulation upon factual elements being
implemented into and within a fictional account that leads to a multifold/multi-interpretative
comprehension, enabling the readers to make up their own finality through the open-closure
endings. One could almost think of the literature of the time as being vulgarised and democratized
for there is no clear-edged finality/interpretation, an allusion to the state of loss and plurality of
the time. The aim of postmodernist thinkers is, either consciously or unconsciously, an endeavour
of reconstructing history with a sustainable authenticity away from the grand narratives that have
overtaken on the world’s reportedness of The truth.
Postmodern literature is that literature which started to emerge by the end of the Second
World War - by the erection of the Berlin Wall - characterized by the disillusionment with regard
to the enthusiasm of the previous modern enterprise that failed into securing peace and justice. It
reflects the malaise of the chaos that the world witnessed due to the Western aspired-domination
of the world.
It tends to be ascribed to historiographic metafiction; an expression coined by the Canadian
academic: Hutcheon, (1988) refers to the constant concern of postmodern fiction in reflecting and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

16

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

revisiting history, and mainly the reportedness of history in an attempt to evaluate its authenticity
and validation through fictional accounts. There exists a plethora of postmodern practitioners of
historiographic metafiction. Amongst the most prominent British novelists whose works not only
revise, but question and inquire the validity along with the authenticity of knowledge, history, and
anything that belongs to the past; we have Julian Barnes and Graham Swift.
Postmodern fiction, for Hutcheon, is ironically contradictory since it converges and relates
both the fictitious element with the factual historiographic mode of narration, and the meeting
point of both represents the poetics of postmodernism. The concern with historiography is also
displayed in postmodern women fiction with the works of Winterson The Passion (1987), Barker
Regeneration Trilogy (1991), Kennedy Day (2007), and Smith Autumn (2016).
Postmodern fiction is, therefore, and most often than not, history-related thematically in the sense
where it takes factual history to implement it with the fictional element, a criterion which renders
postmodern fiction as being a literature of resistance. The latter addresses a genre which
encapsulates both history reportedness and fictional creativity, or rather imagination, through the
use of unconventional fictional techniques such as pastiche, intertextuality, temporal disorder,
fragmentation, paranoia, and open-ending closures of narratives, all of which tend to give it a form
of experimental literature (Sim, 2001, pp. 121-133).
The Exhaustion of Postmodern Fiction
Lewis appoints to postmodern literature as “the work of virtually any writer from an ethnic
minority [deemed to be postmodern] by virtue of their hybrid status in a displaced, globalized
society” (as cited in Sim, 2001, p. 111). Accordingly, postmodern literature is a literature which is
galvanised by the extent of its experimental nature both technically and thematically, a literature
that serves a new socio-historical context. It is that of the disillusionment from the outcome of
hypermodernity which resulted in racial, ethnic, and religious wars/terror. Several commentators
who contributed to the definition as well as to the accurate period within which postmodernism
started to emerge, such as Barth, De Villo Sloan, and Bradbury with Ruland, all of whom worked
on positioning the roots of the emergence of such a movement.
Barth (1984) refers to postmodern literature as being a literature of ‘exhausted possibility’
or ‘the literature of exhaustion’ (p. 64) when addressing the definition of postmodern literature in
terms of its entangled forms in contradistinction to the modern form, he claims that:
Our century is more than two-third done; it is dismaying to see so many of our writers
following Dostoevsky, Tolstoy or Balzac, when the question seems to me to be how to
succeed not even Joyce and Kafka, but those who succeeded Joyce and Kafka and are now
in the evenings of their careers [and that] one of the modern things about these two writers
is that in an age of ultimacies and “final solutions” - at least felt ultimacies, in everything
from weaponry to theology, the celebrated dehumanization of society, and the history of
the novel - their work in separate ways reflects and deals with ultimacy, both technically
and thematically. (p. 67)
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

17

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

Accordingly, when Barth claims the exhaustion of postmodern literature he does not mean
“anything so tired as the subject of physical, moral or intellectual decadence, only the used-upness
of certain forms or the felt exhaustion of certain possibilities - by no means necessary a cause for
despair” (p. 64). Barth mentions that postmodern literature which became exhausted by the 1990s
is aligned with De Villo’s stance in his essay; The Decline of American Postmodernism (1987),
where he sketches that: “postmodernism as a literary movement … is now in its final phase of
decadence” (as cited in Sim, 2011, p. 111). Bradbury and Ruland (1991) also suggest that
postmodern literature is that writerly production of the period from the 1960s to the 1980s, and
that anything that came after 1990 is to be under the category of ‘post-postmodernism’, or as postpomo.
Since postmodernism is known for its hybrid criterion, pluralism and a culture of the
anything goes, postmodern practitioners, regardless, tend to form “a unified movement for which
a coherent theory could be formulated” (Sim, 2011, p. 112). On similar grounds; Aldridge (1983)
describes postmodern fiction as a fiction where:
Virtually everything and everyone exists in such a radical state of distortion and aberration
that there is no way of determining from which conditions in the real world they have been
derived or from what standard of sanity they may be said to depart. The conventions of
verisimilitude and sanity have been nullified. Characters inhabit a dimension of
structureless being in which their behaviour becomes inexplicably arbitrary and
unjudgeable because the fiction itself stands as a metaphor of a derangement that is
seemingly without provocation and beyond measurement. (p. 65)
Assumingly, postmodern literature defies the structures of fictional narration on the one hand, and
on the other, it tends to self-ascribe itself the authority of knowing more than what the official
historiography has acknowledged the generations all along. It is a literature which revises the past
in a condescending or mocking sense that unravels and shatters the authority of factual
reportedness inviting the history readers, and the post-historical Man to an evaluation of the means
that the construction of past history has been elaborated and disseminated, and is then uncertain
and in defiance of universality. A literature which merges facticity with fiction is often straddled
and torn between literature and paraliterature. It resists both fictional conventions as well as factual
historiographic reportedness, defying the fundamental criteria of official history in its assumed
function of critical counter-inspection of the past. Otherwise explained, historiographic
metafiction tends to measure the extent of authenticity and truthfulness of the grand official
history, hence the implementation of historical facticity with fictitious elements. Its structure, as
well as its underlying themes unveil a self-conception of a self-ascribed epistemological
superiority with regard to its imaginary/fictional element over historiography when condemning
the latter as being a virtual tantalization of civilization’s history.
Historicising the Philosophical Entanglement of Post-historicism
The post-historical period is characterized by the disillusionment inflicted by the World
Wars. Jenkins (1997) suggests that our assumptions about history and the form in which modern
historiography reported them are being suspected, i.e., "no longer so readily acceptable” (p. 6).
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

18

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

Postmodern reading of history is, accordingly, defined by the sceptical view it holds upon the
reliability of what universal history discloses. In similar respects, Young (2004) defines
postmodern historiography as the ‘European culture’s awareness that it is no longer the
unquestioned and dominant centre of the world’ (p. 75).
The major post-historical thinkers ascribed to postmodern deconstructive approach upon
history are; Jameson (1991) who dreads the end of, and replacement of culture by hyperconsumerism due to the post-industrial enterprise that has been inflicted upon the Western hypermodernized societies, and that knowledge and culture are now replaced and dominated by massmedia. He further suggests that the narrated history of the previous modern “old certainties, aims
and ideals … are now insecure and debatable” (2009, p. 267). Lyotard (1984), on the other hand,
defines postmodernism as “the incredulity towards metanarratives” (p. xxiv); that the end of
universal history is here and now taking place. Baudrillard (1998), aligned with Lyotard’s position,
theorized on the simulation of history, i.e. the inability of making sense of what is authentically
defined as The Truth in contradistinction with what he conceives of as Grand Narratives being
within the category of framed simulation, or monolithic block-representation of truth. Both
Lyotard and Baudrillard share a dismantled view of history which rejects and opposes Hegel’s
Universal History.
Truth, for Baudrillard, Jameson, and Lyotard represents nothing but a sheer simulation (created
representation) of authentic reality. Roland Barthes sketches that “the historian is not so much a
collector of facts as a collector and relater of signifiers; that is to say, he organized them with the
purpose of establishing positive meaning and filling the vacuum of pure, meaningless series” (as
cited in Jenkins, 1997, p. 121). It is this ‘filling the vacuum’ that postmodern history thinkers react
upon. Postmodern historiography would be represented as:
Instead of the traditional modern metanarrative prescriptiveness, postmodern narrative is
more disjunctive, inhabited by the stories of those excluded by previous historical accounts,
and more ‘heteroglossic’ awareness of the way that history can be found in a wider range
of ‘types’ of sources. (Acheson & Ross, 2005, p. 7)
Other prominent thinkers whose critiques stand against the uniformity and universality of history
are Michel Foucault and Walter Benjamin with their deconstructive heterotopic, or counter-utopic
view upon history and its reportedness against the conventional metanarrated history. Both of
them argue that the formalist form of historiography is irrelevant to the postmodern reading of
history for it does not engage with minor histories; the oppressed voices, instead, it stresses “the
movements of accumulation and slow saturation, the great silent, motionless bases that traditional
history has covered with a thick layer of events” (as cited in Adshead-Lansdale, 1999, p.11).
History is, from a post-historical perspective, regarded as a simulation of authentic historicity, the
validation of which is rejected by many grand history philosophers who theorized against the
conventional monolithic reportedness of truth, their works not only represent the rejection of
monolithic historiography, but they also reflect the entangled spirit of postmodernism, contributing
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

19

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

either directly or indirectly into shaping and delineating its criteria, and paradoxically enough all
of whom share a dystopian view about how the world’s societies operate.
The Reader-response Theory: A Response to Modern Formalism
Contemporary postmodern fiction is entangled and multidimensional, oscillating between
the fictional and the factual. It is a fiction that could therefore serve as a historical record for those
minor histories that the factual historiographic mode of reportedness failed to engage with.
The German literary theorist Jauss, (1984) shares this assertion of a multi-faceted version of
history and the past, responding to the modern formalist approach which inverts the conventional
formalist analysis of a text from a single biased view to a three-dimensional construction of view
between: “the author and the work to the text and the reader” (as cited in Holub, 1984, p. xii). The
theory represents a revolutionary approach to contemporary literary criticism, reflecting the
postmodern spirit that denounces the validation of universality.
Indeed, Jauss’s theory came as a reaction to the “social, intellectual, and literary
developments in West Germany during the late 1960s” (p. xiii), a theory which revolves around
the reader-response theory that emanates in the open-ending finality of narratives and opposes the
limitations of literary analysis that belong to the conventional school of formalism. The latter tends
to measure literature as serving itself only away from the historicity that surrounds its context. The
aesthetics of reception, termed in German as Rezeptionasthetik, involves a major contribution of
the reader when it comes to synthesizing the coherence and structure of a literary text.
Jauss, (1982) considers literature as a dialectical process of production and reception in that:
The relationship of work to work must now be brought into this interaction between work
and mankind, and the historical coherence of works among themselves must be seen in the
interrelations of production and reception. Put another way: literature and art obtain a
history that has the character of a process when the succession of works is mediated not
only through the producing object but also through the consuming subject. (p. 15)
Accordingly, Jauss views literature; and fiction in particular, from the perspective of the reader,
that is for a text to fully form its completion, the reader is inevitably to be involved, and the finality
of the narrative is therefore individualistic and differs from a contextually comprehension
background into another.
Conclusion
To conclude with, the literature of the postmodern transition reflects the philosophy as well
as the ideologies of the postmodern zeitgeist, a zeitgeist which is entangled in its existing nature.
Such literature is not only entangled, it is exhausted by the realism effect and its factual implication
in what is termed as historiographic metafiction, it is also tormented by the unconventional
techniques that shape the skeleton of post-modernist fiction. When it comes to the reception theory,
it actually portrays the Barthesian stance on the inconsistency of a static mono-narration of history.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

20

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 2. May 2019
The Literature of Exhausted Possibility: The Entanglement of Postmodern

LARBI

An invitation of the audience into the formation of the narrative is what one could relate to the
democratization of literature. The democracy of the age has come to be pinned to the literature of
the age.
About the Author:
Dr. Nariman LARBI is a Lecturer (Assistant Professor) of British Literature: the English Novel
and Literary Movements, at Mostaganem University, Algeria. Graduated in 2008, she was granted
a BA in Australian Studies from University Rennes 2, Brittany - France. She took pregraduate linguistic courses in Cambridge University, England, obtained a Magister Degree
in British Literature from Oran University and a PhD Degree from Tlemcen University,
Algeria. She is fascinated with the Philosophy of Literature and researches on Modern and
Postmodern British and Arabic fiction. ORCid ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0888-2741
References
Acheson, J. & Ross, S. C. E. (2005). The Contemporary British Novel since 1980, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Adshead-Lansdale, J. (1999). Dancing Texts: Intertextuality in Interpretation. London: Dance Books.
Aldridge, J. W. (1983). The American Novel and the Way we Live Now, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barth, J. (1984). The Literature of Exhaustion, London: The John Hopkins University Press. Retrieved from
http://people.duke.edu/~dainotto/Texts/barth.pdf
Baudrillard, J. (1974). Société de Consommation, Paris: Galilée, Engl. trans. (1998). The Consumer Society:
Myths and Structures, London: Sage.
Cuddon, J. A. (1999). Dictionary of Literary Terms and Literary Theory, London: Penguin.
Holub, R. C. (1984). Reception Theory: A Critical Introduction, London and New York: Methuen.
Hutcheon, L. (1988). A Poetics of Postmodernism: History, Theory, Fiction, London: Routledge.
Jameson, F. (1991). Postmodernism, or the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism, Durham: Duke University
Press.
Jameson, F. (2009). The Cultural Turn: Selected Writings on the Postmodern 1983-1998. London: Verso.
Jauss, H. R. (1982). Toward an Aesthetic of Reception. Eng. trans. Timothy Bahti, Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press.
Jenkins, K. (1997). The Postmodern History Reader, London: Routledge.
Klages, M. (2001). Postmodernism, Colorado University, Department of English. Retrieved from
http://www.webpages.uidaho.edu/~sflores/KlagesPostmodernism.html
Lyotard, J. (1979). La Condition Postmoderne: Rapport sur le Savoir, Paris: Les Éditions de Minuit, Engl.
trans. (1984). The Postmodern Condition: A Report on Knowledge, Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
Ruland, R. & Bradbury, M. (1991). From Puritanism to Postmodernism, Penguin Books, USA. Retrieved
from https://analepsis.files.wordpress.com/2011/08/from-puritanism-to-postmodernism.pdf
Sim, S. (2001). The Routledge Companion to Postmodernism, London and New York: Routledge.
Young, R. (2004). White Mythologies, 2nd edition, London: Routledge.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

21

