Galisonian logic devices and data availability: revitalising Upper Palaeolithic cultural
taxonomies ​Ben Marwick​*
*​

Department of Anthropology,​ ​University of Washington,​ ​314 Denny Hall, Box 353100, Seattle,

WA 98195-3100 USA

This paper was published as:

Marwick, B. (2019). Galisonian logic devices and data availability: Revitalising Upper
Palaeolithic cultural taxonomies. ​Antiquity​, 93(371), 1365-1367.
https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2019.131

as a response to the debate lead article:

Reynolds, N. & Riede, F.. 2019. House of cards: cultural taxonomy and the study of the
European Upper Palaeolithic. ​Antiquity​ 93: 1350–58. ​https://doi.org/10.15184/aqy.2019.49
Reynolds and Riede’s (2019) call for caution in the use of cultural taxonomies in the study of
stone artefact assemblages is welcome. In my contribution to this debate, I draw on work in the
philosophy of science to explore the implications for archaeology should researchers adopt
Reynolds and Riede’s proposals—particularly those concerning data types and data availability.
The study of cultural taxonomies defined by lithic materials currently resembles a
Lakatosian degenerative research programme. Lakatos (1978) proposed that a scientific research
programme can be recognised by a ‘hard core’ of established central tenets that are the
assumptions upon which all work is based, and a ‘protective belt’ of predictions and hypotheses
that are actively under investigation. At any point in time, a programme is progressive, stagnant
or degenerating. Reynolds and Riede note that cultural taxonomies rarely engage with work on
archaeological systematics and epistemology, which should represent the hard core of a
taxonomic programme. Without such an emphasis, the cultural taxonomy programme—as

currently constituted in stone artefact archaeology—is stagnant, or even degenerating. What
steps can we take to build a substantial hard core for this programme? Unfortunately, Reynolds
and Riede are silent on the question of which of the competing approaches (e.g. essentialist
typological thinking or evolutionist population thinking) will be most productive for Palaeolithic
archaeology. The answer may only become apparent after large-scale comparative work becomes
possible. With data availability of archaeological journal articles currently at around 50 per cent
of published papers (Marwick & Pilaar Birch 2018), we are, however, still a decade or two away
from the routine meta-analysis of data from multiple archaeological publications, such as is
routine in fields such as psychology and oncology.
If archaeologists heed Reynolds and Riede’s call for large-scale comparative work, they
may stimulate a major shift in what counts as data, and how it is collected and shared. We can
see a description of these types of shifts in Galison’s (1997) analysis of experimental particle
physics. In his book ​Image and Logic,​ ​ h​ e describes a historical sequence of two incompatible
research traditions in particle physics, with the transition between the two driven predominantly
by technological changes. The earlier tradition represents particles through the hand-collection of
photographic images. The time-consuming nature of generating such images meant that visual
methods were best suited for the detailed study of a single image, and often a single event served
as evidence for a novel claim. This was succeeded by a tradition similar to contemporary
practices that uses electrical sensors and statistical methods to collect masses of quantitative data.
Galison calls this the ‘logic tradition’, which allows researchers to collect data rapidly—albeit in
less detail than individual photographs—from a large number of events. The accumulation of
large volumes of sensor data has made it possible for physicists to conduct statistical analysis in
order to evaluate claims.
We can find close parallels in the practice of stone artefact archaeology to the traditions
described by Galison for microphysics. As Reynolds and Riede note, hand-drawn or
photographic illustrations of a small number of visually distinctive stone artefacts are often
presented as the primary evidence in support of cultural taxonomic claims and interpretations.
We also have a parallel, overlapping tradition that adds quantitative metric and attribute data for
all individual pieces in an assemblage. Currently, for most researchers, these data are collected

by hand with callipers and similar hand-operated instruments. Callipers resemble a Galisonian
‘logic device’ in their more rapid collection of less detailed data—relative to an
illustration—from a stone artefact. This is desirable, as it produces data that are more
representative of past behaviours than a small set of artefacts subjectively selected for
illustration. Callipers are therefore vital for generating the full datasets that Reynolds and Riede
argue to be urgently needed to conduct meaningful, robust cultural taxonomic research. To share
these detailed assemblage data, we can directly borrow repositories, licences and policies from
other research communities, in which these norms have been established for many years. Data
availability is already an established norm in fields such as palaeoproteomics that produce
masses of quantifiable data. Within the social sciences, the ​American Journal of Political
Science​, for example, only publishes papers after a reviewer has verified that the data and
analysis code submitted along with the manuscript can reproduce the specific results presented.
Imagine how efficiently large-scale comparative work in Palaeolithic archaeology could be
achieved, if we required similar quality control for our journals, in order to ensure that detailed
datasets were readily available.
Although callipers and related instruments are an important part of the toolkit for
improving cultural taxonomies, a more striking analogy to the Galisonian logic device is the
application of computer vision (e.g. the OpenCV library, Bradski 2000) and geometric
morphometric statistics to images of artefacts (either two-or three-dimensional photogrammetric
models). This tradition, which is emerging in the archaeological literature (e.g. Buchanan et al.
2014; Reide et al 2019), allows us to both see the artefact, and to extract their curves, outlines
and surfaces rapidly, using automatic computer vision algorithms. This gives us a much richer
dataset than linear calliper measurements, and thus a much broader scope for statistical
comparison. Furthermore, if these methods are implemented in an open source programming
language, such as R or Python, we would have a logical trace from each artefact’s image to its
statistical representation. This is important for responding to Reynolds and Riede’s observation
that making data available is only a hollow victory, unless we communicate descriptions of how
such data are produced. While glossaries are part of the solution to improving data re-usability, a
thorough understanding of the logic and usefulness of data is only possible if scripts are available

that document the transformation of data as they move from collection to published summary
tables or visualisations.
Improved data availability and methodological transparency from archaeologists working
on stone artefacts will do more than improve the robustness of cultural taxonomic work. It will
also help to close the gap between the practice of Palaeolithic archaeology and the ideals of
archaeological science, specifically, the gap around the first Mertonian ideal of communality
(Mulkay 1976). Communality is the idea that scientists value common ownership of scientific
results and methods, and share both freely. A closer adherence to this principle will have the
additional benefit of helping to decolonise archaeology. We often work on cultures to which we
do not belong, and we take away their remains and sometimes never return them, putting them
into museum or university research collections. These practices may be at odds with the
stewardship responsibilities of the indigenous and local groups with whom we work, and may
have analogies to the economic and political activities of Western colonising nations (Atalay
2006). Making available the data extracted from these specimens is a necessary process in
decolonising archaeology and supporting participation from our indigenous, community and
under-resourced collaborators. Data availability is important not only for improving our cultural
taxonomies, but also for an ethical and socially just practice of archaeological research.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Gayoung Park for reading an earlier draft and offering suggestions for improvements.

References
ATALAY, S. ​(2006). Indigenous archaeology as decolonizing practice. ​American Indian Quarterly​,
30(3&4) 280-310.
BRADSKI​, G., 2000. The OpenCV Library. ​Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Software Tools​. Available at
http://www.drdobbs.com/open-source/the-opencv-library/184404319​ (accessed 5 August 2019).
BUCHANAN, B., O’BRIEN, M.J., COLLARD, M.,​ 2014. Continent-wide or region-specific? A
geometric morphometrics-based assessment of variation in Clovis point shape. ​Archaeological
and Anthropological Sciences​ 6, 145–162.

GALISON, P​. 1997.​ Image and logic: a material culture of microphysics​. Chicago (IL): University
of Chicago Press.
LAKATOS, I.​ 1978. ​The methodology of scientific research programmes​. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
MARWICK, B. & S.E. PILAAR BIRCH​. 2018. A standard for the scholarly citation of archaeological
data as an incentive to data sharing. ​Advances in Archaeological Practice​ 6: 125–43.
MULKAY, M​. 1976. Norms and ideology in science. ​Social Science Information​ 15: 637–56.
RIEDE, F., HOGGARD, C., SHENNAN, S.,​ 2019. Reconciling material cultures in archaeology with
genetic data requires robust cultural evolutionary taxonomies. ​Palgrave Communications​ 5, 1–9.
REYNOLDS, N. & F. RIEDE​. 2019. House of cards: cultural taxonomy and the study of the European
Upper Palaeolithic. ​Antiquity​ XX: XX

