Journal Title
XX(X):1–16
c The Author(s) 0000
⃝
Reprints and permission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI: 10.1177/ToBeAssigned
www.sagepub.com/

Geosilhouettes: geographical
measures of cluster fit

SAGE
1

2

2

Levi John Wolf , Elijah Knaap , Sergio Rey

Abstract
Regionalization, under various guises and descriptions, is a longstanding and pervasive interest of urban studies.
With an increasingly large number of studies on urban place detection in language, behavior, pricing, and
demography, recent critiques of longstanding regional science perspectives on place detection have focused on
the arbitrariness and non-geographical nature of measures of best fit. In this paper, we develop new explicitlygeographical measures of cluster fit. These hybrid spatial-social measures, called geosilhouettes, are demonstrated
to capture the “core” of geographical clusters in racial data on census blocks in Brooklyn neighborhoods. These new
geosilhouettes are also useful in a variety of boundary analysis and outlier detection uses. These new measures are
defined, demonstrated, and new directions are suggested.
Keywords
data science, urban sociology, segregation, clustering, unsupervised learning

Introduction
Analysis of spatial community dynamics is a longstanding
domain of regional science & urban geography, and
a burgeoning concern for spatial data science. One
common kind of geography, the “ecologically meaningful”
municipal neighborhood (Drukker et al. 2003) is a prime
geography used in urban data science. Neighborhoods are
often analyzed for their impacts on health (Roberts 1997;
O’Campo et al. 1997; Santos, Chor, and Werneck 2010;
Spielman, Yoo, and Linkletter 2013) crime (Sampson,
Raudenbush, and Earls 1997; Hipp and Boessen 2013) and
life outcomes (G. J. Duncan, Brooks-Gunn, and Klebanov
1994). However, since these neighborhoods are often
defined by government or administrative bureaucracies for
convenience’s sake, these neighborhood impacts measure
the effect of this pre-existing geography, not the geography
that might emerge latent in the data (Shelton and Poorthuis
2019).
A different and longstanding mode of analysis focuses
on estimating or “bounding” the neighborhood according to
some specific objective or known phenomenon under study
(Isard 1956). One domain focuses on latent geographies in
demographic data–the study of gemodemographics (Harris,
Sleight, and R. Webber 2005; Singleton and Longley
2009; Singleton and Spielman 2014). Geodemographic
analysis produces a demographic “typology,” or collection
of interpretable demographic categories, which are mapped
and examined to provide a sense of the social tapestry of a
Prepared using sagej.cls [Version: 2017/01/17 v1.20]

(typically) urban space. In contrast to this, detecting latent
ecologically-meaningful communities directly from data is
growing more popular in spatial data science. While serious
work “bounding” the neighborhood is not new (Galster
2001; Spielman and John R Logan 2013; Spielman and
Folch 2015), the advent of high-quality spatio-temporal
data has made this pursuit more feasible (Luc Anselin and
Williams 2016; Poorthuis 2018; Arribas-Bel and Bakens
2018; Gibbons, Nara, and Appleyard 2018; Wachsmuth
and Weisler 2018). In both geodemographic and latentneighborhood approaches, these places can be defined
consistently in terms of a coherent demographic profile,
containing a consistent “bundle” of attributes, behaviors,
interactions, marketing, or social ties.
Latent neighborhoods may be used in a similar context
as prescriptive administrative ones, but can also be
used themselves as indicators of spatial social structure
(Morenoff, Sampson, and Raudenbush 2001; Mikelbank
2011) or to study the perceptions or experiences of these
boundaries (Hipp, Faris, and Boessen 2012; D. T. Duncan
et al. 2014). Further, some latent neighborhood methods

1 School
2 Center

of Geographical Sciences, University of Bristol
for Geospatial Sciences, University of California Riverside

Corresponding author:
Levi John Wolf, School of Geographical Sciences, University Road,
Clifton, Bristol, BS8 1SS, United Kingdom
Email: levi.john.wolfbristol.ac.uk

2

provide data-dependent geographic frames for the analysis
of urban dynamics, volatility, and social change (Sergio J.
Rey, L. Anselin, et al. 2011; Duque, Luc Anselin, and
Sergio J Rey 2012). Regardless, latent spatial neighborhood
analyses provide data-driven regions for secondary models
or for analysis in their own right.
For this spatial clustering problem, it is often necessary
to characterize how “cohesive” a candidate neighborhood
is. Traditional measures of cluster cohesion, or“goodness
of fit,” do not take into consideration the geography of
the data being clustered. Although the analysis of urban
“boundaries” arose early in geography (Womble 1951)
and has seen consistent application in epidemiology (G.
Jacquez 1995; G. Jacquez, S. Maruca, and M.-J. Fortin
2000; Lu and Carlin July 2005 2007; G. M. Jacquez,
Kaufmann, and Goovaerts 2008) & ecology (Marie-Josée
Fortin et al. 1996; Fitzpatrick et al. 2010), fundamental
work in the area continues (Dean et al. 2018; Dong
et al. 2019). In these contexts, goodness of fit statistics
to measure whether some members, houses, families, or
blocks are distinct from a neighborhood’s general spatialsocial profile; but, the way that this goodness of fit
is measured or operationalized is often entirely nongeographic, and has no knowledge of spatial proximity,
boundaries, or adjacency (Shelton and Poorthuis 2019).
Thus, we develop a new boundary strength measure
inspired by ecological & epidemiological methods, but one
which is appropriate for urban data science applications like
geodemographics and neighborhood-bounding.
In the following work, we explore the trade-offs involved
between demographic coherence and spatial integrity in
the analysis of urban structure through common geodemographic or neighborhood-bounding methods. Then, inspired
by the logic of parametric statistical boundary detection
(Womble 1951), we suggest a geographic innovation on
Rousseeuw (1987) called the geosilhouette. We demonstrate the usefulness of these new measures in both an
empirical-descriptive example, assessing the strength &
direction of racial boundaries between Zillow neighborhoods over Brooklyn Census blocks, and in latent neighborhood/place learning, where they can be used to characterize
the joint spatial-social goodness of fit. Together these new
measures provide novel insight into the structure of spatial
partitions and enable new analyses of the power of boundaries in quantitative human geography.

Conceptualizing “goodness” of fit
In general, geodemographic & neighborhood-bounding
exercises use goodness of fit statistics to characterize the
homogeneity or consistency of a given neighborhood or
demographic partitioning. Further, measures of segregation
are used in a similar fashion for empirical analyses of how
thoroughly-mixed (or not) urban spaces are when split by
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journal Title XX(X)

race, class, or other demographic traits. These ancillary
measures of neighborhood homogeneity or cluster fit are
usually not leveraged directly in theory-driven analyses,
but are instead a part of the barely-visible constellation
of descriptive statistics used in the heuristic analysis of
geographical clusters. To support the wide variety of cluster
analyses, there is a similarly-wide set of goodness of fit
measures.
Silhouette scores, as suggested by Rousseeuw (1987),
are one particularly useful measure. The silhouette score
expresses the relationship between an observation, the
other observations in the same cluster, and a counterfactual
“next-best-fit” cluster for that observation. In the original
presentation of the silhouette score, Rousseeuw (1987)
offers an intelligible conceptual motivation for this nextbest fit cluster:
[The next-best-fit cluster] is like the secondbest choice for object i: if it could not
be accommodated into [its current] cluster
A, which cluster B would be the closest
competitor? (p.55)
Thus, for demographic data, an observation’s next-best-fit
cluster is the cluster closest in population profile to that
observation but that does not contain the observation.
The silhouette’s motivating concepts are clear—
“tightness” of each cluster and “separation” between
clusters. Each concept has a distinct term in the formal
statement of the silhouette score for observation i:
{
}
min d¯k (i) − d¯c (i)
{
}
(1)
s(i) =
max{min d¯k (i) , d¯c (i)}
where d¯m (i) is the average distance from observation i to
other observations j in cluster m, j ̸= i. Here, we use c to
denote a cluster that contains i and k for any cluster that
does not. Taken together, this means that the minimum d¯k (i)
represents the cluster k that does not contain i, but whose
observations tend to be closest to i on average. This is the
“second-best choice” cluster, or the “next-best-fit” cluster
(NBFC), since it does not contain i, but is the most similar
alternative for i. For observation i, we denote the next best
fit cluster k̃i .
Silhouette values range between −1 and 1, with
values close to 1 indicating i is “well-classified” into c.
Conceptually, this occurs when min d¯k (i) is much larger
than d¯c (i), so the quotient in Eq. 1 is nearly 1. Values close
to −1 indicate i is not well-classified into c, since i is much
closer to members of k̃i than it is to other members of c.
For a particularly poor clustering, nearly all i in cluster c
may have negative silhouettes, meaning they are closer to
some other cluster, k̃i , than they are to their own cluster. In
light of this, the median silhouette score within each group
is often used to characterize the goodness of fit of that group

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

3

Figure 1. Zillow neighborhoods (left), with 2010 Census blocks with nonzero population under-laid for Brooklyn, NY. Blocks with
low populations are shown in black on the left figure, and omitted entirely from the remainder of the analysis. The single
most-predominant race for blocks in the study area is shown on the right. Throughout, basemaps are provided by Stamen
Design.

overall, and the map median characterizes the fit of the map
as a whole. In contemporary applications, silhouettes are
often used to identify an appropriate number of clusters,
as well as being used to identify outlying observations in
clusters, or clusters with exceptionally poor fit. It is in the
second sense, as a measure of the goodness of fit or outlier
detection, that we extend the silhouette.

Data: Neighborhoods & Endogenous Racial
Clusters
In part due to their simplicity, silhouettes have long been
used to detect observations that are not well-grouped with
their cluster. However, for geographic analysis, next-best-fit
scores can be made more informative. As it stands, the next
best fit cluster represents a group to which observation i can
be most plausibly reassigned—the “second-best choice.”
What “best” means is more complex in geographical
analysis, though.
To examine various kinds of geographic “second-best
choice“ cluster assignments, we examine self-reported
race in the 2010 Census blocks across neighborhoods
in Brooklyn, NY using the neighborhood boundaries
provided by Zillow.1 One view of this data is provided by
Figure 1, which demonstrates the populated census blocks,
neighborhood boundaries, and provides an indication of
the racial composition across Brooklyn blocks. To contrast
with these exogenous neighborhoods, we also will analyze
detected clusters in the racial composition of census blocks
Prepared using sagej.cls

in the 2010 US Census using an aspatial K-means approach
common in geodemographics (Harris, Sleight, and R.
Webber 2005) and a spatial-hierarchical agglomerative
clustering heuristic based on Ward’s method (Ward 1963).2

Fragmentation in Urban Regions
Fundamentally, the idea of cluster quality in spatial
cluster analysis implicates two distinct concepts: attribute
coherence, that an observation’s characteristics are similar
to its cluster; and spatial coherence, that the cluster itself
demarcates or delineates a geographically-coherent “zone”
or region of the overall problem frame.3 To varying degrees,
“real” neighborhoods generally exhibit both demographic
coherence and spatial coherence: they are a “bundle of
spatially-based attributes associated with [a] cluster of
residences” (Galster 2001, p. 2112). Both the “bundle
of attributes” and the “spatial cluster” are needed to
characterize a classification’s fitness in a geographical
process.
However, most goodness of fit measures (including
silhouettes) only measure attribute coherence. This is
fine for non-spatial clustering applications, but is difficult
to justify in geographical applications. Indeed, for the
contiguous regions used in the neighborhood dynamics
and neighborhood effects literature, nearly all of the
“second-best choices” constructed for silhouette scores are
actually infeasible choices: i might be nowhere near k̃i
geographically. If i were to move from c to k̃i , both c and

Figure 2. Demographic clusters in Brooklyn, NY for k -means and spatially-constrained Ward agglomerative clustering. Fragmentation increases dramatically as the
number of demographic clusters increases.

4

Prepared using sagej.cls

Journal Title XX(X)

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

5

Figure 3. Breakdown of census block types based on their boundary & next-best-fit cluster relationships for clusters shown in
Figures 2 & 1.

k̃i would cease to be geographically coherent. Since i can
not feasibly be reassigned to k̃i , the counterfactual “secondbest choice” considered by the silhouette score is moot.
Acknowledging this, we can leverage observations’
spatial contexts (in addition to their group memberships) to
extract more meaningful information about neighborhoods
or spatial clusters themselves. Observations on the
boundary of a spatial cluster are the only ones that could
be connected to their next-best-fit spatial cluster if they
were reassigned. All other interior observations require
more than one block to be reassigned in order to be a
feasible, internally-connected cluster. As clusters become
less geographically coherent, the size of their interior
decreases. Visually, the clustering solutions shown in
Figure 2 illustrate this: as the number of clusters increases,
the spatial fragmentation of clusters increases quickly.
Another view of this fragmentation is provided by Figure
3. In this composition plot, the share of all blocks that are
interior to the cluster—those that only touch other blocks
in the same cluster—is represented by the gray area. The
blue fraction shows blocks that are touching their nextbest-fit cluster. These are blocks where the “second-best
choice” assignment is feasible, since the block could be reclassified to its second-best choice and not affect the spatial
fragmentation in the map. Finally, the red area denotes
the share of blocks that are on the boundary of their own
cluster, but are not near any member of their next-best-fit
cluster. These are the blocks where a “second-best choice”
assignment would affect territorial integrity. In addition to
the shares from latent/discovered neighborhoods, we show
“empirical” fractions of the same quantities: census blocks
in Zillow neighborhoods that touch a neighborhood that is
next-most demographically similar to the block itself, or
that are on the boundary of a neighborhood but do not touch
a neighborhood that is next-most demographically similar.
Prepared using sagej.cls

These are shown by the tickmarks on the right side of the
plot.
Interpreting Figure 3, we can understand a few things.
First, as is mathematically necessary, the share of interior
blocks declines as the number of clusters increases. Second,
despite this increasing fragmentation, the number of blocks
that touch their NBFC is relatively stable as the number
of clusters increases. This occurs quickly for the spatial
agglomerative clusters, but both are remarkably stable at
around k = 20. Third, we see that groups defined without
spatial information (k-means) tend to be much more
fragmented than either the empirical neighborhoods or
the clusters discovered using the explicit spatial clustering
technique. The fraction of blocks that is interior to a
cluster is consistently smaller in the aspatial k-means
map, and clusters are much more dramatically interspersed.
The most spatially-coherent solution seen in the k-means
clustering solutions (that with the smallest k) is still more
fragmented than the most fragmented spatial agglomerative
clustering solution (that with the largest k). Finally, the
empirically-observed breakdowns are quite low; given that
only 7% of the 7729 blocks with non-zero population sit
on the boundary between two Zillow neighborhoods, only
11% of these boundary blocks (approx .08% overall) are
themselves near their next-best-fit clusters. Thus, the level
of spatial cohesion in the Zillow neighborhoods is much
higher than even those detected using the spatially-explicit
clustering method.

Silhouette Scores are not Spatial
Focusing on the empirical case, the interplay between
these NBFCs and the silhouette scores is shown in Figure
4. Note that the preponderance of silhouette scores are
negative for real-world neighborhoods. This means that,
in terms of their racial composition, census blocks are

6

nearly always more similar to a different neighborhood
than they are to the neighborhood in which they reside.
Together, this suggests that silhouette scores will always
favor more socially-homogeneous neighborhoods, without
regard for spatial feasibility or geographical plausibility.
Neighborhoods (empirical or embedded within the data)
are more diverse than these optimal socially-homogeneous
partitions that the silhouette refers to. Indeed, any realistic
urban place-geography will be considered less “well-fit”
by the silhouette score, since attribute coherence and
geographic coherence are usually opposing objectives. By
the same logic, any spatially-informed clustering method
must also be less “well-fit.” Any non-geographical measure
of cluster fit exhibits this same property, as noted by Shelton
and Poorthuis (2019).
Indeed, neighborhood social homogeneity should not be
regarded as a necessarily intrinsically-desirable normative
objective when conducting place detection. Social scientists
have long argued that diverse and socially integrated
neighborhoods provide benefits to residents when they
are able to foster meaningful social exchanges (Joseph,
Chaskin, and H. S. Webber 2007; Chaskin and Joseph
2013; Talen and Koschinsky 2014; Tolsma and Meer 2018).
Further, there is evidence that neighborhood diversity in the
United States is increasing, carrying important benefits for
residents: methods that distill neighborhoods according to
maximum demographic homogeneity may be overlooking
important aspects of they ways that neighborhoods are
experienced by their residents (John R. Logan 2013).
As trends towards diversification continue, there is
also recent evidence that neighborhood boundaries are
perceived differently among residents from different social
backgrounds (Hwang 2016), too. Together, this suggests
that neighborhood definitions are tenuous, occasionally
contested, and may be defined by attribute homogeneity,
resident perception, or physical demarcation–and each of
these definitions has unique value in different research
contexts.

Geosilhouettes: Measures of Spatial
Cluster Similarity
While silhouette scores are particularly useful for identifying spatial configurations of attribute homogeneity, (such
as racial and ethnic enclaves) the point we raise here is that
other definitions are important and useful for other research
questions; building explicitly geographic measures of fit
is necessary to improve the validity of geographical work
on urban regions. Therefore, contra Shelton and Poorthuis
(2019), it is not the designation of a goodness of fit
criterion itself that harms the construct validity of detected
places; it is the inflexibility, simplicity, and arbitrariness
of these criteria that makes detected regions uninteresting
Prepared using sagej.cls

Journal Title XX(X)

or unhelpful. For more interesting and helpful computational geographies, it is necessary to improve, develop, and
strengthen the conceptualization and operationalization of
these measures of best fit.
In short, we need better geographical measures of cluster
fit. They should characterize the local attribute coherence
in a way that respects or controls for spatial coherence.
While others may examine Figure 2 and observe simple
or straightforward fragmentation in shape (e.g. McGarigal
et al. 2002), we instead take inspiration from G. M. Jacquez,
Kaufmann, and Goovaerts (2008): geographical cluster
fit is determined by boundaries and the social similarity
of nearby observations. Fortunately, the silhouette score
provides a conceptually elegant structure for this. Below,
we derive two geosilhouette specifications. One, the socalled path silhouette, focuses on joint attribute-spatial
affinity through the use of so-called dissimilarity paths.
The other, the boundary silhouette, restricts the set of each
observation’s next-best-fit clusters to only those clusters
that are nearby. That is, the boundary silhouette constrains
the next-best-fit cluster to be a feasible cluster reassignment
(Duque, Church, and Middleton 2011). These two methods
will be derived and discussed for the three styles of
clustering analyses of neighborhoods and Brooklyn census
blocks. 4

Path Silhouettes
One way to make the silhouette score geographically aware
is to account for the fact that objects that are closer
should be rated as more similar to one another in a
joint geographical-social silhouette score. Thus, let us use
a dissimilarity path to model the dissimilarity between
two observations, i and j, as a function of the total
social dissimilarity between observations along the path
connecting them. This recognizes that for i and j to be
in the same geographically-contiguous cluster c, they must
connected by a set of observations also in c. Thus, a “path”
silhouette is a silhouette score computed using the length of
dissimilarity paths from i to j as the the distance from i to
j.
From Rousseeuw (1987)’s silhouette, let us consider the
N × N matrix, D, that contains every pair of distances
between observations i and j. Recalling that dk (i) takes
the ith row of D and computes the average of all j
columns in cluster k, it is sufficient to modify D to
account for spatial structure. For this, we will build a
complement to D that expresses spatial structure. This
is W, an N × N spatial affinity matrix. W may be
binary, reflecting a near/not near classification common for
describing adjacency in polygonal lattice data, k-nearest
neighbor proximity, buffer/distance banding proximity, or
a spatial kernel/basis function (Bradley, Wikle, and Holan

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

7

Figure 4. Sillhouettes & next-best-fit clusters (NBFCs) for US Census Blocks within Zillow neighborhoods in Brooklyn, NY.

2015). Regardless, W should represent symmetric spatial
relationships between all pairs of observations.
Bringing D and W together, a path silhouette can be
constructed on C1 , the first-order cost matrix.
C1 = D ◦ W

(2)

where ◦ denotes element-wise (Hadamard) matrix products.
The shortest path from each observation to every other
observation can be computed using C1 as the attributeweighted spatial adjacency matrix, or cost matrix, to
provide a complete set of dissimilarities used in a silhouette
score. Let this N × N matrix of all-pairs shortest path
lengths found in C1 be called C (computed using Floyd
1962, for instance). In C, the total dissimilarity between i
and j is the sum of dissimilarities along the path connecting
i and j in geographic space. 5
The path silhouette is then computed using the same
formula as in Eq. 1, using C instead of D. Since an
observation’s next-best-fit cluster (k̃i ) on D alone will often
not be the next-best-connected cluster in C, let us denote
the next-best-connected cluster to observation i as k̈i to
make it clear that k̈i ̸= k̃i in general. The path silhouette
expresses the difference between the average path length
from i to j ∈ k̈i and i to other j ∈ c.6 When the path
silhouette is close to 1, it indicates that i has short attributeweighted paths to other j ∈ c, so it is either extremely close
to j ∈ c, extremely similar to j ∈ c, or some combination
thereof. Alternatively, path silhouette scores close to −1
indicate that i is much easier to connect to elements in k̈i
than to other elements c; again this can be driven by spatial
and/or social factors. 7
An example of this approach to analyzing cluster quality
can be seen in Figure 5. In this color ramp, the darker purple
Prepared using sagej.cls

areas are those where an observation is classed as not wellfit to its cluster (since the silhouette is negative), and lighter
yellow are areas where the observation is well fit. This is
in the same style as Figure 4, but shows the path silhouette
versions: the “next best fit” cluster becomes the “next best
connected” cluster, and the silhouettes shown are the path
silhouette variant.
These maps show a few things. First, the geographically
remote neighborhoods in the far north, west, and south of
Brooklyn exhibit strong joint spatial-social cohesion due to
their joint social coherence and geographical remoteness.
Second (and more critically), the empirical neighborhoods
with path silhouettes closer to 1 in Figure 5 tend to remain
together in the spatially-informed clusterings in Figure 6,
even when they are in more central areas of the city. Since
the path silhouette measures joint spatial-social similarity, it
is reasonable that the spatial agglomerative clustering picks
up on this. However, there is no constraint forcing this to
occur, so this reinforces the utility of the path silhouette as
an exploratory measure of the local spatial-social coherence
for urban regions.
To illustrate, central Brooklyn has many neighborhoods
with majority-African American populations, as shown
in Figure 1. The aspatial silhouettes shown in Figure
4 show one quite clearly: East Flatbush. Recalling its
atypically-high silhouette scores in Figures 4 and path
silhouettes in 5, this area in the deep center of Brooklyn
is spatially & socially distinctive. This distinctiveness is
recognized regardless of cluster heuristic. In this area, both
the silhouettes and the path silhouettes are high, showing
this is an area with significant demographic homogeneity
(a bundle of similar attributes) that also is spatially-coherent
(this bundle clusters geographically).

8

Journal Title XX(X)

Figure 5. Neighborhoods and next-best-fit clusters using the path dissimilarity metric. This is the path silhouette analogue of
Figure 4.

Notably, though, high path silhouettes still betray
spatial-social similarity in demographically more-complex
neighborhoods, such as Bushwick, along the northeast
Queens-Brooklyn border. This area is not as strongly
self-similar (it is not predominately mono-racial in the
Census), but its profile is still distinct from other nearby
neighborhoods. Path silhouettes pick up on this weaker
form of spatial-social similarity, too. However, this sociogeographic distinctiveness is missed by aspatial silhouettes,
regardless of the clustering heuristic. The “core” of
Bushwick is assigned its own cluster in the spatial Ward
clustering, and shares the same high path silhouette
values as the empirical neighborhoods. Thus, geographical
measures of cluster fit like the path silhouette can identify
geographical exemplars: the components of a geographical
cluster that are spatially- and socially-distinctive for that
cluster.

Boundary Silhouettes
While path silhouettes are a novel useful measure of
joint social-spatial similarity, it too suggests a somewhat
unrealistic “second-best choice” counterfactual: when
computing the “next-best-fit” cluster, the cost of moving i
from c to k is modeled by the average length of paths from
i to j ∈ k. This captures both spatial and social distance.
But, neighborhoods, recovered or received, are usually not
point-to-point paths. While we believe these geographical
data-weighted path lengths are a better model of spatial
reassignment costs than nothing at all, it remains only one
possible model of the actual reassignment costs, which will
be different for every heuristic and clustering objective. So,
Prepared using sagej.cls

we suggest a second, more conservative measure of spatialsocial proximity in clusters & regions: consider only those
observations that might be reassigned without affecting
other observations. That is, focus on the cluster boundaries.
Consider that for each i, the NBFC k̃i is identified
out of all available clusters. In the standard silhouette,
k̃i has no predetermined spatial relationship to i. Often,
it is geographically distant from i—indeed, the “secondchoice” for i may never plausibly contain i. Whereas the
path silhouette considers the cost of connecting i and all
elements in other k̃i , a more conservative approach would
consider only the clusters that are near i.In this way, we are
constructing the best local alternative cluster for i, instead
of the next-best-fit cluster over the entire map.
In light of this, a boundary silhouette is defined as a
restriction of the standard silhouette score. Reprising the
original silhouette statement from Equation 1:
{
}
min d¯k (i) − d¯c (i)
{
}
(3)
s(i) =
max{min d¯k (i) , d¯c (i)}
the boundary silhouette must restrict min d¯k (i) to only
clusters where i could be reassigned without affecting any
other j. So, to disqualify distant alternatives, for any k
that is not geographically near i, d¯k (i) is set arbitrarily
high. Then, our target counterfactual “second-best choice”
for i—called the best local alternative cluster—has three
properties: (A) it does not contain i, (B) it is geographically
near i, and (C) it has the lowest average attribute
dissimilarity to i. It is helpful to denote the best local
alternative as k̂i , since it is often the case that k̂i ̸= k̈i ̸= k̃i .
In fact, depending on the notion of geography used to define

Figure 6. Assignments to 15 clusters, silhouettes, and path silhouettes for aspatial k-means and spatial Ward agglomerative clustering are shown above.

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

Prepared using sagej.cls

9

10

Journal Title XX(X)

local and the relative scales of the clusters and what is being
clustered, there may only be one or two alternative clusters
near i.8 It also may be true that k̂i is not even a particularly
good fit for i in attribute space. But, since k̂i is the best
cluster for which i can be reassigned without affecting other
observations, it also is the best feasible second choice.
Using this idea, the boundary silhouette is the silhouettestyle score between i, c, and k̂i , defined only for i on the
boundary. To build the set of observations on the boundary,
first let us use η(i) to mean the set of all observations j
that are local/nearby i. Then, the set of observations on the
boundary are all i for which at least one element of η(i) falls
in a different cluster than i’s cluster, c. This set of boundary
observations is then:
B=

N
∪

{i ; kj ̸= c ∃ j ∈ η(i)}

(4)

i

Second, the set of clusters around site i can also be defined
in a similar fashion:
Ai = {kj ; kj ̸= c j ∈ η(i)}

(5)

Together, these definitions are sufficient to define the
boundary silhouette. The “best local alternative,” the
boundary silhouette’s version of the next best fit cluster,
is the cluster in Ai that is most similar to i. With this
understanding of i’s best local alternative, we can state
the boundary silhouette as a familiar ratio of within- and
between-cluster distances:
{
}
minAi d¯k (i) − d¯c (i)
{
} ∀ i∈B
(6)
sb (i) =
max minAi {d¯k (i)}, d¯c (i)
This score has the same interpretation as Rousseeuw
(1987)’s silhouette, but measures the cost of “flipping” i
over the border of c and k̂i . 9
Practically speaking, when both sides of the boundary
have a positive median boundary silhouette, it means that
the parts of the clusters immediately adjacent to one another
are strongly distinct. When both are negative, it suggests
that the neighborhoods may be misaligned from the true
underlying demographic difference in that locality. When
one is positive and one is negative, the cluster on the
positive side of the boundary blocks could merge with the
blocks on the other side of the boundary and improve the
local structure of fit without adjusting the spatial coherence
of the two clusters. Thus, the boundary silhouette asses
the local goodness of fit for a cluster by centering on the
relative similarities between candidate reassignments on the
cluster’s boundary.
The boundary silhouette exhibits an interesting property:
it can be asymmetric for any boundary. For cluster k
and cluster c, the median boundary silhouette score for
observations in k bordering c may not necessarily be equal
Prepared using sagej.cls

to the score for observations in c bordering k. This would
imply that observations in c that are near k are more
similar to observations in k, but observations in k that
are near c are still closer to their own cluster, k. Put
another way, assume that c has a large positive boundary
silhouette and k has a large negative boundary silhouette.
Then, observations in k that are geographically near c are
also more demographically-similar to c than they are to
their currently-assigned cluster, k. In reverse, observations
in c that are geographically near k are more similar to their
currently-assigned cluster than to thei nearby alternative.
For an example, we provide an empirical illustration of
the boundary silhouettes in north-central and downtown
Brooklyn in Figures 7 & 8. In addition to the figures,
the median boundary silhouette values for each adjacent
neighborhood pair is provided in Tables 1 & 2. On the left
of each plot, the neighborhoods are labeled On the right, the
boundary silhouettes are shown.
A few strongly asymmetric boundaries are apparent.
Looking at the strongest asymmetry, blocks in Gowanus
near Carroll Gardens are more similar to Carroll Gardens
than the rest of Gowanus, while the blocks in Carroll
Gardens bordering Gowanus are much more similar to
Carroll Gardens. Thus, the demographic profile of Carroll
Gardens is a better demographic fit for those boundary
blocks in Gowanus, so the similarity is directional, and
the two neighborhoods may appear to change gradually
in demographic composition when moving from Gowanus
into Carroll Gardens. This contrasts with a socially
undirected boundary, such as the one between BedfordStuyvesant and Bushwick in Figure 8. For boundaries with
positive scores on both sides, social characteristics change
remarkably between the boundary and its adjacent cluster.
Blocks in Bushwick immediately north of Broadway
Boulevard, simply could not easily be demographically
passed off as a typical Bedford-Stuyvesant block.
In addition, some neighborhoods may be quite internally
heterogeneous and still have positive boundary silhouettes.
Plainly, a neighborhood may be an arbitrarily-bounded
“bundle” of inchoate and dissimilar attributes, and yet
be distinct from every other bundle nearby. Some
neighborhoods may even have positive and negative
boundaries of nearly equal magnitude. For instance, the
boundaries for Cobble Hill are positive when abutting two
neighborhoods (Boerum Hill & Gowanus) but not a third
(Carroll Gardens). Indeed, an even stronger example of this
is in the north-central detail shown in Figure 8 with medians
in Table 2. The border area between Bedford-Stuyvesant
& Williamsburg is directed towards Williamsburg, but
Williamsburg overall is more heterogeneous than BedfordStuyvesant according to their aspatial silhouette values.
Further, Williamsburg blocks on the Bushwick boundary
are about equally split in their demographic similarity to

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

11

Figure 7. Detail of downtown Zillow neighborhoods in Brooklyn, with boundary silhouettes overlaid. The legend on the bottom
right demonstrates the distribution of boundary silhouettes.

neighbor
focal

Boerum Hill

Cobble Hill

Carroll Gardens

Gowanus

Park Slope

Boerum Hill
Cobble Hill
Carroll Gardens
Gowanus
Park Slope

0.000
0.627
0.339
-0.071
0.050

-0.32
0
0.152
-0.359
-

-0.358
-0.156
0
-0.647
-

0.274
0.639
0.710
0.000
0.390

0.122
-0.168
0

Table 1. Median boundary silhouette values for blocks abutting each cluster in downtown Brooklyn neighborhoods. The rows
record blocks in the “focal” cluster that tough the “neighbor” cluster.

Williamsburg or Bushwick. This is despite the fact that
Bushwick is much more demographically cohesive than
Williamsburg as a whole, measured by its median aspatial
silhouette score.

Discussion
Thus, between the path and boundary silhouettes, these
methods introduce spatial structure into the canon of
(aspatial) methods common in spatial data science.
Formally, each statistic does this using a slightly different
spatial structure. Both, however, introduce a formal, direct
notion of geographical proximity or distance directly into
Prepared using sagej.cls

the computation of social distance used to assess the
coherence of a given neighborhood or the goodness of fit
for an urban cluster.
The path silhouette, by mixing together attribute
similarity and spatial proximity, provides a useful
mechanism to measure and assess the joint spatialsocial similarity in a dataset. This strategy shows
increasing promise at the methodological frontiers of urban
data science (Chodrow 2017; Wolf 2019), providing a
comprehensive way to introduce an explicit model of
geographical similarity into the analysis of urban clusters.
The pervasiveness the “cores” identified by path silhouettes

12

Journal Title XX(X)

Figure 8. Detail of north-central Zillow neighborhoods in Brooklyn, with boundary silhouettes overlaid. The legend on the bottom
right demonstrates the distribution of boundary silhouettes.

neighbor
focal

Williamsburg

Bushwick

Bedford Stuyvesant

Clinton Hill

Crown Heights

Williamsburg
Bushwick
Bedford Stuyvesant
Clinton Hill
Crown Heights

0
0.288
-0.478
-0.355
-

-0.096
0
0.198
-

0.693
0.482
0.000
0.358
0.077

0.516
0.006
0
-0.427

-0.059
0.296
0

Table 2. Median boundary silhouette values for blocks abutting each cluster in north-central Brooklyn neighborhoods. The rows
record blocks in the “focal” cluster that touch the “neighbor” cluster.

to be clustered in both spatial, aspatial, and exogenouslydetermined boundaries suggests that this joint spatial-social
similarity measure is both useful in empirical description
and in unsupervised learning.
The boundary silhouette, similarly introduces spatial
thinking into a classic data science measure, but does
so with a different focus in mind. Instead of specifying
an explicit model for joint spatial-social similarity, this
measure instead aims to quantify how strongly (and in
which direction) does each side of a boundary align? It
provides a novel, explicitly spatial method to examine how
demographic differences coincide (or fail to) in the areas
where regions meet. While this is a post-hoc diagnostic
(rather than a boundary detection method), it can easily be
incorporated into the myriad heuristics that guide cluster
design, too.
It is important to note that the directional structure
inherent in boundary silhouettes is not simply caused
by some neighborhoods being more internally cohesive
than others. These boundary silhouettes are not functions
of the absolute goodness of fit of a given observation,
Prepared using sagej.cls

they indicate the relative goodness of fit comparing an
observation’s home cluster to its local alternatives. The
aspatial silhouette also does not take into account the
proximity of the next-best-fit choice; again, only 16% of
blocks have their next-best-fit neighborhood as their best
local alternative neighborhood. Since it is often the case
that local urban structure can be quite distinct from global
urban patterning (Leckie et al. 2012; Jones et al. 2015;
Harris 2017), this distinction between the relative goodness
of local fit and the global best alternative considered by the
classic silhouette is novel and insightful.

Conclusion
Geosilhouttes, both path and boundary variants, are
immensely useful in their own right for detecting the latent
social-spatial "core" of geographical regions, identifying
the strength & direction of spatial boundaries, and
for understanding the local socio-geographical structure
of cluster fit. There is a large variety of possible
refinements available for these methods, as well as possible

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

extensions or applications. Moving forward, a classic
statistical perspective could be used to identify the formal
distributional properties of silhouette statistics in conditions
common in urban data science (L. Anselin and S. J.
Rey 1991; Sergio J Rey, Kang, and Wolf 2018, e.g.).
Second, the strongly scale-driven reasoning embedded in
the boundary silhouette could be used to generalize the
analysis of boundaries between multiple levels, allowing
for “local” alternatives at a micro (i.e., primitive units
such as census blocks/tracks), meso (individual clusters),
or macro (citywide) scale (Harris 2017, e.g.). Third, these
measures could be extended to spatiotemporal clustering,
applying the conceptual logic of the “second-best choice”
to alternatives in time and space, or considering the
trajectories of demographic classifications using a spatiotemporal distance metric (E. Delmelle et al. 2013; E. C.
Delmelle 2016, e.g.). Fourth, a common use case of
silhouettes is for graphical heuristics to identify the
“optimal” number of clusters in an aspatial context; the path
silhouette should provide a similar method for geographical
clustering problems, and this should be further studied in
future work.
At a more conceptual level, the silhouette provides a
useful formal method to introduce spatial thinking because
Rousseeuw (1987) is so explicit in the operationalization
of their intent. Future work should be similarly explicit in
intent. However, our choice to use silhouettes as the basic
structure onto which geographical thinking can be grafted
does not limit the scope of “spatializing” data science
methods. Where possible, enhanced methods for spatial
data science should make the intent of the statistic explicit
and then accommodate geographical relationships directly
in the statistic, rather than in post hoc geographical analysis
of aspatial data science.
In our execution of this research program, we develop
two new ways of measuring the local “goodness of
fit” for urban clusters. Assessing the local structure of
“neighborhoods,” either detected lying latent within a
dataset or exogenously determined using government or
colloquially-defined boundaries, is a ubiquitous problem in
urban data science. For the path silhouette, demographic
similarity and geographical similarity are combined,
providing a single measure of how cohesive neighborhoods
are, both spatially and socially. For the boundary silhouette,
local thinking is introduced into how observations’ are
assessed for similarity. This provides an indication of
how quickly or dramatically social characteristics change
between two adjacent urban clusters, and speaks to the
inherently multi-scale structure of urban geography.
Generally speaking, this effort participates in the broader
project of developing new methods for urban spatial
Prepared using sagej.cls

13

data science. Sometimes, is not enough to conceptualize fundamentally-geographical problems in aspatial structures; instead, we suggest that introducing spatial thinking
directly into the way a statistic operationalizes its core
measurement is necessary to provide new insights, as we
have done. Further, it is through these better concepts and
operationalizations that better, more meaningful, and more
useful results on the structure of urban society will be
obtained.
Funding
We are grateful to the National Science Foundation (NSF #
1733705, Neighborhoods in Space-Time Contexts for the generous
support.

Notes
1. These
can
be
accessed
at
https://www.zillow.com/howto/api/neighborhoodboundaries.htm and are licensed as a Creative Commons
dataset. It is important to note that the neighborhoods
shown on the left side of Figure 1 are different from the
official government neighborhoods maintained by the
New York Transit Authority (NYTA); there are 7 more
of the “Zillowhoods” than the NYTA Neighborhoods and
Zillowhoods are smaller on average. This is likely done to
keep the overall size of communities more consistent in
the NYTA definitions than in the Zillow neighborhoods,
which derive from how properties are marketed. Regardless,
both the NYTA and the Zillow neighborhoods serve here as
exogenously determined neighborhood boundaries for our
purposes, so their relative arbitrariness is not under analysis
here.
2. These results, as well as all estimators developed here, depend
on the efforts of sckit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011) and
pysal (Sergio J. Rey and Luc Anselin 2007). They will be
made available alongside this manuscript as free and open
software in pysal.
3. This is the intended meaning of “ecologically meaningful”
used by Drukker et al. (2003).
4. While the percentage measures used in Figure 3 are useful
to describe a single map, it is unclear what the “expected”
or “neutral” value of these percentages are. For some
geographies and attribute distributions, it may be quite
difficult to achieve even 1% NBFC proximity; the “natural”
level of proximity for a given geography is unknown. Thus,
these percentage-style measures are inherently map-specific
and difficult to generalize, and so should only be used to
characterize the relative quality of a solution over a given
map. Thus, again like silhouettes, social-spatial measures of
cluster fit should be comparable between maps, have some
finite range, and have a theoretically-useful zero point. Using a
measure with a similar structure and meaning to the silhouette
in Eq. 1 is desirable, since silhouettes have a long history in

14

5.

6.

7.

8.

9.

Journal Title XX(X)

unsupervised learning, are well-understood, and are not mapspecific.
When W is complete, then every path in D is shortest
due to the triangle inequality, so C1 = C. Otherwise, C1
expresses only the first-order path costs between observations,
and C must be constructed using standard all-pairs shortest
path algorithms (e.g. Floyd 1962). In the case where W
is quite sparse, this may be feasible for large N using
dedicated sparse algorithms. Further, since D is non-negative
and W is connected, then C is guaranteed to be well defined.
When C1 has disconnected sub-graphs, no path will exist
to connect them, meaning C will have infinite values. Thus,
the connected sub-components of C1 should be analyzed
separately if this occurs.
It is also possible to define the next-best-connected cluster
solely by the single shortest cost of connection between j ∈ k
to i, rather than the shortest average cost of connection over
all j ∈ k as we suggest. However, this is also not in the
spirit of the original average-of-cluster dissimilarities used by
Rousseeuw (1987), and so is elided here.
This method can be used in clustering problems in other
spatial supports as well, so long as the structure of spatial
relationships can be represented in an appropriate W. That is,
it is not explicitly restricted to polygonal spatial data shown
here.
For observations deep within the interior of a cluster, where
there is no best local alternative, we adopt a similar convention
to Rousseeuw (1987) and set their boundary silhouette to zero.
At its widest, k̂i can represents a very general class of
“second-best choice” clusters—regions where the reassignment of i from c to k̂i yields the best feasible reassignment.
Further, for spatial clustering problems with stronger constraints, a stronger notion of feasibility can be adopted by
imposing more restrictions on Ai , the set of local alternatives
for i.Common additional constraints in the literature include
population minima or compactness requirements, such as in
redistricting contexts. Since locality or geographic coherence
may only be one of many relevant constraints on feasible
reassignments for i, this generality means this particular
statistic is remarkably flexible.

References
Anselin, L. and S. J. Rey (1991). “Properties of Tests for
Spatial Dependence in Linear Regression Models”. In:
Geographical Analysis 23, pp. 112–131.
Anselin, Luc and Sarah Williams (Oct. 2016). “Digital
Neighborhoods”. In: Journal of Urbanism: International
Research on Placemaking and Urban Sustainability 9.4,
pp. 305–328. ISSN: 1754-9175. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
17549175.2015.1080752.

Prepared using sagej.cls

Arribas-Bel, Daniel and Jessie Bakens (2018). “Use and
validation of location-based services in urban research:
An example with Dutch restaurants”. In: Urban Studies,
p. 0042098018779554.
Bradley, Jonathan R., Christopher K. Wikle, and Scott H.
Holan (Feb. 2015). “Regionalization of Multiscale Spatial Processes Using a Criterion for Spatial Aggregation
Error”. en. In: arXiv:1502.01974 [stat]. arXiv: 1502 .
01974 [stat].
Chaskin, Robert J. and Mark L. Joseph (Mar. 2013).
“Positive’ Gentrification, Social Control and the Right
to the City’ in Mixed-Income Communities: Uses and
Expectations of Space and Place”. In: International
Journal of Urban and Regional Research 37.2, pp. 480–
502. ISSN: 03091317. DOI: 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 2427 . 2012 . 01158 . x. URL: http : / / doi .
wiley . com / 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 2427 . 2012 .
01158.x.
Chodrow, Philip S (2017). “Structure and Information in
Spatial Segregation”. In: Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences, pp. 11591–11596.
Dean, Nema et al. (2018). “Frontiers in Residential
Segregation: Understanding Neighbourhood Boundaries
and Their Impacts”. en. In: Tijdschrift voor economische
en sociale geografie in print. ISSN: 1467-9663. DOI: 10.
1111/tesg.12316.
Delmelle, Elizabeth C. (2016). “Mapping the DNA
of Urban Neighborhoods: Clustering Longitudinal
Sequences of Neighborhood Socioeconomic Change”.
In: Annals of the American Association of Geographers
106.1, pp. 36–56. DOI: 10.1080/00045608.2015.
1096188.
Delmelle, Elizabeth et al. (2013). “Trajectories of Multidimensional Neighbourhood Quality of Life Change”.
In: Urban Studies 50.5, pp. 923–941. DOI: 10.1177/
0042098012458003.
Dong, Guanpeng et al. (2019). “Inferring neighbourhood
quality with property transaction records by using
a locally adaptive spatial multi-level model”. In:
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 73,
pp. 118–125.
Drukker, Marjan et al. (Sept. 2003). “Children’s HealthRelated Quality of Life, Neighbourhood SocioEconomic Deprivation and Social Capital. A Contextual
Analysis”. In: Social Science & Medicine 57.5,
pp. 825–841.
Duncan, Dustin T et al. (Jan. 2014). “Examination of How
Neighborhood Definition Influences Measurements of
Youths’ Access to Tobacco Retailers: A Methodological
Note on Spatial Misclassification”. In: American Journal
of Epidemiology 179.3, pp. 373–381.
Duncan, Greg J, Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, and Pamela Kato
Klebanov (1994). “Economic Deprivation and Early

Geosilhouettes: geographical measures of cluster fit

Childhood Development”. In: Child development 65.2,
pp. 296–318.
Duque, Juan C, Luc Anselin, and Sergio J Rey (2012).
“The Max-p-Regions Problem”. In: Journal of Regional
Science 52.3, pp. 397–419.
Duque, Juan C, Richard L Church, and Richard S
Middleton (2011). “The P-Regions Problem”. In: Geogr.
Anal. 43.1, pp. 104–126.
Fitzpatrick, Matthew C. et al. (Dec. 2010). “Ecological
Boundary Detection Using Bayesian Areal Wombling”.
In: Ecology 91.12, pp. 3448–3455.
Floyd, Robert W. (June 1962). “Algorithm 97: Shortest
Path”. In: Commun. ACM 5.6, pp. 345–. ISSN: 00010782. DOI: 10.1145/367766.368168.
Fortin, Marie-Josée et al. (Oct. 1996). “Quantification of the
Spatial Co-Occurrences of Ecological Boundaries”. en.
In: Oikos 77.1, p. 51. ISSN: 00301299. DOI: 10.2307/
3545584.
Galster, G. (2001). “On the Nature of Neighbourhood”. In:
Urban studies 38.12, p. 2111.
Gibbons, Joseph, Atsushi Nara, and Bruce Appleyard
(2018). “Exploring the imprint of social media networks
on neighborhood community through the lens of
gentrification”. In: Environment and Planning B: Urban
Analytics and City Science 45.3, pp. 470–488.
Harris, Richard (2017). “Measuring the scales of segregation: Looking at the residential separation of White
British and other schoolchildren in England using a
multilevel index of dissimilarity”. In: Transactions of the
Institute of British Geographers 42.3, pp. 432–444.
Harris, Richard, Peter Sleight, and Richard Webber (2005).
Geodemographics, GIS and Neighbourhood Targeting.
Vol. 7. John Wiley and Sons.
Hipp, John R and Adam Boessen (2013). “Egohoods as
Waves Washing across the City: A New Measure of
“Neighborhoods””. In: Criminology 51.2, pp. 287–327.
Hipp, John R, Robert W Faris, and Adam Boessen (2012).
“Measuring ‘Neighborhood’: Constructing Network
Neighborhoods”. In: Social networks 34.1, pp. 128–140.
Hwang, Jackelyn (Jan. 2016). “The Social Construction
of a Gentrifying Neighborhood”. In: Urban Affairs
Review 52.1, pp. 98–128. ISSN: 1078-0874. DOI: 10 .
1177 / 1078087415570643. URL: http : / /
journals . sagepub . com / doi / 10 . 1177 /
1078087415570643.
Isard, W (1956). “Regional Science, the Concept of Region,
and Regional Structure”. In: Pap. Reg. Sci. 2.1, pp. 13–
26.
Jacquez, Geoff M., Andy Kaufmann, and Pierre Goovaerts
(Dec. 2008). “Boundaries, Links and Clusters: A New
Paradigm in Spatial Analysis?” en. In: Environmental

Prepared using sagej.cls

15

and Ecological Statistics 15.4, pp. 403–419. ISSN: 13528505, 1573-3009. DOI: 10 . 1007 / s10651 - 007 0066-4.
Jacquez, Geoffrey (Nov. 1995). “The Map Comparison
Problem: Tests for the Overlap of Geographic Boundaries”. In: Statistics in Medicine 14.21-22, pp. 2343–
2361.
Jacquez, Geoffrey, S. Maruca, and M.-J. Fortin (2000).
“From Fields to Objects: A Review of Geographic
Boundary Analysis”. In: Journal of Geographica 2,
pp. 221–241.
Jones, Kelvyn et al. (Dec. 2015). “Ethnic Residential
Segregation: A Multilevel, Multigroup, Multiscale
Approach Exemplified by London in 2011”. en. In:
Demography 52.6, pp. 1995–2019. ISSN: 0070-3370,
1533-7790. DOI: 10.1007/s13524-015-0430-1.
Joseph, Mark L., Robert J. Chaskin, and Henry S. Webber
(Jan. 2007). “The Theoretical Basis for Addressing
Poverty Through Mixed-Income Development”. In:
Urban Affairs Review 42.3, pp. 369–409. ISSN: 10780874. DOI: 10 . 1177 / 1078087406294043. URL:
http : / / journals . sagepub . com / doi /
10 . 1177 / 1078087406294043 % 20http : / /
uar . sagepub . com / cgi / doi / 10 . 1177 /
1078087406294043.
Leckie, George et al. (2012). “Multilevel modeling of social
segregation”. In: Journal of Educational and Behavioral
Statistics 37.1, pp. 3–30.
Logan, John R. (June 2013). “The Persistence of
Segregation in the 21st Century Metropolis”. In: City
& Community 12.2, pp. 160–168. ISSN: 15356841. DOI:
10 . 1111 / cico . 12021. arXiv: NIHMS150003.
URL : http://doi.wiley.com/10.1111/cico.
12021.
Lu, Haolan and Bradley P. Carlin (July 2005 2007).
“Bayesian Areal Wombling for Geographical Boundary
Analysis”. In: Geographical Analysis 37.3, pp. 265–285.
McGarigal, Kevin et al. (2002). “FRAGSTATS: Spatial
Pattern Analysis Program for Categorical Maps”. In:
Mikelbank, Brian A. (2011). “Neighborhood Déjà Vu:
Classification in Metropolitan Cleveland, 1970-2000”.
In: Urban Geography 32.3, pp. 317–333. DOI: 10 .
2747/0272-3638.32.3.317.
Morenoff, Jeffrey D, Robert J Sampson, and Stephen
W Raudenbush (2001). “Neighborhood Inequality,
Collective Efficacy, and the Spatial Dynamics of Urban
Violence”. In: Criminology 39.3, pp. 517–558.
O’Campo, P. et al. (1997). “Neighborhood Risk Factors for
Low Birthweight in Baltimore”. In: American Journal of
Public Health 87.7, pp. 1113–1119.
Pedregosa, F. et al. (2011). “Scikit-Learn: Machine
Learning in Python”. In: Journal of Machine Learning
Research 12, pp. 2825–2830.

16

Poorthuis, Ate (Apr. 2018). “How to Draw a Neighborhood? The Potential of Big Data, Regionalization, and
Community Detection for Understanding the Heterogeneous Nature of Urban Neighborhoods”. en. In: Geographical Analysis 50.2, pp. 182–203. ISSN: 1538-4632.
DOI : 10.1111/gean.12143.
Rey, Sergio J., L. Anselin, et al. (2011). “Measuring
Spatial Dynamics in Metropolitan Areas”. In: Economic
Development Quarterly 25.1, p. 54.
Rey, Sergio J. and Luc Anselin (2007). “PySAL: A Python
Library of Spatial Analytical Methods”. In: The Review
of Regional Studies 37.1, pp. 5–27.
Rey, Sergio J, Wei Kang, and Levi John Wolf (2018).
“Regional inequality dynamics, stochastic dominance,
and spatial dependence”. In: Papers in Regional Science.
Roberts, E. (1997). “Neighborhood Social Environments
and the Distribution of Low Birthweight in Chicago”. In:
American Journal of Public Health 87.5, pp. 597–603.
Rousseeuw, Peter J (1987). “Silhouettes: A Graphical Aid
to the Interpretation and Validation of Cluster Analysis”.
In: Journal of computational and applied mathematics
20, pp. 53–65.
Sampson, Robert J, Stephen W Raudenbush, and Felton
Earls (1997). “Neighborhoods and Violent Crime: A
Multilevel Study of Collective Efficacy”. In: Science
277.5328, pp. 918–924.
Santos, Simone M, Dora Chor, and Guilherme Loureiro
Werneck (2010). “Demarcation of Local Neighborhoods
to Study Relations between Contextual Factors and
Health”. In: International journal of health geographics
9.1, p. 1.
Shelton, Taylor and Ate Poorthuis (2019). “The Nature of
Neighborhoods: using big data to rethink the geographies
of Atlanta’s Neighborhood Planning Unit system”. In:
Annals of the American Association of Geographers
forthcoming. DOI: https://doi.org/10.31235/
osf.io/vmrnf.
Singleton, Alexander D and Paul A Longley (Aug. 2009).
“Creating Open Source Geodemographics: Refining a
National Classification of Census Output Areas for
Applications in Higher Education”. In: Pap. Reg. Sci.
88.3, pp. 643–666.
Singleton, Alexander D and Seth E Spielman (2014). “The
Past, Present, and Future of Geodemographic Research in
the United States and United Kingdom”. In: Prof. Geogr.
66.4, pp. 558–567.
Spielman, Seth E and David C Folch (2015). “Reducing
Uncertainty in the American Community Survey through
Data-Driven Regionalization”. In: PLoS One 10.2,
e0115626.
Spielman, Seth E and John R Logan (2013). “Using HighResolution Population Data to Identify Neighborhoods

Prepared using sagej.cls

Journal Title XX(X)

and Establish Their Boundaries”. In: Annals of the
Association of American Geographers 103.1, pp. 67–84.
Spielman, Seth E, Eun-Hye Yoo, and Crystal Linkletter
(2013). “Neighborhood Contexts, Health, and Behavior:
Understanding the Role of Scale and Residential
Sorting”. In: Environment and Planning B: Planning and
Design 40.3, pp. 489–506. DOI: 10.1068/b38007.
Talen, Emily and Julia Koschinsky (Oct. 2014). “Compact,
Walkable, Diverse Neighborhoods:Assessing Effects
on Residents”. In: Housing Policy Debate 24.4,
pp. 717–750. ISSN: 1051-1482. DOI: 10 . 1080 /
10511482 . 2014 . 900102. URL: http : / / www .
tandfonline . com / doi / abs / 10 . 1080 /
10511482.2014.900102.
Tolsma, J. and T.W.G. van der Meer (July 2018). “Trust and
contact in diverse neighbourhoods: An interplay of four
ethnicity effects”. In: Social Science Research 73.April,
pp. 92–106. ISSN: 0049089X. DOI: 10 . 1016 / j .
ssresearch . 2018 . 04 . 003. URL: http : / /
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/
S0049089X17304726.
Wachsmuth, David and Alexander Weisler (2018). “Airbnb
and the rent gap: Gentrification through the sharing
economy”. In: Environment and Planning A: Economy
and Space 50.6, pp. 1147–1170.
Ward, Joe H. (Mar. 1963). “Hierarchical Grouping to
Optimize an Objective Function”. In: Journal of the
American Statistical Association 58, pp. 236–244. DOI:
10.1080/01621459.1963.10500845.
Wolf, Levi John (2019). “Spatially-Encouraged Spectral
Clustering”. In: Open Science Framework Preprint. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/yzt2p.
Womble, W. H. (Sept. 1951). “Differential Systematics”.
en. In: Science 114.2961, pp. 315–322. ISSN: 0036-8075,
1095-9203. DOI: 10.1126/science.114.2961.
315.

