Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

Author(s): Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal
Source: Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018): 117–132
Published by: National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy

http://kmhj.ukma.edu.ua/

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II
Oleksandr Pronkevych

Petro Mohyla Black Sea National University,
Department of English Philology

Olga Shestopal

Kyiv Taras Shevchenko National University,
Department of World Literature
Abstract
The paper analyzes a book written by Volodymyr Yarymovych, Oleksandr Bilyk, and
Mykola Volynskyi, entitled Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady ta Ukrainskykh
poselen v Espanii 1946–1996 (An Overview of the History of the Ukrainian Student
Community and Ukrainian Settlements in Spain, 1946–1996), which tells about the
Ukrainian students who arrived in Madrid in 1946 and formed part of the early Ukrainian
Diaspora in Spain. The book proves to be an important source of information, previously
unknown to scholars, which describes the dramatic and controversial process of
constructing Ukrainian identity in the aftermath of World War II. The authors of the
study consider the historical and cultural context of the Ukrainian emigration in the
second half of the 20th century, its connection with Francoist ideology, and its integral
role in the Spanish-Ukrainian cultural dialogue.
Key Words: political emigrants, combatants, Cold War, Francoism, Ukraine as European
Orient, Ukrainian identity.

3
Introduction
World War II produced waves of Ukrainian emigrants who went to different countries,
mainly to the USA,1 Canada,2 Germany, Austria,3 and Argentina.4 In the history of this
1

John-Paul Himka, “A Central European Diaspora under the Shadow of World War II:
The Galician Ukrainians in North America,” Austrian History Yearbook 37 (2006): 17–31.

2

Lubomyr Y. Luciuk, Searching for Place: Ukrainian Displaced Persons, Canada, and the Migration
of Memory (Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2000).

3

Wsevolod Isajiw et al., eds., The Refugee Experience: Ukrainian Displaced Persons after World
War II (Edmonton: Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, 1992); Volodymyr Mariuniak,
Ukrainska emigratsiia v Nimechchyni i Avstrii po druhii svitovii viini. Tom I (1945–1951)
[The Ukrainian Emigration in Germany and Austria after World War II. Volume I (1945–1951)]
(Munich: Akademichne vydavnytstvo doktora Petra Beleia, 1985).

4

Serge Cipco, Ukrainians in Argentina, 1897–1950: Making of a Community (Edmonton: Canadian
Institute of Ukrainian Studies, 2011).

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

118

phenomenon, there is a page which remains almost unknown. It concerns the lives
and activities of the Ukrainian students who initiated the Ukrainian Diaspora in Spain.
The information about this group can be found in a book by Volodymyr Yarymovych,
Oleksandr Bilyk, and Mykola Volynskyi, entitled Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi
hromady ta Ukrainskykh poselen v Espanii (1946–1996). A scanned copy of the book is
available at the diasporiana.org.ua web-site.5 It serves as important evidence about
the complexity of constructing Ukrainian identity in the 20th century. It is also an
illuminating episode in the cultural dialogue and exchange of ideas between the two
countries, although it has never become the subject of a separate detailed study.
The methodological approach, which we will apply to an analytical reading of the
document, is predetermined by the book’s complex genre nature. It does not consist
of only memoirs in the traditional understanding of the term. On the one hand, it
contains reminiscences of the authors about the life of the Ukrainian community in
Madrid after World War II, including personal records and descriptions of everyday life
and of important celebrations, like Christmas or Easter, and meetings with influential
politicians and aristocrats. On the other hand, the book is something more than just
a collection of “memoirs” because it also contains elements of research: it provides
facts, statistics, biographies of each member of the community, and bibliographies.
It also presents information about Spain and Ukraine, which is not directly related to
the experiences of the Ukrainian students in Madrid. Moreover, the style of the book
suggests to the reader that the document is a propaganda piece, because it reproduces
rhetorical clichés typical of other Ukrainian émigré writings during the Cold War
period.
Some words should be said about the addresser and the addressee of the text. As
for the former, it is important to stress that the book is a product of three authors who
try to speak on behalf of the Ukrainian community in Madrid as a whole. The individual
voices of the authors can be heard just a few times, when they include their personal
reminiscences. In our opinion, the 1997 publication date of the book has special
meaning. The Soviet Union had collapsed and independent Ukraine was proclaimed
six years prior. The authors of the book and other Ukrainian students in Spain were
not just displaced persons but former soldiers and officers of the “Halychyna” division
and looked upon themselves as combatants, whose aim was fighting the USSR. Their
main enemy had been defeated and diplomatic relations between Spain and Ukraine
had been established. These circumstances explain the victorious tone of the objective
and even the “academic” style of the “memoirs.” The potential readership is complex
as well. On the one hand, the book was written for descendants — the children and
5

Volodymyr Yarymovych, Oleksandr Bilyk and Mykola Volynskyi, Narys istorii ukrainskoi
studentskoi hromady ta Ukrainskykh poselen v Espanii (1946–1996) [An Overview of the History of
the Ukrainian Student Community and Ukrainian Settlements in Spain, 1946–1996] (Philadelphia;
Madrid, 1997), accessed January 11, 2018, http://diasporiana.org.ua/ukrainica/7704-yarimovichv-bilik-o-volinskiy-m-naris-istoriyi-ukrayinskoyi-studentskoyi-gromadi-ta-ukrayinskih-poselenv-espaniyi‑1946–1996/.

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

119

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

grandchildren — of those Ukrainians who had studied in Spain. On the other hand,
we are confident that the real addressee of the text is the reader in contemporary
independent Ukraine, who has to reconsider his/her national identity and to learn to
look upon him/herself as taking part in the European project. This is why the authors
of the book pay so much attention to the study of Ukrainian-Spanish historical and
cultural contacts.
Thus, Volodymyr Yarymovych, Oleksandr Bilyk, and Mykola Volynskyi use the
historical narrative about their own and their friends’ émigré experiences to address a
threefold task. They want (1) to disseminate their understanding of Ukrainian identity
in the 20th century and especially after World War II; (2) to present their understanding
of Spain as a country, which hosted Ukrainians; and (3) to create a global vision of
Spanish-Ukrainian cultural relations in the past and present. In order to understand
whether they managed to complete such a complex task the book should be read
from three different perspectives. First, it makes sense to compare the worldview of
the Ukrainian students in Madrid with the ideological platforms produced by other
Ukrainian émigré movements after World War II in the atmosphere of the Cold War. In
our opinion, the Ukrainian emigrants in Spain used the same models of behavior and
strategies of working through the trauma of separation from the Motherland, which
were typical of combatants within Ukrainian Diasporas in other countries.
Second, the Ukrainian students were looking for ways of integrating into Spanish
culture and engaging with the realities of Western civilization. It was not an easy
process, because it required a deep transformation of their Ukrainian worldview,
which was traditional in its core. From this viewpoint, it makes sense to analyze the
ideological and aesthetic ideas of the Ukrainian students in Madrid in the context of
the dominant trends of Spanish culture in the 1940s‑1990s. It is a long period, which
includes Franco’s dictatorship and the modernization of Spain, and the so-called First
Transition to democracy, which began after Franco’s death. The most intensive period
of the Ukrainian students’ activities coincided with the second half of the 1940s through
the beginning of the 1960s, when Francoism as a state system and specific worldview
was extremely strong.
Third, we will read the book in the context of the Spanish-Ukrainian cultural
dialogue. The experience described by the authors was not the first cultural encounter
of Ukraine with Spain. Consciously or unconsciously, the Ukrainian students were
involved in the global exchange of ideas between the two countries, which had begun
some centuries before they arrived in the Iberian Peninsula. In particular, they came
to Madrid with the ready-made understanding of the part their homeland had played
in the history of the European continent. The students applied this model to the ways
they presented Ukrainian culture to Spaniards and to heir study of Ukrainian-Spanish
historical, cultural, and artistic contacts.

120

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

The Life of the Ukrainian Students in Spain: Dates and Facts
The authors of the book produce a detailed record of the life of the Ukrainians who
came to Spain to receive an education at the University of Madrid from 1946 until
1958, from the displaced persons camp in Rimini, Italy, Great Britain, Germany, and
other countries. Most of them served in the “Halychyna” division during World War II
and became war prisoners. With help of the Greek Catholic Church Archbishop, Ivan
Buchko, they received scholarships, which the Obra Católica Foundation gave to young
displaced persons from Central and Eastern Europe, including Ukraine. 1947 became
the year of the creation of Hromada, the Ukrainian student community, with Yurii
Karmanov as its first president. The students joined the organization when they arrived
and left it when their studies were over. During its existence, 90 students belonged to
Hromada until 1963, when it was closed because most of the Ukrainian students had
graduated from the university and emigrated to the USA, Canada, and other countries.
Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi provide statistics and facts about the everyday
life of Hromada. Seventy students received their degrees at various departments,
mostly in Medical Studies (36). The second largest group were philologists (Filosofía
y Letras) — 8 persons. Two of the Humanities students presented and defended their
PhD dissertations: Semen Fediuk (Political Science) and Petro Kliuk (Literary Studies).
The best known Ukrainian student who completed his studies in Madrid was Wolfram
Burghardt, the translator of José Ortega y Gasset’s Revolt of the Masses, the poetry of
Juan Ramón Jiménez and Pablo Neruda, and the plays of Federico García Lorca into
Ukrainian.
Hromada was not a political organization, and its main tasks prioritized cultural,
such as meetings, presentations, academies, schooling, conferences, choirs, dances,
and participation in church services, not only in Madrid but also in other cities of
Spain and Portugal. The Ukrainian students maintained contacts with other Ukrainian
institutions all over the world: The Central Union of Ukrainian Students (until the mid
1950s), The Commission on Assistance to Ukrainian Students, The Ukrainian Congress
Committee of America, and The Ukrainian Canadian Congress. Hromada earned the
strong support of bishops and archbishops of the Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church, in
particular of Archbishop Ivan Buchko. Its members attended presentations of Ukrainian
professors and artists who visited Spain, cooperated with Obnova, an organization of
young Catholic intellectuals, among others. From 1946 until 1962, Hromada became the
center of Ukrainian life in Spain.
In 1963, Hromada ceased to exist and a new era for the Ukrainian Diaspora in Spain
began. Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi define it as a time of hopes and expectations.
The period lasted until 1990. During those years, the Ukrainian migration changed its
direction because Ukrainians were arriving to Spain from the USA. Most of them were
medical students (30 persons). Some representatives of the first wave of emigration
stayed in Spain for good (about 15 persons). They obtained Spanish citizenship,
married Spanish women, and had well-paid jobs. Despite the fact that their group was
not numerous and was scattered all over the country, former members of Hromada

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

121

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

communicated with veteran structures of the “Halychyna” division and did not lose
their national and religious identity. They welcomed Cardinal Yosyp Slipyi when he
visited Spain in 1970, and organized anti-Soviet manifestations during sessions of the
International Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe, which was held in
Madrid from 1980–1983, to protest against the persecution of Ukrainian dissidents.
Another important event of this period, organized by the Ukrainian Diaspora, was the
celebration of the 1000th anniversary of the Christianization of Rus.
The last years of the first wave of the Ukrainian Diaspora described in the book is
the period from 1990 until 1996. It was a time of the reestablishment of connections with
independent Ukraine, assistance to the children of Chornobyl, and official registration
of the Ukrainian Association in Spain. The chronicle of events ends in 1996, when
diplomatic relations between the two countries were established and President Leonid
Kuchma visited Spain. According to the authors of the book, the mission of preserving
Ukrainian identity and representing their country in Spain was completed.

In the War Against Communism
Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi pay much attention to the contribution of the group
into the global war against communism and Soviet imperialism as its main stronghold.6
The proof of this intention is the title of Part I of the book, “…Choho vid nas chekaie
chas” (What Time is Expecting From Us). The authors of the book cite words of the
anthem of the “Halychyna” division, which contains a program of action and points
to the main enemy. This enemy is Moscow, which is “destroying, burning everything
around” (ruinuie, palyt vse kruhom).7 The anthem depicts communists as wild barbaric
hordes, descendants of the Huns, with whom they, “warriors of the Division,” have to
fight. The authors chose these words because most of the Ukrainian students in Madrid
identified themselves with the Division and continued the fight using cultural rather
than military weaponry.
There is nothing extraordinary in the ideological position of the Ukrainian students
in Spain because the combatants in other Diasporas followed similar life programs.
The description of what a model Ukrainian should do in emigration is included in
propaganda books produced in DP camps. One of these books was anonymously
written and entitled Emigration and Our Tasks. Published in 1948, issue 1 of the “Ridna
knyzhechka” (My Book) series of brochures contains a definition and brief history
of the phenomenon of emigration, and provides instructions on how to act in order
to retain national uniqueness in a new international environment while preserving
Ukrainian identity. The main method consists of looking upon oneself as a political
emigrant, as this option makes a displaced person an Ambassador of his/her home
country:
6

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 7.

7

“Himn dyvizii SS Halychyna,” accessed January 11, 2018, https://iomedia.ru/empty/гимн_
дивизии_сс_галичина/.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

122

Every political emigrant without exception must learn how to in
conversation be able to inform any foreigner in a proper way not
only about his/her hard life or personal needs, but also about the
entire people and its national catastrophe.8
Then, the unknown author provides the reader with a list of subjects on which
every Ukrainian political emigrant is obliged to speak. These include the national
history of Ukraine presented as an incessant struggle for independence, the territorial
integrity of the country, and the European (anti-Russian, anti-Soviet) dimension of its
culture. The concluding pages of the brochure sound like a Manifesto:
We must not forget that struggle for an independent Ukrainian
State is at the same time a struggle for the existence of not only
the nation as a whole but also of every Ukrainian individual. To
live for Ukraine and to fight for its Freedom up to the final victory
is a sacred duty of every Ukrainian regardless of where he/she is
or lives.9
Without any doubts, the former “Halychyna” soldiers and officers had read similar
brochures before they made their decision to go to Spain. Yarymovych’s, Bilyk’s, and
Volynskyi’s book reflects the same rhetoric. The authors call the entire group of
students “Cossacks attacking the Alcázar of the academic sphere,” or Zaporizhtsi from
Rimini.10 They are students-patriots, representatives of the oppressed nation and
troops, “fighting against aggressive and atheist materialism.” 11 Oleksandr Bilyk cites
the instructions given to the students by Archbishop Ivan Buchko: “your weapon is
progress in your studies and dissemination of the beauty of our church rite and the
incomparable charm of Ukrainian song.” 12 For this reason, the creation of a choir and
serving the Liturgy were part of strategic operations of the guerrilla war against world
communism and of a struggle for Ukrainianness. No wonder Bilyk and Yarymovych
remember Mykola Volynskyi, who died in 1990, “as their old fellow soldier and a faithful
co-worker of history.” 13 From the biographies included in the book one learns that he
graduated from the Political Science department at the University of Madrid and for
many years worked for the CIA. Another member of the community, who immediately
took part in the ideological fight with the USSR, was Volodymyr Borachok. He studied
Philology and became a journalist at Radio Free Europe. In brief, university studies were
8

Emigratsiia i nashi zavdannia [Emigration and Our Tasks], vol. 1 (Ellwangen: Ridna
knyzhechka, 1948), 29.

9

Emigratsiia i nashi zavdannia, 30.

10

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 10.

11

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 23.

12

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 30.

13

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 8.

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

123

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

a continuation of the war of liberation.14 Many activities of Hromada were politically
motivated. The Ukrainian students participated in anti-Soviet manifestations and
cooperated with the Ukrainian service of Spanish National Radio, which transmitted
its programs to the USSR.
The state of war, in which the Ukrainian students continued to live, helped
them cope with the trauma caused by military defeat and emigration. In contrast to
Polish students who suffered from consequences of post-traumatic stress disorder and
demonstrated explosions of aggression and depression, the young Ukrainians looked
optimistic. They did not have the time or even the duty to be frustrated as they were still
in the army. At the same time, the authors of the book stress that the students belonged
to the entire global Ukrainian community fighting for the freedom of Ukraine. The book
opens with a chapter by Natalia Pazuniak about the history of the Ukrainian students’
movement, and Hromada as an inseparable part of it. A sense of solidarity helped
maintain a combatant spirit inside the group, which became an additional factor of
mobilization and the channeling of energy against the main enemy — the communist
regime of Moscow. However, the reader can conclude that, despite of their combatant
spirit, the Ukrainian students looked upon Spain as a temporary stop in their migration
to more developed, more comfortable, and richer countries, like the USA and Canada.
The statistics and short biographies provided by the authors confirm this observation.

Learning to be a Spaniard in Francoist Spain
The Ukrainian students adjusted to Spanish life and accepted Francoism. According to
Eamonn Rogers, the Francoist culture was
one of the outcomes of the Civil War and its aftermath. The
propaganda of the Francoist side fostered the notion that in
overcoming the “red hordes” they were also redressing the effects
of two centuries of negative and alien influence deriving from
the Enlightenment, nineteen-century liberalism and modern
democracy.15
A key element in this cultural program was National Catholicism. It proclaimed
conservative traditional Christianity to be the essence of the Spanish nationality.
Another pillar of the Francoist culture was Falange ideology, the Spanish variant of
fascism. Both doctrines coincided in their glorification of the Spanish imperial past.
Such controversial historical figures as Phillip II became symbols of the ideal Politician
and Governor. The historians paid attention primarily to the “Reconquest” of Spain
from the Moors in the Late Middle Ages, the unification of the crowns of Castile and
14

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 7.

15

Eamonn Rogers, “Francoist Culture,” in Encyclopedia of Contemporary Spanish Culture,
ed. Eamonn Rodgers (London; New York: Routledge, 2002), 206.

124

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

Aragon, the achievement of religious uniformity by the “Catholic monarchs” Ferdinand
and Isabella at the end of the fifteenth century, and of Empire in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries. Franco and his followers manipulated these components of
the great Spanish historical narrative to culturally legitimize their rebellion against the
Second Republic and their political system, and to present the regime as a “Crusade”
against communism.
There are a number of factors that predetermined the ideological choices of
the Ukrainian students. First, they and the Spanish dictator had the same enemy —
the Soviet Union and global communism. Second, most of them were Catholics or
Greek Catholics who shared the same deeply traditional understanding of religion
with Francoist ideology. The communist state wanted to destroy their church and to
exterminate religion as a whole. In this situation, they had two very bad choices —
either join the anti-communist forces or cease to exist. Third, they were grateful to
the Spanish government for providing them with a home and opportunities to study.
Fourth, the Francoist regime with its terrible repressions in many aspects was less
destructive of human life than the Soviet Stalinist system with its GULAG, purges, and
persecutions of dissidents.
The authors of the book interpret the events of the Civil War and the situation
of Spain after World War II in the international arena in Francoist language. In the
chapter “Spain after World War II,” one learns that the Spaniards are people of Christian
virtues who heroically defended Europe against communism. Spain itself was a victim
of the former Allies, the Western countries and the USSR, which were responsible for
not ending the Civil War. The authors of the book repeat other clichés of Francoist
propaganda, which presented the Cold War as a chance for Spain to break out of its
isolation with the help of the USA. A constant zone of reference in the book is the
role of the Spanish Catholic Church in the everyday life of the students. The authors
proudly recall visits of influential archbishops and bishops, contacts with high officials
of the Francoist government, and with Inés Luna Ternero, a rich eccentric woman from
Salamanca who supported the Ukrainian emigrants. They describe the activities of the
Obra Católica, which donated money for their education and dormitory.
Left-wing Spanish journalists have used the affinities of the Ukrainian students’
worldview with Francoist ideology in their publications dedicated to the war in the
Donbas. The pretext for studying the history of the first wave of the Ukrainian Diaspora
in Spain was an incident, which took place on October 8, 2014. The followers of a
Ukrainian nationalist party tried to protest the meeting of Spanish students who had
gathered at the Department of Political Science of the University Complutense to
commemorate the victims killed in the fire at the Trade Union building caused by the
“fascist Ukrainian government” on May 2, 2014.16 The publication is a typical example of

16

@iLeninOficial, “Neonazis ucranianos revientan un acto en la Universidad Complutense de
Madrid,” Actualidad.Alternativa.es, accessed January 11, 2018, http://actualidadalternativa.
blogspot.com/2014/10/neonazis-ucranianos-revientan-un-acto.html.

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

125

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

anti-Ukrainian propaganda and reflects pro-Russian trends, which are popular among
Spanish left-wing parties.
The continuation of the episode was story by Nahia Sanzo, who posted on the
web-site slavyangrad.es, a blog about the Ukrainian students who came to Madrid
after World War II. The author of the blog neither knows the Ukrainian language nor
understands Ukrainian history. The main goal of the publication is to prove (1) that
the presence of Ukrainian nationalists has long roots in Spain; (2) that the members of
Svoboda are descendants of the first wave of Ukrainian emigrants who came to study
in Madrid after World War II; and (3) that both groups are fascist. The text manipulates
numerous leftist clichés, which do not distinguish between “fascism” and “nationalism,”
and refuses to recognize the fact that the USSR with its leaders, Lenin and Stalin,
comprised no less a criminal regime than Nazi Germany.
The disruption of Svoboda members of an event at the University
Complutense of Madrid made visible the presence of Ukrainian
nationalists in Spain, a presence which was never new or incidental.
The history of Ukrainian right-wing extremists in Spain begins in
the post-World War II period after the defeat of Nazi Germany.
It began the collaboration of exiled Ukrainians and the secret
services of the USA during the Cold War.17
The sources of information are newspapers (ABC and The Ukrainian Weekly) and
the works of Kevin C. Ruffner, who has studied the activities of the CIA. In general, the
facts, names, and dates in Yarymovych’s, Bilyk’s, and Volynskyi’s book and in N. Sanzo’s
publication coincide, but their interpretation in the blog differs. The Spanish journalist
depicts the Ukrainian students as Greek-Catholic fanatics, outraged anticommunists
working for the CIA in the Belladonna and Trident operations, and as young people
full of hatred against Jews and Poles. The Yarymovych’s, Bilyk’s, and Volynskyi’s book
undermines this simplified and stereotypical vision of the first wave of the Ukrainian
Diaspora in Spain as xenophobic and extremist nationalists. First, some of the students,
like Volodymyr Volynskyi, without doubt, worked for the CIA as we have previously
mentioned, but it would be an exaggeration to suggest that all of them were CIA agents.
Many members of Hromada were not involved in political issues and not all of them
were Greek-Catholic believers. Second, Oleksandr Bilyk comments on the incidents of
Ukrainian and Polish students in the university dormitory. He demonstrates that the
two groups reconciled on the ground of having a common enemy — the USSR.
Another proof of the pro-Polish sympathies of the Ukrainian students is their
active contacts with Józef Łobodowski. He was well-known Polish poet and contributor
to Jerzy Giedroyc’s journal Kultura (Culture), and a frequent visitor of the Ukrainian
17

Nahia Sanzo, “La origen de la diáspora ucraniana en España,” slavyangrad.es, accessed January
11, 2018, https://slavyangrad.es/2014/10/27/EL-ORIGEN-DE-LA-DIASPORA-UCRANIANA-ENESPANA/.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

126

students’ community in Spain. He believed that the future of Polish-Ukrainian relations
needed a basis of mutual respect and equality. The authors of the book call him “a great
friend of Ukrainians.” 18 They provide biographical information about him and include
the beginning of his poem Song about Ukraine in the original and in a Ukrainian
translation by Sviatoslav Hordynskyi. Bilyk indicates that when Petro Kliuk gave his
presentations about Symon Petliura and pogroms at the Catalonian club in Madrid,
the Jewish inhabitants of Madrid who attended the event received the speech warmly.
This fact is hardly compatible with the anti-Semitic image of the Ukrainian emigrants.
In other words, the everyday and historical reality of the Ukrainian students in Spain
proves that the Ukrainian nationalist ideology, which they represented, was a more
complex phenomenon than its ideologically motivated interpretation suggested by
Nahia Sanzo.

Ukraine as a Christian Orient
The Ukrainian group in Spain was not large in membership, and the existence of
Hromada was short-lived. However, it was impossible to silence its members in the
cultural dialogue between the two countries. Following the code of the political
emigrant, they took every opportunity to spread word of Ukraine in Spain and to
research Spanish traces in Ukrainian history, literature, and art.
One may ask, what can unite these nations, which are located at
the two opposite ends of Europe? Moreover, in the past Ukrainian
history has never been favorable for establishing and developing
contacts. These were the issues discussed by the Ukrainians trying
to find answers to historical mysteries.19
In their interpretation of the issue the authors depart from the idea that Ukraine
had always been an inseparable part of Europe. For them it was the European Orient
or the Christian Orient. We are sure that the young Ukrainians arrived in Spain with
this idea and that it penetrated deeper into their consciousness under the influence
of the intellectual environment of Spain. First, we should mention the Center of
Oriental Studies (Centro de los Estudios Orientales) recalled in the Yarymovych, Bilyk,
and Volynskyi book many times. The founder of the institution was Santiago Morillo,
a Jesuit who taught at the Dubno (Volyn or Volhynia) seminary before 1939. He spoke
many languages, including Ukrainian, and knew the history of the oriental churches
very well. Santiago Morillo was a member of the Board of Directors of Obra Católica and
communicated with the students. He was the editor of the The European East (Oriente
Europeo) journal. In 1957 he published a special issue of the journal, dedicated to

18

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 149.

19

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 132.

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

127

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

Ukraine.20 It included papers about Ukrainian history, geography, literature and culture,
written by renowned experts, such as Dmytro Chyzhevskyi and George Shevelov. As
one can see from the name of the journal, its authors imagined Ukraine as a part of the
European (Christian) East. The same persons who helped the Ukrainian students get
scholarships to study in Spain participated in the creation of the journal; they included
Greek-Catholic Church hierarchs Maksym Hermaniuk, Ivan Buchko, and Andrii Kishka.
Another key person in the intellectual world of the Ukrainian students was Dmytro
Buchynskyi, a journalist, literary scholar, and a leading researcher at the Ukrainian
department of the Center of Oriental Studies. He also supported the vision of Ukraine
as an integral part of Western civilization and encouraged the students to disseminate
this viewpoint in their research and communication with Spaniards. Yarymovych,
Bilyk, and Volynskyi recall his name with great respect and describe his early death
(in 1963) at the age of 53 as a dramatic event, which puts an end to the first period of
the first wave of the Ukrainian Diaspora in Spain.
Thus, the book is about an important episode in the Spanish-Ukrainian dialogue,
which remains almost unknown to scholars. It concerns cultural practices used by the
students to speak about their country. These included Ukrainian church music, folk
songs, and dances performed at the University, in the dormitory, in religious processions,
and at the International Festival of Folklore Arts in Madrid in 1949. Ukrainian subjects
often appeared in the agenda of Obnova sessions. In particular, Dmytro Buchynskyi
spoke about Taras Shevchenko, the philosophy of Skovoroda, the Cult of the Virgin
Mary in Ukraine, and the life and works of Natalena Koroleva and Ivan Franko.

The Spanish-Ukrainian Cultural Dialogue
The second part of the book contains a mosaic of many facts about the past and present
of the Spanish-Ukrainian cultural dialogue. The authors begin with two questions:
1) whether the Alans and Scythians, whom the Ukrainians consider their ancestors,
reached the Iberian Peninsula and 2) if the Cossacks had ever been to Zaragoza or any
other place in Spain. The answer to the first question is positive. The authors stress
that they do not
have in their minds to insinuate or to prove a biological affinity
between the Ukrainians and Spaniards, but one should recognize
the fact that the mentioned peoples were at a certain moment on
the lands of both peoples.21
The other question remains without an answer, as no evidence has been found.
However, Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi suggest that the Cossacks most likely were
20

Oriente Europeo. Revista trimestral del Centro de Estudios Orientales, director Santiago Morillo,
S. J., Núm. 26, 1957.

21

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 133.

128

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

in Spain, because there is information about their participation in the Thirty Years War,
at the battle of Lepanto, and the battle of Dunkirk. These historical speculations were
important for the Ukrainian students because they looked upon themselves as the
inheritors of the heroic spirit of the Cossacks. The section about the medieval period
concludes the discussion about possible contacts of the people of Ancient Rus with
Al-Andalus, and provides information about Ukrainians who came to Spain during the
Napoleonic wars. In general, this data is fragmentary and anecdotal but, in any case,
the selection and interpretation of the facts reflect the Eurocentric mode of thinking
of those who collected them.
When speaking about the history of the 20th century, the authors of the book
show the attempts of the Spanish Ambassador in Vienna to liberate Andrei Sheptytskyi,
who was arrested by the Russian Tsarist government for his ecumenical ideas. The
grateful metropolitan encouraged the Spanish church to pay more attention to the
Eastern Church and gave an impulse for the creation of the journal Obra del Oriente
Cristiano. Another important episode treated by Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi is
an attempt to establish diplomatic relations between Spain and the Ukrainian People’s
Republic in 1918–1920. King Alfonso XIII authorized his Consul in Odesa, José María
Sempere y Olivares, to establish and maintain contacts with the government in Kyiv.
As a response, the Ukrainian People’s Republic appointed Yevhen Kulisher as its
Ambassador in Madrid, but the diplomatic mission never begin its functioning. Along
with events of religious and political history, the second part of the book discusses
groups of musicians who visited Spain. Among them were Oleksandr Koshyts’s
Ukrainian National Bandura Chorus (January, 1921), the Mykola Leontovych National
Chorus (November, 1921), and Hryhorii Kytastyi’s and Volodymyr Bozhyk’s Ukrainian
Bandurist Chorus (October, 1958).
The Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi book is especially valuable for those who
study Spanish-Ukrainian literary contacts. An important person to study is Dr. Yaroslav
Rudnytskyi, a professor at the University of Manitoba, who participated in the
International Onomastic congress, held in Salamanca in April of 1955. He gave a talk
in Spanish, entitled “Spanish topo- and anthroponomy in Ukrainian versions of Don
Juan.” The professor spoke about two plays — Lesia Ukrainka’s The Stone Master and
Spyrydon Cherkasenko’s Don Juan and Rosita. The authors indicate that during his stay
Rudnytskyi presented a Spanish translation of Bohdan Ihor Antonych’s well-known
poem, “A Word about Alcazar,” to the museum of Alcázar in Toledo. They provide
a description of this act:
Impressed by the courage and heroic struggle of the defenders
of Alcazar, B. I. Antonych, in Lviv, wrote and dedicated the poem
“A Word about Alcazar” dedicated to the heroic participants of
those events. Yaroslav Rudnytskyi, Antonych’s schoolmate and
friend since university, brought a copy of the poem to Spain.
Thanks to the efforts of Dr. Buchynskyi, the Ukrainian original and
its Spanish translation were framed and, with the permission of

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

129

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

General Moscardo (the commander-in-chief of Francoist troops in
Toledo. — O. P., O. Sh.) located in one of the most visible places in
Alcázar, which anyone can easily see from the entrance.22
Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi cite the titles of two PhD dissertations about
Spanish literature defended at the University of Madrid. Their authors are Semen
Fediuk (Political Ideas in Cervantes’ Don Quixote, 1953), and Petro Kliuk (Spanish Motifs
in Ukrainian Literature, 1971).23 In Kliuk’s dissertation one can find an overview of the
use of Don Juan’s image in Spanish, world, and Ukrainian literatures. Dr. Kliuk, with the
help of Prof. Carlos Jiménez, translated Lesia Ukrainka’s The Stone Master into Spanish.
Another subfield of Dr. Kliuk’s research is Ivan Franko’s contribution in discovering —
for the Ukrainian reader — the works of Cervantes, Calderón, Lope de Vega, and the
world of the Spanish romances. Dr. Kliuk also analyzes Spanish imagery in the works of
Natalena Koroleva, a Ukrainian writer born in Spain. Among the facts of her biography
connected with Spain he mentions Natalena Koroleva’s translation of St. Teresa de
Ávila’s book, The Way of Perfection, which remains unknown to scholars.
Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi provide information about translations of
Spanish literature. They pay attention to the Ukrainian translations of Lope de Vega’s
works and of Mykola Lukash’s translation of Don Quixote. Another intellectual included
in the overview is Mykola Osadchyi, who during his imprisonment in a concentration
camp in Mordovia, translated Federico García Lorca’s poetry. It is important to stress
that the authors of the book had only a vague idea of the history of translating Spanish
literature into Ukrainian, as they do not mention intellectuals most readers have likely
heard of, Ihor Kachurovskyi and Yuriy Tarnaswsky, who both lived in the Diaspora. The
artistic dimension of the Spanish-Ukrainian dialog in the book is represented by figures
such as Borys Kriukov (who lived in Argentina and illustrated Don Quixote), Oleksa
Hryshchenko (a friend of Pablo Picasso), Liuboslav Hutsaliuk, Ivanna Nizhnyk, Andriy
Solohub, Petro Andrienko, Oleksa Klymko, and Roksolana Luchakovska-Armstrong.
Some of these artists spent time in Spain and created works reflecting Spanish motifs.
The concluding paragraphs of the overview provides information about Ukrainian
opera singers who visited Spanish cities with their performances.
The picture of historical and cultural contacts between Spain and Ukraine
presented in the Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi book is far from complete and lacks
methodology. It appears as if the authors were following the recommendation of the
brochure for Ukrainian political emigrants, who had to use any opportunity to tell
everything they knew about their country to a foreigner. However, we would like to
again stress that the addressees of the book are not Spaniards, but Ukrainian readers,
both from the Diaspora and from independent Ukraine, which appeared as a result of
the collapse of the USSR. In this sense, this attempt at rewriting the history and culture
22

Yarymovych et al., Narys istorii ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady, 141.

23

Petro Kluk, La temática española en la poesía ucraniana (Madrid: Universidad
Complutense, 1971).

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

130

of Ukraine as part of a Christian (European) Oriental narrative, undertaken by the
memoirists, has special meaning. It teaches all Ukrainians, regardless of where they
live, to look upon themselves as a part of the Western world.

Conclusion
Yarymovych, Bilyk, and Volynskyi’s book reveals the controversial experience of
Ukrainians in the 20th century. First, the information provided by the authors makes
a researcher take into account all varieties of displacement. In particular, the Ukrainian
students in Spain were not displaced persons in the strict meaning of the words. They
were war prisoners, who for a certain period found themselves in DP camps. They
identified themselves as political emigrants and combatants, which, in our opinion,
played a decisive part in developing their strategies of survival in coping with the
consequences of stress, and in mobilizing their energies to live.
Second, the book underlines that the students in Madrid, like many other
Ukrainian emigrants, faced dramatic challenges during the aftermath of World War II,
and had to adjust to cultural circumstances of the country to which they emigrated. In
their case, this country was Spain, where the dominant ideology was Francoism. They
accepted this authoritarian worldview because it gave them a chance to protect their
Ukrainianness during the Cold War between the Western world and the USSR.
Third, the book proves the importance of Christianity as an identificational and
civilizational factor of the Ukrainian nation. The students had to leave their home
country, but they did their best to preserve their religious identity. Moreover, they
believed that Ukraine was European, therefore a Christian Orient. They were conservative
representatives of what Tamara Hundorova has defined as Occidentalism — a cultural
paradigm, which consists in the modernization of Ukraine through its westernization.
Finally, Yarymovych’s, Bilyk’s, and Volynskyi’s book provides researchers with new
theoretical perspectives and empirical information, important for the comparative
study of displacement and emigration experiences of Ukrainians in the second half
of the 20th century. It opens unknown subplots of the Spanish-Ukrainian cultural
dialogue and includes biographies of Dmytro Buchynskyi and Santiago Morillo, who
maintained intensive contacts with the Ukrainian students and contributed to their
spiritual development. Future research should include archival work, which will allow
for collecting data about the Ukrainian service of Spanish national radio and about the
involvement of the Ukrainian students in CIA operations against the USSR. This future
quest, without any doubt, will bring unexpected discoveries, which will help to better
understand Ukrainian destinies in the global world.

Oleksandr Pronkevych, Olga Shestopal.

131

Ukrainian Students in Spain after World War II

Bibliography
Cipco, Serge. Ukrainians in Argentina, 1897–1950: Making of a Community. Edmonton:
Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies, 2011.
Emigratsiia i nashi zavdannia [Emigration and Our Tasks], vol. I. Ellwangen: Ridna
knyzhechka, 1948.
Isajiw, Wsevolod, Bishyk, Yury, and Senkus, Roman, eds. The Refugee Experience:
Ukrainian Displaced Persons after World War II. Edmonton: Canadian Institute of
Ukrainian Studies, 1992.
Himka, John-Paul. “A Central European Diaspora under the Shadow of World War II:
The Galician Ukrainians in North America.” Austrian History Yearbook 37 (2006):
17–31.
Kluk, Petro. La temática española en la poesía ucraniana. Madrid: Universidad
Complutense, 1971.
Luciuk, Lubomyr Y. Searching for Place: Ukrainian Displaced Persons, Canada, and the
Migration of Memory. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2000.
Maruniak, Volodymyr. Ukrainska emigratsiia v Nimechchyni i Avstrii po druhii svitovii
viini. Tom I. Roky 1945–1951 [The Ukrainian Emigration in Germany and Austria after
World War II. Volume I, 1945–1951]. Munich: Akademichne vydavnytstvo doktora
Petra Beleia, 1985.
Rogers, Eamonn, ed. Encyclopedia of Contemporary Spanish Culture. London; New York:
Routledge, 2002.
Sanzo, Nahia. “La origen de la diáspora ucraniana en España.” slavyangrad.es.
Accessed January 11, 2018. https://slavyangrad.es/2014/10/27/EL-ORIGEN-DE-LADIASPORA-UCRANIANA-EN-ESPANA/.
Yarymovych, Volodymyr, Bilyk, Oleksandr, and Volynskyi, Mykola. Narys istorii
ukrainskoi studentskoi hromady ta Ukrainskykh poselen v Espanii (1946–1996)
[An Overview of the History of the Ukrainian Student Community and Ukrainian
Settlements in Spain, 1946–1996]. Philadelphia; Madrid, 1997. Accessed January 11,
2018. http://diasporiana.org.ua/ukrainica/7704-yarimovich-v-bilik-o-volinskiym-naris-istoriyi-ukrayinskoyi-studentskoyi-gromadi-ta-ukrayinskih-poselen-vespaniyi‑1946–1996/.

3
Oleksandr Pronkevych is a Professor at the Department of English Philology at Petro
Mohyla Black Sea National University and at the Department of Literature at the
National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy. His research interests include Spanish
Literature and the Theory of Literature. Professor Pronkevych has participated in
numerous conferences on Spanish and World Literature. He has authored and edited
more than 130 papers and 9 books.

132

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

Olga Shestopal is an Assistant Professor at the Department of World Literature at Kyiv’s
Taras Shevchenko National University. She is a member of the Association of Hispanists
of Ukraine. Her research interests include the History of Spanish Literature of the
20thcentury and Comparative Literature.

