"x"
"1" "Open   textbooks  and  student learning in social work  research methods : Results from a mixed-methods and student-engaged pilot project"
"2" "Corresponding Author :"
"3" "DeCarlo,  M. P. PhD,   Radford University School of Social Work, mdecarlo1@radford.edu, Waldron Hall 223, PO Box 6958, Radford, VA 24142"
"4" "Additional Authors:"
"5" "Crenshaw, C. MSW,  Radford University School of Social Work, PO Box 6958, Radford, VA 24142"
"6" "Fominaya, A. PhD, School of the Art Institute of Chicago ,  116 S. Michigan Ave.   13th floor ,  Chicago IL, 60603"
"7" "Parsons, A.  MSW , Ohio State University School of Social Work ,   1947 College Rd N, Columbus, OH 43210"
"8" "Secret, M. C. PhD, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Social Work, 1000 Floyd Ave PO Box 842027, Richmond, VA 23284"
"9" "Stewart, M. L. PhD, Virginia Commonwealth University School of Social Work, 1000 Floyd Ave PO Box 842027, Richmond, VA 23284"
"10" "Acknowledgments:"
"11" "This work was supported by the Radford University’s Waldron College Research Award, and the Open Education Group’s OER Research Fellowship.   The author would like to acknowledge the  invaluable  contributions  to the production of the open textbook by  Anita Walz  and Robert Browder of V irginia Tech  Publishing,  Prof.  Melissa Ashman  of Kwantlen Polytechnic University, and Radford University MSW graduates   David Cacamis  and  Daniel Brooks   as well as the  undergraduate  students, faculty, and  administrators of the Radford University School of Social Work  and Waldron College of Health and Human Services  without  whom this project would not have been possible .  Dr. Dalia Khoury assisted greatly with the production of this manuscript."
"12" "Disclosures: The author has no conflicts of interest to disclose."
"13" "Abstract"
"14" "Researchers conducted a quasi-experiment over two academic years comparing students using a  customized and free   ( i.e.,  open )  textbook  with those using a   commercial textbook  in an undergraduate research methods class .  Quantitative results  indicated  students  using  the open textbook  demonstrate d  similar  gains in research knowledge  to those using a commercial textbook . Specifically, students using an OER   earned  higher final grades but   showed   fewer gains in research knowledge from  pre-test  to  post-test .  Focus group s—conceptualized, facilitated, and analyzed by student s on the  research  team — uncovered  themes that demonstrate the importance of customization of open textbooks by faculty.  S tudents using  the customized open textbook  reported greater engagement and comprehension of textbook content ,  describing it as easy to  understand , tailored to the course, and less boring to read ."
"15" "Open textbooks and student learning in  undergraduate  social work research methods:  A  mixed-methods and student-engaged pilot  evaluation"
"16" "Undergraduate social work students exist in an environment of economic  precariousness   and oppression. According to the Council on Social Work Education ( CSWE,  2016), the average bachelor of social work  (BSW)  student graduates with about $28,283 in debt.  Over  two-thirds of  BSW   students report that working part-time or full-time is necessary to afford  college , with nearly 30% using credit cards to finance the cost of education (Yoon, 2010).  Debt is likely to follow the student long-term, as t he average salary of a BSW graduate is $39 ,119 , affording little room for loan repayment and graduate education   (Salsberg et al., 2017 ) .   Post-graduation, s tudent debt is associated with bankruptcy, medical hardship, mental health problems, substance abuse, and suicide (Despard et al., 2016; Sweet et al., 2013) ."
"17" "F aculty cannot control the biggest source of student debt —   tuition.    However, academic freedom ensure s  that faculty  and  program  administrators control a  key  contributor to student debt— the cost of textbooks and other required  learning  materials . The cost of college textbooks has increased  8 8 % since 2006  and 1, 041% since 1977  (Bureau of Labor Statistics,  2016; Popken, 2015 ). The average undergraduate student at a public or private institution is advised by the College Board ( 2019 ) to budget $ 1,240  for textbooks and other required course materials  per academic year .  Textbook costs are particularly burdensome because they are due all at once,  draining student bank accounts at  the beginning of the semester . Students  commonly  report delaying the purchase of textbooks until they make sure the professor will use them   ( National Association of College Stores [NACS] , 2019 ).  Students receiving  financial aid , especially veterans,  must wait weeks into the semester  to receive financial aid  to purchase  textbooks  ( Agnihotri, Essa, & Baker, 2017 ).  In this way , textbook costs create a barrier to learning  and academic achievement  for all students and compound existing inequalities ."
"18" "Students cannot learn from textbooks they cannot afford to buy.  Open educational resource s  (OER) are  one  potential  solution  to make education more accessible .  OER are free resource s   such as   textbooks, assignments, videos, and case studies, that allow users to copy, edit, share, and remix content under a  C reative  C ommons or other open license (Hewlett Foundation,  2019 ; Wiley, n.d. ).  OER, and open textbooks  specifically , are tou ted as a social justice  intervention, making college more accessible and  equitable  for students, particularly those from historically marginalized groups  ( Hodgkinson-Williams & Trotter, 2018 ;  Willems & Bossu, 2012 ) ."
"19" "In a study of  21,822 students in  introductory c ourses  at the University of Georgia,  students  in courses  using  OER in place of commercial textbooks   earned higher grades ,  with  even larger gains  in final grades  achieved by  non-white, Pell-eligible, and part-time students (Colvard, Wilson, & Park 2018).  According to a survey of  over 21,000  Florida students,   64.2% of students have not purchased a textbook due to cost ; moreover,  textbook  costs caused  students   to take fewer courses, avoid expensive courses, earn a poor grade, and withdraw  from classes   (Florida Virtual Campus, 2019).  Meta-analyses of open textbook implementation studies, on the whole, find students using OER perform equivalently to students using a commercial textbook on measures of academic performance  (Hilton, 2019) and are less likely to withdraw from courses (Clinton, 2019).  Student perceptions of OER are generally positive, rating them to be of similar or better quality to commercial textbooks ( e.g.,  Abramovich & McBride, 2018 )."
"20" "These empirical findings support the most  well-developed hypothesis  for OER’s impact on student learning :   the  access hypothesis . This hypothesis   posits that students who either could  not or would not purchase expensive commercial textbooks are able to access the materials in  an OER course  that are needed to be successful ( Grimaldi et al., 2019 ).  Another  pedagogical hypothes i s for OER  focuses  on the opportunities afforded to students and faculty by the open license attached  to OER .  T he  remix hypothesis   offers  that the more professors integrate remixing and adaptation into their course  and learning materials , the better student learning outcomes will be  ( Wiley, 2015 ) .  This hypothesis applies only to faculty who use the open license to customize the materials, possibly with students as part of open pedagogy. OER facilitates faculty collaboration,  and  the  remix hypothesis holds that over time,  this  community-driven creation  will  yield more robust, personalized, and useful  learning  resources  (Basu Malick, et al., 2019)."
"21" "Although the empirical evidence for the use of OER supports  these hypotheses to some extent , there are a number of limitations  in the  OER  literature  that require further inquiry.  E valuations of OER  are mixed  to   the degree  with   which they  control for confounding variables (Hilton, 2019; Clinton, 2019). While there are a handful of high-power studies in the field  (e.g.  Colvard, Wilson, & Park, 2018;  Winit z ky - Stephens & Pickavance, 2017 ) , most empirical studies are small-scale evaluations which may  not  have enough statistical power to distinguish  between modest changes in grades ( e.g. ,  improving a final   grade from  C to B )  (Grimaldi, et al., 2019)."
"22" "In applying the extant OER literature to  the social work discipline, there are additional  relevant  limitations. Many OER efficacy studies are conducted in large introductory  undergraduate or community college classes ,  often using OpenStax textbooks ,  while social work classes  are usually  taken during Junior and Senior years .  Additionally, e fficacy and perceptions studies with students are almost entirely quantitative.  Researchers who   collect qualitative data from students  ( e.g.,  Cooney, 2017; Petrides et al., 2011) do so with a small minority of participants as part of a larger quantitative study.  Finally, from  a participatory perspective,  r esearch teams within OER studies  rarely  include studen ts in the design, data collection, or data analysis  processes  of research , privileging the  “expert”  perspectives of professors and researchers over students in the  scholarship  of teaching and learning."
"23" "This pilot study was  designed  with the se  participatory and qualitative critiques in mind .  It  investigated the impact of  Scientific inquiry in social work  ( an open textbook created by the lead author )  on  quantitative  learning outcomes and  qualitative  experience s .  Researchers hypothesized that ( a ) students using an open textbook  would  earn higher final grades and  show  greater  improvements  research knowledge; ( b ) students  would be  frustrated by high textbook costs; and ( c ) students using an open textbook  would  demonstrate  improvements  in research -related  attitudes and self-efficacy."
"24" "Methods"
"25" "Participants"
"26" "The 33 p articipants  in this study  were drawn from the lead author’s undergraduate research methods courses at  Radford University,  a  CSWE-accredited  mid-size regional public university in a rural area.  Data were collected  over two academic years . Three groups were convened across two campuses.  The control group and experimental group were composed of full-time BSW students on the main campus  enrolled in  the lead author’s Introduction to Social Work Research course. The pilot group were composed of part-time students  in the same course  on a satellite campus  associated with a local community college ."
"27" "Procedure"
"28" "The Radford University Institutional Review Board approved both protocols associated with this project . Informed consent and confidentiality procedures  were reviewed on the first day of class and  obscured student participation from the instructor  until after final grades were  submitted .  Students in the control group were assigned the  traditional  textbook for the course,  Engel & Schutt’s  The practice of research in social work (4 th  ed.) , and the professor used publisher materials to create slideshows and quizzes tailored to that resource  to  use  alongside original resources .  The lead author’s open textbook,  Scientific inquiry in social work , was assigned  to  the experimental group, and a beta edition was assigned  to  the pilot group."
"29" "The research team  was composed of the lead author, one undergraduate researcher, and two graduate researchers. As part of an independent study, the undergraduate researcher  conducted a literature review on OER research, create d  focus group questions,  participated in instruction  on moderating  and analyzing  focus groups,  as well as   facilitated  and transcribed  the  control and pilot  focus groups . A graduate researcher served as note-taker for these groups , coded data alongside the undergraduate researcher and lead author, and  participated in  a  coding conference.  After these  two  students graduated, a  third graduate researcher facilitated focus groups for the experimental group and conducted a final round of qualitative data analysis  in conference with  the lead author."
"30" "Measures"
"31" "To measure improvements in research knowledge, r esearchers assessed  changes in  pre -  and post - test scores  as well as final grades .  Students  complete d  a pre - test   synchronously   on the first day of class   assessing baseline research knowledge   using the  Social Work Research Knowledge Assessment (RKA) developed by Secret a nd  colleagues (2017). The RKA measures research knowledge in graduate social work students , but  its  six domains  strongly  overlap with undergraduate research methods .  In place of a final exam, students completed the RKA post - test. All  students were required to complete the pre -  and post - test, each worth 2.5% of the final grade .   S tudents who completed the pre - test were awarded full credit . T he post - test was graded on a 22% curve .  Students were not told of the impact the pre-test or post-test would have on their grade. They were simply urged to do their best on each assessment, providing an accurate measurement of their research knowledge.  This report omits data from students who did not consent to the study ."
"32" "Students in the experimental group received two additional quantitative measures. The first  was   a  10 -item measure of self-efficacy in performing  social work  research tasks (Holden et al., 1999). The second  was   an original measure of research attitudes created  using  focus group data from the experimental and control groups. Th is  nine-item scale asked students to rate the degree to which they felt research was interesting/boring, useless/useful in social work practice, easy/difficult to apply in social work practice, anxiety-provoking ,  among  other  items ."
"33" "Student researchers conducted f ocus groups during the last class session of the semester.  Groups of  five  or  six  students  rotated  into  a  private meeting room with student researchers  who moderated and recorded the sessions .   Focus group questions were created using the cost, outcomes, use, and perceptions (COUP) framework developed by Hilton  and colleagues  ( 2016 ). Focus groups used a semi-structured protocol that  remained  largely identical between conditions,  save  for questions  about access and cost .  Twenty-eight students participated in the focus groups."
"34" "Results"
"35" "A total of 33 students participated in the study. Descriptive statistics for the full sample are provided in  T able 1."
"36" "[Table 1 about here]"
"37" "Question  1: Learning outcomes"
"38" "For this analysis, the  pilot and experimental groups were combined (n=17) to allow for direct comparison between those  who   received OER and those  who   did not. Final  g rades served as the dependent variable and was notable for three outliers, each of which  represented  students who failed  or withdrew  from  the course.  Outliers   were retained in the analysis, as those  who failed the course may have failed in part because of the materials available to them.  Researchers conducted  a Mann-Whitney U test to compare the  two groups  since  it is robust to the presence of outliers  in data .  Analyses revealed  a significant difference in final grades between  students using  OER and  those using a commercial textbook , U=80.00, p=0.04. The mean rank for the OER group (20.29) was higher than that of the non-OER group (13.50) , as indicated in Table 2 ,  thereby  supporting the efficacy of OER ."
"39" "[Table 2 about here]"
"40" "Dissimilar results were found in the RKA pre -  and post - test data.  These results should be interpreted with caution, as the post - test for the experimental group was influenced by an emergency weather event  that  necessitated  half of the students to complete the measure from home .  Many students who completed the test remotely  performed  worse   than their pre - test score .  This  disparity was reflected in  the analysis, which found that  on average ,  the level of knowledge exhibited by  students using OER declined over time.  Strong gains were made by students in the control group, though this is largely attributable to far lower pre - test scores, as in dicated in  Table 2."
"41" "T he RKA variable was leptokurtotic and included important outliers that  researchers  did not want to lose in  the  analysis. As such,  researchers  sought a non-parametric alternative to a typical repeated measures ANOVA.  Researchers  selected the ANOVA-type statistic explained in Noguchi, Gel, Brunner, and Konietschke (2012) because it allows for a longitudinal, factorial design to be analyzed when only two time-points are available , and it is  robust to both small samples and outliers. This was analyzed using the R-statistical package “nparLR” and the “f1.ld.f1” function. The ANOVA-type showed significant main effects for time, F(1) = 4.69, p=0.03, though not for group, F(1)=2.66, p=1.03.  Additionally, t here was a significant interaction between group and time, F(1)=19.28, p<0.001."
"42" "Question  2 :  Learning experience"
"43" "Researchers analyzed  focus group  data using  directed content analysis (Hsieh & Shannon, 2005) .  Building from  Hilton  and colleagues’  ( 2017 ) COUP framework, researchers coded responses related to costs, outcomes, use, and perceptions while also  noting  emergent codes within the dataset.  During  the final coding conference,  codes  coalesced into two groups—student experience s   influenced by open textbook   adopt ion  and student experience s   influenced by open textbook  adaptation , which  were  interpreted using the  access  and  remix  hypotheses of OER efficacy , respectively .  The  coding matrix is  pictured  in Table  3 ."
"44" "[Table 3 about here]"
"45" "Open textbook adoption .  Codes related to textbook adoption refer to  the set of learning experiences that arise when professors replace a commercial textbook with an open textbook.  Students using open and commercial textbooks  differed with regard to  the ir experiences with the  cost of the textbook, accessing the textbook, and the perceptions they formed about textboo k  quality."
"46" "Cost .  In all groups, students reported that textbook costs were a  very important  concern  and  a  source of annoyance . Students  in all groups   agreed ,  “ I  shouldn’t have to pay an extreme amount for my books if  I’m  already paying a lot to be here to sit in the classes ,” and “I’m broke, okay? Radford takes all of my money.”  Students reported that  in other classes  professors  “get mad at you for not buying the textbook and then you buy the textbook and they never use it so I waste [d]  my money”  Because of the high cost  of the textbook  in the bookstore ,  students   in the control group  delayed the purchase of textbooks   until they knew  the required books  were required  to succeed in the class .  O ther cost-cutting strategies   includ ed  buying used books and  using  online retailers."
"47" "Student experiences regarding cost were, for obvious reasons,  quite  different  between groups .  The price of  the commercial textbook   (new)  was approximately $200  in  the bookstore.  The commercial textbook was viewed as particularly expensive  by students .   “I think this book was a lot more expensiv e” than other books, and these costs add up across classes “ because I had to get like 6 books in total and a couple of them I couldn’t get.”  Students in the pilot condition expressed  excitement and gratitude for the  lack of cost , as one student  related  “I was just screaming hooray because I didn’t have to pay for another book .”  Students using OER  saved money, and reported spending it  on rent, gas, groceries,  bills,  and other  text books."
"48" "Access .  The experimental group  demonstrated less enthusiasm  than the pilot group  for the free resource  because   the two groups  access the textbook in  striking ly   different   ways .  Most s tudents in the pilot condition print ed  out  each  textbook   chapter  using a  free  printer in the computer lab .   Students also use d  their  mobile  phone s , for example while  waiting to see   a  doctor.  The PDF used in the pilot group made it difficult to access links,  which frustrated  some  students.  The one student  in the pilot group  who  only used the digital edition  was unaware of the free printer because she did not commonly take classes at the satellite campus. She suggested that the professor provide a low-cost print edition through the bookstore."
"49" "This suggestion was implemented with the experimental group on the main campus.  Students were provided a link to the HTML , PDF, and e-reader  edition s  of the textbook via email and in the course syllabus. However,  focus groups revealed  students   “didn’t know it was free until after” purchasing the  $50 print edition  produced and sold through  the campus bookstore .  As a non-commercial work, it was printed at-cost by the bookstore’s print-on-demand supplier  with no remuneration to the author .  Even after the professor posted the links to the HTML, PDF, and e-reader editions in the LMS platform  in the fourth week of classes , most students did not use them  at any point in the semester .  To increase awareness of free editions , students  in  the  control group suggested “emailing everybody…being like ‘hey this is free online,’” or  putting this information in “ the bookstore page.”   The few s tudents  in the experimental group who used  digital editions built access patterns early,  clicking  the same link in the initial email or syllabus  to access  the textbook  each time they read."
"50" "While the experimental group purchased  the textbook   exclusively  from the bookstore,  few  students in the control group did  so .  O pinions of the bookstore were negative . Students in the control group complained the textbook  was out-of-stock at the beginning of the semester  and they “had to go back in the bookstore to keep checking on it.” Students in all groups described a similar textbook access process  across courses , starting with the bookstore’s listing of required textbooks and ending with online retailers .  Students  were   frustrated that  “with a lot of the social work classes you don’t even see what you’re book is till like the week before class… s o you don’t even have time to order it online so you have to buy it from the bookstore , ” where it is more expensive.  While this access pathway is disrupted with OER,  as it was for students in the pilot group,  students  using OER   report ed  needing more clarity in  accessing the  online  textbook ,  downloading  digital editions , as well as   highlighting and  annotatin g a digital textbook ."
"51" "Quality .  Student perceptions of quality were  probed using questions about specific qualities such as visual appeal, organization, ease of use, and  other  attributes .  Overall, students using both the commercial and open textbook found them  well organized and  easy to navigate ,   though  “not appealing to look at .”  Students in the control group found the “words run really close together…I guess to save space but it’s kind of small for me.”  Students using both the pilot and final edition of the OER textbook reported “it felt like a real official boo k. ”   Some  organizational issues and broken links were reported by pilot students but not by those in the experimental group . B oth  groups of students using OER  found  “grammar issues and typos in [the book] but it was overall good,”   indicating these  errors  did not detract from perceived quality."
"52" "Open  textbook adaptation .  While adoption can be described as simply choosing a different textbook, adaptation refers to a more in-depth process in which the faculty takes fuller advantage  the open license by revising textbook  content.  A consensus emerged among students  that the open textbook was  customiz ed , personaliz ed , and simplif ied ,  driving  engage ment  and  comprehension . Students using the commercial textbook were split  evenly  in the degree to which they described the book as easy to understand and coherent with how  content  was presented in the class."
"53" "Customized .  Students  spoke  of   a customized textbook as containing less  irrelevant information  as well as  greater coherence  and  usefulness   with in-class  work .  For students using OER,  “ t here is no ‘ignore this chapter, ignore that chapter,’ you need it all and it’s all applicable which is helpful.”  In comparison to “other classes, I don’t feel like I’ve ever used a textbook as much as I have in this class.”  Students in the pilot group and some in the experimental group offered that the OER did not “drag on and on,” had “less fluff,” and  was   “more concise than a normal textbook .” Consensus was not  unanimous , as one student in the experimental group felt the open textbook was too long as “the chapters are like a book itself.” Customization helped students  using OER  complete weekly quizzes, as “when you read it, it fits the answer perfectly.”"
"54" "These quizzes were a source of frustration  for   half of the  students using the commercial textbook.  To  students in  one focus group , the  commercial  textbook contained irrelevant information that the professor and assignments did not focus on. The result, as one student relates, is “I felt like I’m wasting my time looking at the book. None of the stuff is really on the quiz  be cause it would only be one or two questions and everything else…I don’t know what the answer is.”  Another student in this group suggested some of the information in the commercial textbook “was irrelevant and not needed and … could be simplified, somewhat.”  This was related to the perception that research is overwhelming, as  “ you are  learning a lot of things you haven’t learned yet” and “a lot of definitions … start to look the same but you know it’s not the same because there’s so much in each chapter.”  By contrast, student s   in the other  control condition  focus group offered that  the commercial “ book  prepared us really well for the quizzes. If you read the chapter, I don’t think the quizzes were really challenging . ”"
"55" "Easy to  understand .  S tudents  using the commercial textbooks were also  conflict ed  on whether  the textbook  w as easy to understand .  One group found the  content  to be “at a good reading level for where we are and words that … you’ve learned through college, but not … at a doctorate level either.”  Students  did not require outside resources like Google to understand the content.  Overall, this group found it to be “effective compared to other textbooks . ”  However , the second control group found  definitions of key concepts   to be  hard to understand as “even some of the words that were used to explain a definition I didn’t know” and “Google is always  easier .”  Students said publisher-created quiz questions were  “worded differently”  than the textbook ."
"56" "Focus groups of s tudents using OER  were in consensus that the textbook was  “ easy to understand. ”   Students compared the open textbook positively to textbooks from other classes, saying “it’s easy language too, some textbooks you’re reading through and … I don’t know what any of this means . ” There was “no need for Google ”  because  “ it was simple to read, like I didn’t have to think really hard about what he was trying to get across.”  The link between comprehension and engagement was paramount in student experiences. As one student stated, the language in the open textbook was  “a lot less boring than just sitting down and reading a normal textbook where they try to use all of these big words but you don’t really understand what they are saying… so I thought [the open textbook]  made it a lot more clear.”"
"57" "Personalized .  Students using the open textbook talked about the importance of the professor’s voice in the textbook.  They liked how “he put examples of something that we’re familiar with in there…like examples from his wife [and] personal experiences, so it wasn’t a made-up case scenario.”   Personalized content made it seem like “you’re less distanced from the writer of the book.” It also influenced engagement  and comprehension , as one student related , “I liked how he talked about himself…and the studies he was doing… too because I feel like a lot of like this had the potential to be like really really boring and like not understandable.”"
"58" "Engaging ( less  boring) .  Engagement  was a key component of how students experienced the textbook .  S tudents using the commercial textbook   agreed it was  “very dull ,” “not something I want to read . ”  Despite some students’ frustrations, they did not fault the textbook  because  research  methods  “is not super interesting so I don’t know that there could have been like a better way to I guess make it more lively ” or “attention - grabbing.”   By contrast, s tudents using the open textbook stated that the book was “less boring” than  other textbooks which made it “easier to read . ”   They linked engagement with the other three adaptation themes, including customized content that was tailored to the class,  ability to understand the language , and  providing personal examples relevant to local communities  and  social work practice ."
"59" "Question  3: Research attitudes and self-efficacy"
"60" "Research attitudes were assessed in the experimental group using two measures. Because the attitudes post-test score had two outliers, Wilcoxon signed-rank test was utilized, though the difference was not significant (z=   -0.36, p=0.72). Researchers tested whether those who were in the experimental OER group significantly improved in their self-efficacy. In this case, there was a significant improvement in self-efficacy over time (z= -2.35, p =0.02) such that  the  mean rank of self-efficacy post-test was 6.90 compared with the mean rank of the pre-test being 4.50."
"61" "In the focus group data, students  across  all groups expressed  negative  attitudes towards research methods. Students indicated they felt research was boring, difficult, useless, and anxiety-provoking. Perspectives of research tied into self-efficacy in student responses , as one student   offered ,  “especially with a research class it’s going to be really confusing and I’m not going to understand what in the world they’re talking about.” These results corroborate the quantitative findings, showing an improvement in perceived self-efficacy  in those using the open textbook  across the semester  but  consistent  negative attitudes  towards research as a topic."
"62" "Discussion"
"63" "The  quantitative  impact of OER in this study is consistent with the broader OER literature  indicating  that students  using OER achieve similar  learning  outcomes to those using commercial resources   (Hilton, 2019) .  The  mixed findings  on efficacy  are unsurprising, as simulation studies conducted by  Grimaldi and colleagues (2017) find that small sample studies  will  not have enough statistical power to detect  improvements in  learning outcomes . They also reflect Clinton’s (2019) critique that most OER implementation studies  encounter  important threats to internal validity . As such,  the results of this  pilot  study  should be interpreted with caution."
"64" "Internal validity"
"65" "I t is difficult to triangulate the efficacy of OER within  the  quantitative data  d ue to noncomparable pre - test scores between groups  and  emergency weather events during the  post-test .  Future studies of OER should  also  endeavor to find a more coherent incentive structure for students to complete the pre -  and post - test to the best of their ability.  Low  pre -  and post - test scores observed were likely due  to course fatigue, testing environment, and insufficient incentive, as the  tests  counted for only 2.5% towards the final grade. Based on these results, providing a financial incentive for students rather than using the measure as part of the final grade  may elicit  more genuine   effort .  Pre - tests are, in effect, a surprise exam on the first day of class which may negatively influence self-efficacy, attitudes towards research, and ecological validity."
"66" "Experimenter effects are also an important potential limitation, as  having the same individual serve   as lead author of the textbook and primary investigator on the study may have subjected the project to unconscious bias. The student-engaged design  may have mitigated  experimenter  bias to some extent by  providing  student  perspectives  from conceptualization through  qualitative  data analysis , but power imbalances between the professor and students remained."
"67" "Adaptation  and research methods education"
"68" "Because there are so few OER and open textbooks for social work, faculty who want to lower textbook costs or engage  with  open pedagogy   will have to create  or adapt  their own content .  The qualitative results  support this practice, demonstrating that student learning —in particular engagement and comprehension— is impacted by the personalization and customization  that professors  undertake   as part of adaptation .   Personalization may reinforce the  usefulness of research methods ideas  by relating  them  to  social work practice , similar to previous practice-focused  engagement strategies  (Cameron & Este, 2007). This was accomplished through localization and customization, rather than  through  partnerships with community agencies as in other studies (e.g., Knee,  2002) .  Personalization may have also facilitated a more authentic learning experience,  a value connected with the  emerging  generation of learners (Hostettler et al., 2013) ."
"69" "Just as students cannot learn from books they cannot afford to access, they cannot learn from books they cannot understand or find boring.  While half of the students using the commercial textbook could understand it with little problem,  they  found it to be boring .  With one exception, students using  the  open textbook  reported it was  understandable and all students found it to be engaging .  Ease of understanding was mentioned alongside the vocabulary used matching their existing level of knowledge and the personal stories in the textbook that minimized psychological distance between student and professor.   This reflects the  importance of the remix hypothesis in impacting student learning  as well as the social work adage  to  “meet  [students]  where they are.”   The preference for more “stripped down” learning materials  among students in the sample echoes the  undergraduate student  view of research methods in the literature as complex   and overwhelming  (Earley, 2012)."
"70" "Greater engagement with the textbook  did not improve  student  attitudes towards research ,  as  they  remained unchanged across the semester for students using OER.  R esearch self-efficacy increased in students using OER . While this  may be associated with greater engagement and comprehension of the  open   t extbook , t he  lack of  attitudes and self-efficacy  data from students using commercial textbook makes interpreting  these  finding s  challenging , as does the lack of pilot testing for the  research attitudes scale.  Combined, OER  improved  only one component  of  attitudes and self-efficacy, echoing  Adam  and colleagues’   (2004) finding that “ r esearch … evokes the greatest amount of anxiety and the least sense of confidence among social work students” (p. 2).  Future studies should explore t he relationship between self-efficacy,  research attitudes,  engagement, and comprehension  in research methods education , as the stickiness of negative attitudes towards  research methods is a consistent finding across studies ( Earley, 201 4 ) .  Nevertheless, this study provides some evidence that the core textbook content may drive student disengagement from research methods classes . Distinct from previous  technology studies , it measures  the impact of  an  open  online   resource  not   online instruction  in a closed course management system  (e.g.,  Hisle-Gorman & Zuravin, 2006 )."
"71" "Access , agency, and choice"
"72" "Students roundly identified textbook costs as a major stressor, with almost all  rating textbook costs  as “very important.”  They  were frustrated  with the  upfront cost of  the commercial textbook in this class , and the total spent  on textbooks   each  semester. Student purchasing decisions were influenced by  “wasted money,” similar to other studies that find  around one-third of students do not purchase the textbook by the first day of class because they do not know if the professor will use it ( NACS , 2019).  This phenomenon  may  be increasing, as Florida Virtual Campus (2019) found  undergraduate  students purchase 3.6 textbooks that are not used by professors, an increase of one book from students surveyed in 2016."
"73" "In  this  study,  the beneficial effects of OER  were likely  undercut  by  the   $50  paid by   almost all students in  the experimental group  to access  the  free  open textbook , unbeknownst to the professor .   In addition to  distributing  textbook  information via email  and in the syllabus , l inks to open content should  have been  present in the learning management system from the first day of class . Moreover, the  professor  should have reviewed h ow to  download, access,  annotate, highlight, print, and  otherwise  use the various formats  of   the   open  textbook  on the first day of class .  Other studies of OER (e.g., Petrides et al., 2011) find OER can match the existing technological competency of students, but  students in this study  required additional help ."
"74" "In addition to technological  capacity ,  student access issues  should be contextualized within multiple state’s efforts to label OER courses in the course catalog ,  h elping students make informed  financial choices . While these efforts are commendable, OER labeling should be integrated into the campus bookstore with clear language indicating that while the textbook is required, digital editions are available for free from the professor and the print edition in the bookstore is optional.  The campus bookstore was  the primary  method  by   which students acquired information about required materials  in this study , rather than emails or the syllabus , which aligns with other studies of student textbook purchasing   ( NACS , 2019) .  If professors are unable to provide  access  instructions  via  the bookstore platform ,  economically  insecure  students  will suffer ."
"75" "Critiquing the OER literature"
"76" "OER  is  transitioning  from  general education  into more specialized  and advanced  areas  like social work ,  but  the empirical literature has only begun to investigate  the use of OER in  upper-level classes .  This study is the first to investigate the impact of open textbooks on social work undergraduate students and is among only a few to study open textbooks in upper-level undergraduate coursework.  Moreover ,  this study demonstrates  the importance of mixed-methods  and participatory (student-engaged)  inquiry.  The insider perspective offered through student conceptualization, facilitation, and analysis of focus group data was invaluable to uncovering the differential effects of adoption and adaptation in the sample .  Yet, student-engaged research is not a common feature in open education research, in stark contrast to its participatory pedagogical  orientation ."
"77" "Conclusion"
"78" "Students are heavily burdened by textbook costs . S imilar to all undergraduate students,  BSW students in this study reported that high  costs prevent them from buying textbooks and caus e  them to perform worse or withdraw from classes  (Florida Virtual Campus,  2019 ).  For this reason,  universities, systems, and governments increasingly fund and train faculty, facilitating the transition  away from costly commercial resources  that replicate  social inequity .  Although  OER  adaptation and creation are more work -intensive  than simply adopting a resource , the results of this study demonstrate that customizing and personalizing an open resource will  have a  unique  impact  on student learning  versus  simply adopting a n existing no-cost resource.  Although OER are conceptualized as one of many textbook affordability initiatives available in higher education, the qualitative data in this study demonstrate that open content has a unique pedagogical impact versus any free resource.  Adaptation  and open licensing by faculty  opens the door to further engagement with  participatory  and critical digital  pedagogies , as students become co-creators of textbook content, ancillaries, and other resources designed drive authentic engagement with a challenging topic  ( Mays, n.d.;  Morris & Stommel, 2018 ; Wiley & Hilton, 2018 ) .  As a pilot study, the researchers encourage others to  verify and  replicate their findings using the data and measures in  this open project ."
"79" "References"
"80" "Abramovich, S., & McBride, M. (2018). Open education resources and perceptions of financial value.  The Internet and Higher Education,   39,  33–38"
"81" "Adam, N., Zosky, D. L., & Unrau, Y. A. (2004). Improving the research climate in social work curricula: Clarifying learning expectations across BSW and MSW research courses.  Journal of Teaching in Social Work ,  24 (3-4), 1-18."
"82" "Agnihotri, L., Essa, A., & Baker, R. (2017, March). Impact of student choice of content adoption delay on course outcomes. In  Proceedings of the Seventh International Learning Analytics & Knowledge Conference  (pp. 16-20). ACM."
"83" "Basu Mallick, D., Grimaldi, P.J., Whittle, J., Waters, A.E., & Baraniuk, R.G. (2019).  An empirical evaluation of a customized open educational resource.  Manuscript submitted for publication."
"84" "Bureau of Labor Statistics (2016).  College tuition and fees increase 63 percent since January 2006 . Retrieved from:  https://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2016/college-tuition-and-fees-increase-63-percent-since-january-2006.htm"
"85" "Cameron, P. & Este, D. (2007). Engaging students in social work research education.  Social Work Education,  27 (4), 390-406."
"86" "Clinton, V., & Khan, S. (2019). Efficacy of open textbook adoption on learning performance and course withdrawal rates: a meta-analysis.  AERA Open ,  5 (3), 2332858419872212."
"87" "College Board (2019).  Average estimated undergraduate budgets by sector, 2019-20 . Retrieved from:  https://research.collegeboard.org/pdf/2019-trendsincp-fig-1.pdf"
"88" "Colvard, N. B., Watson, C. E., & Park, H. (2018). The impact of open educational resources on various student success metrics.  International Journal of Teaching and Learning in Higher Education ,  30 (2), 262-276."
"89" "Cooney, C. (2017). What Impacts do OER have on students? Students share their experiences with a health psychology OER at New York City College of Technology.  The International Review Of Research In Open And Distributed Learning ,  18 (4)."
"90" "Council on Social Work Education (2016).  2016 statistics on social work education in the United States . Retrieved from:  https:// www.cswe.org/CMSPages/GetFile.aspx?guid=6e8bc9e7-ebd6-4288-bc7a-d2d427d68480"
"91" "Despard, M. R., Perantie, D., Taylor, S., Grinstein-Weiss, M., Friedline, T., & Raghavan, R. (2016). Student debt and hardship: Evidence from a large sample of low-and moderate-income households.  Children and Youth Services Review, 70 , 8-18."
"92" "Earley, M. A. (2014). A synthesis of the literature on research methods education.  Teaching in Higher Education, 19 (3), 242-253."
"93" "Florida Virtual Campus (2019, March 8).  2018 student textbook and course materials survey: Results and findings.  Retrieved from:  https://dlss.flvc.org/documents/210036/1314923/2018+Student+Textbook+and+Course+Materials+Survey+Report+--+FINAL+VERSION+--+20190308.pdf/07478d85-89c2-3742-209a-9cc5df8cd7ea"
"94" "Grimaldi, P. J., Mallick, D. B., Waters, A. E., & Baraniuk, R. G. (2019). Do open educational resources improve student learning? Implications of the access hypothesis.  PloS one ,  14 (3), e0212508."
"95" "Hewlett Foundation (2019).  Open educational resources . Retrieved from:  https://hewlett.org/strategy/open-educational-resources/"
"96" "Hilton, J. (2019). Open educational resources, student efficacy, and user perceptions: a synthesis of research published between 2015 and 2018.  Educational Technology Research and Development , 1-24."
"97" "Hilton, J., Wiley, D., Fischer, L., & Nyland, R. (2016).  Guidebook to research on open educational resources adoption . Open Textbook Network. Retrieved from:  http://research.cehd.umn.edu/otn/wp-content/uploads/2016/08/OER-Research-Guidebook.pdf"
"98" "Hisle-Gorman, E., & Zuravin, S. (2006). Teaching social work research: A comparison of web-based and in-class lecture methods.  Journal of Technology in Human Services ,  24 (4), 77-93."
"99" "Hodgkinson-Williams, C. A., & Trotter, H. (2018). A social justice framework for understanding open educational resources and practices in the global South.  Journal of Learning for Development-JL4D ,  5 (3)."
"100" "Holden, G., Barker, K., Meenaghan, T., & Rosenberg, G. (1999). Research self-efficacy: A new possibility for educational outcomes assessment.  Journal of Social Work Education, 35 (3), 463-476."
"101" "Hostetter, C., Sullenberger, S., & Wood, L. (2013). The key to learning: Engaging undergraduate students in  authentic social work research.  The Journal of Baccalaureate Social Work ,  18 , 47-61."
"102" "Hsieh, H. F. & Shannon, S. E. (2005).  Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.   Qualitative health research ,  15 (9), 1277-1288."
"103" "Knee, R.T. (2002). Can service learning enhance student understanding of social work research?  Journal of  Teaching in Social Work, 22 , 213-225."
"104" "Mays, E. (Ed.) (n.d.)  A guide to making open textbooks with students . Retrieved from:  https://press.rebus.community/makingopentextbookswithstudents/"
"105" "Morris, S. M., & Stommel, J. (2018).  An urgency of teachers: The work of critical digital pedagogy . Hybrid Pedagogy Inc."
"106" "National Association of College Stores (2019).   Student Watch: Attitudes and Behaviors toward Course Materials ,  2018-2019.  Oberlin, OH."
"107" "Noguchi, K., Gel, Y. R., Brunner, E., & Konietschke, F. (2012). nparLD:  A n R software package for the nonparametric analysis of longitudinal data in factorial experiments.  Journal of Statistical Software ,  50 (12)."
"108" "Popken, B. (2015, August 6). College textbook prices have risen 1,041 percent since 1977.  NBC News . Retrieved from:  https://www.nbcnews.com/feature/freshman-year/college-textbook-prices-have-risen-812-percent-1978-n399926"
"109" "Ruth, D. (2019).  More than half of all colleges and 2.94 million students using free OpenStax textbooks this year . OpenStax. Retrieved from:  https://openstax.org/press/more-half-all-colleges-and-294-million-students-using-free-openstax-textbooks-year"
"110" "Petrides, L., Jimes, C., Middleton‐Detzner, C., Walling, J., & Weiss, S. (2011). Open textbook adoption and use: Implications for teachers and learners.  Open Learning: The Journal of Open, Distance and e-Learning, 26 (1), 39-49."
"111" "Salsberg, E., Quigley, L., Mehfoud, N., Acquaviva, K., Wyche, K., & Silwa, S. (2017).   Profile of the social work workforce .  Washington, DC: George Washington University Health Workforce Institute.  Retrieved from:  https://www.cswe.org/Centers-Initiatives/Initiatives/National-Workforce-Initiative/SW-Workforce-Book-FINAL-11-08-2017.aspx"
"112" "Secret, M., Abell, M. L., Ward, C. J., Charles, J. L., & Perkins, N. H. (2017). Research knowledge assessment: A study of MSW students’ acquisition and retention of research knowledge.  Journal of Social Work Education ,  53 (3), 480-494."
"113" "Sweet, E., Nandi, A., Adam, E. K., & McDade, T. W. (2013). The high price of debt: Household financial debt and its impact on mental and physical health.  Social Science & Medicine ,  91 , 94-100."
"114" "Wiley, D. (n.d.)  5R permissions.  Retrieved from:  https://opencontent.org/definition/"
"115" "Wiley, D. (2015, March 24).  The remix hypothesis . Retrieved from:  https://opencontent.org/blog/archives/3813"
"116" "Wiley, D., & Hilton III, J. L. (2018). Defining OER- e nabled  p edagogy.  The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning ,  19 (4). https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v19i4.3601"
"117" "Willems, J., & Bossu, C. (2012). Equity considerations for open educational resources in the glocalization of education.  Distance Education, 33 (2), 185-199."
"118" "Winitzky-Stephens, J. R., & Pickavance, J. (2017). Open  e ducational  r esources and  s tudent  c ourse  o utcomes: A  m ultilevel  a nalysis.  The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning ,  18 (4). https://doi.org/10.19173/irrodl.v18i4.3118"
"119" "Yoon, I. (2010). Debt burdens among BSW graduates: A national cross-sectional study.  Journal of Baccalaureate Social Work ,  15 (2), 61-79."
"120" "Table 1"
"121" "Characteristics of the sample"
"122" "Freq. (%)"
"123" "Group"
"124" "Control"
"125" "Pilot"
"126" "Experimental"
"127" "16 (48.50)"
"128" "5 (15.20)"
"129" "12 (36.40)"
"130" "Gender"
"131" "Male"
"132" "Female"
"133" "4 (12.10)"
"134" "29 (87.90)"
"135" "Race/Ethnicity"
"136" "African-American"
"137" "White"
"138" "Hispanic"
"139" "Multiple origins"
"140" "12 (36.40)"
"141" "14 (42.40)"
"142" "1 (3.00)"
"143" "6 (18.20)"
"144" "Prior research course"
"145" "Yes"
"146" "No"
"147" "1 (3.0)"
"148" "32 (97.00)"
"149" "Prior statistics course"
"150" "Yes"
"151" "No"
"152" "6 (18.20)"
"153" "27 (81.80)"
"154" "Class  y ear"
"155" "Junior"
"156" "Senior"
"157" "+4 year"
"158" "25 (75.80)"
"159" "7 (21.20)"
"160" "1 (3.0)"
"161" "Table 2"
"162" "Mean ranks  of  research knowledge  across groups"
"163" "Textbook used"
"164" "RKA- Pre-test"
"165" "RKA- Post-test"
"166" "Commercial"
"167" "19.06"
"168" "39.09"
"169" "Open"
"170" "41.06"
"171" "34.26"
"172" "Table 3"
"173" "Coding matrix of student learning experiences when using open and commercial textbooks"
"174" "Open textbook a doption  experiences"
"175" "Open textbook a daptation  experiences"
"176" "Cost"
"177" "Customized"
"178" "Access"
"179" "Easy to understand"
"180" "Quality"
"181" "Personalized"
"182" "Engaging (less boring )"
