Sociability Between Coworkers and Social Fit
at Work
Thomas Lyttelton

Abstract
Social interactions vary across workplaces, in part because workers and managers treat
informal social interactions as a facet of workplace cultures, encouraging it in some instances
and suppressing it in others. Equally, such interactions are consequential for social capital,
and may be a dimension of cultural fit. Thus processes of status attainment and resource
allocation may vary across workplaces in concert with their sociability. Using a new measure
of time spent with coworkers, constructed using the American Time Use Survey, this paper
shows that work explains a great deal more variation in sociability between coworkers
than individual characteristics. The extent of shared workplace identities, influenced by
occupational competition levels and union membership, and incentives to socialize are two
important mechanisms in this process. Moreover, norms and expectations of appropriate
behavior in the workplace accompany occupational differences in sociability, and matching
these expectations is consequential for workers’ earnings.

Introduction
Both workers and managers treat informal social interactions as an important facet of
workplace cultures, encouraging it in some instances and suppressing it in others (Halle 1984,

1

Kunda 2009, Reich and Bearman 2018, Richman 2015) At the same time, workers understand
sociable interactions with other workers to be fundamentally different to sociable interactions
without an instrumental component (Fischer 1982, Ingram and Zou 2008). In this, they
have good cause, as both individual social relations and the broader workplace social context
influence a number of important worker and organizational outcomes, both positive and
negative, including job satisfaction, human capital accrual, and harassment (Baillien et al.
2008, Morrison 2012, Roscigno et al. 2018). Processes of status attainment and resource
allocation thus may vary across workplaces in concert with sociability, yet we know little
about how sociability varies across occupations and organizations.
The dominant approach to studying sociability in workplaces has been the social networks
paradigm, which treats interactions as ties. This is well suited to illuminating both the
individual and relational determinants of interactions, but usually abstracts away the organizational context in which the interaction took place (Burt 1992, McPherson et al. 2001,
Podolny and Baron 1997). This is often a necessity, as most network data comes from a
single organization, limiting contextual variation in the data. This is also true of workplace
ethnographies, for which, in any case, “coworker relations have held at best a secondary place
in the analysis of the workplace”, (Hodson 2001: 202).
In contrast, research on culture and work has been finely attuned to the role of contextual
variation in influencing behavior, but has rarely considered informal social interactions. This
literature considers, first, the contextual antecedents to organizational norms (Chandler et
al. 2000), second, the role of organizational norms in directing workers’ behavior (Burawoy
1982, Chatman and O’Reilly 2016), and third, the consequences of relational fit of the worker
to the job or organization (Mobasseri et al. 2019, Srivastava et al. 2018). Yet despite
documenting the importance organizations place on sociability (Kunda 2009, Richman 2015,
Rivera 2012), research in this vein has considered neither the contextual determinants of
workplace sociability nor the consequences of this sociability for workers.

2

I explore the contextual determinants of coworker sociability and its consequences for workers’
earnings, using a novel measure of coworker sociability - the amount of time workers spend
socializing with coworkers - derived from the American Time Use Survey (ATUS). As a
time diary study, ATUS contains fine-grained distinctions between social contexts, such as
between sociability in and outside of the workplace, detailed measures of work patterns, such
as irregular schedules and work breaks, and affectual data. As a module of the Current
Population Survey (CPS), ATUS also includes a number of job, workplace, and occupation
measures.
I find that sociability is highly sensitive to context: different activity partners, locations, and
occupations all create starkly different patterns of interaction. At the same time, coworker
sociability is strongly influenced by organizational and occupational characteristics: coworkers
socialize at higher rates when their sense of shared identity is strong, in, for example, less
competitive and unionized workplaces, and when there are strong instrumental incentives
to socialize. Overall, work explains much more of the variation in coworker sociability than
individual characteristics, such as marital status and care work responsibilities. Work patterns
in coworker sociability, in turn, produce sociability expectations that are consequential for
earnings: in highly sociable occupations, the earnings of sociable workers are higher than
they are in less sociable occupations. This suggests that sociability between coworkers is a
facet of cultural fit.

Theory
The following three sections argue that sociability between coworkers is important both for
workers and workplaces, and that it is distinct from and often more difficult than sociability in
other contexts. As such, it is distinctively driven by workplace processes. The first section lays
out that sociability flourishes when in egalitarian, volitional, and non-instrumental contexts,

3

and so often is in tension with work, which is often none of these things. Because of this tension,
workers often conceptualize sociability with coworkers as different to other kinds of sociability.
The second section argues that, as a work-inflected phenomenon, sociability between coworkers
is driven by workplace mechanisms, and suggests three important ones: coordination costs,
incentives, and preference-shaping. Coworker sociability may be consequential for workers
and workplaces, and this is discussed in the third section. Socializing is a precursor of social
capital, and sociability likely clusters by work context. These aggregate behavioral differences
may be accompanied by cultural norms and expectations, and thus be a dimension of cultural
fit.

The Sociology of Sociability
Humans are motivated by a need to belong, satisfying which requires relationships and
interactions (Baumeister and Leary 1995, Nezlek et al. 2002). That is, people require
frequent, pleasant interactions in the context of affectually-positive relationships. At first
glance, coworkers are an ideal source for such interactions: people spend a long time at
work, where they are, usually, exposed to a stable set of coworkers, with whom they have at
least one thing in common. For many workers, work provides such social relations. In the
General Social Survey, 18-29% of respondents list a coworker as a confidant and workplace
ethnographies detail the ways in which workers intersperse work tasks with sociability (Halle
1984, Hodson 2001, McPherson et al. 2006).
Yet workers across diverse jobs report finding socializing with coworkers fraught. In response
to a comment that publishing was founded on a “phony sense of community,” a publicity
director bursts into tears (Coser et al. 1982, quoted in Ingram and Zou 2008). Kunda (2009)
reports employees at a technology firm classifying socializing with coworkers as “work,”.
Jackall quotes a bank clerk explaining that she goes to the company party because “if I
don’t, they’ll talk about me” (1978, quoted in Hodson 2001), and in his meta-analysis of
4

workplace ethnographies, Hodson (2001) finds conflict between coworkers to be pervasive.
These reactions are found whether or not socializing takes place at work or outside the
workplace, as in above examples. These reactions therefore probably do not reflect either
tension with work tasks, or managerial disapproval.
Georg Simmel draws an analogy between sociability and play. He argues that, like play,
successful sociability requires insulation from both the cognitive orientations and social
contexts of normal life, particularly instrumental motives and external roles (Simmel and
Hughes 1949). Instrumental motives introduce a set of cognitive orientations routed in
quotidian life, while external roles, such as those of supervisor and supervisee, come with
obligations and interactional norms that detract from the playful nature of sociability.
Simmel’s account has been criticized by Irving Goffman (1972), for his insistence that
sociability is devoid of status differentials, when sociable situations, such as parties, often
include status jockeying. But the existence of status play within sociability is not necessarily
inconsistent with the tension between sociability and external motivations and roles. As
Alice Goffman points out, people rarely enjoy status jockeying in social situations (Goffman
2019), and diary studies on the relationship between interaction and psychological wellbeing
suggests that sociable interactions are more pleasant when people feel they have autonomy
over a situation (Downie et al. 2008, Nezlek 2003).
Simmel’s criteria shows why workers often dislike socializing with coworkers. First, work
introduces a set of instrumental motives. Social relations are important for many individual
work outcomes (Castilla 2005, Fernandez et al. 2000, Podolny and Baron 1997, Shwed and
Kalev 2014), and popular culture promotes networking (Carnegie 1933, Ferrazzi and Raz
2005). In response, some workers instrumentally cultivate social relationships (Ingram and
Zou 2008). But instrumental motivations for coworker sociability extend beyond individual
outcomes: leaders often promote social events to develop or maintain a “strong culture”
(Berman et al. 2002, Kunda 2009), while some ethnographers report teams using social

5

interactions to test job suitability (Halle 1984).
Second, workers struggle with role ambiguity. Workers may be uncertain of the motives
of their socializing coworkers. It also may be unclear to workers whether to follow the
interactional norms that apply to socializing or work, which are often in tension (Pillemer
and Rothbard 2018). Some coworkers resolve this by socializing minimally, or insisting on
classifying some social events as “work” (Kunda 2009). Relatedly, people are more reluctant
to conceptualize a relationship as a friendship when there is a preexisting instrumental
relationship, such as working together (Fischer 1982).
Similarly, some status roles really are incompatible with sociability, as Simmel argues. It
would, for example, be a violation of the norm that sociability is volitional for a manager to
order one of their employees to get them a drink in a social setting, for example. Yet the
setting aside of status differentials is not straightforward, and workers may feel obliged to
socialize because those in positions of power over them are doing so. Thus, sociability between
coworkers is likely experientially distinct from other kinds of sociability. Role ambiguity
introduces uncertainty about appropriate interactional norms, while the incentive to pursue
instrumental ends through sociable means leaves parties second guessing the intentions of
each other. More broadly, sociability is highly sensitive to context, with the setting and
pre-existing relationships between actors influencing the valence of the interaction.

Work Contexts and Sociability
If sociability between coworkers is a work-inflected phenomenon, then it is likely to also be
distinctly structured by work contexts. Differences in rates of sociability between coworkers
by work context may be the result of three sets of mechanisms, laid out in Table 1. First,
work may influence the coordination of interaction between coworkers. Interactions require
time, a location, and at least two actors, all of which work may determine. Second, workers
in different contexts may be differientially motivated to socialize for motivations intrinsic to
6

sociability. This may be because sociable workers select into jobs, or because work shapes
preferences. Third, there are differences in the extrinsic incentives to socialize between work
contexts. Some jobs expect sociability, while others do not, and there is variation in the
capacity to enforce these expectations. At the same time, social capital is differentially
important across jobs.
Researchers use “work contexts” to refer to two levels of analysis: occupations and organizations. Occupations demarcate socially understood jobs, and structure opportunities and
rewards, while organizations provide the context in which workers do their jobs. There
have been recent turns in the sociology of work and organizational behavior to reintegrate
occupations and organizations (Anteby et al. 2016, Tomaskovic-Devey 2014), one consequence
of which is to draw attention the difficulty of disentangling them. This is both because many
outcomes, including earnings, are jointly determined (Mouw and Kalleberg 2010), and because
there is covariance of occupation and organizational form. Within large organizations, jobs
are often clustered by occupation into their own delineated teams, with their own cultures
(Kirkman and Shapiro 2001), while many kinds of organization, such as hospitals, are specific
to a group of occupations. Occupations thus nest in organizations, which nest in occupations.
Organization and occupation are as much complimentary as competing explanations of
sociability, with many mechanisms, such as selection, operating in parallel, and mechanisms
that take place at one level clustering at the second level, such as schedule-setting, which
takes place in organizations, but covaries with occupation.
[Insert Table 1 about here.]

Coordination
Sociable interactions require that two coworkers are available at the same time. The number
of workers in a workplace, the extent to which they are brought into contact, and their
schedules all determine if this occurs. Workplaces vary from being solitary to containing many
7

employees, with the nature of the work a determinant. Solitary work is easier when tasks
require few workers, such as journalism or janitorial work. Equally, there is within-sector
variation in firm size. Many jobs can exist either directly in a large firm, or in smaller
organizations that are in turn contracted by a larger organization, such as call centers in the
service sector.
But even within similar-sized workplaces, organization varies the extent of interactions. Many
organizations use teams, increasing the number of coworkers a worker will know (Ezzamel
and Willmott 1998). Equally, sociability in the workplace is dependent on an “interaction
space” (Kellogg 2009). These are understood by workers and their bosses as appropriate sites
of sociability, and having access to such a space may induce workers to socialize more.
Organizations influence sociability by controlling schedules, which determines coordination.
Time is limited, and non-essential tasks like socializing should be sensitive to time budgets.
But, as Young and Lim (2014) argue, time is also a network good: to socialize, other people
have to be free to do so, and that requires them to be on similar schedules (Young and Lim
2014). This, like workplace interactions, is a function of both organizational decisions and
job tasks: sales work, for example, needs to be scheduled around the availability of customers.
When people work should therefore matter for sociability alongside the length of time they
work. Standard schedules make sociability with coworkers easier both in and out of the
workplace, as workers’ schedules are more likely to align.

Intrinsic Motivations to Socialize
Access to coworkers is a condition for sociability, but coworkers also need to want to socialize.
Variation in general sociability likely has both selection and causal components, while
orientation towards socializing with coworkers, specifically, is likely influenced by homophily,
the nature of working relationships, workplace culture, and opportunity costs.
Workers may select into both occupations and organizations based on their sociability. Work
8

tasks vary in the extent to which they require social interaction, either with customers or
with coworkers, with some occupations largely solitary, and many others, such as many blue
collar or engineering occupations, inherently requiring teamwork (Hodson 2001, Kozlowski
and Bell 2003). In a meta-analysis, Barrick et al find high levels of extroversion to positively
correlate with choosing social, enterprising, and artistic occupations (Barrick et al. 2003).
At the same time, organizations select workers based on their fit with the social culture
of the organization (Rivera 2012), and it is plausible that workers differentially apply to
organizations based on the same metric.
Equally, occupations shape their occupants. While jobs for life are increasingly rare (Kalleberg
2009), it is still the case that workers usually stay in an occupation for a long time. Occupations
provide workers with a stable set of job tasks, and the content of job tasks can change workers’
personalities. Though most previous work on this topic relates task complexity to intellectual
curiosity (Spenner 1988), it is plausible that sociable work, over the long term, produces
sociable people.
In parallel to the individual workers’ propensity to socialize, its relational equivalent should
matter: the extent to which workers specifically want to socialize together. First, opportunity
costs matter. In the workplace, socializing either displaces solitary breaks or work time.
After work, people usually prefer to socialize with friends, but just as work schedules affect
coordination between coworkers so they do the same for coordination with friends and family
(White and Keith 1990). When workers are on non-standard schedules they will usually find
it harder to socialize with friends, and instead may turn to coworkers.
Second, coworkers are more motivated to socialize if they are alike. Research in lab and
real-world settings has shown that shared identities, characteristics, and group membership
increases social interaction (Bowles 2006, Goette et al. 2006, McPherson et al. 2001). Work
itself is one such shared identity, but it varies in nature and intensity.
Both workers and management can deliberately construct shared identities in organizations.
9

Organizations in sectors where employees have hard-to-replace skills, such as technology,
cultivate “strong” cultures (Kunda 2009). Workers are encouraged to internalize organizational, so that workers will coordinate without overt bureaucratic control. So ubiquitous has
this become that more than three-quarters of Fortune 500 CEOs recently listed corporate
culture among their top three concerns (Chatman and O’Reilly 2016). In parallel, public
sector organizations often cultivate a “public service ethos,” grounding workers’ identities in
an overtly moral framework (Rayner et al. 2011).
Workers can also create shared identities independent of management (Hodson 2001). Workers
cultivate solidarity based upon shared experiences (Goffee 1981), and strong social relations
(Hodson 2001). But the relationship between social relations and solidarity likely also runs in
the opposite direction: if there is a strong shared identity among coworkers, they are more
likely socialize. One potentially strong source of solidarity is membership in a labor union.
Unions provide a secondary identity, not linked to management, and it is an identity that is
likely viewed as less hierarchical than the organization as a whole, and thus less in tension
with sociability.
Equally, homophily is likely lower in particularly competitive occupations. Competition inhibit
trust and promotes oppositional behavior. While competition is ubiquitous in workplaces, it
is much more intense, and more visible to workers in some occupations. This is likely to be
the occupations where remuneration is based upon commission, such as real estate brokers,
in which workers may conceptualize rewards as zero sum.

Differential Incentives for Sociability
The above mechanisms operate on a worker’s internal orientation towards sociability. But
work introduces a particularly strong set of extrinsic motivations, because work provides
material resources. The relationship between sociability and instrumental motivations is
dependent, first, on the consequences of coworker sociability for a particular job. Some
10

organizations and occupations expect sociability, while others do not. Second, in some jobs
and workplaces, workers will be sensitive to expectations of sociability, because they have
more to gain from meeting expectations, or because they are safe from the consequences of
ignoring them. Similarly, workers socialize to build social capital, but social capital is not
equally useful in all kinds of jobs.
The extent to which organizations and coworkers expect sociability varies across work contexts.
As discussed above, many organizations try to encourage sociability as a component of firm
culture. But in the workplace, sociability displaces work time, and so many organizations try
to discourage it, by monitoring breaks or productivity (Reich and Bearman 2018). This is
common in large workplaces in low wage sales- and service-sector occupations, such as big
box stores, where employee turnover is high and job-specific skills relatively low (Kalleberg
2012).
Jobs may or may not come with expectations around sociability, but whether workers
match expectations is another matter. First, the relative power of workers in organizations
determines if workers can ignore organizational pressure. Workers are more powerful when
they are harder to replace, or when they organize to circumscribe managers’ power (Hodson
1997). Union-negotiated contracts, for example, limit managers ability to discipline workers.
In the workplace, unionization should make it easier for coworkers to socialize on the job
without management reprisal. Outside of work, where the alternative to sociability with a
coworker is not work but often some other preferable form of leisure activity, unionization
has the opposite effect, making it easier for workers to safely ignore organizational demands
to socialize.
Second, occupations create different incentives. By doing well at work, workers can gain
greater rewards, and increased status, but progression is not available in all occupations.
In high-status work, such as professional occupations, there are clear career paths, with
expectations that mobility will be accompanied by benefits, and this provides strong incentives

11

for high-status workers to follow expectations around sociability. This kind of career structure
is rarer in low status work (Kalleberg 2012).
Equally, social capital is consequential for workplace outcomes (see below), but its utility
may vary across jobs. As Weber argued, rational-legal authority, which characterizes modern
bureaucratic organizations, attempts to eliminate personal ties as sources of claims on functionaries (Weber 2009). But some parts of the economy have remained non-bureaucratic, and
there social ties are more important (Mears 2015), while even within putatively rational-legal
organizations, there is variation in levels of bureaucratization. Governmental organizations are
usually more fully bureaucratized than private ones, while formal rules that limit managerial
discretion are an explicit goal of most labor unions.

Cultures of Sociability and their Consequences
Workplace incentives are more likely to influence coworker sociability if it is consequential.
Research suggests that social relationships contribute to workplace outcomes (Castilla 2005,
Fernandez et al. 2000, Podolny and Baron 1997, Shwed and Kalev 2014), and socializing is
an antecedent to this. Equally, the ways in which work contexts pattern sociability , laid
out in the previous section, may make sociability consequential for workers, if these differing
aggregate patterns in sociability are accompanied by sociability norms and expectations.

Social Relationships
Sociability, over time, creates social relationships between coworkers. These relationships
can be consequential for workplace outcomes. They provide actors access to resources that
they would lack otherwise, and which constitute social capital (Burt 2000, Lin 2002). For
hiring, personal contacts with existing workers in a workplace are an important way in which
workers find out about new jobs, and the social status of workers’ contacts, the nature of their

12

ties to those contacts, and the extent of their social network are all associated with hiring
(Fernandez and Weinberg 1997, Granovetter 1973, Lin 1999). In the workplace, informal
ties are associated with faster human capital accrual (Morrison 2012), increased creativity
(Fleming et al. 2007), better evaluations (Shwed and Kalev 2014), and intrafirm job mobility
(Burt 1992, Podolny and Baron 1997).
But informal relationships can also be deleterious to workplace outcomes, for many of the
same reasons that work makes sociability between coworkers fraught. Friendships at work
suffer from role ambiguity, and while work relationships are predicated on instrumentality,
friendships rely on its absence. These roles may come into conflict, with friends having to
choose friendship or organizational priorities (Pillemer and Rothbard 2018). Friendships,
while they can provide support, may also be distracting, and thus impact productivity.
By focusing on the sociable interaction, instead of the long term relationship, it is possible to
examine the circumstances in which contradictory theories about the positive or deleterious
influence of social relations between coworkers on workplace outcomes apply. In particular,
where sociability takes place should matter a great deal. A workplace setting makes role ambiguity more salient, and it is only at work that sociability can be deleterious for productivity.
Outside of the workplace, however, sociability is less affected by these tensions. In addition,
because it less circumscribed by the spatial organization of the workplace in which workers
are usually placed together in teams of similar workers, coworker sociability outside of work
is more likely to expose coworkers to a broader network, which in turn is more useful for the
cultivation of social capital (Burt 1992, Granovetter 1973).

Social Fit
Workers see improved outcomes when they match the norms and expectations of their jobs.
The literature on cultural fit between workers and job has for the most part focused on
cognition: whether or not employees express values congruent with those of their organization.
13

Researchers have recently turned their attention to behavior (for a review of this literature see
Mobasseri et al. 2019). Srivastava et al. (2018) finds that worker adoption of the linguistic
style of coworkers predicts tenure and promotion, while Rivera (2012) argues that recruiters
at elite firms both use worker-organization lifestyle fit as a formal evaluation metric, and
more positively evaluate candidates with whom they share lifestyles.
Despite this behavioral turn, past research has not examined sociability as a dimension of
behavioral fit. Yet, as we have seen, sociability is an important component of the kinds
of cultures managers cultivate in organizations (Chatman and O’Reilly 2016, Fleming and
Spicer 2004, Kunda 2009). Indeed, sociability is a stated motivation of recruiters when they
explain their emphasis on lifestyle (Rivera 2012). According to one management consultant,
“[i]t’s way more fun if the people around you are your friends. So, when I’m interviewing, I
look for people . . . I’d want to get to know and want to spend time with, even outside of
work . . . people I can be buddies with.” (Rivera 2012).
Employees at elite firms seek new hires with whom they want to socialize, but in the low
information situation of the hiring process, use lifestyle as a proxy. According to Rivera
(2012), workers at these firms prioritize sociability because coworkers already make up the
majority of their social networks. While Rivera’s case is the hiring process, the motivations
of her interviewees suggest that sociability continues to be an important aspect of cultural fit
thereafter, as workers at elite firms are expected to cultivate work colleagues socially.
Sociability thus may be consequential as a way for workers to cultivate social capital. It also
may be consequential if, first, workplaces develop norms governing sociability, and, second,
workers benefit when their behaviors match the norms. While we know a great deal about
the kinds of relationships from which workers benefit, we know far less about how and where
coworkers go about cultivating those relationships, and about sociability as a dimension of
cultural fit. Nor we do we know very much about what sociability contexts for American
workers look like: previous work has neither established in which jobs workers socialize with

14

their coworkers, nor the mechanisms driving these patterns, nor the analytical level at which
they occur. Finally, we know little about how American workers experience socializing with
coworkers: qualitative accounts suggest that it can be fraught, but is it less pleasant or
meaningful than sociable interactions when other kinds of social relationships are involved?
It is to addressing these gaps that the paper now turns.

Data and Time Use Measures
The analyses proceed in three parts. The first section establishes that sociability between
coworkers differs from sociability between friends both in affect and revealed preference. The
second section examines the work determinants of sociability both in the workplace and
outside of work. The third section examines the influence of sociability on wages, and how
that relationship is conditional on both workplace culture of sociability and the setting of
social interactions.

Time Diaries and Time Use Measures
The American Time Use Survey (ATUS) is a time diary survey, which allows for the
construction of time use measures of coworker sociability (Hofferth et al. 2018). ATUS
prompts respondents to record activities for 24 hours prior to 4AM on the day of the survey.
Answers are are coded into activity categories at the Bureau of Labor Statistics, and nested
in activity groupings. Respondents are asked to list the start- and end-time and location of
activities and who was present. Table 2 provides an example diary for one respondent.
The measures of sociability combine activity, duration, location, and copresence variables.
The analyses use three key measures of sociability: socializing with friends, with coworkers
in the workplace, and with workers outside the workplace. These sum the minutes spent in

15

appropriate activities-copresence-location combinations (when used as independent variables
in the regression analyses, these variables are dichotomized).
Socializing with friends uses all activities from the socializing and leisure broad activity
grouping, along with eating and drinking with friends, in any location. For the respondent in
Table 2, four activities meet these criteria: three instances of socializing and communicating,
and attending a party, with a duration of 335 minutes. Socializing with coworkers outside of
work uses the same activities, but limits location to outside of work , and in our example no
activities meet these criteria.
Socializing with coworkers in the workplace combines all activities from the socializing and
leisure categories, but omits eating and drinking, because it is not possible to distinguish
solitary eating in a workplace canteen from social eating. When a respondent eats with
a coworker outside of the workplace, in contrast, it is likely that they chose to eat with a
coworker. In our example, one activity meets these criteria: watching TV/movies in the
workplace, for fifteen minutes. Figure 1 shows the contribution of activity groupings to the
measures. For coworker sociability at work, most time is spent on activities categorized as
first, relaxing and leisure, and second, socializing. 60% of coworker sociability outside of work
is eating and drinking, which is unsurprising given that leaving work is socially sanctioned
for meals but not generally otherwise, while socializing and communicating and attending or
hosting social events each make up 10-15% of the measure. Table 3 reports descriptives for
all variables.
[Insert Figure 1 about here.]
These measures do not perfectly capture sociability, for three reasons. First, because ATUS
is a 24 hour diary respondents spending no time in sociable activities is common. This is
accurate, but means that many respondents are categorized as not sociable at all, when over
the course of a week they likely do socialize.
Second defining activity partners is inexact. The only activity partner category available
16

for non-work activities across all years of the survey combines coworkers and clients, but,
ideally, the measure would exclude socializing with clients. A supplementary analysis excludes
client-focused occupations, defined as occupations for which more than 20% of workers
record client or customer presence for a work activities, and results are substantively similar
(Appendix A).
Moreover, it is possible that occasionally respondents are socializing with coworkers who are
not categorized as such. This could be particularly problematic if respondents are classifying
their coworkers as friends, as the measure would exclude the most enduring relationships.
Outside of work, it is not possible to identify these cases, but for sociability in the workplace
I infer that activity partners categorized as friends are also coworkers, so these cases are used
as a sensitivity check. Relatively few respondents’ categorize workplace sociability partners
as friends (186 vs. 3,514). Repeating the analyses including these cases does not change the
results (Appendix B).
Third, classifying activities as relevant to sociability or not is inexact. The social psychological
literature on sociability emphasizes that social interactions motivated by a desire to socialize
are voluntaristic and usually pleasant (Baumeister and Leary 1995, Downie et al. 2008,
Nezlek et al. 2002), traits shared with leisure activities. But the measure likely misses some
sociable behaviors not explicitly categorized as socializing or leisure by ATUS. Taking a class
with a coworker, or sharing a lift to work, for example, may, in some cases, be sociable. In
other cases, however, respondents may think of these activities as work, service, or chores.
Given, however, the importance of voluntarism and interaction quality, using a too narrow
measure seems preferable to a too broad one.
[Insert Table 2 about here.]

17

Other Data
ATUS is drawn from the CPS, allowing researchers to draw on the contextual data collected
previously. But this leads to attrition. Respondents are surveyed two to five months after
CPS, and the response rate is around 50%. Response rates do not vary substantially with how
busy respondents are, but they vary with aspects of SES (Abraham et al. 2006). To correct
this, ATUS provides weights constructed using race, sex, education, presence of children, age,
administration day, and incentives to participate. Abraham et al. (2006) find that weighting
by a broader set of characteristics, including income, housing tenure, household composition,
marriage, the presence of a telephone, and geography, and changes time use estimates very
little.
In 2010, 2012, and 2013, ATUS included a wellbeing module, which I use to examine the
relationship between sociability and affect. The wellbeing module is designed to supplement
global measures of wellbeing by collecting data on variation in affect during daily activities
(Stone and Mackie 2013). Using the day reconstruction method (Kahneman et al. 2004), the
module randomly selects five activities and asks respondents to describe their feelings during
each. Respondents rate their feelings from 0 to 6, corresponding to absence of the feeling to
a very strong feeling. The sample of sociable activities in this module is small (see Figure 2),
and so analyses using the wellbeing module are bivariate and descriptive.
The analyses presented here pool ATUS samples from 2003 to 2016, but exclude several
categories of respondents. Models include employed respondents of prime working age (25-55)
in full time work, to reduce variance in underlying labor force attachment. Because ATUS
does not record earnings for self-employed individuals, they are excluded. Union status is
only recorded in the eighth month of the CPS panel, so analyses exclude respondents who
changed jobs between CPS and ATUS. Models of sociability in the workplace exclude days
not working. This gives samples of 25,602 and 41,848 for sociability in the workplace and
outside of work.
18

To supplement the work measures recorded in ATUS, the analyses use occupational measures
from ONet and CPS, the latter constructed with data from 2003 to 2016. ONet uses
workplace surveys to measure occupation-level work characteristics on a comprehensive range
of topics (Hadden et al. 2004). The ONet measures used have been collected since 2001 using
occupational surveys, and which ask respondents in a given occupation to rate the importance
of a work-task or -style. ONet is often used, as here, in combination with person-level data,
to measure occupational exposures and characteristics (Cifuentes et al. 2010).
[Insert Table 3 about here.]

Analysis and Results
Sociability Among Coworkers and Friends
In its ideal type, sociability is non-instrumental and volitional (Simmel and Hughes 1949).
Work, which is often insrumental and coercive, is thus a potentially challenging context for
sociability. In a number of case studies, workers report struggling with the role ambiguity
inherent in socializing with coworkers (Coser et al. 1982, Hodson 2001, Ingram and Zou 2008,
Kunda 2009).
Figure 2 uses the wellbeing module of the American Time Use Survey (ATUS) to examine
reported happiness during and meaningfulness of sociability across four combinations of
activity, location, and partner: sociability between coworkers in the workplace and outside
of work respectively, sociability between friends, and, as a baseline, work. Figure 3 turns
from affect to revealed preferences, and plots the proportion of workers who socialize with
coworkers in the workplace and outside of work, and with friends, and the mean time spent
socializing among those who socialize.
[Insert Figure 2 about here.]

19

Figure 2 presents strong evidence that people find socializing with coworkers challenging. As
expected, people generally like social activities: happiness is higher for all kinds of sociability
than for work. But people are happier socializing with friends than socializing with coworkers
in any setting, and find interactions with friends more meaningful. This suggests that affectual
differences in socializing with friends and coworkers are not only the result of setting, but
indicative of the quality of interaction. Location does, however, matter: in the workplace,
people are less happy while socializing than outside of work.
[Insert Figure 3 about here.]
Revealed preferences also support this conclusion (Figure 3). While a similar proportion of
workers socialize with coworkers at work as socialize with friends, outside of work, where
workers have more agency over with whom they choose to associate, half as many workers
socialize with coworkers as friends. Among those who socialize, the relative time spent with
friends and coworkers suggests people prefer socializing with friends. The mean time spent
socializing with coworkers outside the workplace is about an hour, less than half of the mean
time spent socializing with friends.

The Work Determinants of Sociability
The relationship between between sociability and affect suggests that sociability between
coworkers is distinct from other sociability. If coworker sociability is conceptualized by
workers as distinctively work-related, and if it is also distinctively patterned by workplace
location, then it is likely that coworker sociability is also patterned by work contexts.
[Insert Figure 4 about here.]
Figure 4 suggests that this is the case. It plots the occupational class distribution of
sociability between coworkers in the workplace and outside of work, and sociability between
friends. Sociability between coworkers across occupational classes deviates from the mean

20

to a far greater extent than sociability between friends. But, coworker sociability in the
workplace and outside of it almost mirror each other: in the workplace, sociability is most
frequent in traditional blue collar occupations, and lowest in professional and managerial
occupations, while outside of work the reverse is true. This section examines occupational
and organizational differences in rates of coworker sociability in and outside of the workplace.
It examines the organizational and occupational characteristics that influence coworker
sociability.

Work Characteristics
Table 1 lays out the coordination, intrinsic, and incentive-related mechanisms linking work
contexts to sociability. Using ATUS, it is possible to explore many of these, including
schedules, selection, personality-task alignment, homophily, and incentives. Tables 4 and 5
report parallel sets of models of rates of sociability in and out of the workplace, and which
regress sociability on organizational and occupational characteristics.
The models are quasipoisson regressions, and coefficients represent the percent change in
the dependent variable associated with a one unit change in the predictor.1 The dependent
variables are counts of minutes and so all values are non-negative integers. They are also
overdispersed: 10.5% and 4.5% of respondents socialize with coworkers. This precludes using
standard Poisson regression, which assumes that the mean of the distribution is equal to
its variance. Quasipoisson relaxes this assumption by estimating the dispersion parameter
from the data (Hoef and Boveng 2007). Alternative approaches include negative binomial
regression, which is sensitive to outliers (Aeberhard et al. 2014), and log-transforming the
dependent variable. Log-transforming requires adding an arbitrary value to the dependent
variable to remove zeros, and thus is also not ideal. However, log-transformation produces
extremely similar results (Appendix C).
1

This is the incident rate ratio minus 1, and multiplied by one hundred.

21

Model 1 regresses coworker sociability organizational characteristics, related to coordination,
worker power, social capital, and homophily. Union status may influence sociability via worker
power or homophily, while employer type (private/governmental/nonprofit) relates to social
capital utility and homophily. Working a nonstandard schedule, defined here as earlier than
6AM or later than 7PM on a weekday, or on a weekend, is important for schedule alignment,
and hours worked for time budgets, and both of these measures also relate to opportunity
costs. I control for time spent taking solitary work breaks, to ensure that sociability is not
confounded by general non-work time spent in the workplace. I include detailed occupation
fixed effects, which requires estimating this model separately from Model 2, which includes
covariates measured at the level of occupation.
I include two key non-work controls. The first sums time spent doing any form of care work
or housework. Care work limits opportunities to socialize, but also shapes work opportunities
(Gough and Noonan 2013). The second is a dummy indicator of spending any time socializing
with friends. Whether or not a respondent socializes with friends indicates a general propensity
to socialize, as well as alternative opportunities to socialize. Also included are year and
day of the week (not shown), gender, hispanicity, age and its quadratic. It includes race
(Black/White/Other), and schooling (less than high school degree, GED, high school degree,
some college, college degree), marital status, and a categorical measure of how many children
the respondent has (0, 1, 2, 3+). The non-workplace models also include a dummy variable
indicating if the diary fell on a workday (not shown).
Model 2 adds occupational measures that relate to homophily, task-related conditioning, and
incentives. The social context of work tasks may shape propensities to socialize, and so the
model includes an ONet measure of the importance of social orientation to an occupation’s
work style, which ONet defines as being personally connected to others on the job. Jobs that
require coworker interactions, specifically, increase the pool of coworkers workers know, and
so may increase sociability. The model therefore includes an ONet measure of the importance

22

of teamwork in an occupation. Conversely, intense competition between coworkers may reduce
homophily and solidarity between coworkers, and so the model includes an ONet measure of
occupational competitiveness. All these are standardized.
Finally, model 2 also adds two measures of status and material rewards. Higher status
jobs have lower turnover and more defined career structures than low status jobs, which in
turn increases the incentives to be responsive to organizational demands and norms around
sociability. The model therefore includes measures of logged weekly earnings and occupational
status, operationalized as the proportion of an occupation with a college degree (Hauser and
Warren 1997). Outside of work, socializing can cost money. To separate the influence of
resources from the incentive-related component of earnings, the non-workplace model also
includes family income. ATUS records family income in brackets and top codes, so the model
includes family income categorically (not shown). As a control, the model includes dummies
for detailed industry.
[Insert Tables 4 and 5 about here.]
Organizational characteristics are associated with coworker sociability in complex ways, as
Tables 4 and 5 show. There is a strong association between union status and socializing
with coworkers in the workplace. Union status may influence sociability via the mechanisms
of worker power or homophily, with the fact that the association is confined to workplace
sociability suggesting the former. Stronger evidence for the importance of homophily is
provided by the high rates of sociability outside of work among government workers, who
share a public service ethos. Equally, this suggests that workers aren’t differentially motivated
to socialize based upon the relevance of social capital to their jobs.
Working a nonstandard schedule is associated with increased sociability in the workplace,
and decreased sociability outside of work. Outside of work, non-standard schedules makes
coordinating more difficult. And schedule misalignment between workers on non-standard
schedules and their friends and families may drive them to socialize with coworkers while
23

at work. Hours worked is negatively associated with sociability in the workplace. If the
associations were driven by opportunity costs or time budgets they would run in the opposite
direction. One plausible explanation is that hours worked proxies organizational commitment.
Occupational covariates provide further evidence that homophilous coworkers socialize at
higher rates: in the workplace, coworker sociability declines with occupational competitiveness.
Model 2 also suggests that incentive structures matter. In the workplace, status and earnings
negatively predict sociability, while outside of work earnings positively predict sociability.
This is consistent with high-status workers responding to incentives not to slack off in the
workplace, but to either cultivate social capital or conform to sociable norms outside of
work. The models provide little evidence that work-based coworker interactions are related
to sociability, while sociable work tasks seem to suppress, rather than encourage sociability.
Tables 4 and 5 suggest that coworker sociability is highly responsive to work contexts. The
differences in patterns of sociability across work contexts are the response of coworkers to
work-based differences in incentives, power arrangements, and group identities. The models
provide evidence for the influence of homophily at both the organizational and occupational
level, with governmental work, occupational competition, and union status, all promoting
coworker homophily and sociability. Worker responsiveness to institutional demands and
norms is much stronger among higher status workers for whom there are clear pathways of
career progression, and they are weaker for workers insulated from organizational discipline
by union membership.

Behavioral Fit and Occupational Cultures
Occupations place workers in contexts of sociability. As Figure 4 shows, the average production
worker’s context is one in which workers socialize in the workplace at around four times the
rate of the average manager. When behaviors are accompanied by norms that code those
same behaviors as appropriate or otherwise, contexts become cultures. The mechanisms
24

linking work to sociability suggest that work may create distinctive cultures of sociability:
work influences sociability via cognition. Coworkers socialize at greater rates when their
shared identity as coworkers is strong and positive, for example in unionized workplaces, or
in occupations with low internal competition. Group identities and norms are reinforcing,
because shared norms create a further point of in-group similarity, which in turn encourages
association and identification.
Cultures often reward compliance and sanction deviance. Workers who fit, culturally, stay in
their jobs longer, are more likely to be promoted, and have higher levels of job satisfaction
than those who do not (Chatman 1991, Srivastava et al. 2018). Previous research, however,
has not examined the material rewards for sociability, either directly or in tandem with work
cultures of sociability.
Most previous studies on work cultures focus on organizations, but occupations are also
an appropriate level of analysis. Ethnographic researchers have found that occupations
have distinct cultures, and that these come with norms and expectations around sociability
(Van Maanen and Barley 1982). Furthermore, processes which take place in workplaces
and organizations often still cluster by occupation (Kirkman and Shapiro 2001, Mouw and
Kalleberg 2010).
To check that occupations explain a substantial amount of variance in sociability, Appendix
D presents a series of decompositions of variance of sociability by individual characteritistics,
occupation, and organization/industry, using the covariates in Tables 4 and 5, and adding
detailed industry.2 Models containing detailed occupation alone explain 78% and 54% of the
total variation explained in a saturated model of workplace and outside of work sociability,
respectively. In comparison, individual characteristics explain only 24% and 31%. Occupation
also explains far more marginal variation3 in sociability than individual characteristics.
2

To enable decomposition of variance, the models presented in Appendix D are linear regressions with
a logged dependent variable. The substantive results presented in Tables 4 and 5 using quasipoisson are
extremely similar when estimated using linear regression (see Appendix C).
3
That is, the portion the saturated variance left unexplained by models containing all variables except

25

Tables 6 and 7 examine the relationship between earnings, workers’ sociability in the workplace
and outside of work, and cultures of sociability, by regressing logged earnings on individual
and occupational sociability in and outside of the workplace, and their interaction. As before,
there are parallel sets of models for the two sociability contexts. Model 1 regresses earnings on
respondent’s sociability and the same individual controls as for Model 4.1, above. Coworker
sociability here is dichotomized, because the continuous measure is overdispersed. These
models also include a measure of family income (not shown).
Model 2 adds the same work measures included in 4.2 and 4.3 above, except for detailed
occupation and industry, and adds a measure of broad occupational class. Models 3 and 4
are identical to Models 1 and 2, but add measures of occupational sociability and interact
them with respondent-level coworker sociability. Occupational sociability is the proportion of
workers in an occupation who report socializing with a coworker in ATUS. These are linear
models, but because ATUS top codes weekly earnings at $2884, Appendix E replicates the
results using Tobit regressions.
[Insert Tables 6 and 7 about here.]
There is a meaningful relationship between individual-level sociability and earnings, but
it depends on location. In the workplace, where excessive sociability is often perceived
as slacking off, sociability is negatively associated with earnings, controlling for individual
characteristics. The association is reduced by about half by including work controls, although
it remains significant (Model 2). Outside of the workplace, where sociability does not hold
the same stigma and so where the instrumental benefits of sociability as a way to cultivate
social capital are greatest, the relationship is positive, and not meaningfully affected by work
controls.
[Insert Figure 5 about here.]
For sociability in the workplace, but not outside of work, the association between earnings
occupation.

26

and sociability varies by occupational sociability levels, and there is a substantial penalty for
sociable workers in unsociable occupations, which declines as the sociability of the occupation
increases (Figure 5). Unsociable workers earn $30 per week ($1560 per year) more than
their sociable counterparts in unsociable occupations. In occupations in which 30% of
workers socialize with each other, however, earnings for sociable and antisocial workers are
indistinguishable. This interaction is robust to controlling for work characteristics, including
competition, social work tasks, levels of teamwork, and occupational status (Model 4). Both
models 3 and 4 also control for sociability with friends. The interaction is thus not explained
by general sociability, but specifically by socializing with coworkers.
The interaction between individual and occupational sociability suggest that sociability
context is accompanied by a culture of sociability, and that workers benefit from conforming
to the dominant culture of sociability in their job. These norms hold for the workplace, where
there are strong general expectations surrounding worker conduct, but not outside of work,
where such expectations are weaker.

Discussion
This study finds that sociability between coworkers is a distinct phenomenon, which feels
different and has different consequences to general sociability. Coworker sociability is patterned
by work, with sociability explained by both homophily and differential incentives. Outside of
work, workers who socialize earn higher wages than those who do not, which suggests that
sociability is a strategy for social capital accrual. In the workplace, patterns of sociability
create distinct cultures of sociability with concomitant expectations for workers’ social
behavior. Workers who socialize at work receive lower wages than those who do not,
but as occupational sociability increases, this gap declines and then disappears. This
study contributes to the sociology of sociability, work, organizational behavior, and cultural

27

matching.

Sociability and Social Fit
This is the first study to examine sociability as a dimension of worker-job fit. Previous work
has shown that value congruence between a worker and their job or organization leads to
improved workplace outcomes on multiple dimensions (Elfenbein and O’Reilly 2007, Mobasseri
et al. 2019), and more recently researchers have turned to assessing the behavioral aspects
of cultural fit, and have found evidence for the importance of lifestyle for hiring (Rivera
2012), and of language for tenure and promotion (Srivastava et al. 2018). Identifying a new
domain of behavior - informal social interactions - and a new outcome - earnings - in this
nascent literature is itself an important finding, and one that could be followed up with
further research on both alternative workplace outcomes, and organization-worker matching.
This finding suggests a distinction should be made in the cultural fit and matching literatures
between behaviors that do not presume coworker or workplace interactions, and those that
do. Social fit or matching, which does require interaction, includes both coworker sociability
and the linguistic enculturation practices identified by Srivastava et al. (2018). Dimensions of
cultural fit that to do not presume social interaction include the lifestyle behaviors identified
by Rivera (2012).
Such a distinction illuminates when different elements of cultural fit are important. Rivera’s
interviewees give expectations of future sociability as their motivation for prioritizing lifestyle
in hiring decisions. That is, because they cannot test directly if they will enjoy socializing
with potential hires, they use lifestyle as a proxy measure. This suggests that lifestyle fit
should be important for hiring, but in the workplace social fit will be more consequential.
This distinction also emphasizes the way in which social and lifestyle fit may be related.
While previous work considers the relationship between cultural fit and social embededness
within organizations (Goldberg et al. 2016), if lifestyle proxies presume sociability, then the
28

importance of lifestyle should be heterogeneous by the culture of sociability in, and thus the
density of interactions in, a job or organization.

Sociability and Social Interaction
Examining sociability between coworkers also has implications for sociability itself, and
informal social interactions more broadly. First, it draws our attention back to semi-habitual
interactions. Recent sociology of sociability has mostly focused on irregular events (Wynn
2016), such as parties (Goffman 2019) or weddings (Sniezek 2005). These, while disproportionately important to people’s lives, are not typical of sociability, which mostly occurs
between people who see each other regularly, know each other, and have for a long time
(Baumeister and Leary 1995), yet we know little about the structural determinants of more
quotidian social interactions, particularly in relation to work.
Focusing on quotidian interactions also suggests a synthesis between the two most prominent
theoretical conceptions of sociability in sociology. Simmel theorized sociability to be a social
relation that requires separation from the roles, including status roles, and motivations of
everyday life. Goffman, in contrast, saw sociability itself as thoroughly imbued with status
competition. This is certainly the case (Goffman 2019), but Simmel emphasizes not the
internal dynamics of sociability, but the interaction between sociability and external roles and
motives. The substantial differences in the affective valence of sociability between coworkers
and friends suggests that Simmel was broadly correct: when there is more potential for
role ambiguity and instrumental motivations are stronger, sociability is considerably more
problematic for workers.
Quasi-habitual sociability is not ignored by scholars, but the interaction itself is usually
abstracted away, because it is usually studied in the networks paradigm, and conceptualized
as a relation, or tie, and thus a state rather than a process. A consequence of this conceptual
move is that the context of the interaction is usually ignored. This study suggests that
29

this is an important gap in the literature. Sociability simply in a different location - in the
workplace or outside of it - is associated with different emotional valence, work determinants,
and consequences for earnings. Similarly, there are differing earning returns to sociability
associated with more or less sociable occupational cultures. Future research should consider
the ways in which work contexts influence social network formation, and the rewards associated
with workplace social networks.

Work and Sociability
Coworker sociability is affectually distinct from socializing with friends, and is strongly
influenced by work contexts. The sociology of work has recently taken a relational turn,
with researchers examining the ways in which workplace and organizational interactions can
structure individual outcomes and workplace inequalities (Mears 2015, Tomaskovic-Devey
2014, Vallas and Cummins 2014). But thus far work in this tradition has either focused
on relations between workers and managers (Hodson et al. 2006, Roscigno et al. 2009), or
inequality-generating mechanisms of social closure (Tomaskovic-Devey 2014). Little work has
considered informal horizontal relations (for an exception see Roscigno et al. (2018)). Yet
we know that informal social relations are important in their own right, and contribute to
workplace outcomes (Castilla 2005, Fernandez et al. 2000, Podolny and Baron 1997, Shwed
and Kalev 2014)
Moreover, sociability may be an important mechanism for and modifier of the generation
of labor force inequalities. Prior research shows that differential social capital is a source of
labor market inequality (Lin 2000). The substantial differences in propensity to socialize by
work contexts suggests that the dynamics of social capital accrual may function differently in
different kinds of work. In highly sociable workplaces, workers have many more opportunities
to cultivate useful relationships than they would in less sociable workplaces. It may therefore
be the case that the relationship between social capital and inequality varies by occupation
30

or organization.
At the same time, sociability may contribute directly to gender inequalities in workplace
outcomes. First, as it shown above, women, on average, socialize less with their coworkers
than men, even controlling for time spent doing care work, which itself both limits sociability
and is disproportionately undertaken by women (Gough and Noonan 2013). Insofar as
socializing with workers is useful, this will disadvantage women.
But even when women socialize with coworkers at the same rate as men, it is possible that
women do not accrue the same benefits from that sociability as men. The analyses above
show the importance of homophily for sociability. In workplaces in which either the overall
workforce or employees in positions of authority are disproportionately male, socializing may
not translate into the same kinds of instrumentally beneficial relationships for women as for
men. Future research should thus consider the role sociability plays in producing unequal
workplace outcomes by gender.

References
Abraham KG, Maitland A, Bianchi SM (2006) Nonresponse in the American Time Use
Survey: Who is Missing from the Data and How Much does it Matter? International Journal
of Public Opinion Quarterly 70(5):676–703.
Aeberhard WH, Cantoni E, Heritier S (2014) Robust inference in the negative binomial
regression model with an application to falls data. Biometrics 70(4):920–931.
Anteby M, Chan CK, DiBenigno J (2016) Three Lenses on Occupations and Professions
in Organizations: Becoming, Doing, and Relating. The Academy of Management Annals
10(1):183–244.
Baillien E, Neyens I, De Witte H (2008) Organizational, team related and job related risk

31

factors for workplace bullying, violence and sexual harassment in the workplace: A qualitative
study. International Journal of Organisational Behaviour 13(2):132–146.
Barrick MR, Mount MK, Gupta R (2003) Meta-Analysis of the Relationship Between the
Five-Factor Model of Personality and Holland’s Occupational Types. Personnel Psychology
56(1):45–74.
Baumeister RF, Leary MR (1995) The Need to Belong: Desire for Interpersonal Attachments
as a Fundamental Human Motivation. Psychological bulletin 117(3):497.
Berman EM, West JP, Richter MN (2002) Workplace Relations: Friendship Patterns and
Consequences (According to Managers). Public Administration Review 62(2):217–230.
Bowles S (2006) Group Competition, Reproductive Leveling, and the Evolution of Human
Altruism. Science 314(5805):1569–1572.
Burawoy M (1982) Manufacturing Consent: Changes in the Labor Process under Monopoly
Capitalism (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Burt RS (1992) Structural Holes: The Social Structure of Competition. (Harvard University
Press, Cambridge, MA).
Burt RS (2000) The Network Structure of Social Capital. Research in organizational behavior
22:345–423.
Carnegie D (1933) How to Win Friends and Influence People (Simon & Schuster, New York,
NY).
Castilla EJJ (2005) Social Networks and Employee Performance in a Call Center. American
Journal of Sociology 110(5):1243–1283.
Chandler GN, Keller C, Lyon DW (2000) Unraveling the determinants and consequences
of an innovation-supportive organizational culture. Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice
25(1):59–76.

32

Chatman JA (1991) Matching People and Organizations: Selection and Socialization in
Public Accounting Firms. Administrative Science Quarterly 36(3):459–484.
Chatman JA, O’Reilly CA (2016) Paradigm lost: Reinvigorating the study of organizational
culture. Research in Organizational Behavior 36:199–224.
Cifuentes M, Boyer J, Lombardi D, Punnett L (2010) Use of O NET as a Job Exposure
Matrix. American Journal of Industrial Medicine 53:898–932.
Coser LA, Kadushin C, Powell WW (1982) Books: The Culture and Commerce of Publishing
(Basic Books New York).
Downie M, Mageau GA, Koestner R (2008) What Makes for a Pleasant Social Interaction? Motivational Dynamics of Interpersonal Relations. The Journal of Social Psychology
148(5):523–534.
Elfenbein HA, O’Reilly CA (2007) Fitting In: The Effects of Relational Demography and
Person-Culture Fit on Group Process and Performance. Group & Organization Management
32(1):109–142.
Ezzamel M, Willmott H (1998) Accounting for Teamwork: A Critical Study of Group-Based
Systems of Organizational Control. Administrative Science Quarterly 43(2):358.
Fernandez RM, Castilla EJ, Moore P (2000) Social Capital at Work: Networks and Employment at a Phone Center. American Journal of Sociology 105(5):1288–1356.
Fernandez RM, Weinberg N (1997) Sifting and Sorting: Personal Contacts and Hiring in a
Retail Bank. American Sociological Review 62(6):883.
Ferrazzi K, Raz T (2005) Never Eat Alone: And Other Secrets to Success, One Relationship
at a Time (Currency Doubleday, New York, NY).
Fischer CS (1982) What do we Mean by “Friend”? An Inductive Study. Social Networks
3(4):287–306.

33

Fleming L, Mingo S, Chen D (2007) Collaborative Brokerage, Generative Creativity, and
Creative Success. Administrative Science Quarterly 52(3):443–475.
Fleming P, Spicer A (2004) “You Can Checkout Anytime, but You Can Never Leave”: Spatial
Boundaries in a High Commitment Organization. Human Relations 57(1):75–94.
Goette L, Huffman D, Meier S (2006) The Impact of Group Membership on Cooperation and
Norm Enforcement: Evidence using Random Assignment to Real Social Groups. American
Economic Review. 212–216.
Goffee R (1981) Incorporation and Conflict: A Case Study of Subcontracting in the Coal
Industry. The Sociological Review 29(3):475–497.
Goffman A (2019) Go to More Parties? Social Occasions as Home to Unexpected Turning
Points in Life Trajectories. Social Psychology Quarterly 82(1):51–74.
Goffman E (1972) Encounters: Two Studies in the Sociology of Interaction (Allen Lane, New
York, NY).
Goldberg A, Srivastava SB, Manian VG, Monroe W, Potts C (2016) Fitting in or Standing
Out? The Tradeoffs of Structural and Cultural Embeddedness. American Sociological Review
81(6):1190–1222.
Gough M, Noonan M (2013) A Review of the Motherhood Wage Penalty in the United States.
Sociology Compass 7(4):328–342.
Granovetter MS (1973) The Strength of Weak Ties. American Jounal of Sociology 78(6):1360–
1380.
Hadden WC, Kravets N, Muntaner C (2004) Descriptive Dimensions of US Occupations with
Data from the O*NET. Social Science Research 33(1):64–78.
Halle D (1984) America’s Working Man: Work, Home, and Politics among Blue Collar
Property Owners (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).

34

Hauser R, Warren J (1997) Socioeconomic Indexes for Occupations: A review, Update, and
Critique. Sociological Methodology.
Hodson R (1997) Individual Voice on the Shop Floor: The Role of Unions. Social Forces
75(4):1183–1212.
Hodson R (2001) Dignitity at Work (Cambridge Univ Press, Cambridge).
Hodson R, Roscigno VJ, Lopez SH (2006) Chaos and the Abuse of Power. Work and
Occupations 33(4):382–416.
Hoef JMV, Boveng PL (2007) Bimodial Regression: How Should we Model Overdispersed
Count Data? Ecology 88(11):2766–2772.
Hofferth SL, Flood SM, Sobek M (2018) American Time Use Survey Data Extract Builder:
Version 2.7 [dataset].
Ingram P, Zou X (2008) Business friendships. Research in Organizational Behavior 28:167–
184.
Jackall R (1978) Workers in a Labyrinth: Jobs and Survival in a Bank Bureaucracy (Allanheld
& Schram, New York, NY).
Kahneman D, Krueger AB, Schkade DA, Schwarz N, Stone AA (2004) A survey method for
characterizing daily life experience: The day reconstruction method. Science 306(5702):1776–
1780.
Kalleberg A (2009) Precarious Work, Insecure Workers: Employment Relations in Transition.
American sociological review.
Kalleberg A (2012) Good Jobs, Bad Jobs (Russell Sage Foundation, New York, NY).
Kellogg KC (2009) Operating Room: Relational Spaces and Microinstitutional Change in
Surgery. American Journal of Sociology 115(3):657–711.

35

Kirkman BL, Shapiro DL (2001) The impact of Cultural Values on Job Satisfaction and
Organizational Commitment in Self-managing Work Teams: The mediating Role of Employee
Resistance. Academy of Management journal 44(3):557–569.
Kozlowski SW, Bell BS (2003) Work Groups and Teams in Organizations. Handbook of
psychology. 333–375.
Kunda G (2009) Engineering Culture: Control and Commitment in a High-Tech Corporation
(Temple University Press, Philadelphia, PA).
Lin N (1999) Social Networks and Status Attainment. Annual Review of Sociology 25:467–487.
Lin N (2000) Inequality in social capital. Contemporary sociology 29(6):785–795.
Lin N (2002) Social Capital: A Theory of Social Structure and Action (Cambridge university
press).
McPherson M, Smith-Lovin L, Brashears ME (2006) Social Isolation in America: Changes in
Core Discussion Networks over two Decades. American Sociological Review 71(3):353–375.
McPherson M, Smith-Lovin L, Cook JM (2001) Birds of a Feather: Homophily in Social
Networks. Annual Review of Sociology 27(1):415–444.
Mears A (2015) Working for Free in the VIP: Relational Work and the Production of Consent.
American Sociological Review 80(6):1099–1122.
Mobasseri S, Goldberg A, Srivastava SB (2019) What is Cultural Fit? From Cognition to
Behavior (And Back). The Oxford Handbook of Cognitive Sociology. (Oxford University
Press, Oxford), 305–330.
Morrison EIW (2012) Newcomers’ Relationships: The Role of Social Network Ties During
Socialization. Academy of Management Journal 45(6):1149–1160.
Mouw T, Kalleberg AL (2010) Do Changes in Job Mobility Explain the Growth of Wage
Inequality among Men in the United States, 19772005? Social Forces 88(5):2053–2077.
36

Nezlek JB (2003) The Motivational and Cognitive Dynamics of Day-to-day Social Life.
The social mind: Cognitive and motivational aspects of interpersonal behavior. (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge), 92–111.
Nezlek JB, Richardson DS, Green LR, Schatten-Jones EC (2002) Psychological well-being
and day-to-day social interaction among older adults. Personal Relationships 9(1):57–71.
Pillemer J, Rothbard NP (2018) Friends Without Benefits: Understanding the Dark Sides of
Workplace Friendship. Academy of Management Review 43(4).
Podolny JM, Baron J (1997) Resources and Relationships: Social Networks and Mobility in
the Workplace. American Sociological Review 62(5):673.
Rayner J, Williams HM, Lawton A, Allinson CW (2011) Public Service Ethos: Developing a
Generic Measure. Journal of Public Administration Research and Theory 21(1):27–51.
Reich A, Bearman P (2018) Working for Respect: Community and Conflict at Walmart
(Columbia University Press, New York, NY).
Richman R (2015) The Culture Blueprint: A Guide to Building the High-performance
Workplace (Culture Hackers).
Rivera LA (2012) Hiring as Cultural Matching: The Case of Elite Professional Service Firms.
American Sociological Review 77(6):999–1022.
Roscigno VJ, Lopez SH, Hodson R (2009) Supervisory Bullying, Status Inequalities and
Organizational Context. Social Forces 87(3):1561–1589.
Roscigno V, Sauer C, Valet P (2018) Rules, Relations, and Work. American Journal of
Sociology 123(6):1784–1825.
Shwed U, Kalev A (2014) Are Referrals More Productive or More Likeable? Social Networks
and the Evaluation of Merit. American Behavioral Scientist 58(2):288–308.
Simmel G, Hughes EC (1949) The Sociology of Sociability. American Journal of Sociology
37

55(3):254–261.
Sniezek T (2005) Is it Our Day or the Bride’s Day? The Division of Wedding Labor and its
Meaning for Couples. Qualitative Sociology 28(3):215–234.
Spenner KI (1988) Social Stratification, Work, and Personality. Annual Review of Sociology
14(1):69–97.
Srivastava SB, Goldberg A, Manian VG, Potts C (2018) Enculturation Trajectories: Language,
Cultural Adaptation, and Individual Outcomes in Organizations. Management Science
64(3):1348–1364.
Stone AA, Mackie C (2013) The Subjective Well-Being Module of the American Time Use
Survey: Assessment for Its Continuation (National Academies Press (US), Washington, DC).
Tomaskovic-Devey D (2014) The Relational Generation of Workplace Inequalities. Social
Currents 1(1):51–73.
Vallas S, Cummins E (2014) Relational Models of Organizational Inequalities. American
Behavioral Scientist 58(2):228–255.
Van Maanen J, Barley SR (1982) Occupational Communities: Culture and Control in Organizations (Alfred P Sloan School Of Management, Cambridge, MA).
Weber M (2009) From Max Weber: Essays in Sociology (Routledge).
White L, Keith B (1990) The Effect of Shift Work on the Quality and Stability of Marital
Relations. Journal of Marriage and the Family 52(2):453.
Wynn JR (2016) On the Sociology of Occasions. Sociological Theory 34(3):276–286.
Young C, Lim C (2014) Time as a Network Good: Evidence from Unemployment and the
Standard Workweek. Sociological Science 1:10–27.

38

Tables
Table 1: Work Mechanisms of Coworker
Sociability
Mechanisms

Primary level

Coordination:
Workplace size
Work interaction

Organization
Both

Time budgets

Organization

Schedule alignment

Organization

Intrinsic Motivation:
Selection

Occupation

Task-related conditioning

Occupation

Opportunity costs
Homophily

Organization
Both

Extrinsic Incentives:
Cultures of sociability

Both

Worker power

Organization

Social capital utility

Organization

Opportunities for advancement

Occupation

39

40

04:00
05:00
05:15
05:25
06:10
10:00
13:00
13:30
16:00
17:00
17:30
17:45
18:00
19:00
19:15
19:40
23:30
23:35
01:00
01:20
01:25
02:25

Food & drink preparation

Household organization

Travel related to work

Work, main job

Sleeping

Eating & drinking

Work, main job

Washing, dressing, and grooming

Work, main job

Television/movies

Work, main job

Travel related to socializing

Socializing & communicating

Travel related to attanding/hosting social events

Attending/hosting parties/receptions/ceremonies

Travel related to socializing

Socializing & communicating

Travel related to socializing

Socializing & communicating

Travel related to socializing

Sleeping

Start

Washing, dressing, and grooming

Activity

Table 2: Example ATUS Time Diary

04:30

02:25

01:25

01:20

01:00

23:35

23:30

19:40

19:15

19:00

18:00

17:45

17:30

17:00

16:00

13:30

13:00

10:00

06:10

05:25

05:15

05:00

End

Not asked

Car/truck/motorcycle (driver)

Someone else’s home

Car/truck/motorcycle (passenger)

Restaurant/bar

Walking

Outdoors

Car/truck/motorcycle (passenger)

Someone else’s home

Car/truck/motorcycle (driver)

Workplace

Workplace

Workplace

Not asked

Workplace

Workplace

Not asked

Workplace

Car/truck/motorcycle (driver)

Home

Home

Not asked

Location

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

No

Coworker Friend

Table 3: Descriptive statistics
Variable
Mean/Proportion
Coworker sociability outside workplace (mins)
3.02
Coworker sociability in workplace (mins)
3.15
Friend sociality (mins)
17.7
Solitary work breaks
0.14
Care work (mins)
61.3
Female
0.42
Married
0.63
Hispanic
0.14
Hours worked
44.6
Weekly earnings (dollars)
985
Team based work (occupational)
0
Social work tasks (occupational)
0
Competition (occupational)
0
Part of labor union
1.15
Non-standard work schedule
0.25
Race
...White
0.83
...Asian
0.05
...Black
0.1
...Other
0.02
Education
...<HS
0.07
...HS
0.24
...GED
0.02
...Some college
0.26
...Bachelor’s Degree
0.41
Occupational Class
...Professional
0.32
...Management
0.13
...Service
0.11
...Sales
0.08
...Administrative
0.13
...Farming
0.01
...Construction
0.09
...Production
0.08
Transport
0.06
Children in household
...0
0.53
...1
0.19
...2
0.19
...3+
0.09
Employer type
...Private sector
0.74
...Government
0.19
...Nonprofit
0.07
41

SD Proportion Missing
19.4
0
10.4
0
76.5
0
1.69
0
115
0
0
0
0
8.17
0.03
622
0
1
0.07
1
0.07
1
0.07
0.03
0.43
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 4: Quasipoission models of the percent
change in coworker sociability at work by
work characteristics
1
Sociable w. friends
Female
Age
Age squared
Care work (hours)
Education: (ref. = HS)
...<HS
...GED
...Some college
...Bachelors Degree
Race: (ref. = White)
...Asian
...Black
...Other
Married
Hispanic
Children in household (ref. = 0)
...1
...2
...3+
Solitary breaks
Hours worked
Nonstandard work schedule
Part of labor union
Employer type: (ref. = Private sector)
...Government
...Nonprofit
Occ. prop. college educated
Weekly earnings (log)
Social work tasks
Team based work (occupational)
Occ. competitiveness
N

Coef.
-3.6
-18.4*
-8.5*
0.1*
-10.7*

2
SE
6.4
3.2
2
0
1.6

Coef. SE
1.1
7
-10.9* 4.1
-5.5* 2.1
0.1*
0
-10*
1.7

17.5* 8.5
31.4* 13.2
-13.7* 3.9
-61.9* 2

1.4
7.6
13.3
12.2
-5.8
4.5
-33.8* 4.3

3.4
36.5*
-6.5
-3.1
2.1

10.5
7.1
11.5
4.1
5.5

13.7
27.1*
-11
-1.5
-1.4

11.8
6.9
11.5
4.4
5.5

-0.6
2.5
-4
2*
-2.2*
42*
75.1*

5.2
5.7
7.1
0.4
0.2
6
8.4

-1
3.7
-4.1
1.5*
-1.7*
30.5*
67.3*

5.3
6
7.3
0.4
0.2
5.7
8.4

-6.1
3.6
-65.6*
-14.8*
-12.5*
3.3
-11.2*

5.3
8.8
3.6
3.2
2.3
2.3
2.1

-11.9* 4.7
-5.8
7.5

=

25,602

Controls not shown: year and weekday (all models); detailed occupation
(Model 2), detailed industry (Model 3). * = p.<0.05

42

Table 5: Quasipoission models of the percent
change in coworker sociability outside work by
work characteristics
1
Sociable w. friends
Female
Age
Age squared
Care work (hours)
Education: (ref. = HS)
...<HS
...GED
...Some college
...Bachelors Degree
Race: (ref. = White)
...Asian
...Black
...Other
Married
Hispanic
Children in household (ref. = 0)
...1
...2
...3+
Solitary breaks
Hours worked
Nonstandard work schedule
Part of labor union
Employer type: (ref. = Private sector)
...Government
...Nonprofit
Occ. prop. college educated
Weekly earnings (log)
Social work tasks
Team based work (occupational)
Occ. competitiveness
N

2

Coef.
13.6
-24*
-1.2
0
-17.2*

SE
9.4
4.5
3.4
0
2.1

Coef.
16
-23.5*
-4.8
0
-16.9*

SE
11.1
5.6
3.8
0
2.4

6.2
22
43*
94.3*

17.4
31.1
13.5
17

43.1*
11.1
36.7*
68.6*

25.9
32.4
14.8
19.6

5.7
-10.6
-40.6*
8.1
6.2

13.5
8.4
14.2
7.2
9.6

-3.9
-6.2
-39.4
-2.6
5

14
10.1
16.4
7.9
10.8

-20.7*
-14.8
-23.2*
-5.6
0.8*
-25.7*
-7.6

6.4
7.2
8.8
3.3
0.3
5.6
8.3

-18.4*
-10.5
-23.1*
-4.9
0.4
-17.3*
-14.2

7.5
8.6
10.2
3.7
0.4
7
8.8

18.8*
-10.8

8.8
10

29*
-11
-2.4
24.2*
0.8
0.9
-2.6

11.4
11.7
14.3
10.4
4
4.8
4.2

=

41,848

Controls not shown: year, weekday, and workday (all models); detailed
occupation (Model 2), detailed industry and family income (3). * =
p.<0.05

43

Table 6: Linear Models of Earnings (Log $) by
Individual and Occupational Sociability At
Work
1
Sociable with coworker
Occupational sociality
Sociable w. coworker x Occ. sociability
Female
Age
Age squared
Care work
Sociable with friend
Education: (ref. = HS)
...<HS
...GED
...Some college
...Bachelors Degree
Race (ref. = White)
...Asian
...Black
...Other
Married
Hispanic
Children in household (ref. = 0)
...1
...2
...3+
Solitary work breaks
Occ. proportion college educated
Hours worked
Nonstandard work schedule
Social work tasks
Team based work (occupational)
Occ. competition
Part of labor union
Employer type: (ref. = Private sector)
...Government
...Nonprofit
N

2

Coef. SE
-0.09* 0.01

-0.26*
0.06*
0*
0
0.02

0.01
0
0
0
0.01

3

Coef. SE
Coef.
-0.04* 0.01 -0.14*
-1.21*
0.73*
-0.17* 0.01 -0.28*
0.05* 0
0.06*
0*
0
0*
0
0
0
0.01
0.01 0.02

4
SE
0.02
0.06
0.11
0.01
0
0
0
0.01

Coef.
-0.08*
-0.21*
0.26*
-0.17*
0.05*
0*
0
0.01

SE
0.02
0.07
0.1
0.01
0
0
0
0.01

-0.29* 0.02
-0.16* 0.02
0.16* 0.01
0.55* 0.01

-0.21* 0.02 -0.26* 0.02 -0.21* 0.02
-0.14* 0.02 -0.16* 0.02 -0.14* 0.02
0.11* 0.01 0.14* 0.01 0.11* 0.01
0.31* 0.01 0.48* 0.01 0.31* 0.01

0.08* 0.02
-0.16* 0.01
-0.05* 0.02
0.07* 0.01
-0.17* 0.01

0.06* 0.01 0.08* 0.02 0.06*
-0.1* 0.01 -0.14* 0.01 -0.1*
-0.04* 0.02 -0.05* 0.02 -0.04*
0.05* 0.01 0.06* 0.01 0.05*
-0.13* 0.01 -0.17* 0.01 -0.13*

0.01
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.01

-0.01
0.03*
0.02

-0.01
0.02
0.02*
0*
0.45*
0.01*
-0.06*
-0.06*
0.02*
0.07*
0.17*

0.01
0.01
0.01
0
0.02
0
0.01
0
0
0
0.01

0.01
0.01
0.01

0.01 -0.01
0.01 0.03*
0.01 0.02
0
0.02
0
0.01
0
0
0
0.01

-0.07* 0.01
-0.09* 0.01
=

Controls not shown: year and weekday. * = p.<0.05

44

25,602

0.01 -0.01
0.01 0.02
0.01 0.02*
0*
0.44*
0.01*
-0.06*
-0.06*
0.02*
0.07*
0.18*

-0.07* 0.01
-0.1* 0.01

Table 7: Linear Models of Earnings (Log $) by
Individual and Occupational Sociability
Outside Work
1
Sociable with coworker
Occupational sociality
Sociable w. coworker x Occ. sociability
Female
Care work
Age
Age squared
Sociable with friend
Education: (ref. = HS)
...<HS
...GED
...Some college
...Bachelors Degree
Race (ref. = White)
...Asian
...Black
...Other
Married
Hispanic
Children in household (ref. = 0)
...1
...2
...3+
Solitary work breaks
Occ. prop. college educated
Hours worked
Social work tasks
Nonstandard work schedule
Team based work (occupational)
Occ. competition
Part of labor union
Employer type: (ref. = Private sector)
...Government
...Nonprofit
N

2

Coef.
0.04*

SE
0.01

-0.24*
0*
0.03*
0*
0.03*

0
0
0
0
0.01

Coef.
0.04*

3
SE
0.01

Coef.
0.01
2.31*
0
-0.18* 0
-0.22*
0
0
0*
0.03* 0
0.03*
0*
0
0*
0.02* 0.01 0.03*

4
SE
0.02
0.09
0.4
0
0
0
0
0.01

Coef.
0
0.73*
0.56
-0.17*
0
0.03*
0*
0.02*

SE
0.02
0.09
0.38
0
0
0
0
0.01

-0.13* 0.01
-0.05* 0.02
0.08* 0.01
0.29* 0.01

-0.09* 0.01 -0.12* 0.01 -0.09* 0.01
-0.05* 0.02 -0.05* 0.02 -0.05* 0.02
0.07* 0.01 0.07* 0.01 0.07* 0.01
0.19* 0.01 0.26* 0.01 0.19* 0.01

0.06* 0.01
-0.05* 0.01
-0.02 0.01
-0.19* 0.01
-0.07* 0.01

0.04*
-0.03*
-0.02
-0.16*
-0.05*

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01

0.02*
0.05*
0.08*

0.02*
0.05*
0.08*
0
0.26*
0.01*
-0.04*
-0.03*
0.02*
0.05*
0.13*

0.01 0.02*
0.01 0.05*
0.01 0.08*
0
0.01
0
0
0.01
0
0
0.01

0.01
0.01
0.01

-0.04* 0.01
-0.05* 0.01
=

41,848

Controls not shown: year, weekday, workday and family income. * = p.<0.05

45

0.07* 0.01 0.04*
-0.04* 0.01 -0.03*
-0.01 0.01 -0.02
-0.18* 0.01 -0.16*
-0.07* 0.01 -0.05*
0.01 0.02*
0.01 0.05*
0.01 0.08*
0
0.25*
0.01*
-0.04*
-0.03*
0.02*
0.04*
0.13*

0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0
0.01
0
0
0.01
0
0
0.01

-0.04* 0.01
-0.05* 0.01

Figures

46

Figure 1: Activity Components of Coworker Sociability in and Outside of the Workplace

Figure 2: Affect during Work, Coworker Sociability, and Socializing with Friends.

47

Figure 3: Proportion of Workers who Socialize, and Mean Duration Sociable, Conditional on
Socializing.

48

Figure 4: Sociability with Friends and Coworkers by Broad Occupational Class

49

Figure 5: Predicted weekly earnings by Individual and Occupational Coworker Sociability in
the Workplace

50

