Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at the Beginning
of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

Author(s): Liudmyla Pastushenko
Source: Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018): 97–116
Published by: National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy

http://kmhj.ukma.edu.ua/

Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at the Beginning of
the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures
Liudmyla Pastushenko

National University of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy,
Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies
Abstract
This article attempts to reveal intercultural connections at the Kyiv Theological
Academy at the beginning of the 20th century by reconstructing the spiritual
biographies of two theological academy professors: Archimandrite (later, Archbishop
of Berlin and Germany) Tykhon (Tymofii Liashchenko) and Petro Kudriavtsev. The
article demonstrates how different cultural traditions intersected and combined in
the spiritual experience of these figures. The author of the article argues that, as a
result of revolutionary events in 1917–1919, both Kyiv Theological Academy professors
experienced transformations in personal cultural identity, and their spiritual
biographies reveal a transition from Russian to Western European and a combination
of both (Tykhon (Liashchenko) identities), and from Russian to Ukrainian ideological
cultural orientation (Petro Kudriavtsev).
Key Words: Kyiv Theological Academy, Tykhon (Liashchenko), Petro Kudriavtsev,
spiritual biography, intercultural connections, church life, Ukrainian language of
worship, Ukrainian culture, Russian culture, western European culture.

3
Professor of the Kyiv Theological Academy Petro Kudriavtsev, one of the first
researchers of the historical and cultural heritage of the Kyiv Academy, intending to
show images of the Academy’s past “in their concrete, vital integrity,” did this through
the prism of reproducing spiritual biographies of theological academy professors.1 It
is worth emphasizing how valuable and effective Kudriavtsev’s choice of approach to
studying pages in the history of the Academy was. He not only reconstructed external
aspects of the vitae of theological academy professors, but also tried to express the
diversity and uniqueness of their personal worldviews, which reflect the prism of
cultural and historical realities of the times formed and presented in their works. The
1

See “‘My priobshchili by vashi vospominaniia k nashim i postaralis by ikh sokhranit dlia istorii
proshlogo Kieva i Kievskoi Akademii…’ (Pisma Petra Pavlovicha Kudriavtseva k Alekseiu
Afanasevichu Dmitrievskomu (1924–1929 gg.) [‘We Would Add Your Memoirs to Ours and
Try to Save Them for the History of the Past of Kyiv and of the Kyiv Academy…’ (Letters
of Petr Pavlovych Kudriavtsev to Aleksei Afanasevich Dmitrievskii, 1924–1929)],” Vestnik
Ekaterinburgskoi dukhovnoi seminarii 2.8 (2014): 389.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

98

emphasis on personal spiritual experience, which “emerges in a rather wide area of
communication presented by many cultures,” is the main feature of the humanistic
turn in modern historical science that consists of understanding culture as a place
of human communication and interaction.2 The study of diversity, a polylogue of the
voices of different cultures, their intersection, adjacency or opposition, and dialogism
or confrontation through the prism of human individuality, is the fundamental
methodological approach of contemporary historians. Let us apply the method of
Kudriavtsev and attempt to recreate images of the past of the Kyiv Academy in their
full color and concrete manifestations by reconstructing the spiritual biographies
of its professors Tykhon (secular name Tymofii Ivanovych Liashchenko) and Petro
Pavlovych Kudriavtsev. They belonged to opposing camps of the theological academy
professorship and had different worldviews, philosophical beliefs, and social and civil
positions. However, a common feature of these figures is that due to the historical
flow of the eventful beginning of the 20th century, their spiritual biographies became
an expression of the clarification of the intersection and the intertwining of cultural
traditions, which, in its turn highlights the picture of intercultural ties of the Kyiv
Theological Academy at the beginning of the 20th century.
Archbishop Tykhon (secular name Tymofii Ivanovych Liashchenko) (1875–1945) was
an alumnus, teacher, and inspector of the Kyiv Theological Academy, and a well-known
church figure of the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad (ROCA).3 Tymofii Liaschenko
participated in Kyiv Theological Academy life from 1905, when he entered the Academy 4
already being a priest and having considerable experience in teaching The Law of God

2

M. L. Tkachuk, Kyivska akademichna filosofiia ХІХ — pochatku ХХ st.: metodolohichni
problemy doslidzhennia [Kyiv Academic Philosophy of the 19th — Beginning of the 20th Century:
Methodological Issues of Research] (Kyiv: ZAT “Vіpol,” 2000), 117.

3

See more about him in L. A. Pastushenko, “Tykhon (Liashchenko Tymofii Ivanovych),” in
Kyivska dukhovna akademiia v imenakh: 1819–1924, vol. 2, ed. M. Tkachuk (Kyiv: Vydavnychyi
dim “Kyievo-Mohylianska akademiia,” 2016), 669–72; L. A. Pastushenko, “Arkhivna spadshchyna
arkhyiepyskopa Tykhona (Tymofiia Ivanovycha Liashchenka) u fondakh Instytutu rukopysu
Natsionalnoi biblioteky Ukrainy imeni V. I. Vernadskoho [The Archival Heritage of Archbishop
Tykhon (Tymofii Ivanovych Liashchenko) in the Holdings of the Institute of Manuscripts,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine],” in Biohrafichnyi pidkhid u vyvchenni istorii ta
spadshchyny Kyivskoi dukhovnoi akademii, ed. M. L. Tkachuk (Kyiv: Vydavnychyi dim “KyievoMohylianska akademiia,” 2016), 199–213.

4

See Liashchenko Timofei Ivanovich. Avtobiografiia. Chernovik. Prilozhenie: studencheskii
bilet i vizitnaia kartochka [Autobiography. Draft Document. Appendix: Student Card and
Visiting Card], 1908 [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library
of Ukraine, f. 216, no. 1, p. 1); Formuliarnyi spisok ekstraordinarnogo professora arkhimandrita
Tikhona [Record of Service of Extraordinary-Professor Archimandrite Tykhon] [Manuscript]
(Central State Historical Archives of Ukraine in Kyiv, f. 711, desc. 1, no. 10964, p. 2).

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

99

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

in the schools of his native Voronezh province.5 In 1909, priest Tymofii Liashchenko
graduated from the Academy with a Candidate’s degree in theology,6 and as the best
alumnus stayed at the Department of Patrology, receiving a professorial scholarship.7 In
1910, he began teaching at the Kyiv Theological Academy. During his application for the
vacant cathedra at the Department of Pastoral Theology with Ascetical Theology and
Homiletics, which took place at a meeting of the Kyiv Theological Academy Conference
on 5 November 1910, priest Liashchenko failed to gain enough votes. However, shortly
after, on 1 December 1910, the Holy Governing Synod appointed him to this chair as
acting Associate Professor.8 On 4 April 1913, after the successful defense of his work
The Life of St. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria (Kyiv, 1913),9 he received a Master’s degree
in Theology and the title of Associate Professor.10 On 17 August 1913 he was elected an
Extraordinary Professor. During 1910–1913 Liashchenko headed a preaching group of Kyiv
Theological Academy students, realizing in practice the instructions he gave to Academy
students in his course of Pastoral Theology.11 Other evidence of his theological academic
career success is his appointment as an inspector of the Kyiv Theological Academy with
the rank of Archimandrite on 29 July 1914.12 In 1915 Archimandrite Tykhon (Liashchenko)
twice served as the rector of the Kyiv Theological Academy. In his ideological beliefs he

5

Tymofii Liashchenko was born in Kulakovka settlement, Ostrohozhsk region of Voronezh
province (today a village in the Rossoshanskii district of Voronezh oblast in the Russian
Federation) in a peasant family.

6

After the defence of his candidate’s work The Life of St. Cyril, Archbishop of Alexandria,
Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. 304, no. 2052.

7

See in Izvlechenie iz zhurnalov Soveta Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii za 1908–1909 uchebnyi god
[Extracts From Records of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1908–1909 Academic Year]
(Kyiv, 1909), 415–18, 486, 488, 490; Izvlechenie iz zhurnalov Soveta Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii
za 1909–1910 uchebnyi god [Extracts From Records of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council,
1909–1910 Academic Year] (Kyiv, 1910), 650–52.

8

Izvlechenie iz zhurnalov Soveta Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii za 1910–1911 uchebnyi god [Extracts
From Records of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1910–1911 Academic Year] (Kyiv, 1911),
187–94, 198–206, 209–11, 232; Formuliarnyi spisok arkhimandrita Tikhona, 3.

9

This defence took place at a public meeting of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council on
4 April 1913.

10

Formuliarnyi spisok arkhimandrita Tikhona, 4.

11

See Propovednicheskii kruzhok studentov Kievskoi duhovnoi akademii. Rukovoditel Liashchenko
Timofei Ivanovich. Materialy deiatelnosti [The Evangelical Group of Kyiv Theological Academy
Students. Liashchenko Tymofii Ivanovych, Leader. Records], 1910–1913 [Manuscript] (Manuscript
Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National library of Ukraine, f. 216, no. 84–116).

12

On 2 August 1914 priest Tymofii Liashchenko took his monastic vows with the name of Tykhon
(he received the tonsure from Metropolitan of Kyiv and Halychyna, Flavian (Horodetskyi));
on 6 August of the same year he received the rank of archimandrite. See Formuliarnyi spisok
arkhimandrita Tikhona, 3.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

100

belonged to the right wing of theological academy professors, who denied the need for
any (especially liberal) innovations in the Academy’s theological life.
A demonstration of Archimandrite Tykhon’s (Liashchenko’s) philosophical and
ideological beliefs in pre-revolutionary years was the work Asceticism as the Basis
of Russian Culture (Moscow, 1915), which was written as an answer to the political
and historical realities of the day, associated with the First World War and the
military confrontation between the two empires, Russia and Germany. The work
of Archimandrite Tykhon reflects general attitudes of Russian religiously oriented
intellectuals at the beginning of the 20th century. In particular, Russian religious thinkers
united around the Put publishing house (Nikolai Berdiaev, Sergei Bulgakov, Evgenii
Trubetskoi, Vladimir Ern and others) and regarded the confrontation between the two
empires as a watershed for the future of Russia, “a religious moment, a supra-political,
supranational, and idealistic moment,” 13 since it was about the confrontation between
two directions of cultural development, “two deep self-determinations of human will,”
the Russian religious one and the Western atheistic one.14 The aforementioned thinkers
argued that Russia was a protagonist in the war, endowing the Russian people with
a historical mission of pointing the true way to the world, the way of universal assertion
of the Christian ideal. The central idea of Archimandrite Tykhon’s work became the
idea of confrontation between the Russian and German (in a broader sense, Western
European) cultures. According to Archimandrite Tykhon, among the national traits of
the German people were rudeness, selfishness, and cruelty. He thought these features
generally typical for Western European culture, denoted by rationalism (with its
cult of ratio opposing God and religion), individualism (advocating the ideal of an
emancipated God-man with his unlimited power and rights), and materialism, which
caused a real revolution in the realm of human life, limiting the latter only to earthly
presence and serving only material interests. Regarding German culture as an evil
threatening all mankind, Archimandrite Tykhon opposed it, in the spirit of Slavophilia,
to the ideals of Russian culture and, in a broader sense, to the culture of Orthodox
Christianity. The basic features of Russian culture, according to Archimandrite Tykhon,
were humility, love for one’s neighbor, self-denial and others, united by the general ideal
of asceticism, the foundation of Christian life. Archimandrite Tykhon’s philosophical
concept of the cultural development of mankind is a vivid expression of a typical
outlook of the conservative wing of the Kyiv Theological Academy professorship with
Russian imperial identity, featuring such typical traits as Russophilia, Orthodoxy, and
devotion to the autocrat.15 Arguing for the principles of the Russian national idea,
Archimandrite Tykhon was a member of the Kyiv club of Russian nationalists.
The revolutionary years of 1917–1918 radically changed the established traditions
of the Kyiv Theological Academy and the usual course of the life of its professors. Like
13

E. A. Hollerbakh, K nezrimomu gradu. Religiozno-filosofskaia gruppa “Put” (1910–1919) v poiskakh
novoi russkoi identichnosti [Towards the Invisible City. The “Put” Religious and Philosophical
Group (1910–1919): The Search for a New Russian Identity] (St. Petersburg: Aleteia, 2000), 248.

14

Hollerbakh, K nezrimomu gradu, 44.

15

Tkachuk, Kyivska akademichna filosofiia, 137.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

101

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

most academics, Archimandrite Tykhon took an active part in the church, civil-political,
and educational life of Kyiv.16 Instructed by the Kyiv Theological Academy Conference
in 1919, he visited General Anton Ivanovich Denikin at the General Headquarters of the
Armed Forces of South Russia, applying for the issuance of money for the maintenance
of the academic corporation.17 During this mission Archimandrite Tykhon became ill
with typhus in Odessa, and was taken to the Bulgarian city of Varna together with the
field hospital.
As it later turned out, Archimandrite Tykhon (Liashchenko) was destined to leave
Russia forever and spend the rest of his life abroad, directly encountering the world
of Western European culture, which he had previously criticized. In the 1920s‑1930s
he became one of the notable and influential figures in the church and cultural life of
the Russian Orthodox Church abroad. In Bulgaria, in 1920–1921 Archimandrite Tykhon
was installed as the Dean of the Church of St. Nicholas of Myra at the Russian Embassy
in Sofia, and was also engaged in teaching activities: he taught patristics at the local
Theological religious school.18 Together with his former students of Bulgarian origin
(Kyiv Theological Academy graduates), he considered the possibility of opening a
theological academy in Sofia, but did not realize this intention because of the Bulgarian
government’s resistance.
By the authority of Archbishop Eulogy (Georgievskii), who headed Russian
Orthodox parishes abroad, beginning with May 1921 Archimandrite Tykhon
(Liashchenko) was made the Dean of St. Vladimir’s church at the Russian Embassy in
Berlin.19 Extant correspondence of Archimandrite Tykhon with the rector of the Kyiv
Theological Academy (which was transformed into the Kyiv Orthodox Theological

16

Archimandrite Tykhon (Liashchenko) was, in particular, a delegate of the All-Ukrainian
Orthodox Church Council (1918), a member of the Cultural commission, created in 1918 under
the Ministry of Religions of the Pavlo Skoropadskyi government; the commission worked on
issues of severance between Ukraine and Russia. In May 1918 Council of Kyiv pastors elected
him honoured member and head of the Commission on missionary and educational affairs in
Kyiv and the Kyiv Eparchy.

17

Zhurnaly zasedanii Soveta Kievskoi dukhovnoi akademii [Records of Meetings of the Kyiv
Theological Academy], 1919 [Manuscript] (Central State Historical Archives of Ukraine in Kyiv,
f. 711, desc. 3, no. 4072, p. 7).

18

See A. K. Klementev, “Zhizn i trudy Timofeia Ivanovicha Liashchenko, v monashestve Tikhona,
arkhiepiskopa Berlinskogo (v ego perepiske s prof. N. N. Glubokovskim) [The Life and
Works of Timofei Ivanovich Liashchenko, Monastic Name Tykhon, the Archbishop of Berlin
(Correspondence with Prof. N. N. Glubkovskii)],” in Rukopisnoe nasledie deiatelei otechestvennoi
kultury XVIII–XXI vekov. Materialy Mezhdunarodnoi nauchnoi konferentsii, ed. R. I. Kraineva
(St. Petersburg: RNB, 2007), 115.

19

Evlogy, Metropolitan [Georgievskii], Put moei zhyzni. Vospominaniia mitropolita Evlogiia. Izlozh.
po ego rasskazam T. Manukhinoi [The Path of My Life. Memoirs of Metropolitan Evlogii. Retold
According to His Stories to T. Manukhina] (Paris: YMCA-Press, 1947), 91.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

102

Academy), Bishop Vasylii (Bohdashevskyi), dated 1922,20 expresses not only the rich
life of the former Kyiv professor, but also his complex spiritual experiences caused by
forced emigration. His first letters are full of sincere grief over Kyiv and the Academy,
as well as the desire to help former colleagues, who were left without any livelihood
by the Soviet authorities.21 However, over time, Archimandrite Tykhon was more and
more immersed in the eventful church and intellectual life of Europe. In particular, in
subsequent letters to Bishop Vasylii (Bohdashevskyi) he enthusiastically described the
revival of the religious life of Russian emigrants:
the interest in religion among the refugee population, especially
among the intelligentsia, has been increasing. Even the former
rector of Petrograd University, Grimm, makes reports about the
existence of God and the need for religion to save Western culture
and the world.22 Therefore, the need for pastors with professorial
experience is very high. And in particular, as a pastor I have been
fated to minister to such a flock that, I am sure, no one has ever
had — the blossom of our hereditary, administrative, and learned
intelligentsia. There is much work to do, and the work is very
serious.23
Inspired by the idea of developing the Russian Orthodox Church abroad and
reviving the persecuted on Soviet territory religious values in the bosom of Western
European culture, Archimandrite Tykhon took an active part in the “Russian All-Abroad
Church Council” that took place in Sremski Karlovci from 21 November to 2 December
1921. In 1922 he went to Poland, where he was preparing for his episcopate in Grodno
Eparchy under the direction of Metropolitan of Warsaw Heorhii (Yaroshevskyi), and
also assisted the creation of the Orthodox Theological Faculty at Warsaw University.24
Due to the dissolution of church relations between the Russian Orthodox Church
Abroad and Metropolitan Heorhii, who supported the autocephaly of the Polish
Orthodox Church, Archimandrite Tykhon left Poland. In autumn 1922 Metropolitan
Eulogy (Georgievskii) appointed him to be Dean of the Berlin parish. On 11 May 1924,
according to the decision of the Synod of Hierarchs of the Russian Orthodox Church
Abroad, Archimandrite Tykhon (Liashchenko) was consecrated Bishop of Berlin. In
20

Tikhon, arkhimandrit. — Vasiliiu, episkopu Kanevskomu. Pisma. 1 yanvaria — 28 noiabria
(11 dekabria) 1922 g. iz Berlina v Kiev [Tykhon, Archimandrite. — To Vasylii, Bishop Kanevskii.
Letters. 1 January — 28 November (11 December) 1922 From Berlin to Kyiv] [Manuscript]
(Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. 191, no. 872–76).

21

In 1922 Archimandrite Tykhon sent provision parcels to Kyiv through the ARA American
charity organization (American Relief Administration).

22

This concerns Russian historian Ervin Grimm, the rector of the University of St. Petersburg
(Petrograd) in 1911–1918.

23

Tikhon, arkhimandrit, no. 874, 2.

24

Tikhon, arkhimandrit, no. 873, 2.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

103

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

October 1924 he participated in the work of the Bishops’ Assembly of the Russian
Orthodox Church Abroad in Sremski Karlovci and was elected its secretary by the
participants of the assembly. By the decision of the Synod of Hierarchs on 10 October
1924 Bishop Tykhon was appointed Bishop of all Orthodox parishes in Germany. After
the cessation of church communication with Metropolitan Eulogy (Georgievskii), and
due to the formation of German Orthodox parishes into an independent eparchy of
the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad, a synodal decree dated 1 July 1926 appointed
Tykhon (Liashchenko) Bishop of Berlin and Germany.
We can see that fate paradoxically willed Bishop Tykhon to find himself in the
fold of the German culture that he had criticized before. He had to spend the rest
of his life getting used to it, finding his place in it, and even cooperating with Nazi
authorities. In particular, from 1933 on Bishop Tykhon made efforts to legalize Orthodox
parishes of the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad by Nazi Germany and to receive
sequestration of church property.25 The Nazi government tried to use the parishes
headed by Bishop Tykhon for the purposes of a unification campaign of the Russian
Orthodox Churches in Germany that began in September 1935. The campaign had its
ideological basis in an international propaganda effort creating an image of the Nazi
regime as a defender of the Russian Orthodox Church (as opposed to the Bolshevik
Soviet government), thus winning favor in the Balkan countries with their majority
Orthodox population.26 Under these circumstances, Bishop Tykhon persisted to finally
induce the Prussian government to grant public legal status to the Berlin and German
Eparchy that he headed (dated 14 March 1936) and to approve its statute (previously
approved by the Synod of Hierarchs of the Russian Orthodox Church on 23 October
1935), as well as to allocate large funds for the construction of the Orthodox Cathedral
of the Resurrection of Christ in Berlin in April 1936.27 Later, Tykhon emphasized the
enormous historical, cultural, clerical, and socio-political importance of that event,
pointing out that even under conditions of Church oppression in Soviet Russia, “the
basis of Russian culture and statehood — the Orthodox faith is still alive, strong and
fruitful” 28 (even if, paradoxically, it was built up and strengthened, thanks to the efforts
of Bishop Tykhon, in the bosom of the contradictory to the “Russian spirituality,”
German spirit). Ranking as the Archbishop of Berlin and Germany (starting from
28 September 1936), he collaborated with the Nazi regime to add “eulogian” parishes
to the Berlin Eparchy. However, the uncompromising position of Archbishop Tykhon
against the supporters of Metropolitan Eulogy (Georgievskii) led to further escalation
of inter-church conflict. That fact contradicted the interests of German authorities who
25

M. V. Shkarovskii, Krest i svastika. Natsistskaia Germaniia i Pravoslavnaia Tserkov [The Cross and
Swastika. Nazi Germany and the Orthodox Church] (Moscow: Veche, 2007), 512.

26

A. K. Nikitin, Natsistskii rezhim i russkaia pravoslavnaia obshchina v Germanii (1933–1945)
[The Nazi Regime and the Russian Orthodox Community in Germany, 1933–1945] (Moscow:
Tserkovno-nauchnyi tsentr “Pravoslavnaia entsiklopediia,” 1998), 237–38.

27

On April 26, 1936 the Prussian government allocated a large sum of money for church
construction.

28

Klementev, “Zhizn i trudy,” 115.

104

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

sought to unify Orthodox parishes in Germany. So, having lost governmental support,
Archbishop Tykhon was released from heading the eparchy by the decision of the
Synod of Hierarchs of the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad, dated 24 February 1938.29
Summarizing the experience of Archbishop Tykhon’s (Liashchenko’s) church
policy under Nazi rule, it can be stated that mutually beneficial relations existed
between the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad under the leadership of Tykhon and
the Nazi regime: the Prussian government chose and used Karlovсhans to establish
their ideology; in turn, Archbishop Tykhon used the church “manoeuvre” of the Nazis
to build the Russian Church abroad. Moreover, Tykhon won from the church situation
created by the Nazi regime, as the unification of the eulogian parishes, planned by the
Reich, never took place, while Karlovchanian parishes received significant political and
financial support.30 Thanks to this support Archbishop Tykhon made every possible
contribution to the development of the Russian Orthodox tradition in the bosom of
Western European culture.
The spiritual biography of his teacher and colleague at the Kyiv Theological
Academy, Petro Pavlovych Kudriavtsev (1868–1940), an outstanding theological and
academic philosopher and historian, a religious, educational, and cultural figure, is
also quite representative in the light of intercultural ties in the theological academic
and church environment of the early 20th century.31 Born far from the centre of
Russia,32 he entered the Kyiv Theological Academy 33 in 1888, where after four years
he received a degree in theology.34 As one of the most successful students of his class,
he remained at the Kyiv Theological Academy at the Department of the History of
Philosophy, receiving a professorial scholarship. On 10 June 1897 Kudriavtsev was

29

Tykhon retired on 11 June 1938 and stayed at the Rakovica Serbian Orthodox monastery
near Belgrad. He was the Head of the Academic Committee, created by the first hierarch of
the Russian Orthodox Church Abroad, Metropolitan Anastasii (Grybanovskii) in Belgrad.
In September 1944, together with the Assembly of Hierarchs of the Russian Orthodox Church
Abroad, he moved from Belgrad to Karlsbud (today Karlovy Vary), where he soon died on
11 February 1945 and was buried at the municipal cemetery.

30

It should be noted that the “collaboration” of Bishop Tykhon with the Nazi regime was only
a formality, not an indication of inner ideological support of the regime.

31

A more detailed biography of Kudriavtsev is available in L. A. Pastushenko, “Kudriavtsev
Petro Pavlovych,” in Kyivska dukhovna akademiia v imenakh: 1819–1924, vol. 1, ed. M. Tkachuk
(Kyiv: Vydavnychyi dim “Kyievo-Mohylianska akademiia,” 2015), 729–35.

32

He was born in Alekseevskoe village in the Chernski region of Tula province (which is now
a village in the Teplo-Ogarevskii region of Tula oblast of the Russian Federation).

33

After graduating from Efremovskoe religious school and Tula Theological Seminary.

34

After the defence of his Candidate’s dissertation concerning a church’s history topic on
11 June 1892 The most important local churches in the East in the 2nd and 3rd centuries and their
interaction in developing Christian thought and life in this period.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

105

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

elected as acting Associate Professor of this department.35 Based on the public defense
of his monograph, Absolutism or Relativism? The Experience of a Historical and Critical
Study of Pure Empiricism of the Modern Age in its Relation to Morality and Religion.
Prolegomena, which took place on 17 October 1908, he obtained his Master’s degree
in theology and the title of Associate Professor. In January 1909 he was elected as an
Extraordinary Professor at the Department of Philosophy, a position which he held
until the Academy was closed by the Bolsheviks in 1919.36 In 1922–1924, he took part in
the work of the Kyiv Orthodox Theological Academy.
Petro Kudriavtsev played an exceptional role in reforming academic-theological
life at the beginning of the 20th century. He became head of the left wing of the Kyiv
theological academy professorship, and directed his efforts to radically transform
academic-theological life on the principles of self-government, elections, and the
freedom of academic research. Such a reformist attitude of the professors distinguished
the Kyiv Theological Academy from other contemporary Russian educational
institutions, as a progressive institution open to innovative processes. This is attested
to by one of the professors of St. Petersburg University: “The Kyiv academy is number
one when it goes about freshness and progressiveness. And this is clear because it is
in the hands of a person such as Kudriavtsev…” 37 During 1905–1918 Petro Kudriavtsev
took part in the work of several commissions established for the purpose of reforming
the theological school and for preparing a new theological and academic statute.38
Petro Kudriavtsev is one of the key figures of the Kyiv religious and philosophical
renaissance of the early 20th century. He was a founder and chairman of the Kyiv
religious and philosophical society (1908–1919), which united the Kyiv intelligentsia
who were convinced in the need to reform socio-political, cultural, and educational
life, regarding Christianity as a powerful factor in the future revival in all spheres of
social life. Beginning with 1914 he was a member, and later a friend of the chairman

35

Izvlechenie iz protokolov Soveta Kievskoi dukhovnoi Akademii za 1896–1897 uchebnyi god [Extracts
From Protocols of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1896–1897 Academic Year] (Kyiv, 1898),
102, 129–30. Formuliarnyi spisok o sluzhbe ekstraordinarnogo professora KDA Statskogo Sovetnika
Petra Pavlovicha Kudriavtseva [Record of Service of Kyiv Theological Academy ExtraordinaryProfessor Petro Pavlovych Kudriavtsev] [Manuscript] (Central State Historical Archives of
Ukraine in Kyiv, f. 711, desc. 1, no. 10928, p. 2).

36

Formuliarnyi spisok Kudriavtseva, 3.

37

E. P. Kudriavtseva, Vospominaniia [Memories] [Typescript] (One Street Museum, no number, p. 6).

38

In particular, in 1905 — in the commission of the Kyiv Theological Academy on the preparation
of a Project of the most acute temporary changes in Orthodox Theological Academies’ statute,
in 1906 — in developing “The project of the statute of Orthodox Theological academies.” In
1917 — in the Commission of the Holy Synod on reforming higher theological schools, in 1918 —
in the Commission on developing the Temporary statute of the Kyiv Theological Academy,
the Commission on issues of implementing the new statute into academic life.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

106

of the Kyiv scientific and philosophical society, founded at St. Volodymyr University.39
Kudriavtsev was also a member of the Kyiv pedagogical society of mutual aid, which
aimed to unite all Ukrainian teachers (in 1902–1905 he was chairman of the society).
Arguing for the need for church reform in his numerous journalistic works, as well
as for the revision of the relationship between the state and the Church, the revival of
church life on the basis of unity, creativity, and freedom, in the revolutionary years of
1917–1918 Kudriavtsev actively participated in many socio-political and church events
on the territory of the former Russian Empire.40
A remarkable feature of Petro Kudriavtsev’s spiritual biography is that during
the attempts to form Ukrainian statehood (1917–1919) he, a Russian by origin and a
well-known specialist and teacher of Russian philology and literature,41 stood for the
significance and value of the Ukrainian language and culture, and contributed to the
development of Ukrainian culture and Ukrainian church life. A rather demonstrative
step, which conveys Kudriavtsev’s attitude to Ukrainian culture, is his bringing up an
issue of the status of the Ukrainian language at the 1917–1918 Local Council of the
Orthodox Church of Russia. In particular, at the meetings of the sixth section of the
pre-council conference (related to the issues of faith and worship, preaching, and
Old Belief), as well as during the work of the council’s 13th section concerning the
language of worship, the Kyiv professor made speeches on the necessity of worship
both in Ukrainian and Russian. Emphasizing the urgency and essential need to translate
liturgical texts into an understandable native language for the laity, and taking into
consideration the fact that the church was entering the age of the “creative prosperity of
the church and religious forces of our nation,” Kudriavtsev substantiated a proposition
about the admissibility of worship in Ukrainian and Russian, although warning against
a hasty replacement of the language of worship in contemporary conditions when
traditions of church creativity continued to be neglected. After all, he stressed, the
language of worship is a poetic language, and translation requires a creative rather than
39

He was also a member of the Orthodox religious and educational association. 1897 — a member
of the historical, and archaeological association at the Kyiv Theological Academy.

40

A delegate of the Kyiv Eparchy congress (12 April — 18 April 1917), where he was elected a
member of the newly formed Eparchial Rada (a high eparchial body under the hierarch).
A delegate of the Kyiv Theological Academy on the Kyiv eparchial council (May 1918),
convened to elect a new Kyiv metropolitan (in place of murdered Metropolitan Volodymyr
(Bohoiavlenskyi)). Took part in the All-Russian Local Council and All-Ukrainian Orthodox
Council.

41

At the beginning of the 20th century Kudriavtsev taught philology and Russian literature in
several Kyiv secondary schools — The second women’s eparchial school of the ecclesiastical
department (1898–1919), the private women’s gymnasium of Maria Klussinsh, a private
women’s gymnasium at the Evangelical and Lutheran church, in 1911–1914 he gave lectures on
modern Russian literature at Zemstvo courses organized in Poltava and Kherson for teachers to
raise their level of skills. One of the main directions of Kudriavtsev’s work was studying Russian
philology and literature.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

107

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

a mechanical approach, which requires consolidation with poetic-religious inspiration
of past church poets. At the same time Kudriavtsev found the partial use of Russian, and
especially Ukrainian (when reading Holy Scripture and prayers, in certain songs, etc.)
to be permissible and even desirable, therefore, applications of each parish concerning
worship in Russian or Ukrainian were to be satisfied after a translation was approved
by church authorities. Kudriavtsev’s thesis about the possibility of the partial use of the
Ukrainian and Russian languages in worship and satisfaction of the relevant petitions
of church communities was used as the basis for project decisions on the issues of the
liturgical language, prepared at meetings of the council’s subsection.42
The question of the use of the Ukrainian language in liturgical practice was more
fully considered by Kudriavtsev in his article “On the Liturgical Use of the Russian (and
Ukrainian) languages.” 43 The Kyiv professor was convinced that the need to replace
the Church Slavonic language is more tangible and urgent in Ukraine than in Russia,
where the attachment to established church tradition remains. Taking into account the
importance of the biblical word in the Ukrainian religious tradition, he emphasized the
growing need for “expressive reading, and accessible, vital interpretation of the Word
of God.” 44 Reflecting on the problems of the translation of the liturgy into Ukrainian,
Kudriavtsev advocated the need for a creative approach to the translation of naturally
poetic liturgical texts, since “artistic creations” require “artistic translation.” 45 When
asked whether the Ukrainian language had the proper lexical means to express “intimate
motions of a religiously-minded soul and sublime concepts of Christian theology,” 46
Kudriavtsev answered positively. On an obvious example of Taras Shevchenko’s poetry
(where the sweet-sounding Ukrainian language is used in quiet words of prayers
and blessings), he proved the idea that the Ukrainian language has “rich means for
expressing the lyrical side of religious life.” 47
Rather than remaining aside of the development of church life in Ukraine,
Kudriavtsev took an active part in the preparation and work of the All-Ukrainian
Orthodox Church Council (1918). From a note “On the History of Convocation of the
All-Ukrainian Church Council” 48 published in the Slovo newspaper we learn about his
42

See N. Balashov, Archpriest, Na puti k liturgicheskomu vozrozhdeniiu [Towards a Liturgical
Renaissance] (Moscow: Kulturno-prosvetitelskii tsentr “Dukhovnaia Bibliotieka,” 2001), 125–45.

43

See P. P. Kudriavtsev, “O bogosluzhebnom upotreblenii russkogo (a takzhe ukrainskogo) yazyka
[On the Liturgical Use of the Russian and Ukrainian Languages],” Tserkovno-obshchestvennaia
mysl 13–14 (1918): 23–29; 15–16 (1918): 16–20; 17–18 (1918): 10–18.

44

Kudriavtsev, “O bogosluzhebnom upotreblenii,” 13–14 (1918): 27.

45

Kudriavtsev, “O bogosluzhebnom upotreblenii,” 15–16 (1918): 17.

46

Kudriavtsev, “O bogosluzhebnom upotreblenii,” 15–16 (1918): 18.

47

Kudriavtsev, “O bogosluzhebnom upotreblenii,” 15–16 (1918): 18.

48

P. P. Kudriavtsev, “K istorii sozyva Vseukrainskogo Tserkovnogo Sobora. Dve popravki k
state nekoego ‘Tserkovnika’ v gazete ‘Nasha Rodina’ [On the History of the Convocation of
the All‑Ukrainian Church Council. Two Amendments to the Article of a Certain Tserkovnik in
the Nasha Rodina Newspaper],” Slovo 25 (1918): 1.

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

108

personal contribution to the efforts of the Kyiv Theological Academy professors who
sought to resolve the intra-church conflict on the eve of the Council. As Kudriavtsev
wrote, pro-Ukrainian church circles formed the All-Ukrainian Church Rada, which was
concerned with the preparation of the Council convened to establish autocephaly of
the Ukrainian Church. However, these measures did not have the support of the then
functioning pro-Russian Ukrainian episcopate, and holding the Council without the
participation of the bishops would contravene canonical norms. Participating in fierce
debates at Council meetings aimed at resolving this conflict in a canonical manner,
it was Kudriavtsev who proposed a formula that helped to achieve a “pre-council
reconciliation” of the Ukrainian and pro-Russian church circles: “The Central Rada,
acting in agreement with the bishops of the Ukrainian eparchies, is eligible to convene
an All-Ukrainian Church Council.” 49
Elaborating on the theme of church formation as one of the priorities in his religious
journalism, Kudriavtsev tried to understand the ways of development of church life in
Ukraine in 1917–1918. At an open meeting of the Kyiv religious and philosophical society
(14 October 1918), he publicly lectured on “Church Issues in Ukraine.” 50 This report is
worth special attention as testimony of a living participant in contemporary Ukrainian
church events and includes an attempt to generalize the diverse and contradictory life of
the church, as well as to comprehend its main tendencies. Outlining the current state of
development of the church and of religious life on the Ukrainian lands, Petro Kudriavtsev
evaluated it as unsatisfactory, since, in his opinion, the church movement referred only
to the form of church life (church policy, formation of church structures, the question
of relations between Church and state, Ukrainian and Russian elements, bishops, clergy
and faithful, and others), but not to its content. According to Kudriavtsev, church life
in Ukraine was marked with the struggle between two church movements, progressive
and conservative. This struggle first became apparent in the confrontation between
pro-Ukrainian and pro-Russian church forces regarding the issue of autocephaly (first
session of the All-Ukrainian Church Council). The second stage of the church struggle
was marked by a confrontation between those who supported the “church-progressive
platform” and conservative forces in addressing issues of the decentralization of church
governance and the involvement of believers in church formation, and the autonomy of
theological academies (second session of the Council). Although representatives of the
church-conservative movement subsequently united around the metropolitan of Kyiv,
Antonii (Khrapovytskyi), representatives of the progressive movement formed their
“headquarters” at the Ministry of Religions in the government of Pavlo Skoropadskyi,
headed by Vasyl Zenkovskyi.

49

Kudriavtsev, “K istorii sozyva,” 1.

50

P. P. Kudriavtsev, “Tserkovnyi vopros na Ukraine (Doklad, chitannyi v otkrytom zasedanii
Kievskogo religiozno-filosofskogo obshchestva 14-go oktiabria 1918 g.) [Church Issues in
Ukraine: Report Given at the Open Meeting of the Kyiv Religious and Philosophical Association
on 14 October 1918)],” Slovo 18 (1918): 4; 23 (1918): 4.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

109

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

As the Minister of religions and concerned with the development of Ukrainian
national culture, Zenkovskyi appointed Kudriavtsev to form and lead an Academic
Committee under the Ministry of Religions. The choice of Kudriavtsev to head a
competent body intended to stimulate the revival of Ukrainian church culture was
due to the fact that Kudriavtsev, as Zenkovskyi indicated, although “born a Russian,
loved and understood Ukraine, and, what is most important, understood both the light
and dark sides of the Ukrainian church and knew boundaries of the national element
in church life.” 51 Petro Kudriavtsev saw the task of the Committee as broad cultural
and educational work aimed at the revival of church and religious life in Ukraine and
the development of spiritual enlightenment based on Orthodox tradition. Due to the
authority and professionalism of Kudriavtsev, the Committee brought together the best
available academic scholarly forces (mostly Kyiv Theological Academy and University
professors) and performed significant work in many areas: organizing the translation
of the Bible, liturgical books and church rules into the Ukrainian language; preparing
a Ukrainian theological encyclopedia, Ukrainian-language scholarly theological works
and books of ecclesiastical and religious content (first of all, hagiography, especially of
those saints respected on the Ukrainian lands), popular scholarly books on religious
issues; developing curricula and textbooks on Scripture; addressing school matters;
publishing materials on the history of Ukraine related to the development of religious
poetry, church architecture, music, philosophy, and others.52
The study of Ukrainian culture became the main subject of Kudriavtsev’s academic
work during his cooperation with the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences, too. From 1919, Petro
Kudriavtsev worked in various commissions studying the Ukrainian cultural heritage
in many dimensions and directions. While executing separate academic assignments
of the Historical and Philological Department, he, in particular, collected materials on
the history of philosophical studies on the Ukrainian territories in the 18th and 19th
centuries.53 Working as a member of the Permanent Commission of the Academy of
51

V. Zenkovskii, Protopresbiter, Piat mesiatsev u vlasti (15 maia — 19 oktiabria 1918 g.).
Vospominaniia [Five Months in Power (15 May — 19 October 1918). Memoirs] (Moscow: Krutitskoe
izdatelskoe podvore, 1995), 98.

52

See in The Central State Archive of the Supreme Bodies of Power and Government of Ukraine
f. 1071, desc.1, no. 407–12. “Pratsia v Uchenomu Komitetovi [Work in the Academic Committee],”
Slovo 31 (1918): 4. “Pratsia v Uchenomu Komitetovi [Work in the Academic Committee],” Slovo 32
(1918): 4. “Pratsia v Uchenomu Komitetovi (Prodovzhennia) [Work in the Academic Committee
(Continuation)],” Slovo 33 (1918): 4. “Khronika: Uchenyi komitet pri Ministerstve Ispovedanii
[Chronicle: Work in the Academic Committee of the Ministry of Religious Affairs],” Tserkovnoobshchestvennaia mysl 17–18 (1918): 30–31. V. I. Ulianovskyi, Tserkva v Ukrainskii Derzhavi
1917–1920 rr. (doba Hetmanatu Pavla Skoropadskoho) [The Church in the Ukrainian State, 1917–1920:
Era of Pavlo Skoropadskyi’s Hetmanate] (Kyiv: Lybid, 1997), 55–70.

53

See Zvidomlennia pro diialnist Ukrainskoi Akademii Nauk u Kyievi do 1 sichnia 1920 roku [Report
about the Work of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences in Kyiv until 1 January 1920] (Kyiv: vydannia
Ukrainskoi Akademii nauk, [1920]), XХІ. P. P. Kudriavtsev, Zametka ob izuchenii filosofskogo

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

110

Sciences to compile a Biographical dictionary of Ukrainian figures (1924–1930s),54 he
continued an affair he had begun in pre-revolutionary times — studying the spiritual
heritage of figures and students of the Kyiv Academy.55 Working in the Commission
on studying the history of Kyiv and right-bank Ukraine (1924–1930s), Kudriavtsev
researched the literary heritage of Kyivan Rus 56 and pages of the history of the Kyiv
Academy in a broad cultural and educational context.57 The intercultural relations of
Ukraine became the object of Kudriavtsev’s study during his work in the Jewish Historical
and Archaeological Commission of the All-Ukrainian Academy of Sciences (in the late
1920s), which studied Jewish history and culture on Ukrainian territory,58 and also in the
dvizheniia na Ukraine [A Note on the Study of the Philosophical Movement in Ukraine],
c. 1920s‑1930s [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine,
f. Х, no. 34691, p. 30).
54

See P. P. Kudriavtsev, Avsenev Petr Semenovich (Feofan) [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5344). P. P. Kudriavtsev, Amfiteatrov
Antonii, 1929 [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of
Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5345). P. P. Kudriavtsev, Amfiteatrov Fedor Egorovich. Biograficheskie zametki
[Amfiteatrov Fedor Egorovich. Biographical Notes] [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5346). P. P. Kudriavtsev, Amfiteatrov
Yakov Kosmich (1802–1848). Biograficheskii ocherk. [Amfiteatrov Yakov Kosmich (1802–1848).
Biographical Sketch] [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library
of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5346). P. P. Kudriavtsev, Artemonovich Andrei Fedorovich (1828–1887)
[Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5347).

55

Postiina Komisiia dlia skladannia Biohrafichnoho Slovnyka ukrainskykh diiachiv [Permanent
Commission on the Compilation of a Biographical Dictionary of Ukrainian Religious Figures]
[Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х,
no. 4791–4794, p. 20–22, 33, 36, 52).

56

P. P. Kudriavtsev, “Dekilka storinok iz kulturnoi istorii davnioho Kyieva. Bibliohrafichna dovidka
[Notes on the Cultural History of Old Kyiv. Bibliographical Reference],” Kyivski zbirnyky istorii
i arkheolohii, pobutu i mystetstva 1 (1930): 114–23.

57

P. P. Kudriavtsev, “Do istorii osvity na Ukraini. Dva nevydani uryvky z avtobiohrafichnoi zapysky
Or. M. Novytskoho [On the History of Education in Ukraine. Two Unpublished Extracts From
the Autobiographical Record of Or. M. Novytskyi],” Zapysky istoryko-filolohichnoho viddilu
VUAN 13–14 (1927): 174–84. P. P. Kudriavtsev, “Shche dvi slovi pro Or. M. Novytskoho [Another
Two Words on Or. M. Novytskyi],” Zapysky istoryko-filolohichnoho viddilu VUAN 25 (1929): 229–32.
P. P. Kudriavtsev, “Osvitni mandrivky vykhovantsiv Kyivskoi akademii za kordon u XVIII st.
[Educational Trips of Kyiv Academy Students Abroad in the 18th Century],” Kyivski zbirnyky
istorii i arkheolohii, pobutu i mystetstva 1 (1930): 285–94.

58

In the course of his work, P. Kudriavtsev studied the Jewish influences on the works of
I. Franko. See P. P. Kudriavtsev, Dekilka sliv pro siuzhet Frankovoi poemy “Smert Kaina.”
Bibliohrafichna dovidka [Notes on the Plot of Franko’s Poem “Death of Cain.” Bibliographical
Reference], 1930 [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of
Ukraine, f. Х, no. 34029). P. P. Kudriavtsev, “Yevreistvo, yevrei ta yevreiska sprava v tvorakh Ivana

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

111

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

Byzantine Commission of the All-Ukrainian Academy of Sciences (on 5 February 1929 he
was elected its head), which studied Byzantine influence in various fields of Ukrainian
life and culture in connection with the history of Byzantium,59 as well as the historical
and ethnological department of the Ukrainian scientific association of oriental studies
(from 1929).60
Summing up, we can conclude that Petro Kudriavtsev, due to his diverse and wideranging activities in various spheres of Ukrainian cultural life, organically found his
place in the Ukrainian cultural sphere. A Russian by birth, he can be named a perfect
Ukrainian scholar, teacher, church, religious, and public activist.
In this exploratory study, the outlined biographies of Archbishop Tykhon
(Liashchenko) and Petro Kudriavtsev show that as a result of the revolutionary events of
1917–1919 Kyiv theological academic professors experienced significant transformations
of their beliefs and cultural and worldview priorities; and in many cases were also
bound to experience transformations in cultural self-identification for the purposes
of determining choices. Tykhon (Liashchenko), known in pre-revolutionary Kyiv as a
passionate supporter of the Russian national idea who was unwavering in his belief in
the incompatibility and irreconcilable opposition of Western European and Russian
cultures, had to spend a significant part of his life (25 years) in Western Europe, mainly
in Germany, which he had criticized, combining in his activities and work the Russian
and European cultural styles. Kudriavtsev, born in the Russian outskirts, an outstanding
connoisseur and admirer of Russian literature and language, managed to understand
and properly assess the richness and uniqueness of the Ukrainian language and cultural
tradition and manifested himself in his activities and works as an organic and integral
part of Ukrainian culture.
It is also worth mentioning that in post-revolutionary times, despite all the
vicissitudes of fate, students and teachers of the Kyiv Theological Academy kept their
most important connection and factor of their cultural identity — their belonging to
the Kyiv Theological Academy and its academic traditions. Both Archbishop Tykhon
Franka. [Judaism, Jews and the Jewish Question in the Works of Ivan Franko],” in Zbirnyk prats
Yevreiskoi Komisii istoryko-arkheohrafichnoi komisii, book ІІ, ed. I. Halant (Kyiv, 1929), 1–81.
59

P. P. Kudriavtsev, Komisiia dlia vyvchennia vizantiiskoho pysmenstva (stattia dlia “Yuvileinoho
zbirnyka”) [Commission on the Study of Byzantine Writers: Article for the Anniversary
Collection)], 1929 [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of
Ukraine, f. Х, no. 18680). P. P. Kudriavtsev, Ukrainoznavstvo i vizantynoznavstvo [Ukrainian
and Byzantine Studies], c. 1930s [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National
Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 22883). Protokoly zasidan ta inshi materialy Vizantolohichnoi
Komisii za 1926–1930 rr. [Minutes and Other Documents of the Byzantine Commission, 1926–1930]
[Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 21493–
21546).

60

Anketa vstupu do Vseukrainskoi Naukovoi Asotsiatsii [Entry Form to the All-Ukrainian Scientific
Association] [Manuscript] (Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine,
f. Х, no. 24512).

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

112

(Liashchenko), and Petro Kudriavtsev remained devoted to the Academy until the end
of their lives, striving to save and reconstruct it in cultural memory in different ways
and under different circumstances. Archbishop Tykhon, in particular, maintaining his
spiritual connection with the Kyiv Theological Academy in emigration, tried to open a
theological academy in Bulgaria using his alma mater as a model; later, he worked on
opening an Orthodox theological faculty at the University of Warsaw; in Germany, he
conducted widespread preaching and pastoral work among the émigré intelligentsia,
many of whom were academic professors. Petro Kudriavtsev, acutely feeling the end of
the Kyiv Theological Academy era and watching its last figures completing their earthly
paths 61 one after another, tried to preserve the memory of the glorious past of the Kyiv
Academy, its prominent figures, and their creative heritage for future generations.
Bibliography
Anketa vstupu do Vseukrainskoi Naukovoi Asotsiatsii [Entry Form to the All-Ukrainian
Scientific Association]. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of
Ukraine, f. Х, no. 24512 [Manuscript].
Balashov, N., Archpriest. Na puti k liturhicheskomu vozrozhdieniiu [Towards a Liturgical
Renaissance]. Moscow: Kulturno-prosvetitelskii tsentr “Dukhovnaia Bibliotieka,”
2001.
Evlogy, Metropolitan [Georgievskii]. Put moei zhizni. Vospominaniia mitropolita
Evlogiia. Izlozh. po ego rasskazam T. Manukhinoi [The Path of My Life. Memoirs of
Metropolitan Evlogii. Retold According to His Stories to T. Manukhina]. Paris: YMCAPress, 1947.
Formuliarnyi spisok ekstraordinarnogo professora arkhimandrita Tikhona [Record of
Service of Extraordinary-Professor Archimandrite Tykhon]. Central State Historical
Archives of Ukraine in Kyiv, f. 711, desc. 1, no. 10964 [Manuscript].
Formuliarnyi spisok o sluzhbe ekstraordinarnogo professora KDA Statskogo Sovetnika
Petra Pavlovicha Kudriavtseva [Record of Service of Kyiv Theological Academy
Extraordinary-Professor Petro Pavlovych Kudriavtsev]. Central State Historical
Archives of Ukraine in Kyiv, f. 711, desc. 1, no. 10928 [Manuscript].
Hollerbakh, E. A. K niezrimomu gradu. Religiozno-filosofskaia gruppa “Put” (1910–1919) v
poiskakh novoi russkoi identichnosti [Towards the Invisible City. The “Put” Religious
and Philosophical Group (1910–1919): The Search for a New Russian Identity].
St. Petersburg: Aleteia, 2000.
Izvlechenie iz protokolov Soveta Kievskoi dukhovnoi Akademii za 1896–1897 uchebnyi
god [Extracts From Protocols of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1896–1897
Academic Year]. Kyiv, 1898.
Izvlechenie iz zhurnalov Soveta Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii za 1908–1909 uchebnyi
god [Extracts From Records of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1908–1909
Academic Year]. Kyiv, 1909.
61

See “‘My priobshchili by vashi vospominaniia,’” 377–423.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

113

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

Izvlechenie iz zhurnalov Soveta Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii za 1909–1910 uchebnyi
god [Extracts From Records of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1909–1910
Academic Year]. Kyiv, 1910.
Izvlechenie iz zhurnalov Soveta Kievskoi Dukhovnoi Akademii za 1910–1911 uchebnyi god
[Extracts From Records of the Kyiv Theological Academy Council, 1910–1911 Academic
Year]. Kyiv, 1911.
“Khronika: Uchenyi komitet pri Ministerstve Ispovedanii [Chronicle: Work in
the Academic Committee of the Ministry of Religious Affairs].” Tserkovnoobshchiestvennaia mysl 17–18 (1918): 30–31.
Klementev, A. K. “Zhizn i trudy Timofeia Ivanovicha Liashchenko, v monashestve Tikhona,
arkhiepiskopa Berlinskogo (v ego perepiske s prof. N. N. Glubokovskim) [The
Life and Works of Timofei Ivanovich Liashchenko, Monastic Name Tykhon,
the Archbishop of Berlin (Correspondence with Prof. N. N. Glubkovskii)].” In
Rukopisnoe nasledie deiatelei otechestvennoi kultury XVIII–XXI vekov. Materialy
Mezhdunarodnoi nauchnoi konferentsii, edited by R. I. Kraineva, 106–18.
St. Petersburg: RNB, 2007.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Amfiteatrov Antonii, 1929. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi
National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5345 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Amfiteatrov Fedor Egorovich. Biograficheskie zametki [Amfiteatrov
Fedor Egorovich. Biographical Notes]. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi
National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5346 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Amfiteatrov Yakov Kosmich (1802–1848). Biograficheskii ocherk
[Amfiteatrov Yakov Kosmich (1802–1848). Biographical Sketch]. Manuscript Institute,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5347 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Artemonovich Andrei Fedorovich (1828–1887). Manuscript Institute,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5348 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Avsenev Petr Semenovich (Feofan). Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi
National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 5344 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Dekilka sliv pro siuzhet Frankovoi poemy “Smert Kaina.” Bibliohrafichna
dovidka [Notes on the Plot of Franko’s Poem “Death of Cain.” Bibliographical
Reference], 1930. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine,
f. Х, no. 34029 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “Dekilka storinok iz kulturnoi istorii davnioho Kyieva. Bibliohrafichna
dovidka [Notes on the Cultural History of Old Kyiv. Bibliographical Reference].”
Kyivski zbirnyky istorii i arkheolohii, pobutu i mystetstva 1 (1930): 114–23.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “Do istorii osvity na Ukraini. Dva nevydani uryvky z avtobiohrafichnoi
zapysky Or. M. Novytskoho [On the History of Education in Ukraine. Two
Unpublished Extracts From the Autobiographical Record of Or. M. Novytskyi].”
Zapysky istoryko-filolohichnoho viddilu VUAN 13–14 (1927): 174–84.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “K istorii sozyva Vseukrainskogo Tserkovnogo Sobora. Dve popravki
k state nekoego ‘Tserkovnika’ v gazete ‘Nasha Rodina’ [On the History of the

114

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

Convocation of the All-Ukrainian Church Council. Two Amendments to the
Article of a Certain Tserkovnik in the Nasha Rodina Newspaper].” Slovo 25 (1918): 1.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Komisiia dlia vyvchennia vizantiiskoho pysmenstva (stattia dlia
“Yuvileinoho zbirnyka”) [Commission on the Study of Byzantine Writers: Article for
the Anniversary Collection)], 1929. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National
Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 18680. [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “O bogosluzhebnom upotreblenii russkogo (a takzhe
ukrainskogo) yazyka [On the Liturgical Use of the Russian and Ukrainian
Languages].” Tserkovno-obshchestvennaia mysl 13–14 (1918): 23–29; 15–16 (1918):
16–20; 17–18 (1918): 10–18.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “Osvitni mandrivky vykhovantsiv Kyivskoi akademii za kordon u XVIII
st. [Educational Trips of Kyiv Academy Students Abroad in the 18th Century].”
Kyivski zbirnyky istorii i arkheolohii, pobutu i mystetstva 1 (1930): 285–94.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “Tserkovnyi vopros na Ukraine (doklad, chitannyi v otkrytom zasedanii
Kievskogo religiozno-filosofskogo obshchestva 14-go oktiabria 1918 g.) [Church
Issues in Ukraine: Report Given at the Open Meeting of the Kyiv Religious and
Philosophical Association on 14 October 1918)].” Slovo 18 (1918): 4; 23(1918): 4.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Ukrainoznavstvo i vizantynoznavstvo [Ukrainian and Byzantine Studies],
c. 1930s. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х,
no. 22883 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “Yevreistvo, yevrei ta yevreiska sprava v tvorakh Ivana Franka [Judaism,
Jews, and the Jewish Question in the Works of Ivan Franko].” In Zbirnyk prats
Yevreiskoi istoryko-arkheohrafichnoi komisii, book ІІ, edited by I. Halant, 1–81. Kyiv,
1929.
Kudriavtsev, P. P. Zametka ob izuchenii filosofskogo dvizheniia na Ukraine [A Note on
the Study of the Philosophical Movement in Ukraine], c. 1920–1930s. Manuscript
Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 34691 [Manuscript].
Kudriavtsev, P. P. “Shche dvi slovi pro Or. M. Novytskoho [Another Two Words on
Or. M. Novytskyi],” Zapysky istoryko-filolohichnoho viddilu VUAN 25 (1929): 229–32.
Kudriavtseva, E. P. Vospominaniia [Memories]. One Street Museum, no number
[Typescript].
Liashchenko Timofei Ivanovich. Avtobiografiia. Chernovik. Prilozhenie: studencheskii
bilet i vizitnaia kartochka [Autobiography. Draft Document. Appendix: Student Card
and Visiting Card], 1908. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of
Ukraine, f. 216, no. 1 [Manuscript].
“‘My priobshchili by vashi vospominaniia k nashim i postaralis by ikh sokhranit dlia
istorii proshloho Kieva i Kievskoi Akademii…’ (Pisma Petra Pavlovicha Kudriavtseva
k Alekseiu Afanasevichu Dmitrievskomu (1924–1929 gg.) [‘We Would Add Your
Memoirs to Ours and Try to Save Them for the History of the Past of Kyiv and of
the Kyiv Academy…’ (Letters of Petr Pavlovych Kudriavtsev to Aleksei Afanasevich
Dmitrievskii, 1924–1929)],” Vestnik Ekaterinburgskoi dukhovnoi seminarii 2.8 (2014):
377–423.

Liudmyla Pastushenko. Kyiv Theological Academy Professors at

115

the Beginning of the 20th Century: At the Intersection of Cultures

Nikitin, A. K. Natsistskii rezhim i russkaia pravoslavnaia obshchina v Germanii (1933–
1945) [The Nazi Regime and the Russian Orthodox Community in Germany, 1933–
1945]. Moscow: Tserkovno-nauchnyi tsentr “Pravoslavnaia entsiklopediia,” 1998.
Pastushenko, L. A. “Arkhivna spadshchyna arkhiiepyskopa Tykhona (Tymofiia
Ivanovycha Liashchenka) u fondakh Instytutu rukopysu Natsionalnoi biblioteky
Ukrainy imeni V. I. Vernadskoho [The Archival Heritage of Archbishop Tykhon
(Tymofii Ivanovych Liashchenko) in the Holdings of the Institute of Manuscripts,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine].” In Biohrafichnyi pidkhid u vyvchenni
istorii ta spadshchyny Kyivskoi dukhovnoi akademii, edited by M. L. Tkachuk 199–
213. Kyiv: Vydavnychyi dim “Kyievo-Mohylianska akademiia,” 2016.
Pastushenko, L. A. “Kudriavtsev Petro Pavlovych.” In Kyivska dukhovna akademiia v
imenakh: 1819–1924, vol. 1, edited by M. Tkachuk, 729–35. Kyiv: Vydavnychyi dim
“Kyievo-Mohylianska akademiia,” 2015.
Pastushenko, L. A. “Tykhon (Liashchenko Tymofii Ivanovych).” In Kyivska dukhovna
akademiia v imenakh: 1819–1924, vol. 2, edited by M. Tkachuk, 669–72. Kyiv:
Vydavnychyi dim “Kyievo-Mohylianska akademiia,” 2016.
Postiina Komisiia dlia skladannia Biohrafichnoho Slovnyka ukrainskykh diiachiv
[Permanent Commission on the Compilation of a Biographical Dictionary of
Ukrainian Religious Figures]. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National
Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 4791–4794 [Manuscript].
“Pratsia v Uchenomu Komitetovi [Work in the Academic Committee].” Slovo 31 (1918):
4; 32 (1918): 4.
“Pratsia v Uchenomu Komitetovi (Prodovzhennia) [Work in the Academic Committee
(Continuation)].” Slovo 33 (1918): 4.
Propovednicheskii kruzhok studentov Kievskoi duhovnoi akademii. Rukovoditel
Liashchenko Timofei Ivanovich. Materialy deiatelnosti [The Evangelical Group of Kyiv
Theological Academy Students. Liashchenko Tymofii Ivanovych, Leader. Records],
1910–1913. Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. 216,
no. 84–116 [Manuscript].
Protokoly zasidan ta inshi materialy Vizantolohichnoi Komisii za 1926–1930 rr. [Minutes and
Other Documents of the Byzantine Commission, 1926–1930]. Manuscript Institute,
V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. Х, no. 21493–21546 [Manuscript].
Shkarovskii, M. V. Krest i svastika. Natsistskaia Germaniia i Pravoslavnaia Tserkov [The
Cross and Swastika. Nazi Germany and the Orthodox Church]. Moscow: Veche,
2007.
Tkachuk, M. L. Kyivska akademichna filosofiia ХІХ — pochatku ХХ st.: metodolohichni
problemy doslidzhennia [Kyiv Academic Philosophy of the 19th — Beginning of the
20th Century: Methodological Issues of Research]. Kyiv: ZAT “Vіpol,” 2000.
Tikhon, arkhimandrit. Asketizm kak osnova russkoi kultury [Asceticism as the Basis of
Russian Culture]. Moscow: Tip. A. Snegiriovoi, 1915.
Tikhon, arkhimandrit. — Vasiliiu, episkopu Kanevskomu. Pisma. 1 yanvaria — 28 noiabria
(11 dekabria) 1922 g. iz Berlina v Kiev [Tykhon, Archimandrite. — To Vasylii, Bishop

Kyiv-Mohyla Humanities Journal 5 (2018)

116

Kanevskii. Letters. 1 January — 28 November (11 December) 1922 From Berlin to Kyiv].
Manuscript Institute, V. I. Vernadskyi National Library of Ukraine, f. 191, no. 872–76
[Manuscript].
Ulianovskyi, V. I. Tserkva v Ukrainskii Derzhavi 1917–1920 rr. (doba Hetmanatu Pavla
Skoropadskoho) [The Church in the Ukrainian State, 1917–1920: Era of Pavlo
Skoropadskyi’s Hetmanate]. Kyiv: Lybid, 1997.
Zhurnaly zasedanii Soveta Kievskoi dukhovnoi akademii [Records of Meetings of the Kyiv
Theological Academy], 1919. Central State Historical Archives of Ukraine in Kyiv,
f. 711, desc. 3, no. 4072 [Manuscript].
Zenkovskii, V. Protopresbiter. Piat mesiatsev u vlasti (15 maia — 19 oktiabria 1918 g.).
Vospominaniia [Five Months in Power (15 May — 19 October 1918). Memoirs]. Moscow:
Krutitskoe izdatelskoe podvore, 1995.

3
Liudmyla Pastushenko is a candidate of philosophical sciences and Associate Professor
at the Department of Philosophy and Religious Studies at the National University
of Kyiv-Mohyla Academy. Her research includes the history of the Kyiv Theological
Academy of the 19th — beginning of the 20th centuries, especially Kyiv Theological
Academy philosophical and religious thought. She is a contributing author of the Kyivska
dukhovna akademiia v imenakh (Kyiv Theological Academy in Names) encyclopedia
(Kyiv: Vydavnychyi dim “Kyievo-Mohylianska academia,” vol. 1 (2015), vol. 2 (2016)). Her
major publications include: Ideia tserkovnoho vidrodzhennia na storinkakh chasopysu
“Khrystyanskaia mysl” (The Idea of Church Revival on the Pages of Khrystyanskaia mysl,
2012), Do zhyttiepysu Petra Kudriavtseva: iz materialiv slidchoi spravy 1938–1939 rokiv
(On the Biography of Petro Kudriavtsev: Materials of the 1938–1939 Investigative Case,
2012), Vykhovanets Kyivskoi dukhovnoi akademii Mykola Stelletskyi: storinkamy biohrafii
ta tvorchosti (Kyiv Theological Academy Graduate Mykola Stelletskyi: Biography and
Works, 2014), Relihiino-filosofska publitsystyka vykhovantsia Kyivskoi dukhovnoi akademii
Yevhena Kapralova (The Religious and Philosophical Publications of Yevhen Kapralov,
a Graduate of the Kyiv Theological Academy, 2017).

