Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26

The preparation of stewards with the Mastery Rubric for Stewardship: Re-envisioning the
formation of scholars and practitioners
Christopher M. Rios, PhD1, Chris M. Golde, PhD2, Rochelle E. Tractenberg, PhD, MPH, PhD3

Reprint Requests:
Rochelle E. Tractenberg
Building D, Suite 207
Georgetown University Medical Center
4000 Reservoir Rd. NW
Washington, DC 20057
rochelle.tractenberg@gmail.com
1

Baylor University Graduate School, Waco, TX, USA;
Stanford University, Palo Alto, CA, USA;
3
Collaborative for Research on Outcomes and –Metrics; Departments of Neurology;
Biostatistics, Bioinformatics & Biomathematics; and Rehabilitation Medicine; Georgetown
University, Washington, DC, USA.
2

RUNNING HEAD: Mastery Rubric for Stewardship

27
28

Keywords: Mastery Rubric; stewardship; higher education curriculum development and

29

evaluation; actionable evidence of learning; professional identity; professional development;

30

higher education; graduate education; post-graduate education; preparing future faculty;

31

workforce development

32

1

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69

2

Abstract
A steward of the discipline was originally defined as “someone who will creatively generate new
knowledge, critically conserve valuable and useful ideas, and responsibly transform those
understandings through writing, teaching, and application”. This construct was articulated to
support and strengthen doctoral education. This paper expands the construct of stewardship so
that it can be applied to both scholars and non-academic practitioners, and can be initiated
earlier than doctoral education. To accomplish this, we describe a general developmental
trajectory supporting cross-curriculum teaching for stewardship of a discipline as well as of a
profession. We argue that the most important features of stewardship, comprising the public
trust for the future of their discipline or profession, are obtainable by all practitioners, and are not
limited to those who have completed doctoral training. The developmental trajectory is a
Mastery Rubric, which requires articulating the knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) to be
targeted with a curriculum; recognizable stages of performance of these KSAs; and
performance level descriptors of each KSA at each stage. Concrete KSAs of stewardship that
can be taught and practiced throughout the career (professional or scholarly) were derived
directly from the original definition. We used the European guild structure’s stages of Novice,
Apprentice, Journeyman, and Master for the trajectory, and through a consensus-based
standard setting exercise, created performance level descriptors featuring development of
Bloom’s taxonometric cognitive abilities for each KSA. Together, these create the Mastery
Rubric for Stewardship (MR-S). The MR-S articulates how stewardly behaviour can be
cultivated and documented for individuals in any disciplinary curriculum, whether researchintensive (preparing “scholars”) or professional (preparing members of a profession or more
generally for the work force). We qualitatively assess the validity of the MR-S by examining its
applicability to, and concordance with professional practice standards in three diverse
disciplinary examples: 1) History; 2) Statistics and Data Science; and 3) Neurosciences. These
domains differ dramatically in terms of content and methodologies, but students in each
discipline could either continue on to doctoral training and scholarship, or utilize doctoral or predoctoral training in other professions. The MR-S is highly aligned with the practice standards of
all three of these domains, suggesting that stewardship can be meaningfully cultivated and
utilized by those working in or outside of academia. The MR-S can be used for curriculum
development or revision in order to purposefully promote stewardship at all levels of higher
education and beyond.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

70

3

Introduction

71

In 2001, the Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching instituted a five-year project

72

entitled the “Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate” (CID) that sought to examine the purpose of

73

doctoral education in the United States. The primary outcomes included two publications:

74

Envisioning the Future of Doctoral Education: Preparing Stewards of the Discipline [1] and The

75

Formation of Scholars: Rethinking Doctoral Education for the Twenty-First Century [2]. These

76

volumes argued that the goal of doctoral education was to create more than simply experts in a

77

field but also stewards of a discipline [1: p. 5]. The CID defined a steward as “a scholar first and

78

foremost”, one to whom “we can entrust the vigor, quality, and integrity of the field” (p. 5) and

79

went on to describe the activities of a steward in three categories—generation, conservation,

80

and transformation. A steward is someone who “will creatively generate new knowledge,

81

critically conserve valuable and useful ideas, and responsibly transform those understandings

82

through writing, teaching, and application” [1: p. 5].

83

In a higher-education symposium held at Baylor University in October 2016, a panel

84

reviewed the first 10 years of the construct’s use [3] and drew attention to current applications in

85

three settings: in the Graduate School at Baylor University (Waco, Texas), the “Reframing the

86

PhD” project (2015-2018) in Australia (http://reframingphd.com.au/), and as an alternative model

87

for training and certifying “mentors” through the American Statistical Association. The panel

88

affirmed the validity and value of the stewardship model as the goal of doctoral education,

89

demonstrating how the active promotion of disciplinary stewardship is well worth supporting [3-

90

5]. In doing so, they also highlighted the relevance of the characteristics of stewardship in areas

91

beyond the scope intended by the CID. Namely, they asserted (1) its validity for professionals

92

and practitioners within a discipline as well as scholars in the traditional sense, and (2) its

93

validity for educational levels prior to the doctorate. This expansion is alluded to in the original

94

[1: p. 10]: “Upon entry into practice, all professionals assume at least a tacit responsibility for the

95

quality and integrity of their own work and that of colleagues. They also take on a responsibility

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

96

to the larger public for the standards of practice associated with the profession”. In order for “all

97

professionals” to explicitly assume these responsibilities, teaching and learning about them is

98

essential.

99

4

This paper expands upon the ideas generated at the Baylor symposium. We developed

100

a general curricular framework that can be used by different disciplines to promote the explicit

101

integration of stewardship throughout higher education and into the workplace. Articulating such

102

a framework adds formative value to the stewardship model by permitting both students and

103

faculty to determine where they are in their own stewardly development so that individuals can

104

set goals for further growth. Additionally, while we agree that the characteristics of a steward are

105

fully and most explicitly formed through doctoral education, many individuals do, or would,

106

advance and sustain their disciplines without pursuing doctoral education. Further, many

107

doctorally-prepared faculty around the US teach first and foremost, with scholarship playing a

108

secondary role in their professional lives. Thus, the construct is relevant for more than just “the

109

scholar first and foremost”. We therefore argue for the expansion of the stewardship model

110

beyond doctoral education and beyond those for whom scholarship is their primary

111

responsibility. This expansion could also enhance the practical value of the model, but

112

articulating a developmental trajectory for stewardship is needed to promote its wider adoption

113

across disciplines and levels of practice, providing guidance for curricula that can prepare

114

stewards throughout higher education rather than solely for doctoral education. Moreover, we

115

sought to ensure that, rather than assuming a “tacit responsibility” for integrity and their

116

professional practice standards, all those who proceed through the developmental trajectory for

117

stewardship –whether or not they do so in a doctoral curriculum- would be prepared to engage

118

fully and responsibly in their profession.

119

Subsequent sections of the introduction more fully describe stewardship and explain and

120

contextualize the proposed expansion of its scope. A developmental trajectory for stewardship

121

is articulated as a curriculum development and evaluation tool called a Mastery Rubric. The

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

122

methods and results section describe and explore how this developmental model for

123

stewardship can be utilized to integrate the construct at the undergraduate, graduate, and

124

postgraduate/professional levels. A qualitative exploration of the applicability of the knowledge,

125

skills, and abilities of the steward is executed through degrees of freedom analyses [6, 7] in

126

three case studies focusing on professional/vocational practice standards from History,

127

Statistics and Data Science, and Neuroscience.

128

Who is a Steward of the Discipline?

129

As noted, the CID described stewards of the discipline as those committed to the

5

130

foundation and future development of one’s field as expressed in three activities: generation,

131

conservation, and transformation. Generation is the heart of doctoral study, and of the PhD in

132

particular. Of all graduate education, the PhD is distinguished by the expectation and obligation

133

to make a new and significant contribution to one’s field. Doctoral graduates are expected to be

134

able “to ask interesting and important questions, to formulate appropriate strategies for

135

investigating these questions, to conduct investigations with a high degree of competence, to

136

analyze and evaluate the results of the investigations, and to communicate the results to others

137

to advance the field” [1: p. 10]. Included here is the responsibility to critically evaluate new and

138

existing claims in order to ensure the quality of others’ work in the field, and to help promote

139

scholarship that advances the field, and does not simply augment the author’s CV. Thus,

140

“generation” implies both making one’s own contribution and judging the contributions of others.

141

Conservation means understanding the history and fundamental ideas of one’s field so

142

that depth of knowledge in one aspect of the discipline is balanced by understanding how that

143

knowledge fits within the discipline overall. While doctoral students typically acquire narrow

144

expertise, their specialization should be balanced by a commitment to knowing the field more

145

broadly. Similarly, stewards know how their field (or their niche in it) complements the larger

146

intellectual landscape beyond their own discipline. Stewards are thereby called to move the field

147

forward while maintaining its defining characteristics. By doing so, stewards are “aware of the

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

148

shoulders on which they stand and are able to judge which ideas are worth keeping and which

149

have outlived their usefulness” [2: p.12].

150

6

Transformation includes the tasks of responsible writing, teaching, and application. It

151

represents “teaching in the broadest sense of the word” [2: p.12]. Whether one is in or outside of

152

a traditional academic or research setting, stewards must clearly communicate within and

153

across traditional disciplinary boundaries and to diverse audiences, including novice learners,

154

specialists in the field, or the broader society. These transformations represent significant

155

achievements, not all of which are taught or practiced in doctoral training. Transformation also

156

includes the ability to apply one’s knowledge and expertise to help solve problems, or bring

157

greater understanding, within and outside of the specific discipline. Such application varies by

158

field and topic of study, but stewards in all fields have a responsibility for transparency – open,

159

honest, and thorough documentation or communication in all aspects of this broadest sense of

160

teaching, including writing, teaching, mentoring, and the application of the knowledge of their

161

discipline to problems within and outside of their discipline.

162

Thus, stewards are those who contribute to the generation, conservation, and

163

transformation of their fields, and PhD program graduates should be able to bring their

164

knowledge, skills, and expertise to bear on a wide range of challenges [8]. Significantly, the CID

165

did not limit stewards to traditional faculty roles, but affirmed the diverse career paths pursued

166

by doctoral graduates (see also e.g., [9, 10, 11: p. 299]. Whether they serve in the academy as

167

researchers or teachers, or they use their education in business, government, or non-profits,

168

doctoral graduates may be seen as scholars, because, in words of the CID, “the work of

169

scholarship is not a function of setting but of purpose and commitment” [2: p. 8]. Admittedly, this

170

is a broad view of scholarship, stemming in part from the Carnegie Foundation’s understanding

171

of doctoral education as a kind of professional preparation: it is preparation for an academic

172

profession [2: pp. X-XI]. This broad view is one we affirm, in so far as “scholar” means a steward

173

of the discipline. Where we differ from the CID is: a) with their view that stewardly formation

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

7

174

occurs only within doctoral education; and b) with their definition of stewards as those for whom

175

scholarship is first and foremost. Stewards are fully and explicitly formed at the doctoral level,

176

but stewardship can also be developed earlier than doctoral training, and/or in professional

177

practice. In our model, instilling the characteristics and identity of a steward can be a goal for

178

doctoral, professional, and undergraduate education, promoting a commitment to the integrity

179

and vigor of the discipline by scholars, professionals, and practitioners within a field.

180

For example, in many professions, conservation is practiced in that there are

181

requirements for an understanding of the fundamental ideas of the field. Nurses, accountants,

182

lawyers, statisticians, and many other professionals have a responsibility to maintain the

183

standards and fundamental principles of their professions. Similarly, transformation —in the

184

words of the CID, “teaching in its broadest sense”—is a common expectation across

185

workplaces, professions, and environments. Even “generation” - the hallmark of the PhD - can

186

be achieved by those who are dedicated to their fields yet lack the doctoral degree. Concretely

187

illustrating this point is the GitHub repository for code and computing tools, which is a venue for

188

“publishing” and making public – open to user and community input – new tools and techniques

189

to promote scientific advances (see, e.g., [12]). Contributors to resources like GitHub need not

190

hold doctorates, but they do need to be stewardly (e.g., [13]).

191

Additionally, the rate of PhD production across disciplines in the US has long outstripped

192

the needs of the academic job market (see e.g., [14]). Thus, increasing numbers of doctoral

193

graduates work outside of the academy, and yet may continue to function as stewards in their

194

non-scholarly roles. In addition, many doctoral graduates seek employment in colleges or

195

universities where teaching, and not scholarship, is the principal obligation. If the construct of

196

stewardship is limited to those for whom scholarship is in fact “first and foremost”, then the

197

majority of college and university faculty (whose principal role is education, not scholarship)

198

might not self-identify as stewards – which is clearly neither desirable nor true. Importantly,

199

modern scientific practice has become highly inter- and multi-disciplinary, which suggests that

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

8

200

academics may be contributing scholarship to their own discipline as well as others, or into the

201

literature that comprises the intersection(s) between disciplines. These recent changes in the

202

landscape of scholarly preparation and employment must be accommodated if the construct of

203

stewardship is to be more widely engaged. We seek to promote commitment to the construct in

204

the widest possible sense in scholars, educators, and professionals outside of the academy.

205

Finally, reserving the cultivation of stewardship to only doctoral students, who are the

206

smallest proportion of students in any academic setting (sometimes by orders of magnitude),

207

leaves to chance the development of stewardly attitudes towards a discipline or profession

208

among the vast majority of graduates. While it is argued that “(u)pon entry into practice, all

209

professionals assume at least a tacit responsibility for the quality and integrity of their own work

210

and that of colleagues” [1: p. 10 –emphasis added], this should not describe only professionals

211

who are graduates of doctoral programs. We conclude that, for the benefit of society broadly,

212

and higher education specifically, the stewardship model should not be limited to doctoral

213

education.

214

A developmental path for stewardship

215

In the words of the CID, “doctoral education is a complex process of formation.” It

216

includes technical training, but is more importantly concerned with developing the intellectual

217

expertise, commitments, and perspectives required of a custodian of the field. “What is formed,

218

in short, is the scholar’s professional identity in all its dimensions” [2: p. 8]. This is perhaps most

219

true – and observable- in doctoral education, but professional identity development could be

220

more widely promoted if stewardly preparation were started earlier than the doctoral level. A

221

Mastery Rubric is a tool for curriculum development and evaluation [15] that articulates a

222

curriculum’s intended outcomes and integrates a developmental trajectory that moves learners

223

from novice to more expert performance within an evidence-centered design framework. The

224

Mastery Rubric construct supports the articulation of a developmental framework for

225

stewardship where students as early as the first year of college (2- or 4-year programs) and

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p.

226

faculty can engage in, and actively monitor, development of the target knowledge, skills, and

227

abilities [15]. Thus, we used the Mastery Rubric construct to create a developmental path for

228

stewards of the discipline, profession, or enterprise across disciplines.

9

229

Mastery Rubrics have been published for clinical research [16], ethical reasoning [17],

230

evidence-based medicine [18], and statistical literacy [19]. The construct is described in detail

231

by [15]. In order to create a Mastery Rubric (MR), three elements are needed [15, 20]:

232

1. A list of knowledge, skills and abilities (KSAs) to be developed by learners via the curriculum

233

in order for progress towards expertise (or independence) to be attained;

234

2. Conceptualization of the trajectory of progression from novice to the desired (targeted)

235

level(s) of expertise or independence, and ideas of the evidence supporting claims of

236

classification; and

237

3. Descriptions of two or more mutually exclusive performance levels (e.g., novice, proficient)

238

on each of the list of KSAs.

239

Performance of the KSAs that are the ultimate objective of the curriculum should

240

progress in recognizable stages from uninitiated towards expertise or independence. The

241

specific achievements of a person at each stage and for each KSA are represented in the

242

Mastery Rubric as performance level descriptors (PLDs). PLDs clarify, but do not restrict or

243

prescribe, what instructors need to teach and assess, and what students need to demonstrate in

244

order for their performance of a KSA at a given stage to be recognized as “achieved”. The MR

245

should capture the consensus around the curriculum; making the KSAs explicit, and their

246

achievement at target stages explicit, so decisions about a new curriculum or revisions to

247

existing ones can be facilitated and communicated.

248

Methods

249

To develop a Mastery Rubric for stewardship (MR-S, Table 1), we completed each of the

250

three elements, described below. We then sought to determine the value and utility of the

251

construct through three case studies, assessing the alignment of the MR-S KSAs with

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 10

252

professional practice standards, all of which are relevant for practitioners of that field in or

253

outside of academia, by way of a Degrees of Freedom Analysis [6,7] (Campbell, 1975;

254

Tractenberg, in press).

255

1. KSAs:

256

The first step in any MR is to identify core KSAs. We started by applying a cognitive task

257

analysis (CTA; [21]) to the Carnegie Foundation’s original definition of Stewardship. This

258

approach is outlined in the Supplemental Materials. KSAs were taken directly from the main

259

characteristics of stewardship: generation, evaluation, conservation, and responsibility in

260

disciplinary/scholarly writing, teaching, application, and communication. Since the MR is a tool

261

for curriculum development, the “teachability” of KSAs, and observability of learning, are

262

prioritized; thus KSAs were revised until these features were realized. KSA articulation was also

263

informed by whether performance at a given stage in a developmental trajectory could be

264

demonstrated concretely, within a variety of curricula, for the specific KSA. The first draft of

265

KSAs were further separated where this brought clarity to the performance level descriptions,

266

and/or where the evidence supporting achievement of different KSAs could plausibly be

267

separable (by job description or by intention). Ongoing discussion led to consensus on the final

268

KSAs.

269

2. Trajectory:

270

Step 2 in developing a Mastery Rubric is the articulation of the stages along the

271

trajectory. The trajectory is designed to ensure that each KSA is learnable and improvable, with

272

concrete opportunities for assessment and demonstration, at each stage. As with all but one MR

273

(see [15]), we used the European guild structure (see [22: p. 182]), which identifies novice,

274

apprentice, journeyman, and master stages or levels. These developmental stages conveniently

275

map onto higher education generally, as well as to many professions. Thus, this trajectory can

276

be used for curriculum development or evaluation so that the MR-S can be implemented across

277

educational contexts, but can also be implemented in the workplace.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 11

278
279

3. Performance Level Descriptors:
The third step in developing a MR is to describe what each KSA “looks like” when

280

performed at a given stage. Because stewardship KSAs cannot be “tested” but must be

281

observable, we sought to formally specify the level of KSA performance that would be minimally

282

required for an individual to be classified into a given stage on that KSA (following [23: p. 4]).

283

The first and last authors did this using a formal approach to performance level description

284

(PLD), combined with the assumption that the performance of a KSA by someone at a given

285

stage can be described using the appropriate level of Bloom’s taxonomy [24] (see Appendix)

286

required for the demonstration or performance of the KSA. Bloom’s taxonomy is one of the most

287

widely used, empirically and theoretically supported taxonomies for cognitive functions and is

288

featured in every MR to date. Rather than rely on age, career stage or other such criteria, we

289

drafted Range PLDs [25: pp. 91-92] that could describe the complex behaviors each KSA

290

represents. The three co-authors, who come from different disciplinary perspectives, were

291

participants in the Stewardship panel in 2016 specifically because of their expertise in the

292

development (CMG) and application (CMR, RET) the construct of stewardship; the first and last

293

authors served as the “subject matter experts” in this iterative standard setting (PLD drafting)

294

exercise following a combination of approaches articulated by Kingston & Tiemann (2012) [26].

295

Since our goal was to develop a tool that could be used by diverse disciplines, we required that

296

PLDs entailed teachable behaviors that would be demonstrable within a variety of curricula.

297

PLDs were articulated through an iterative process using a modified Body of Work procedure

298

[26]: a first draft of each PLD for a given KSA was created based on Bloom’s taxonomy by one

299

co-author (RET), and served as the "range finding" for performance of the KSA at a given stage.

300

PLD drafting used Bloom’s taxonomy, refined by appealing to the elements of assessment

301

validity outlined by Messick (1994) [27]:

302

1. What is/are the knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs) that students should possess at the

303

end (or a given stage) of the curriculum?

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 12

304

2. What actions/behaviors by the students will reveal these KSAs?

305

3. What tasks will elicit these specific actions or behaviors?

306

The integration of Bloom’s taxonomy and the Messick criteria facilitated the inclusion of

307

concrete and observable behaviors in the PLDs that can be developed sequentially – and

308

reinforced iteratively for deeper and sustainable learning over time.

309

The drafts were then discussed among the co-authors (CMR, RET) for "pinpointing",

310

clarifying how different evidence of performance of a given KSA at a given level by anyone

311

developing their stewardship would be exhibited. The “boundaries” between stages relied on

312

Bloom’s levels and our own individual experiences with students and colleagues at different

313

stewardship levels. Discussions were both synchronous and asynchronous via online meetings

314

(CMR, RET) and email (CMR, CMG, RET), to finalize the performance level descriptors.

315

As each of these three steps were initiated, the interim results were used to triangulate

316

results at other steps. That is, discussions about the PLDs led to the identification of a “missing”

317

KSA (see Results), and also reinforced the choice of the guild structure for the developmental

318

trajectory when concrete descriptions of each KSA at each stage were articulated. Refinements

319

of PLDs for one KSA led to revisions and refinements in other KSA PLDs, to ensure that we pin-

320

pointed performance in terms of stage and KSA, and also that the PLDs were not redundant.

321

4. Validation:

322

Once the Mastery Rubric for Stewardship was created (see Results), case studies were

323

used to study both its validity – as a function of its relevance for professional preparation, and

324

also to assess the evidence for our claim that stewardship can be expanded beyond doctoral

325

education to professional preparation: If the MR-S can be used to support training of

326

professionals as well as scholars, there should be considerable alignment between the KSAs

327

and professional practice guidelines – which are intended to guide both scholars and

328

professional practitioners. Degrees of Freedom Analyses were used in all validation. The

329

conclusion that scholarly stewardship is supported by the Mastery Rubric for Stewardship (MR-

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 13

330

S) was explored with one of three case studies, representing the discipline of History (Case 1).

331

The second case represents the discipline of Statistics and Data Science; both History and

332

Statistics and Data Science have professional practice guidelines that already embrace the

333

professional, as well as the scholarly, practitioner, but History is predominantly a scholarly

334

discipline while Statistics and Data Science comprise a majority of practitioners outside of the

335

academy. The third case explores the alignment of the MR-S with neurosciences, which has

336

practice guidelines that emphasize scholarship (rather than general professional practice),

337

although many neuroscience doctorate holders work in, or will go into, industry or other non-

338

academic jobs. Finally, by examining the alignment of the MR-S with these three different

339

disciplines, we explored the relevance for the MR-S generally, to determine if different

340

disciplines each need their own MR-S (i.e., with discipline-specific PLDs, which would be

341

suggested if the alignments across these cases were highly variable) or if the MR-S is

342

sufficiently general, which is expected given that the construct of stewardship was intended to

343

be general (i.e., for all doctoral education); this would be suggested if the alignments of the MR-

344

S KSAs with the diverse practice guidelines in these validating case analyses were similar and

345

high.

346

Results

347

1. KSAs

348

As noted, a steward is someone who “will creatively generate new knowledge, critically

349

conserve valuable and useful ideas, and responsibly transform those understandings through

350

writing, teaching, and application”. Based on this definition, with consideration of its utility

351

outside of doctoral education (i.e., earlier as well as for those who will not pursue a doctorate)

352

as well as within it, the KSAs for stewardship were determined to be:

353

1.

Requisite knowledge/situational awareness

354

2.

Create and/or generate new methods/new knowledge

355

3.

Critically evaluate extant and emerging ideas

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 14

356

4.

Conserve ideas (or not, if deemed rejectable & non-conservation is justified)

357

5.

Responsibly write (disciplinary scholarship)

358

6.

Responsibly teach/mentor/model (formally and informally)

359

7.

Responsibly apply the knowledge and principles of the discipline

360

8.

Responsibly communicate (outside of scholarly venues)

361

Seven of the eight KSAs (2-8 in the list above) were derived directly from the original

362

definition of stewardship. But as the PLDs for those seven were being articulated, it became

363

clear that knowing when to exhibit which aspect of stewardship was, itself, something that

364

needed to be taught and practiced explicitly. In the words of the CID, stewardship encompasses

365

both a set of roles and skills and a set of principles: “the former ensure competence, and the

366

latter provide the moral compass” [1: p. 9]. Thus, we determined that an additional KSA was

367

needed to describe the responsibility to recognize when these behaviors need to be applied or

368

modeled, which is a concrete and observable version of a “moral compass” (see also [28: p.

369

xxi]). We have called this KSA “requisite knowledge/situational awareness” to capture the

370

attention that would be given to standards of professional practice during education or training,

371

or when orienting new employees in the workplace. The applications of the other KSAs of

372

stewardship are contingent upon this situational knowledge. An individual who learns and grows

373

all the other KSAs, but cannot recognize when to use them, is less likely to act in a stewardly

374

manner when it is needed. As an individual becomes increasingly inculcated into the habits of

375

mind and practice of a discipline or profession, their abilities to recognize situations in which

376

stewardship is needed should similarly increase. Formally including this KSA in a curriculum is

377

essential for wider exposure to, and greater likelihood of demonstrating, stewardly behaviors.

378

One of the defining features of the scholarship is the generation of new knowledge;

379

however, modern scientific scholarship, in and outside of academia, can also emphasize new

380

methods or techniques. Thus, we added “generate new methods,” which also includes the

381

development of software; computational, mathematical, and statistical techniques; as well as

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 15

382

new methods for cross-disciplinary work. Augmenting the KSA this way both broadens the

383

scope of behaviors to which a stewardly approach is important and specifies professional

384

activities (where techniques and methods are developed for industry and non-academic venues)

385

as meaningful sources of evidence of stewardship.

386

We also broke one of the features of the steward into two separate KSAs: “the critical

387

conservation of valuable and useful ideas” was separated into “critical evaluation of extant

388

knowledge” (KSA 2) and “conserve ideas and justify rejection in non-conservation of ideas”

389

(KSA 3). In fact, critical evaluation of extant knowledge is essential to both the creation of new

390

knowledge and to the conservation (or non-conservation) of the ideas of the discipline. For the

391

scholar, both of these KSAs invariably require a critical evaluation of extant knowledge.

392

However, for the independent practitioner who is not primarily a scholar, conservation (or non-

393

conservation) of ideas may not require a critical evaluation of the literature supporting the idea

394

or an intention to generate new knowledge. One current (2017) example is the data scientist

395

who creates a new algorithm and, recognizing that the dominant or prevailing computational

396

paradigm creates bias in the algorithm’s output (e.g., [29]), rejects that paradigm and seeks to

397

create a different algorithm that does not have that bias. Including two separate KSAs instead of

398

one makes these features of stewardly practice more widely applicable. The differences in

399

performance of these separated KSAs may be less obvious for scholars than for others, but the

400

fact that different performance level descriptors were generated for each KSA affirms the

401

suggested separation. The distinction was further reinforced by recognizing fundamental

402

differences in the two KSAs. Critical evaluation entails an obligation to contribute to the vetting

403

(e.g., by performing peer review) that is essential to promote the vitality and rigor of the

404

literature or knowledge base. Conservation/non-conservation is distinguished with a dimension

405

of understanding the process of vetting, and potential influences on vetting by cultural as well as

406

extra-disciplinary forces.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 16

407

Similarly, we took the “transformation” feature of the steward (“responsibly transform

408

those understandings through writing, teaching, and application”) and divided it into four

409

fundamental KSAs, namely: responsibly write; responsibly teach/mentor/model; responsibly

410

apply disciplinary knowledge; and responsibly communicate. In particular, many faculty are

411

stewardly specifically because they teach and apply disciplinary knowledge (but do not primarily

412

write scholarly papers), while many non-faculty stewards (e.g., those in industry) must teach

413

informally (e.g., modeling professional practice and mentoring junior members of a team or work

414

group) and communicate outside of scholarly venues. We distinguished “communication” from

415

both teaching and scholarly writing, because some discipline-specific communication (with

416

collaborators, team members, or the public) is not considered scholarly, but communication

417

outside of the discipline must be as stewardly as that within the discipline. All four of these are

418

key features of stewardly practice, although all practitioners may not have opportunities to

419

develop or demonstrate all four. By separating the components of this stewardship feature, we

420

sought to make each learnable and improvable throughout the development of both scholars

421

and professionals in any discipline.

422

Thus, these eight KSAs represent the definition of stewardship with subtle refinements

423

that make stewardship achievable and demonstrable by a wider range of practitioners across

424

disciplines.

425

2. Trajectory

426

As shown in Table 1, four guild-based stages of development were articulated.

427
428

Novice: The novice is just beginning to engage with the discipline. This individual is

429

focused on their own performance of any given KSA, which tends to be at Bloom’s levels of

430

cognitive complexity 1-2 (understand, summarize). They do not recognize that, or act as if,

431

failures to act in a stewardly manner have ramifications beyond themselves. The novice stage

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 17

432

represents the individual embedded in the acquisition of discipline-specific content. This could

433

be an undergraduate declaring the major or an early-stage graduate student.

434

Apprentice: The apprentice is actively engaged in study of the profession or discipline

435

and developing the full range of Bloom’s cognitive abilities. She is developing the capacity to

436

practice independently, but has not yet demonstrated ability qualification to do so. Yet compared

437

to the novice, her work and KSA performance exhibits greater reflection, and thus, awareness of

438

her own limitations. Additionally, by learning the “tacit responsibility for the quality and integrity

439

of their own work and that of colleagues”, and the “responsibility to the larger public for the

440

standards of practice associated with the profession” that Golde & Walker (2006) [1] assume “all

441

professionals” have, the apprentice is aware that professional and disciplinary independence

442

will require stewardship. This stage, which can be the longest period in one’s formation, might

443

describe the advanced undergraduate in a major or the later graduate student who has

444

articulated research problems (or their thesis) with some support. However, the stages are not

445

time-dependent, so any individual at any point in a career could be or become an apprentice

446

steward.

447

Journeyman: The journeyman is an independent scholar or practitioner – a steward of

448

the discipline. Depending on the field, this individual could be a doctoral student, an

449

independent scholar (with or without a PhD in the field), or baccalaureate holder who is

450

prepared for independent work in a profession or practice. The journeyman steward (“steward”)

451

is uniformly stewardly in their interactions with others in the disciplinary or professional

452

community. They may seek new opportunities to reinforce less-well developed skills.

453

Performance is reflective, and includes analysis and synthesis of their experience with their

454

knowledge (Bloom’s 4-6).

455

Master: The Master steward is recognized by evidence and consensus as one who

456

teaches effectively. The distinction between the journeyman and the Master is the Master’s

457

demonstrated ability to teach effectively, comprising evidence of successful diagnosis and

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 18

458

remediation of the thinking or work of practitioners at earlier stages1. The Master steward is

459

therefore an expert in the KSAs themselves (journeyman) and also as someone to whom

460

apprenticeship in stewardship can be entrusted. Evidence of successful diagnosis and

461

remediation of earlier-stage performance of the KSAs, rather than a listing of the jobs or funding

462

that one’s trainees/students have gone on to obtain, is an essential feature of Master level

463

stewards. This can include the development and evaluation of assessments that are specific to

464

the KSAs and the progressive evolution of their performance, plus methods by which these

465

cognitive skills can be elicited by, or developed in, those who are less-expert. These would be

466

most clear from a formal educational context but are also important in the workplace: rather than

467

focusing on student work, Master stewards in the workplace might focus on transparency in

468

promotional processes and supporting the creation of evidence that mentees and junior

469

practitioners need in order to be recognized as “developing professionals” who are making

470

progress towards career goals. Simply modeling stewardship is not sufficient to train others to

471

become stewardly or to promote active, critical, engagement in the profession or the discipline;

472

thus, achieving the Master level requires evidence of the ability to support the development of

473

these KSAs in those whose stewardly behaviors and attitudes are still in development.

474

3. Performance level descriptors (PLDs)

475

In the academic or workplace context, the novice steward deals mostly with facts and

476

pre-defined problems, but is also focused on their own actions and is only starting to learn about

477

professional practice standards, such as the fact that standards exist (and why). Novices lack

478

awareness of many or all of the dimensions of stewardship and professionalism, and also of

479

their own development or place in the continuum. In many fields, this corresponds to

480

performance at Bloom’s levels 1-2 (understand, summarize), moving towards developing levels
1

This characterizes performance at the Master level in every Mastery Rubric that has this level.
Many independent practitioners (journeymen) have responsibilities to mentor or instruct; but
have not accumulated evidence of qualification and the focus on the diagnosis and remediation
of challenges that are encountered earlier in development, that distinguishes the Master.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 19

481

3 (apply) and 4 (analyze/predict) on the stewardship KSAs. The PLDs for the novice are

482

consistently representing these Bloom’s levels for all KSAs. Depending on motivation as well as

483

structural support, an individual might spend 1-2 years in this stage (e.g., first two years of

484

college before declaring a major), or longer if they have not begun to identify with a profession

485

or discipline.

486

The apprentice steward is someone who is actively learning about practice standards as

487

they begin to align themselves and their emerging professional identity with these standards.

488

Their abilities to engage with stewardship KSAs are improving, so they can engage with less-

489

structured problems and less scaffolding. Apprentices perform the KSAs at Bloom’s levels 3-4,

490

and because they are learning more about standards of practice for their domain, they would be

491

developing abilities at Bloom’s levels 5-6 (evaluate, synthesize) and also demonstrating a

492

growing awareness of their own limitations and opportunities for growth (i.e., developing

493

metacognitive skills). The PLDs for the apprentice represent more confidence with Bloom’s

494

levels 3-4 than the novice would be expected to demonstrate for all KSAs, but for those whose

495

sense of professional identity is actively being shaped, engagement with less structured

496

challenges – requiring Bloom’s levels 5-6 – would be sought and practiced. In an academic

497

context, this individual collects evidence of their apprenticeship of stewardly behaviors and

498

habits of mind over the period of time “in training” for a job or role. For example, this might be

499

the time spent “in the major” for undergraduates, a master’s program, or the majority of the time

500

in a doctoral program. In the workplace, individuals may train for, and learn to identify with, new

501

jobs. However, once an individual leaves the apprentice steward performance level, they will be

502

adaptable to new contexts and might enter this stage briefly, as needed, for refinements to

503

professional identities they are on the way to forming.

504

The journeyman is a steward of the discipline. They have concrete awareness of

505

professional practice standards and understand how these apply to themselves, to others, and

506

to interactions within and outside of the profession or discipline. The journeyman steward

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 20

507

performs the KSAs with understanding, analysis, and synthesis of their experience with their

508

knowledge, functioning at the highest Bloom’s levels as they perform all the KSAs that comprise

509

stewardship in their working life. In an academic context, this individual is recognizable as

510

someone to whom the integrity of the field can be entrusted. In the workplace, this individual is

511

recognized as someone whose integrity, and whose commitment to their field or profession, is

512

visibly and concretely demonstrated. One can be considered a journeyman steward when one

513

has evidence of this level of performance on all of the stewardship KSAs that are relevant for

514

their practice; if new dimensions of practice are added (e.g., adding responsibility for junior team

515

members or supervising duties), development of stewardly attributes of those new professional

516

responsibilities can follow the articulated trajectory.

517

The Master is confirmed, by evidence, as both independent in their performance of the

518

KSAs themselves and also as someone to whom apprenticeship can be entrusted. Master level

519

performance of all stewardship KSAs includes understanding, analysis and synthesis, and an

520

understanding of mechanisms by which these cognitive skills can be elicited by those less-

521

expert stewards within their discipline. Evidence of Master level performance in stewardship

522

comes from diagnosis (the identification of weaknesses in KSA performance) and remediation

523

(the recommendation of methods to address those weaknesses in the KSAs), including the

524

development and evaluation of assessments that are specific to the KSAs and their progressive

525

evolution. The Master can train others to begin to be, and to be, stewardly (novice/apprentice),

526

or to be (journeyman) stewards; they may also train new Master stewards. This individual

527

directly and indirectly supports the development and recognition of stewardly behaviors in those

528

he/she works with whether in academic or workplace contexts. Examples of evidence of Master

529

level achievement include the use of individual learning plans that incorporate the development

530

of stewardly behaviours in academic settings, or by encouraging continuing professional

531

development in the workplace. In addition to the explicit “instructional” performance by a Master

532

steward, the Master is also entrusted to support a stewardly context in which the apprentice is

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 21

533

trained/prepared for practice. For example, in the academic setting, as the steward creates new

534

knowledge, they understand that the goal of advancing knowledge diverges from the worst

535

characteristics of the “publish or perish” culture, which does not prioritize the discipline and may

536

actually be detrimental to the discipline and to public trust in the academic enterprise more

537

generally (see [30]). Outside of the academic setting, where the “publish or perish” attitude may

538

seem absent, there may still be a “rush to results”, or emphasis on short term tasks that can

539

ultimately weaken the discipline or profession. The journeyman steward seeks to ensure that

540

their own work prioritizes the discipline or profession, while the Master steward goes further,

541

seeking to support a culture where the integrity of the discipline is not undermined by pressures

542

such as publication or pushing to complete a project simply for completions’ sake or because

543

publication and completion are deliverables.

544

A throughline for all PLDs is the critical dependence of all practitioners on honest and

545

complete reporting of their work. This transparency supports clear communication with all

546

stakeholders of the scholarly, scientific, and professional communities, accessibility of all work,

547

and promotes both reproducibility and rigor. Additionally, we built in features of advanced stages

548

(journeyman/Master) whereby advocacy for stewardship becomes part of performance of the

549

KSA. With these features and characteristics in mind, the specific PLDs were crafted for the

550

KSAs and are presented in the Mastery Rubric for Stewardship in Table 1.

551
552

Has limited

Largely unaware of
the professional
community and
standards within
which their
academic or
professional
interests operate.

Is discovering the
importance of
disciplinary and
professional
stewardship.

Has interest but
limited experience in
the discipline or
profession, but is
being introduced to
the ideas and
commitments that
the Apprentice will
build upon.

Apprentice

Journeyman

Developing the full
range of Bloom’s
cognitive abilities, a
greater awareness of
their own limitations,
and a commitment to
professional and
disciplinary stewardship.

Exercises professional
practice standards and
recognizes situations in
which stewardship
should be modeled
and/or applied with
respect to themselves
and others, and to
interactions within and
outside of the
profession or discipline.
Generates, and

Is engaged in a
disciplinary or
professional community,
and seeks additional
opportunities to
reinforce less-well
developed skills.

Demonstrates the KSAs
and commitments of a
steward of the
discipline, including
preserving disciplinary
integrity.

Learning to recognize
when and how to
demonstrate
stewardship, that
professional standards
of practice involve both
legal/illegal and
ethical/unethical
continua, and how to
recognize and respond
to these features.
Learning to create

Actively engaged in
study of the discipline
and seeks opportunities
to demonstrate and
grow the KSAs.

Table 1. The Mastery Rubric for Stewardship
Developmental
Novice
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs

General
descriptor of
performance:

Requisite
knowledge/
situational
awareness

Create and/or

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 22

Master

An expert in the KSAs and
someone to whom
apprenticeship in stewardship
can be entrusted.

Formatively diagnoses and
remediates the performance
of KSAs, and develops and
evaluates summative
assessments for specific
KSAs in support of stewardly
development through the
master level.

Models, promotes, and
teaches recognition of
situations in which
stewardship can and should
be demonstrated; identifies
strategies for how best to
proceed when it isn’t clear.

Models, promotes, and

Developmental
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs
generate new
methods/new
knowledge

Critically

Novice

awareness of the
knowledge and
activities of the
discipline, and
limited exposure to
the ethical issues
involved in their
creation and use.
Learning that
knowledge is
generated; and that
the creation of new
methods or
knowledge may
have ramifications
beyond the original
intent.

Limited ability to

Apprentice

transparently
communicates, new
methods and knowledge
to strengthen and
advance the field.

Journeyman

Master

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 23

methods and knowledge
in a manner that
strengthens and
advances the field and
disciplinary community.

teaches stewards to
recognize and exhibit their
responsibilities to the
disciplinary community and
society as they create and/or
generate new methods and
knowledge.

Models, promotes, and

Supports systems for
professional assessment and
developmental milestones for
themselves, their
mentees/trainees, and others
in the community that are
consistent with stewardly
responsibilities.

Promotes transparency in the
documentation of the new
knowledge/methods to others
in the disciplinary community
and those outside it.

Considers how new
ideas can be used for
unethical ends, and
models how to respond
when such action
occurs.

Critically evaluates

Prioritizes the
disciplinary community
over metrics that
devalue it. Challenges
such metrics whenever
possible.

Developing the ability to
recognize when new
methods or knowledge
can be used for
unethical ends, and how
stewards of the
discipline respond.
Learning how to
balance a commitment
to strengthen and
advance the discipline
with advancing one’s
career

Learning how

Developmental
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs
evaluate extant
and emerging
ideas

Conserve ideas
(or rejects ideas
if nonconservation is
justified)

evaluate ideas or
differentiate
between assertions
and arguments
within the discipline.

Novice

professionals review,
critique, and challenge
each other’s ideas and
arguments.

Apprentice

Journeyman

Practicing these skills
through guided work
with increasing levels of
disciplinary engagement
and independence.
Developing the
intellectual humility
necessary to critically
evaluate their work
according to disciplinary
standards.
Learning to conserve
fundamental ideas of
the field through
engagement,
application, relation, and
extension, as well as
qualification and
critique.
Learning to recognize

Recognizes multiple
perspectives, including
cultural and extradisciplinary influences,
in describing and

Exhibits intellectual
humility and ensures
their contributions to the
field are well-reasoned
and well-supported.
Critically conserves the
ideas that advance the
field and preserve its
integrity.

Participates in the
vetting of new and
emerging ideas within
the profession or
discipline.

knowledge and ideas
within the discipline or
profession and the
paradigms by which this
knowledge is derived,
and promotes this
evaluation by others.

Uncritically treats
vetted ideas and
materials as “true.”
Learning how
warrants and claims
function together to
form arguments and
evidence-based
reasoning.

Entering the field by
learning about the
fundamental ideas,
thinkers, and
accomplishments of
the past.
Attention is focused
on remembering and
understanding core

Master

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 24

teaches critical thinking.
Trains stewards in intellectual
humility and the critical
evaluation (vetting) of extant
and emerging ideas, including
their own work and the work
of others both in and outside
of their own discipline.

Trains stewards to recognize,
understand, and critically
evaluate the vetting that ideas
in the field have/have had,
including the influence of
cultural and extra-disciplinary
forces.

Models, promotes, and
teaches that conservation or

Developmental
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs

Responsibly
write

Novice

processes by which
ideas in the field are
vetted and that reevaluation and
conservation are
essential to the integrity
of the field.

Apprentice

Demonstrating
increased sophistication
in writing, including
content, rhetoric and
argumentation, and
transparency and

Learning how these
decisions have shaped
the history of the field
and the ideas that
are/have been
conserved.
Gaining greater
proficiency in disciplinespecific writing.

Learning to describe
and justify decisions
about conservation or
non-conservation.

(highly conserved)
ideas; justifies
neither their
conservation nor
rejection of ideas or
arguments.

Learning disciplinary
writing standards
with attention to the
details of what must
be recorded, how to
construct written
reports, and why
responsible writing
requires
transparency.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 25

Master

non-conservation of ideas in
the discipline or profession
must be justified, and how to
do so.

Journeyman

justifying decisions of
conservation or nonconservation of ideas,
models, and views.

Strives to instill in others, both
in and outside of their own
discipline, an understanding
of the dynamics of the
evolution of the field.

May also train stewards in
cross-disciplinary writing, and
in writing for readers outside
the discipline.

Trains stewards in the
importance and execution of
transparent, complete, and
appropriate – responsible writing within the field.

Participates in the
conservation, nonconservation, or rejection of
ideas through teaching or
training and enabling others
to do so.

Recognizes their role in
shaping the field/
profession and its
history.

Independently writes in
the diversity of contexts
and styles specific to
the field, to generate,
conserve, challenge,
and reject field-specific
knowledge and to
engage others in and
outside the field.

Developmental
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs

Responsibly
teach/mentor/
model

Responsibly

Novice

As someone
uninitiated in the
field, the Novice
does not undertake
teaching or
mentoring roles.

As someone

Practices and promotes
transparency in their
writing for the sake of
the discipline and field.

Journeyman

professional integrity.

Possess the knowledge,
skills, and abilities of the
discipline and is able to
pass these along to
others.

Apprentice

Growing in disciplinary
knowledge, skills, and
abilities and the ability
to pass these on to
others.

Teaches, mentors, and
models professionalism
and the commitments of
stewardship in both
formal and informal
settings, within and
outside the field.

Applies the KSAs in a

Develops an
understanding of the
importance of
competent mentoring
and modeling inherent
in professional practice
and disciplinary
responsibilities.
Seeks opportunities to
learn about workplace
appropriate teaching
and learning, and to
practice teaching, with
supervision if available.
Learning how and when

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 26

Master

The Master steward teaches
others to teach, model, and
mentor professionalism and
stewardship. *

Trains stewards to

Developmental
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs
apply disciplinary
knowledge

Responsibly
communicate

Novice

Apprentice

way that preserves and
advances the field by
demonstrating integrity,
transparency, and
respect in interactions
within and outside of the
profession or discipline.

Journeyman

Seeks opportunities to
deepen their knowledge
of their professional and
ethical responsibilities.
Learning how and when
to communicate with
insiders and outsiders
about their discipline or
profession.

Clearly and effectively
communicates the
ideas, perspectives, and
content of the discipline
to insiders and outsiders
in a way that promotes
integrity, transparency,
and respect.

to apply the KSAs of the
discipline and how
application entails
professional and ethical
responsibilities,
including integrity,
transparency, and
respect.

Discovering the
rules for
communicating in
the discipline or
profession.

Recognizes that
communicating as a
steward imparts
responsibilities that
include demonstrating
integrity, transparency,
and respect, and seeks
to exhibit their
commitment to these
responsibilities.

inexperienced in the
KSAs of the field,
the Novice is not
expected to apply
them but is learning
that application
entails
responsibilities for
the practitioner.

Learning that
stewards of the
discipline have a
responsibility to
represent their field
to others in a way
that promotes the
integrity,
transparency, and
respect of their

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 27

Master

responsibly apply disciplinary
knowledge within and outside
of the professional or
discipline.

Teaches, models, and
promotes the recognition and
acceptance of the
responsibility that accrues to
those who practice in the
discipline or profession.

Trains stewards to
communicate responsibly
across modalities and
audiences.

Teaches, models, and
promotes the acceptance of
the responsibility that accrues
to those who communicate
about the discipline or
profession, or its results.

Developmental
stage/
performance
level of
stewardship
Stewardship
KSAs

Novice

profession.

Apprentice

Journeyman

NOTE: * This cell encompasses the entire MR as well as the entire definition of the steward.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 28

Master

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 29

553

Our objective was to broaden the definition of “stewardship” so that it could apply to

554

professionals and practitioners as well as scholars, and to describe a developmental trajectory

555

that can be initiated earlier than doctoral education and at any point in a career. As described in

556

the Methods, the MR-S was iteratively developed by articulating the KSAs and drafting/revising

557

the PLDs once the stages were identified. During this process, as can be seen in Table 1:

558a. The cognitive task analysis extracted additional dimensions (KSAs) beyond the original
559

definition of stewardship (generation, conservation, transformation), and eight different features

560

(KSAs) of stewardship that are each learnable and improvable were articulated so that each

561

maintained the essence of the construct.

562b. PLDs were formalized to capture a variety of ways that stewardship can evolve organically
563

across disciplines and throughout a career. They are also general enough so that any KSA at

564

any stage can be demonstrated within and outside of academia, and across fields.

565c. PLDs recognize that the journeyman steward may have opportunities to teach, mentor, and
566

model stewardly behaviors, but that specific successes in these activities are concretely

567

demonstrated by the Master. Outside of an academic setting, journeyman stewards can

568

demonstrate their achievement of the Master level with the same kinds of evidence as

569

instructors, even if they are derived from non-academic activities, from working with their

570

mentees/junior collaborators.

571d. While stewardship is fundamentally concerned with responsibility and integrity, there is no KSA
572

for “ethical practice” or specifications about treating others with respect – not because these

573

should not characterize every practitioner in any domain, but because these are not particular to

574

the integrity of the discipline itself (with which stewardship is principally concerned). Thus, just

575

as with the definition of the steward, the focus in the MR-S is on taking and demonstrating

576

responsibility in the dimensions of stewardly practice. Professional or workplace guidelines may

577

(should) then focus attention on respectful (rather than responsible) conduct (e.g., see case

578

studies, next section).

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 30

579
580

4. Validation
The Mastery Rubric supports professionals, practitioners, and scholars envisioning

581

themselves as stewards, “committed to the foundation (“heart and essence”) of one’s field, but

582

also to thoughtful and innovative forward momentum, and development of the future of one’s

583

field”. To test more empirically whether stewardship can be extended beyond the scholarly

584

disciplinary domain into professional practice (i.e., to test the validity of this extension), we

585

applied the degrees of freedom analysis method to study alignment of the stewardship KSAs

586

with the guidelines for professional conduct – which guide professional and disciplinary practice-

587

in three disparate domains, History, Statistics and Data Science, and Neuroscience. For history,

588

the guidelines are publically available in narrative form. The key principles for Professional

589

Practice of History were extracted and summarized for the case analysis. For the Professional

590

Practice of Statistics and Data Science, and Neuroscience, the publicly available text for each

591

standard or principle was copied directly from the then-current website (in July 2018). If there is

592

alignment between the Guideline principle and a stewardship KSA, we indicate this with an

593

asterisk (*) – we made no attempt to quantify “how well-aligned” a KSA and Guideline principle

594

is, partly because this will depend on individual training programs’ (in schools or the workplace)

595

specific emphasis on either stewardship or their professional standards. Our indications of

596

alignment are, at their most foundational, signals that (or whether) stewardship is consistent

597

with professional practice guidelines.

598

Case 1. American Historical Association (AHA) Statement on Standards of Professional

599

Conduct (2018) [31]

600

First published in 1987 and most recently revised in 2018, the AHA Standards of

601

Professional conduct recognize that the discipline of history does not belong exclusively to

602

historians. It is an area of “shared human fascination” that is accessible to and produced by

603

people outside of the narrow body of professionals. The Standards thus serve not just as a

604

guide to proper historical inquiry, but also as a way of distinguishing professional historians from

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 31

605

others. Professionals are defined by “a self-conscious identification with a community of

606

historians who are collectively engaged in investigating and interpreting the past as a matter of

607

disciplined learned practice.” The historian’s task begins with discovery. In the words of the

608

AHA, “Scholarship—the discovery, exchange, interpretation, and presentation of information

609

about the past—is basic to the professional practice of history.” From here, seven principles

610

describe the “discipline of learned practice.”

6111. Critical Dialogue: Historians engage in a complex process of exploring “former lives and
612

worlds in search of answers to the most compelling questions of our own time and place.” This

613

process takes place through “reasoned discourse” within “communities governed by mutual

614

respect and constructive criticism.”

6152. Trust and Respect: Historians must maintain the trust and respect of readers, both academic
616

and public.

6173. Maintain integrity of the historical record: Related to the need to maintain trust with the
618

readers is the need to guard the integrity of the historical record. This involves a commitment to

619

not invent, alter, remove, or destroy evidence of any kind, as well as to maintaining the

620

distinction between primary and secondary sources and leaving a clear trail in regards to their

621

use to their use of primary sources and the consistent use of scholarly bibliographies and

622

annotations.

6234. Acknowledging debts: Trust is also maintained by the proper acknowledgment of one’s debts,
624

whether intellectual, financial, or otherwise. This includes avoiding any form of plagiarism, an

625

act of the most serious ethical and professional misconduct. It also includes acknowledging

626

assistance from colleagues, students, or collaborators and or other circumstantial privileges,

627

such as being given special access to material.

6285. Forming points of view: Among the most basic tasks for historians is the need to form points
629

of view that argue for a “particular, limited perspective on the past.” Historians strive to make

630

sense of the past with the recognition that “all knowledge is situated in time and place, that all

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 32

631

interpretations express a point of view, and that no mortal mind can ever aspire to omniscience.

632

Because the record of the past is so fragmentary, absolute historical knowledge is denied us.”

6336. Valuing multiple and conflicting perspectives: At the same time that historians form and
634

defend particular points of view about the past, they also recognize and value differing historical

635

perspectives. This does not mean that all interpretations are equally valid. It means that

636

historians recognize that a final interpretation is impossible—“no single objective or universal

637

account [of the past] could ever put an end to this endless creative dialogue within and between

638

the past and the present.”

6397. Recognize personal bias and commit to follow evidence: Points of view are often shaped by
640

historians’ own personal views and biases, thus historians should remain aware of their own

641

biases and commit to following “sound method and analysis wherever they may lead.”

642

Table 2 presents the Degrees of Freedom Analysis matrix to examine the alignment

643

between the Principles of the AHA Guidelines (1-7; columns) and the KSAs of the Steward

644

(Rows).

645
646
647

Table 2. Alignment of 7 AHA Guideline Principles (columns) with Stewardship KSAs (rows).
AHA Guideline Principle:

1

MR-S KSAs:
Requisite Knowledge/ situational
awareness

648

2
*

Create and/or generate new
methods/new knowledge

*

Critically evaluate extant knowledge
Conserve ideas (or not, if deemed
rejectable & non-conservation is
justified)
Responsibly write
Responsibly apply disciplinary
knowledge
Responsibly communicate
Responsibly teach/mentor/model

*

3

4

5

*

*
*

*

*

*

*
*

*
*

*

*
*

*

*
*

*
*
6

*
*
4

*

*
*
5

*

5

6

6

7
*

ALIGNMENT
4
3

*
*

*
*
5

3
4
*
*

6
4

*
*
5

7
5

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 33

649

Table 2 shows that all of the MR-S KSAs are consistent with at least three of the AHA

650

Practice Standard elements. The KSAs of responsible writing, communicating, and

651

teaching/mentoring/modeling have the strongest alignment (with 5-7 AHA standards); this is not

652

surprising given the fact that History is a profession that is practiced mostly within the academy.

653

According to the AHA (https://www.historians.org/jobs-and-professional-development/career-

654

diversity-for-historians) roughly a third of PhDs graduates between 2004 and 2013 work outside

655

higher education of any sort, while just over half hold tenure track positions in four-year

656

colleges/universities.

657

When it comes to historians working in non-academic roles, the question of their

658

demonstrating stewardship is more complex. There are a few popular historians, such as David

659

McCullah and Ken Burns, whose work serves an important role in promoting historical literacy

660

within our society. There are also public historians, who work in places such as museums, and

661

institutional historians, who serve on staff at places ranging from the US senate to small

662

organizations and associations. Historians also serve an important role in think tanks or in

663

agencies that maintain or establish archives; including the European Molecular Biology

664

Laboratory (which has outposts, associates, and partner organizations hosting cutting edge

665

science all over the world). These roles, though not in the academy, certainly allow one to bring

666

their historical knowledge, skills, and abilities to bear in their areas of service; therefore,

667

historians both in and outside academia are expected to follow the AHA Practice Standards.

668

The “Alignment” column in Table 2 shows that training the historian in the stewardship KSAs will

669

create opportunities to demonstrate 3-7 of the seven AHA Standards; training individuals to

670

follow the AHA Standards in their practice will create opportunities to demonstrate 5-7 of the

671

eight KSAs of stewardship. The strong alignment of each AHA Practice Standard with the

672

stewardship KSAs supports the claim that stewardship can be exercised by historical

673

professionals, whether or not they complete a PhD.

674

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 34

675

Case 2. The American Statistical Association (ASA) Ethical Guidelines for Statistical

676

Practice (2018) [32]

677

The Ethical Guidelines were first endorsed by the ASA Board in 1995 and the latest

678

revision was endorsed by the Board in 2018. These Guidelines include seven general principles

679

and 52 specific elements. The ASA Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice describe the

680

professional habits of all practitioners in statistics and data science; practice in government

681

(e.g., Bureau of Labor Statistics; Census), industry (e.g., business; pharmaceutical; biomedical),

682

social science fields (decision making/marketing; industrial/organizational), and scholarship.

683

A. Professional Integrity and Accountability

684

The ethical statistician uses methodology and data that are relevant and appropriate,

685

without favoritism or prejudice, and in a manner intended to produce valid, interpretable, and

686

reproducible results. The ethical statistician does not knowingly accept work for which he/she is

687

not sufficiently qualified, is honest with the client about any limitation of expertise, and consults

688

other statisticians when necessary or in doubt. It is essential that statisticians treat others with

689

respect.

690

B. Integrity of data and methods

691

The ethical statistician is candid about any known or suspected limitations, defects, or

692

biases in the data that may impact the integrity or reliability of the statistical analysis. Objective

693

and valid interpretation of the results requires that the underlying analysis recognizes and

694

acknowledges the degree of reliability and integrity of the data.

695

C. Responsibilities to Science/Public/Funder/Client

696

The ethical statistician supports valid inferences, transparency, and good science in

697

general, keeping the interests of the public, funder, client, or customer in mind (as well as

698

professional colleagues, patients, the public, and the scientific community).

699

D. Responsibilities to Research Subjects

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 35

700

The ethical statistician protects and respects the rights and interests of human and

701

animal subjects at all stages of their involvement in a project. This includes respondents to the

702

census or to surveys, those whose data are contained in administrative records, and subjects of

703

physically or psychologically invasive research.

704

E. Responsibilities to Research Team Colleagues

705

Science and statistical practice are often conducted in teams made up of professionals

706

with different professional standards. The statistician must know how to work ethically in this

707

environment.

708

F. Responsibilities to Other Statisticians or Statistics Practitioners

709

The practice of statistics requires consideration of the entire range of possible

710

explanations for observed phenomena, and distinct observers drawing on their own unique sets

711

of experiences can arrive at different and potentially diverging judgments about the plausibility

712

of different explanations. Even in adversarial settings, discourse tends to be most successful

713

when statisticians treat one another with mutual respect and focus on scientific principles,

714

methodology and the substance of data interpretations.

715

G. Responsibilities Regarding Allegations of Misconduct

716

The ethical statistician understands the differences between questionable statistical,

717

scientific, or professional practices and practices that constitute misconduct. The ethical

718

statistician avoids all of the above and knows how each should be handled.

719

An 8th Guideline Principle is specific for employers:

720

H. Responsibilities of Employers, Including Organizations, Individuals, Attorneys, or

721

Other Clients Employing Statistical Practitioners

722

Those employing any person to analyze data are implicitly relying on the profession’s

723

reputation for objectivity. However, this creates an obligation on the part of the employer to

724

understand and respect statisticians’ obligation of objectivity.

725

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 36

726

Table 3 presents the Degrees of Freedom Analysis matrix to examine the alignment

727

between the Principles of the ASA Guidelines relating to the practitioner (A-G, columns) and the

728

KSAs of the steward (rows).

729
730
731

Table 3. Alignment of ASA Professional Statistics Guidelines (columns) with Stewardship KSAs
(rows)
ASA GUIDELINE: A
B
C
D
E
F
G
ALIGNMENT
Stewardship KSAs:
Requisite knowledge
/situational awareness
Create and/or generate new
methods/new knowledge
Critically evaluate extant
knowledge
Conserve ideas (or not, if
deemed rejectable & nonconservation is justified)
Responsibly write
Responsibly apply disciplinary
knowledge
Responsibly communicate
Responsibly
teach/mentor/model

732
733

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

*

3

*

*

*

*

6

*

*

*

*

5

*

*

*

*

3
6

*
*

*
*

*
*

6
4

7

7

4

*
*

*
*

*

*

*
*

*

6

6

5

5

*

7

Table 3 shows that professional behaviors that are consistent with the ASA Guidelines

734

(columns) can also generate evidence of stewardship of the discipline or profession (rows). The

735

row marginals show that between three and seven of these seven core ASA Ethical Guideline

736

principles are aligned with each stewardship dimension. Thus, although stewardship was

737

originally conceptualized for PhD level practitioners whose primary objective is scholarship, it

738

can also generally support practitioners who are not “scholars first and foremost”, which

739

describes many, if not most, practicing statisticians and data scientists. Statisticians and

740

practitioners in quantitative sciences (to whom the ASA Ethical Guidelines pertain, see [33])

741

practice in every discipline, and not solely as scholars; so finding alignment between

742

stewardship dimensions and ASA professional practice guideline elements strongly supports the

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 37

743

claim that stewardship can be relevant for those who are not principally scholars. Master’s level

744

preparation is also sufficient for “professional preparation” as a statistician, and with new

745

undergraduate degree programs in data science being developed across the U.S., it is possible

746

that baccalaureate preparation may suffice for professional preparation in some cases. With the

747

role of data increasing in priority in so many science and technology fields, it is essential to

748

engage all those preparing for statistical practice in active consideration of how they may be as

749

stewardly as possible.

750

Not every statistician or data scientist who is (or wishes to be) stewardly will have

751

opportunities to teach or create new knowledge; therefore, these “typical” stewardly behaviors

752

cannot be required of every steward of statistics and data science. However, every ASA Ethical

753

Guideline Principle is relevant for every practitioner [33] - and practicing these principles is

754

clearly relevant for stewardship of the profession of statistics and the practice of data

755

analysis/data science. Importantly, while some students in statistics and data science programs

756

must complete general training in the responsible conduct of research at their universities, that

757

general training, especially if it focuses on principles and practices of research subject

758

protections, can seem unrelated to data intensive applications (see [34]). The “Alignment”

759

column in Table 3 shows that training the statistician/data scientist in the stewardship KSAs will

760

create opportunities to demonstrate 3-7 of the seven ASA Guideline Principles relating to the

761

practitioner (A-G); training individuals to follow the ASA Guidelines in their practice will create

762

opportunities to demonstrate 5-7 of the eight KSAs of stewardship. The alignment of each ASA

763

Guideline Principle with the stewardship KSAs supports the claim that stewardship can be

764

exercised by the full range of professionals in statistics and data science (irrespective of degree

765

completion).

766

Case 3. Society for Neuroscience Guidelines for Ethical Practice (2010) [35]

767
768

The Society for Neuroscience (SfN) issued its Guidelines for Ethical Practice in 2010.
These Guidelines include nine general principles. The Guidelines describe the scope of

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 38

769

practitioners to whom guidelines – and the integrity of its scientific mission – pertain.

770

Importantly, many individuals are included in this scope who are not actually producing

771

scholarship themselves, but are supporting its dissemination (e.g., as editors or reviewers).

772

While most neuroscience is carried out specifically for scholarly purposes, neuroscientists also

773

work in industry (e.g., pharmaceutical; biomedical) and in some social applications (networks),

774

as well as scholarship.

7751. The integrity of the scientific mission is a collective responsibility. SfN members and
776

those who contribute to SfN activities and publications are expected to conduct science in a

777

responsible and ethical manner. The institutions at which scientific work is carried out are

778

responsible for ensuring ethical standards are followed. SfN has a special responsibility

779

regarding those scientific activities for which it is directly responsible, including publication

780

of The Journal of Neuroscience, eNeuro, and presentations at the annual meeting. Investigators

781

are responsible for the accuracy of information reported in published articles and abstracts, for

782

insuring that authorship is appropriate, for avoiding plagiarism and duplicate publication, and for

783

insuring the ethical treatment of animals and human subjects. Journal editors and reviewers are

784

responsible for providing a fair, objective, and timely process for reviewing submitted

785

manuscripts.

7862. Data must be original and accurate. It is essential that researchers and others be able to trust
787

the validity of published data. That trust permits researchers to build on prior observations and

788

thus facilitates the progress of science. Replication and extension of published results allows

789

science to move forward and often entails free sharing of research material. While scientific

790

errors and differences of interpretation are natural aspects of the creative process, data that

791

have been fabricated or falsified contaminate the scientific literature, greatly diminishing its

792

value for researchers and others in the community. Moreover, such fraudulent actions

793

undermine society's trust in the scientific enterprise.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 39

7943. Priority of data and ideas must be respected. Scientific publication is an important part of
795

the process by which priority is established for experimental work and research

796

ideas. Plagiarism — the presentation of other investigator's data or ideas as your own — is

797

unacceptable. Duplication of text or data (including figures, tables, or portions thereof)

798

previously published by others or presentation of ideas or experimental findings of others must

799

be accompanied by citation of the previous work.

8004. Authorship should reflect a significant intellectual contribution. Each author should have
801

made a significant intellectual contribution to the conception, design, conduct, analysis, and/or

802

interpretation of the scientific work. Each individual meeting this criterion should be offered the

803

opportunity to participate in authoring, drafting, or critically reviewing the manuscript.

8045. Original data should only be published once. Reporting the same finding based on the same
805

data in separate publications without explicit acknowledgement of the relationship constitutes

806

duplicate publication and is unacceptable.

8076. Every author shares responsibility. All authors share responsibility for the scientific accuracy
808

of an abstract or manuscript, including supplementary material. Hence, in cases of fabrication,

809

falsification, or plagiarism, all authors are potentially culpable.

8107. Conflict of interest must be declared. Authors are responsible for declaring any conflict of
811

interest or appearance thereof that is relevant to a manuscript, abstract, or presentation.

812

Everyone involved in peer review should declare any conflict of interest or appearance thereof

813

and avoid any inappropriate conflict of interest.

8148. Pre-published material is confidential. Reviewers and editors must avoid breach of
815

confidentiality or using confidential information to advance their own or someone else’s research

816

or financial interests.

8179. Research using animals and human subjects must be conducted ethically. Research
818

using laboratory animals or human subjects must be done humanely and in accordance with

819

institutional and governmental regulations.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 40

820

Table 4 presents the alignment of the Guidelines from the Society of Neuroscience (1-9,

821

Columns) with the KSAs of the steward (rows).

822
823
824

Table 4. Alignment of Neuroscience Guidelines (columns) with Elements of Stewardship (rows)
Neuroscience Guideline:

1

2

*

*

Create and/or generate new
methods/new knowledge

*

*

Critically evaluate extant knowledge
Conserve ideas (or not, if deemed
rejectable & non-conservation is
justified)
Responsibly write
Responsibly apply disciplinary
knowledge
Responsibly communicate
Responsibly teach/mentor/model

*
*

Stewardship KSAs:
Requisite knowledge /situational
awareness

*

5

*
*

4

3

4

5

6

7

*

*

*

*

*

*
*

*

*

*

*
*

*
*

*
*

*

*

*

*

5

4

3

*
*
7

*
*
5

8

9

ALIGNMENT
5

*

6

*
*

4
3

*

8
5

*

*
2

6
2
4

825
826

Table 4 shows considerable overlap between the KSAs of stewardship and the

827

guidelines of the Society for Neuroscience. The weakest areas of overlap are “conservation of

828

ideas” and “responsibly teach/mentor/model”. It is possible that the reason why “responsibly

829

teach” is not more explicit in the SFN Guidelines is because most science research is done in

830

academic settings (including research-intensive and medical school contexts), and teaching is a

831

part of the more general “practice” of academia –and as such, might not be included in the

832

specific neuroscience community practice standards (being more akin to “workplace”

833

standards). The conservation of ideas might have less resonance for Neuroscience than for

834

Statistics and Data Science and History if innovation and discovery are higher priorities for

835

neuroscience; in fact, several of the guidelines themselves relate to treating new/breaking

836

knowledge in a stewardly and responsible manner (which is not considered in the other two sets

837

of guidelines).

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 41

838

The “Alignment” column in Table 4 shows that training the neuroscientist in the

839

stewardship KSAs will create opportunities to demonstrate 2-8 of the nine Neuroscience

840

Guideline Principles; training individuals to follow the Neuroscience Guideline Principles in their

841

practice will create opportunities to demonstrate 4-7 of the eight KSAs of stewardship. The

842

alignment of each Neuroscience Guideline Principle with the stewardship KSAs supports the

843

claim that stewardship can be exercised across the professional contexts for the neuroscientist.

844

Discussion

845

As noted in the introduction, this paper has built upon the work of the Carnegie Initiative

846

on the Doctorate to describe a general curricular framework applicable across disciplines and

847

throughout higher education to promote the explicit formation of stewardship. This Mastery

848

Rubric for Stewardship (MR-S) describes how scholars, professionals, and practitioners,

849

whether inside and outside the academy, can develop and document the characteristics (KSAs)

850

of a steward of the discipline. The three case analyses show considerable – but varying -

851

alignment of the KSAs for stewardship and the professional/ethical practice guidelines and

852

standards for these three disciplines/professions. The different features of stewardship identified

853

as KSAs can thus be seen to be achievable by all practitioners in these diverse fields, and are

854

not limited to those who have completed doctoral training. They can therefore be introduced

855

earlier and more widely – to a far wider audience – than was originally envisioned. The

856

alignment of each of the KSAs with at least some of the Guideline Principles across diverse

857

disciplines suggests that stewardship can be learned and exercised by the full range of

858

professionals across fields as diverse as those we analyzed here. The discussion explores the

859

potential opportunities and values added or enhanced by such development and

860

documentation.

861

Development of the Stewardly KSAs

862
863

The CID’s construct of stewardship focused exclusively on doctoral education, and we
have agreed that stewardship is most fully and explicitly formed at this level. This is particularly

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 42

864

true for the traditional academic disciplines and in those where highly specialized knowledge is

865

required to create and critique new ideas. Nevertheless, the MR-S shows how the

866

characteristics and commitments of disciplinary stewardship can be fostered earlier than the

867

doctoral level. Since many professionals engage in disciplinary practice without pursuing the

868

terminal degree, instilling stewardly attitudes at the undergraduate and masters’ level would

869

benefit the discipline overall. For example, it has been argued [36] that undergraduate statistics

870

and data science majors can be oriented to the importance of stewardship generally, even if

871

their engagement with the discipline or profession entails neither producing nor critically

872

consuming scientific argumentation. Fostering similar attitudes in other disciplines would benefit

873

not only the disciplines individually but also society more broadly. And since the performance

874

level descriptors of the MR-S are based on Bloom’s taxonomy, the rubric can be applied to

875

students at these levels. Indeed, since the highest levels of Bloom’s Taxonomy include

876

“evaluation” and “synthesis,” two key characteristics of stewards, all levels of higher education

877

that develop these higher-order cognitive abilities would be able to promote stewardship without

878

dramatically altering coursework or assessment. Yet without attention to the growth and

879

development of the characteristic KSAs that define the steward, it is unlikely that higher

880

education can prepare all practitioners to be those to whom the integrity of their respective fields

881

can be confidently entrusted. If that responsibility is taken up by employers, the MR-S can be

882

used in continuing education and other standard training initiatives across workplaces.

883

In addition to its utility throughout different levels of higher education, the MR-S also

884

represents a curricular structure that is general and flexible enough to be applied across

885

disciplines and institutions. The results of the degrees of freedom analyses showed

886

considerable alignment between the KSAs of stewardship and the professional practice

887

standards from three diverse fields. This alignment suggests that the framework is applicable

888

across many areas of study. In particular, curricula that incorporate disciplinary guidelines can

889

use stewardship to underpin efforts to ensure a developing engagement with the discipline and

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 43

890

document the achievement of these pre-professional behaviors. If stewardship were adopted as

891

part of “general training” or general education across a college or department, all students

892

would gain experience in their roles as future stewards of their profession or field.

893

As such, the MR-S has the potential to enhance the goals of professional and academic

894

societies and to promote the explicit integration of stewardship at any level or career stage.

895

Many other disciplines have published codes of professional conduct. These codes represent

896

the profession and describe how professionals in the discipline can and should engage in their

897

craft (see e.g., [37, 38]). While these disciplinary guidelines and codes all serve to promote the

898

integrity of their respective fields, they are essentially focused on the individual practitioner. The

899

concept of a disciplinary steward may be implied in these codes, but it is never made explicit. A

900

formal consideration of how to promote stewardship in a discipline through the discipline’s own

901

model of professional behavior would therefore support the explicit incorporation of both

902

stewardship and its development into the process of training the next generations of scholars

903

and professionals (e.g. [36]). The incorporation of the developmental path to journeyman or

904

Master level stewardship can also facilitate and promote engagement with disciplinary

905

guidelines from early in training. Professional associations have an interest in attracting new

906

members, but the professions themselves have a vital interest in inculcating new members of

907

the profession with the habits of mind that are necessary to promote successful engagement in

908

the domain and between domains (in multi-disciplinary work) or between their domain and the

909

public and other stakeholders. Any individual, regardless of where they are in their career, can

910

begin to curate evidence that they possess the KSAs at each stage of their development (e.g.,

911

[17]). While we hope the stewardship construct will be taught and practiced more universally in

912

doctoral education, the MR-S can also serve disciplines as they train pre-doctoral practitioners.

913

Documenting Teaching and Learning

914
915

The MR-S’s potential to serve as a general curricular framework lies both in its
usefulness in developing scholars, professionals, and practitioners, and its utility for

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 44

916

documenting their development. In this way, the MR-S, as with other Mastery Rubrics, is

917

consistent with recent calls to better document and more effectively communicate learning

918

outcomes in higher education. In 2016 the National Institute for Learning Outcomes Assessment

919

(NILOA) published guidelines for learning outcomes targeting undergraduate education [39]. In

920

2017, the Council of Graduate Schools (CGS) published the findings of a study of the use of

921

learning outcomes in doctoral education [40]. The 2017 report noted widespread use of learning

922

outcomes among CGS members, as well as growing interest of accrediting bodies in

923

documenting and assessing these outcomes [40: p. 2]. CGS defined a doctoral degree

924

framework as “as set of reference points that defines general skills and competencies of all

925

doctoral recipients” [40: p. 9]. The MR-S (like all Mastery Rubrics) begins with KSAs, and not

926

skills or competencies, but also provides guidance about how these “general skills and

927

competencies” can be developed [41] – and so, fits and possibly expands on this CGS

928

description. Because it includes a Master level and its stipulation that qualification is required to

929

take on apprentices (i.e., teach), it could also support faculty buy in, which is essential for the

930

success of curriculum revision projects [42].

931

Since a key attribute of any Mastery Rubric is flexibility with respect to the source of

932

evidence used to support a claim of achieving a given KSA, the MR-S is well suited for the

933

formal documentation and evaluation of professional development in a variety of settings. Just

934

as a teaching portfolio holds evidence curated to document an individual’s attitudes and growth

935

relating to the specific features of education, a “stewardship portfolio” could be curated to

936

document one’s attitudes and growth related to their discipline. Those who document their

937

performance of a given (target) KSA, with evidence that is appropriate to their field, would be

938

recognized as achieving that stage. Those who compile this evidence at the journeyman level

939

are designated a “Steward” of their discipline. Those who further meet the Master-level

940

descriptors have demonstrated their expertise and experience in actively and successfully

941

forming earlier-stage stewards. A portfolio approach to the documentation of achievements in

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 45

942

stewardship would require the identification and qualification of cohorts of Master level

943

stewards, and a portfolio-based training and assessment program based on the MR-S would

944

support the development and recognition of these cohorts. The stewardship KSAs are

945

opportunities, or suggestions for how to find or create opportunities, to demonstrate their

946

accomplishments as well as learning plans. The flexibility in the MR-S arises from the types or

947

sources of evidence that an individual can use to justify claims of achievement, and portfolios

948

support this flexibility. Independent (preferably Master-level) evaluators should agree that

949

evidence supports that claim.

950

Limitations of this project

951

Weaknesses must be acknowledged in the development of the MR-S and particularly in

952

our validation analyses. The primary consideration is that this work was inherently

953

multidisciplinary but does not capture a consensus from any of the three case study disciplines

954

on the alignment between the disciplinary standards and the KSAs of stewardship. This is

955

particularly true for history, since the guidelines themselves were interpreted (CMR) before they

956

were aligned with the KSAs. We hope and encourage further exploration of the applicability of

957

the MR-S KSAs and their developmental trajectories within disciplines, so that consensus on

958

alignment, as well as dissemination and endorsement of an emphasis on cultivating

959

stewardship, can be developed. Also, while the MR-S meets or addresses the NILOA and some

960

of the CGS criteria, it is silent on two specific areas of concern regarding the doctoral degree,

961

namely, assessing the need for and quality of doctoral degrees; and improving public

962

understanding of the value of the doctorate. However, by design, the MR-S would specifically

963

increase transparency and understanding for students of the implicit expectations of degree

964

programs, albeit with respect solely to standards of practice, rather than other core aspects of

965

degree programs. It can also support better alignment of training with career paths, particularly

966

with respect to standards of practice along any selected path. The MR-S is intended to be used

967

to create a “contract” between the instructor and the learner - making program requirements

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 46

968

more student-centered by engaging the student in the identification of opportunities to learn,

969

grow, or demonstrate each KSA at the desired level.

970

A second consideration is that we did not observe perfect alignment with

971

Guidelines/Standards and the KSAs of stewardship. Yet, since stewardship was proposed

972

wholly independently of the three sets of practice standards we analyzed, finding any alignment

973

at all tends to support our interpretation of the alignment, namely, that stewardship KSAs can be

974

used to introduce or support training with practice guidelines whether or not the individual will be

975

a “scholar first and foremost” or has/will obtain a PhD. Since not all doctoral level statisticians

976

will be “scholars first and foremost” (many go into industry and government, where scholarship

977

is not a principal priority), at least some divergence from the MR-S KSAs and the professional

978

guidelines is expected. The DoFA matrix results do differ by discipline, and each shows some

979

gaps. Also, some attributes of stewardship are more consistent with some disciplinary

980

guidelines than others. For example, the guidelines for Neuroscience (2010) [35] are highly

981

focused on publication and the creation of new knowledge (i.e., “scholarship”), while the

982

guidelines for Statistics and Data Science (2018) [32] are mainly focused on data and decision-

983

making. The gaps in the alignment of stewardship with disciplinary guideline principles suggests

984

that disciplinary stewardship is not redundant with, and is actually supportive of, the professional

985

ideals for conduct for these disciplines. From this observation, we conclude that stewardship is

986

consistent with the core ideals of these professions. Critically, none of these three disciplines

987

systematically inculcates these professional guidelines into doctoral or pre-doctoral training.

988

Because membership in each disciplinary organization is optional, their practice guidelines,

989

while consensus-based and reflective of ethical and professional conduct by all practitioners,

990

cannot be mandated. If educational programs integrate stewardship into their completion

991

requirements, then even superficial engagement with some professional guidelines, and with

992

stewardship, can be required by institutions that accomplish this integration.

993

Conclusion

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 47

994

The MR-S has the potential to connect the goals of higher education with the formation

995

of professional identity that is intended when discipline-specific guidelines are formulated and

996

published. The Ethical Codes and Guidelines that exist for disciplines are typically complex and

997

require instruction and practice, and becoming a steward of a discipline also requires attention

998

and focus for initiation and development of the defining characteristics. The MR-S maps

999

observable but flexible performance level descriptions across academic and professional

1000
1001

development.
Two main conclusions may be drawn from this project. First, the formation of stewards is

1002

a worthy goal for all higher education— at doctoral, masters’, and undergraduate levels.

1003

Expanding the stewardship model, and facilitating the development of stewardly habits

1004

throughout a curriculum promote achievement of both the expertise (journeyman) and the

1005

mentorship (Master) that are necessary for the ongoing vitality and vigour of each discipline as

1006

well as in cross-, trans-, and inter-disciplinary work. Second, the MR-S outlines how curricula

1007

could be conceptualized so that they promote the KSAs of stewardship and their development.

1008

While not all practitioners have opportunities to do (or job descriptions that include) all of

1009

the elements of stewardship, all practitioners should be engaged with their disciplinary

1010

guidelines (if they exist; see [43]) and the most stewardly – or steward-like - conduct possible.

1011

Practitioners in fields or disciplines that do not have ethical guidelines (e.g., economics) can

1012

also use a stewardship model, and its developmental trajectory, to integrate attention to

1013

professionalism (or ethics) throughout a curriculum. Inculcating the attitudes and commitments

1014

of stewardship in any given major has the potential to encourage the translation of these

1015

commitments to any discipline or profession in which graduates may engage.

1016
1017
1018

Acknowledgement: There are no actual or potential conflicts for any co-author.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 48

1019
1020
1021
1022
1023
1024
1025
1026
1027
1028
1029
1030
1031
1032
1033
1034
1035
1036
1037
1038
1039
1040
1041
1042
1043
1044
1045
1046
1047
1048
1049
1050
1051
1052
1053
1054
1055
1056
1057
1058
1059
1060
1061
1062
1063
1064
1065
1066
1067
1068

References
1. Golde CM & Walker GE (Eds.) (2006) Envisioning the Future of Doctoral Education:
Preparing Stewards of the Discipline - Carnegie Essays on the Doctorate. San Francisco, C:

Jossey Bass.
2. Walker GE, Golde CM, Jones L, Bueschel AC, Hutchings P. (2008). The Formation of
Scholars: Rethinking Doctoral Education for the Twenty-First Century. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
3. Golde CM. (2016; October). Invited speaker/panellist. Integrating stewardship into graduate
education: The Carnegie Initiative on the Doctorate plus ten. Baylor Symposium on Faith and
Culture: Higher Learning. Baylor University, Waco, TX.
4. Rios CM. (2016; October). Invited speaker/panellist. Forming Stewards. Baylor Symposium
on Faith and Culture: Higher Learning. Baylor University, Waco, TX.
5. Tractenberg RE (2016-a; October). Invited speaker/panelist: Stewardship as engagement as
stewardship. Baylor Symposium on Faith and Culture: Higher Learning. Baylor University,
Waco, TX.
6. Campbell DT. (1975). Degrees of freedom in the case study. Comparative Political Studies,
8(July), 178–193.
7. Tractenberg RE. (in press-2019). Degrees of Freedom Analysis in Educational Research and
Decision-Making: Leveraging Qualitative Data to Promote Excellence in Bioinformatics Training
and Education. Briefings in Bioinformatics
8. Peseta T, Fyffe J, Barrie S, Trigwell K. (2016). Briefing Paper 4: Opportunities for developing
stewardship in the Australian PhD. Downloaded from http://reframingphd.com.au/wpcontent/uploads/2016/12/Briefing-Paper-4-Opportunities-for-developing-stewardship-in-theAustralian-PhD.pdf 6 March 2018
9. Bass H. (2006). Developing Scholars and Professionals: The Case of Mathematics. In CM
Golde & GE Walker (Eds.) (2006) Envisioning the Future of Doctoral Education: Preparing
Stewards of the Discipline - Carnegie Essays on the Doctorate. Pp. 101-119.
10. Richardson V. (2006). Stewards of a Field, Stewards of an Enterprise: The Doctorate in
Education. In CM Golde & GE Walker (Eds.) (2006) Envisioning the Future of Doctoral
Education: Preparing Stewards of the Discipline - Carnegie Essays on the Doctorate. San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. Pp. 251-267.
11. Bender T. (2006). Expanding the Domain of History. In CM Golde & GE Walker (Eds.)
(2006) Envisioning the Future of Doctoral Education: Preparing Stewards of the Discipline Carnegie Essays on the Doctorate. Pp. 295-210.
12. Perez-Riverol Y, Gatto L, Wang R. Sachsenberg T, Uszkoreit J, da Veiga Leprevost F,
Fufezan C, Ternent T, Eglen SJ, Katz DS, Pollard TJ, Konovalov A, Flight RM, Blin K, Vizcaíno
JA. (2016). Ten Simple Rules for Taking Advantage of Git and GitHub. PLoS Computational
Biology, 12(7), e1004947. http://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004947

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 49

1069
1070
1071
1072
1073
1074
1075
1076
1077
1078
1079
1080
1081
1082
1083
1084
1085
1086
1087
1088
1089
1090
1091
1092
1093
1094
1095
1096
1097
1098
1099
1100
1101
1102
1103
1104
1105
1106
1107
1108
1109
1110
1111
1112
1113
1114
1115
1116
1117
1118
1119

13. Loukides M, Mason H, Patil DJ. (2018). Doing good data science. Downloaded from
https://www.oreilly.com/ideas/doing-good-data-science on 12 July 2018.
14. Mason JL, Johnston E, Berndt S, Segal K, Lei M, Wiest JS. Labor and skills gap analysis of
the biomedical research workforce. FASEB J. 2016 Aug;30(8):2673-83. doi:
10.1096/fj.201500067R.
15. Tractenberg, RE. (2017-a). Preprint. The Mastery Rubric: A tool for curriculum development
and evaluation in higher, graduate/post-graduate, and professional education. Published in the
Open Archive of the Social Sciences (SocArXiv), osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/qd2ae
16. Tractenberg RE, McCarter RJ and Umans J. (2010). A Mastery Rubric for clinical research
training: guiding curriculum design, admissions, and development of course objectives.
Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 35(1): 15-32.
17. Tractenberg RE & FitzGerald KT. (2012). A Mastery Rubric for the design and evaluation of
an institutional curriculum in the responsible conduct of research. Assessment and Evaluation in
Higher Education. 37(7-8): 1003-21.
18. Tractenberg RE, Gushta MM, Weinfeld J. (2016). The Mastery Rubric for Evidence-Based
Medicine: Institutional validation via multi-dimensional scaling. Teaching and Learning in
Medicine 28(2):152-165.
19. Tractenberg, RE. (2017-b). How the Mastery Rubric for Statistical Literacy can generate
actionable evidence about statistical and quantitative learning outcomes. Education Sciences.
Special Issue: Consequential Assessment of Student Learning. Educ. Sci. 2017, 7(1), 3;
doi:10.3390/educsci7010003 http://www.mdpi.com/2227-7102/7/1/3/pdf .
20. Tractenberg RE. (2011, March). Developing a curriculum for research in pathology
residency: A Pathology Research Mastery Rubric. Northeast Group on Educational Affairs
(NEGEA) Annual Meeting, Washington, DC.
21. Clark RE, Feldon DF, van Merriënboer J, Yates KA, Early S. (2008). Cognitive Task
Analysis. In J. Michael Spector, M. David Merrill, Jan Elen, M. J. Bishop (Eds.). Handbook of
research on educational communications and technology, 3E. Mahwah, NH: Lawrence
Earlbaum Associates. 577-593.
22. Ogilvie, S. (2014). The economics of guilds. Journal of Economic Perspectives 28(4): 169192
23. Cizek GJ. (2012). An introduction to contemporary standard setting: concepts,
characteristics, and contexts. In GJ Cizek (Ed.), Setting Performance Standards: Foundations,
Methods, and Innovations, 2E. New York, NY: Routledge. Pp 3-14.
24. BS Bloom (Ed.), with Engelhart MD, Furst EJ, Hill WH & Krathwohl DR. (1956). Taxonomy
of educational objectives: Handbook I: Cognitive domain. New York, NY: David McKay.
25. Egan KL, Schneider C, Ferrara S. (2012). Performance Level Descriptors. In GJ Cizek (Ed.),
Setting Performance Standards: Foundations, Methods, and Innovations, 2E. New York, NY:
Routledge. Pp 79-106.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 50

1120
1121
1122
1123
1124
1125
1126
1127
1128
1129
1130
1131
1132
1133
1134
1135
1136
1137
1138
1139
1140
1141
1142
1143
1144
1145
1146
1147
1148
1149
1150
1151
1152
1153
1154
1155
1156
1157
1158
1159
1160
1161
1162
1163
1164
1165
1166
1167
1168
1169
1170

26. Kingston NM & Tiemann GC. (2012). Setting Performance Standards on Complex
Assessments: The Body of Work method. In GJ Cizek (Ed.), Setting Performance Standards:
Foundations, Methods, and Innovations, 2E. New York, NY: Routledge. Pp 201-223.
27. Messick S. (1994). The interplay of evidence and consequences in the validation of
performance assessments. Educational Researcher 23(2): 13-23.
28. Sullivan WM, Rosin MS. (2008). A New Agenda For Higher Education: Shaping a Life of the
Mind for Practice. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
29. Caliskan A, Bryson JJ, Narayanan A. (2017). Semantics derived automatically from
language corpora contain human-like biases. Science 14 Apr 2017: Vol. 356, Issue 6334, pp.
183-186. DOI: 10.1126/science.aal4230
30. Stark PB, Saltelli A. (2018). Cargo-cult statistics and scientific crisis. Significance 15(4); pp.
Downloaded from https://www.significancemagazine.com/2-uncategorised/593-cargo-cultstatistics-and-scientific-crisis on 8 Sept 2018.
31. American Historical Association (2018). Statement on Standards of Professional Conduct.
Downloaded from https://www.historians.org/jobs-and-professional-development/statementsand-standards-of-the-profession/statement-on-standards-of-professional-conduct on 11 July
2018.
32. American Statistical Association. (2018). ASA Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice.
Downloaded from http://www.amstat.org/ASA/Your-Career/Ethical-Guidelines-for-StatisticalPractice.aspx on 30 May 2018.
33. Hogan H, Tractenberg RE, Elliot AC. (2017). Ethics and Big Data: Perspective of the
American Statistical Association Committee on Professional Ethics. Proceedings of the 61st
International Statistics Institute World Statistics Congress, Marrakesh, Morocco.
34. Tractenberg RE. (2016-d). Creating a culture of ethics in Biomedical Big Data: adapting
‘guidelines for professional practice’ to promote ethical use and research practice. In, L Floridi &
B Mittelstadt (Eds)., Ethics of Biomedical Big Data. London: Springer. 367-393.
35. Society for Neuroscience. (2010). SfN Ethics Policy. Downloaded from
https://www.sfn.org/member-center/professional-conduct/sfn-ethics-policy on 19 February 2017.
36. Tractenberg RE. (2016-b). Integrating ethical reasoning into preparation for participation to
work in/with Big Data through the Stewardship model. In, J. Collmann & S. Matei (Eds)., Ethical
Reasoning in Big Data: An Exploratory Analysis. New York: Springer. 185-192.
37. Tractenberg RE, Russell A, Morgan G, FitzGerald KT, Collmann J, Vinsel L, Steinmann M,
Dolling LM. (2015) Amplifying the reach and resonance of ethical codes of conduct through
ethical reasoning: preparation of Big Data users for professional practice. Science and
Engineering Ethics. 21(6):1485-1507.
38. Tractenberg RE. (2016-c). Why and How the ASA Ethical Guidelines should be integrated
into every quantitative course. Proceedings of the 2016 Joint Statistical Meetings, Chicago, IL.
Pp. 517-535.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 51

1171
1172
1173
1174
1175
1176
1177
1178
1179
1180
1181
1182
1183
1184
1185
1186
1187
1188

39. National Institute for Learning Outcomes Assessment (2016, May). Higher education quality:
Why documenting learning matters. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois and Indiana University,
Author.
40. Denecke, D., Kent, J., & McCarthy, M.T. (2017). Articulating learning outcomes in doctoral
education. Washington, DC: Council of Graduate Schools.
41. Tractenberg RE, Wilkinson M, Bull A, Pellathy TP, Riley JB. (in review). Designing a
developmental trajectory supporting the evaluation and achievement of competencies: a case
study with the Mastery Rubric for the nurse practitioner curriculum.

42. Diamond RM. (1998). Designing & Assessing Courses & Curricula: A practical guide,
Revised. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
43. DeMartino, GF. (2011). The Economist’s Oath. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 52

1189
1190
1191
1192
1193
1194
1195
1196
1197
1198
1199
1200
1201
1202
1203

Appendix: Bloom’s Taxonomy
Bloom’s taxonomy of cognitive complexity (Bloom et al. 1956) specifies a hierarchy with six
levels of cognitive skills or functioning:
1.
Remember/Reiterate - performance based on recognition of a seen example;
2.
Understand/Summarize - performance summarizes information already known/given;
3.
Apply/Illustrate - performance extrapolates from seen examples to new examples by
applying rules;
4.
Analyze/Predict - performance requires analysis and prediction, using rules;
5.
Create/ Synthesize – performance yields something innovative and novel, creating,
describing and justifying something new from existing things/ideas;
6.
Evaluate/Compare/Judge - performance involves the application of guidelines, not rules,
and can involve subtle differences arising from comparison or evaluation of abstract, theoretical
or otherwise not-rule-based decisions, ideas or materials.

Mastery Rubric for Stewardship p. 53

1204
1205
1206
1207
1208
1209
1210

1211
1212

Supplemental Materials. Cognitive Task Analysis Methodology and Example
There are five general steps in cognitive task analysis (CTA, discussed in Clark
et al. 2008; p.580). The table below lists these steps and describes the contributions to
each step from the subject matter experts (co-authors on this manuscript working in the
domains of bioinformatics and bioinformatics education), the relevant theory, and from
the literature.
CTA steps1:
Subject Matter
Theoretical
From the literature
Experts (SMEs)
contributions
1.Collect preliminary
SME (CR, CG,
Bloom et al.
Standard setting
knowledge/information
RET) parsing
Messick
models and
stewardship
methods (Cizek
definition;
2012)
evaluation of
Blooms-level
requirements in
each element
(RET)
2. identify knowledge
Guild structure;
Bloom’s,
Stewardship
representations and
career stage
Messick
literature; Ethical
organizations
(stages of
Guidelines
degrees)
statements
3. elicit knowledge
Performance
Bloom’s,
curriculum &
standard setting Messick
training/workforce
development
considerations
across educational
contexts
4. analyze and verify data
SMEs engage in iterative range-finding, pinpointing,
alignment of KSAs, stages, and other PLDs; validation
with alignment of KSAs and guidelines. Iterative and
ongoing analysis and revisions of PLDs by all coauthors for observability and relevance.
5. Format results
Following format for MR construct; SME iteration on
PLDs to insure clarity and relevance.
1
Adapted from Clark et al. 2008; p.580

