Paper published in Global Social Policy, 2019
The publication is available at: https://doi.org/10.1177/1468018119873267
To cite this article: Gibrán Cruz-Martínez (2019): Rethinking universalism: Older-age international
migrants and social pensions in Latin America and the Caribbean,
https://doi.org/10.1177/1468018119873267

Rethinking universalism: Older-age international migrants
and social pensions in Latin America and the Caribbean
Gibrán Cruz-Martínez
Institute of Public Goods and Policies, CSIC
gibran.cruz@csic.es

Abstract:
This article criticises the social policy literature for equating universalism to the universal coverage of
citizens. The current so-called ‘universal’ social protection systems guarantee social citizen rights, while
the revisited truly universalism guarantees social human rights for everyone. Crisp-set qualitative
comparative analysis (csQCA) is used to map and track the level of exclusiveness or inclusiveness into
social pensions in the existing 30 social pension programmes on 28 Latin American and Caribbean (LAC)
countries. The article examines the various paths of eligibility requirements in social pensions
conditioning three specific outcomes: (1) access for every older-age individual (truly universal), (2)
access for every category of immigrant (no targeting by citizenship or residency) and (3) access for olderage immigrants with legal resident status (targeting by residency but not by citizenship). The research
makes several contributions. First, it offers a useful inventory of the eligibility requirements for access to
the 30 social pensions in LAC. Second, it proposes an analytical framework to redefine universalism after
considering the migration-social policy nexus. Contrary to what the literature claims, there are no
universal social pensions in the region. Third, the analysis indicates that only in two countries, Cuba and
Jamaica, social pensions have immigrant-friendly targeting rules, requiring neither citizenship nor any
length of residency to become a beneficiary. A total of 12 countries require citizenship and 24 of them a
certain number of years of residency. Moreover, the overwhelming majority of social pensions are means
tested. Finally, the csQCA allows identifying patterns of targeting mechanisms and is used to propose five
exploratory regimes of inclusionary social pensions. The article calls for protected international mobility
of the older-age population in the form of a truly universalistic system in which the entire aged population
has the right to a social pension. Only then, countries would truly adhere to Article 22 of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.

Keywords: Migration, non-contributory pensions, QCA, social policy, social protection,
targeting

1

“Everyone, as a member of society, has the right to social security and is entitled to realisation (…) of the
economic, social and cultural rights indispensable for his dignity and the free development of his
personality.”
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Article 22 (United Nations, 1948)

1.

INTRODUCTION

International mobility of the older-age population is increasing worldwide. In the period 19902015, the number of older-age migrants worldwide increased from 25 million to 42 million, and
in Latin America and Caribbean (LAC), this number rose from 1.5 million to 1.6 million (UNDP,
2015). If the number of international migrants – including older-age migrants – is increasing, and
the global population is ageing 1, are national social protection systems adapting to the fluid reality
of the XXI century?
There is plenty of evidence that social rights of citizens are shaped by the type of welfare regime
(Esping-Andersen, 1999; Haggard & Kaufman, 2009; Huber & Stephens, 2012; Martínez
Franzoni, 2008), but what about the social rights of immigrants? One one hand, Soysal (2012)
argue that international migrants enjoy citizenship-rights even without the possession of legal
status (see also Benton, 2010; Castles, 2002; Hammar, 1985; Joppke, 2007). On the other hand,
research shows that long-term legal residents tend to enjoy social citizen rights and welfare
entitlements, while other categories of immigrants do not (Bauböck, 2006).
Comparative welfare state research has not paid sufficient attention to the topic of immigrants’
access to social rights (i.e. the migration-social protection nexus) (Sainsbury 2006, p. 229). This
is especially important in Latin America where international migrants have lower access to social
protection in the host countries than individuals with a citizen status in the respective countries
(Tokman, 2008, p. 19). Tokman concludes that the gap in social protection coverage in the region
between citizens and international migrants is: (1) higher in both the formal and informal sector,
(2) more than double for women than men, (3) higher for international migrants coming from the
Latin American and Caribbean region than from countries out of the region, (4) and finally, the
higher the social protection coverage for citizens the lower the gap with international migrants.
Social policy architectures2 in Latin America have been fragmented by rules of access, providers
and funding (Martínez-Franzoni & Sánchez-Ancochea, 2018). However, we must ask if by
including migration into the picture of the emerging Latin American welfare state, the result is an
even more segmented social policy architecture? Moreover, does citizenship and legal residency
act as stratifying mechanisms segmenting beneficiaries?

1

By 2030, the number of population aged above 60 years- is expected to grow by 56 per cent (United Nations, 2015), and will
outnumber children below 10 (HelpAge International, 2015). LAC is expected to be the region with the fastest growth of this group
(71 per cent increase), followed by Asia (66 per cent), Africa (64 per cent), Oceania (47 per cent), North America (41 per cent) and
Europe (23 per cent) (United Nations, 2015).
2
Martínez Franzoni & Sánchez-Ancochea (2016) define social policy architecture as the combination of instruments that define
who gets what and how.

2

By focusing on the different eligibility requirements regulating the access to 30 social pension
programmes in 28 LAC countries,3 the primary purpose of this paper is twofold (1) to map and
analyse the discriminatory effects targeting mechanisms have on the social protection coverage of
older-age individuals relocating to Latin America and the Caribbean; (2) to revisit the concept of
universalism with a human rights approach after considering the migration dimension, discussing
the shortcomings of the dominant social-citizenship concept of universalism. More specifically,
the paper addresses the following questions: Is there a gap in the access to social pensions between
immigrants, citizens relocating to their nation-state and citizens residing in the host countries? Do
eligibility requirements promote inclusiveness or exclusiveness of older-age immigrants into
social pensions?
To respond these questions, Qualitative Comparative Analysis (QCA) is used to track and map the
level of exclusiveness or inclusiveness into social pensions in the existing 30 social pension
programs on 28 Latin American and Caribbean countries, relying on publicly available data from
ECLAC (n.d.); HelpAge International (n.d.); OECD, IDB, and World Bank (2014); Social Security
Administration (2016), and from national social security acts. In lieu of a truth table, a five-level
diagram is constructed, coding pension systems on five different eligibility requirements or
targeting mechanisms (citizenship, legal residency status, geographical location, access to any
other kind of pension, means-testing) and illustrating the combination of targeting criteria that
characterise different pension schemes in different countries. The interaction of conditions (i.e. the
configuration of conditions) helps to track the degree of ease an international older-age immigrant
has to be covered by social pensions in the host country.
The paper makes several contributions. First, it offers a useful inventory of the eligibility
requirements for access to the 30 social pensions in Latin America and the Caribbean. Second, it
proposes an analytical framework to redefine universalism in social policy after incorporating the
migration dimension into the analysis. Contrary to what social policy literature claims, the paper
confirms there are no universal social pensions in the region. Social pensions in Bolivia, Guyana
and Suriname, are not ‘truly-universal’ because of the inclusion of citizenship and residency
eligibility requirements as targeting mechanisms. Third, the analysis indicates that only in two
countries, Cuba and Jamaica, social pensions have immigrant-friendly targeting rules, requiring
neither citizenship nor any length of residency to become a beneficiary. Brazil’s scheme for rural
workers requires neither citizenship nor residency per se, but a certain number of months of rural
employment. Twelve countries require citizenship, twenty-four of them a certain number of
years of residency, and the overwhelming majority of social pensions is means tested. Five social
pensions regimes are proposed taking into consideration universalism with a human-rights
approach. The paper calls for protected international mobility of the older-age population in the
form of a genuinely universalistic system where the entire aged population, regardless of
immigrant status, has the right to a social pension. Only then, countries would truly adhere to
Article 22 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
The paper is organised as follows. Section 2 briefly introduces the theoretical framework, situating
social pensions in the social protection framework, and redefining universalism with migration
and the new mobility paradigm in perspective. Later, the qualitative comparative analysis and the
3

Countries in the region without a social pension are Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Puerto Rico among other Caribbean
countries.

3

explanatory factors are introduced. Finally, Section 4 presents the main results of the research,
interconnecting the discussion and conclusions.

2.

A REVISITED ‘UNIVERSAL’ IN SOCIAL PROTECTION INCLUSIVE OF ALL HUMAN
BEINGS

2.1 Social Protection
Social protection, or social security, is considered a social development practice as it raises
household income while develop beneficiaries’ human capital by encouraging school attendance
and raising health outcomes (Midgley, 2014). Therefore, social protection involves the
transference of cash benefits to individuals and the provision of benefits in kind (e.g., public
education, health care, housing). This paper pays attention to cash benefits in older-age population.
There are two broad available cash benefits options in the social policy menu: social insurance and
social assistance programs. Social insurance is a cash transfer based on consumption smoothing
and collective risk sharing. It is, generally, a contributory program where employers and
employees contribute shares of the wages to fund cash transfers of workers at specific times of
vulnerability (e.g., unemployment, disability, reaching retirement age). On the contrary, social
assistance programmes are generally non-contributory programmes 4 using benefits to level up
individuals living below a societal minimum standard (Barr, 2012; Cruz-Martínez, 2019b).
One of the ways in which the older-age population cope with non-random disadvantages
accumulated across their life is pensions. Pensions are cash benefits that can be classified as social
insurance (contributory pensions), social assistance (social pensions), or private schemes
(individual capitalisation funds), which differs according to the funding sources and the ideology
supporting them. Contributory pensions are funded via contributions or taxes, while the state
usually finances, social pensions, and individuals fund private pensions. Welfare residualism and
(neo) liberalism could be considered as the ideologies supporting private pensions, while
Keynesianism and the social security Bismarckian approach stands by contributory pensions.
Social pensions can follow a residual approach if benefits are targeted to those considered as the
‘truly-deservers’, or can take a social democratic approach if benefits are guaranteed to all olderage individuals. The following subsection briefly describes the main difference between
universalism and targeting to be able to define different types of social pensions and distinguish
how specific eligibility requirements can discriminate between citizens and particular categories
of immigrants.
2.2 Targeting versus Universalism
Cash benefits such as social pensions can be assigned to all individuals (e.g., universal social
pensions) or reserved to a group of individuals with specific characteristics (targeted social
pensions). Targeting implies a range of techniques to identify those considered as the neediest and

4

. The Colombian, Barbadian, and Costa Rican social pensions are an exception to this rule. Even though they are considered social
assistance programs the state is just one of the sources of funding.

4

‘deserving poor’. Following Gilbert (2000, pp. 9-11) at least two ‘pure’ types of targeting
mechanisms are identified: categorical targeting and targeting by means.
Categorical targeting uses an easily-identifiable category as a proxy to identify a group in the
population. Categories include a range of criteria such as age, employment status, and geographical
location. If categorical targeting is used as the only targeting mechanism, beneficiaries are
expected to receive a universal flat-rate benefit. Nonetheless, as this paper shows for social
pensions in LAC, categorical targeting is usually used in conjunction with other types of targeting
mechanisms (e.g. targeting by means).
Targeting by means involves means-testing to identify income-poor households. Means-testing
might involve the corroboration of incomes (e.g., wages, contributory pensions) or assets (e.g.,
properties, capital investments). If targeting by means is used as the only targeting mechanism,
beneficiaries are expected to receive a flat-rate benefit/ service (e.g. public health-care) or an
incremental benefit conditional on the relative degree of need.
By definition, social pensions are targeted social assistance programs. The reason for this is that
–at least- age is used as an eligibility criterion by the state to identify the beneficiary group.
However, once targeting by age is performed, a social pension can still be universal if every
older-age individual could become a beneficiary. This is what we call universal targeting (CruzMartínez, 2019; Cruz-Martínez, 2018). If the social protection programme demands other
eligibility requirements, such as residency or citizenship, then the social pension could not be
considered a universal cash transfer because not every older-age individual could become a
beneficiary. However, when discussing these concepts and policy tools, scholars have
traditionally connected universalism with the notion of citizenship (Kildal & Kuhnle, 2008;
Koehler & Rabi, 2017; Willmore, 2007). Following Marshal (1950), universal social policy
entails that citizens in a nation-state benefit from social protection as a social-citizen right.
Welfare benefits are thus considered as birth-rights (Marshall, 1950). Likewise, the Economic
Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean classifies a social policy as universal if it is
“available for the citizenry as a whole” (Cecchini et al. (2015).”
In a globalised world with large numbers of individuals relocating to countries different from
their place of birth, social policy literature should question the normative prerequisite of
citizenship for a human being to be considered a deserving individual. Citizenship status and
immigration law invalidate the universal access of welfare benefits and hierarchize rights to
welfare programmes. For instance, Könönen (2018) confirms the differential inclusion of noncitizens in Finland, one of the so-called universalistic or social democratic welfare states. He
demonstrates the existing legal hierarchies between non-citizens’ entitlements. “Non-citizens’
social entitlements differ depending on the nationality, the type of legal status and the form of
employment, affecting their position in the labour markets and in the society” (2018:53). Hayes
de Kalaf (2019) evidence the role played by civil registries in the Dominican Republic to exclude
“racialised others” from social-citizenship rights. Casey (2018) pays particular attention to the
discriminatory attacks against the rights of “racialised” others (i.e. immigrants, minority groups,
refugees). Hence, citizenship and residency, along with other types of targeting mechanisms, act
as powerful devices of exclusion and inclusion of social welfare programmes.

5

Citizenship refers to the recognition of being born in a specific nation-state by the so-called
lottery of birth (i.e. the status of being a citizen from a particular country). Therefore, nationcentric and rigid social policy architectures with social citizenship rights discriminate among
individuals because of the chance deriving from the lottery of birth. "States typically
conceptualise (…) social contracts vis-à-vis citizens, rather than with migrants or other visitors"
(Noy & Voorend, 2016: 606). These authors differentiate citizen rights – those extended to every
citizen – and human rights – those granted to every individual, citizen or not. Migration is
transforming the traditional notion of citizenship and social-citizen rights (Bauböck, 2006),
signaling the gap between members with full rights to social welfare programmes (i.e. citizens
and holders of long-term residence permits) and those living in the nation-state without rights to
social welfare (i.e. short-term stayers, migrants with irregular status) (Bosniak, 2000).
The literature presents the basic universalism as the next step in the Latin American emerging
welfare states (Espina, 2008). Basic universalism, according to Molina (2006), is achieved through
a combination of universal coverage of essential services, quality transfers for everyone and with
the state as the leading provider. Filgueira and colleagues (2006: 21) agree with Molina and
explicitly calls for a basic universalism grounded on universal coverage of welfare programmes
coping social risks with uniform standards for everyone and following the social-citizenship right
approach. The limitation of the basic universalism proposal is that the social-citizen approach
implies the provision of welfare benefits with a rights-based approach but only for citizens.
Citizens represent the ‘everyone’; therefore, basic universalism proposes rights-based benefits
only for those who meet the citizenship – and in several cases, residency – eligibility requirement.
More recently, the literature has defined universalism as a social policy output achievable in
multiple ways. Countries can deliver universal policy outputs through a diverse set of instruments
(e.g., social insurance and social assistance) and with welfare providers across different levels of
government (Pribble, 2013). Pribble proposed an operational measure to track the progress towards
universalism using Latin America as a case study. The four criteria of a universal model according
to her are: universal coverage, little or lack of segmentation in the services and transfers,
sustainable and equitable financing, and non-discretionary transfers (Pribble, 2013).
“A pure universal model would be one with full universal coverage (e.g. all families with
children, all older adults, all unemployed, the whole population in the case of health-care
access) based on objective criteria and underpinned by laws that guaranteed basic rights,
adequate and homogeneous service quality, little or no stratification of transfers and
sustainable financing based on general revenues (with a progressive tax base) or
contributory models whose architecture, combined with provision, generated progressive
effects.” (Cecchini et al. 2015: 41)
According to Martinez-Franzoni and Sanchez-Ancochea (2016), the welfare system secures
universal social policy outputs if the entire population living inside the national boundaries has
access to generous transfer and services regardless of their class, citizenship, gender and status.
Therefore, massive coverage of population needs to be combined with generous benefits – in terms
of level and quality – and even distribution (i.e. equity in coverage and benefits). MartínezFranzoni and Sánchez-Ancochea call this the triangle of coverage, generosity and equity.

6

Language matters and shapes our thinking. Based on the social policy architecture framework,
specifically on the eligibility criteria, this paper argues that social protection programmes could be
labelled as universal only if every individual living in a country is eligible. If citizenship, residency
or other attributes act as a discriminatory mechanism, then at most, we could talk about
universalism for citizens-residents, but we must not refer to universalism. By doing so, researchers
and policymakers are excluding non-citizens, legal residents and non-legal residents from the
category of human beings.

2.3 Re-examining the Concept of Universalism: Citizenship and Residency as Discriminatory
Targeting Mechanisms
“Eligibility rules set out who is entitled to a programme and can exclude certain groups from social
protection. These can include rules set in relation to targeting and conditionality” (Hopkins,
Bastagli, & Hagen-Zanker, 2016, p. 4). One of the groups that can be excluded by eligibility
requirements are non-citizens or at least different categories of immigrants such as skilled workers,
long-term legal residents, refugees, undocumented migrants.
Sainsbury (2012) argues that it is necessary to have a multidimensional approach when
understanding the social rights of immigrants in the host country. She argues that to truly
understand the variation in the quality of immigrants’ social rights, researchers need to go beyond
the four conditions5 used by Esping-Andersen (1990) to develop the typology of welfare regimes.
Specifically, Sainsbury proposes to include two additional complementary conditions: the
immigration policy regime (Boucher & Gest, 2015) or incorporation regime (Soysal, 1994), and
the form of immigration (Morris, 2002).
The analysis of welfare regimes in shaping the degree of inclusion or exclusion of older-age adults
in Latin American social pensions is out of the scope of the paper, as it focuses on the structural,
programmatic requirements of social pensions which includes or excludes older-age adults based
on eligibility requirements. The novelty is the incorporation of citizenship and residency as
targeting mechanisms; thus, the relevance to consider the form of immigration and the
incorporation regime.
The incorporation regime “consists of rules and norms that govern immigrants’ possibilities to
become a citizen, to acquire permanent residence, and to participate in economic, cultural and
political life” (Sainsbury, 2012:16). Here, we are not interested in examining these inclusionary
measures but the inclusion of individuals – citizens and non-citizens – into social pensions.
The form of immigration refers to the different "entry categories" of non-citizens in a nation-state
(e.g., legal residents, refugees, asylum seekers, ethnic citizens 6). Sainsbury (2012), Perna (2018)
among other international migration scholars highlight the need to update the welfare regime
literature taking into consideration the particular rights and restrictions to social rights depending
5

The four conditions are decommodification (dependency on market participation to have access to social provision), social
stratification (stratifying effects of social policies), relations between welfare actors (state, market, family, NGOs) and the dynamics
with the structure of employment.
6
Refers to “immigrants of the same ethnic stock as the citizens of the country of settlement” (Sainsbury, 2006, p. 230)”. For
example, in the case of the Brazilian social pension ‘Benefício de Prestação Continuada’ resident citizens of Brazil and Portugal
are eligible.

7

on the category or type of immigrant. The literature mentions several categories: refugees, labour
migrants, co-ethnic immigrants, family members and asylum seekers, among others. As Sainsbury
(2012:16) notes, “entry categories stratify the social rights of immigrants”. This paper examines if
citizenship and residency status stratify the social rights of older-age immigrants relocating to
Latin America and the Caribbean.
International mobility of migrants is motivated by several reasons, including the insecurity created
by conflicts, the search for upward mobility, family life, pleasure, among others. Faist (2013)
argues that in fact, spatial mobility has significant explanatory power on social mobility and social
inequality. However, as Sheller and Urry (2006) claim, one of the social sciences’ scholarship
limitations has been its ‘a-mobile’ or static perception of society. Following this argument of the
new mobility paradigm, not considering citizenship-testing and residency-testing as targeting
mechanisms in social protection programs could be exposed as a ‘sedentarist’ limitation of the
social policy literature.
According to Sheller and Urry (2006, pp. 208-209) sedentarism, derived from the work of
Heidegger (2002), “treats as normal stability, meaning, and place, and treats as abnormal distance,
change, and placelessness”. This sedentarism and territorial nationalism in social policy could be
used as an explanation to understand why residents and citizens are portrayed as the natural
beneficiaries of social protection programs, while irregular migrants – which does not meet
citizenship or residency eligibility requirements – are not seen as customary deserving recipients.
A more inclusive society would incorporate non-citizens and would entitle them with more social
rights than an exclusive society. While the previous sentence is valid and useful to merge the
concepts of incorporation regime and the form of immigration, we must conduct a critical reflexion
on what conditions a social program must have to be considered universal.
Several social pensions have been widely classified as universal by scholars, think tanks and
international organizations (e.g. Bolivia’s Renta Dignidad), even though cash benefits are not
available unconditionally to all who meet the age eligibility (Cruz-Martínez, 2019a; ECLAC, n.d.;
HelpAge International, n.d.; Kidd, 2009; Ortiz, Cummins, & Karunanethy, 2015; Willmore, 2007).
This paper argues that social protection programs cannot be catalogued as ‘universal’ if citizenship
and residency status acts as stratified mechanisms targeting the targeted older-age individuals. The
paper adopts the coverage dimension in Martinez-Franzoni and Sanchez-Ancochea (2016)
definition of universalism. Rather than massive coverage, universalism is understood as the total
coverage of the population. The generosity and equity dimensions were not included in the
empirical analysis and are left for a future research paper. Therefore, a universal social pension is
a cash-transfer programme for the entire population above the age-eligibility requirement living
inside the national boundaries regardless of their class, citizenship, gender and status.
As it was noted in the introduction, higher numbers of older-age individuals are relocating to
countries different than their place of birth. So what happens to an older-age individual if she/ he
migrates to Latin America and the Caribbean? Do immigrants have to meet the same categorical
and means-tested targeting mechanisms as citizens? Is there any additional eligibility requirements
limiting their inclusion as beneficiaries of a social pension scheme?

8

3.

EMPIRICAL POINT OF DEPARTURE

3.1 Inclusion and Exclusion of Beneficiaries via Targeting Mechanisms
To answer the research questions and describe the level of inclusion or exclusion of social pensions
in LAC towards older-age immigrants, five targeting mechanisms are used as explanatory factors
in the qualitative comparative analysis, summarised in Table 1.
The first two targeting mechanisms are citizenship and residency status. Both are categorical
targeting mechanisms – as it was previously mentioned – even though they are not usually
considered as such in the social pension’s literature. Citizenship “generally denotes full
membership in a political community, comprising a set of rights and/or political obligations”
(Craig, 2002). An individual is considered a citizen of a nation-state if one or both of their parents
are citizens (jus sanguinis), by the place of birth of the individual (jus soli), or by years of legal
residency (naturalisation). Social pensions targeting citizenship will exclude all different
categories of immigrants residing in the nation-state – regardless of their status.
Meanwhile, residency refers to the current place of residence and the legal status of the individual.
Therefore, social pensions targeting residency will exclude citizens with a legal permanent
residence in another nation-state as well as immigrants without legal residency status. Generally,
a specific amount of years of legal residency prior to the application of the social pension is
required.
Geographical targeting is also another type of categorical targeting. This mechanism “selects
different districts, villages or regions – often on the basis of [income] poverty data where
[deprivation] is known to be chronic, or on the basis of other criteria (such as proneness to
earthquakes, flooding [or other] natural disasters” (Slater & Farrington, 2009, p. 9). This type of
targeting will include as beneficiaries only those living at predetermined specific locations inside
the nation-state.
Pension-testing is a categorical targeting. Beneficiaries are targeted, taking into account if the
individual is a pensioner (category) or not of a contributory, foreign or private pension. Therefore,
pension-testing excludes individuals entitled/ receiving any other kind of pension. ‘Pension’ is the
label used for this type of targeting in Figure 1.
Finally, means-testing identifies the beneficiaries based on assessments of income, assets or
wealth. Generally, those with incomes below the poverty line – or alternatives monetary thresholds
– are included as beneficiaries.
Table 1: Description of targeting mechanisms
Type of targeting
Citizenship
Residency status
Geographical location
Access to any other
kind of pension
Means-testing

Requisite to become a beneficiary
Be a citizen of the nation-state providing the cash transfer
Be a legal resident of the nation-state providing the cash transfer
Living in a specific municipality or province
Not being a beneficiary of contributory, service-related or private pensions
Have incomes/assets below the threshold defined in the social pension programme

9

3.2 Research Technique: Qualitative Comparative Analysis
The purpose of the qualitative comparative analysis (QCA) is to transform information from data
into a truth-table where different combinations of conditions producing a specific result can be
identified. In this research, QCA is used to determine if it is possible to identify a universal or an
inclusive immigrant-friendly social pension program by examining five categorical and meanstested targeting mechanisms as causal conditions.
Ragin (1987, p. 84) intention with this technique was to develop a strategy as a midpoint between
the cases-oriented approaches (qualitative), and variables-oriented approaches (quantitative),
where best features of both could be integrated into one method. Ragin (1987) rejects the argument
that through QCA, a single causality is determined, rather a number of different paths that might
have allowed the corresponding final outcome is determined. In his next books, Ragin (2000, 2008)
calls for a justification of the use of crips (dichotomous) vs fuzzy sets. The main distinction
between the two is the degree to which they satisfy membership criteria. With crisp-set QCA
(csQCA) variables can only have two values, which have to be determined by the researcher based
on a defined threshold. It distinguishes full-membership (1) versus non-membership (0) (i.e., in vs
out, high vs low). On the contrary, with fuzzy-sets QCA (fsQCA), membership scores can vary
from 0.0 to 1.0. This paper relies on csQCA, as social pensions programmes either incorporate an
eligibility requirement as a targeting mechanism or not.
Therefore, the paper examines the various paths of eligibility requirements in social pensions
conditioning a specific outcome: (1) access for every older-age individual living in the country
(truly universal), (2) access for every category of immigrant (no targeting by citizenship nor
residency) and (3) access for older-age immigrants with legal resident status at the moment of
application and who meet any other requirement (targeting by residency and no targeting by
citizenship).
Variables in the QCA are used to portray the stratifying mechanisms of eligibility requirements
and to identify a potential universal or inclusive immigrant-friendly social pension. The QCA
tracks the set of causal conditions that must be met in each case to become a beneficiary. In
addition, the QCA allows identifying patterns of targeting mechanisms, tracing commonalities
across social pension’s programmes in the region and could be even used to propose exploratory
regimes of inclusionary social pensions.
Causal relationships between targeting mechanisms of eligibility requirements (explanatory
factors) and the three outcomes are examined through Boolean algebra principles and comparative
analysis. Qualitative data binary matrices (0,1) are used to describe the presence or absence of
specific characteristics or conditions. A case exhibits a ‘1' in the explanatory variable presenting
the favourable features for the desired outcome. Therefore, cases with a ‘0’ in the explanatory
variable exhibit unfavourable features for the desired outcome. A social pension exhibits a ‘0’ in
the QCA if the programme has an eligibility requirement for any of the five targeting mechanisms.
A social pension with a ‘0’ in the citizenship factor denotes that only citizens can become
beneficiaries, while a social pension with a ‘1’ denotes that both citizens and non-citizens can
become beneficiaries.

10

The absence of the citizenship, legal residency, means, geographical and pension eligibility
requirements lead to the first desired outcome: access to a social pension for every older-age
individual living in the country (truly universal). The analysis of necessary conditions in the
fsQCA software presents with an error, as expected because all five tested conditions are necessary
for the desired outcome.
The absence of at least citizenship and legal residency eligibility requirements leads to the second
outcome being examined: access for every category of immigrant. The analysis of necessary
conditions in the fsQCA software confirms, as expected, that citizenship and residency conditions
have a consistency score of 1.0.
Thirdly, the presence of the residency eligibility requirement and the absence of at least the
citizenship eligibility requirement leads to the third outcome being examined: access for older-age
immigrants with legal resident status. Next section unveils the need to distinguish, in addition, if
immigrant-friendly social pensions require a specific amount of time of legal residence at the
moment of application. The analysis of necessary conditions in the fsQCA software confirms, as
expected, that the citizenship condition has a consistency score of 1.0 in the immigrant-friendly
path without any specific time requirement of legal residence. However, the absence of meanstesting also has a consistency score of 1.0, due to none of the cases following the third path target
social pensions by means (Ragin & Davey, 2016).
A multiple truth-table is constructed showing the favourable (1) and unfavourable (0) targeting
conditions for a truly-universal social pension (not shown here). The absence of targeting
mechanisms is considered the favourable condition for a universal or an immigrant-friendly social
pension. Instead of the truth-table, a five-levels figure – one level for each targeting mechanism
besides age – is built to display and trace more easily the combination of targeting mechanisms in
the 30 social pensions. The figure reveals a binary map with the combination of conditions
necessary for the social pension to be truly-universal or –at least- open to granting access for olderage immigrants with legal residency status. Figure 1 not only helps to identify distinct targeting
mechanisms trajectories but also facilitates visualising the gaps in the access to social pensions for
individuals with different immigration statuses.
4.

RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Figure 1 illustrates the high level of stratification that is created due to the targeting mechanisms
of social pensions. Access to cash transfers of social pensions in LAC is linked to the legal status
of older-age individuals. This creates a hierarchical and stratified system where eligibility to social
assistance is limited by –at least- 5 different levels of targeting mechanisms. The “truly-deservers”
of social pensions are then identified taking into account a combination of the following
conditions: the citizenship of an individual –lottery of birth-, place, duration and status of
residence, the existence of additional sources of revenue (e.g., contributory pensions, salary,
assets) and the relative perception of being considered in poverty, mainly assessed through
monetary instead of multidimensional approaches.

11

Figure 1: Targeting older-age adults in Latin America and the Caribbean: Examining eligibility requirements and immigrant-friendly social pensions
in a Five-Level Diagram after csQCA

Notes: The names of the non-contributory social pensions can be found in the Appendix. Universal social pensions do not involve any targeting. ‘Immigrant-friendly targeting’
enables access for every older-age individual living in the country (no citizenship or residency targeting), while ‘legal residence targeting’ enables access for older-age immigrants
without requesting any specific period of residency prior application (no citizenship targeting). Author´s elaboration
Sources: (ECLAC, n.d.; HelpAge International, n.d.; OECD et al., 2014; Social Security Administration, 2016; and national social security laws)

12

The 30 social pension programs followed 11 different targeting paths, meaning that there
are 11 unique combinations of eligibility requirements. This multiplicity of targeting
mechanisms co-occurs (i.e., the older-age population must meet two or more eligibility
criteria), or develops in parallel (i.e., different groups of beneficiaries are selected
according to a different combination of targeting measures). Let us briefly described the
various types of multiple targeting mechanisms with two social pensions in the region.
For example, the Dominican Republic’s social pension, ‘Pension de asistencia social’,
follows the simultaneous type. Beneficiaries must have an income below the minimum
legal monthly wage, must be legal residents and cannot be considered as dependents of a
contributory pension holder. On the other hand, Colombia’s social pension, ‘Programa
Colombia Mayor’, follows the parallel type. First, beneficiaries must be Colombian
citizens with ten year’s residency immediately before the application, with insufficient
means to live according to the National SISBEN poverty index and be living in one of the
selected municipalities where the program is operating. Once the citizenship-, residency-,
and means-testing are applied, different pension levels are established, taking into account
the level of contribution to the ‘Beneficios Económicos Periódicos’ means-tested
individual account.
The more used targeting mechanisms are means-testing (25 programs), residency-testing
(24 programs) and pension-testing (22 programs). Citizenship-testing is used in 12 social
pensions, while geographical-testing is applied only in 3 programmes. The most relevant
for the object of study in this paper is the residency-testing and citizenship-testing, as they
are responsible for including or excluding different categories of immigrants.
None of the programs followed the first path; therefore, none is truly universal, meaning
that at least more than one targeting measure is implemented besides age eligibility. 7
Twelve programs have two targeting mechanisms, this being the least number of targeting
mechanisms exhibited amongst the 30 social pensions in the region. The Cuban ‘Pensión
de asistencia social’ and the Jamaican Programme for Advancement through Health and
Education have means- and pension-testing, while Bolivia´s ‘Renta Dignidad’, Guyana´s
Old Age Pension and Suriname’s ‘Algemene Oudedags Voorzieningsfonds’ exhibit
citizenship- and residency-testing. Antigua & Barbuda’s Old Age Assistance Programme,
Chile’s ‘Aporte Provisional Solidario’, Costa Rica’s ‘Programa Régimen No
Contributivo’, Trinidad & Tobago’s Senior Citizens' Pension, and Venezuela’s ‘Gran
Misión Amor Mayor’ use means- and residency-testing to select beneficiaries. The
Mexican social pension, ‘Pensión para Adultos Mayores’ exhibits pension- and residencytesting, and finally the Brazilian ‘Previdencia Rural’ implements pension- and
geographical testing.
Of these 12 programs, only three followed the second path in the QCA: Cuba, Jamaica and
Brazil’s ‘Previdencia Rural’. These three are the only ones without targeting by citizenship
7

A critical voice could ask about the need to have a truly universal social pension in countries with low-level of olderage immigrants. A simple response would be that social protection is a human right, and every individual should be
entitled to its coverage. Moreover, in the future, any Latin American or Caribbean country could become a net receptor
of older-age immigrants. Therefore, enacting universal social welfare legislation will guarantee a basic social protection
floor for citizens, legal residents and all other categories of immigrants.

and residency. However, only social pensions in Cuba and Jamaica are considered as
‘immigrant-friendly’. In both cases, social welfare legislation uses the wording “any
person” who meets the following criteria is eligible for the social pension. The criteria for
both programmes is living in monetary poverty and not receiving any other pension.8 The
paper is not arguing here that social pensions in Cuba and Jamaica are the best in the region
in terms of effective coverage, or replacement rates. These two are the most immigrantfriendly social pensions in the region. Now, taking a more in-depth look into the social
assistance pension in Cuba, "the monthly average social assistance benefit was 154 pesos
in 2013 or US$6.16 […], 41 percent less than the average social insurance pension [and
not enough] to cover basic food needs" (Mesa-Lago, 2017, p. 116). This means that a social
pension can be immigrant-friendly without being the model to follow in terms of effective
coverage and replacement rates.
Even though the ‘Previdencia Rural’ social pension does not target by citizenship nor
residency, it does require beneficiaries a history of 180 months’ work in rural areas that
must not exceed a yearly quota of 90 days in non-agricultural economic activities. The
logical explanation for this requirement is to grant social rights to farmers who are
generally working in the informal sector – thus not contributing to the social insurance
pension. However, for this reason, it is not considered as an immigrant-friendly social
pension.
Finally, which countries followed the third path and thus could be granted with the
‘consolidation prize’? Out of the 15 social pensions following the third path in the QCA
that target beneficiaries by residency but not for citizenship, only 6 have no requirements
for a given period of legal residency as an eligibility requirement (e.g., five years prior
application). These are Bahamas’ Old Age Non-Contributory Pension, Belize’s NonContributory Pension Programme, Costa Rica’s ‘Programa Régimen No Contributivo’,
Dominican Republic’s ‘Pensión de asistencia social’, El Salvador’s ‘Pensión Básica
Universal’ and Saint Kitts & Nevis’ Old-age social assistance. However, Bahamas have an
additional employment-testing that limits even more the access of international migrants
to social pension coverage (i.e., if claimant is not an insured person, she/ he must be a
citizen or a resident who has continuously worked for a period longer than 12 months
within the last 15 years preceding the claim).
Legal residents in Belize, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Saint Kitts &
Nevis are treated as equals to citizens regarding eligibility, although different categories of
migrants with legal resident status are socially created. Faist (2013, pp. 1642-1643) argues
that the reproduction of discursive social inequalities in public debates and public policies
creates mechanisms of hierarchization. Highly-skilled international migrants are labelled
with the category of ‘mobile’ individuals in contrast to other low-skilled international
migrants – with or without legal residency – who are labelled as ‘labour migrants’ in a
pejorative way. Mobile is then a category to refer to those “wanted and welcome” while
labour migrants is a category used for those “wanted but not welcomed” (Zolberg, 1987).
8

Jamaican beneficiaries also have access to free medical care at public health centres and hospitals. Cuban
beneficiaries also received health care but like any other Cuban because of the universal health provision in this
Caribbean island.

14

The second favoured entry-category are refugees with convention status. As Sainsbury
(2006, p. 230) recalls “the Geneva Convention has accorded [refugees with convention
status] the same treatment as nationals with respect to public assistance and social security
benefits”. Undocumented older-age migrants, older-age refugees without convention status
and international older-age migrants inside alternative entry-categories are then left with
minimal chances to claim social pensions in LAC. These have only the opportunity to
become beneficiaries in Cuba and Jamaica, if and only they met the pension and means
eligibility requirements.
The QCA results reveal distinct groups of countries with similar paths of targeting
mechanisms in the 30 LAC social pensions. A typology of social pensions is proposed
taking into account these groupings and the inclusiveness of older-age adults (citizens or
non-citizens) into social pension programmes. Table 2 shows the five social pensions
regimes with a human rights approach. None of the countries has a universal social pension
(i.e. every individual is entitled). Jamaica, Cuba and Previdencia Rural in Brazil are in the
immigrant-friendly targeting regime. Citizenship and residency eligibility requirements are
absent in these three cases, although the Brazilian social pension has rural employment
requirements that impede access for immigrants. The legal-residency targeting regime
includes all social pensions without citizenship requirement and without a specific legalresidency time requirement. The social pensions in Belize, Costa Rica, Dominican
Republic, El Salvador, and Saint Kitts & Nevis are in this regime. Although the Bahamas
have a legal-residency targeting, the employment requirement limits the access of
immigrants.
The long-term legal-residency targeting regime includes all social pensions without
citizenship requirement but with a specific legal-residency time requirement. Finally,
social pensions with citizenship testing are classified in the immigrant-unfriendly regime.
Even though Bolivia, Guayana and Suriname do not target by means, pensions or
geographical region, their citizenship and residency requirement disable the access to
different categories of migrants. They could be located in a sixth regime called universal
social pensions for citizens and legal residents. However, they should not be labelled as
universal social pensions.
Table 2: Social Pensions Regimes with a Human-Rights Approach
Universal ImmigrantLegal-residency Long-term
legaltargeting friendly
targeting
residency targeting
targeting
None
Jamaica, Cuba
Belize, Costa Argentina, Barbados,
Rica,
Chile, Chile 2, St.
Dominican
Vincent & Grenadines,
Republic,
El Mexico, Antigua &
Salvador, Saint Barbuda, Trinidad &
Kitts & Nevis
Tobago, Venezuela
Brazil 2*
Bahamas*

5.

Immigrant-Unfriendly

Colombia,
Brazil,
Guatemala,
Paraguay,
Uruguay,
Bermuda,
Ecuador, Panama, Peru

Bolivia*,
Suriname*

Guyana*,

CONCLUSION

15

Citizenship acts as a filter, including the deserving individuals and excluding the nondeserving ones (Voorend, 2013). This paper criticises social policy literature for equating
universalism to universal coverage of citizens rather than humans. The current so-called
“universal” systems guarantee social-citizen rights, while the truly-universalism proposed
in this paper is reserved to those programmes guaranteeing social human rights for every
individual residing in a nation-state.
There is an epistemological need for welfare states to evolve its conception of a deserving
individual from citizens to human beings. Simply put, social citizen rights must be
conceptualised as social human rights. As noted above in the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights, access to social protection is supposed to be granted to every individual.
However, a nation-centric and rigid conceptualisation of universality excludes individuals
not belonging to the citizens of a state.
The three key findings of the paper are as follows. First, the form of immigration allows
distinguishing different social rights to particular categories of immigrants, at least
regarding access to social pensions in Latin America and the Caribbean. Second,
eligibility requirements promote exclusion of older-age immigrants into social pensions,
except two cases, which are available for “any person” meeting additional means- and
pension-testing mechanism. In contrast to what Sainsbury (2012) proposes, there are
significant and visible differences between the social rights of citizens and non-citizens.
The Jamaican and Cuban social pensions are the only two social pension programmes in
Latin America that are friendly towards older-age individuals relocating to the region
because citizenship and residency are not eligibility requirements acting as targeting
mechanisms.
Third, there are no universal social pensions in the Latin American region. In contrast to
what the social pension literature claims, the Bolivian, Guyanese and Surinamese social
pensions are not ‘truly-universal’ due to the inclusion of citizenship and residency
eligibility requirements as targeting mechanisms, Figure 1 shows how international
migrants residing in these nation-states do not have automatic coverage in the social
assistance programs.
It is also relevant to acknowledge the limitations of this paper with the purpose to overcome
them in future research. The comparative research was conducted with secondary data from
a diverse set of sources, and also recurring to national social security acts. Therefore, the
paper shows a ‘de jure’ picture that might not necessarily be the ‘de facto’ reality. There
might be additional informal eligibility requirements acting as targeting mechanisms that
are not represented in the data (e.g., affiliation with a political party, family member of a
political elite). To overcome this limitation, future fieldwork-based research should be
incorporated to present a closer picture to the ‘de facto’ reality. Finally, this research used
five targeting mechanisms in addition to the age eligibility requirement. Future research
might incorporate additional targeting mechanisms – such as employment requisites – to
see if they have a discriminatory effect on international migrants' access to social pensions.

16

Efforts are needed to move towards protected international mobility of the older-age
population, where migrants would be able to integrate into the host societies without
reproducing cross-border inequalities. Social pensions guarantee a basic social protection
floor for older-age population and could be their only or primary source of income. Tokman
(2008) adds a list of factors which should be considered to promote a protected and nondiscriminatory international mobility: free circulation of people, regularization of
individuals without residence legal status, the promotion of social mobility to spatial
international migrants through entitled social protection as a human right, and the
development of transferable social protection rights among net migration emitters and
receivers. Specifically, to the case of older-age migrants, the last two could be highlighted
as the most relevant. With more integration and cooperation between countries, individuals
meeting the eligibility requirements for contributory or non-contributory pensions in their
previous country of residence or place of origin would be entitled to cash benefits in the
new country of residence. To support this, social justice arguments based on the rights of
individuals to entitled social protection must be raised.
Social pensions must be seen as a means to an end. This social assistance program increases
income security and political support to conduct the necessary reforms to implement an
institutionalised welfare system with a mix of contributory and universal social welfare
policies. Social policy needs a “postnational deterritorialization process” to adapt to liquid
modernity (Bauman, 2000; Sheller & Urry, 2006). Instead of stratifying and excluding
migrants, truly-universal social pensions could promote inclusive welfare.

After revisiting the concept of universalism as truly-universalism with social welfare
entitlements for all, we must ask how to achieve universal access. The institutional
arrangements of “universal” social rights coverage in a transnational context could be an
option. Citizens across the European Union can transfer their contributions and social
welfare entitlements across nation-state borders. Therefore, the integration or collaboration
of emerging welfare states could be a viable option to consider. Scholars of the
transnational school argue, according to Voorend, (2013), that nation-states must grant
social rights to immigrants residing in their territories following the recognition of the
human right legislations, which overcomes the exclusionary distinction between national
and foreigner (Jacobson, 1996; Sharma, 2006; Soysal, 1994). This inclusionary
responsibility of XXI century nation-states devaluates the importance of citizenship over
human rights (Sassen, 1996).

6.

REFERENCES

Barr, N. (2012). Economics of the Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bauböck R. (2006) Migration and Citizenship: Legal Status, Rights and Political Participation. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.
Bauman, Z. (2000). Liquid Modernity. Cambridge: Polity.
Benton, M. E. (2010). A theory of denizenship (Doctoral dissertation, UCL (University College London)).
Bosniak, L. (2000). Universal Citizenship and the Problem of Alienage. Northwestern Law Review, Vol.
94, pp. 963-982.

17

Boucher, A., & Gest, J. (2015). Migration studies at a crossroads: A critique of immigration regime
typologies. Migration Studies, 3(2), 182-198. doi:10.1093/migration/mnu035
Casey, L. (2018). The perils of universalism. Dissent, 65(1), 42-50. doi:10.1353/dss.2018.0013
Castles S. (2002) ‘Migration and Community Formation under Conditions of Globalization’, International
Migration Review 36(4): 1143–68.
Cecchini, S., Filgueira, F., Martínez, R., & Rossel, C. (2015). Towards universal social protection: Latin
American pathways and policy tools. Santiago de Chile: ECLAC, United Nations.
Chang, H.-J. (2014). Economics: The User's Guide. London: Penguin Books.
Craig, C. (2002). Dictionary of the Social Sciences. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cruz-Martinez G (2018) Revenue-generating potential of taxation for older-age social pensions. Ageing
International 43(4): 415–437. DOI: 10.1007/s12126-017-9298-2.
Cruz-Martinez G (2019a) Older-age social pensions and poverty: Revisiting assumptions on targeting and
universalism. Poverty & Public Policy 11(1–2): 31–56. DOI:10.1002/pop4.243.
Cruz-Martinez G (2019b) Welfare and Social Protection in Contemporary Latin America. London:
Routledge.
Devereux, S., Masset, E., Sabates-Wheeler, R., Samson, M., te Lintelo, D., & Rivas, A. (2015). Evaluating
the Targeting Effectiveness of Social Transfers: A Literature Review. Institute for Development
Studies Working Paper, 460.
ECLAC. (n.d.). Social Pensions: Non-contributory social protection programmes in Latin America and the
Caribbean database: Social Development Division: http://dds.cepal.org/bdps/en/.
Espina, A. (2008) Modernización, estadios de desarrollo económico y regímenes de bienestar en América
Latina. Documento de Trabajo 28, Fundación Carolina-CeALCI. Retrieved from
http://www.fundacioncarolina.es/esES/publicaciones/documentostrabajo/Documents/TextoDt28.pdf.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). Social Foundations of Post Industrial Economies. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Faist, T. (2013). The mobility turn: a new paradigm for the social sciences? Ethnic and Racial Studies,
36(11), 1637-1646. doi:10.1080/01419870.2013.812229
Filgueira, F., C.G. Molina, J. Papadopulos, et al. (2006) Universalismo básico: una alternativa posible y
necesaria para mejorar las condiciones de vida. In Molina, C.G. (ed) Universalismo básico: Una
nueva política social para América Latina. Washington, D.C.: Editorial Planeta / Banco
Interamericano de Desarrollo.
Gilbert, N. (2000). Targeting Social Benefits: International Perspectives and Trends. New Jersey:
Transaction Publishers.
Haggard, S., & Kaufman, R. R. (2009). Development, Democracy, and Welfare States: Latin America, East
Asia, and Eastern Europe. New Jersey: Princeton University Press.
Hammar T. (1985) ‘Dual Citizenship and Political Integration’, International Migration Review 19: 438–
50.
Hayes de Kalaf, E. (2019). Making foreign: Legal identity, social policy and the contours of belonging in
the contemporary Dominican Republic. In G. Cruz Martinez (Ed.), Welfare and Social Protection
in Contemporary Latin America (pp. 101-117). London: Routledge.
Heidegger, M. (2002). Building dwelling thinking Basic Writings. London: Routledge.
HelpAge International. (2015). Pension watch. Social protection in older age. http://www.pensionwatch.net/.
HelpAge International. (n.d.). Pension-Watch Database. http://www.pensionwatch.net/download/55129fc5749ec.
Hopkins, E., Bastagli, F., & Hagen-Zanker, J. (2016). Internal migrants and social protection: A review of
eligibility and take-up. ODI Working Paper, 436:
https://www.odi.org/sites/odi.org.uk/files/resource-documents/10522.pdf.
Huber, E., & Stephens, J. D. (2012). Democracy and the Left. Social Policy and Inequality in Latin
America. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Jacobson, D. (1996). Rights Across Borders. Immigration and the Decline of Citizenship. Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press.

18

Joppke C. (2007) ‘Transformation of Immigrant Integration: Civic Integration and Antidiscrimination in
the Netherlands, France, and Germany’, World Politics 59: 243–73.
Kidd, S. (2009). Equal pensions, equal rights: achieving universal pension coverage for older women and
men in developing countries. Gender and Development, 17(3), 377-388.
Kidd, S. (2016). Social Protection: universal provision is more effective than poverty targeting. Ideas for
Development, http://ideas4development.org/en/social-protection-universal-provision-is-moreeffective-than-poverty-targeting/.
Kildal, N., & Kuhnle, S. (2008). Old Age Pensions, Poverty and Dignity: Historical Arguments for
Universal Pensions. Global Social Policy, 8(2), 208–237.
https://doi.org/10.1177/1468018108090639
Koehler, G., & Rabi, A. (2017). The case for universal social protection in Myanmar: Options, costs and
policy benefits. Global Social Policy, 17(3), 365–374. https://doi.org/10.1177/1468018117729915
Könönen, J. (2018). Differential inclusion of non-citizens in a universalistic welfare state AU - Könönen,
Jukka. Citizenship Studies, 22(1), 53-69. doi:10.1080/13621025.2017.1380602
Marshall, T. (1950). Citizenship and social class and other Essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Martínez Franzoni, J. (2008). Welfare regimes in Latin America: Capturing Constellations of Markets,
Families, and Policies. Latin American Politics and Society, 50(2), 67-100.
Martinez-Franzoni, J. & D. Sanchez-Ancochea (2016). The Quest for Universal Social Policy in the South:
Actors, Ideas and Architectures. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Martinez-Franzoni, J. & Sanchez‐Aconchea, D. (2018), Overcoming Segmentation in Social Policy?
Comparing New Early Education and Childcare Efforts in Costa Rica and Uruguay. Bulletin of
Latin American Research. doi:10.1111/blar.12850
Mesa-Lago, C. (2017). The Cuban welfare system. In C. Aspalter (Ed.), The Routledge International
Handbook to Welfare State Systems. Oxon: Routledge
Midgley, J. (2014). Social Development: Theory & Practice. London: SAGE.
Mkandawire, T. (2005). Targeting and Universalism in Poverty Reduction. Social Policy and Development
Programme 23, , United Nations Research Institute for Social Development.
Molina, C.G. (2006) Universalismo básico: Una nueva política social para América Latina, Washington
D.C: Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo / Editorial Planeta.
Morris, L. (2002). Managing Migration. Civic Stratification and Migrants’ Rights. London: Routledge.
Noy, S., & Voorend, K. (2016). Social Rights and Migrant Realities: Migration Policy Reform and
Migrants’ Access to Health Care in Costa Rica, Argentina, and Chile. Journal of International
Migration and Integration, 17(2), 605-629. doi:10.1007/s12134-015-0416-2
OECD, IDB, & World Bank. (2014). Pensions at a Glance: Latin America and the Caribbean: OECD
Publishing: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/pension_glance-2014-en.
Ortiz, I., Cummins, M., & Karunanethy, K. (2015). Fiscal Space for Social Protection. Options to Expand
Social Investments in 187 Countries. Extension of Social Security Working Paper, 48, ILO.
Perna, R. (2018). Bound between care and control: Institutional contradictions and daily practices of
healthcare for migrants in an irregular situation in Italy. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 1-20.
doi:10.1080/01419870.2018.1533645
Pribble, J. (2013). Welfare and Party Politics in Latin America. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Ragin, C. (1987). The Comparative Method: Moving Beyond Quantitative and Qualitative Strategies.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Ragin, C. (2000) Fuzzy-Set Social Science. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Ragin, C. (2008) Redesigning Social Inquiry: Fuzzy Sets and Beyond. Chicago: Chicago University Press.
Ragin, C. & Davey, S. (2016). Fuzzy-Set/Qualitative Comparative Analysis 3.0. Irvine, California:
Department of Sociology, University of California.
Sainsbury, D. (2006). Immigrants’ social rights in comparative perspective: welfare regimes, forms in
immigration and immigration policy regimes. Journal of European Social Policy, 16(3), 229-244.
doi:10.1177/0958928706065594
Sainsbury, D. 2012. Welfare States and Immigrant Rights. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sassen, S. (1996). Losing Control? Sovereignty in the Age of Globalization. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Sharma, A. (2006). Introduction: Rethinking Theories of the State in an Age of Gobalization, In Sharma, A.
& A. Gupta (eds) Anthropology of the State: A Reader. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

19

Sheller, M., & Urry, J. (2006). The New Mobilities Paradigm. Environment and Planning A, 38(2), 207226. doi:doi:10.1068/a37268
Slater, R., & Farrington, J. (2009). Targeting of Social Transfers: A Review for DFID. London: ODI.
Social Security Administration. (2016). Social Security Programs Throughout the World: The Americas,
2015. https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/2014-2015/americas/ssptw15americas.pdf.
Soysal, Y. N. (1994). Limits of Citizenship: Migrants and Postnational Membership in Europe. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Tokman, V. E. (2008). Movilidad internacional de personas y protección social. Santiago de Chile:
ECLAC, IDB.
UNDP. (2012). Trends in Total Migrant Stock: 2012 Revision. Department of Economic and Social Affairs
((United Nations database, POP/DB/MIG/Stock/Rev.2012).
UNDP. (2015). Trends in Total Migrant Stock: 2015 Revision. Department of Economic and Social Affairs
(United Nations database, POP/DB/MIG/Stock/Rev.2015).
United Nations. (1948). Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Paris: General Assembly.
United Nations. (2015). World Population Ageing. New York: United Nations:
http://www.un.org/en/development/desa/population/publications/pdf/ageing/WPA2015_Highlight
s.pdf.
Voorend, K. (2013) ¿Universal o Excluyente? Derechos sociales y control migratorio interno en Costa
Rica. Serie Documentos de Trabajo, Red de Posgrados, no. 32, CLACSO.
Willmore, L. (2007). Universal pensions for developing countries. World Development, 35(1), 24-51.
World Bank. (2016). World Development Indicators. Washington D.C.:
http://data.worldbank.org/products/wdi (version 11/17/2016).
Zolberg, A. R. (1987). "Wanted but not welcome’’: alien labor in western development. In W. Alonso
(Ed.), Population in an Interacting World (pp. 36-73). Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

20

7.
Countries
Antigua &
Barbuda
Argentina
Bahamas

Barbados
Belize
Bermuda

Bolivia
Brazil
Brazil (2)

APPENDIX
Social Pension
Old Age Assistance
Programme
Pensiones Asistenciales
Old Age NonContributory Pension

Non-contributory Old
Age Pension
Non-Contributory
Pension Programme
Non-contributory old age
pension

Renta Dignidad
Beneficio de Prestacao
Continuada

Age of
Eligibility

Number of
beneficiaries

Coverage as a
% of older-age
people (+65)

Benefit level
(monthly in local
currency)

Benefit level
(monthly in
US$)

Cost
(%GD
P)

87
70

ND
48394

ND
1

255
1610

94.44
103.03

0.02
0.03

65

2275

9

262.34

262.34

0.08

65.5
67 (M) 65
(W)

8791

30

628.33

314.17

0.74

Government
2% of employment
earnings, plus 2%
covered payroll, plus
government for any
deficit

3711

30

100

49.76

0.13

Government

ND

451-464

451-464

65

Source of Funding
Government (Social
Security Board)
Government

60

838866

155

187.50-250

27-36

1.08

Government
taxes on
hydrocarbons and
dividends from stateowned enterprises

65
60 (M) 55
(W)

1700000

12

880

286.01

0.26

Government

5851554

42

678

220.4

0.98

ND

65

1000806

55

135.9

0.05

Government

Chile

Previdencia Rural
Pension basica solidaria
de vejez (PBS)

Chile (2)

Aporte previsional
solidario de vejez

65

included in
PBS figures

included in
PBS figures

89764
difference
between the PBS
and the minimum
pension

Colombia

Programa Colombia
Mayor

59 (M) 54
(W)

1258000

40

40000-75000

14-26

0.13

Costa Rica

Programa Regimen No
Contributivo

65

83438

29

136.13

0.37

Pension de asistencia
social
Pension de asistencia
social
Pension para Adultos
Mayores
Pension Basica Universal
Programa de aporte
economico del adulto
mayor
Old Age Pension
The Programme for
Advancement through
Health and Education
Pensión para Adultos
Mayores
120 a los 65
Pension alimentaria para
las personas adultas
mayores
Pension 65

65 (M) 60
(W)

ND

ND

75968.75
benefits are
adjusted
according to
economic and
social factors

ND

ND

ND

60

ND

ND

3070.5

65.22

ND

Government

65
70

625001
28154

61
6

50
50

50
50

0.24
0.07

Government
Government

65
65

103125
42500

16
151

400
18200

54.42
87.66

0.13
1.06

ND
Government

60

51846

24

900

6.98

0.04

Government

65
65

5100000
86392

63
32

580
120

30.53
120

0.2
0.17

Government
Government

65
65

100272
317298

26
16

456013.8
125

82.54
38.48

0.44
0.11

Government
Government

Old-age social assistance

62

ND

ND

255

94.44

ND

Government

77

5800

77

162.5

60.19

ND

Government

60

44739

154

500

66.8

1.61

ND

65

79942

68

1000-3500

149-522

1.41

Government

70
60 (M) 55
(W)

33436

7

7692

273.35

0.24

Government

531546

28

40638.15

57.72

0.6

Government

Cuba
Dominican
Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador

Guatemala
Guyana

Jamaica
Mexico
Panama

Paraguay
Peru
St. Kitts &
Nevis
St. Vincent
& the
Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad &
Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela

Elderly Assistance
Benefit
Algemene Oudedags
Voorzieningsfonds
Senior Citizens' Pension
Programa de Pensiones
No-Contributivas
Gran Mision Amor
Mayor

ND

Government
Government &
between 1-2% of
covered earnings
5% of covered
payroll, plus
governmental
subsidies

Notes: In the column ‘age of eligibility’, M refers to men and W to women. Exchange rates to US dollars are correct as 20 March 2017. The SIMADI exchange rate was used for
the case of Venezuela. ND: No data available
Sources: (ECLAC, n.d.; HelpAge International, n.d.; OECD et al., 2014; Social Security Administration, 2016; and national social security laws)

21

