"x"
"1" "Partners in Ministry and Mission: Women Religious and Associates"
"2" "Ryan P. Murphy"
"3" "Chestnut Hill College"
"4" "murphyr@chc.edu"
"5" "Abstract"
"6" "Women’s religious communities—like other communities of religious—began exploring the possibility of embracing lay women and men as associate members in the 1970s and 1980s. Associate member groups offered congregations a new way to extend the reach of their respective missions and charisms, while deepening the relationships with lay women and men who partnered with them in ministry."
"7" "In this paper, I explore the relatively recent history of associate groups and how these organizations have and continue to work with their sponsoring congregations. I use data from the Center for Applied Research in the Apostolate (CARA)—commissioned recently by the North American Conference of Associates and Religious (NACAR)—to look at demographic trends among women religious and associates. I  describe  how religious communities incorporate associates into their organizational decision-making, and how certain internal processes—like general chapters—are now open to associate members."
"8" "Overall, I submit that given the declining numbers of sisters and aging populations of many religious communities, associate groups have the potential to provide opportunities to conceptualize new forms of religious life in the Catholic Church. Finally, I argue that associate groups also have the important role of increasing gender, racial, and class diversity among communities of women religious, and that this diversity may lead to a more inclusive and democratizing corporate structure for women’s religious congregations in the 21st century."
"9" "Introduction"
"10" "Women’ s religious  institutes —like other communities of religious—began exploring the possibility of embracing lay women and men as  associate  members in the 1970s and 1980s. Associate member groups offered congregations a new way to extend the reach of their respective missions and charisms, while deepening the relationships with  non-vowed  lay  persons  who partnered with them in ministry."
"11" "In this paper, I explore the relatively recent history of associate   groups and how these organizations have and continue to work with their sponsoring congregations.  Specifically, I  use data from the Center for  Applied Research in the Apostolate (CARA)—commissioned by the  North American Conference of Associates and  Religious (NACAR)—to look at  recent  demographic trends among women religious and associates. I  also  use a case study of one congregation—the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia—to  look at  how religious communities incorporate associates into their organizational decision-making, and  how certain internal processes like general chapters  are now open to associate members."
"12" "G iven the   diminishing populations   that  many  religious  communities   face  and that the number of new vocations  will never again  reach the peak numbers of the 1960s , associate  members   are likely to have an increasing influence on  carrying out  the missions of many women’s religious institutes. Therefore, I suggest that associate groups  have the potential to provide opportunities to conceptualize new  opportunities to envision  religious life in the Catholic Church  in the coming decades .  In that regard, my hope is that this paper gives us a chance to look closely at how the mutuality of associate groups and religious communities holds promise. What I am not suggesting however is an end to religious life or vocations—or that associate members will replace vowed religious.  Rather, I submit that  an  analysis of how associate  members live their lives presents an opportunity to broaden the definition of religious life. Finally, a s a sociologist, I argue that associate  members   hold the important potential  of increasing gender, racial, and class diversity among communities of women religious , and that  this diversity may lead to a n even  more  inclusive and  democratizing  planning and visioning process for women’s religious institutes in the 21 st  century."
"13" "History of Associate Groups"
"14" "Lay Christians have associated with religious institutes in a variety of ways throughout history . The practice of  seeking spiritual guidance or direction from  vowed  religious  goes back to the  fathers and mothers in the desert , through to the monastic and apostolic periods in the late medieval and early modern period (Hereford 2012).  Further, formal associations— known as Third Orders, Secular Orders, Sodalities, Confraternities, and Associations of the Faithful   are early precursors to modern understandings of  lay  association, but  these groups  are distinct in several ways. First, unlike Sodalities and Confraternities, modern associates do not join preexisting organizations founded by the institute for laity—rather they come individually or through a member(s) of the congregation itself. Secondly,  though there may be an official liaison between the associate group and the congregation, this person is not understood to be a quasi-superior, as those of Third orders or Sodalities.  Finally, guidelines for  associate  groups are not regarded as a “rule for life , ”  but instead detail affiliation to the congregation, with associates seeing themselves as living their commitment on their own life terms and situations ,  just as vowed religious participate in their own distinct ,  committed way   (Schneiders 2000:44)."
"15" "In the decades after Vatican II—as religious  communities looked to renew in the spirit of thei r unique missions and charisms— congregations of women religious began seriously exploring relationships with lay associates , who were at the same time attracted to  a particular   institute’s mission and spirituality.  Many religious institutes had long recognized the lay persons already active as partners in mission in their sponsored ministries, and saw associate membership as a way to formalize this relationship.  Though there  had been  considerable variation  among congregations  in  their affiliation with associate members , the 1983 Code of Canon Law permitted all  religious communities to establish associate relationships (Johnson, Wittberg, and Gautier 2014).  This permission led to  a few thousand associates in the 1980s, with that number growing to  more than  20,000  in the new millennium (Hereford 2012 ; Johnson et al.  2014 ). In fact, I suspect several folks in this room may be associate members of religious communities to whom they have a shared  identity with  mission  or spirituality ."
"16" "Though associates are not considered full members of religious institutes, trends  show associates increasingly integrated into the daily activities of the affiliated congregation .  For example, many institutes have a history of sharing congregational communications, and inviting associates to join them for community gatherings and celebrations. Other associates may join vowed members on retreats and other similar spiritual enrichment programs  (Hereford 2012) .  Simply put, associates and vowed members are  distinct  and identified by  their  primary  institutional affiliation. By  their  nature  and c anonically , associates’ lives are generally lived outside of the bonds of the religious institute—that is, one’s associate identity is not primary in the way that an associate lives one’s life as a teacher, parent, or in a partnered relationship.  Associates are not bound by congregational legislation or accountable to its leadership.  While  they may join the congregation in apostolic and spiritual works, associates do not commit their entire  personal and financial selves  to the institute—meaning that their  individual  finances and debts remain separate  (Schneiders 2000) . Any financial contributions that associates make to the  affiliated congregation are purely voluntary, and not considered  a necessary  part of  associate  membership."
"17" "More recently however, some institutes are welcoming associates to serve on committees, attend meet ings and g eneral  c hapters, and even participate in congregational governance and decision-making. These developments significantly blur the boundaries of associate a ffiliation and vowed membership , particularly when it comes to voting in congregational elections and helping to decide the future direction of the congregation  ( Cerullo  2015; Hereford 2012) . At what point then, does the associate cease being an associate and become more identifiable as a full member of the congregation? This and similar questions are likely to continue to emerge, especially as growing numbers of associates and their institutional involvement eventually overtake the population of vowed religious in the congregation, if they have not already."
"18" "Current Demographics"
"19" "Turning then to current demographics, in 2015 the North American Conference of Associates and Religious (NACAR) commissioned the Center for Research in the Apostolate (CARA) to produce a longitudinal study of associates and vowed religious in the United States and Canada , replicating an analysis CARA did for the group in 2000-2002 .  For the study, CARA sent a link to a survey to the major superiors of the Leadership Conference of Women Religious (LCWR), the Council of Major Superiors of Women Religious (CMSWR) and the Conference of Major Superiors of Men (CMSM). Of the 918 superiors, 588 responded to the survey and of those, 378 indicate having  a total of 55,942  associate members affiliated with their  respective  congregation s.  CARA also surveyed associate members and vowed religious, and received responses from 5,667 vowed members, 4,200 associates, and 207 Third Order affiliates."
"20" "Of the  associates who  identified according to gender, 8 0% are women  (n= 35,937)  and  20% are men (n= 9,226) , with  nearly  6 3 % identifying as being 60 or older. Three in ten identify as being in their 40s or 50s, with 7% reporting ages under 40.  In an effort to invite younger persons into associate life, some congregations are focusing on specific outreach to millennials and generation Xers. For example, the Sisters of Divine Mercy in San Antonio, Texas developed a  successful  Young Adult Associate program,  targeted specifically to   persons  between the ages of 18-40.  ( Garcia and Fiedler 2011)."
"21" "Racially and ethnically, most associates  (57%, n= 29,615)  identi fy as white, followed by 9% Hispanic/ Latinx ,  5% Asian /Pacific Islander,  and 3% black.  These numbers follow similar demographic patterns of  younger Catholics and particularly those vowed  women in initial formation , as  described by Mary Johnson, Patricia Wittberg, and Mary Gautier in their 2014 book  New Generations of Catholic Sisters: The Challenge of Diversity.  Though these women represent a more racially and ethnically diverse group than those sisters in perpetual vows, women in religious communities are still largely white  and American women’s religious congregations  generally  reflect the composition of their founding communities in Europe—that is to say, they are comprised of very few women of color  (Johnson et al. 2014) ."
"22" "Case Study—SSJ Philadelphia"
"23" "The congregation that I study, the Sisters of St. Joseph, have a long history of relationship with non-vowed lay persons who partner with them in mission.  Soon after the first houses of the Sisters of St. Joseph were founded in Le  Puy , France in the mid-17 th  century, their Jesuit founder Jean Pierre Médaille mentions in their Constitutions a group of women on the fringes of the congregation known as  agrégées . While there is  relatively  little written about these women, what is recorded indicate s  a distinction between them and sisters in the larger body of the  congregation. For  instance , in the original Constitutions, Médaille writes that  agrégées  did not form part of the “ body of [the] new congregation” yet in “various places of the towns, and surrounding villages” they performed “the same exercises” as the sisters. The Constitutions outline how these women lived “only two or three together” and that they were attached “to [the] little congregation by the vow of stability ”  ( Vacher  2010). Congregational historian Marguerite  Vacher  speculates that there were socioeconomic class distinctions between the  agrégées  and sisters in the general body of the congregation, with the  agrégées  regarded as “Poor and peasant women in the villages…in small communities of only  three or four” under the  authority  “of the superior of the closest house of the Sisters of St. Joseph” ( Vacher  2010 :298-290). The author notes that these women made a commitment to serve Christ, but that this commitmen t was subordinate to that made b y sisters in the body of the congregation.  The  agrégées   were not a third order of the Sisters of St. Joseph, and were viewed even less as religious in the traditional monastic sense than s isters in the congregation. T his lack of strict enclosure gave the group  greater  freedom to take up charitable and apostolic work ( Vacher  2010:304)."
"24" "Writings about the  agrégées   gradually disappeared, suggesting that  this  group either faded away into obscurity, or that the women eventually professed vows and were assumed into the full congregational body of the Sisters of St. Joseph.   The congregation dispersed during the French Revolution, to be refounded in Lyon in 1807 . The community  eventually branch ed  off into North America   in the early 19 th  century, first in St. Louis in 1836 and then in Philadelphia in 1847."
"25" "As a sociologist, much of my research is in how this particular congregation—the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia—negotiated institutional social structures within the Catholic church and secular society, especially in the decades after Vatican II. In my interviews and  archival research, I was struck by how much emphasis the congre gation placed on developing an a ssociate p rogram in the 1970s and 1980s—l ikely due  in equal measure  to  the growing  recognition of shifting demographics in their congregation  and religious life in general , but also  for  a desire to welcome partners in mission more into the fold in their sponsored ministries, parishes, and schools.  For instance, there is a notable focus in the archival documents near the end of the twentieth century toward sustainability and long-term corporate planning. Anticipating the inevitability of what fewer sisters in the congregation would mean to their presence in some communities, the congregation’s 1979 general chapter made the first refe rence to the possibility of a lay a ssociate program."
"26" "At the chapter, the congregation proposed,"
"27" "That the Sisters of St. Joseph form an association of persons who desire both to share and to witness the values and goals of the congregation within their own life style. In forming such an association, the congregation will help the associates respond to the universal call to holiness ( Mount St. Joseph Convent Archives  1979)."
"28" "The Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia were rarely the first congregation—even among the other members of the Federation of Sisters of St. Joseph—to make outward changes after Vatican II, and characteristically, they spent considerable time in prayer and planning to discern how and when to introduce an Associates program. The fruit of this process came in 1984, when the community established the SSJ Associates Mission program in Philadelphia ( Beirne  2015), supported by the congregation with both human and financial resources."
"29" "This model continued for more than 30 years, with associates being invited to partner with the congregation in multiple ways  from  service and social justice advocacy  to deeper  spiritual development and  faith formation.  A board  of advisors —made up of equal numbers of  associates and Sisters of St. Joseph guided the group, and advised the director in how best to manage the affiliation. The congregation underscored its commitment to developing stronger associate relationships in 2015 when it funded two full-time staff position s, and again in  spring  2019, when  for the first time,  the  Sisters of St. Joseph hired a lay associate as the new director of the program ."
"30" "The congregation incorporated associates as much as they were permitted canonically into  the community’s  long-term planning and direction, most notably in their inclusion in general chapter.  Until the most recent general chapter—happening this week actually—associates were welcome to observe all portions of the chapter of affairs, only being excluded  from the chapter of elections. However, for the 2019 general chapter, associates were invited to participate in a yearlong parallel process—similar to the one that sisters in the congregation were doing—to share their voices and ideas for the future direction of the congregation/associate relationship. Several times throughout the past year, associates were invited to participate in structured planning activities  in person or virtually through Z oom meetings. The goal was to have sisters and associates understand what each respective group was think ing and feeling, and to set their respective  direction  and goals  for the next five years with informed, prayerful discernment."
"31" "T he Future/Conclusion"
"32" "So where does this leave us?  Of course, the Sisters of St. Joseph Associates in Mission program I just described is just one example, but I believe it is helpful in illustrating one way that congregations of women religious can increase their affiliation with associate members  in creative ways , mindful of the need to maintain clear boundaries between vowed religious and lay persons.  The changing demographics in religious life are undeniable. At the beginning of this year, the Sisters of St. Joseph of Philadelphia had  684  vowed members with a median age of 77,  and 586 committed associates. In the not-too-distant-future, these numbers will be equal, and eventually the number  of associates will surpass vowed members of the congregation. To be clear once again, I am not suggesting that associates should or will ever replace vowed religious, but I do believe that religious communities face a looming critical point where they must decide how they want their missions and charisms lived out  in the event that  they no longer  have sisters  in active ministry. Sandra Schneiders, in a 2014 speech declared this time for religious life  a period of transition toward  what she calls  a “new normal.” Schneiders argues that lamenting the “good old days” of novitiates full of women in their 20s and 30s  is not only unrealistic,  but that  it fails to recognize changing demographics of the American populace. Today, the fastest growing segment of our population are persons over the age of 65, with the number of children under 5 declining—a situation  that has been unfolding for decades and one  that was completely reversed when many women entered religious life in the 1950s and 1960s.  In other words, the  age distribution of a healthy religious congregation in the 21 st  century  should  show that the majority of its members are in the 60-80 age bracket, with fewer members under 50.  In light of this, Schneiders suggests that the future of religious life include ministries “likely to involve inter-congregational projects, working with lay associates…” and that “one or two religious animating a group of full or part-time lay ministers is often more effective and a much better use of our limited personnel than six or ten religious running one institutional ministry” (Schneiders 2014)."
"33" "In closing then, I suggest that carefully integrated associate groups provide religious congregations great potential to share their missions and charisms in these changing times. Associates are not—and should not—be viewed as “junior sisters,” or as persons who in some way are replacing  those who choose vowed  religious life. Rather, associate members have the potential to add a richness of diversity to religious institutes, and as much as is canonically  possible, they  offer opportunities for greater visioning about the future of religious life—one that is expansive and inclusive in ways that respond to the ministerial needs of our time."
"34" "References"
"35" "Beirne , Mary Helen. 2015.  Ready for Any Good Work: History of the Sisters of Saint Joseph, Chestnut Hill, Philadelphia 1944-1999 . Lanham, MD: University Press of America."
"36" "Center for Applied Research in the Apostolate. 2015.  Partners in Mission: An Updated Profile of"
"37" "Associates and Religious in the United States and Canada . (Report for the North"
"38" "American Conference of Associates and Religious). Washington, DC."
"39" "Cerullo ,  Deboarh  M. 2015.  Associates and their Relationships to Religious Institutes: Gifts and"
"40" "Challenges."
"41" "Gar cia, Elsa and Gloria Ann Fiedler. 2011. “Five Winning Ways to Extend Contact  With  Young"
"42" "Adults.”  Horizon: Journal of the National Religious Vocation Conference  36(3):30-32."
"43" "Hereford, Amy. 2012. “Associates of Religious Institutes- A Way Forward…”  The Research"
"44" "Center for Religious Institutes Bulletin . No. 7( Spring ):4-20."
"45" "Johnson, Mary S.N.D. de N., Patricia Wittberg SC, and Mary L. Gautier. 2014.  New"
"46" "Generations of Catholic Sisters: The Challenge of Diversity . New York: Oxford"
"47" "University Press."
"48" "Mount St. Joseph Convent Archives. 1979.  General Chapter."
"49" "Schneiders, Sandra. 2000.  Finding the Treasure: Religious Life in the New Millennium ."
"50" "Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press."
"51" "------. 2014.  The Ongoing Challenge of Renewal in Contemporary Religious Life ."
"52" "Vacher , Marguerite. 2010.  Nuns  Without  Cloister: Sisters of St. Joseph in the Seventeenth"
"53" "and  Eighteenth Centuries . Translated by Patricia Byrne. Lanham, MD: University"
"54" "Press of America."
