"x"
"1" "STEM Gender Gap  and the  Leaky Pipeline : A-levels  to University"
"2" "Anesa Hosein"
"3" "Department of Higher Education, University of Surrey, UK"
"4" "a.hosein@surrey.ac.uk"
"5" "Introduction"
"6" "The is movement to try and decrease the science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) gender gap. However, the STEM gender gap persists because of a leaky pipeline. National trends show, that at all stages of education, less girls choose to go into STEM subjects   (Stoet & Geary, 2018; WISE, 2018a, 2018b) . However, this appears to be particularly true for the physical science, technology, engineering and mathematics (PSTEM) rather than the biological sciences and its related subjects. Girls participation in the biological sciences and its related subjects often exceed or equal that boys  but are often less than boys in PSTEM subjects   (WISE, 2018a) .  Whilst the figures from national t r ends shows that there is a leaky gender gap pipeline, it is difficult to know the size of this leaky pipeline between boys and girls. Therefore, this research intends to fill this gap by using a longitudinal cohort research to determine the size of the PSTEM gap between A-levels and university for boys and girls. If we can understand, where girls go, it may be helpful in plugging this leak."
"7" "Further,  (Stoet & Geary, 2018)  from their country case studies using Programme for International Student Assessment ( PISA datasets) using an expectancy-value theory lens found  that girls were more likely to take subjects that they had better strengths in even though they may be equivalent to boys  in science subjects  i.e. for example, if  girls  were good at reading the n they  may pursue subjects that will strengthen their position  over those they were equivalent to boys in ."
"8" "Therefore, using a self-concept theory lens, we will expect that girls who were doing a PSTEM A-level may choose to do another option because of their past self-concept and performance in the maths and science subjects."
"9" "Therefore, the research questions for this research is:"
"10" "What is the gap of the leaky PSTEM pipeline in the transition of A-levels and University between boys and girls?"
"11" "Where go girls with PSTEM A-levels end up in comparison with boys?"
"12" "How does early maths and science self-concept play a part in the leaky pipeline?"
"13" "Methods"
"14" "The research used data from the Longitudinal Study of Young People in England (LSYPE). The LSYPE is a longitudinal cohort study which followed over 14000 young people measuring their attitudes and outcomes over seven years , called Waves,  from 2004 (when they were 13/14 years old) to 2010 (19/20 years old)  and then again in 2015 (25 years old). Their data was linked to National Pupil Database (NPD). Using the data from Key Stage Five (circa 18 years old) which represents A-levels from the NPD, young people were determined whether they did at least one PSTEM GCEA-level, AS- level or an Advanced Extension Award. Similarly, the data was also coded if they did at least one biological  studies  and relate subjects  (BSTEM) , one Arts, Humanities and Social Science  ( ArtSS )  subject and at least one other qualifications ( Other,  such as GCE vocational qualifications)."
"15" "Following the same analysis and methods of  Hosein (2019) , a multinomial regression method was used to determine whether girls were more likely to go  onto  a PSTEM  vs any Other/No  degree if they did at least one PSTEM  , BSTEM,  ArtSS  A/AS/AEA level or Other qualifications. The variables of young people’s self-concept at Key Stage  2  (10 years old) for English, Maths, Science and ICT was included as well as their Key Stage 2 performance on English, Maths and Science. Young people’s ethnicity and IDACI ( income deprivation affecting children index ) score was included (a measure of socio-economic region of deprivation).  Analysis was conducted separately for boys and girls. The data was weighted using the Wave 7 weights."
"16" "Results"
"17" "The results indicate that boys  were 7.1 times more likely to take a PSTEM degree than any other/no degree if they took at least one PSTEM A/AS/AEA levels. For girls, this was only 5.2 times. Therefore, girls were less likely than boys to translate a PSTEM A-level into a PSTEM degree which follows the national trend  data  but this has now been quantified."
"18" "Further analysis of early performance and self-concept data in influencing boys into going into a PSTEM subjects, boys ’  performance in maths and science at K ey Stage 2, as well as, their maths, science and ICT self-concept were all positive influencers. Ethnicity and IDACI was not significant."
"19" "Analysing the destinations of boys and girls with a PSTEM A-level, we note that not unexpectedly, that more boys were undertaking PSTEM degrees than girls (31% vs 14%, see also  Figure  1 and  Figure  2 ).  However, taking a PSTEM A-level seems to be a factor in ensuring girls go to university, that is, 77% of boys with a PSTEM A-level went on to do a degree whilst for girls it was 84%.  For girls, the only factor that was significant was their IDACI score (i.e. their socioeconomic geographic region) , with girls from higher socioeconomic geographic regions 4.2 times more likely to a PSTEM degree than those from lower socioeconomic geographic regions."
"20" "Figure  1 : Destination of boys with a PSTEM A-level"
"21" "Figure  2 : Destination of girls with a PSTEM A-level"
"22" "Discussion"
"23" "Girls with a PSTEM A-level are less likely to go on to do a PSTEM degree than boys. This appears because they tend to select  a BSTEM degree instead. Whilst for boys, there is a strong relationship with their performance self-concept for going into a PSTEM subject this is not the same for girls, rather its their socioeconomic background that influences their choice of a PSTEM degree. This suggests the reasons for girls going to PSTEM degrees may have to do with more systematic reasons, such as the welcoming nature of PSTEM environments for girls, the need for changing stereotypes and broadening the aspirations of girls."
"24" "Hosein, A. (2019). Girls' video gaming behaviour and undergraduate degree selection: A secondary data analysis approach.  Computers in Human Behavior, 91 (1), 226-235. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.10.001"
"25" "Stoet, G., & Geary, D. C. (2018). The gender-equality paradox in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education.  Psychological Science, 29 (4), 581-593. doi:10.1177/0956797617741719"
"26" "WISE. (2018a). Analysis of a level core stem entrants and results by girls.   Retrieved from  https://www.wisecampaign.org.uk/statistics/analysis-of-a-level-core-stem-entrants-and-results-by-girls-2/"
"27" "WISE. (2018b). Core stem graduates 2018.   Retrieved from  https://www.wisecampaign.org.uk/statistics/core-stem-graduates-2018/"
