AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number1. February 2019
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.5

Pp.66-73

Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle ‫ هل‬in the Holy Quran: A Critique
of the Holy Quran Translation
Eyhab Abdulrazak Bader Eddin
English Department, faculty of Languages and Translation
King Khalid University, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Buried in the quicksand of ignorance and drowned in the deep reticence of the sea of linguistics,
Arabic particles in general, and particle ‫ هل‬in particular have received little attention on translators’
part. This paper carefully examines the most widely-read translations of particle ‫ هل‬as held up
through the Quran. It is a critique of the translation of the Quran. Contrary to the long-standing
concept which perceives ‫ هل‬as solely an interrogative particle, this paper crosses t’s and dots i’s in
relation to focusing translators’ attention on other almost-overlooked linguistic functions carried
by ‫هل‬, i.e. corroborative, negative and imperative. It is found that particle ‫ هل‬in all contexts is dealt
with from the same perspective in the translations. This entails the translators’ failure to understand
the inconsistent linguistic behaviors of ‫هل‬. This paper has put efforts to plumb the depths of
identifying the different functions expressed by ‫هل‬, which have long stood in the face of translators,
a knotty problem that has long escaped the notice of translators, and thus yielded inaccurate
renditions of the ‫هل‬. This paper may open up new horizons for scholars in their future studies, and
act as a bedrock for researchers to follow suit.
Keywords: Corroborative, imperative, interrogative, linguistic functions, Particle ‫هل‬, Quran,
translation
Cites as: Bader Eddin, E. A.(2019). Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
in the Holy Quran: A Critique of the Holy Quran Translation. Arab World English Journal for
Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (1) 66-73.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no1.5

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

66

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
Introduction
Any language is made up of components which are set off by spaces in orthography. These
components, though can technically still be further broken down into smaller units known as
morphemes, are known as ‘words; or ‘lexical items’. The words of any language must fall into one
of its wider categories, known as ‘parts of speech’ or ‘word classes’. Parts of speech are words of
which sentences structures are composed (Quirk and Greenbaum 1973). While Arabic is,
according to Mahmoud (2012), very limited in its parts of speech which consist of a noun, a verb
and a particle (to be analyzed further below), English parts of speech exceed their Arabic
counterparts in number. English words belong to such parts of speech as verbs, nouns, adjectives,
adverbs, prepositions, pronouns, conjunctions and interjections (Leech & Svartvik 2003).
However, it is worth noting that it is a misnomer to believe that the Arabic tri-nomenclature of
word classes excludes the five seemingly extra ones in English. It is but a difference in
categorization. For instance, the English word class of nouns covers in Arabic the word classes of
nouns, pronouns, adjectives and adverbs. So, the tri-classification of Arabic parts of speech does
not mean that English has more parts of speech than Arabic does. By the same token, the Arabic
word class of ‘particles’ includes English prepositions, conjunctions and interjections.
The present paper explores the semantic functions carried by the ‘Arabic particle ‫هل‬. Arabic
particles are considered an umbrella term because they include such English parts of speech as
prepositions, conjunctions and interjections. Particles in Arabic, referred to as ‫حرف‬, can be further
divided into two types of particles, namely. ‫( حروف مبنى‬alphabetical letters) and ‫حروف معنى‬
(conjunctions). The former category helps construct words, and are thus considered the bricks
which words are made up of. One example is ‫ ق‬in ‫قرأ‬. The letter ‫ ق‬is said to be ‫( حرف مبنى‬an
alphabetical letter) as it is one of the letters which make up the word ‫ قرأ‬. Although the difference
between a sound and a letter lies beyond the scope of this paper, we can in passing draw a firm
dividing line between both by saying a sound is more specific than a letter in that each letter is a
sound BUT NOT vice versa. One illustrative example is that while ‘K’ is both a letter and a sound,
the initial sounds, i.e. affricates’ in ‘church’ or ‘judge’ are not letters because they are not members
of the English alphabet. One more difference lies in how the same letter can be technically referred
to as different sound acoustically speaking, depending on the neighboring sound preceding or
following a certain sound in a word or in connected speech.
On the other hand, ‫( حروف المعنى‬conjunctions or particles) are meaningful in themselves,
but do not refer to nouns or verbs. They include such many subdivisions as ‘prepositions’, ‘jurative
particles, exception particles, warning particles, entreatment particles, interrogative particles,
excitative particles, etc (Babity 2004). The major category of ‘Particles’ under which all the abovelisted sub-classes can be divided into two classes: one-letter particles’ and ‘poly-letter particles’.
The former includes 13 particles; some of which are ‫ الالم‬-‫ الكاف‬-‫ الفاء‬-‫ السين‬-‫ التاء‬-‫الباء‬. The latter subclass includes particles which are made up of two or more letters. It is under the latter category
that ‫ هل‬falls, our point in focus in this paper. The poly-letter particles are over 82 ones (Babity
2004) whereas Al Murady (1992) extends them to 91 ones. Some of these particles include, but
not limited to, ‫ لكن‬-‫ على‬-‫ إلى‬-‫ لن‬-‫ لم‬-‫ هل‬-‫ أو‬-‫من‬.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

67

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
This paper scrutinizes the inconsistence of linguistic functions carried by the particle ‫ هل‬in
Arabic. This paper makes an attempt to vividly show how the particle ‫هل‬in Arabic does not stick
to one linguistic meaning, bringing about grave mistakes in the most widely-read translations of
the Holy Quran. This paper thoroughly explores the varied linguistic functions carried by ‫ هل‬in
different contexts. Almost all Quran translators perceive ‫ هل‬as an interrogative particle, making
their translations inaccurate.
Literature Review:
The present paper is concerned with the Arabic semantic functional content, carried by the
particle ‫هل‬. In Arabic, particles are divided into ‘effective or operative’ and ‘passive’ ‫عامل وعاطل‬.
By the former, we mean that the occurrence of one particle before the noun it accompanies brings
about what is grammatically known as ‘declension’ ‫اإلعراب‬. This means the last morpheme or
inflection of the word carries a marker (diacritic mark) showing its grammatical case and category.
Such particles, depending on what particles are used, may make the word they precede in the
nominative, accusative, genitive or apocope case, that is ‫حالة الرفع أو النصب أو الجر أو الجزم‬
respectively. For instance, prepositions are considered one type of ‘effective particles’ as they
transform the noun following them into the genitive case. The ‘passive’ particles, when preceding
words, bring about indeclinability or invariability to those words. They enable the words they
precede to keep adhering to one form, no matter where they occur ‫( حالة البناء‬Eddin 2018).
Approaching the paper focal point further, the paper will shed light on ‘the particle ‫هل‬.
Considered a passive particle, it is has no effect on both the noun or verb it precedes (Mahmoud
2012). Although it precedes both nouns and verbs, it is more common for it to precede verbs.
One of the functions of particle ‫ هل‬is its use as an interrogative particle in Arabic as in ‫هل‬
‫( رأيت محمدا‬Did you see Mohammed?). It is always used in affirmative statements (Ghalaiyeeni
2015). If preceding a verb in the present tense, it indicates ‘futurity’ as in ‫هل تسافر اآلن؟‬. When it is
used in the interrogative sense, it is usually realized as ‘a non-negative operator’ in English to form
a yes/no question (Quirk &Greenbaum 1973). The operators include verbs to be, have, do and the
modals. When operators are used in negative forms, we are left with what is called in Arabic ‫استفهام‬
‫( إنكاري‬negative interrogative). One example is ‫( أما رأيت زيدا اليوم؟‬Did you not see Zaid today?).
Note that a negative interrogative in English is realized in Arabic by a word other than ‫هل‬, i.e ‫أما‬.
Operators are characterized by carrying the tense, aspect and mood of the statement in which they
appear. It is worth mentioning that ‘time’ is a universal non-linguistic concept, and thus is
expressed by adverbials or adjuncts (Quirk& Greenbaum 1973).
The particle ‫ هل‬has many other linguistic functions in other contexts, the most known is
that of interrogative function. A considerable amount of efforts has gone into finding out the
instances where ‫ هل‬has been held up through the holy Quran since particles lie beyond the index
finders of statistical dictionaries as ‫ المعجم المفهرس‬by Abdulbaqi (2007). All uses of the particle ‫هل‬
have been identified throughout the Holy Quran. Eight nine uses of the particle ‫ هل‬have been
found out through the Quran. These uses are categorized according to their context-specific
functions, having based the study on different exegesis books (Al-Hamathani, Attantawi, Ibn
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

68

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
Ashour, Al Alousi, Azzamakhshari, Azzajaj, etc). Bringing the most widely-read translations by
(Khan & Al Hilali,1994 ) and (Abdullah Yusuf Ali, 1992) to compare them to the alreadyidentified functions of ‫هل‬.
Research Questions
The present paper addresses critical issues in relation to ‫ هل‬and its linguistic functions in the Holy
Quran along with their translations. The key issues dealt with can be demonstrated through the
following questions:
•
•
•
•

Do all the frequent uses of particle ‫هل‬, held up throughout the Holy Quran, carry the same
function or meaning, i.e that of interrogative function?
What other functions does the particle ‫ هل‬have in different contexts (of course other than
serving as an ‘interrogative particle’?
How accurate are the mostly-read translations of the Holy Quran regarding the particle ‫?هل‬
Why did the translators in question of the Holy Quran fail to capture the function of the
particle ‫هل‬, and thus gave inaccurate translations?

Discussion and Analysis
Having identified the 89 appearances of the particle ‫ هل‬throughout the Holy Quran, I have
categorized the major linguistic functions of the particle. I came up with 7 different major linguistic
functions of the particle ‫( هل‬see Table 1 in Appendix). While the basic function indicated by ‫ هل‬is
‘interrogative’, it can be used to denote other different functions (Al Murady 1992). I selected to
discuss only the last three functions in Table 1 of Appendix, i.e. Corroborative particle, Negative
Particle and imperative particle. Additionally, other linguistic functions of the particle ‫ هل‬included
Interrogative particle, Interrogative sarcastically-veiled particle, Remorse particle and Despair
particle. Readers may refer to Table 1 to see the 7 different functions along with the instances from
the Holy Quran which include the particle ‫هل‬. It is noticed that the same particle in Arabic carries
different linguistic functions in different contexts. Some illustrative examples have been identified,
and tabulated in Table 1.
A. Particle ‫ هل‬as a corroborative particle
It shall start by the particle ‫ هل‬as it functions as a corroborative particle to give emphasis to the
act expressed by the verb it precedes. In this case, ‫ هل‬precedes a verb in the past tense, and the
linguistic function expressed here is ‘emphasis’. One example is quoted from lines said by the
Prophet’s companion Zaid Al-Ta’y as he says
‫سائل فوارس يربوع بشدّتنا … أهل رأونا بسفح القاع ذي األكم‬
Here it is noticed that ‫ هل‬is used to give emphasis to the verb ‫رأونا‬, and it is thus a ‘corroborative
particle’ rather than a question (Ibn Yaeesh 2001, and Al Sayouty 1907). The Holy Quran exhibits
many instances where ‫ هل‬is used in the same sense. A few examples are ‫ هل أتاك حديث الغاشية‬and ‫هل‬
‫أتى على اإلنسان حين من الدهر لم يكن شيئا مذكورا‬. Table 2 in the Appendix shows some examples from the
Holy Quran where ‫ هل‬is used to carry the function of emphasis, and can be replaced with ‫( قد‬Al
Murady 1992).
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

69

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
Looking at Table 2 shows how two of the most widely- read translations of the Holy Quran,
i.e. Khan and Al Hilali and Abdullah Yusuf Ali, have understood the particle ‫ هل‬superficially.
They understand it as an interrogative question, leading them to translate the particle in this context
as a simple polar question, initiated with an operator as discussed above. This has yielded a
different message from the one intended, flouting the ultimate goal of translation. In other words,
while readers take the translated Quranic verses as interrogatives, the intended message to be
conveyed is that the verses in question are ‘emphasized statements’.
B. Particle ‫ هل‬as a negative particle
Another different linguistic function expressed by ‫ هل‬is that of ‘negation’ (See Table 3 in the
Appendix). In this case, ‫ هل‬is usually followed by ‫إال‬. One example is ‫فهل على الرسل إال البالغ المبين‬
(16:35). More examples can be ‫ هل يصلح العطار ما أفسد الدهر‬and ‫( هل يقدر على هذا غيري؟‬Al Muradi
1992). In the above-mentioned examples, the particle ‫ هل‬is not an interrogative particle; rather
it is a negative particle, equal to ‘not’. Table 3 exhibits examples from the Holy Quran where
‫ هل‬appears to carry the linguistic function of ‘negation’. In the translations provided by Khan
and Al Hilali and Abdullah Yusuf Ali (see Table 3), it is clear that they both fail to capture the
subtle meaning intended that they render the particle ‫ هل‬into interrogatives, starting with an
operator and ending in a question mark, in a means which further boosts their interpretation of
‫ هل‬here as an interrogative particle. Because the aim of translation is to render the intended
message, the particle ‫ هل‬in Table 3 must be translated into a negative particle, taking the aspect
into context.
C. Particle ‫ هل‬as an imperative particle
Inconsistent in its linguistic functions, the particle ‫ هل‬continues to change its function
according to the context. Table 4 in the Appendix shows that particle ‫ هل‬appears to carry an
imperative function. The selected Quranic verses in Table 4 exhibit particle ‫ هل‬as an imperative
particle, rather than an interrogative particle as rendered and understood by the two
translations. When ‫ هل‬is used as an imperative particle, it precedes addressee pronouns, i.e.
‫أنتم‬. Table 4 vividly shows that ‫ هل‬has been understood as an interrogative particle, bringing
about a different function that the intended particle. In Table 4, particle ‫ هل‬should be translated
into an imperative form of verb. Again, it is noticed that the translators in focus could not spot
the exact meaning carried by ‫هل‬.
Conclusion
As we have noted above, Particle ‫ هل‬translation has not been explored thoroughly, bringing about
inaccurate translation. Translators do not dive deep into the real functions of particles, and they
take meaning superficially instead. Translators apparently have a nodding acquaintance with the
linguistically-deeply running functions of ‫هل‬. A considerable gap of translators’ linguistic
knowledge needs to be filled. All uses of the particle ‫ هل‬have been perceived and understood the
same by the translators as ‘an interrogative particle’. A deeper thorough knowledge of linguistic
nuances of the source text brings about new results, and thus a new translation can be launched in
the light of such important differences. Having paved the way for other researchers, the researchers
can set off on an epic journey to further explore the translation of other particles in the Holy Quran.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

70

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
It is a strong call to delve into the sea of the translation of the Holy Quran to come up with new
pearls for discussion and analysis. Researchers may roll up their sleeves to take this study steps
further with tenacity; they can bring into focus other particles, and the suprasegmental features
accompanying the newly-explored linguistic functions of ‫هل‬. Analysis of the richness of the
particles in Arabic as used in the Holy Quran could take this study further until it reaches its
apogee.
Acknowledgement
The author would like to express his gratitude to King Khalid University, Saudi Arabia for
providing administrative and technical support.
About the Author:
Eyhab A. Bader Eddin is an Assistant Professor of Translation at King Khalid University,
KSA. His PhD Thesis is titled 'Semantic Problems in A. J. Arberry's Translation of the
Suspended Odes (Al-Muallaqat). He has an MA in Applied Linguistics from the University of
Reading, UK, and a BA and PGD in English language & Literature from Damascus University.
He worked formerly as a simultaneous interpreter for the European Union, and as a lecturer in
Kuwait, Syria and Oman. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-0096-6334

English References
Ali, Abdullah. Yusuf. (1992). The Meaning of the Holy Quran. Maryland: Amana Corporation.
Eddin, E. (2018). Multiplicity of Different English Functional Semantic Realizations of the
Translation of the Arabic Preposition ‫ب‬. International Journal of Linguistics, Literature and
Translation, 1 (2), 182-193.
Leech, G. and Svartvik, J. (2013). A Communicative Grammar of English. Routledge.
Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1973). A University Grammar of English. Longman.
Khan, M. M. & Al Helali. (1994). Interpretation of the Meanings of the Noble Quran. Riyadh:
Dar-us-Salam.
Arabic References

2001 ،‫ بيروت‬،‫ دار الكتب العلمية‬،‫صل‬
ّ ‫ شرح المف‬،‫ابن يعيش‬
.1907 ،‫ القاهرة‬،‫ مطبعة السعادة‬،‫ همع الهوامع‬،‫ جالل الدين عبد الرحمن بن ابي بكر‬،‫السيوطي‬
2015 ،‫ بيروت‬،‫ المكتبة العصرية‬،‫ جامع الدروس العربية‬،‫ مصطفى‬،‫الغالييني‬
1992 ،‫ بيروت‬،‫ دار الكتب العلمية‬،‫ الجني الداني في حروف المعاني‬،‫ حسن بن قاسم‬،‫المرادي‬
2004 ،‫ بيروت‬،‫ دار الكتب العلمية‬،‫ المعجم المفصل في النحو العربي‬،‫ عزيزة‬،‫بابتي‬
2007 ،‫ القاهرة‬،‫ دار الحديث‬،‫ المعجم المفهرس أللفاظ القرآن الكريم‬،‫ محمد فؤاد‬،‫عبد الباقي‬
2012 ،‫ دار السالم للطباعة والنشر والتوزيع والترجمة‬،‫ دليل مفاتيح اإلعراب الميسر‬،‫ شريف‬،‫محمود‬

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

71

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
Appendix
Table 1 shows the different functions of particle ‫ هل‬as classed in different contexts

Table 2 shows particle ‫هل‬, acting as a tool for carrying the meaning of ‘a corroborative
particle’ in different Quranic verses

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

72

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 1. February 2019
Inconsistent Linguistic Functional Behaviours of Particle‫هل‬
Bader Eddin
Table 3 shows particle ‫هل‬, acting as a tool for carrying the meaning of ‘a negative particle’ in
different Quranic verses

Table 4 shows particle ‫هل‬, acting as a tool for carrying the meaning of ‘an imperative
particle’ in different Quranic verses

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

73

