1
BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES: REGIONS FOR AMERICAN HEALTHCARE REFORM
By Brian Coyle
INTRODUCTION

“Media Highlights” are
provided at the end of
this paper, starting p. 54.

Major health care reform, such as a government run "public option" insurance program, an expansion
of Medicare to include the 50 to 65 age group, or "Medicare for All," will reach hundreds of millions of
people. Any of these programs need hundreds of thousands to millions of new employees. Rolling out
such a program will be a massive challenge. It certainly will require an extended length of time – not a
few years, but a decade or longer. Given the political controversies over federal programs, this requires
sustaining a difficult, long-term commitment.
Extensive reforms will face dynamics like the Affordable Care Act did. Legislation will be influenced
by medical industries. States where a significant number of beneficiaries are people of color will be
centers of growing opposition. Channeled through the courts, the Supreme Court's conservative
majority may quash important components. Progressive commitment will wane, as it did as when the
ACA was rewritten and adjudicated. Immediate cost reductions and better care will lag predictions.
Program flaws will be emphasized, as were difficulties in the roll-out of the ACA. Facing reality,
centrists will decline to commit to the program, as they declined to support the ACA.
At the same time, the public are afraid to lose what they have. Since the ACA's implementation, fewer
people face bankruptcy and barriers to treatment because of preexisting conditions. The public strongly
opposes loss of these specific benefits. They also fear losing health insurance they obtain through work,
as some health reforms propose. Yet this support is limited, not the kind of full-throated commitment
that renders programs immune to attack. Commitment is limited by Americans fear of "big
government." Between 1965 and 2017, Gallup has asked if "big business", "big labor", or "big
government" most threatened the country. "Big government" is consistently the biggest threat, growing
to 67% under the Trump administration. "Big business" is most feared by only a quarter of the public.1

1 Fishman, N., and Davis, A., "Americans Still See Big Government as Top Threat"
news.gallup.com/poll/201629/americans-big-government-top-threat.aspx

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

2

Those who seek more accessible, affordable, and higher quality health care need to move beyond the
current political paradigm. Instead of simply focusing on the current system's inflated costs and other
problems, they need to address the challenges of administering and managing a new system. That
includes strategy to address inevitable political hurdles, as well as developing the capacity to run very
large organizations. Programs that touch hundreds of millions of people must expand gradually.
Political objections must be proactively managed.
For all Americans to get relatively low-cost and high-quality health care requires addressing the
nation's realities. It's a big country (3rd or 4th largest in the world)2 with lots of people (3rd most.) Most
of us don't recognize how important this is, in terms of administration of complex affairs. The US is
passing through an interethnic gauntlet, as the majority ethnicity – white Americans of non-hispanic
decent – falls below 60% of the total. Any social program with benefits for people with non-white or
hispanic heritage, especially if benefits make a big difference for disadvantaged groups, will face harsh
majoritarian opposition. On the other hand, as bad as commercially operated health care may be, a
centralized bureaucracy may have very serious problems. Too often Americans look at small European
health care systems as models. They need also observe larger countries like Russia.
Solutions emerge when it’s recognized that America's division into 50 states is imperfect. Plenty of “red
state” opposition to federal programs has to do with the incapacity of their meager state governments to
shoulder burdens. To achieve success requires observing how other countries address decentralized
health care delivery, namely regionally. Many states need to be grouped together under an
administrative umbrella, so that properly delegated administration can function well.
This will happen deliberately, by seeding rollouts of “public-option” or “Medicare for All” type
programs in multiple regions. These can grow, develop necessary capacities, and demonstrate potential.
It will take time, as any program will need hundreds of thousands to millions of managers and benefit
coordinators. This is common to all universal plans, including England, France, and Canada. Their
scale is a fraction of the US, however. To manage a US system may require an organization that rivals
the US military – a task to make any rational person pause. One rather radical alternative is to
2 It is unclear, when one includes territorial waters (rivers, lakes, oceanic borders) whether China or the US has a larger
area. If China is larger, the US is the 4th largest nation. Otherwise it is the 3rd largest.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

3

nationalize US health insurers like United Health Group, and thereby obtain hundreds of thousands of
specialized employees instantly. That no one considers this, while having no qualms about barring such
companies from operating (and essentially putting them out of business) shows how little attention is
given to administrative needs.
Any roll-out will take more than twice as long as the current “Medicare for All” plan intends. It will
require sustained political effort. Contemporary politics will be difficult. Proponents will have to be
clever. History shows that the US could now have more accessible, better quality health care. But
perfection became enemy of the good, and reform was set back for half a generation. To avoid that, we
need to face America's size, and its social realities, squarely.
KEEP SCALE IN FOCUS
Scale matters. At the smallest, things break down. Normal rules don't work. Quantum mechanics
produces superpositions, entanglement, particle tunneling. Time and gravity are suspect. Of course,
that's 36 orders of magnitude smaller than the mechanics of cars and toasters.
I'm the board member of a tiny school district, under 100 students, which is 104 smaller than Los
Angeles Unified. Normal organization rules break down at such small scales, replaced by psychological
relationships. It matters less if teachers are constructivists, instructivists, or connectivists, and more
what their personalities are. At this scale a single interpersonal conflict is ruinous.
Scale also matters at large scales. Herding animals can often survive environmental calamities like
drought. But when herds get too large they degrade their environments. Scale improves health and
survival up to a point, until the population itself becomes the story.
Increased scale usually requires diversity. The Argentine ant (Linepithema humile) is one of the most
common invasive species in the world. It's distinguished from other ants by its lack of genetic diversity.
Instead of local colonies fighting when they contact each other, Argentine colonies engage in kumbaya
meetings. Huge supercolonies can form, spanning all of California, or most of New Zealand. However,
homogeneous genetic systems don’t adapt well. As colonies pass some threshold of scale, their

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

4

numbers collapse. Perhaps a pathogen or predator discovers a vast ant resource to mow through. Or
genetic homogeneity leads to deleterious attributes, the ant version of inbred royalty. The lack of
diversity that facilitated initial expansion also undermines it.
Mathematicians like scale invariance, or patterns that scale up or down without changing, like fractals.
When processes and structures change their configuration, depending on how big or small they are, it’s
called scale variance. Human society is scale variant. At different sizes, different patterns and processes
happen. Nearly every country’s government, including the US, provides at least some health care to its
public. Richer countries generally provide more than poor. But scale impacts how its done, in both.
American political culture is shaped by its large scale, particularly the politics and processes of health
care reform. Scale impacts attitudes and habits. US homes, cars, guns, schools, and hospitals are shaped
by it. American consumer behavior and medical consumption, is rooted in it. Because of its size and
history, the US has high rates of internal mobility. That undermines tight-knit authority, and makes
grassroots activism difficult. Geographic scale impacts organizational efficiency and effectiveness. The
most comparable country to the US, in population and space, is, surprisingly, Russia. In the Americas,
the country whose demographic and geographic scale the US most resembles is Brazil. We can learn
from these countries, in ways that might surprise us.
There’s a basic scale factor that I’ve identified that constrains organization scale. I call it the “Rule of
Fives.” A formula shows how large organizations can become. There are absolute limits, at least during
ordinary times. Ignoring scale impacts on bureaucracies is tantamount to inviting failure. This is a real
danger, because scale is so overarching, it’s almost invisible. That’s also true for Russia (and, naturally,
it’s easier to see in another country than one’s own.) When politicians tell people what they want to
hear, scale isn’t mentioned.
Most nations subdivide into states or similar entities. That handles elections and administration. If scale
didn’t matter, subdivisions like states wouldn’t be necessary. The US did much of its dividing while its
European population rapidly expanded. States were sectioned off of larger territory, after a critical mass
migrated in. There was more politics than planning involved. Old world subdivisions emerged in a

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

more distant past, some to make sure hospitals and homes for old soldiers were in the right places.
Scandinavian countries continue to reconfigure subdivisions, mainly to improve health care delivery.
The more a national government provides everyone’s medical care, the more it becomes its major
domestic function. Health care in large countries, particularly its administration, must be managed
regionally. In the US, Medicare is delivered via groups of states. States are too varied, often too small
or sparsely populated to sustain competent management. In the political discourse of today, it may
surprise some people to learn that Medicare outsources all of its management to insurance companies.
The map below shows the areas of each Medicare Administrative Contractor (MAC.)

source: www.cms.gov
Federal agencies often organize regionally, not state by state. The IRS separates the country into 33
districts, each with 7 to 13 million people, in contiguous states (California and Texas are divided up.)

source: tracfed.syr.edu/help/geo/irsmap.html

5

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

6

Given America’s size, rolling out a universal health care plan like the UK’s National Health Service, or
counterparts in France, Italy, or even Canada, will be a more than a big project. It would be collosal.
Although its wrinkles were ironed out, the first years of the ACA’s website roll-out skated close to
disaster. This was a limited program for 12 million people, not hundreds of millions; the ACA was a
portal for insurance, not a program managing complicated delivery systems. Countries like Britain or
Italy have health care systems that deliver care like the US Veteran’s Administration health care does,
not US Medicare. Creating a national equivalent to the VHA system would require an organization that
tracks and pays six to nine million employees. That’s two or three times larger than the US Department
of Defense, the world’s largest employer. Many analysts believe the US military is itself too large to
effectively manage, with operations too complex for existing accounting systems.3 The nation’s
medical delivery, provided through hospitals, HMOs, and clinics, with expensive machines and
specialist MDs, making four billion prescriptions to millions of patients, whose sensitive, complex
medical records are kept in regulated proprietary databases, is as complex as the military.
Many observers focus on the complexity of paying for US health care, not administering it. The usual
story has two main causes: history and American governance. History starts with the different
responses of allied powers to World War 2. European health care infrastructure was devastated.
Governments had to provide medical services for their people. The US experience was different.
During the war, with so many employees in the military, labor had leverage. That reduced the
government's capacity to purchase ships, tanks, and planes, so it enacted wage controls. Employers
used benefit packages, especially medical benefits, as a non-wage inducement to prospective workers.
These became standard. After the war, the health care institution remained, unblemished. Employers
got major tax deductions paying for health plans.
As for governance, the US federal government has difficulty passing legislation because of deliberate
friction inserted in its Constitution. The founders united 13 colonies spanning 1,200 miles, at a time
when transport was 20 miles a day by horse. At the time, of course, the issue of small and large states
was a priority. Madison’s solution forced provincial mind-sets and self-interests to enact legislation
through processes that demanded compromise after compromise.
3 Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, 2010, Improving Financial Accountability at the Department
of Defense: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/CHRG-111shrg63833/html/CHRG-111shrg63833.htm

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

7

The complex system of American health care, especially its funding, is said to result. Medicare includes
three different payment systems, one based on Democrat proposals, another on Republican, a third
from an American Medical Association (AMA) plan.4 The VHA is run like the UK’s National Health
System. The many commercial plans used by employers pay providers independently. The Children's
Health Insurance Plan (CHIP,) signed into law in 1997, provides a block grant to states, which can
expand Medicaid to children, or provide a state-level payment system. On top of these payers, each
negotiating different prices, hospitals don’t reveal their costs.
Those who demand universal care gain attention during election cycles. This is when committed people
and groups have an opportunity to make demands. After elections, their voices lose clout. The scale of
the US makes it difficult for grassroots activism to mobilize large scale efforts in Washington DC. It’s
much easier for profitable institutions to organize nationally, and apply continuous, coordinated
pressure. Throughout the 20th century, the AMA would block reform. President Roosevelt dropped
health coverage from the New Deal to avoid AMA opposition. As more women became doctors and
more doctors work on salary for HMOs, the AMA took a back seat to other industries.5 Now opposition
is led by for-profit hospitals, health insurance companies, and pharmaceutical firms.
Legislators retrench, and focus on tractable solutions. Campaign and lobbying contributions play a
major role today, but this pattern existed even when money was more restricted. In the 1950s the
Eisenhower administration wanted the federal government to provide universal reinsurance. It would
cover 2/3 of any hospital bill over $1,000 ($10,000 today.) Conservatives objected at the cost. Liberals
wanted more, but there was no national constituency clamoring for it. The next two administrations
focused on senior health care, and a backstop for the poor. The decision to focus on the elderly was
political. Seniors were a sympathetic group, and a voting bloc. The working poor became a surprising
focus for conservative Democrats, to appease those wanting Medicare for the entire population. This
appeared to be an issue primarily salient to the working poor. Medicaid was proposed to quiet them.

4 Oberlander, J. 2013. “Medicare: The Great Transformation.” In J. A. Morone and D. Ehlke, eds., Health Politics and
Policy (5th ed.). Stamford, CT: Cengage.
5 https://www.wsj.com/articles/doctors-once-gop-stalwarts-now-more-likely-to-be-democrats-11570383523

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

8

The 1993 Clinton health plan was an effort to provide both universal insurance and offset medical
costs. The Clinton plan ran into full-throttled right-wing opposition and floundered. The administration
turned its focus on children, with CHIP. Failing to reach a mountain peak, reformers compromise for an
intermediate height. Each compromise increases overall complexity.
Lobbyists, partisanship, and legislative roadblocks aren’t the only reason health care reform is hard.
The uninsured population is skewed towards the historically disadvantaged, which undermines
mainstream support. Also, existing infrastructure won’t disappear. Over-built and heavily financed
hospitals will remain. So will powerful industries like pharmaceuticals, and overpaid doctors. Since all
solutions involve compromise, many in the public don’t really like what they hear, either.
The friction that slows the legislative process, since not long after the constitution was ratified, is not a
thousand small differences. Political parties, then slavery, finally race, became the overarching issue.
This still stymies reform, yet health care reformers seem to misread it. Dog whistle policies like “states
rights” are just words. Their proponents mean they want to discriminate like they used to, not run
complicated government services at the state level. Reformers, generally Democrats, hear these dogwhistles, and though they may understand their intent, still believe they’re a literal statement.
The call for “state’s rights” doesn’t mean people in Missouri or Arkansas believe their state is
particularly capable. They’ve heard propaganda to cut state taxes and services, and may agree. That
certainly doesn’t promote confidence in their state’s ability to do things. They’re angry that postindustrial development concentrates on coasts, and draws away their own best and brightest. That
hardly encourages them to believe their state is equipped to run new programs. When the 1993 Clinton
initiative or the ACA proposed that states manage health care (even if according to federal rules, and
perhaps with federal aid), it’s not something rural red state Americans necessarily find comforting.
People want to limit federal oversight, not federal support. Does anyone in Wyoming believe the ACA’s
web-based exchange, if operated by their state, would be as useful as California’s? The Clinton plan
relied on states to collect all state health care premiums, to use for all health care plans in that state.
Ignored was that such a program requires substantial administrative ability and significant employer
participation. Opponents of the plan lived in states least likely to effectively run such programs. Not a

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

9

message anyone wants to embrace, of course. Instead they dog whistle. Racial overtones are ugly, but
they may camouflage concerns that the real beneficiaries of reform are, essentially, non-whites who
live in large states.
When the ACA’s health exchanges were rolled out, states could either run them on their own, get
federal support, or let the federal government run it entirely. The map below shows few underpopulated
states tried to run them independently.

Clearly this coincides with partisan opposition to the bill, since Republican controlled states declined to
run their own online exchanges. Yet another map, of states that expanded Medicaid, shows this was
more than just partisan politics. Montana and North Dakota, and Nebraska and Idaho in 2019, are
Republican states with limited populations that didn’t run exchanges but chose to expand Medicaid.

source: Norris, L., 2018. Medicaid expansion, eligibility, enrollment, and benefits.
healthinsurance.org/medicaid

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

10

A reason large, underpopulated states in the middle of the country are susceptible to anti-government
propaganda could be, in part, an accurate assessment that their state government isn’t very effective,
while heavily populated states have both superior capacity, and the demographic density to obtain
valuable federal attention. Devolving health care administration to underpopulated states puts them at a
disadvantage, as does centralizing it in Washington DC.
It’s also true that Republican oriented states that chose to expand Medicaid have primarily white
working poor populations. It was those states whose likely new recipients were non-white that didn’t
expand it. This is an issue that deserves the slogan “black lives matter” as much policing, since nonexpanding states saw a five year excess death toll of around 15,600 Medicaid eligible people.6 These
were predominantly the non-white working poor, in states where Medicaid expansion cost almost
nothing. It’s hard to see this as reflecting a state’s concern for non-white lives.
The federal government spends quite a bit in a few sparsely populated states. But this “red state
advantage” is exaggerated. Most of the prairie states get around the same amount of federal dollars as
others. Some draconian Republican policies reflect the interests of their sparsely populated districts.
Mass transit rarely impacts areas with fewer than 100 people per square mile, the areas Republicans
dominate. Many GOP congresspeople reject any public spending on mass transit, while supporting
highways. One could argue they’re not nationalists, but the system is set up to force compromise.
Not considered is whether the division of US states makes sense. It’s a common critique about other
parts of the globe. The middle east and Africa are said to be badly divided into countries. In Africa
there are over a thousand different ethnic groups (with different languages and cultures.) Borders slice
some coherent groups in two or three, and leave others whole. Larger, intact ethnicities dominate
politics; divided groups are disadvantaged. Conversely, two or more powerful ethnic groups are
sometimes lumped into the same country, each wanting it's own nation. Instability often follows. The
middle eastern case is better known, such as the cobbling together of Iraq, Jordan, or Lebanon with
rival ethnic and religious groups.7
6 Miller, S., at al., 2019, Medicaid and Mortality: New Evidence from Linked Survey and Administrative Data, NBER
Working Paper No. 26081, July 2019, Revised August 2019
7 Englebert, P., et al., 2002, Dismemberment and Suffocation, Comparative Political Studies, 35:10 1093-1118

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

11

The US formation of states, after the initial 13, was done with little more care. Native Americans
lacked any say. The first focus was on an area called the Northwest Territory. Three to five states were
to be formed. A state needed 60,000 people, but most important was political agency to request it.

source: en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northwest_Ordinance

Three forces kept states small. 1) States east of the Mississippi ceded lands to form new states, and
didn’t want these larger than the original. Antebellum Americans were keenly aware of being
overshadowed by new states. 2) Migrants into new territories wanted to be bordered off from potential
rivals, to maintain state control. Michigan Territory was carved out from Indiana Territory when a
request for votes to elect Indiana's government arrived in Detroit after the actual election. 3) The
balance of power between slave and free states led to a proliferation of each. The Louisiana Territory,
renamed Missouri Territory after Louisiana became a state, had a southeast chunk become a slave state,
Missouri, in 1821. Antislavery members of Congress blocked it, until an infamous compromise. For
every new slave state, a new free state would enter. Keeping states relatively small helped keep the
"balance.”8 The result of these multiple forces is that many American states, regardless of spatial
extent, are too small to effectively manage what modern governments do.
A recent method uses the degree of straight-line borders to rank nations by arbitrary borders. Nonsquiggly, straight-line borders correlate with lower levels of development.9 US states east of the
8 North, D.C., 1990, Institutions, institutional change and economic performance, Cambridge University Press
9 Alesina, A. et al., 2006, Artificial States, https://wcfia.harvard.edu/files/wcfia/files/alesina_artificialstates.pdf

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

12

Mississippi have squiggly borders, suggesting they’re derived from natural impediments or contrasting
political forces. States carved from the Louisiana purchase and points west tend to have long straight
borders. That suggests they’re arbitrarily drawn by distant officials.
You build a healthcare program with the state lines that you have, not the ones you wished you had.
The US has regions based on historical and cultural patterns. It also sliced into states that must be
respected. Luckily, it is possible to group the country into five regions of about 65 million people each.
That’s the population size of successful European universal health plans. Within each, an administrative
team can deploy resources much like today’s Medicare, which “touches” over 60 million.

There are legitimate reasons humans can’t manage complex services for more than 100 million people.
Some may believe the existing US health care system, however inefficient, demonstrates existing
management capacity sufficient for centralized administration. This is myopic. The current patchwork
includes many hospital systems larger than other nations’ entire health systems. Universal care
proponents often present their ideas as “single-payer,” “single-provider,” and “single health care
player.” They should recognize that many Americans are threatened by the idea of centralized federal
government.
The US federal government has a limited domestic footprint, compared to many other countries. But
bigness is a fact of life for nearly all Americans. Social and physical conditions that encompass one’s
reality become background, ubiquitous. They shape attitudes, behaviors, and expectations. The inability
of the federal government to provide important social services well may be a self-fulfilling tragedy,
since the more people believe it can’t, the less funding they support. But in the third or fourth largest

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

13

country on earth, with the third largest population, it’s not an irrational belief. There are 50 states, after
all. The founders thought 13 were a lot.
In fact, a division of the US into five administrative regions probably exceeds the current capacity of
federal health care delivery. This is partly a function of administrative realities, but also concerns
national politics. In every country, a national program to provide services is a political process. The US
is passing through a complex demographic period. In some areas there are critical amounts of ethnic
diversity. This is a transitional problem, which should resolve itself in 15 to 20 years.
There are five themes I consider.
1. Scale impacts American society. This is usually taken for granted. But it’s essential to understand, in
contemplating almost any political or social change. The current “Medicare for All” bill seems almost
oblivious to the demands of scale.
2. To organize a lot of people in a very large country is hard. That’s true both for the establishment of a
universal medical system workforce, and for the grassroots activism that must sustain a long roll-out.
The option of regional organization has not been sufficiently considered.
3. The “Rule of Fives” is an equation that helps make sense of bureaucratic organization. People can
manage four to six other people effectively. This forms a pattern, when repeated in organizations. It
illustrates the capacity to organize large groups, and their constraints. There are reasons to respect the
limitations on administrative size, as well as avenues to explore to overcome it.
4. The “60% to 50% Gauntlet” describes a phenomena in which majorities damage society as their
relative population reduces. I provide examples from the pre-Civil War south, California in the 1990s,
and Brazil in the 1970s. This is not the only cause of ethnic fear and virulent outrage. But given the US
white population in 2020 approaches 60%, it’s significant enough to prepare for.
5. There are common ways that nations divide into state-like entities. There are enough similarities
between nations, regarding state-like formation, that a country can learn a lot by examining what others

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

14

have done. Scandinavian countries have reworked their regional divisions primarily for health care
delivery. Even Russia provides an example of recent regionalization.
A conclusion follows, which provides a road map for a scale-based plan for health care reform.
(1) SCALE, AMERICAN STYLE
Americans are sometimes oblivious to how scale changes things in their society. The country’s values,
history, and institutions are considered more important. Consider the US military. It keeps the peace for
global movements of goods, energy, services, and people. During the Cold War it was arrayed to
prevent nuclear war. But in purely defense terms, the US, surrounded by oceans, with only two much
weaker and friendly nations on its borders, is almost impregnable. The country could prevent invasion
with less than half the military it now has, if that was its primary purpose. Many politicians understand
that the relatively giant US military prevents hostile regimes from expanding their influence, stabilizes
trade routes, and solidifies allied partnerships. Yet they rarely express this, worried the public will find
them too oriented towards other countries’ benefit. Instead they fall back on a sense people have that
big is good. President Trump went so far as to reject the military’s foreign strategy, yet wanted bigger,
larger armaments based on their cultural appeal. US geography helps explain this national
characteristic. The same disconnect between scale’s political impact and its influence on behavior
occurs in Russia. Russians are hyper-conscious of their status, or lack of status, as a superpower. This
despite a meager economy, a provincial culture, and limited public interest in global affairs. It seems to
be a function of large populations in enormous spaces.
There’s an old joke about a duck who says “how’s the water down there” to two fish. They respond, of
course, “what’s water?” Perhaps nothing illustrates the influence of scale on Americans as norms about
building size. We swim in a sea of big, bigger, and McMansion homes. Not only are US homes the
largest in the world, a driving force behind rising health care and college costs is large building
construction. These seem so natural, so essential to a properly functioning community, hospital, or
university, they are accepted without criticism.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

15

People elsewhere notice. Another old joke, heard in plenty of European bars, runs “in heaven the chef
is French, the policeman British, the home American, the engineer German, the wife Japanese. In hell
the chef is British, the policeman German, the engineer French, the home Japanese, and the wife
American.” This offends nearly everyone, but gets knowing laughter. One survey found UK homes
average 33 m2 per person, Japanese 35 m2, French 43 m2, German 55 m2, and in the US 77 m2.10 Other
surveys find different averages, but similar trends, with Americans having the largest homes.
Americans appreciate houses the way the French like food or the Germans cars. When surveyed, the
only area the Americans rank highest on, among OECD life satisfaction indices, is their own housing.
America is indelibly imprinted by large scales. Only 17% live in apartments or condos; 53% want to
live "away from it all.”11 Yet Americans don’t believe that the scale of things shapes them. The hubris
required to send people to the moon required the most powerful rocket ever built, the Saturn V (after 50
years still the biggest.) In contemporary American consciousness, this massive fact, on display in
various museums, is ignored. Instead debate concerns whether the tiny lunar module failed to kick up
moon dust, thereby revealing a giant conspiracy. “We’re not really that big,” conspiracy theorists seem
to be saying.
Large suburban houses are attributed to zoning laws, transport systems, FHA mortgages, segregation,
economic conditions, a baby boom, aggressive contractors, and weak local governments. These all
matter, but most intersect scale: zoning giant suburban lots starts with having expendable space, and the
ease of spreading suburban housing made automobiles more useful than trains. Cities like London,
Frankfurt, and Copenhagen saw a vast expansion of suburbia after 1970, but none on the US scale.
Sprawl consumes land, and land is scarce in Europe. Los Angeles initially epitomized the low-density
metropolis, a city of suburbs. But it's ringed by mountains and deserts, and could expand only so far.
Had LA only rolling hills and green landscapes to the east, it might stretch all the way to Las Vegas.12

10 http://shrinkthatfootprint.com/how-big-is-a-house
11 2011 Community Preference Survey, National Association of Realtors builderonline.com/money/economics/80-percentof-americans-prefer-single-family-homeownership_o
12 Moura, M.C.P., et al., (2015) 120 Years of U.S. Residential Housing Stock and Floor Space, PLoS One, 10(8): e0134135

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

16

Sprawl occurs when property values further out are less than those further in. Houses are less expensive
when more people build them. Post-war America mass marketed power hand tools. Contractors hired a
vast pool of inexperienced workers and built cheaply quickly.
Americans demand front yards, but they're not unique in this. Demand needs supply, and its big
countries like Canada, the US, and Australia that have abundant land for lawns. Between 1950 and
1995 Chicago's population grew 48%, while land covered by residences grew 165%.13 Pine forests
spread around Atlanta, until cleared for suburbs. There’s so much available, 31 million forest acres may
become single-family housing units by 2040.14 Few other countries have that much forest to cut.
Forests were spread so thickly across colonial North America that it's said a squirrel could run from the
Atlantic ocean to the Mississippi without touching ground. As settlers moved inland, they cut trees and
farmed. The tree abundance was so intense visitors expected to find a roaring fire in a farmer's hearth.15
If not, it was a sign of laziness. Ambitious farmers were expected to use things up and migrate west.
Conspicuous consumption was a sign of hard work. It was culture driven by a lot of land.
US gun culture is "frontier" mentality. People on newly demarcated land, surrounded by a vast
continent, were isolated and afraid. An endless forest or prairie needed a gun.
Americans value larger cars and drive farther. Compared to 11 other "advanced democracies," they
drive nearly double the average distance per car, per year. Canada is closest, where vehicles travel
8,200 km per capita. In the US each car travels 13,000 km.16 Commute distances are important, as are
distances between cities. Both are larger in a bigger country. Crossover SUVs became the most
commonly purchased automobile in 2018, pushing sedans to second place. Spatial perception is
important. Larger cars let occupants see farther. For the king of the castle, it’s the commanding heights.

13 Greene, R.P., and J.M. Harlin, 1995 "Threat to High Market Value Agricultural Lands" Social Science Journal, 32(2):
137-155
14 Wear, D.C., 2002, Land Use and Timber Outlook, samab.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/2002-ProgramAbstracts.pdf
p54
15 H.C.M. Scott, Fuel An Ecocritical History, Bloomsbury Academic, 2018, p.36
16 pdf.wri.org/automobile-fuel-economy-co2-industrialized-countries.pdf

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

17

Larger cars fit more children, while American family size shrinks. US home sizes increased the most in
the last 30 years, when persons per home decreased.17 The US has the largest pig, dairy, and cattle
farms in the world, when Americans are eating more calories than they need.18 But while the US has the
highest obesity rate (of countries over 10 million people) big farms don't cause it.19 Big farms are
possible in a big country, where conspicuous consumption is a sign of hard work. Big homes are
possible in a big country, where big homes are a sign of status. The common thread is size.
US education culture rejects, as a norm, control by the federal government. In other OECD countries
education is more centralized, controlled and funded by the national government. The US federal
government is too distant to be in charge of something so intimate. It’s the same in other big countries.
English public schools are governed by the national government, Australia’s by the local state.
A national health care database, with every residents’ medical records, will run up against this. Health
history is personal and intimate, not something to gathered in Washington DC.
The biggest expense in US health care is hospital costs. A large part of hospital costs is facilities. The
average patient room size in the U.S. increased from 240 square feet in 2002 to 320 square feet in
2012.20 The average bed occupancy of other developed countries was 76.1% in 2016. In the US,
occupancy was 62.9%.21 The US spent $36 billion in 2006 on new buildings and extending existing
hospitals, a 33% increase from 2003.22 In 2015 it spent $97 billion, a 266% increase from 2006.23
According to a Bank of America report, “Capital spending drives market share in the hospital
industry.”24 Non-profit and profit hospitals are compelled to build larger, more impressive buildings,
which is accomplished by charging patients more than necessary to secure financing. Yet according to
McKinsey, “US provider systems have a considerable amount of capital tied up in what are now
17 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and U.S. Department of Commerce, 2015 Characteristics of New
Hoursing, census.gov/construction/chars/pdf/c25ann2015.pdf
18 www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver/5jlv81sclr35-en.pdf?
19 worldpopulationreview.com/countries/most-obese-countries/
20 Luoma, H., 2014, Best of 2014: Increasing Patient Satisfaction By Decreasing Patient Room Size, healthcare design
21 Sahni, N., 2019, The productivity imperative for healthcare delivery in the United States, McKinsey & Company
22 healthcare.mckinsey.com/sites/default/files/MGI_Accounting_for_cost_of_US_health_care_full_report.pdf
23 healthcarefinancenews.com/news/top-healthcare-construction-projects-2015-buidling-surges-demand-picks-revista-says
24 Bank of America Annual Hospital Survey, 2015

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

18

unproductive fixed assets.”25 Hospitals in countries where governments pay for hospital buildings have
much lower costs. They also don't have such large hospital buildings. They are also smaller countries.
During the run up to the 2020 Democrat Presidential nomination, several candidates, and many voters,
supported “Medicare for All” legislation. Senator Bernie Sanders wrote a bill by that name, co-signed
by four other Presidential hopefuls. It’s a list of health needs that must be covered at no cost to citizens.
Three single sentences describe administration: the federal unit in charge will plan for expenditures and
services; it will plan doctor and nurse education funding; it will help states develop plans. No details
are offered. A section titled “Regional Administration” establishes regional directorates, which, if
possible, incorporate the CMS regional office. This is the only mention of how administration is
structured, and suggests it will use the Medicare regional arrangement. These are highly unequal
regions, incomparable in population and income, an unfortunate basis to serve 327 million Americans.
CMS Medicare programs are delivered in 12 geographic jurisdictions. Each area has very different
Medicare populations. Jurisdiction H contains 13.5% of total Medicare A/B recipients, while
Jurisdiction 8 has 5.9%. Since 2003, CMS does competitive bidding for MAC selection. They’re
concerned about scale. In 2010 CMS tried to limit the jurisdictions a single MAC could contract for.
They didn’t want to award over 26% of the national A/B Medicare population to any single contractor,
or more than 40% to a single contractor's affiliates. A Federal Appeals panel overruled them.
Other than the mention of CMS regions, the Sanders bill follows a state-level orientation. The national
budget determines administration, capital, and education expenditures, and each state is responsible for
execution. 1% of the budget, which could be $30 billion (1% of $3 trillion) may be used to assist health
insurance workers displaced by the bill. According to 2018 Insurance Information Institute figures,
there are 507,100 medical insurance employees.26 This number doesn’t include a similar number of
plan administrators who work in health maintenance organizations. For just the insurance workers, the
bill provides about $60,000 each. Their expertise is ignored, though potentially invaluable to rolling out
a massive new program.
25 healthcare.mckinsey.com/sites/default/files/MGI_Accounting_for_cost_of_US_health_care_full_report.pdf
26 https://www.iii.org/presentation/insurance-industry-employment-trends-1990-2018-january-2018-030918 (Note that a
Google search returns the health insurance industry hires 2.66 million people. This is incorrect.)

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

19

The Sanders plan has a four year roll-out. In year one the Medicare age lowers to 55, year two to 45,
year three to 35, then presumably it’s Medicare for all. The bill offers no explanation for why these age
groups are selected. In 2017 there were 41.65 million Americans between 55 and 64, and 83.32 million
between 35 and 54, according to the US Census. Thus around 40 million people join the rolls each
each, tripling Medicare’s population to over 180 million. According to the Sanders bill, the transition is
run like Medicare. Although they aren’t mentioned, presumably MAC insurance companies must
massively increase, integrate a million new employees, establish systems and vast hierarchical
bureaucracies, over three years. Their roles after that, when Medicare for All kicks in, is not explained.
The bill, in pdf format with wide margins and oversize text, runs 100 pages. Formatted like this article,
it’s 35 pages long. It would be considered bare bones and of little functional use in a country like
Norway, with 5 million people. The bill that established the ACA was criticized for being over 1,000
pages, as was the failed Clinton health plan. Their lengths reflected the demands of actual
implementation. Without addressing the massive scale of the US, its population, the size of its medical
infrastructure, the Sanders bill isn’t grounded in reality. That it has gathered so much attention, often
uncritical, including enthusiasm from millions of supporters, demonstrates the American penchant for
ignoring the scale and diversity around them.
Proponents of the Medicare for All legislation point to Canada as a model. What’s commonly ignored
is its regionalization, which has fostered incremental innovation, not sudden major reform.
Although Canada has so many fewer people than the US, because they're spread out over such a large
area, it suffers some similar issues. Universal health care was passed in Canada in 1966, but quality
deteriorated towards the end of the 20th century. A 2001 review found "task forces, commissions, and
policymakers charged with strengthening primary care have almost always advocated “big bang”
reforms—the universal, more or less simultaneous, implementation of an “ideal” model." The authors
concluded "the pursuit of “big bang” change under unfavorable circumstances may not simply be futile
but may result in missed opportunities for cumulative incremental change."27

27 Hutchison, B., et al., 2001, Primary care in Canada, Health Affairs, May-Jun;20(3):116-31

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

20

Canadians are spread out and have a strong feeling of independence. Prior to the 21st century, there
were many parts of the country where physicians worked in small groups or alone. A top-down plan
didn’t sit right with many. These feelings can be found in the US as well. When provincial
governments, working with provincial medical associations, developed their own autonomous
healthcare organizations, funding methods, and payments, genuine innovation and reform happened.28
Provincial governments fund primary health care services. The money is actually transferred from the
Canadian federal government's general revenues, through The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), a
scheme developed in the early 21st century. It's a block grant, but must be used to meet national
healthcare criteria. The CHT is based on population (though until recently provinces with less robust
economies got more.) Provinces can also raise their own taxes to supplement healthcare.
Different provinces organize health care differently, because they hold the purse-strings. In Quebec,
many family physicians serve in groups of six to ten. Ontario organizes it's family medical groups in
teams of ten to 30. In Alberta they work in groups that average about 60. Quebec tried the larger,
interdisciplinary approach, but physicians opposed it. Provinces have different priorities, and different
health care outcomes. But Canadians are receiving more effective care. In 2002 only 600,000 people in
Ontario had a primary physician. By 2011 that number rose to 9.5 million.19
Canada has a smaller population than California, by about two million. So it bears none of the
demographic scale of the US. But it’s geography is immense. That is sufficient to drive a certain type of
health care path. Reform failed when the country’s scale wasn’t recognized, and “big bang” solutions
were borrowed from Europe. It would seem the US is still caught in this phase.
(2) THE NEED FOR PEOPLE TO RUN THINGS
Through much of the 20th century, US workers migrated from one part of the country to another at
higher rates than other countries. Employers dramatically relocate without leaving the country.
Employees move to different latitudes, where living conditions can be completely different. European
political norms, like labor supporting socialist parties, need groups of people in concentrated networks.
28 Hutchison, B., et al., 2011, Primary Health Care in Canada: Systems in Motion, Milbank Quarterly Jun; 89(2): 256–288

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

21

The ubiquity of internal migration in the US lets the air out of politically charged unions. Spatial
mobility, which can exploit distance in big places, defeats organization.
The US ordinarily functions on two primary levels, one nation-spanning, one state-level. People
distrust Washington DC, a federal government composed of a tiny fraction of the national population.
It’s burdened by distance, separated by an entire continent from the nation’s biggest economic engine,
California. No other country in the world has it’s economic center and finance and government centers
so far apart. It’s as if Vladivostok was the economic powerhouse of Russia.
When national protests occur, demonstrations in Washington DC are center stage. It’s extraordinarily
unlikely that people from California, Texas, or the state of Washington can be present in numbers that
represent their state sizes. The US Constitution is clear that public demonstrations are important for
democracy, that in modern terms they serve to speak truth to power. Yet the scale of America dilutes
that, damping popular efforts to change major policies.
Beatrix Hoffman noted that grassroots campaigns, essential for movements that changed conditions for
workers, women, African-Americans, and seniors, rarely mobilized for universal medical care.29 She
observed that health reforms emerge among experts in elite institutions, while grassroots activists
demands are more urgent and immediate. Unlike factory workers or working women, who spend 10
hours a day reminded of conditions that need changing, health care needs arise infrequently. But
Hoffman misses something. Grassroots activism that changes national policies makes its voice heard
protesting in Washington, DC and New York City. That’s a very high bar for movements in a big
country, because people live far away.
Prior to 2016, seven of the ten biggest marches in US history were in Washington DC, two were in
NYC. Politics is a social contest, and nothing rivets attention, from the media, the public, and
especially elected officials, like mass protest on their doorstep. The point of demonstrating is to push
the problem into the face of the most powerful leaders, who aren’t in San Francisco or Chicago. The
juxtaposition of protesters with Washington's monuments or New York's towers galvanizes the public.
29 Hoffman, Beatrix. “Health care reform and social movements in the United States.” American journal of public
health vol. 93,1 (2003): 75-85. doi:10.2105/ajph.93.1.75

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

22

Recent protest marches against the Trump administration, the Women's Marches and Marches for
Science, as well as the gun reform protest March for Our Lives, occurred in many cities. They're still
anchored in Washington DC, where their leaders speak, and largest crowds assemble. But protest
leaders now encourage marches in multiple cities around the country. Organizers recognize the
difficulty of reaching the nation's capital.
Decentralized protests are what a grassroots movement for universal health care may accomplish. Gun
control, after all, is a public health problem. Decentralization can weaken reform, because it reduces
protest concentration in the capital. For example, as many as five million people joined the 2017
Women's March, making it the largest in history. 200,000 to 500,000 marched in Washington, DC,30
almost as many in NYC,31 150,000 in Boston, 250,000 in Chicago.32 The largest group may have been
in Los Angeles, where 100,000 to 750,000 marched.33 The contemporary policy domain, for many
reasons, generates enough interest to mobilize many city protests, not a gigantic national one.
If five million people show up in Washington DC they can demand almost anything, and probably
achieve a breakthrough. That power is lost when spread out to many cities. If Boston, NYC, and
Philadephia selected one city to march in, they would have reached 800,000. Had just these northeast
marchers joined Washington DC, they would have had 1.3 million. That would have been the largest
single city demonstration in history. If San Francisco, Sacramento, and Los Angeles settled on a single
city, they would have easily broached a million. It’s not part of an American mindset to organize
regionally. But if there were four or five regional marches of around million each, it could break into
the national consciousness in a way city protests do not. This “regional” mindset needs development.
Americans believe they can reinvent themselves, largely because they can relocate somewhere
completely different. Instead of being indivisible, they can be invisible. In this way Americans are like
people from other large countries, and not the rest. Most of the world’s people live in smaller countries.
30 www.washingtonpost.com/local/womens-march-on-washington-a-sea-of-pink-hatted-protesters-vow-to-resist-donaldtrump/2017/01/21/
31 www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20170121/midtown/trump-protest-womens-march-nyc;
32 www.chicagotribune.com/news/ct-womens-march-chicago-0122-20170121-story.html
33 abc7.com/news/750000-attend-womens-march-la-organizers-say/1713822/

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

23

If protesters have more power when they concentrate in bigger numbers, workers tend to lose power
when institutions concentrate as larger entities. The operations of California's landline telephones were
summarized to me by a lineman who had worked on them for several decades. He saw PacBell become
SBC become AT&T. Each change saw levels of organization grow, and policy became more opaque.
Today's AT&T has so many levels that he solves problems by taking a work order and "losing" it, then
doing what's obviously necessary. His supervisor covers things up, because with so many levels of
administration, there’s too much paperwork for anyone to monitor. The lineman’s ethical code keeps
him honest, even if he does what he wants. At least that’s what he said. He can’t vouch for others.
Bureaucracies operate through hierarchies. The larger these are, the less transparent they become.
Those high up in the hierarchy can’t see down to the bottom. Those on lower rungs can’t see to the top.
Huge countries have this problem. From abroad, China looks like a draconian big-brother state. But
with 1.3 billion people, the central government rules through layers upon layers upon layers of lower
level cadres. Citizens can escape rules by convincing or corrupting local officials, who pay attention to
demands of those on levels directly above, not eight levels higher.
China, despite having the second largest police force in the world (India has the largest,) ranks around
130th out of 142 in police per capita. Each policeman in China serves 869 people, each policeman in
the U.S. serves 358, and each in Russia serves 158.34 Even if India or China wanted a police system like
Russia's, they couldn't run one. India would need 8.24 million police, 4 1/3 times more than today. China
would need 8.63 million police, nearly 5 ½ times more than now. These forces would be vastly larger
than any organized security forces in the world. Such a large police force would have so many layers of
bureaucracy it might grind to a halt.
China developed a Confucian culture to run a big place, deliberately avoiding excess bureaucracy. In
the late tenth century, the early Northern Song government bureaucracy had only 3,000 to 4,000 ranked
officials, who governed a population of about 300 million.35 It operated by monitoring local authorities,
34 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_countries_and_dependencies_by_number_of_police_officers
35 Department of Asian Art, 2000 “Scholar-Officials of China.” Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History, New York: The
Metropolitan Museum of Art

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

24

possible because strict social hierarchies captured local gentry and local clerks. The Chinese population
was fixed, visible, and bound by status. When people can't hide, they are much easier to control. That
seems to be the ambition of the current Chinese regime. But it isn’t possible. A “big brother” security
state of China’s size can monitor aberrant behavior. If people meet and organize in buildings for
legitimate reasons, they can do so for reasons not deemed legitimate without standing out. China’s
monitoring apparatus is primarily operated by central authorities to monitor other powerful people,
because it is these they can control, whom they are threatened by.
Medicare also operates with only a little more than 4,000 administrators. They do it by outsourcing
management to the MACs. Administrators can monitor and try to control key MAC executives, not the
MAC workforce. MAC workers reimburse hospitals and doctors, pay for pharmaceuticals and medical
equipment, and have call centers where Medicare participants find out benefits, make appointments,
choose doctors. Their disbursements follow Medicare rules, using Medicare dollars. Medicare covers ½
the health care costs of 60 million people this way.
The Medicare for All proposals supported by several Democratic candidates in the 2020 Presidential
primary are unclear on MACs. The government is the payer. But is it just the administrator, like
Medicare? Or does the government reimburse hospitals, pay for drugs, and serve customers, like the
VA’s health system, the VHA? The Sanders bill only states that enrollees “are entitled to have payment
made by the Secretary,” which, combined with its ban on insurance companies, sounds like VHA.
Running the whole country’s health care like the VHA would require setting up an enormous operation,
bigger than the US military. The problem isn’t just cost. How will so many people be hired,
administered, and managed?
To estimate a “VHA for All” employee total, I used the VHA’s own disaggregation of patients into 8
categories, called priorities. Veterans in priorities 1 to 6 are older, poorer, sicker. They use 85% of the
VHA budget. Other vets, younger, healthier, are categories 7 and 8. Half don't receive appreciable
services in a given year. It’s difficult to assess their per capita costs, because the total budget includes
overhead. The VA itself estimates it spends between $1,000 and $6,000 on different types of users in
categories 7 and 8, but doesn’t offer an average.36
36 VA Priority Groups Qualifications www.payingforseniorcare.com/longtermcare/resources/veterans_priority_groups.html

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

25

Categories 7 and 8 don’t use 15% of the budget, but they may use 15% of VHA employees, 45,000, or
64 veterans per employee. This is better than the UK's National Health Service, where each employee
serves 42.1. The NHS serves the elderly as well as others. The entire VA Health Care population,
including sick and old, requires an employee for each 30 veterans.
There are 272 million Americans not in government medical programs now. If every 64 need an
employee, VHA for All would have 4.25 million employees on its payroll. The NHS has, depending on
information source, between one and 1.6 million.37 At the NHS rate, the US would pay between 4.92
and 6.46 million, midpoint 5.69. However these numbers include hospital staff and doctors, all those
who deliver care, as well as the government administrators and managers. Between 3% to 5% of NHS
employees are direct managers. 4% at American scale would be 227,700. In 2008, 16% of the
workforce was part of "NHS infrastructure," customer service and administrators. At the US rate, given
5.69 million total Medical for All workers, that number is 910,400.
The total government employees required for Medicare for All, structured like the VHA or NHS, might
be around 1.14 million.
Figuring how many employees are required for a Medicare for All, structured like today’s Medicare, is
more complicated. Medicare has a good reputation is because its core parts A and B, which provide
hospitalization and doctor payments for around 38.5 million people, have very low overheads. But to
figure out how many workers they use is more difficult. Some data suggests MACs use 500 to 1,000
employees per state.38 If so, that’s 30,000 and 45,000 nationally, a very efficient rate of one employee
per 1,000 Medicare recipients. Medicare reports 86.1% of Medicare claims are filed electronically, or
139 million claims filed on paper. That could explain workforce efficiency, but it implies the total
number of Medicare claims is 1.2 billion, when they are actually about twice that number.
In a footnote39, I calculate estimates for MAC employee totals. The figure is probably between 30,000
and 90,000, all efficient rates of 425 to 1,200 Medicare customers per MAC employee (midpoint 812.)
37 K. Grosios, et al., 2010, Overview of healthcare in the UK, EPMA Journal, 1(4): 529–534
38 dailykos.com/stories/2019/4/16/1850694/-Big-MACs-Meet-the-7-private-insurers-who-d-grow-larger-w-out-actuallyinsuring-anyone-under-M4A

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

26

“Medicare for All” using insurance companies would not hire managers, as does VHA for All, although
Medicare A/B programs provide only 55% of Medicare services. Extended nationally to all Americans,
that 55% would need around 400,000 employees.
According to the CMS 2019 annual report, administration costs for Medicare Parts A and B are
historically small. “The ratio of administrative expenses to benefit payments has generally fallen within
the range of 1 to 3 percent.” This includes MAC expenses. Part of the low figure is due to the higher
cost of older people who use Medicare. In 2014, Medicare spent $10,926 per beneficiary, while overall
US per capita spending was $9,523. Distangling the part of that overall spend that was on Medicare,
Medicare total spending was 62% of commercial plan spending. Commercial plans insured four times
as many customers in 2017.40
Thus Medicare spent 2 ½ times more per capita, which dilutes administrative costs. For the general
population, Medicare A/B would run around 4%.41 This is similar to Germany or Australia. It's
considerably less than commercial insurance administrative costs, which are 10% to 20%. There's a
caveat. Medicare Part C comprises about 45% of Medicare recipients. Instead of "fee per service," as
Parts A and B are operated, Part C is provided by HMOs and other commercial providers. Part C may
control overall costs better than A and B, but it has a much higher administrative cost component –
around 14%. This may be due, in part, to the inclusion of HMO fees in Part C administrative costs.
Hospitals incur the kinds of administrative costs that insurance companies do, namely billing process,
but its only a fraction of their total administrative costs.42
39 According to one source, electronically filed claims save around $3 per claim, compared to paper filing. One estimate
places computer costs at around $8 per claim, which seems high. I'll assume they cost $5 per claim, and paper claims $8.
MAC employees are not well paid. Perhaps with benefits and other employer costs, a company spends $20/hour per claims
processor. That would suggest the worker processes 2.5 claims an hour. If the total number of claims is two times 139
million, or 278 million, that's about 110 million hours of work. Given a full-time worker clocks around 14,400 hours a year,
it would only take 8,000 total employees to process that.
No one works 60 seconds a minute, 60 minutes an hour. One study found office workers spent 2½ hours a day on dedicated
tasks. Another reported the most productive employees worked 75%. The real productivity of MAC employees who work
on claims processing is at best 50%. That bumps their numbers up to 16,000. Claims processors make up perhaps 20% of
MAC employees. Figured this way, there are 80,000 total MAC employees.
40 https://www.census.gov/library/publications/2018/demo/p60-264.html
41 https://www.kff.org/medicare/issue-brief/the-facts-on-medicare-spending-and-financing/
42 Bentley, Tanya G K et al. “Waste in the U.S. Health care system: a conceptual framework.” The Milbank quarterly vol.
86,4 (2008): 629-59. doi:10.1111/j.1468-0009.2008.00537

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

27

The Medicare population’s higher expenses could also mean this 14% would be higher for the general
population, although some HMOs use “capitation,” rather than paying for services. Part C may have
about four times higher administrative costs, serving 45% of Medicare services. It seems reasonable to
assume that Medicare Part C, extended to the whole country, will need around 725,000 employees.
Together with Part A/B workers, “Medicare for All” using MACs will need around 1.125 million
employees. If they cover all of the US, that’s 290 Medicare employees per person.
Medicare for All structured like the VHA or NHS, and Medicare for All structured like Medicare, both
may need a similar number of new government workers, a little over one million. That is twice the
number of employees hired by the US healthcare insurance industry today, but including HMO
managers and administrators, today’s total is around 1.2 million, serving a smaller population than
Medicare for All would. That’s because the roughly 28 million Americans without insurance who
would get coverage, as well as CHIP and other programs that would fold into it.
Under either Medicare for All flavor, a government workforce channels $3.5 trillion to hospitals and
other providers, requiring institutional fortitude no government or company has been tested on.
Currently state-level workers manage funding, within and apart from programs. According to the Urban
Institute, in 2017 US state and local governments spent 10% of expenditures on health and hospitals,
and around that much on Medicaid. Medicaid is folded in to public welfare expenditures, which
account for 22% of total budgets.43 State and local governments hired 422,579 health-related employees
in 2019 and 885,900 hospital employees. There are also 1 million managers, some of whom operate
Medicaid and other healthcare-related programs. Regardless of their source of funding, they provide
necessary work.
These people will operate a universal healthcare program. It would serve five times as many people as
today. It seems possible that four million new state hires will be needed. This would be the largest
expenditure and biggest hiring need of the program. They would be distributed across the states,
however. It's likely that hiring shortages would emerge in some states.
43 State and Local Government DataQuerySystem, The Urban Institute-Brookings Institution Tax Policy Center. Data from
US Census Bureau.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

28

In Canada, provincial government workers channel money to providers. Around 900,000 Canadians
work in provincial government health and social service institutions. This includes public services for
housing, job assistance, but most deal with health care. The same commitment in the US would require
eight million state workers to channel money and operate programs.
Canada is not a great example for the US. First, 2018 total healthcare spending in Canada was $253.5
billion, $162.5 billion from public sources.44 That’s only 3.3% of what’s spent in the US. Second,
Canadian federal and provincial governments hire 19.9% of all Canadian employees, while US federal
and state governments hire 15.8% (both 2014 figures.) If US governments hired 19.9%, they’d have to
put 12.7 million more people on the payroll. Many developed countries have larger public payrolls than
the US, where public employment is not well respected.45 The UK hires 21.5%, France 24.9%,
Australia 18%. Some nations have lower rates, like Germany’s 12.9%. We should look at what they do.
Germany has the oldest "universal" health care system in the world, surprisingly similar to a wellfunctioning ACA. The Germany state chose to regulate rather than engage in direct provision of care.
That reduces the government's administrative load. Each year a commission, with representatives from
medical industries, other businesses, and unions, determines the upcoming year’s total expenditures.
Health insurance is compulsory for everyone, and everyone has it. Those who earn less than $67,575
per year are automatically enrolled in a non-profit insurance fund. These are managed independently,
but must stay within the commission’s parameters. Employers and employees each pay 7.3% of the
worker's salary for it. No actuarial adjustment is made for age or health status. Most Germans who earn
more than $67,575 also enroll in these funds, which cover the whole family.
Countries like the UK and France are comfortable with a larger role for government employees. The
British government employs most of the people who work in the healthcare sector, and pays for
hospital buildings and equipment. It's funded by general tax revenue. France has a system midway
between the UK and Germany. Health insurance is compulsory, but is operated by the government
44 cihi.ca/en/health-spending/2018/national-health-expenditure-trends/who-is-paying-for-these-health-services
45 Lerman, A.E., Good Enough for Government Work, Chicago Studies in American Politics, 2019

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

29

(unlike Germany.) It costs about $11/month for 100% coverage.46 In Paris doctors can charge three
times more than the reimbursement rate, which must be covered by the patient. The system is paid for
with a 12.8% tax on business earnings, and a minor income tax.
Given the penchant of Americans for limited government, a plan like Germany’s (an ACA with teeth)
may seem the best fit. It’s reasonable to assume that in countries where more people work for the
government, a significant portion of them are involved in managing the healthcare system.
Any government health care system that serves the entire US population will involve over one million
new federal hires, and perhaps four million new state workers. A successful roll-out will take many
years. Questions of equity will be raised, since a long roll-out means some areas and some people get
service before others. This is a strong reason for starting in many different locations at the same time,
and expanding. The following map shows a division of the country into five areas with about the same
population in each.

Five equal regions
An intermediate level of administration, at a regional level, can address the needs of sparsely
population states as well well as more populated ones. Regional boundaries should resemble cultural,

46 Deluxe plans for $110/month offer maids and babysitters to keep up one's lifestyle when in the hospital.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

30

political, and economic regional aggregations. Five regional areas would be large enough to avoid
overly partisan manipulation. Each has about 65 million people to serve, the current Medicare size.
Keeping state lines intact, five regions can be delineated, three with 65 million people, two with 66.
They're what you'd expect: Northeast, Southeast, Midwest, Prairie, Pacific.
The need to regionalize healthcare delivery is not unique to social change in the US. Political
manifestations, including those pursuing universal healthcare, must increasingly focus on regional
assemblies, rather than in every city. Other elements of governance, including elections, may benefit
with partial regionalization of processes.
(3) THE ‘RULE OF FIVES’
Organizations are not unlimited in size. People can reliably supervise four to six other people. If they
are supposed to have charge over many more, most administrators stumble. It may be a matter of time
management, of cognitive overload, of the tendency of people to veer from expected behavior. Some of
it is due to the need for redundant communication, which requires time. This heuristic principal of
administrative load can be called the “Rule of Fives.” Certain organizational constraints follow.
If governed in a top-down manner, the Rule of Fives generates an exponential growth of the governed,
0.239 ∙ (e ∙ (1.616 ∙ x)), where x is the number of hierarchical levels. An organization with 10 levels
could, in this view, govern about 2½ million; with 11 levels, 12½ million; with 12 levels 63 million;
with 13 levels 317 million; with 14 levels, 1.6 billion; with 15 levels, 8 billion.
These totals correspond to certain human organizational phenomena. The largest employers on the
planet, the U.S. and Chinese militaries, contain around 2½ million people. The largest in history were
the U.S. and Soviet militaries during WW II, which had about 12½ million each. The U.S. Medicare
system (60 million) and the British (65), Italian (61), and French (67) universal health care systems
serve an average of 63 million people. The next levels correspond roughly to the U.S. total population
(327), the projected future population of India (1.68 billion) which will likely be the largest population

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

31

any country achieves for many years, and the world’s population in around 2030 (estimated to be 8.6
billion.)
Organizations do not rule in strictly top-down manners. Instead they form silos, which introduces
redundancies. Many people have assistants. Headquarters have their own groups. Specialists have roles
that don’t configure into tree diagrams.
Nevertheless, a Rule of Fives hierarchy corresponds to the number of employees in canonical
institutions, suggesting something about how human organizational capacity scales.
There's evidence that the largest employer in the world, the U.S. Department of Defense, exceeds some
conventional threshold of manageability. It employs 2.86 million personnel. A military organization
may appear simpler to operate than a business, on one level, because incentives are formal. But soldiers
need room and board, technology continuously evolves, and the services (army, navy, air force) are
fiercely independent. As the U.S. military has grown, so has it's tooth to tail ratio. The teeth are
combat-ready troops, the tail are support. In 2011, the tooth side made up 17%. This compares to 26%
in a survey of 28 other countries (and doesn't count the contractors the military uses.) U.S. military
departments use up to 20% of their budgets to coordinate their own activity. It's easy to advise them to
use central administration. But examples, giant corporations like Walmart, are smaller and much
simpler.
The basic US army structure is notable for it’s levels of organization. The Army Group is the highest
tactical level, with seven or eight levels beneath it (field army, division, brigade, battalion, company,
platoon, squad).47 Each level has its own headquarters units and certain specialties. What’s interesting
is that from the bottom-up, employing the “Rule of Fives” produces the same numbers as each higher
level. The Pearson Coefficient value of their correlation is 1, too good to be true, so it probably is.

47 CBO, 2016, The U.S. Military's Force Structure, cbo.gov/sites/default/files/114th-congress-2015-2016/reports/51535fsprimer.pdf

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

Army
squad
platoon
company
battalion
brigade
division
field army
army group

8
30
150
1000
4000
15000
90000
500000

32

Rule of 5
6
30
153
771
3883
19541
98350
495196

What this means is that the army group, seven levels of hierarchy above a squad, coordinates roughly
half a million personnel. It would appear that at each level the organizational structure has one
individual in charge of five at the next lower level.
There are only 1.3 million troops in the four services. To this are added 826,000 National Guard and
reservists, and 732,000 civilians. In the army, there are about one half million each on active duty and
in the reserves. Each branch, and each active and reserve operation, has an independent hierarchy. They
each duplicate high-level management functions. This is common among conglomerates. BP, an energy
conglomerate, had 11 levels of hierarchy when Tony Haywood became CEO in 2007.48 He apparently
cut four levels out, perhaps too many, since three years later the Deepwater Horizon explosion revealed
BP had limited oversight of contractors. Mergers most often fail because of failure to blend top
management, not lower-level workforces. It's not a problem of big egos unable to get along. If two
companies are a good fit, then its mainly high level management who duplicate efforts. This occurs
between the US military's branches, too.
The US military may be highly capable, but no accounting system is sufficiently flexible and scalable
to manage it.49 This isn’t hyperbole. A basic attribute of any organization, especially one that processes
$700 billion annually, includes a systematic accounting. Big accounting programs exist for this very
purpose, used by very large corporations, for example. They simply do not scale to the US military’s
size and complexity. Media reports headline the DOD’s budgetary fudging and misreporting, but that
48 Times Online, Sept. 25 2007, BP to strip out four layers of management, business.timesonline.co.uk/tol/
business/industry_sectors/natural_resources/article2527470.ece
49 Paltrow, S.J., Aug. 19, 2016, "U.S. Army fudged its accounts by trillions of dollars, auditor finds," Reuters

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

33

misses the point. It's like complaining how someone very nearsighted takes pictures out-of-focus. The
problem is scale. It’s possible that a step-wise reduction in size, perhaps 2% at a time, could be tried. A
pause at each slightly lower level would permit both adaptation and review.
It’s not clear why systems with 10 or 11 levels approach a human maximum. It seems self evident that
100 levels would be too many, but why 11?
If each level interprets, implements, and communicates a message from one level above, then a
hierarchy is like a game of telephone. I assume a message must be at least 50% coherent to be
meaningful. In a hierarchy there’s a cost in interpreting it incorrectly, so under 50%, there’s more value
in ignoring the message. Once messages are ignored, the benefits of organization break down.
It only takes about a 7.5% loss of fidelity at each of nine levels below the first, to end with a just above
50% accurate message at the bottom level. A 92.5% fidelity rate is much better than what normally
occurs during any communication. Research suggests people only remember about 50% of a message
immediately after hearing it, eight hours later that drops to 35%, two months later to 25%.50 However,
if the message is repeated over carefully spaced periods of time, memories of it increase to the 70%
level.51 Perhaps appropriate repetition is the secret to managerial success. This may explain a reason for
the “Rule of Fives.” A manager could communicate a message to many more than five people, even
individually, but the need for redundancy reduces that.
Oversight of the US health care system is a significant task. There are 16,866,020 people in the sector.52
2,590,770 work in medical offices, 3,401,900 in nursing and residential care, and 5,232,630 are in
dentists offices, other health practitioners, outpatient centers, diagnostic labs, home health services, and
other ambulatory care.53 Most are under the umbrella of Medicare for All. 5,640,720 work in hospitals.

50 Kramar E.J.J., and T.B. Lewis, (1951) “Comparison of Visual and Nonvisual Listening,” Journal of Communication,
November, p. 16
51 Roediger, H.L., and J.D. Karpicke, (2006) “The power of testing memory: Basic research and implications for
educational practice,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, 1(3) 181-210
52 www.kff.org/other/state-indicator/total-health-care-employment/
53 www.bls.gov/oes/current/naics4_621100.htm; www.bls.gov/iag/tgs/iag623.htm; www.bls.gov/iag/tgs/iag621.htm

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

34

In 2017 there were 931,000 hospital beds in the US, in 7,200 hospitals, an average of 130 beds. There
are many small clinics that bias the average. 200 beds is a typical or median hospital size. The Bureau
of Labor Statistics estimates that about five million people were employed by hospitals in 2016, an
average of 694 per hospital. According to Beckers Hospital Review, 597 full time and 257 part time
employees typically work at a 200 bed hospital.
Hospitals must be accredited, resourced, staffed, operated, financed, and monitored. A government
team may be able to oversee two 200 bed hospitals. Their directions and feedback are under the
authority of a group that controls three oversight teams. These are under area authorities, who are under
semi-regional ones. These, in turn, have regional directors, under a federal administration. 7,200
hospitals require 3,600 oversight teams, coordinated in 1,200 groups, under 300 area authorities, and
100 multi-area ones, and 50 higher level ones. Above them are semi-regional (perhaps 10) regional (5)
and federal overseers. Eight heirarchical levels. If each unit has 20 people, 100,000 staff.
In 2010, one study found an average residential care facility had 24 beds.54 Another study in 2001
found average-size nursing homes had 107 beds.55 A 2013 study put the number at 108.6.56 A
government funded system would need to dedicate a team to oversee every two facilities with 100
beds. But because of logistics, no team can handle more than four, even if they're small. In 2010 there
were 51,367 licensed residential facilities. If we assume an average team oversees three, the result is a
pretty frightening nine levels of oversight management. This could require 400,000 government
personnel. Perhaps this is why so many scandals occur in residential care.
There are about 600,000 doctors in the US, in about 50,000 medical groups.57 Medicare for All will
need to deploy seven levels for this sector, about 100,000 people. Twice that many will be required for
the dental, outpatient, lab, and other ambulatory care organizations. The Rule of Fives analysis suggests
about 800,000 government workers are needed to run an entire Medicare for All system, if it takes a
hands-off approach to service providers. However this doesn't include the back-end systems, customer

54 R. Mollica et al., 2010,"Assisted Living and Residential Care in the States," INSIGHT on the Issues, AARP
55 Wunderlich, G.S. and P.O. Kohler, (2001) Improving the quality of long-term care, Washington DC: National Academy
56 American Health Care Association Quality Report, 2013, ahcancal.org/qualityreport/Documents/
57 Bloniarz, K., (2016) “Physician Affiliation and Practice Size”, Medpac

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

35

service, and other personnel. Again we end up with at least one million people, for a system that leaves
existing health care companies to operate much like they do now.
Some politicians have proposed a “public option” plan, run by the federal government, that would be a
low-cost, adequate benefit insurance plan. The concept for a public option was developed by academics
in the early 2000s. Most of these ideas retained state-level payment structures, as would the ACA.
Some, though, proposed a one stop national-level public option plan. It was estimated, in 2002, that if
plans extended to all who wanted them, 100 million might join. Today, given shrinkage of the employer
insurance market, that number could be 150 million. It might trigger a cycle of commercial insurance
retrenchment, followed by more public option growth. Yet academics didn’t deeply consider how
administering a “single payer” option to 100 or 150 million people would work. A national “public
option” would be a single government plan.
The largest commercial health insurer is currently UnitedHealth Group, with almost 50 million
commercial subscribers. It also covers another 20 million for supplemental Medicare and Medicaid
services. UHG is the largest health care company in the world by revenue, ranked 6th on the 2019
Fortune 400, with 300,000 employees.
A public option could mean the federal government replaces UHG’s services, presumably at lower cost.
Their CEO is the leading opponent of “Medicare for All.” But though this for-profit company
maximizes premiums, it offers something of a model for a “public option” roll-out.
UHG, originally a Minnesota insurer, began expanding in 1994, to Florida (~20 million,) in 1996 to
Arkansas, Maryland, Kentucky and Tennessee (~20 million,) in 1998 to Arizona (~7 million,) in 2001
New York (~20 million,) 2002 New Jersey and Pennsylvania (~20 million,) 2003 Maryland,
Washington D.C., Virginia, Delaware and West Virginia (~18 million,) 2004 Wisconsin and
Connecticut (~10 million,) 2005 Colorado and California (~35 million,) then overseas. The numbers in
parenthesis are the states total populations, of which UHG only serves a fraction.
It’s notable that the general population of states per year of expansion is fairly consistent. It took about
a decade for UHG’s mostly-national coverage to complete. The chart below makes an arbitrary

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

36

assumption that UHG obtained half the population of each state it entered. Although very imprecise,
the final total is roughly equal to its current market share.

UHG expansion
over 9 years

Given 250,000 UHG employees serve 70 million customers, each employee serves 280. An annual
growth of 10 million new customers required bringing on board 36,000 new employees each year. That
required at least seven levels of bureaucracy for each group, an organizing requirement greatly
facilitated by expansion through the purchase of existing companies. It’s possible that an organization
that grows by acquisition can escape the “Rule of Fives” constraint, if it allows the acquired
organization to operate independently.
The US government could, in theory, purchase insurance companies outright, and thereby gain
hundreds of thousands of experienced employees. No one has suggested this, because the debate over
health care has focused on costs and services, not administration.
When governments purchase a company's assets and operations, it's called nationalization. Nationalized
companies become government bureaucracies. If the company sells things on the open market,
nationalization usually fails. The insurance company American International Group (AIG) was
nationalized by the Federal Reserve and federal government during the financial crisis. They sold it
four years later, for a hefty profit. Of all industries to nationalize, insurance may pose the fewest
contradictions. Most insurance markets are determined by statistical analysis. They don't involve
commercially driven design needs, mechanical engineering, complex retail operations, even much
product development. Their most important function is to retain sufficient capital, or have reinsurance
arrangements, to cover losses. And of course staff negotiate with beneficiaries and others.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

37

Any plan to banish the existing health care insurance industry should be compared to nationalizing it. A
lot of the services that health insurers perform, such as negotiating hospital costs and determining
patient needs, will still have to be performed, even if insurers don't exist. The data that insurers collect
and analyze will continue to be needed, to plan how to deploy resources. Insurance employees are not
simply dead weight, they have valuable skills and knowledge. Insurance companies are not like tobacco
companies, they perform a public service. Putting them out of business by fiat is not particularly fair.
Purchasing them at fair market value is an interesting alternative.
Nationalization won’t expand health care, simply replace the commercial provider of tens of millions
with a government one. But given the simplification of policy and payments that should occur under
the government program, insurance employees could become more productive. More importantly, they
could enable the rapid expansion of a public option that the public will demand. Expanding it 50%
annually needs 40,000 or more new employees each year. If these employees were obtained from
existing insurance firms, the federal government could provide them new operating rules, but allow the
cohort to operate independently, even under previous lower-level management.
Many people would find a ten-year roll-out of the program unremarkable, except for the fact that it's
supposed to provide everyone with the same services from day one. Which states would be earliest?
This inherent lack of fairness would cause opposition. It took seven years for the US Border Patrol to
increase from 11,000 to nearly 22,000 agents. It took nine years for the Transportation Safety
Administration to deploy 60,000 agents. A “public option” for all who want it may require a federal
workforce over ten times that large. It might take well over a decade to roll-out.
Of course, if a public option was combined with putting insurance companies out of business, then
potential administrators, managers, and employees may become available. But a public option is
supposed to supplement existing insurance. Eliminating insurance would instantly require the
government to administer solutions for 327 million people.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

38

(4) THE 60% TO 50% GAUNTLET.
The US pioneered universal white male suffrage, the right of white men to vote. Though initially
limited to men owning sufficient land, that was quickly expanded along with the country. Some popular
accounts claim only “6%” of US white males could vote in the early 1800s, a myth derived from
superficial histories of Andrew Jackson (that make him out to be the “great populist” who expanded
voting.) The most important force driving universal white male suffrage was the nation’s growth. Six of
the ten new states formed in the early 1800s established it from the start. Instead of Jackson causing
expanded voting rights, he was its result: those new states were his strongest “base”.
Meanwhile, all the new states (except Maine in 1819) banned free blacks from voting. New Jersey and
New York had originally granted free blacks the right, but after 1800 rescinded it. Other states
implemented formal bans. As white male suffrage was promoted by the growth of America, blacks and
women were suppressed. In 1776 New Jersey made history by granting women the right to vote, but in
1807 the state extinguished it.
By scaling larger without increasing voter diversity, the young country set itself on course for a civil
conflict. Since the Cold War era, studies consistently find democracies rarely have civil wars. Semidemocratic nations, on the other hand, have the highest rate of internal conflict of any form of
government. Rather than deducing how undemocratic the US was in 1820, what’s notable is that it
doesn’t fit the statistical pattern of democracies that do have civil wars. Hegre found, using
international data on 20th century civil wars, that democracies usually avoid them once their per capita
GDP is above $700 annually (1995 dollars.)58 The US had a per capita GDP well above this through its
entire national history, reaching around $2,240 in 1860 (1990 dollars.)59 By excluding AfricanAmericans, native-Americans, and women from de-jure power, early America opened the door to
repression and violence to silence opponents. The country’s growth, which opened areas without
European inhabitants, was an invitation to people to flee repression and generate discontent. People
denied democratic rights were aware of democratic norms.
58 Collier, P., et al., Breaking the Conflict Trap, World Bank, Washington DC, 2003
59 Lindert, P.H., and J.G. Williamson, (2011) American Incomes 1774-1860, eml.berkeley.edu/~webfac/cromer/e211_f12/
LindertWilliamson.pdf

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

39

A common reason given for the US Civil War is that both sides eyed the new territory, west of the
Mississippi to the Pacific, through an economic lens. Each wanted to impose its economic system,
slave-based or free, because members of each side didn't want to compete with the other. This textbook
economics is questionable. Northerners might expect to migrate into a more southerly western state one
day, but a long-term future economic constraint is a weak reason to die in a war. People knew that wars
(in the 19th century) were death zones. Because of the War of 1812 (the US version) Americans were
very aware of Napoleon’s disastrous Russian campaign. There was widespread anxiety that the British,
freed from worrying about the French, would redouble their efforts against the US (in fact the British
were exhausted.) Napoleon was understood to have not merely lost, he lost catastrophically. People
understood this was what modern 19th century war meant.60
Even if mobilization is seen through rosy glasses, these weren’t naive people. Southerners should have
been even less inclined to fight. Only ½ of 1% of whites in slaveholding states had slaves! Of those
who did, most owned one, not enough to compete with slave holding plantations. Only 2,341
plantations had 100 or more slaves, a minuscule portion of the white population. Rationally,
southerners had powerful economic reasons to want to migrate out of slavery's shadow.
The reason white populations in the antebellum south volunteered to fight had to do with demographic
change. A pattern can be observed in different areas of the US through its history, and in different
countries of the world. When the dominant ethnic group’s population total falls below 60%, a
substantial portion reacts harshly. Very conservative, unfair policies are promoted. Democrat norms get
violated. If democratic institutions are in place, and the suppressed minority can accumulate assets, the
situation improves once the dominant group falls below 50%. Both democracy and assets were missing
for African-Americans in the antebellum south.
In 1790, the white population in slave states was 64% of the total. South Carolina had the lowest
percent, 56%, and through the antebellum period was the state most egregiously hostile to national
change.61 In 1860, across the south, the white total had fallen, though it’s complicated by new states
60 Bukovansky, M. (1997). American identity and neutral rights from independence to the War of 1812. International
Organization, 51(2), 209–243. doi:10.1162/002081897550348
61 faculty.weber.edu/kmackay/statistics_on_slavery.htm

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

40

with small populations.62 The original slave state white population fell to 60%. South Carolina’s white
population was 41%, Georgia’s was 56%, new state Alabama had 54%, new state Louisiana 53%, new
state Florida 56%. South Carolina, the state with the smallest relative white population, was first to
succeed. When ethnic majorities fall below 60% of the population, a significant part of it becomes
fearful. It wasn’t economic self-interest that drove southerners to fight in the Civil War, but racial fear.
California experienced this pattern during the 1990s. In the late 1980s, the state’s white population
approached 60%, then fell below it. The political center veered rightward. Undocumented immigrants
were barred from public schools and hospitals, and other laws made their lives difficult. Affirmative
action was repealed in referenda. Perhaps half of California’s white voters were truly fearful. Voting as
a block, they controlled politics for a decade.
But early in the 2000s the white population’s percent in the state fell below 50%, then continued lower
(it is now 37%.)63 Below 50% the fearful half of white voters were too small to determine elections.
Like a toy ship pushed down by a thumb bobs up when released, California's politics righted
themselves. Non-white Californians remember the political groups that hurt them, and together with the
half of the white population that wasn't afraid, now control the state. In time the state's politics may
shift towards political parties that are both multi-ethnic, but for now only one of two is.
The wealth of ethnic groups interacts with their numbers. The role of African-Americans in the US is
undermined by more than their minority status. Systematically denied asset accumulation, blacks face
major barriers in obtaining education, safe housing, and starting businesses. But non-whites in
California are primarily Latino and Asian. A careful study of Los Angeles found that most Asian
groups, who are almost half the population of whites in LA and California, have more assets than
whites, per capita.64 Latinos, who are slightly more numerous than whites in the state (and considerably
more in LA) had much fewer assets than both. This complexity, which may not be present in the entire
US, dampens the capacity of the dominant ethnic group to control power. California did not
disenfranchise minorities, as other states have done.
62 www.civil-war.net/pages/1860_census.html
63 Adele M. Hayutin, A.M, et al., (2011) "Understanding California's Demographic Shifts, Stanford Center on Longevity
64 De La Cruz-Viesca, M., et al., 2016, The Color of Wealth in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Federal Reserve Bank

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

41

Nationally, Americans of Latino and Asian heritage are the fastest growing population groups. Across
the entire country, a “60% to 50% Gauntlet” may follow a trajectory seen in California. In specific
regions and states, however, African-Americans make up the most significant minority group. States
that have a history of Jim Crow and racial suppression will delay a resolution to the gauntlet, even after
the white population diminishes to under 50%.65
The US is part of the New World. Most other New World countries are much smaller and less
populated. Two exceptions stand out, Canada and Brazil. Canada is a poor comparison for US
demographic dynamics. It has 1/9 the US population, with much less diversity. Canada’s black
population is about 3.5%, and Latinos number less than 1%. Asians account for 17%. Canadians of
European ancestry make up over 75%.66 Perhaps this helps explain the apparent tone-deaf behavior of
Canadian Prime Minister Trudeau, who as a young man wore black-face to parties.
Brazil has 64% of the US population, in a country 87% as large. At first glance it seems to have very
different ethnic dynamics. In Brazil, people with both black and white ancestry are called multiracial or
"pardos," which means brown. (The US “one drop rule” defines the same person as black.) The percent
of both whites and blacks keeps falling, while multiracials gradually increase, to now over 40%.67 But
in important ways, Brazil does resemble the US. Wealth is distributed predominantly to whites, who
earn twice what both multiracials and blacks do. Brazil also suffered a “60% to 50% gauntlet.”
Brazil's military leaders overthrew the elected leaders of the country in 1964, as the white population
fell to 60%. The military dictatorship censored all media, tortured, murdered, and exiled dissidents, and
reduced wages for the poor.68 By the mid-1980s the white population had fallen to about 50%. Many
forces were at work undermining the dictatorship, which ended in 1985. But the fact remains that the
Brazilian power structure, largely white, lost its demographic dominance. Once elections were
reestablished, a new majority asserted itself, promoting policies that helped the country advance.
Recently a populist reactionary government was elected. Brazil’s wealth remains entrenched among
65 Perez, A.D., and C. Hirschman, 2009, The Changing Racial and Ethnic Composition of the US Population, Population
Development Review, 35(1): 1–51
66 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Demographics_of_Canada
67 https://www.worldatlas.com/articles/largest-ethnic-groups-in-brazil.html
68 Klein, H.S., and F.V. Luna, Brazil, 1964–1985, New Haven: Yale, 2017

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

42

those of European heritage, so they can still control the political narrative. But Brazil went through a
far more wrenching political period when the white population transitioned from 60% to 50%.
After the dictatorship fell, a universal healthcare provision was established. Anyone in Brazil is served
without charge. But private health insurance and private hospitals and doctors are used by professionals
and other middle class and wealthier persons. These make up 25% of medical consumers, but 2/3 of
Brazil's hospitals, and 87% of its specialized hospitals, serve the private sector.69 This is a function of
Brazil's economic condition, but also a result of the pent-up demand for reform. After the "gauntlet"
period the free system was demanded, despite being under-resourced and over-worked. It doesn’t work
well. A colleague of mine was in a rural Brazilian area, and had a medical problem. She went to a free
hospital, waited many hours, and saw a doctor for five minutes. He dismissed her illness. She then
made an appointment with a private hospital, and a doctor spent half an hour with her, diagnosing and
prescribing a cure. What was so notable to her was that it was the same doctor. He didn't remember her
from the day before, having seen so many patients in the free system.
Brazil's system claims to have the largest free healthcare service in the world, with over 50,000 clinics
distributed over 3.3 million square miles. It "only" employs 642,027, a function of its limited service
capacity.70 Certainly Brazil's scale, like the US's, makes a national program difficult. Unlike programs
developed gradually and carefully, it’s over-centralized and bureaucratic. But given Brazil’s ethnic
dynamics, which induced great hardships during the 1970s, an idealistic reformation was inevitable.
The histories of the antebellum US, of California in the 1990s, and of Brazil between 1960 and 1985,
show that when the dominant ethnic group, in these cases European whites, falls to around 60% of the
population, stuff happens. Politics takes a nasty turn towards right-wing retrenchment. Rational policies
are rejected, if they serve more than the dominant ethnic group. Once that population falls below 50%,
things can return to relative normalcy. But a high degree of ethnic repression can trigger an idealistic
surge when the situation changes.

69 healthmanagement.org/c/icu/issuearticle/the-overview-of-healthcare-in-brazil
70 en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sistema_%C3%9Anico_de_Sa%C3%BAde

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

43

Between 60% and 50% may be a “red zone” of racial anxiety. The 2020 US census will find that the
nation’s white population falls to 60%.71 In US states along the Pacific ocean, whites are already less
than 50%, and rational politics have reemerged there. In the southeast, European-Americans have fallen
to 59%. In Texas, they’ve fallen to 43%. In most other states white populations are above the “red
zone” threshold.
A national plan will suffer because the entire nation is in the thrall of white fear. If rolled-out
regionally, programs will face opposition from those areas within a gauntlet “red zone.” These areas
include states that refused to expand Medicaid under the ACA, because it would have served many
non-white people.
At the same time, the US lacks the necessary health care administrative experience to field five distinct
regional programs. By dividing each 65 million region in half, the subdivisions can more easily gain
experience. Coincidentally, the Prairie and Southeast regions will be divided so that half have much
less, and half much more, ethnic diversity. The same thing happens with the other three regions,
primarily because white Americans dominate less populated states. When a region is divided in half,
it’s usually the largest state (California, Texas, New York) on one side, and remaining states on the
other. The largest states may be sufficiently diverse to minimize racial fear. The less populated states
haven’t reach the tipping point yet.
When states have more than 60% white populations, they are less opposed to rational health care
policies. This can be seen in the decisions of states to expand Medicare. Midwestern states under
Republican leadership, whose poor populations are largely white, expanded Medicare even though, as
partisans, these leaders ostensibly opposed it. States in the south and southwest, whose working poor
include large numbers of blacks and Hispanics, refused to expand Medicare. This despite the fact that
states didn’t bear Medicaid costs, but their hospital emergency rooms would cover uninsured victims.

71 www.census.gov/quickfacts/fact/table/US/IPE120218

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

44

This ethnic conundrum will surely derail any future medical plan that doesn’t strategically address it, as
it has derailed previous efforts. Subdivided regions will have groups of about 32 million that are either
less than 50% white, or well over 60%. The map illustrates the 10 subregions.
In the southeast, Florida, with 55% whites, and Georgia, with 54%, are in the midst of their “majority
white” crisis. There may be no way to avoid their combination as a subdivision. Texas is peculiar, and a
dangerous example, having less than 43% of its population white, yet still suffering revanchism. This is
due to systematic suppression of non-white ethnic groups, particularly through restrictions that prevent
them from registering to vote.72 Among self-reported registered voters in Texas, 64% are white, and
only 19% Hispanic. The last time whites made up 64% of the actual Texas population was during the
1980s. Texas uses neo-Jim Crow strategies based on the size of the state and counties. Texas is very
large, larger than any European country. At the same time it has 254 counties, most surprisingly small.
California has 58, Alaska 19. Texas passed laws that make it a very expensive crime (with prison
sentences) to register someone in the wrong county. Given the distances in Texas, that’s impossible to
avoid. This rule effectively banished registration efforts. Texas can’t repress voters forever. The key is
Latino economic development. White South Africans tried to use a much more draconian geographic
approach to suppressing an ethnic group, black South Africans. Even this failed, once urban blacks
gained assets and mobilized.

72 https://texascivilrightsproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/order.pdf

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

45

Other states can’t reproduce the Texas model exactly, because none have the plethora of small counties
where non-white majorities live. By 2040, the 10 subdivided regions will be able to reconvene into the
5 regions. Unless the nation as a whole veers towards an illiberal voting regime that excludes nonwhites, white-led opposition to rational health care delivery will no longer be consequential. At the
same time, regions will have had time to develop expertise in health care administration.
During an initial phase there can be a roll out of an intermediate expansion of Medicare in all ten
subregions. This could be either a “public option,” or expansion of Medicare to those between 50 and
65 years of age, or some other combination. Subregions are better than states as laboratories of
democracy. They will all have similar populations, after all. They can follow different strategies, and
outcomes compared. Although this model was tried with earlier programs like CHIP, it was always
state by state. 15 prairie states have about as much population as California. Grouping the 15 together
enables them to achieve their potential to perform as well as more densely populated regions.
Subregions will have 32 to 34 million initially, which is a considerable challenge. Yet this Canadian
size population should be sufficient for regions to attract and mobilize administrative expertise.

(5) DIVIDE AND CONQUER
The largest countries in the world, by geography, are Russia, Canada, the US, China, Brazil, Australia,
and India. Six of them form pairs: the US and Russia, India and China, and Canada and Australia. They
have similar demographic and geographic scales, and they’re divided up into similar administrative or
electoral units. China has slightly more people than India, but they both have enormous populations,
each with more than four times the people of the next most populous, the US. China has almost 3 times
as much land, but much is empty, unlike India's. India is composed of 36 state-like units, China 34.
The US, Russia, Canada, and Australia are the only big countries that span between two oceans.
Canada's 37 million population is dwarfed by the US, and also by Russia's 148 million. Australia,
however, has a similar small population, 25 million. It’s also a continent-sized space with the Indian
Ocean on one side, the Pacific on the other. Canada has 10 provinces, and Australia has eight states and
territories.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

46

The US and Russia both have large land areas. Their populations are midway between the
Canada/Australia level and the India/China one. Russia is three times the size of the US, but like China
relative to India, the difference is relatively empty space. The US and Russia also have the most statelike units. Russia has 84 republics, krays, oblasts, okrugs, and municipalities. 81, if you don't count the
cities.73 The 46 oblasts, most west of the Urals, are the size of many east of the Mississippi US states.
The 22 republics are areas around the country's perimeter, like the various "stans" (Dagestan,
Tatarstan.) The largest of these parallel the size of California and Alaska. The remaining okrugs are in
the far corners, near Korea, China, and Finland.
Russia also considered consolidating its subdivisions, in 2000. Although Moscow historically rules
Russia by central authority, after the Soviet Union fell in 1991 this changed. Power briefly devolved to
its state-like units. By 2000 many were run like near autocracies, challenging Russian tradition. That’s
when Putin took office as President. His priority was for Moscow to retake central control. One of his
first decrees was to divide the county into seven regional districts.74 The purpose wasn’t to improve
health care delivery or increase government responsiveness. Putin’s seven districts promoted a
centralized legal system, replacing the many independent laws promulgated by smaller regions. The
seven districts were also conduits for the security services to dominate states. The Putin administration
was interested in control. Districts aren’t allowed autonomous leaders.
Russian health care suffers because its funding is decentralized, based on each localities capacities,
while operations are controlled by the central government. The federal government can’t monitor and
manage actual health care delivery. Issues of quality and service are beyond it. Instead the Russian
federal government pays for, and keeps an eye on, major capital expenses, especially buildings and
equipment. So Russian hospitals may have nice facilities, and a fair distribution of modern equipment.
But the staff and doctors can be poorly trained, unsupervised, unmotivated, corrupt or dangerous, and
face few consequences.75 This is often what happens when a government controls local institutions, but
73 CIA, 2010, World Factbook, Washington, DC, Potomac Books
74 Hyde, M., (2001) "Putin's Federal Reforms and Their Implications for Presidential Power in Russia", Europe-Asia
Studies, (53)5: 719-743
75 Rozenfeld, B.A., 1995 'The Crisis of Russian Health Care and Attempts at Reform', Chapter 5 in DaVanzo, J., and G.
Farnsworth, 'Russia's Demographic "Crisis"', Santa Monica, RAND

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

47

lacks the capacity to manage them. Many US states are too limited to effectively monitor public
classroom education. Instead they focus on school building construction. These expenditures are “one
and done,” not recurring. The result is that local control can lead to poor outcomes. In Russia it leads to
a generally low level of health care service. In 2013, the lifespan of Russian men was 65, below Haiti’s.
The highly centralized health care plans promoted by candidates for the 2020 Presidential contest take
authority for hospital capital expenditure. It currently drives a lot of health care inflation. Hospitals that
expand facilities and purchase equipment tend to earn more income. The only way to obtain financing
for capital investment is from premiums and patient billing. This makes even non-profit hospitals raise
prices, to generate enough profit. A government run and funded system can avoid this, in theory. What
Russia illustrates is that it may not avoid it in practice, because buildings and equipment become the
focus of interest for federal money. Under Medicare for All, administrations may lavish capital
expenditures on health care infrastructure. Over a four year period, big new buildings can make a mark.
Russia doesn’t decentralize well. If geography overwhelms those who invade Russia, it may
overwhelm Russians as well. The US doesn’t decentralize as well as it could, either, because states are
so unequal in capacity, wealth, population, and diversity. Decentralization doesn’t fit in a place where
local people are isolated. Even urban dwellers in Russia can be isolated, because migration is difficult.
76

Given the distances in the middle of the US, people can be quite isolated there as well.

A dependence on local, rather than federal health care funding, will aggravate inequality. It would
produce very different services in different regions and states.
Americans migrate within their country much more easily than Russians in theirs. Decentralization is
far more common. But there often remains a glaring disconnect between the federal and local levels.
The invention of seven districts to cover all of Russia got off to a promising start, to bridge the gap
between central authority and local health care. It fell victim to the harsh orientation of the Putin
administration. But it’s a theme worth considering.

76 Brunarska, Zuzanna, (2014) Regional out-migration patterns in Russia, European University Institute

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

48

The countries of Scandinavia illustrate how new subdivisions can modified periodically. One of the
primary reasons for changing state-units is to improve health care delivery. This isn’t a recent
phenomena, but goes back hundreds of years, and continues still.
In Sweden there were, in centuries past, 25 historical regions. Today there are 21 modern county units.
They follow historical boundaries closely, but not exactly. Sweden's public health model places most
responsibility in the 21 counties, which govern hospitals. The Swedish federal government establishes
guidelines, and reaches agreements with counties, as well as municipalities, the latter being responsible
for elder care and the disabled. Counties and municipalities pay for most care, mostly out of their own
tax revenue. But the Swedish government plans to merge the current 21 counties into six or nine larger
regions, mainly to increase medical delivery economies of scale.
Denmark had 24 counties called Amt, formed in 1662 to carry out the king's decrees for hospitals, sick
houses, and education. He wanted them properly distributed. That lasted until 1970, when they were
consolidated into 14. In 2007 these were abolished and replaced by five larger regions, primarily to
improve healthcare delivery. For over 300 years, healthcare has driven Danish geographical change.
Norwegian subdivisions date back to the 10th century. In 1919 these were grouped into 19 counties,
then in 2017 they merged into 11 regions. Up till 2002 hospitals were operated by the 19 counties.
Since then, the central government removed medical delivery from political units, and set up four
regional health authorities. Each is an independent legal entity, structured like a corporation, and
autonomous. Health care delivery improved. The four region health system is one reason Norway
merged counties into regions.
Little research has examined whether American identity is linked to their state. The condition today is
far different from the period prior to the Civil War. Then, when asked where they were from, even what
country they belonged to, Americans often responded with their state’s name. That changed after the
war. Now people when in a foreign country, most answer they’re from the USA. When asked where in
the US, people often answer the name of the city closest to where they live, not the state.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

49

This parallels the way sports teams are named. Most professional teams have a city name, even if there
is no competitor within the state, or within neighboring states, and even if their fan base is spread over
multiple states. Of 133 professional sports teams in the US, only about 10 are named for states. Three
states generate most of them: Colorado, Minnesota, and Arizona. So at first glance, identity is best
served as an urban location, given most teams (121) have city names.
Yet evidence from college and professional athletic teams and leagues reveals that it isn’t city or state
identity that organizes fans. Popular teams have a regional identity. A typical survey finds the Dallas
Cowboys capture fans in three or four states, as do the Green Bay Packers. The Atlanta Braves
dominate fans in parts of ten states, the San Francisco Giants in two. The Denver Broncos have fans in
a swathe that starts close to the Mexican border in Arizona, passes through the Rocky mountains, and
ends near Canada.
Someone from western Nevada, when in a foreign country, will not say they’re from San Francisco,
even though they root for the San Francisco Giants. They may say “Reno” or “near Las Vegas”. If a
foreigner isn’t certain where those are, their next level of explanation is probably “in the American
west” or “near the Pacific coast.” Regional identity is strong enough to be a common default. Someone
from the Dakotas may find, when they visit Mongolia or Turkestan, that locals haven’t heard of those
states. So they’ll say something like “near Canada, in the western prairie.”
They could say it’s part of the Louisiana Purchase. The many states now carved out of that territory
make up the abundant sparsely populated states in the nation’s center. Had that territory remained
undivided, people in it might not feel so isolated, as they’d belong to a giant state with abundant people
power. Instead, the region was explored on horseback, and settled that way too. Had airplanes and
motor vehicles existed, the US would have fewer, larger states in the heartland.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that many Americans are anchored in a region of origin, not city or state.
People from the New York metropolitan region, which includes parts of four states, may feel a stronger
common identity than they do with people in upstate New York or inland Pennsylvania. Although large
states like Texas have sufficient scale for residents to have a state-level identity, people along its Rio
Grande valley may identify more strongly with others in Arizona or New Mexico. Some along the gulf

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

50

coast share a strong regional identity as well. Isolated states like Vermont or West Virginia, or a
religious one like Utah, may develop independent identities. Surely the human capacity to rally around
one’s tribe will encourage many people to claim fealty to their state. But it’s easy to see that people in
the Florida panhandle identify more with southern-tier Georgians and Alabamans, than with people in
Miami. Many in the Rocky mountain area identify with the territory, not a particular state. Big sky
country unites Montana, Wyoming, and maybe the Dakotas. In northern California people may identify
more with Oregon than with Los Angeles, but the entire west coast shares a common identity. From
west Texas up to Nebraska, many share a sense of common place, cowboy country.
Many of these regions overlap NCAA football conferences. There’s a Big Sky conference with
Montana, Idaho, and a smattering of more distant schools. The Big 10 has midwestern schools. The
Mountain conference includes the schools from Colorado, Idaho, Utah, and a few from other states.
The Patriot League groups smaller colleges in New England. And so on.
The U.S. Constitution was written when the country had less than four million people on 0.87 million
square miles of land. Today it has 327 million on 3.8 million square miles. To wrangle different states
into the union, the constitution gave states with smaller populations more voice. In 1789 the smallest
state, Delaware, had 8.5% the population of the largest, Virginia. Three states had less than 100,000, six
others clustered around 200,000 and around 350,000, Pennsylvania 400,000, Virginia 700,000. A
normal distribution.
Now the lay of land is different. Wyoming has 1.5% the population of California, six times smaller than
Delaware in comparison to Virginia. The 18 smallest states have about the same population as Texas.
So they have 36 Senators, and Texas two. As the US grew in scale, it's state disparities also grew. Their
population distribution isn't normal any more, but skewed to the very small.
The stars on the American flag represent today's 50 states, the stripes the original 13. The flag's original
meaning was different. The blue state area represented federal power, produced by the union of states.
The European union flag contains white stars on blue to signify this as well. The first US flag, and all
those since, had 13 stripes to represent state-level government. It probably would have made more
sense to increase the number of stripes, and keep 13 stars. Stripes would have gotten very thin, while

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

51

the stars would seem more and more remote. Visually, it would be better if today’s 50 states were
grouped in five or ten sections, each with five or ten stripes. That doesn’t mean these sections are
political units that mobilize national guards, operate universities, or collect taxes. They’re an
organizational tool. It’s how we can squeeze all 50 in.

The US suffers because it lacks intermediate level sections, which could serve as administrative
headquarters and organize national elections. The US hasn’t adapted to the tremendous scale increase,
in population and land, over the past 230 years. Things are run according to the dual levels of 1789.
Health care administration offers a chance to change that.

SUMMARY
It should be obvious that a roll-out of universal medical care, in a time of prejudice and polarization,
will be awkward. This has happened before. Perhaps no one understood the process as well as Daniel
Patrick Moynihan. He was instrumental in setting up both the Kennedy and Johnson administrations
“Great Society” programs, from VISTA to Medicare. These had a profound impact on America, helping
to reduce over-all poverty rates, and triggering a conservative, racially-couched backlash. Moynihan
criticized policies for ignoring unintended impacts. He opposed the limit of Aid to Dependent Families
(welfare) of only serving single-parent households. African-American families were systemically
undermined since slavery (and still are, given the disproportionate imprisonment of black men.) The
welfare rule was doubly damaging. First, because of the condition of many black families, it was
perceived as a special benefit for African-Americans. Second, it would drive men out of poor families.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

52

Given black poverty rates, that would isolate and damage black families. If the nuclear family
collapsed in one group more than others, Moynihan believed, it is disadvantaged against other groups.77
The left charged Moynihan with blaming the victim and promoting racial stereotypes; the right attacked
him as a tax and spend liberal. When Nixon was elected he wanted to appear centrist, so he invited
Moynihan to propose a welfare revision. Nixon surprisingly accepted it. It would have greatly
expanded federal spending on low-income families, by paying income supplements to all poor families
with children, regardless of parent status. It also involved job training, as Moynihan argued men needed
jobs to stabilize their household role. A universal basic income would get rid of the perception of
welfare as a privileged payment to dysfunctional families. It would become a legal right for stated
benefits, like Social Security. The idea drew opposition from staunch conservatives and southern
Democrats, but was derailed by liberal Democrats in the Senate. They preferred welfare’s apparent
focus on African-Americans, and disapproved of the jobs emphasis. Nixon soured on Moynihan, whose
insights, in effect, failed to gain political support.78 25 years later Moynihan was New York's Senator,
and watched right-wingers, now ascendant in the Republican party, gut welfare. He’d predicted it.79
This shaped Moynihan's response to President Clinton’s 1993 universal health care plan. He believed a
sweeping overhaul of the health care system could be undermined by racial animosity, too. Minorities
disproportionately lacked medical care, so the plan would inevitably focus on them. Moynihan also
believed health care had to be a national program, not decentralized to unequal states. Offer Americans
the same health care plan that every Senator got, regardless of where they were from. Each office
holder and staff chose from a dozen or more plans, and many were multi-state or national in scope. The
government paid about 75% of the cost of an average national premium, so enrollees paid more for
expensive plans, less for frugal ones. Surveys monitored plan performance. Plans weren’t expensive,
but maintained benefits and service.
The Clinton plan, on the other hand, was state-based. Employers paid into a state coffer 80% of their
employees health care premiums, around what they were already paying to insurance companies. The
state would use this money, along with supplementary funding of its own and the federal government,
77 Geary, D., Beyond Civil Rights, University of Pennsylvania, 2015
78 Nathan, R.P., (1996) A Retrospective on Richard Nixon, Presidential Studies Quarterly, 26:1: 155-164
79 Moynihan, D.P., and S.R. Weisman, Daniel Patrick Moynihan: A Portrait in Letters, Hachette, 2010

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

53

to cover a lot of the insurance cost of every member of their state. Inevitably less populated states
would have fewer plans, and less able governments to manage them.
The national and multi-state plans that Moynihan promoted were not of the type some conservatives
want allowed, which are lower cost, fewer benefit plans. The federal employee plans were from
national insurance companies such as Aetna or Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, assembled
through constituent regional or state-level companies. Less populated states had plenty of choice.
Moynihan got minority leader Bob Dole to co-sponsor the bill. Like the ACA, it had mandates to have
insurance, and subsidies to make it affordable. Moynihan knew people might not buy in, so it might
never reach universal coverage. But he believed that when the President, and people in Congress,
announced they were giving everyone access to their own medical care, it would overwhelm public
distrust and avoid racial fear-mongering.80 Although not focused on the poor, its subsidies would be.
Most Democrats and many Republicans supported it, and it probably could have passed. But it was
killed by the Clinton administration, who wanted guaranteed universal care.81
In 2009 health care reform occurred. Though damaged by partisan opposition, a tremendous drop in the
uninsured rate followed, based on commercial insurance and Medicaid. Now the 2020 election cycle
has led to calls for universal health care coverage again.
The eventual roll-out of universal health care in the US requires time to develop required regional
expertise. Evolution occurs generation by generation. Young people adapt to the failed attempts of their
forebears. Moynihan provides such an example from a prior generation, which this generation can
advance on. The importance of ethnicity is also clear. The ACA’s naming as Obamacare singled its
ethnic orientation to white Americans.
Rolling out a centralized national program will be massive, decades-long bureaucratic and enterprise
effort, with as many levels of hierarchy as the US military. Rolling out a regional effort is more
tractable, and can be accomplished with fewer risks and more care. Over 15 or 20 years expertise will
develop. Different versions can be tried. Some sub-regions can offer a “public option,” and some can
80 Frank, J., (2017) On Health Care, We’ll Have What Congress Is Having, New Yorker, Jan. 17, 2017
81 FIns, J.J., (2017) When Pat and Bob nearly saved health care reform, http://theconversation.com/

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

expand Medicare to people aged 50 to 65. This will produce comparisons that could lead to better
planning. This is a way to take advantage of US scale, which affords this kind of experimentation.
Eventually a centralized health care system will emerge.

Brian Coyle
brmcoyle@gmail.com
Box 176
Canyon, CA 94516

54

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

55

MEDIA HIGHLIGHTS*82
In Elizabeth Warren’s and Bernie Sanders' “Medicare for All” plan, Medicare expands in 3 years from
servicing 60 million to 180 million. They don't say how, but it's either done the Medicare Today Way,
with insurance companies, or the Medicare Their Way, with government workers. Either way, you'll
need at least 1/2 a million new federal hires in 3 years, and at least 1 million new state employees.
It took the TSA almost a decade to hire 60,000. Sanders and Warren think that HHS can hire 10 times
more in 1/3 the time. Or soon-to-be defunct insurance companies will do the same.
We saw what happened when the ACA was rolled out to 12 million. Just a website. How do you make
Americans love their health insurance? Make a Medicare mess.
–---------Democrats: don’t forget that "dog whistle" politics isn’t about dogs. When red state Republicans talk
about "states rights" it's not because they think their states are ready to run complex policy. It's code for
wanting to discriminate. In fact, people in underpopulated states know their local governments don't
have the capacity to run things the way coastal states do. When the ACA or Medicare for All proposals
"devolve" operations to states, expect rejection in dog whistle code.
People aren't going to admit their communities' lack ability. Instead they couch objections in
objectionable slogans. These contain a belief that dense, ethnically diverse coastal populations have the
critical mass for federal attention and decent performance.
–---------Size matters. Maybe Americans could remember it, when they try to understand reactions to energy
policy or healthcare reform. Not just big companies, but the size of place. Americans have the biggest
houses, cars, farms, hospital rooms, college dorms. Is it surprising the country binges on mortgages,
lives in vehicles, eats too much, and spends lavishly on hospital and university buildings?
Big size helps when everyone pulls in the same direction. For anything else, it's a drag.
Canada has a tiny population compared to the US, but they're spread over just as wide an area. For
decades, Canadians couldn't get their heads around healthcare reform. Liberals in cities kept proposing
universal schemes, and conservatives is small towns kept objecting. Finally they agreed to let each
region reform, within national guidelines. Then things really improved.
Instead of looking at where Canada is now, remember how it got there.
–----------

82* Please

note these highlights are not an abstract or other part of the paper.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

56

The Medicare for All debate has only talked about cost. No one has explained how to run it. How many
people get hired? If Medicare for All gets rid of insurance companies, it's really Veterans Care for All.
Every doctor and technician is on government payroll. At least 5 million, probably 10 or 12. At least
twice the payroll of the Dept. of Defense, not a minor organization. No accounting system handles the
DoD – it's too big, complicated, and siloed. The healthcare system is a hi-tech, highly trained, critical
function sector, storing sensitive, regulated data in proprietary systems. No simpler.
As far as federal government oversight, handling customer service, managing money, those people
number over a million no matter how the system operates. States employ four times as many. The
countries that Medicare for All imitates - Canada, Britain, maybe France - all have a lot more people
working for the government than in the US. Americans aren't keen on government work. We're like the
Germans. They get to universal coverage using a system like the ACA. But everyone pays the same 7.5% tax on income. Doesn't matter how old, young, sick, healthy, or how wealthy.
That’s an idea to consider.
–---------Sanders is quite willing to put giant health insurers out of business, but never talks about nationalizing
them? The N word - nationalization - has a bad rap in America. It doesn't work for most companies.
But insurance is different. It's all about numbers and statistics. CEOs and some investors would object,
but purchasing them at fair market value is a way to bring hundreds of thousands of qualified workers
on board quickly. It's fairer that putting them out of business.
Nationalization is also a natural way to expand a Public Option. As people switched from private
insurers to the Option, companies could be nationalized, and their employees would be retained in the
government program.
–---------It's time to realize that American states were divided up for reasons that don't always make sense now.
We don't travel on horseback, or have to balance free and slave states. The states in the middle seem
huge, but they don't have enough people. They were carved out of bigger territories. The early states
didn't want them too powerful. Other countries have this problem, and don't decentralize healthcare to
states or their equivalent. Instead they combine them in regions.
When it comes to sports, Americans don't play games. We name the teams for cities, but fans are
regional. The Broncos are for people beyond Colorado, the Braves beyond Georgia. Let's get regional.
Divide the country into 10 sub-regions for healthcare administration, and fold those into five large
regions when the program matures.
–---------We're on a road about to make some hairpin turns, demographically. The US white population is falling
below 60%. In the antebellum south, in 1990s California, and in 1970s Brazil, the white population fell
below 60% and all hell broke loose. Once they fall under 50%, things can improve.

COYLE

BETWEEN STARS AND STRIPES

57

The US west coast is already below 50% (California's at 37%.) It's "prairie" states and the southeast
where white populations have dropped to 59%. Nothing that appears to target non-whites with help will
be an easy lift there, until the white percent falls below 50%. Which will happen in 20 years.
We need to start health care reform in multiple regions simultaneously. Each has to serve the same
number of people, and get the same money. They can try different ways, as long as the outcomes meet
objectives. It will work best where whites are less than 50% or over 60% of the population.
The US can be divided into 10 regions of 30 to 35 million people each, where all the regions have
either less than 50% whites, or more than 60%. Except one, the southeast, where the division leaves
Georgia and Florida together with 55%. Can't be helped.
Let these 10 regions run health care reform for a decade, then see where we're at. In 15 years, every
two regions can combine into one, now with 1/5 of the American population. The whole country will
have less than 50% white population, and should be on a straighter path.
–---------Finally, health reform is hard. We make it harder by ignoring social realities. The left believes it should
be righteous, and demand the moon. They imagine they'll get 90%, or even 2/3 of what they want. Still
enough to be great. That's not how politics works! When the left makes those demands, the right pushes
the frightened masses buttons. Your taxes will pay for the healthcare of people who don't look like you,
are lazy, illegal, or worse. You'll be denied care by people with Indian accents.
Respect the legacy of Patrick Moynihan, even if you can't do so publicly. He understood majorities
need to be cajoled into supporting programs that serve minorities, even if the program serves everyone.
Be creative. Moynihan wanted to give everyone the health plan that Senators got, along with subsidies,
price controls, and the other stuff reformers wanted. He recognized this navigated past the fearmongering. But many didn't see it that way.
Send comments to:
Brian Coyle
Box 176
Canyon CA 94516
brmcoyle@gmail.com

