Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 3 September 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.3

Pp. 32 -42

The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language Student
from an Instructor’s Perspective
Beth Bassima Bakkar
Faculty School of Literature, Humanities and Sciences
Lebanese University-Beirut

Abstract
The English Writing Center (WC) has recently become a writing support service in selective
Lebanese universities even though it has been a common practice in Western universities for the
last twenty years. The article from a university instructor’s experience aims to bring forward the
reasons the WC at Lebanese universities is slowly attracting students to its provided practices and
how disciplinary instructors amongst other socio-cultural factors are contributing towards students
misconceptions of the WC philosophy and services. The article first introduces the profile of the
Lebanese university English as a foreign language (EFL) student to provide a background on their
English language level of proficiency and expectations from the WC tutors and the misguided
understanding of the WC philosophies and framework practices that are opposing students’
expectations from the WC; and continues to construct the need for the WC to re-evaluate its current
writing pedagogy and process between tutor and student. The article concludes by discussing the
negotiated roles WC tutors, disciplinary instructors and faculty management should take in order
to transfer students’ misconception of the WC aims and objectives and to take responsibility for
their writing.
Key Words: English foreign language, English language writing centre, English medium of
instruction, English second language, Middle East and North Africa, writing centre, writing
laboratory
Cite as: Bakkar, B. B. (2019). The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English
Foreign Language Student from an Instructor’s Perspective. Arab World English Journal, 10
(3)32-42. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no3.3

32

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

Introduction
The nuance for the attainment of the English language at an academic level has over the
past twenty years become a practised requirement for students at the university level not only in
Lebanon but across most of the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. The English
language learning has become a relevant aspect of an Arabic speaking student’s life, as to ensure
a prosperous academic future and career both nationally and abroad. This standpoint has
encouraged Lebanese university management and administration to place pressure on university
faculty members to raise students’ numbers by provided English language support services and to
enhance the English language academic proficiency to a global level. This discourse between
management and tutors’ has contributed towards a re-evolvement of the universities English
language writing centre (ELWC) from a writing lab philosophy that reflected more on the writing
outcome than the writing process and becoming a member of the writing discourse community
where students take ownership of their writing process and outcome.
The WCs philosophical practices in Lebanon as it has internationally is currently
experiencing changes to what was previously implemented in the 1970s Writing Lab and since
North’s (1984) major undertaking on the objectives of working with students writers. North
argued that the WCs is to be more than a place to edit student’s papers. It is a learning center where
tutors are to focus on student writing negotiation and planning throughout the writing experience.
Since North’s support for the WC to be a writing station that encourages the personal writing
growth of a student community, the academic institutions have seen a surge of international
students seeking to acquire the English language discourse at an academic level. Consequently,
from this advancement, universities administration such as in the case of Lebanon, have increased
the English language learning support by providing students with writing language centres. The
WCs are aimed at aiding students in becoming independent, proficient writers of the English
academic language by addressing writing pedagogical issues relevant to students writing
discrepancies.
The exploration and development of the role, form and content a WC is currently
supporting at Lebanon’s higher studies, is slowly becoming a permanent approach by WC tutors
and disciplinary instructors to the underpinning of various theories and pedagogical processes that
aim to serve WC Philosophy, tutors and students. This support aims to provide and encourage
students’ ongoing discussion between faculty members, instructors and tutors; whereby this
examination of the WC will aim to serve as Archer and Richards (2011) explained, as an
exploration into student profile, teacher relationship and the discipline-specific in teaching writing
requirements. From this perspective, what has been observed and argued by practitioners such as
Hauer (2019), Rafoth (2015) and Richards (2011), is that the WC philosophical practices and
students expectations from the WC tutors and tutors from the students are often mismatched. From
this standpoint, what the article aims to highlight, is that students writing expectations are not met
by the tutors and tutors are unable to address students writing concerns because students do not
meet the current understanding that a WC is no longer a drop off-fix it WL but a learning and
writing community where students’ learning is negotiated, writing strategies are discussed, and
complete control of the writing process is adopted by the student.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

33

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

The objectives of this article are; one to discuss how the EFL programs pre-tertiary studies
in Lebanon have prepared students for the academic writing process; and two, how the WC needs
to re-evaluate its current writing pedagogy and process between tutor and student; and three to
establish an understanding of the WC adopted philosophical rules and the need to encourage not
only dialogue and negotiated instruction between tutor and student but also for students to
understand the importance of taking control of their writing as to ensure knowledge growth of the
writing process in all its form.
To adequately explore these points the article address the Lebanese English Foreign
Language National Curriculum (LNC) that is delivered in the English Medium of Instruction
(EMI) to affirm the reasons for students English language discrepancies in the writing process and
to highlight the misconceptions between student and the WC adopted philosophies and writing
practices between tutors and students. The article further reflects on the writer's experience in
teaching at the Lebanese and Australian universities for comparison purposes between both of the
WCs adopted philosophical writing objectives and instruction.
Profile of the Lebanese Writing Center student
From my experience in working at various universities in Lebanon the profile of the
students that attends a WC compared to that of a WC student in an Australian university, for
example, varies extensively even though their writing needs are very similar. For one, the profile
of the student in Lebanon is homogenous. Students and tutors are mostly of an Arabic speaking
background, and they all share the same geopolitical environment. Furthermore, tutors can
communicate in the Arabic language with the students overcoming any frustration that may evolve
from both sides due to language communication breakdown. Whereas, in Australia, the author
worked with students that were either of an English second or foreign language and are of a various
multicultural background. Students are expected to engage and apply the English language along
with its grammatical functions and writing processes and undertaking as a native English language
speaking student. Tutors as myself are expected to deal with a diversity of cultures and languages
and seek pedagogical instruction to overcome language miscommunications. These international
non-English speaking students are encouraged to seek remedial English language support to stamp
out the remedial English as a second language (ESL) identity quickly and to provide written essays
that are of a global English language academic level.
The profile of the Lebanese tertiary student English language also varies from student to
student in the classroom but for reasons that are different from that of an Australian classroom.
One reason depends on whether the student at the secondary level studied English as a second
language in the English medium of instruction (EMI) or a third foreign language. It is important
to note that the existing Lebanese National Curriculum consists of trilingualism; the medium of
instruction in all public and private schools is the first language being Arabic, and depending on
the teaching policy and philosophy of the school the second language is either English as a second
language or French as a foreign language. A second foreign language is also instructed depending
on the school’s teaching philosophy and chosen medium of a foreign language. The understanding
is that public schools in Lebanon adopt the same curriculum as opposed to the private school sector
that implements another global English language education curriculum. Most Private schools in
Lebanon do not apply the Lebanese national curriculum and textbooks and communicate and teach
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

34

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

all core subjects in the English medium of instruction (EMI). The communication and assessment
that is delivered in the EFL class are expected to be communicated in the English language. From
this perspective, the student from a private education sector whose holistic curriculum is delivered
in the EMI arrives at the university level with extensive exposure of the English language discourse
and culture. Hence, their English language academic needs and shortcomings are expected to be
different from that of a student who attended a national school. Secondly, as dictated by a recent
study by Bakkar (2018) on the Lebanese English foreign language (EFL) curriculum from a
teachers’ perspective, Lebanese national students in no small degree have acquired the English
language through memorisation, and ongoing practices in grammatical rules; and teachers are most
likely to instruct in the traditional teaching methods. The language classroom is teacher-centred;
skills are dictated and tested through traditional assessment methods such as in short quizzes and
tests. As a result, the LNEFL student arrives at university with little knowledge of the academic
English language and control of their learning and writing processes. Students, in a short period,
are expected to submit analytical essays that are at an international English academic standard
(Bakkar, 2018) that are above their language writing and language analytical discourse.
The number of Lebanese universities that are currently teaching all core subjects in the
EMI has escalated in order to attract national and international students from the MENA region.
Globalized higher education enhances universities prospects of students’ enrollments, increases
finances consequently making up for lack of government funding, supporting students’ needs for
the global labour market and establishing the profile of the university on a local and international
platform. However, offering these academic programs at higher studies do not come without their
discrepancies.
Students are attracted to acquire their academic studies in EMI, but their lack of
proficiency in the English language at a global academic level is posing various problems to faculty
management and course instructors. What is noted is that the delivery of the courses in the EMI is
highly ambitious on the students. In support of this, Preece and Martin (2010) ascertained in their
study titled Imagine higher education as a multi-lingual space; that often there is a discrepancy
between the pedagogical practices and philosophies of the EMI tertiary education and the language
needs and profile of the ESL-EFL student. A derivative of these discrepancies are contributing
towards students lack of mastery of the English language, comprehension of its theoretical reading
contents, writing processes and study strategies. Consequently, these factors are pressuring faculty
management to provide students with English language writing support centres as a solution to
helping them achieve the academic results needed for them to reach global English language
academic standards. Students are often directed by their course instructors to seek the WC support
to learn how to research and write at an academic English global level. Hence, from experience
and observation, instructors’ heavy teaching load, lack of office student support time and the
personal perception that “they are not EFL teachers” are additional factors that encourage them to
direct students to receive the assistance of the WC tutors.
Accordingly, students ambitiously approach the WC intending to escape the “Remedial
English” identity inherited from received poor results and instructors’ encouragement with a false
understanding of the philosophy and practices of the WC and tutors. From observation, students
often identify themselves as being academically proficient in the practices of the English language.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

35

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

Their strong perception of their English language level is intertwined with their social-cultural
identity (Martin, 2010); hence, falling short of personally interpreting the different language
elements between academic language and literacy practices. They become frustrated with their
course instructors when encouraged to approach the WC for writing support. This frustration is
birthed from their identity that if they are proficient speakers of the English language, then they
are academically strong in the writing and research elements of higher studies. Furthermore,
students arrive at university with their understanding of the characteristics of language proficiency.
Consequently, the provided WC practices and directive learning approaches placed towards
students’ participation is proving to be challenging between WC tutors and students.
What the author noted is what students perceive from the WC tutors is in contradiction
with its noted philosophy and practices. Lebanese universities students come with past experiences
in the writing mechanism and processes from secondary education with lack of personal
knowledge, independence and consistency (Bakkar, 2018) thus, conditioning them to rely on WC
tutors to take control of their writing essays. Students assume WC tutors as they did of their
secondary teachers to provide directive-centred feedback in highlighted areas of writing concern
and to narrow down the feedback to teacher controlled editing, paragraph writing and referencing.
What is further observed is that due to the lack of experience and fluency and accuracy in the
spoken and writing of the English language students are at ease at giving WC tutors full
instructional command of their work. Students expect tutors to take on a much directive role in the
one on one consultation and they perceive the role of their course instructor and the WC tutor to
be of equal bipartisanship; meaning the writing outcome needs to reflect the expectations of their
instructor and course assessment outcome.
Consequently, the WC tutors are finding themselves mediating between the student’s
language needs and their instructors and overlooking teaching aspects of how students need to take
control of their writing process and outcome. Moreover, students to meet assignment deadlines
and to ensure a high GPA expect WC to polish their paper into a monolingual standard written
English that is a reflection of an English native speaking student. In the process, the philosophical
directive tutoring technicalities of the writing centre are lost, consequently creating tutor and
student frustration and loss of writing management and purpose.
Past and Current Philosophy and Profile of the Lebanese University Writing Center
A modest number of WCs are currently established in several Lebanese universities where
once WLs were a common practice for writing deliberation between students and tutors and work
correction. In the past, the WLs have been an essential constituent of higher education globally,
providing language and writing support to English second language students. The educational
support the WL imparted is much different to the philosophies the twenty-first-century WC bases
its philosophical, pedagogical writing processes on. The WL was based on remedial services, and
tutors adopted the quick-fix method. The quick fix method was back to basics method where tutors
implemented to help students with their grammatical errors and sentences fragmentation (North,
1984).
The common practice between the previous years in Lebanon and WL globally at the
university level is that they provided broad tutoring services to students from various academic
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

36

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

sectors at a large tutorial scale. The instruction broadly communicated the targeted framework
content, and students’ language needs were managed at a macro scale. Furthermore, one on one
tutoring between student and tutor took place through appointed meetings during, after class or the
corrected written assignment was picked up by the student without further conferencing. The WL
objective was to provide a macro managed planning language framework that was aimed at
providing learning support to non-English speaking students, where it focused on more than one
particular pedagogical skill at a time (Rafoth, 2015). What is currently observed, encouraged and
experienced between tutors and students at a WC is that the philosophical transition a WC adopts
now is unlike the previously macro-managed level of language studies that are similar to an
academic language syllabus framework.
The Lebanese universities’ that are adopting a modern WC philosophy and objectives are
staffed by peer tutors, faculty members or professional writers who are there to guide and support
students in their writing. The WC is set up by the university administration to provide students
with a safe, non-judgmental learning environment that encourages a one on one approach to
instruction and direct a meaningful discussion (Harris & Silva, 1993) around the writing process
and experience in order for students to become better writers (North, 1984). In support of this
mission, some students at various Lebanese universities the author has instructed at have
demonstrated an eagerness to approach the WC but become reluctant users because they do not
want to be identified as a member of the “Remedial English” language community. Their
assumption as expressed by them that they have a good command of the spoken language and
others lack the personal skill of gaining writing ownership because their secondary teachers took
full control of their writing process prevents them from seeking writing support. Gillespie and
Lerner (2000), explain that the WC should aim to teach students how to become better writers not
better at writing as the WL previously did and to encourage the student to be self-reliant in the
management of their writing timeline and adopted writing strategies. The WCs at Lebanese
universities are aiming at evolving just like most Western universities WC’s, into a student-centred
learning space that welcomes inquiry analytical discourse that is encouraged and guided by tutors.
They are developing a tutor-student relationship that is non-intrusive and non-judgmental. Tutors
are encouraged by WC management to encourage dialogue between students collaboratively and
to guide the student to discover effective writing strategies that reflect on their style of writing and
to encourage students to move beyond aiming at writing to gain better score results on their
assignment. The aim for WC tutors is to provide a tutor-student micro-managed language target
skill support that aims to solve language problems that are centred on the student’s language needs
one skill at a time (Mackiewicz, 2015) and to empower students in taking control of their work
and finding their writing voice and identifying with their audience.
However, what is encouraged philosophical practices at a WC by tutors are not always
consistent with students’ expectations from the center. The article accepts these different
expectations to be a derivative of students’ experiences with the English language macro-skills of
listening, speaking, reading and writing at secondary schooling and being teacher reliant in all
aspects of their learning (Bakkar, 2018). Consequently, the EFL student arrives at university with
minimal comprehension of the academic writing process and have inherited from their secondary
schooling learning skills that conflict with the expectation of tertiary level. Students are instructed
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

37

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

by their disciplinary instructors to visit a WC to enhance their writing discrepancies in order for
them to reach the university’s required academic level.
These tutoring philosophies that are practised in many global WC universities are not
always accepted positively by students who are seeking a quick fix to their writing assignment.
From my experience, tutors as myself, feel that students’ expectation of the writing session has
nothing to do with building their technical writing process but centred on grammar, writing
techniques and most importantly to ensure an above-passing grade. They arrive at the WC session
to write up their assignment to hand it in on time, and as soon as they finish, they only return to
work on a new one. They do not acknowledge the WC as an academic place where they can
develop their writing techniques and become a member of their writing community. Hence, due to
students misconception of the role of a WC adopts tutors are finding it challenging to manage the
language philosophy delivery that is put into place by the WC management. Students place a high
responsibility on tutors to take leadership of their writing process and embrace tutors feedback as
a definite solution to their writing discrepancies, not as an added value to research and problemsolving.
To better understand the misconception, a Lebanese EFL student at a university level
brings with them to the WC, the article delves into the student academic profile and investigates
their reasoning behind such misunderstandings.
Discussion
In the following section, I aim to highlight the reasoning behind EFL Lebanese academic
students’ misconception of the WC and tutors responsibilities. I reflect on and provide suggestions
on the WCs adopted philosophical strategies and practices and the responsibilities of the student
towards their academic writing. I approach each recommendation with a heading to raise
individual topic awareness, judgement and discussion and to collectively examine the
interrelationship and expectations of these topics from WC tutors, course instructors and faculty
management.
EFL Lebanese University Students and the WC Tutors
To be able to construct the philosophical aims and objectives of the Lebanese universities
WC, tutors and course instructors need to acknowledge students socio-cultural and academic
secondary experience within the writing process. The English academic profile of the Lebanese
students are of a Multilanguage English level, and this is especially highlighted in the level of
academic writing they produce. From observation, students enter university with the expectation
that they will receive extensive support in their writing just as they did from their secondary
English language teachers. Their academic institutional, cultural habits are transferred with them
into higher studies, and to change this mindset has proven on many occasions to be exhausting
from an instructors’ position. From experience in delivering writing tutorials to students from
various course affiliations, it is encouraged that instructors and WC tutors commit to studying
students’ academic profile, English language attained and proficiency in their spoken and written
language before they dictate the WCs philosophical aims and objectives to them. The WC adopted
ideologies should be attainable and supportive of the tutor's teachings and students learning.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

38

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

The misconception students have of the WCs role is because they arrive at university with
little knowledge of its purposes. The WC is virtually a new concept, and students have not been
addressed of its practices and management before their transition into university. Their experience
with the writing process is close to the past concepts adopted by the WL tutors, where students
work was micro-managed, edited, and grammatical syntax errors are highlighted and corrected
with or without their input. The aim is to shift students negative attitude they may have about
writing and to encourage them to take ownership of their writing and to become a member of the
writing community. According to Hauer (2016), the tutor may highlight lower-order elements such
as grammatical and syntax errors but be sensitive as not to overlook higher-order concerns that
address thesis focus, purpose, audience, organization and development. Furthermore, some
students do not take university-tutor students seriously because academic statuses in Lebanon is
part of their culture. I have had to on several occasions introduced the student tutors as competent
and professional as other the WC tutors are and that their knowledge of the WC philosophy and
objectives are comparable to their colleagues.
To alter students understanding of the WCs as a writing tutoring centre, course instructors
and WC tutors need to reform students acceptance of a WC role. Students need to accept it as a
place where they take command of their writing process, and that tutors are available to guide them
in the writing discourse where and when needed and not to take control of the writing as to
eliminate their writer’s voice. They should understand that tutors are not there to evaluate their
work; and that they should not put the responsibility on the tutor in micromanaging their final
writing piece as a production of the final product before submission. In the process of achieving
this, tutors along with student-peers presenters, brochures and online websites could students
understand its aims and practices and accept the fundamental philosophy of a WC, whereby they
experience the WC environment in a nonintrusive way where learning is encouraged through
negotiation and an analytical mindset.
The multifaced profile a WC tutor’s role occupies where a student is concerned should be
clarified. Negotiation between course instructors, WC tutors and students on the management of
students work should be an initiated practice from the beginning. Student’s comprehension of the
role a WC delivers is of language support, negotiation, planning, and micro-managing the
technicalities of specific language skills. The tutor is there to instruct and guide but not to eliminate
the students writing voice.
The WC tutor can go further as to encourage the student to publish their writing on the WC
website as to inspire other students to take up writing independently and gain a better
understanding of its aims and objectives. The advantage of having students publish their work is
to promote undergraduate peer review, improve their multi-disciplinary research skills and to write
for journal publishing post-graduation.
The Transition between Secondary School into Higher Education
The collaboration between universities WCs and secondary schools in Lebanon is still at
its infancy stage. Most schools in Lebanon with the exemption of three are not aware of the WC
philosophy, strategies or practices. If secondary students are to be part of this academic writing
community before entering university, then misconception of the WC and tutors expectation could
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

39

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

be avoided. This misconception can be evaded when universities WC tutors and secondary schools
instructors consider working together in creating writing workshops and providing an in schools
WC environment that practices the same philosophies and strategies that are implemented at
university.
From personal observation during my teachings at university, students were introduced to
the WCs offerings only after they received a poor result on their essay, and by that time, most of
the academic term had lapsed. It is advisable, and I know that most universities are aware of this,
that at the initial stage of entering university students should be presented with a tutorial on the
WCs arrangements, philosophy and expectations from them and the tutors. Students need to be
encouraged by their course instructors to attend the WC regularly not only when they have an
essay to produce but to become a member of a writing community that offers writing support in a
variety of topics and fields. From extensive years of experience in teaching Lebanese students, I
have witnessed how much they are grade driven. Therefore, in agreement with course instructors
and faculty management, a small grade can be allocated to students that are frequent members of
the WC community. This grade can act as an incentive for students who are seeking to enhance
their GPA grades.
Course Instructors and Faculty Management
The culture and reiterated nuance by students on the nature and processes of the WC at the
Lebanese university level can no longer be ignored. Faculty management, course instructors and
WC tutors are equally responsible for altering students’ misconceptions of the purpose of the WC.
Instructors and tutors must initiate conferencing with students to draw students’ attention to its
existence, aims and objectives and how they can benefit from its services. In order to see
substantive change in the students’ mindset, ongoing in-class and online discussion that reflects
the existing students writing community should take place. Course instructor’s role should not be
limited to the teaching of the course material but to also encourage students in their writing process
and to help them discover their writing techniques. It is recommended that instructors express their
expectations from their students and value that their students are of an EFL background and that
their English language level is most likely not to a global academic level. The course instructor
cannot overlook their responsibility towards the student in the writing discourse and needs to
acknowledge that what is expected of them towards their student is different from that of a WC
tutor. The course instructor is compelled to highlight rules that concentrate on higher thinking
order such as the principles of academic writing discipline, research, referencing and provide a
critical assessment on students writing progress. Different to that of an instructor, the WC tutor is
encouraged to remain neutral in their assessment, not to evaluate students work and highlight
useful writing techniques and habits, and encourage students to adopt personal writing strategies
that reflect on their audience and writing voice (North, 1984). Students should not expect the WC
tutor and their course instructor’s responsibilities towards their writing assignment to be at par,
hence, all should engage in the conversation of separating responsibilities in order to achieve as
North noted the “concept of a WC and its philosophy”, and to prevent miscommunication and
management between all members.
The author has always made it a point to educate themselves and encourage other
instructors on the learning techniques and language discrepancies EFL students’ face in the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

40

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

language classroom as to adopt strategies and instructions that promote effectual long term
learning that supports students’ academic writing. It is encouraged that WCs hire trained EFL
tutors but as reiterated by faculty management lack of financial funding does not make it feasible.
In such circumstances, instructors and tutors should be trained on how to accommodate students
learning in an EFL setting, acquiring the academic English language courses in the EMI.
According to Kiedaisch and Dinitz (2007), tutors being familiar with students’ language needs and
can provide language writing assistance and empathy is an essential element towards ensuring
students effective learning outcome. Furthermore, instructors encouragement for students to seek
directed writing assistance from the WC tutors should not be based on personal value but on
assisting them in learning the techniques of research and conventions of writing; understanding
the value of becoming a member of the writing community and becoming aware of their writing
and reading audience.
It is an added benefit to the WC tutors to have a shared link of the faculties’ syllabus across
all academic disciplines in order to be theoretically aware of the literature and thesis topics students
are working on. Furthermore, collaborated learning provides integrated conceptual understanding
of the assignment’s aims and objectives, motivates organized discussion between student and WC
tutor and in the case of a peer tutoring, the tutor will appear more knowledgeable and experienced
hence, as Forman and Cazden (1985) highlighted removing any existing peer doubt and inhibition
between the two.
Another way of changing students’ misconception of the WC is for faculty management to provide
students with an appealing learning environment that encourages students to enter frequently.
What I have frequently observed is that the smallest, dullest room with an inefficient number of
tutors are provided. Tutors are unable to timetable a large number of students and students are
unsuccessful in booking a follow-up session with the tutors before submitting their writing
assignment. Consequently, students fail to receive further negotiated writing support and feedback.
They voice a contradiction in the WCs stated philosophy and practices, hence, maintaining a
negative perception of the WCs theorization and operations.
Conclusion
One cannot deny that the WC in Lebanon as it is globally, has evolved extensively since
the making of the WLs. The philosophical discourse that once encouraged tutor control and
focused on editing, grammar and citation now champion students through mentoring on content,
organisation and voice and through becoming comfortable in the writing discourse discipline. It
should be encouraged that students should not see the WC as a last “stop shop”, “quick fix” service
to solving their writing problems but as a tutorial service environment that supports their writing
journey. A WC where attention is drawn towards the students, initiating tutor-student
conferencing, creating a personalized writing plan and adopting a writing strategy that develops
their writing voice.
Furthermore, when the WCs philosophical technicalities are made manifest through theory
and practice, then students perspective on the role a WC holds may change. The conflicting
understanding of the purpose behind the WC and the functions of the tutor where a student is
concerned is a conversation university administration, lecturers and tutors should have to provide
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

41

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

clear policy guidelines of the WC and the expectations of the students from the tutors. Through
this process, it is hoped that the misguided conception that a WC provides as a paper drop off
services, and complete editing and rewrite of the paper is erased. Conjointly, fundamental issues
are discussed on how to create a WC that services EFL students who are acquiring the English
language at an academic level in the EMI. Ongoing discussion between faculty management and
course instructors with WC tutors on the expectations from students writing and academic research
is encouraged as to ensure students support and awareness of current global academic EFL
practices that they can compare to past theories and adapt to their current student's academic needs.
In conclusion, the existence of the WC philosophy and objective at the university level in
Lebanon in an EFL environment is a new shared practice amongst tutors and students. The article
encourages, WC tutors and faculty management and instructors to reflect on past research and
current adopted strategies by international universities in an ESL and EFL context and become a
member of conferences similar to the ones held by MENAWC on the role a WC plays in supporting
students writing from other MENA universities whose native language is Arabic and academic
instruction is in the EMI. When observing other universities conferencing on their adopted WC
instruction and how students are progressing in the elements of writing, we narrow the gap between
theory, research and practices (North, 1984) and work on transferring students’ misconception of
the WC and becoming a member of the writing community.
About Author:
Beth Bassima Bakkar was brought up and educated in Melbourne and is currently a lecturer at
the Lebanese University of Beirut. Her work focuses specifically on the teaching of the English
literature to English second language and English foreign language students in the English medium
of instruction.
References
Archer, A. & Richards, R. (2011). Writing Centres and Access to Higher Education. Africa: Sun
Press.
Bakkar, B. (2018). A Critical Examination of the Secondary 10-12 English as a Foreign
Language of the Lebanese Public School Curriculum: A Teacher's Perspective. Beirut.
Forman, E. A. & Cazden, C. B. (1985). Exploring Vygotskian Perspective in Education: The
Cognitive Value of Peer Interaction. In J. V. Wertsh (ed.), Culture, Communication and
Cognition. Vygotskian Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gillespie, P. & Lerner, N. (2000). The Tutoring Process. The Allyn And Bacon Guide To Peer
Tutoring. Boston. Allyn & Bacon.
Hauer, L. (2016). Translingualism in the writing center. Where can we meet?. Indiana University
of Pennsylvania: Research Gate.
Kiedaisch, J. & Dinitiz, S. (2007). Changing notions of differences in the writing center: The
possibilities of universal design. Writing Center Journal, 27 (2), 39-59.
North, M. S. (1984). The idea of a writing center. College English, 433-446.
Mackiewicz, J. & Thompson, I. K. (2015). Talk about writing: The tutoring strategies of
experienced writing center tutors. New York: NY: Routledge.
Martin, R. (2010). Transforming Social Work Practices. Sage Publication.
Preece, S. & Martin, P. (2010). Guest editorial. Imagining higher education as a multilingual
space. Language and Education 24, 3-8.
Rafoth, B. (2015). Multilingual writers and writing center. Logan: Utah State University Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

42

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number3 September 2019
The Writing Center’s Role in the Academic Life of an English Foreign Language

Bakkar

Stephen, N. (2009). The Idea of a Writing Center . JSTOR, 433-446.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

43

