Original Article

The Migration State in
the Global South:
Nationalizing,
Developmental, and
Neoliberal Models of
Migration Management

International Migration Review
1-30
ª The Author(s) 2019
Article reuse guidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/0197918319879057
journals.sagepub.com/home/mrx

Fiona B. Adamson
SOAS University of London

Gerasimos Tsourapas
University of Birmingham

Abstract
How do states in the Global South manage cross-border migration? This article
identifies Hollifield’s “migration state” as a useful tool for comparative analysis yet
notes that in its current version the concept is limited, given its focus on economic
immigration in advanced liberal democracies. We suggest a framework for extending
the “migration state” concept by introducing a typology of nationalizing, developmental, and neoliberal migration management regimes. The article explains each type
and provides illustrative examples drawn from a range of case studies. To conclude,
it discusses the implications of this analysis for comparative migration research,
including the additional light it sheds on the migration management policies of states
in the Global North.

Corresponding Authors:
Fiona B. Adamson, Department of Politics and International Studies, SOAS University of London,
Thornhaugh Street, Russell Square, London WC1H 0XG, UK.
Email: fa33@soas.ac.uk
Gerasimos Tsourapas, Department of Political Science and International Studies, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK.
Email: g.tsourapas@bham.ac.uk

2

International Migration Review XX(X)

Introduction
As the international politics of cross-border mobility becomes more complex, there
is a growing need to comprehend the evolution and rationale behind a variety of state
migration management practices. Yet, the field of migration studies lacks an adequate comparative framework for understanding the emergence of different forms of
state migration management regimes outside the Global North. Non-Western countries have experienced trajectories of state formation and development that may
differ from those of industrial “northern” democracies and that are often shaped
by factors beyond the state, including colonial legacies (Klotz 2013; Cooper 2014),
regional dynamics (Thiollet 2011; Tsourapas 2016; Geddes et al. 2019), external
actors (FitzGerald and Cook-Martı́n 2014), and international systemic-level factors
(Adamson 2006; Adamson and Tsourapas 2019). The relationship between migration and processes such as postcolonial state formation, nation-building, developmentalism, and structural dependency has not regularly featured in theories of
migration that emerged from the study of countries in post-1945 Europe and North
America.1 Yet, as we demonstrate here, such factors are crucial to understanding
state migration management regimes in much of the world.
In this article, we seek to better understand state models of migration management in the Global South. We do so by beginning with the key concept of the
“migration state,” as developed by Hollifield (2004), which has been central to
migration studies (e.g., Castles 2004; Boswell 2007; Freeman and Kessler 2008;
Hampshire 2013; Peters 2017). We suggest that this concept’s extension to regions
beyond Europe and North America can help shed light on variations in state
approaches to cross-border mobility across time and space. Taking inspiration from
the political economy literature on varieties of state capitalism (Hall and Soskice
2001), we examine variations in migration management regimes by presenting a
typology of state policies derived from the broader literatures on state formation and
the international political economy of development.2 As a starting point, we propose
characterizing state migration management regimes by the extent to which they are
nationalizing, developmental, or neoliberal. Our aim in doing so is not to produce a
1

Scholars such as Brubaker (1992), Hansen (2000), Triadafilopoulos (2004), and Zolberg
(2006b) have taken an historical approach to migration and nation-building but have focused,
respectively, on France and Germany, Britain, Canada, and the United States. The literature
on colonial legacies, nation-building, and citizenship in the Global South, such as Chatterjee
(1993) or Mamdami (2018), has not been well integrated into migration studies and has not
focused on migration per se. More recently, however, migration histories of cases such as
South Africa (Klotz 2013) and India (Mongia 2018) have begun to bridge this gap.
2
The literature in this area is vast, but on state formation and nation-building, see Smith
(1986); Barkey and Parikh (1991); Vu (2010); Wimmer and Feinstein (2010); and Mylonas
(2012). On the international political economy of the Global South, see Amin (1976); Hout
(1993); Bates (2001); and Haggard (2018).

Adamson and Tsourapas

3

comprehensive typology of state migration regimes but rather to suggest ways of
expanding the concept of the “migration state” beyond its liberal democratic variant
in which migration management has been closely connected with broader state
policy orientations toward markets and rights (Hollifield 2004). We aim to show
that Hollifield’s concept of the “migration state” is historically and temporally
bound and, for this reason, needs amending in order to achieve a more global
applicability.
Our article proceeds in the following manner. First, we discuss the need for
appropriate frameworks for conducting global, comparative, and cross-regional
research on state migration management policies. We note that much of the existing
literature on migration and citizenship policy has emerged from studies of Europe
and North America. Therefore, it has been shaped by a bias toward liberal democratic states, and its findings are not always easily transferable to other contexts. This
bias, we argue, has been compounded by a bifurcation of the field into “migration”
and “refugee” studies, with the latter more focused on the Global South. Second, we
introduce Hollifield’s concept of the “migration state” and assess its utility for
undertaking global and comparative research. By recognizing that Hollifield’s
“migration state” is in actuality the liberal immigration state, we establish a space
for identifying and analyzing other types of migration states. Third, we propose three
additional types of migration states: nationalizing, developmental, and neoliberal.
These three types, we suggest, allow for a more comprehensive understanding of
trajectories of state migration management policies outside the Global North. After
explaining what we mean by each type and providing illustrative examples drawn
from a range of case studies, we discuss the implications of our analysis for comparative migration research, including the additional light it sheds on the migration
management policies of states in the Global North.

The Politics of State Migration Management
The field of migration studies has approached questions of cross-border mobility
management through a predominantly Western European and North American lens
(Natter 2018). This bias is reflected in the division of the field into “migration
studies”— primarily focused on economic and labor immigration in the Global
North — and “refugee studies” — principally concerned with forced displacement
in the Global South. This bifurcation has resulted in, and has been reproduced
through, separate journals and distinct debates around migrants and refugees (Black
2001). It has also contributed to a de facto split between a migration-studies literature focused on issues of economic migration, citizenship, rights, and integration in
“northern” democracies and a refugee-studies literature centered on humanitarian
crises, mass population flows, and security issues in “southern” non-democracies
(Betts and Loescher 2010; Milner 2014).
For example, scholarship on citizenship and integration has focused disproportionately on Europe and North America, with comparisons of France, Germany, and

4

International Migration Review XX(X)

the United Kingdom examining factors like national culture and identity (Brubaker
1992; Joppke 2010; Alba and Foner 2015). Studies of migration policies and politics
across OECD countries have also focused on states’ economic interests in fostering
labor immigration, immigrants’ impact on welfare state systems, and state regimes’
ability to secure the rights of immigrants and their descendants (Hollifield 1992,
2004; Freeman 1995; Ruhs 2013). Increasingly, there has also been scholarly attention to migration and asylum policy within the European Union (EU), focusing on
issues such as Brussels’s role in promoting policy harmonization across state actors;
elites’ and professionals’ free movement within Europe; and the coordination of
national approaches to immigration and asylum issues via burden-sharing (Thielemann 2003; Boswell and Geddes 2010; Favell 2011; Geddes and Scholten 2016).
Overall, then, there has been a strong tendency in migration studies “to focus on the
consequences of immigration in wealthy, migrant-receiving societies, and to ignore
the causes and consequences of migration in countries of origin within the Global
South” (Castles, Miller, and De Haas 2014, 26).
On the other hand, the field of refugee studies has tended to pay more attention to
security, conflict, and humanitarian responses to crisis. For example, a number of
studies have examined how refugee crises can play a role in the diffusion of conflicts
across borders or lead to governance challenges in weak states (Zolberg, Suhrke, and
Aguayo 1992; Weiner and Russell 2001; Lischer 2005; Salehyan and Gleditsch
2006). Others have analyzed the humanitarian dimensions of forced migrations,
including the management of refugee camps, the plight of stateless peoples, and the
economic life of refugees (Jacobsen 2005; Betts et al. 2017). Much of this scholarship has also focused on the international refugee regime’s legal and political
dimensions and treated migration flows in the Global South less as matters of state
policy and more as matters of “global governance” (Barnett 2002; Betts 2011;
Loescher and Milner 2011). Here, the focal point remains on the failure of states
and populations in the Global North to adequately respond to and manage refugee
crises, rather than on the study of policymaking and migration management in
southern states. Indeed, with notable exceptions (Jacobsen 1996, 2002), states in
the Global South are often missing or lack agency in this literature, relegated to the
backdrop on which refugee crises unfold, the passive recipients of international aid,
or victims of the policies of more powerful Northern states (Barnett 2001; Betts and
Collier 2017).
This is not to say that there has been no attention to migration management
outside Europe and North America. For example, one strand of literature has grown
out of the study of diaspora politics and evolved from theorizing how migration
affects sending states and origin-country politics (e.g., Heisler 1985; ØstergaardNielsen 2003; Kapur 2010; Margheritis 2015) to how sending states themselves
attempt to manage and control emigration, expatriates, diasporas, and citizens
abroad (Brand 2006; Adamson and Demetriou 2007; FitzGerald 2009; Varadarajan
2010; Naujoks 2013; Délano and Gamlen 2014; Margheritis 2015). Working from a
political sociology perspective, a second group of scholars has highlighted the

Adamson and Tsourapas

5

importance of migration in non-OECD states’ foreign policies (Klotz 2000; Curley
and Wong 2008; Thiollet 2011). In addition, a strand of literature examines citizenship and membership regimes across the Global South (Whitaker 2005; Sadiq 2008;
Chung 2010a; Kim 2016). There is also a range of important work on labor migrants’
role in the politics and economies of the Arab world (Chaudhry 1997; Chalcraft
2009); policymaking in South Africa (Klotz 2013), Latin America (Arcarazo &
Freier 2015), and Asia (Lie 2008; Chung 2010b); and regional migration systems
in Asia and elsewhere (McKeown 2008; see also sections of various collections, e.g.,
Castles, Miller, and De Haas 2014; Geddes et al. 2019). Finally, there is an emerging
literature on “South–South migration” which focuses on transit and host states in the
Global South in an effort to move beyond conventional expectations of migration
from poorer to richer countries in Europe and North America (Nawyn 2016; Short,
Hossain, and Khan 2017; Fiddian-Qasmiyeh 2018).
Despite this growing scholarly interest in migration across the Global South, we
still lack a systematic comparative treatment of the politics of state migration management that includes states outside Europe and North America (Boucher and Gest
2018, 22–24). Mainstream migration studies has relied on particular assumptions
regarding state structures, interests, and regime types that are derived from the
experiences of states in the Global North and that are not always applicable to
countries with political systems and histories that differ from those of (post)industrial liberal democracies. In the following two sections, we propose a framework for
analyzing migration in the Global South by utilizing Hollifield’s (2004) concept of
the “migration state” as a starting point. We argue that the “migration state” has
become a shorthand for analyzing the policies of what should more accurately be
understood as the liberal immigration state. Expanding the “migration state” concept to include other varieties of migration management regimes beyond those of
liberal democratic states enhances its analytic utility and makes it more suitable for
cross-regional (and transhistorical) comparisons.

The “Migration State” Concept and Its Limits
The notion of the “migration state” is key for understanding the central role that
international migration management plays in the strategies and policies of contemporary states. Building on earlier notions of the “Garrison State” (Lasswell 1941)
and the “Trading State” (Rosecrance 1986), the concept, as developed by James F.
Hollifield (2004), sheds light on the fact that the management of flows of people
across state borders is as important to contemporary states as the management of
violence or trade. Central to the migration state is the idea of the “liberal paradox.”
On the one hand, states must respond to liberalism’s economic logic, which
encourages trade and the free flows of goods across borders. On the other hand,
liberalism’s political and legal logics are of territorial and juridical closure. This
situation leads to a tension in migration policymaking in which states seek to balance
the logic of markets and the logic of rights (Hollifield 2004, 886–87).

6

International Migration Review XX(X)

The “migration state” concept has been particularly fruitful in pointing out the
central role that migration management plays in contemporary state policy and in
understanding the contradictory interests facing states in managing migration flows.
Yet, as currently employed, it is not fully portable to many contexts in the Global
South because its underlying assumptions are biased toward the experience of liberal
democratic states in post-1945 Europe and North America. In particular, the concept
suffers from four biases that limit its conceptual portability: two related to the type of
migration flows assumed by the model — an immigration bias and an economic
migration bias — and two related to the type of state assumed by the model — a state
capacity bias and a liberal bias. In other words, the framework focuses predominantly on a narrow subset of migration flows, states, and regime types and, therefore,
is not comprehensive in its approach to global migration governance.

Immigration Bias
In terms of an immigration bias, Hollifield’s “migration state” concept centers on
state management of migrant flows into a destination country and, thus, examines
policymaking around questions of entry, integration, citizenship, and naturalization.
Due to the need for labor in post-1945 Europe and North America, the regulation of
economically driven immigration has indeed been the greatest policy concern for
many states in the Global North (Castles et al. 2014, 96–123).3 However, immigration is only one possible facet of migration policymaking, which can also include the
management of emigration and its consequences, including state management of
remittance flows, state diaspora engagement and diaspora management policies, as
well as circular and transit migrations (Mylonas 2013; Gamlen 2014; Ragazzi 2014;
Adamson 2019).
For many states in the Global South, the management of out-migration as a
strategy of economic development to both alleviate unemployment and secure foreign direct investment via remittances has been more salient than managing inmigration. For example, the Philippines, Mexico, and India are heavily reliant on
labor exports and have incentives to devise policies that harness emigration’s potential (FitzGerald 2009; Kapur 2010; Délano 2011; Naujoks 2013; Ireland 2018).
Hollifield’s model focuses on the management of immigration, rather than emigration, processes, making the framework more applicable to receiving states than to
sending or transit states. Of course, in reality, no state is purely a migrationreceiving or -sending state; these are ideal types. Nonetheless, due to broader patterns of unequal economic and political development in the post-1945 period, the
focus on the politics surrounding immigration, at the expense of emigration, has
3

Increasingly, the regulation of mixed migration flows that include both economic migrants
and refugees/asylum-seekers has become a core policy concern, as evidenced by the
emergence of European and US–Mexico border “migration crises.”

Adamson and Tsourapas

7

meant that the “migration state” concept has been less applicable to the political
realities of labor-exporting states in the Global South.

Economic Bias
Additionally, the migration state model focuses on economic migration, with a
particular emphasis on voluntary labor migration and the interaction between the
flow of human labor across borders with economic markets and human rights.4
Hollifield’s model has paid far less attention to how states manage various forms
of political and forced migration, including conflict-induced migration, ethnic
cleansing, refugee crises, asylum-seeking, modern and historical forms of slavery,
human trafficking, and smuggling. Here again, the focus on economic migration
makes sense in the context of post-1945 states in the Global North, which experienced a period of relative stability and economic growth that acted as pull factors for
both low- and high-skilled labor (Martin 1991; Hollifield et al. 2014, 3–35).
The geographies of North America and Western Europe, as well as their geopolitical position in the post-WWII order, meant that such states were relatively
removed from conflict zones (Zolberg et al. 1992; Loescher 1993). Large refugee
inflows, such as the Vietnamese to the United States in the 1970s and 1980s following the US withdrawal from Vietnam, were managed via specific legislation —
in this case, the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1975 (Bloemraad 2006). While the United States did not distinguish between economic migrants
and refugees prior to 1945, the policy of non-differentiation changed following
WWII, with a number of legislative acts (e.g., the Displaced Persons Act of 1948,
the Refugee Relief Act of 1953, and the Refugee-Escapee Act of 1957) that culminated in the Refugee Act of 1980, which amended the Immigration and Nationality
Acts of 1965 (Zolberg 2006b, 337ff). Nevertheless, even though the United States
has taken in large numbers of refugees, the annual number pales in comparison to
that of economic migrants (Martin 2011).5
Similarly, in Europe, the Iron Curtain dividing Western and Eastern Europe
meant that states such as Britain, France, and Germany were largely protected from
the immediate effects of conflict-induced cross-border refugee flows and could
respond to crises, such as the expulsion of Asians from Uganda in 1972, from a
4

For example, Hollifield (2004, 885) argues that the “rise in immigration is a function of
market forces (demand-pull and supply-push), which reduce the transaction costs of moving
from one society to another.” This framing ignores migration forms that stem from conflict
and political persecution (e.g., refugees and asylum-seekers), although Hollifield (2004,
892–93) does address the spike in refugees following WWI and WWII and notes migration’s
significance in “less-developed countries.”
5
In September 2018, US President Donald Trump announced that the number of refugees
resettled in the United States in 2019 would be capped at 30,000, further scaling back US
responses to forced displacement (Davis 2018).

8

International Migration Review XX(X)

distance. Europe’s geographic isolation changed to some extent with the end of the
Cold War and the Balkan conflicts of the 1990s, which resulted in massive refugee
flows into the rest of Europe, including approximately 350,000 into Germany (Martinovic 2016). More recently, conflicts in Syria and elsewhere have led to substantial
flows of refugees into Europe, yet the number of refugees entering Europe still pales
in comparison to the numbers of refugees hosted by states such as Lebanon, Turkey,
and Jordan (Carrera et al. 2015; Ostrand 2015; Yazgan et al. 2015). Thus, Hollifield’s “migration state” model, which focuses on economic migration and the tradeoff between markets and rights, is insufficient for understanding state management
of conflict-driven and forced migration.

State Capacity Bias
An additional bias in the “migration state” concept is its focus on advanced industrial
(or postindustrial) countries with high levels of state capacity. The model rests
largely on Westphalian assumptions about state sovereignty, which allow researchers to treat the state as a unitary rational actor with functioning policymaking and
bureaucratic apparatuses, clearly defined national borders, and a coherent sense of
national identity (Waltz 1979, 111–14; Hollifield 2004, 887–88). However, many
states in the world do not have these characteristics and suffer from low levels of
state capacity, ongoing internal conflict, or compromised sovereignty. These factors
may affect their ability to formulate and implement coherent and effective migration
policies, hindering the applicability of Hollifield’s model to weak states or states
with low levels of juridical or Westphalian sovereignty (Jackson and Rosberg 1982;
Migdal 1988; Krasner 1999).
Similarly, the migration state model assumes that states possess a basic capacity
for policy formulation and implementation (Hollifield 2004, 893) — a problematic
assumption for weak states with low capacity, which may lack the ability to implement policies or rely on more informal mechanisms of migration control or integration into the labor market. Indeed, the assumption that states can formulate and
implement coherent migration policies does not fully hold in states with high capacity, either: European and North American states, for example, often lack the capacity
or will to deter irregular migration or enforce workplace compliance (Castles 2004).
While this situation may sometimes be related to the so-called “migration gap”
between the rhetoric surrounding migration policy and the actual policies and their
enforcement (Hollifield, Martin, and Orrenius 2014), this problem can be more
severe in states with low internal capacity. For example, in both India and Malaysia,
low state capacity to register and document indigenous births, combined with the
availability of counterfeit documentation for recent migrants, leads to the counterintuitive outcome of some irregular migrants having more formal rights than some
native-born residents (Sadiq 2008). Such practices suggest that the migration state
model’s underlying assumptions regarding a state’s capacity to formulate and

Adamson and Tsourapas

9

implement policy pose yet another barrier to its portability to a variety of contexts in
the Global South.

Liberal Bias
Finally, the migration state model has largely been derived from, and applied to,
states with liberal democratic regime types and market economies rhetorically committed to individual rights (Natter 2018). Hollifield’s work, for example, focuses
explicitly on the migration policies of “advanced industrial democracies” — largely,
the United States, France, and Germany.6 Within this context, states face a “liberal
paradox” with respect to migration policy — they must devise policies that allow
states to capture the benefits of global markets while still protecting individual rights
(Hollifield 2004, 886–87). Yet, not all states have liberal regime types or prioritize
markets and rights (Chung et al. 2018). Thus, the migration state model, in its current
form, has limited applicability to states across a variety of non-liberal regime types,
such as illiberal democracies, authoritarian regimes, autocracies, and anocracies,
which may have policy goals or political systems that diverge from those of states
in Western Europe and North America and may not be beholden to liberal norms.
For example, developing states’ migration policy in much of the post-WWII era
has centered on the prevention of “brain drain” via restrictive emigration practices
(Hirschman 1978, 101). The Eastern European communist bloc focused on preventing emigration to the West while supporting the circulation of skilled migrants
across the communist world, as per the ideals of socialist internationalism (Applebaum 2019). Many states in the Global South, including Gulf Cooperation Council
states and Central Asian republics, have programs that encourage their citizens to
study internationally but also prevent them from migrating permanently by tying
them to a commitment to return following study (Perna et al. 2014; Del Sordi 2017).
Some autocratic regimes continue to consider migration a politically suspect act and
try to prevent citizens’ freedom to travel via a number of means (Alemán and Woods
2014). Moreover, liberal norms can be used for exclusionary and identarian purposes, leading to deep contradictions around migration even within liberal states
(Adamson et al. 2011).
The desire to procure material gains via emigration often contrasts with nondemocracies’ desire to politically control their citizens within the nation-state’s
borders (Alemán and Woods 2014). In line with Hollifield’s argument that liberal
democracies are characterized by a liberal paradox, non-democratic migration states
in the Global South frequently face an illiberal paradox (Tsourapas 2019a): on the
one hand, they seek to restrict emigration for political and security reasons; on the
other hand, they need to encourage emigration for economic reasons to attract
6

More recently, Hollifield and Sharpe (2017) applied the “migration state” framework to
Japan.

10

International Migration Review XX(X)

remittances, tackle structural problems of unemployment and overpopulation, or
reap other material benefits associated with cross-border mobility (Mosley and
Singer 2015). A number of Global South states respond to this illiberal paradox
by restricting emigration: at times, Cuba, Uzbekistan, North Korea, and Soviet bloc
states have imposed firm control on citizens’ emigration, prioritizing political
repression over material gain (Dowty, 1989). For China, it was only during the
post-1978 period of “reform and opening up” that the ruling Communist Party
agreed to relax its restrictive emigration laws (Liu 2009). Other developmental
migration states’ response to the illiberal paradox is to encourage emigration but
to attempt to control political activism abroad: Jordan, Morocco, and Tunisia
encouraged their citizens’ emigration for economic reasons but also developed
intricate mechanisms of monitoring and controlling citizens’ behavior abroad
(Brand 2006). Eritrea, with one third of its citizens residing outside the country, has
established coercive transnational institutions to ensure continuous inflows of remittances and tax income (Hirt and Mohammad 2017). Broadly, then, non-democracies
that allow, and benefit economically from, citizens’ cross-border mobility tend to
also develop intricate “extraterritorial authoritarian practices” that aim to “manage
and offset the risks population mobility poses to them” (Glasius 2018, 179).
These four biases — an immigration bias; an economic migration bias; a state
capacity bias; and a liberal bias — all point to the limitations of the existing
migration state model, which has emerged inductively from the study of migration
management policies in the Global North. Although the four characteristics converge in post-1945 states in Western Europe and North America, there are many
examples of states that represent only some or none of these characteristics. For
example, India is a liberal democratic state with weak capacity to manage and
implement formal migration systems (Sadiq 2008); Mexico, which successfully
implemented liberal democratic practices only recently, has historically managed
not only immigration but also emigration and transit migrant flows (FitzGerald
2009). Therefore, we argue, it is useful to further unpack the notion of the migration
state in ways that extend its relevance to other settings and contexts. Just as the
“varieties of capitalism” literature has observed that state management of relations
between labor and capital varies across states to include both liberal and coordinated
market economies (Hall and Soskice 2001), so too is there significant variation
across states in their migration management regimes.

Varieties of Migration States: Nationalizing,
Developmental, and Neoliberal
Based on the above discussion, we can see that the “migration state” concept refers,
in actuality, to a relatively narrow set of migration management regimes that may be
best understood as those of immigration policies for economic migrants in advanced
liberal democracies. In other words, the migration state, as it has been used, should
be more accurately understood as the liberal immigration state. As a means of

Adamson and Tsourapas

11

strengthening the concept’s applicability across time and space, we extend it to a
variety of state migration management regimes that would be more applicable to
contexts in the Global South.
We propose that the categories of nationalizing, developmental, and neoliberal
migration states provide a framework for applying the migration state concept to a
greater range of historical and geographical cases. The categories recognize the need
to look historically at processes of state formation and development, while considering broader structural trends and international factors, such as changing global
relations between capital and labor, that shape state choices (Basch, Schiller, and
Blanc 2005; Peters 2017).7 The three categories are derived from both inductive and
deductive reasoning, drawing on a combination of the literatures on nation-building,
developmentalism, and neoliberalism and from our critique of the migration state
framework. As such, we propose these models as an exercise in grounded theory
(Strauss and Corbin 1997; Glaser 2017), with the aim of producing new categories.
In the remainder of this article, we illustrate the categories’ logic by using a range of
examples to show their broader applicability.
All three of these additional varieties of migration states pose challenges to
Hollifield’s liberal migration state because their migration policies and practices
are not guided by concerns with trade-offs between markets and rights. Furthermore,
the nationalizing migration state poses a challenge to the dominance of economic
and market concerns as motivating factors for state migration policies, highlighting
instead the political and ideological roots of state migration policy and the prevalence of state-driven instances of forced displacement. In the case of the developmental migration state, the model challenges the overwhelming focus on
immigration by pointing to the important role of emigration and labor export in the
economic development strategies of democratic and non-democratic states in the
Global South. Finally, the neoliberal migration state calls into question the centrality
of rights-based migration policymaking and demonstrates how variations in state
capacity (and autonomy) lead to differences in how states commodify cross-border
migration flows. More broadly, the policies of these three types of “migration states”
emerge not just from domestic politics and preferences but are embedded in broader
structural and international trends, such as imperial collapse and decolonization;
ideologies of developmentalism; and the global rise of deregulation and commodification, all of which are closely associated with a number of international actors,
such as powerful “Northern” states and international organizations.
Furthermore, these three forms of migration states are meant to be ideal types —
in the Weberian sense — and are designed to be indicative (rather than exhaustive)
of the alternative logics that might drive state migration policy across a range of
cases. As such, they should be treated as heuristic tools that help contextualize and
illuminate underlying logics of state migration policies across different contexts. In
7

We thank an anonymous reviewer for raising this important point.

12

International Migration Review XX(X)

reality, the categories may overlap or merge into one another, and any particular
state may have contradictory policies that correspond to particular aspects of one or
more ideal type. With these caveats, the rest of this section outlines and illustrates
these three additional types of “migration states.”

Nationalizing Migration States: Population Exchanges, Expulsions,
and Ethnic “Return”
The concept of the state that informs Hollifield’s migration state is the modern
sovereign nation-state, defined by clear boundaries and a national identity — the
same model that pervades much of the mainstream literature in international relations and political science (Agnew 1994). While this model may be suited to understanding many aspects of policymaking in post-1945 industrial democracies, it
sidesteps the fact that the vast majority of the world’s states came into existence
after 1945.8 Migration studies has undertheorized the role that population movement
and control in general, and policies of forced migration in particular, have played in
larger processes of state formation and nation-building, especially in postcolonial
and postimperial contexts (Zolberg 1983; Klotz 2013). State- and nation-building
processes have been responsible for significant human population flows during the
twentieth century and need to be understood as a subcategory of state migration
management policies. The ideology of nationalism, and the political impetus “to
make a state correspond to a nation,” shaped postcolonial and postimperial statebuilding around the world and in different contexts (Cooper 2018, 95). In nationalizing migration states, the dominant logic is identity based and politically driven,
rather than one of markets and rights.
One of the most spectacular examples of the use of mass migrations in the
formation of new states occurred with the 1947 partition of British India into the
newly formed states of India and Pakistan. An estimated 10–12 million refugees
were created, with around 7,226,000 Muslims moving to Pakistan and approximately 7,249,000 Hindus and Sikhs crossing from Pakistan to India (Talbot and
Singh 2009). A further partition of Pakistan in the context of the 1971 Bangladesh
Liberation War led to an additional outflow of 10 million Bengali refugees to
neighboring India (Totten and Bartrop 2008).
Earlier in the twentieth century, the Ottoman Empire engaged in population
exchanges with Bulgaria and Greece in 1913 and 1914, respectively. In addition
time, approximately 350,000 people were forced to move between Greece and
Bulgaria as part of a 1919 bilateral agreement (Içduygu and Sert 2015; Robson
8

In 1945, the United Nations had 51 member states, compared to 193 in 2018. The vast
majority of this growth has come from the emergence or independence of new states in the
international system, http://www.un.org/en/sections/member-states/growth-united-nationsmembership-1945-present/index.html

Adamson and Tsourapas

13

2017, 73). More broadly, the transition from the Ottoman Empire to the modern
Turkish Republic can be characterized as a period of nation-building via the state
management of forced migration, including population exchanges, expulsions, and
ethnic cleansing (Yildirim 2007). Some of these expulsions predate the emergence
of modern Turkey — most famously, the Armenian expulsions between 1915 and
1917 and smaller population transfers of Armenians to Syria and Lebanon in 1921–
22 (Robson 2017, 78). The founding of the new Turkish Republic, however, saw
rounds of deportations in the form of the 1923 Greek–Turkish population exchange,
in which 1.2 million Christian “Greeks” in Anatolia were denationalized and
exchanged for 350,000 Muslim “Turks” from Greece (Triadafilopoulos 1998;
Hirschon 2003). At the same time, immigration policies in the early Republican
period promoted the development of an ethno-religiously defined Turkish identity,
encouraging the arrival of over 700,000 Muslims from various Balkan states, including Greece, Romania, Yugoslavia, and Bulgaria (Akgündüz 1998; Kirişci 2000).
The transition from empire to nation-state, thus, involved the establishment of a
migration management regime based on the homogenization of a population within
clearly defined territorial borders.
Further examples of the mass expulsion of populations during processes of stateformation and nation-building in the Middle East include the approximately 750,000
Palestinians expelled in 1948 with the founding of the state of Israel — a process that
was legitimized in part by the example of “nation-building exchanges such as the
postwar expulsion of Germans from Poland and Czechoslovakia” (Robson 2017,
133–34). Throughout the twentieth century, most of these flows were managed by
newly formed states, sometimes with the assistance of international actors, such as
the Mandatory Powers of the League of Nations, which viewed the “unmixing” of
populations “as a legitimate, internationally sanctioned form of state building”
(Robson 2017, 74). The exodus of approximately 800,000 French citizens from
Algeria in 1961–62 followed the Algerian War of Liberation (McDougall 2017,
221). In addition, there were multiple cases of the expulsion or mass exodus of
approximately 850,000 Jewish residents from Arab states in the 1950s through
1970s during periods of Arabization that accompanied postcolonial state-building
processes (Cohen 1973). The reshaping of the Arab Middle East along ethnic lines
also led to the expulsion of other minorities (Sharkey 2017). For example, the
introduction of nationalization policies by Egypt’s Nasserite regime, particularly
the 1957 Egyptianization Laws, contributed to the decline of the country’s European
communities; by the time of Nasser’s death in 1970, Egypt’s once-thriving Greek
and Italian communities were almost non-existent (Kazamias 2009; Gorman 2015).
The regional dynamics of the Arab–Israeli conflict also marked the end of Egypt’s
thriving Jewish community (Laskier 1992), as a community of over 80,000 in 1948
was reduced to six elderly women by 2016 (AFP 2017).
Similar processes took place in other cases of decolonization. At the end of the
Portuguese empire in the 1970s, approximately 500,000 European retornados
“returned” to Portugal, despite never having lived there (Lewis and Williams

14

International Migration Review XX(X)

1985). Around 90,000 Europeans left the Congo for Belgium in 1960 (Stanard
2018).9 Nationalizing processes in Uganda under Idi Amin led to the mass expulsion
of approximately 80,000 citizens and residents of South Asian descent in 1972
(Adams and Bristow 1979). Population expulsions and returns also formed key
components of post-imperial nation-building in Japan, where the ethnically Korean
population was forcibly repatriated to Korea after WWII (Morris-Suzuki 2007;
Ryang 2013).
Forced expulsions, population exchanges, and refugee flows are not usually
studied as migration policy and are instead framed as ethnic cleansing or genocide
(Brubaker 1998). Nevertheless, if migration is defined as the movement of people
across borders, these types of mobility constitute significant examples of statedriven forms of migration, particularly throughout the twentieth century. In these
cases, migration policy has not primarily been used as a tool of economic development or a means of filling gaps in the labor market, but rather as a means of forcibly
constituting national populations in an attempt to create ethno-religious homogeneity (Rae 2002; Vigneswaran 2013).

The Developmental Migration State: Labor Emigration and Remittances
The migration state model, as applied to North America and Europe, has assumed
that advanced industrial states rely on immigration as part of a strategy of economic
growth — past labor shortages in Europe and the United States have encouraged the
recruitment of both high- and low-skilled foreign labor. Yet, the relationship
between cross-border mobility and economic growth is demonstrably different in
many states of the Global South, which have adopted developmental strategies that
rely heavily on labor export via emigration. This interplay between migration management and development has been examined under the framework of “brain gain”
and, most prominently, economic remittances (Castles, Miller, and De Haas 2014,
75–83). Research has long established the importance of capital inflows for sending
states, particularly in the Global South (Orrenius and Zavodny 2012; Escribà-Folch,
Meseguer, and Wright 2015; Mosley and Singer 2015). Migrant remittances constitute a source of foreign exchange and produce multiplier effects on the aggregate
economy (Kapur 2010), while decreasing demand for social spending (Doyle 2015).
In 2018 alone, the World Bank estimated official migrant remittances to low- and
middle-income countries to have reached a record high of US$529 billion; from
2019, remittances are expected to become these countries’ largest source of external
funding (World Bank 2019). Numerous states of the Global South also encourage
citizens’ pursuit of education and training opportunities abroad as part of their
modernization or industrialization strategies (Guruz 2011). A key strategy of developmental migration states involves the use of migration management as a “safety
9

“Flight from Angola,” The Economist, August 16, 1975.

Adamson and Tsourapas

15

valve,” encouraging an outflow of (excess) domestic labor, with the aim of reducing
labor surpluses and easing accompanying sociopolitical and economic pressures
(Appleyard 1989).
In the 1960s and 1970s, Turkey, for example, used labor emigration as a means
of reducing unemployment and increasing foreign exchange reserves through
remittances, which were also used to keep the Turkish lira’s value artificially high
(Martin 1991). Additionally, Turkish migration policy was viewed as a way of
ensuring that rural migrant workers acquired new skills and training that could be
tapped upon their return, when they would bring foreign capital to invest in their
local communities (Sayari 1986, 92–93). A similar developmental rationale governed the migration state in North Africa: Tunisia and Morocco identified powerful economic incentives in promoting labor emigration to Western Europe,
primarily to tackle high unemployment and attract remittances (Brand 2006,
17). The Libyan migration state under Colonel Gaddafi expected gains in human
capital, offering scholarships to promote student mobility and encourage citizens’
training abroad (Tsourapas 2019a).
Between 1942 and 1964, the Mexican developmental migration state negotiated
the outflow of Mexican labor into the United States under the auspices of the
Bracero Program, which was designed “to trade a pool of unemployed laborers for
a source of remittances and modernizing influences” (FitzGerald 2009, 48). Following the Bracero program’s end, the Mexican state continued to encourage emigration
as “an economic escape valve” and designed initiatives such as the “Tres-por-Uno”
(3x1) matching funds program to encourage emigrant investment in local development schemes (ibid., 57–58). The Philippines is perhaps the emblematic country that
has used emigration as an explicit developmental strategy, sending approximately
800,000 citizens abroad annually on temporary labor contracts and developing elaborate governance structures to liaise with and protect the rights of its diaspora
(Tyner 2004; Ireland 2018). Like other East Asian states in the 1970s, such as South
Korea, the Philippines followed a developmental state model, while explicitly focusing on emigration’s role in strengthening the national economy: it established an
official “overseas employment program” in 1974, with basic regulatory institutions,
and, by 2009, the Philippines was receiving over US$19 billion per year just from
overseas female workers (Ireland 2018, 325–327). A similar strategy of harnessing
emigration’s power as a development tool has been used by a number of African
states. For example, Cameroon has received tens of millions of US dollars annually
from its diaspora since the 1990s, including an estimated $244 million in 2016, and
the Cameroonian diaspora or “bushfallers” have played a crucial role in development there (Ollong 2013; Malit and Alexander 2017).
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, India, and Pakistan, as well as poorer Arab states such as
Egypt, traditionally promoted labor migration to the oil-producing Arab states not
solely to attract remittances but also to curb overpopulation and unemployment
(Weiner 1985; Kapur 2010; Tsourapas 2018). In 2018, 29.1 million foreign nationals
resided across the Gulf Cooperation Council states, constituting 51.9 percent of the

16

International Migration Review XX(X)

six oil-producing states’ total population.10 Developmental migration states have
created numerous instruments to regulate economically driven mobility, including
bilateral and multilateral treaties (Fargues and Shah 2018). In 2015, the Indian
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs developed “e-Migrate,” an online database
which aimed to increase transparency and enhance labor protection by registering
and inspecting foreign companies that recruit Indians abroad.11 Thus, for developmental migration states reliant on remittances, the management of labor emigration
and the resulting transnational diaspora populations constitute a key element of the
“migration state” (Gamlen 2008; Adamson 2016).

The Neoliberal Migration State: Capitalizing on Cross-Border Mobility
The migration state model rests on the assumption that states have a degree of
capacity and autonomy to independently formulate and develop their migration
policy. For advanced liberal democracies, globalization has created economic incentives for practices such as outsourcing manufacturing to countries with lower labor
and regulatory costs (Peters 2017). Just as state economies in the Global North have
become transnational, however, so has the migration policy of Global South states.
Increasingly, states have an incentive to capitalize on cross-border mobility, treating
both voluntary and forced migration as a commodity that can be utilized to enhance
state revenue and power. While the developmental migration state aims to employ
emigration policy as a means of exporting labor and relieving domestic socioeconomic pressures, the neoliberal migration state is more explicit in its monetization of migration flows. Two examples illustrate the workings of neoliberal
migration states: the emergence of citizenship-by-investment schemes and the use
of refugees and migrants as a means of extracting revenue from external bodies
such as states or international organizations. In these two examples of neoliberal
forms of migration management, states strategically use population mobility as a
means of generating revenue.
In the first case of “citizenship-by-investment” schemes, states literally sell
membership in their polity (Abrahamian 2015; Surak 2016). The use of economic
capital as a determining factor of membership in a political community constitutes a
commodification of citizenship by states that have succumbed to the market’s logic
(Shachar and Hirschl 2014; Tanasoca 2016). Citizenship-by-investment schemes
represent the opposite end of the spectrum from the nationalizing migration state,
as they “speak to the very arbitrariness of the concept of belonging to a nation to
begin with” (Abrahamian 2015, 154). Under this arrangement, modern citizenship is
10

See for more information: https://gulfmigration.org/gcc-total-population-and-percentageof-nationals-and-non-nationals-in-gcc-countries-national-statistics-2017-2018-withnumbers/
11
See for more information: https://emigrate.gov.in/ext/about.action

Adamson and Tsourapas

17

shaped by “universalizing [and contending] criteria of neoliberalism and human
rights” (Ong 2006, 499), within the context of a broader neoliberal shift toward the
“contractualization of citizenship” by states that hold the “market value [to be] the
chief criterion for membership” (Somers 2008, 5). Citizenship-by-investment
schemes reshape the link between citizenship and rights that defined Hollifield’s
liberal migration state model. They are manifestations of the commodification of
rights and the transformation of states into entrepreneurial actors in which belonging
is redefined in neoliberal terms (Brown 2015; Surak 2019).
The proliferation of “citizenship-by-investment” schemes can be partly explained
by the revenue they generate for economies in the Global South. A number of
Caribbean nations charge US$250,000 to provide visa-free access to Europe: in
St. Kitts island, the citizenship-by-investment scheme “has brought about an economic miracle,” with the sale of passports now constituting 25 percent of the country’s GDP (Surak 2016, 39). Since 2017, the Republic of Vanuatu has offered
citizenship for US$150,000, promising “visa-free entry to 26 Schengen Area countries as well as UK, Russia, Hong Kong & Singapore.”12 The Vanuatu Information
Centre promises that the approval process “takes between 30 to 60 days to complete,
making it one of the fastest processing times in the World.”13 Cyprus’s “golden
passport” scheme has been running since 2013 and awards Cypriot (and European)
citizenship for an individual investment of €2 million — a process not dissimilar
from Malta’s ongoing citizenship-by-investment scheme (Antoniou 2018). In 2018,
Turkey revised its national scheme (established in 2016), allowing foreigners to
become citizens if they own property worth US$250,000 (Cağlayan 2018).
Beyond the commodification of citizenship, the neoliberal migration state also
promotes the monetization of other forms of cross-border migration flows, such as
forced migration. The increasing reluctance of states in the Global North to accept
refugees has led to the emergence of strategies aimed at keeping forcibly displaced
populations in the Global South, including providing material support to host states
of first asylum (Loescher 1993; FitzGerald 2019). Formalized via migration “deals”
and refugee “compacts,” the commodification of forced displacement encourages
refugee rent-seeking behavior across Global South states, which seek to attract
external economic support in order to continue hosting refugee populations within
their borders (Tsourapas 2019b).
The trend toward refugee rent-seeking behavior is particularly evident in the
context of the Syrian refugee crisis: Turkey, which has come to host approximately
3 million displaced Syrians, successfully negotiated with the EU in 2015 and 2016 to
receive approximately €6 billion in exchange for controlling emigration and keeping
refugees in situ (Özden 2013; Içduygu 2015; Greenhill 2016; Sert and Yildiz 2016).
Jordan and Lebanon negotiated similar agreements, aimed at “turning the Syrian
12
13

See for more information: https://www.vanuatu-citizenship-program.com
See for more information: http://vic.vu/citizenship/

18

International Migration Review XX(X)

refugee crisis into a development opportunity” (Tsourapas 2019b, 7). Between 2013
and 2014, the EU concluded a number of “Mobility Partnerships” with Morocco,
Tunisia, and Jordan that offered certain perks to these states in return for securitizing
irregular migration and refugee flows in the European periphery (Collyer 2012).
These agreements followed the example of Spain’s first Africa Plan, which saw
the doubling of Spanish development aid to sub-Saharan Africa between 2006 and
2010 (Andersson 2014, 40–42). Senegal, in this context, leveraged Spanish concern
about irregular migration to secure a €20 million migration-linked development
package in 2006 (ibid., 40–42). Under Gaddafi, Libya obtained €2 billion from the
EU in 2005 to prevent emigration to Europe (Greenhill 2010, 332). On the other side
of the world, the tiny island nation of Nauru in 2017–18 earned two-thirds of its
entire US$170 million revenue from detaining and processing migrants for Australia
in the form of “direct aid, resettlement and visa fees for refugees, fees to the Nauru
Regional Processing Center Cooperation, or reimbursements to Nauru’s government.”14 Between 2001 and 2007, Nauru, Manus and Christmas Island were able
to leverage US$1 billion in revenue from Australia to host and process approximately 1,700 asylum-seekers, amounting to more than $500,000 per asylum seeker.15 The trend of capitalizing on irregular migration and forced displacement for
material gain in the Global South is, of course, directly related to Global North
states’ policies of externalizing and outsourcing migration management (Grewcock
2014; FitzGerald 2019).16 Thus, the proliferation of citizenship-by-investment
schemes and the strategic use of cross-border migration flows as a means of generating revenue from external bodies point to the emergence of neoliberal forms of
migration management.

Conclusions
In this article, we have suggested that the “migration state” concept is a useful tool
for engaging in comparative analysis of state migration management policies across
time and space. Yet, in its current usage, the concept has limited applicability, due to
its focus on economically driven immigration in advanced liberal democracies. Our
article proposes a means of extending Hollifield’s (2004) migration state concept to
contexts beyond the Global North by introducing a typology of nationalizing, developmental, and neoliberal migration management regimes. The nationalizing model
14

Ann Davis and Ben Doherty, “Nauru: A Nation in Democratic Freefall Propped up by
Australia,” The Guardian, September 2, 2018, https://www.theguardian.com/world/2018/
sep/03/nauru-a-nation-on-the-cusp-of-democratic-calamity
15
Connie Levett, “Pacific Solution Cost $1 Billion,” Sydney Morning Herald, August 25,
2007, as cited in Greenhill 2010, 329.
16
This situation can lead to perverse consequences, such as the creation of financial incentives
for countries to inflate the numbers of refugees and migrants. See, for example, discussions
of Uganda and Somalia in Okinor (2018) and Kibreab (2004).

Adamson and Tsourapas

19

emphasizes the use of cross-border mobility in nation-building processes, drawing
attention to the political and ideological roots of state migration policies and the
prevalence of state-led policies of forced migration. The developmental model
points to the important role of emigration and labor export in the economic development strategies of many states around the world. The neoliberal model highlights
how states monetize cross-border migration flows via citizenship-by-investment
policies and the commodification of forced displacement. These migration state
models are meant to be illustrative, rather than comprehensive, and to demonstrate
how a critical engagement with, and extension of, the migration state concept can
make it more applicable to cases across the Global South. Extending the migration
state concept opens up new directions in comparative research on the state’s role in
shaping migration policy, including when and why particular states move between
the categories of nationalizing, developmental and neoliberal, as well as the ways
these categories relate to one another over time.
While our primary focus in this article has been on expanding the migration state
concept in ways that make it more applicable to cases across the Global South, our
proposed typology has additional advantages. To start with, it facilitates historical
comparisons. Liberal migration states have also engaged in nationalizing practices
of racial and ethnic exclusion, including the use of forced migration and displacement toward indigenous and other populations and via policies such as the US
Chinese Exclusion Act and the White Australia Policy (Jupp 2002; Triadafilopoulos
2004; Zolberg 2006b; FitzGerald and Cook-Martı́n 2014). European states relied
heavily on emigration as part of their developmental practices and as a way of
managing “surplus populations” in the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries
— long before they switched to importing labor after WWII (Zolberg 2006a).
Neoliberal practices of externalization and outsourcing of migration management
to private entities, such as shipping companies, were prevalent in the late-19th and
early-20th centuries (Zolberg 2003; Feys 2010). Moreover, the instrumentalization
of citizenship that is a feature of contemporary citizenship-by-investment schemes
has affinities with ancient Roman models of citizenship that emphasized access to a
set of goods rather than political belonging (Joppke 2018).
Equally important, this typology helps us better understand and engage the globally entangled nature of migration regimes. The nationalizing migration state in the
Global South emerged in part due to systemic pressures emanating from Europe to
adopt the national state model. Similarly, the developmental migration state, with its
focus on emigration, is the mirror image of labor-receiving immigration states — all
immigrants are also emigrants. Placing immigration and emigration models side by
side allows us to see the relationship between migration and larger dynamics of
economic dependence and structural inequality. The emergence of the neoliberal
migration state can also be tied to larger dynamics of global inequality, in which
migration restrictions in the Global North create global markets for passports via
citizenship-by-investment schemes as well as incentives for states in the Global
South to monetize refugees and other migrants.

20

International Migration Review XX(X)

Finally, the typology we offer here has relevance for understanding the
emergence of illiberal forms of migration policy in both the Global North and
South. The contemporary politicization of migration issues in countries such as
Britain, the United States, and Hungary suggests the ongoing relevance of
nationalizing impulses to the politics of migration in states in the Global North.
The emergence of points-based migration systems in Canada and elsewhere to
attract high-skilled workers in the context of the global knowledge economy can
be seen as a developmental form of migration management; whereas outsourcing
the management of irregular migration by states in the Global North to private
detention firms and states beyond their borders shows the contemporary global
prevalence of neoliberal forms of migration management.17 Therefore, the need
to expand the “migration state” concept beyond its liberal democratic variant
may be increasingly necessary for understanding the evolving migration policies
of states in North America and Europe, as well as states in the Global South.
Especially amid the current global resurgence of populist nationalism, it is
important to recognize that the contemporary “migration state” is not always
a liberal democratic one.
Acknowledgments
An early version of this paper was presented at the 113th Annual Meeting of the American
Political Science Association (APSA), San Francisco, CA, August 31–September 3, 2017. We
are grateful for comments received from Erin Chung, Rebecca Hamlin, Miryam Hazán, James
F. Hollifield, Philip Martin, Ruxandra Paul, Kamal Sadiq, Kristin Surak, and Triadafilos
Triadafilopoulos, as well as the editor of IMR and five anonymous reviewers.

Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.

Funding
The author(s) disclosed receipt of the following financial support for the research, authorship,
and/or publication of this article: The authors acknowledge the support provided by the
European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Program under grant agreement
number 822806.

ORCID iD
Fiona B. Adamson
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3137-1325
Gerasimos Tsourapas
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-2746-9752

17

States in the Global North also have the functional equivalent of citizenship-by-investment
schemes in the form of investor visa programs, such as the US E-B5 Investor Visa program:
https://www.uscis.gov/working-united-states/permanent-workers/employment-basedimmigration-fifth-preference-eb-5/about-eb-5-visa-classification

Adamson and Tsourapas

21

References
Abrahamian, A. A. 2015. The Cosmopolites: The Coming of the Global Citizen. New York:
Columbia Global Reports.
Adams, B. N., and M. Bristow. 1979. “Ugandan Asian Expulsion Experiences: Rumour and
Reality.” Journal of Asian and African Studies 14(3-4):191–203.
Adamson, F. B. 2006. “Crossing Borders: International Migration and National Security.”
International Security 31(1):165–99.
———. 2016. “The Growing Importance of Diaspora Politics.” Current History 115(784):
291–97.
———. 2019. “Sending States and the Making of Intra-diasporic Politics: Turkey and Its
Diaspora(s).” International Migration Review 53(1):210–36.
Adamson, F. B., and M. Demetriou. 2007. “Remapping the Boundaries of ‘State’ and
‘National Identity’: Incorporating Diasporas into IR Theorizing.” European Journal of
International Relations 13(4):489–526.
———, T. Triadafilopoulos, and A. Zolberg. 2011. “The Limits of the Liberal State: Migration,
Identity and Belonging in Europe.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 37(6):843–59.
———, and G. Tsourapas. 2019. “Migration Diplomacy in World Politics.” International
Studies Perspectives 20(2):113–28.
AFP. 2017. “Egypt’s Last Jews Aim to Keep Alive Heritage.” https://news.yahoo.com/
egypts-last-jews-aim-keep-alive-heritage-031827251.html.
Agnew, J. 1994. “The Territorial Trap: The Geographical Assumptions of International Relations Theory.” Review of International Political Economy 1(1):53–80.
Akgündüz, A. 1998. “Migration to and from Turkey, 1783–1960: Types, Numbers and Ethnoreligious Dimensions.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 24(1):97–120.
Alba, R., and N. Foner. 2015. Strangers No More: Immigration and the Challenges of
Integration in North America and Europe. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Alemán, J., and D. Woods. 2014. “No Way Out: Travel Restrictions and Authoritarian
Regimes.” Migration and Development 3(2):285–305.
Amin, S. 1976. Unequal Development: Essays on the Social Formations of Peripheral Capitalism. Translated by B. Pearce. New York: Monthly Review Press.
Andersson, R. 2014. Illegality, Inc.: Clandestine Migration and the Business of Bordering
Europe. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Antoniou, A. 2018. “Cyprus Has Revised Its Citizenship Program: Is It Too Little, Too Late?”
Forbes. https://www.forbes.com/sites/antonisantoniou/2018/10/16/cyprus-has-revisedits-citizenship-program-is-it-too-little-too-late/#50beaeb04d18.
Applebaum, R. 2019. Empire of Friends: Soviet Power and Socialist Internationalism in Cold
War Czechoslovakia. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Appleyard, R. T. 1989. “Migration and Development: Myths and Reality.” International
Migration Review 23(3):486–99.
Arcarazo, D. A., and L. F. Freier. 2015. “Turning the Immigration Policy Paradox Upside
Down? Populist Liberalism and Discursive Gaps in South America.” International Migration Review 49(3):659–96.

22

International Migration Review XX(X)

Barkey, K., and S. Parikh. 1991. “Comparative Perspectives on the State.” Annual Review of
Sociology 17:523–49.
Barnett, M. 2001. “Humanitarianism with a Sovereign Face: UNHCR in the Global Undertow.” International Migration Review 35(1):244–77.
Barnett, L. 2002. “Global Governance and the Evolution of the International Refugee
Regime.” International Journal of Refugee Law 14(2/3):238–62.
Basch, L., N. Glick Schiller, and C. Szanton Blanc. 2005. Nations Unbound: Transnational
Projects, Postcolonial Predicaments, and Deterritorialized Nation-States. London and
New York: Routledge.
Bates, R. 2001. Prosperity and Violence: The Political Economy of Development. New York:
W. W. Norton and Co.
Betts, A. 2011. Global Migration Governance. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
———, and G. Loescher, eds. 2010. Refugees in International Relations. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
———, and P. Collier. 2017. Refuge: Transforming a Broken Refugee System. London:
Penguin.
———, L. Bloom, J. Kaplan, and N. Omata. 2017. Refugee Economies: Forced Displacement
and Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Black, R. 2001. “Fifty Years of Refugee Studies: From Theory to Policy.” International
Migration Review 35(1):57–78.
Bloemraad, I. 2006. Becoming a Citizen: Incorporating Immigrants and Refugees in the
United States and Canada. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Boswell, C. 2007. “Theorizing Migration Policy: Is There a Third Way?” International
Migration Review 41(1):75–100.
———, and A. Geddes. 2010. Migration and Mobility in the European Union. Hampshire:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Boucher, A. K., and J. Gest. 2018. Crossroads: Comparative Immigration Regimes in a World
of Demographic Change. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Brand, L. A. 2006. Citizens Abroad: Emigration and the State in the Middle East and North
Africa. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, W. 2015. Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s Stealth Revolution. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Brubaker, R. 1992. Citizenship and Nationhood in France and Germany. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
———. 1998. “Migrations of Ethnic Unmixing in the ‘New Europe’.” International Migration Review 32(4):1047–65.
Cağlayan, C. 2018. “Turkey Cuts Investment Levels for Citizenship, Property Sales Seen
Boosted.” Reuters. https://www.reuters.com/article/us-turkey-currency-citizenship/
turkey-cuts-investment-levels-for-citizenship-property-sales-seen-boostedidUSKCN1LZ1SR.
Carrera, S., S. Blockmans, D. Gros, and E. Guild. 2015. “The EU’s Response to the Refugee
Crisis: Taking Stock and Setting Policy Priorities.” CEPS Essay no 20/16. Brussels: Centre
for European Policy Studies.

Adamson and Tsourapas

23

Castles, S. 2004. “The Factors that Make and Unmake Migration Policies.” International
Migration Review 38(3):852–84.
———, M. J. Miller, and H. De Haas. 2014. The Age of Migration. 5th ed. New York:
Guilford Press.
Chalcraft, J. 2009. The Invisible Cage: Syrian Migrant Workers in Lebanon. Palo Alto, CA:
Stanford University Press.
Chatterjee, P. 1993. The Nation and Its Fragments: Colonial and Postcolonial Histories.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Chatty, D. 2010. Displacement and Dispossession in the Modern Middle East. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Chaudhry, K. A. 1997. The Price of Wealth: Economies and Institutions in the Middle East.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Chung, E. A. 2010a. Immigration and Citizenship in Japan. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2010b. “Korea and Japan’s Multicultural Models for Immigrant Incorporation.”
Korea Observer 41(4):649–76.
———, D. Draudt, and Y. Tian. 2018. “The Developmental Migration State.” Paper presented at the 2018 American Political Science Association Annual Meeting in Boston,
MA.
Cohen, H. J. 1973. The Jews of the Middle East, 1860–1972. Piscataway, NJ: Transaction
Publishers.
Collyer, M. 2012. “Migrants as Strategic Actors in the European Union’s Global Approach to
Migration and Mobility.” Global Networks 12(4):505–524.
Cooper, F. 2014. Citizenship Between Empire and Nation: Remaking France and French
Africa, 1945-1960. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
——— 2018. Citizenship, Inequality, and Difference: Historical Perspectives. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Curley, M. G. and S. Wong, eds. 2008. Security and Migration in Asia: The Dynamics of
Securitisation. London and New York: Routledge.
Davis, J. H. 2018. “Trump to Cap Refugees Allowed Into U.S. at 30,000, a Record Low.” The
New York Times. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/09/17/us/politics/trump-refugeeshistoric-cuts.html.
Délano, A. 2011. Mexico and Its Diaspora in the United States: Policies of Emigration since
1848. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———, and A. Gamlen. 2014. “Comparing and Theorizing State–Diaspora Relations.”
Political Geography 41:43–53.
Del Sordi, A. 2017. “Sponsoring Student Mobility for Development and Authoritarian
Stability: Kazakhstan’s Bolashak Programme.” Globalizations 15(2):215–31.
Dowty, A. 1989. Closed Borders: The Contemporary Assault on Freedom of Movement.
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Doyle, D. 2015. “Remittances and Social Spending.” American Political Science Review
109(4):785–802.

24

International Migration Review XX(X)

Escribà-Folch, A., C. Meseguer, and J. Wright. 2015. “Remittances and Democratization.”
International Studies Quarterly 59(3):571–86.
Fargues, P. and N. Shah, eds. 2018. Migration to the Gulf: Policies in Sending and Receiving
States. Florence: European University Institute/Gulf Research Center.
Feys, T. 2010. “The Visible Hand of Shipping Interests in American Migration Policies 1815–
1914.” Tijdschrift Voor Sociale en Economische Geschiedenes 7(1):38–62.
Favell, A. 2011. Eurostars and Eurocities: Free Movement and Mobility in an Integrating
Europe. Medford, MA: John Wiley & Sons.
Fiddian-Qasmiyeh, E. 2018. “Southern-Led Responses to Displacement: Modes of SouthSouth Cooperation?” In Routledge Handbook of South-South Relations, edited by E.
Fiddian-Qasmiyeh and P. Daley, 239–55. London and New York: Routledge.
FitzGerald, D. S. 2009. A Nation of Emigrants: How Mexico Manages Its Migration. Berkeley: University of California Press.
———. 2019. Refuge Beyond Reach: How Rich Democracies Repel Asylum Seekers. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
FitzGerald, D. S., and D. Cook-Martı́n. 2014. Culling the Masses: The Democratic Origins of
Racist Immigration Policy in the Americas. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Freeman, G. P. 1995. “Modes of Immigration Politics in Liberal Democratic States.” International Migration Review 29(4):881–902.
———, and A. K. Kessler. 2008. “Political Economy and Migration Policy.” Journal of
Ethnic and Migration Studies 34(4):655–78.
Gamlen, A. 2008. “The Emigration State and the Modern Geopolitical Imagination.” Political
Geography 27(8):840–56.
———. 2014. “Diaspora Institutions and Diaspora Governance.” International Migration
Review 48(1):180–217.
Geddes, A., M. V. Espinoza, L. Hadj Abdou, and L. Brumat, eds. 2019. The Dynamics of
Regional Migration Governance. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing.
———, and P. Scholten. 2016. The Politics of Migration and Immigration in Europe. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Glaser, B. 2017. Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. London
and New York: Routledge.
Glasius, M. 2018. “Extraterritorial Authoritarian Practices: A Framework.” Globalizations
15(2):179–97.
Gorman, A. 2015. “The Italians of Egypt: Return to Diaspora.” In Diasporas of the Modern
Middle East: Contextualising Community, edited by A. Gorman and S. Kasbarian, 138–70.
Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Grewcock, M. 2014. “Australian Border Policing: Regional ‘Solutions’ and Neocolonialism.”
Race & Class 55(3):71–78.
Greenhill, K. M. 2010. Weapons of Mass Migration: Forced Displacement, Coercion, and
Foreign Policy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
———. 2016. “Open Arms Behind Barred Doors: Fear, Hypocrisy and Policy Schizophrenia
in the European Migration Crisis.” European Law Journal 22(3):317–32.

Adamson and Tsourapas

25

Guruz, K. 2011. Higher Education and International Student Mobility in the Global Knowledge Economy. 2nd ed. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Haggard, S. 2018. Developmental States. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hall, P. A., and D. Soskice. 2001. Varieties of Capitalism: The Institutional Foundations of
Comparative Advantage. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hampshire, J. 2013. The Politics of Immigration: Contradictions of the Liberal State. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Hansen, R. 2000. Citizenship and Immigration in Post-war Britain. New York: Oxford University Press.
Heisler, B. S. 1985. “Sending States and the Politics of Emigration and Destination.” International Migration Review 19(3):469–84.
Hirschman, A. 1978. “Exit, Voice, and the State.” World Politics 31(1):90–107.
Hirschon, R. 2003. Crossing the Aegean: An Appraisal of the 1923 Compulsory Population
Exchange between Greece and Turkey. New York: Berghahn Books.
Hirt, N., and A. S. Mohammad. 2017. “By Way of Patriotism, Coercion, or Instrumentalization: How the Eritrean Regime Makes Use of the Diaspora to Stabilize its Rule.” Globalizations 15(2):232–47.
Hollifield, J. F. 1992. Immigrants, Markets, and States: The Political Economy of Postwar
Europe. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
———. 2004. “The Emerging Migration State.” International Migration Review 38(3):
885–912.
———, and M. O. Sharpe. 2017. “Japan as an ‘Emerging Migration State’.” International
Relations of the Asia-Pacific 17(3):371–400.
Hollifield, J. F., P. Martin, and P. Orrenius, eds. 2014. Controlling Immigration: A Global
Perspective. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Hout, W. 1993. Capitalism and the Third World: Development, Dependence and the World
System. Aldershot: Edward Elgar.
Içduygu, A. 2015. “Syrian Refugees in Turkeys.—The Long Road Ahead.” Washington, DC:
Migration Policy Institute. https://www.migrationpolicy.org/sites/default/files/
publications/TCM-Protection-Syria.pdf.
———, and D. Sert 2015. “The Changing Waves of Migration from the Balkans to Turkey: A
Historical Acccount.” In Migration in the Southern Balkans: From Ottoman Territory to
Globalized Nation States, edited by H. Vermeulen, M. Baldwin-Edwards, and R. van
Boeschoten, 85–104. IMISCOE Research Book Series (IMIS). Springer International
Publishing.
Ireland, P. R. 2018. “The Limits of Sending-State Power: The Philippines, Sri Lanka, and
Female Migrant Domestic Workers.” International Political Science Review 39(3):
322–37.
Jackson, R. H., and C. G. Rosberg. 1982. “Why Africa’s Weak States Persist: The Empirical
and the Juridical in Statehood.” World Politics 35(1):1–24.
Jacobsen, K. 1996. “Factors Influencing the Policy Responses of Host Governments to Mass
Refugee Influxes.” International Migration Review 30(3):655–78.

26

International Migration Review XX(X)

———. 2002. “Can Refugees Benefit the State? Refugee Resources and African Statebuilding.” The Journal of Modern African Studies 40(4):577–96.
———. 2005. The Economic Life of Refugees. West Hartford, CT: Kumarian Press.
Joppke, C. 2010. Citizenship and Immigration. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
———. 2018. “The Instrumental Turn of Citizenship.” Journal of Ethnic and Migration
Studies 45(6):858–78.
Jupp, J. 2002. From White Australia to Woomera: The Story of Australian Immigration.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kapur, D. 2010. Diaspora, Development, and Democracy: The Domestic Impact of International Migration from India. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Kazamias, A. 2009. “The Myth of the Nasserite ‘Purge’ of the Greeks from Egypt.” Journal of
the Hellenic Diaspora. 35(2):14–34.
Kibreab, G. 2004. “Pulling the Wool over the Eyes of the Strangers: Refugee Deceit and
Trickery in Institutionalized Settings.” Journal of Refugee Studies 17(1):1–26.
Kim, J. 2016. Contested Embrace: Transborder Membership Politics in Twentieth-Century
Korea. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Kirişci, K. 2000. “Disaggregating Turkish Citizenship and Immigration Practices.” Middle
Eastern Studies 36(3):1–22.
Klotz, A. 2000. “Migration after Apartheid: Deracialising South African Foreign Policy.”
Third World Quarterly 21(5):831–47.
———. 2013. Migration and National Identity in South Africa, 1860–2010. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Krasner, S. D. 1999. Sovereignty: Organized Hypocrisy. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Laskier, M. 1992. The Jews of Egypt: 1920–1970; in the Midst of Zionism, Anti-Semitism, and
the Middle East Conflict. New York: New York University Press.
Lasswell, H. D. 1941. “The Garrison State.” The American Journal of Sociology 46(4):
455–68.
Lewis, J., and A. Williams. 1985. “Portugal: The Decade of Return.” Geography 70(2):
178–82.
Lie, J. 2008. Zainichi (Koreans in Japan): Diasporic Nationalism and Postcolonial Identity.
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Lischer, S. K. 2005. Dangerous Sanctuaries: Refugee Camps, Civil War, and the Dilemmas of
Humanitarian Aid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Liu, G. 2009. “Changing Chinese Migration Law: From Restriction to Relaxation.” Journal of
International Migration and Integration/Revue de L’integration et de La Migration Internationale 10(3):311–33.
Loescher, G. 1993. Beyond Charity—International Cooperation and the Global Refugee
Crisis. New York: Oxford University Press.
———, and J. Milner. 2011. “UNHCR and the Global Governance of Refugees.” In Global
Migration Governance, edited by A. Betts, 189–209. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Adamson and Tsourapas

27

Malit, F. T., Jr., and K. Alexander. 2017. “Cameroonian Migration as the New ‘Pipeline’ to
the GCC? Emigration State, Strategic Dysfunctionality Engagement, and Diaspora Welfare.” doi:10.13140/RG.2.2.10615.42403.
Mamdani, M. 2018. Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late
Colonialism. 2nd ed. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Margheritis, A. 2015. Migration Governance across Regions: State–Diaspora Relations in
the Latin America–Southern Europe Corridor. New York and London: Routledge.
Martin, P. L. 1991. The Unfinished Story: Turkish Labour Migration to Western Europe: With
Special Reference to the Federal Republic of Germany. Geneva: International Labour
Organization.
Martin, S. F. 2011. A Nation of Immigrants. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Martinovic, M. 2016. “Refugees Reloaded: Lessons from Germany’s Approach to Bosnia’s
War.” Deutsche Welle. https://www.dw.com/en/refugees-reloaded-lessons-fromgermanys-approach-to-bosnian-war/a-19021249-0
McDougall, J. 2017. A History of Algeria. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McKeown, A. M. 2008. Melancholy Order: Asian Migration and the Globalization of Borders. New York: Columbia University Press.
Migdal, J. 1988. Weak States and Strong Societies. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Milner, J. 2014. “Introduction: Understanding Global Refugee Policy.” Journal of Refugee
Studies 27(4):477–94.
Mongia, R. 2018. Indian Migration and Empire: A Colonial Genealogy of the Modern State.
Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Morris-Suzuki, T. 2007. Exodus to North Korea: Shadows from Japan’s Cold War. Plymouth:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Mosley, L., and D. A. Singer. 2015. “Migration, Labor, and the International Political Economy.” Annual Review of Political Science 18(1):283–301.
Mylonas, H. 2012. The Politics of Nation-Building: Making Co-nationals, Refugee and Minorities. New York: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2013. “The Politics of Diaspora Management in the Republic of Korea.” The Asian
Institute for Policy Studies 81:1–12.
Natter, K. 2018. “Rethinking Immigration Policy Theory beyond ‘Western Liberal Democracies’.” Comparative Migration Studies 6(4):1–21.
Naujoks, D. 2013. Migration, Citizenship, and Development: Diasporic Membership Policies
and Overseas Indians in the United States. New Delhi: Oxford University Press.
Nawyn, S. J. 2016. “Migration in the Global South: Exploring New Theoretical Territory.”
International Journal of Sociology of the Family 46(2):81–84.
Okinor, S. 2018. “Inquiry Finds Refugee Numbers Were Exaggerated by 300,000 in Uganda.”
The Guardian. https://www.independent.co.uk/voices/as-the-kenyan-minister-fornational-security-heres-why-im-shutting-the-worlds-biggest-refugee-camp-a7020891.
html
Ollong, K. A. 2013. “The Cameroonian Diaspora: An Assessment of Its Role in Local
Development.” Journal of Globalization Studies 4(2):82–95.
Ong, A. 2006. “Mutations in Citizenship.” Theory, Culture & Society 23(2–3):499–505.

28

International Migration Review XX(X)

Orrenius, P., and M. Zavodny. 2012. “Economic Effects of Migration: Receiving States.” In
The Oxford Handbook of The Politics of International Migration, edited by M. R. Rosenblum and D. J. Tichenor, 105–31. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Østergaard-Nielsen, E. 2003. Transnational Politics: The Case of Turks and Kurds in Germany. London and New York: Routledge.
Ostrand, N. 2015. “The Syrian Refugee Crisis: A Comparison of Responses by Germany,
Sweden, the United Kingdom and the United States.” Journal on Migration and Human
Security 3(3):255–79.
Özden, Ş. 2013. “Syrian Refugees in Turkey.” MPC Research Report 2013/05. Florence:
Migration Policy Centre, Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies, European University Institute.
Perna, L. W., K. Orosz, B. Gopaul, Z. Jumakulov, A. Ashirbekov, and M. Kishkentayeva.
2014. “Promoting Human Capital Development: A Typology of International Scholarship
Programs in Higher Education.” Educational Researcher 43(2):63–73.
Peters, M. E. 2017. Trading Barriers: Immigration and the Remaking of Globalization.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Rae, H. 2002. State Identities and the Homogenisation of Peoples. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Ragazzi, F. 2014. “A Comparative Analysis of Diaspora Policies.” Political Geography 41:
74–89.
Robson, L. 2017. States of Separation: Transfer, Partition, and the Making of the Modern
Middle East. Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Rosecrance, R. 1986. The Rise of the Trading State: Commerce and Conquest in the Modern
World. New York: Basic Books.
Ruhs, M. 2013. The Price of Rights: Regulating International Labor Migration. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ryang, S., ed. 2013. Koreans in Japan: Critical Voices from the Margin. New York:
Routledge.
Sadiq, K. 2008. Paper Citizens: How Illegal Immigrants Acquire Citizenship in Developing
Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Salehyan, I., and K. S. Gleditsch. 2006. “Refugees and the Spread of Civil War.” International
Organization 60(2):335–66.
Sayari, S. 1986. “Migration Policies of Sending Countries: Perspectives on the Turkish
Experience.” The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science
485(1):87–97.
Sert, D., and U. Yildiz. 2016. “Governing without Control: Turkey’s ‘Struggle’ with International Migration.” In The Making of Neoliberal Turkey, edited by C. Özbay, et al.,
53–72. New York: Routledge.
Shachar, A., and R. Hirschl. 2014. “On Citizenship, States, and Markets.” The Journal of
Political Philosophy 22(2):231–57.
Sharkey, H. 2017. A History of Muslims, Christians, and Jews in the Middle East. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Adamson and Tsourapas

29

Short, P., M. Hossain, and M. A. Khan, eds. 2017. South-South Migration: Emerging Patterns, Opportunities and Risks. New York: Routledge.
Smith, A. 1986. “State-Making and Nation-Building.” In States in History, edited by J. Hall,
228–63. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Somers, M. 2008. Genealogies of Citizenship—Markets, Statelessness, and the Right to Have
Rights. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stanard, M. G. 2018. European Overseas Empire 1879-1999: A Short History. Medford, MA:
John Wiley & Sons.
Strauss, A. and J. M. Corbin, eds. 1997. Grounded Theory in Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications.
Surak, K. 2016. “Our Citizenship is Expensive!” London Review of Books 38(18):39–40.
———. 2019. “What Money Can Buy: Citizenship by Investment on a Global Scale.” In
Deepening Divides: How Territorial Borders and Social Boundaries Delineate our World,
edited by D. Fassin, 21–38. London: Pluto Press.
Talbot, I., and G. Singh. 2009. The Partition of India. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Tanasoca, A. 2016. “Citizenship for Sale: Neomedieval, Not Just Neoliberal?” European
Journal of Sociology/Archives Europe´ennes de Sociologie 57(1):169–95.
Thielemann, E. R. 2003. “Between Interests and Norms: Explaining Burden-Sharing in the
European Union.” Journal of Refugee Studies 16(3):253–73.
Thiollet, H. 2011. “Migration as Diplomacy: Labor Migrants, Refugees, and Arab Regional
Politics in the Oil-Rich Countries.” International Labor and Working-Class History 79(1):
103–21.
Totten, S., and P. R. Bartrop. 2008. Dictionary of Genocide. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Triadafilopoulos, T. 1998. “The 1923 Greek-Turkish Exchange of Populations and the Reformulation of Greek National Identity.” Paper presented at the international conference on
Exchange of Populations between Greece and Turkey: An Assessment of the Consequences
of the Treaty of Lausanne, University of Oxford, September 17–20, 1998.
———. 2004. “Building Walls, Bounding Nations: Migration and Exclusion in Canada and
Germany, 1870–1939.” Journal of Historical Sociology 17(4):385–427.
Tsourapas, G. 2016. “Nasser’s Educators and Agitators across al-Watan al-’Arabi: Tracing
the Foreign Policy Importance of Egyptian Regional Migration, 1952–1967.” British
Journal of Middle Eastern Studies 43(3):324–41.
———. 2018. The Politics of Migration in Modern Egypt—Strategies for Regime Survival in
Autocracies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2019a. “The Long Arm of the Arab State.” Ethnic & Racial Studies. doi:10.1080/
01419870.2019.1585558.
———. 2019b. “The Syrian Refugee Crisis and Foreign Policy Decision-Making in Jordan,
Lebanon, and Turkey.” Journal of Global Security Studies. 4(4): 464–481.
Tyner, J. A. 2004. Made in the Philippines: Gendered Discourses and the Making of
Migrants. London: Routledge.
Varadarajan, L. 2010. The Domestic Abroad: Diasporas in International Relations. Oxford:
Oxford University Press.

30

International Migration Review XX(X)

Vigneswaran, D. 2013. Territory, Migration and the Evolution of the International System.
London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Vu, T. 2010. “Studying the State through State Formation.” World Politics 62(1):148–75.
Waltz, K. 1979. Theory of International Politics. Reading, MA: Addison-Webley.
Weiner, M. 1985. “On International Migration and International Relations.” Population and
Development Review 11(3):441–55.
——— and S. Stanton Russell, eds. 2001. Demography and National Security. New York:
Berghahn Books.
Wimmer, A., and Y. Feinstein. (2010). “On the Rise of the Nation-State across the World,
1816-2001.” American Sociological Review 75(5):764–90.
Whitaker, B. E. 2005. “Citizens and Foreigners: Democratization and the Politics of Exclusion in Africa.” African Studies Review 48(1):109–26.
World Bank. 2019. “Record High Remittances Sent Globally in 2019.” Press Release, April 8,
2019. https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2019/04/08/record-highremittances-sent-globally-in-2018
Yazgan, P., D. E. Utku, and I. Sirkeci. 2015. “Syrian Crisis and Migration.” Migration Letters
12(3):181–92.
Yildirim, O. 2007. Diplomacy and Displacement: Reconsidering the Turco-Greek Exchange
of Populations, 1922–1934. New York: Routledge.
Zolberg, A. R. 1983. “The Formation of New States as a Refugee-Generating Process.” The
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 467(1):24–38.
———. 2003. “The Archaeology of Remote Control.” In Migration Control in the North
Atlantic World: the Evolution of State Practices in Europe and the United States from the
French Revolution to the Inter-War Period, edited by A. Fahrmeier, O. Faron, and P. Weil,
195–222. New York: Berghahn Books.
———. 2006a. “Managing a World on the Move.” In “The Political Economy of Global
Population Change, 1950–2050,” supplement, Population and Development Review 32:
222–53.
———. 2006b. A Nation by Design: Immigration Policy in the Fashioning in the United
States, 1750–2000. Cambridge and New York: Harvard University Press.
Zolberg, A. R., A. A. Suhrke, and S. S. Aguayo. 1992. Escape from Violence: Conflict and the
Refugee Crisis in the Developing World. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

