Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Pp.283-297

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.24

The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal
Composition within Academic Life
Majed Alghamdi
English Language Institute
King Abdulaziz University/ Jeddah, Saudi Arabia
Michael C. Reed
College of Liberal Arts
University of Findlay, Ohio, USA

Abstract
This mixed methods research-based study was conducted to investigate the advantages and
possible disadvantages of using multimodal compositions (MMCs) in the English as a Second
Language (ESL) writing classroom. The conveniently selected participants were thirteen ESL
learners and a native speaker of English instructor. Two data collection instruments were employed
to gather the primary data for this research study. The first instrument was a student survey to
explore the perceptions and beliefs of the students about MMCs. The second measure involved a
set of semi-structured interviews with four students and their instructor. The results of the
statistical data analysis of the student survey indicated that the majority of the student participants
expressed their preference for using MMCs because this writing approach enabled them to more
completely and professionally explain their meanings to others. The findings from the analysis of
the data gathered from the semi structured interviews demonstrated that the students believed that
MMCs made writing easier than writing with words only. However, the perception of the teacher
was that some students believe that MMCs add an extra burden to their writing assignments and
do not constitute an integral part of an assignment itself. Suggestions and recommendations for
the more effective use of MMCs in ESL writing classrooms in the USA context, based on this
research study, are provided at the end of this study.
Keywords: Multimodal composition (MMC), English as a Second Language (ESL) context, mixed
methods, TESOL
Cite as: Alghamdi, M., & Reed, M. C. 2019). The Value Students and Instructors Place on
Multimodal Composition within Academic Life. Arab World English Journal, 10 (1) 283-297.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.24

283

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

1.0 Background:
In the past two decades twenty years, a confluence of events has generated the need for ESL
instructors to follow pedagogically advantageous methods in their teaching, employing a wide
variety of materials like textbooks, diagrams, photographs and drawings to facilitate students’
understanding and their Second Language Acquisition (SLA) (Simpson & Bogan, 2015). This area
of English as a Second Language (ESL) and English as a Foreign Language (EFL) teaching has
been addressed extensively over the past two decades. Ajayi (2012) states that: “English teachers
have grappled with how to integrate different learning modalities into classrooms” (p. 16). This
was evidently stated in Gardner (2000) book reflecting on the ground breaking theory of multiple
intelligence, where he stated that: “students possess different kinds of minds and therefore learn,
remember, perform, and understand in different way” (p. 11). Gardner (2008) stresses that
learners have different perspectives and therefore, they learn, analyze, remember, perform, and
understand through different approaches.
Lotherington and Jenson (2011) argue that learners are currently living in a digital universe
which involves them in active, dynamic, and multidimensional communication. Thus, writing
styles have changed and shifted from the paper to the screen and many students and teachers will
have to adopt that. These changes are not only significant, but also far reaching. These changes
are certain to be challenging for a huge number of instructors of English composition since they
have to be skillful and more experienced in ways that they qualify them to use technology and
provide effective models for learners.
Takayoshi and Selfe (2007)declared that digital environments require multiple modalities,
such as moving and still images, sounds, music, color, words, and animations, to convey meaning.
Additionally, these modes are distributed essentially, but not exclusively, through digital media
such as computers, computer networks, CDs, DVDs. Multimodal compositions theoretically
include many dimensions like social interaction, computer interaction, physical coordination,
visual design, multiple language, musical accompaniment, and animation (Martínez-Álvarez,
Cuevas, & Torres-Guzmán, 2017; Martínez-Álvarez & Ghiso, 2014).
In the ESL context, learners often encounter a number of difficulties while learning the
four language skills (Alrabai, 2018; Elyas & Picard, 2018; Kabouha, 2014). Amongst the most
difficult tasks for ESL learners is mastering rhetorical writing (Rajab, Khan, & Elyas, 2016;
Shukri, 2014). Thus, it is suggested that learning MMC techniques would be a powerful resource
tool that may support second language writers to express their ideas and opinions. These types of
compositions also help writers to more effortlessly share their culture and beliefs with the wider
audiences.
Sullivan (2001) notes that writers have the opportunity with computer technology to have
more power over the page than they have ever had before. Zheng and Warschauer (2017) states
that: “The emergence of digital technologies has significantly transformed the forms, genres, and
purposes of writing both inside and outside the classroom” (p. 61). Consequently, the use of
multimodality is a useful approach in composition classes. It shifts the nature of literacies and
writings from the perception of learning to a more interactive and engagement environment.
Learning how to complete multimodal tasks plays a vital role in keeping up with the revolution in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

284

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

technology. Thus, investigating the impact of applying MMCs in an ESL writing classrooms may
provide practical solutions and recommendations to ESL instructors to improve their instruction
of English composition.
2.0 Review of the Literature:
Teaching composition has gone through many progressions and stages. It started from focusing on
the final product and imitating forms of correct language and moved to the perception of literacies
as multiple and engaged in social context.
2.1 Historical Look at L2 Writing:
2.1.1 The Product Writing Approach
In the product writing approach, as Nunan (1989) states: “writing focuses on the end result of the
act of composition, i.e. the letter, essay, story and so on. The writing teacher who subscribes to
the product approach will be concerned to see that the end product is readable, grammatically
correct and obeys discourse conventions relating to main points, supporting details and so on”
(p.36). He notes that in the product approach, students are engaged in meaningful classroom
activities that emphasize imitating, copying and transforming models of correct language. Ferris
and Hedgcock (2005) underscored that in this traditional approach, which is the product approach,
learners are required to read novels, short stories, plays, essays, and poetry and then, they are asked
to analyze these works in written compositions or themes. Ferris and Hedgcock (2005) also
reported that the teaching practices emphasized the understanding and interpretation of
acknowledged literary texts.
2.1.2 Focus on Form Approach
Focus on form is an essential construct in task-based language teaching and this approach was first
presented by Michael Long to refer to a method where learners increase their attention to linguistic
forms as they become involved in the composing of texts (Ellis, 2017; Long, 2018). Silva (1990)
highlighted that the focus on language structures was born from the marriage of structural
linguistic and the behaviorist learning theory of second language teaching that dominated in the
1960s. Furthermore, Valeo and Spada (2016) noted that in the era of the Focus on form, the
audiolingual method was the central mode of instruction and writing was looked upon as having a
secondary role. The role of the writing was to reemphasize oral patterns of the language and writing
took the form of sentences exercises like fill-ins, replacements, transforming tenses and personal
pronouns, and completions (Steeves, 1969).
In second language writing research, it indicates that the focus on form should include
textual features such as the number of passives or the number of pronouns (Raimes, 1991).
Ebsworth (2014) adds that these textual structures should be counted and compared them for users
of different languages or cultures. F. Hyland (2003) argued that some L2 writing instructors now
see writing as an alternative skill, but it is unhelpful to see writing as not connected to other
language skills. She suggested that students need an understanding of how words, sentences, and
larger discourse forms can construct and build the meanings that they want to produce.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

285

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

2.1.3 Focus on the Writer Approach
The third writing approach takes the writer, rather than the form, as the starting point. Many L2
writing teachers from liberal arts backgrounds see their classroom purposes as boosting L2
students’ expressive skills, inspiring them to find their own voices to form writing that is fresh and
spontaneous (Elbow, 1998; Murray, 1984). K. Hyland (2003) mentioned that, in terms of focusing
on the writer abilities, these writing classrooms revolve around students’ personal experiences and
ideas, and writing is considered a creative act of self-discovery. This approach can assist to create
self-awareness of the writer’s social position and literate possibilities as well as encourage clear
thinking, effective relating, and satisfying self-expression (Friere, 1974; Moffett, 1982).
In addition, K. Hyland (2003) clarified that in the focus on the writer approach, the teachers’ role
is to provide students with the space to make their own meanings within a positive and cooperative
atmosphere.
2.1.4 Focus on the Writing Process Approach
Raimes (1983) reported that the focus on the composer as language learner and creator of writing
led to a process approach. According to Williams (2003): “The process approach emphasizes
revision, and also feedback from others, so students may produce many drafts with much crossing
out of sentences and moving around of paragraphs. The correction of spelling and punctuation is
not of central importance at the early stages” (p. 19). He further adds that: “An important element
of the process approach is the meaningfulness it brings to learners, who make a personal
connection to the topic and come to understand the processes they follow when writing about it.
This starts with prewriting and brainstorming to generate ideas and activate the schemata, which
is the background experience or world knowledge a person possesses that allows a writer to relate
personal experiences to the topic and discover everything he or she has to say” (p.19). Raimes
(1991) described that the process approach applies a new range of classroom activities formulated
by the employ of journals, cooperative peers, invention, revision, and attention to content before
form.
Hyland (2003) indicated that the process approach to teaching writing highlights the writer
as an independent producer of texts, but it goes farther to cover the concern of what instructors
should do to support learners as they perform a writing task. The numerous characterizations of
this approach are consistent in recognizing basic cognitive processes as essential to writing
exercises and in stressing the need to develop students’ skills to plan, define a rhetorical issue, and
propose and assess solutions (Alonso, López, Manrique, & Viñes, 2005).
2.1.5 Focus on Content Approach
Focus on Content (FoC) is another method of conceptualizing L2 writing instruction is in reference
to content, that is, what students are demanded to write about. An emphasis is on the content
method where it focuses on a collection of themes or topics of a course that establish a coherence
and goal of the course that students will discuss (Spada, 2016). Wilkinson (2018) described that
with the focus on the content approach came another academically oriented types, English for
Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Specific Purposes (ESP). This is to stress that the focus
is mainly on the purpose of the course content (Ferris, 2018). Some researchers argue that that the
studies that discuss the content-based approach involve analysis of the rhetorical organization of
technical writing (Zare-ee, 2011). Also, the studies include researches of students writing in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

286

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

content fields, and surveys of the content and tasks second language learners can expect to face in
their academic life (Wright, 2010). Other research studies conclude that topics and themes are
often evolved around social and environmental problems such as pollution, relationships, stress,
juvenile crime, smoking, etc (Barrot, 2015). As such, L2 learners may be disadvantaged in such
classrooms if they do not have a strong knowledge about either the themes or the types of texts
they require to write about.
2.1.6 Focus on Readers and Discourse Communities, Social Constructionism and
Socioliterate Approaches
Similar to the content-based approach, reader and discourse approaches for writing instruction
have developed partly in preference to the focus on the writer approach and the process-oriented
approach (Grabe & Zhang, 2018). Hedgcock and Ferris (2013) stated that content, reader, and
discourse approaches overlap significantly in terms of techniques and purposes, but they may seem
different subjectively and fundamentally. For example, reader- and discourse-based composition
instruction is influenced by the social concept that novice writer’s essential to be apprenticed into
multiple discourse communities like academic disciplines, profession, and social systems beyond
the classroom (Ferris & Hedgcock, 2005; Grabe & Zhang, 2018). Gee (2012) emphasized that
literacies involve not only text forms but also the composers who create literate practices such as
writing. Literacies include the social practices of individuals and groups in the contexts as these
contents express meaning and purpose, and where these texts enjoy situation.
This view of literacies as multiple and engaged in social activity is consistent with Johns’s
perception which is a socioliterate perspective. In 1997, he stated that literacies are developed
mostly through exposure to discourses form a variety of social frameworks. Halliday (1978)
highlighted the complicated relationship between language (form) and text, and how language and
text operate in social contexts. He proposed that there are three central factors shape the forms of
language, beginning with words and sentences to conversations and texts. These three main
features are field (the social practice setting), tenor (the relationships among contributors), and
mode (the communication channel). Furthermore, the emphasis on the relationship between the
social and ideological contexts for writing has also been influenced by the North American
tradition, which is recognized as the research of the New Rhetoric (NR). The NR research
highlights that the purpose of argumentative essays is to provide a clear understanding to whom is
addressed and to influence the audience (Perelman & Olbrechts-Tyteca, 1969).
Motivated by NR and related methodological models, Hyland (2007) pointed out that the
need toward situating genres, writing processes, writers, and readers with respect to their
sociocultural backgrounds has positively influenced L1 and L2 writing pedagogy. He also stated
that in the socioliterate method students in the writing class are regularly engaged in research into
texts, roles, and contexts. Students also are involved into the strategies that they must utilize in
finalizing literacy activities within particular situations. Ferris and Hedgcock highlighted that
socioliterate approach applicably focuses on examining, exercising, and reproducing the implicit
and explicit structures of texts organized to present to specific audiences.
The capability to use and form contents from different genres is important to develop
literacies, which are constantly enclosed in sociocultural contexts and promote by involving in
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

287

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

dynamic verbal activities (Gee, 2012). Cope, Kalantzis, and Kress (2014) added that the verbal
activities include reading and speaking beside multimodal features that we employ from two or
more modes to create a message. Harste (2009) stressed that all language practices are multimodal
in some sense.
2.2 Definition of Multimodal Compositions
Kress (2003) stated that MMCs are written texts that involve processes that apply more than just
words and letters to help people to communicate their thoughts (Takayoshi & Selfe, 2007; Walker,
2017). They may utilize audios, visuals, videos, graphics, drawings or any visual elements to
enhance the meaning of the message or the text. When viewing, analyzing, and creating
multimodal assignments in the writing classroom, instructors and learners are immersing
themselves in MMC (Gee, 2012). Selfe and Selfe (2008) added that creating podcasts, collages,
video, blogs, audio essays, comic strips, and digital storytelling all fall under the types of MMC
tasks. Smith (2017) suggested that MMCs often involve a huge number of visuals, sounds,
movement, and written text to build synergistic messages. MMCs theoretically include many
dimensions like social interaction, computer interaction, physical coordination, visual design,
multiple language, musical accompaniment, and animation (Dallacqua, 2018). Lotherington,
Fisher, Jenson, and Lindo (2016) also pointed out that these dimensions have reshaped how
learners and instructors understand, instruct, and assess language and literacy in the classroom.
In second language teaching, Valdés (2004) highlighted that teachers have the tendency to
formulate language in their teaching as an abstract linguistic system isolated from a broader
socially assembled multimodal perspective. Indeed, instructors in foreign language education have
been hesitant to recognize and employ these new dimensions in their classroom. This principle is
echoed in Kress (2003) who states that: “we have moved from telling the world to showing the
world” (p.140). Moreover, he emphasized that it is impossible to think about literacy in isolation
from an infinite collection of social, technological, and economic factors (Kress, 2009).
2.3 Types of MMCs
MMCs can be classified by two major headings: technological projects and non-technological
projects (Karchmer-Klein & Shinas, 2012). Technological MMCs include: digital storytelling, and
videos. Digital storytelling is a stream of information that involves many different modes like
video, music, visuals, written texts, narration, and varieties of sounds (Smeda, Dakich, & Sharda,
2014). On the other hand, videos have also had their impact on MMCs. For a long time, composing
video has been seen as an impossible mission in schools specifically in the literacy classroom since
it requires training, access to equipment, and cost (Stafford, 1995). Because of these drawbacks,
Goodman (2003) pointed out that many researches discovering that students who have motivation
to compose a video tend to construct the task out of school setting.
Non-technological MMCs projects include: diorama/poster projects. These projects are
basically seeing something from a different angle and in modern times, it refers to three
dimensional sights. A diorama provides learners with a good environment to be creative and
employ objects from their surrounding like homes or classroom’s aids to construct different
diorama models. Below is one example of a diorama that integrates colors, drawing, and written
texts (Quinn & History, 2006).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

288

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

2.4 Advantages and Disadvantages of MMCs
Several researchers believe that there are three main advantages to MMCs and there are: 1)
engagement and forming identity (Alvermann, 2008; Kress, 2003), 2) students as designers and
innovators (Shin & Cimasko, 2008) and 3) acquiring higher-order thinking skills and scaffolding
(Bourne & Jewitt, 2003). On the other hand, some researchers argue that adopting MMCs approach
can have two distinct disadvantages. These two disadvantages are: the various technical issues that
could occur as well as being time consuming (Beard & Jeannie, 2012). The other disadvantage is
related to the curriculum planning and faculty training where MMCs present a challenging
situation for the presently followed strategies in teaching literacy in the major of education
institutions around the world (Jewitt, 2008; Knobel & Lankshear, 2007).
Notwithstanding these advantages and disadvantages, it is evident that research studies, old
and new, stress a lot of potential for the implementation of MMCs in the educational classrooms
in general and the L2 classrooms in particular.
3.0 Methodology
The main purpose of this research study was to explore the advantages and possible disadvantages
of applying MMCs in the writing classrooms from both, the students and the teachers’ perceptions
and beliefs. As such, a mixed methods approach was utilized since the researcher strongly believes
in the gaining of knowledge from both objective as well as subjective inquiries. Whitehead and
Schneider (2007) state that: “Mixed-methods research offers a way of making research more
meaningful, complete and purposeful than is the case when using either a singular qualitative or
quantitative approach and provides the researcher with other valuable tools to add to their research
resources” (p. 264).
3.1 Participants
Due to the nature of this research study, the participants were conveniently selected and were
thirteen ESL learners studying in an intensive English program (IEP) with their native speaker of
English instructor. All of the students participated in the questionnaire phase and only four of them
with their teacher engaged in the semi-structured interview phase. The entire participants were at
a major university in a small private university in northwestern Ohio, USA.
3.2 Survey Instruments
This research study utilized two instruments to collect the primary data. A twenty-three item
students’ questionnaire was custom designed and given to the students for the first phase. Then,
the researcher conducted an interview for four students and one instructor for the second phase.
Each interview lasted between 15-25 minutes for the students. On the other hand, the interview
with the teacher lasted for 30 minutes.
3.2.1 The Students’ Questionnaire
The students’ questionnaire consisted of 23 items and it was purposefully divided into three
sections: 1) demographic questions; 2) close-ended questions; 3) open-ended questions. The closeended and open-ended questions were related to the MMCs. However, the first section had five
questions and those questions examined the participants’ background information such as gender,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

289

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

age, their status at the university, students’ levels based on their grades, the current course of study
or planning to register.
The second part of the questionnaire contained 16 questions and they were close-ended
questions. Questions (6–8) asked about the first time that students started to use a computer and
their ability to use computers and technology. Questions (9-11) evaluated the students’ perspective
regarding using MMCs. Questions (12-18) examined participants’ feeling towards MMCs and how
employing MMCs in their works was helpful and convenient. Questions (19-21) were asked to
address the creativity, the skills used, and the time required for creating a MMC project.
The last section of the survey contained two open-ended questions #22 and #23. They were
intentionally included on the questionnaire to give the participants more freedom to share their
ideas and opinions regarding using MMCs in their writing class. For example, question # 23, asked
participants about which form of the MMC they prefer and why.
3.2.2 Semi Structured Interviews
The students were asked six open-ended questions relating to the students’ perspective about
MMCs and its usage and their teacher was asked five open ended questions relating to her
theoretical perspective on using MMCs in writing class, her opinion if MMCs motivate students
to write and why, her views of the advantages that students acquire from learning MMCs, her
thoughts of the disadvantages of teaching MMCs, and finally which form of MMC projects does
she prefer to teach and why. All interviews were audio recorded and transcribed verbatim. Once
the interviews were transcribed verbatim, thematic analysis was conducted to identify emerging
themes.
4.0 Data Analyses
4.1 Survey Data Analyses
This study was undertaken to test two hypotheses set by the researcher. The first hypothesis
suggested that there would be a correlation between students’ evaluation of themselves as students
(Question #4 and question #10), which stated that students enjoy using MMCs in their writing.
The second hypothesis suggested that there would be a negative correlation between question #7,
which asked the students to rate their abilities with computers and technology, and question #21,
which asked the students to rate their time needed to finish a multimodal project. Furthermore, the
two open-ended questions, Q#22: If you have done a multimodal composition did you enjoy it, and
why? And if you have not done a multimodal composition do you think you would enjoy it and
why?” and Q#23: “Which form of a multimodal composition do you like or do you think you
would like most, and why?”
4.1.1 Coefficient of Determination (Correlation) – First Hypothesis
The calculated value of the coefficient of determination (r-value) for the first hypothesis was 0.322
(p-value was 0.262). This value indicated a strong correlation between the two questions (Q#4 and
Q#10) which indicated that students value the use of MMCs and believe it to be an advantage in
their writing assignments.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

290

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

4.1.2 Coefficient of Determination (Correlation) – Second Hypothesis
The calculated value of the coefficient of determination (r-value) for the second hypothesis was
0.128 (p-value was 0.492). This r-value was not high enough to confirm a good connection
between the answers to these two questions. In addition, the p-value of .492 which is too high. As
a result, this hypothesis was not justified because the r-value is below the standard .3 level and the
p-value is too high. As a consequence, it can be seen that there is not a link between the student’s
ability to use computers and technology and how much time they spend to start an MMC project.
This might be good news for teachers of MMCs because, based on this finding, teachers do not
have to be concerned with whether or not their students have high computer and technology skills
as a pre-condition for promoting this type of writing.
4.1.3 Open-Ended Question #22
Students’ responses to this question were slightly similar. Even though the majority had similar
responses, there were some comments that were different and interesting. One of the students
stated, “I enjoyed a lot when I used PowerPoint because it helped me a lot to explain my idea.”
Another student added, “I have and I enjoy it. It makes it easy for me to express my feelings.” Also,
one of participants answered, “Yes, I will feel the sense of achievement.” Those three comments or
quotations have similarity in the sense of touching the students’ feelings and how using MMCs
assists them to practice that. However, one participant mentioned, “I have done the multimodal
composition and it was easy to make presentation because I do not have to write a lot.” Another
student answered, “Yes, I have. That is interesting because it requires us to be more creative, which
is the most important for future career opportunities.”
Students believed that using MMCs in their writing assignments or projects would provide them
with the opportunity to be more creative and gain useful skills in order to be more professional in
the career’s environment.
4.1.4 Open-Ended Question #24
The majority of the students responded that PowerPoint was their favourite MMC form since they
perceive it to helps them to comfortably demonstrate a presentation and it is easy to get used to it.
One student commented, “I like PowerPoint best because PowerPoint is the most sophisticated
and flexible.” A second student added, “PowerPoint, because you can easily add videos, sounds,
and pictures. Easy to use.” Also, another student proposed, “the most common is a PowerPoint.
Because that is easy to get used to it. Secondly, it is already installed and automatically, therefore,
we do not have to pay extra for it.”
Those responses emphasized the notion that PowerPoint is the most common tool that is being
used within MMC projects. They mentioned that PowerPoint is easy to use and more flexible.
They also declared that PowerPoint is affordable and free with no cost and is already installed in
their computer software. This stresses students’ concern about the availability of a resource and
whether it requires a payment from users to install it or, is free.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

291

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

4.2 Semi-Structured Interviews’ Data Analyses
4.2.1 Students’ Interviews
When the students were asked: “Which do you prefer most to use when you write a paper, writing
by hand or using computer? And why?”, the responses were varied, but the majority preferred to
use a computer rather than writing by hand because they believe that writing with a computer is
easier, faster, and reduced their mechanical mistakes. When they were asked: “How often do you
use multimodal composition for school assignments? And why?”, one student responded that he
sometimes creates a PowerPoint presentation for class because he thinks that if he includes MMCs
in his presentation, it will be easy to create and he does not have to write so many words. Another
response underlined that he utilizes MMC a lot because he thinks it helps him to make his points
clear to students and make it fun.
Moreover, students were asked “Which form of a multimodal composition do you like or do you
think you would like most, and why?”, one student said, “I like a PowerPoint because not only
visual aids, but also it makes the presentation more interesting and more convincing.” Another
student added:
“I think I like making videos the most because videos are… like films…they are like widely
effective because they have everything…so someone is writing a script…someone needs
to write anyways, so you have the writing…you have literature in it…then needs someone
needs to form it…you have science in it…and then someone needs to edit it, someone needs
to act on it, you have arts…so these are like every form together combined and you are
getting one thing, so it’s so powerful I think…it definitely something that I would definitely
love to do it in my carrier also.”
4.2.2 The Instructor’s Interview
The instructor was given five questions. The first question was “What is your theoretical
perspective on using multimodal composition in writing class?” She responded that the MMC is
learner-friendly and does not require students to express their ideas in one mode, but it allows
several different ways. The second question stated: “Do you think that multimodal composition
motivates students to write, and why?” She commented on this question said that the students get
motivated to write more by employing MMCs in their project. She stated: “The more they invest
in it in a creative way, the more engage will be”. Furthermore, the third question was “From your
experience in teaching rhetorical writing specifically multimodal composition what are the
benefits that students acquire while they are composing multimodal texts?” She replied that a
MMC is like brain storming and it encourage students to collect and apply different modes of
presenting information. Also, she added that it allows students to come up with new ideas and
promote creativity. The fifth question was “Do you think are there any disadvantages of teaching
multimodal compositions?” She answered,
“I think sometimes students may perceive it as additional work…that has more work, but
really if the teacher structures it well. It’s kind of taking a place of some of the written
aspects of the process of writing, so it might be just exchanged…you know…so not
everything is done in pencil and paper, but through different mode…so…, but also some
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

292

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

students…may be older students don’t know how to use technology and that might
intimidate them.”
This quotation emphasized that the writing instructor has to be aware of the student’s perspective
regarding the concept of the MMCs. Also, the teacher has to be familiar with technology and
computers and provide students with a good resources and explanation about the usage of MMCs.
The last question was “Which form of multimodal composition do you prefer to teach, and can you
please explain why?” She responded that she likes to instruct the digital storytelling and the
narrative because using a multimodal approach to create a narrative is more interesting and the
audience also will be able to see pictures and images that relate to that story. Finally, the instructor
suggested that the more comfortable a teacher is with technology, the better it is.
5.0 Discussion and Conclusions
Following the data analysis of the collected primary data from the questionnaire and the semi
structured interviews, it can be seen that applying MMCs in ESL writing classroom would be an
amazing tool to create more interactive and engagement environment. By employing MMCs,
students will be able to draw on their knowledge, experiences, and their home background to share
new stories and become more deeply engaged in the school setting. We now are live in a globalized
interconnected society and immersing in technology becomes a necessity for both learners and
educators. Therefore, utilizing MMCs in ESL writing classroom would be extremely valuable to
L2 learners to share their values and promotes diversity. Students can make good relations with
people of different thoughts and from different places. Thus, when students engage in these
processes, their mind habits will develop over time. They will become creative, risk taker,
persistent, and mindfully. These skills are not only very important in the academic setting, but they
are beneficial in the carrier field. Even though there are many positive results of using MMCs in
ESL writing courses, there are some disadvantages, or we can say barriers of applying MMCs.
One of these barriers relates to technology problems. One of the participants stated that he did not
know how to insert a picture or video and how to change the background of the presented piece.
Therefore, instructor has to facilitate an interactive and supportive learning environment in order
to encourage students to achieve their goals create a meaningful work.
Finally, one last comment which considers to be a disadvantage of employing MMCs in
ESL composition class, was stressed by the instructor. She stated that students perceived MMC as
an additional work rather than it is part of it. Thus, the instructor must bear in mind that not all
students have a clear understanding of the reason of applying MMCs in their writing assignments.
Therefore, the teacher has to provide students with helpful resources and explanation regarding
the usage and the benefits of utilizing MMCs.
5.1 Limitations
The students who participated in this study have not had a lot of experience on exercising with
implementing different types of MMCs in their writing assignments. The study would have worked
much more positively if the students had had enough experience regarding the usage of MMCs.
The potential limitation was that students’ responses of the questionnaire and the interview’s
questions were based on their perception not based on their usage. Thus, this could affect their
answers because they have not completed MMC projects during the current semester.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

293

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

5.2 Recommendation for Further Research
There has not been much formal study constructed about the advantages and the possible
disadvantages of employing MMCs in ESL writing classroom. Since researchers and educators are
currently focusing on how to apply multimodal compositional skills in the writing classroom, there
is a need of conducting studies on the students’ perspectives regarding the usages of MMCs in
their writing assignments. Further research could focus on the potential difficulties that learners
encounter while they are composing a MMC project. Also, investigation on what are some new
ideas of MM applications that instructor can bring to the ESL composition classroom.
About the Authors
Majed Alghamdi is an EFL lecturer at the English Language Institute (ELI) at King Abdulaziz
University (KAU), Jeddah, Saudi Arabia. Mr. Alghamdi has an M.A. degree in Teaching English
to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) and Applied Linguistic from the University of Findlay,
Ohio, USA. His main research interest is in multimodal composition (MMC) in the L2 writing
classrooms. ORCiD : https://orcid.org/0000-0003-4840-3290
Dr. Michael C. Reed is a professor of TESOL/Applied Linguistics and bilingual education at the
School of Liberal Arts at the University of Findlay, Ohio, USA. He has a Doctor of Philosophy in
Linguistics from Georgetown University and a Master of Education in English Education from
Temple University.
References
Ajayi, L. (2012). How teachers deploy multimodal textbooks to enhance English language
learning. Tesol Journal, 6(1), 16-35.
Alonso, F., López, G., Manrique, D., & Viñes, J. M. (2005). An instructional model for web‐based
e‐learning education with a blended learning process approach. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 36(2), 217-235.
Alrabai, F. (2018). Learning English in Saudi Arabia. In English as a Foreign Language in Saudi
Arabia (pp. 110-127): Routledge.
Alvermann, D. E. (2008). Why bother theorizing adolescents' online literacies for classroom
practice and research? Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(1), 8-19.
Barrot, J. (2015). A sociocognitive-transformative approach to teaching writing. Indonesian
Journal of Applied Linguistics, 4(2), 113-122.
Beard, P., & Jeannie, C. (2012). Composing on the screen: Student perceptions of traditional and
multimodal composition.
Bourne, J., & Jewitt, C. (2003). Orchestrating debate: A multimodal approach to the study of the
teaching of higher-order literacy skills. Reading (UKRA), 37(2), 64-72.
Cope, B., Kalantzis, M., & Kress, G. (2014). Bibliographical essay: Developing the theory and
practice of genre-based literacy. Cope and Kalantzis, 231-247.
Dallacqua, A. K. (2018). " When I write, I picture it in my head": Graphic Narratives as Inspiration
for Multimodal Compositions. Language Arts, 95(5), 273-286.
Ebsworth, M. E. (2014). The Many Faces of Feedback on Writing. Writing & Pedagogy, 6(2).
Elbow, P. (1998). Writing Without Teachers: Oxford University Press.
Ellis, R. (2017). Position paper: Moving task-based language teaching forward. Language
Teaching, 50(4), 507-526.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

294

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

Elyas, T., & Picard, M. (2018). A brief history of English and English teaching in Saudi Arabia.
In English as a Foreign Language in Saudi Arabia (pp. 78-92): Routledge.
Ferris, D. (2018). Building a Writing Curriculum and Developing Strategic Writers. In Teaching
English to Second Language Learners in Academic Contexts (pp. 89-105): Routledge.
Ferris, D., & Hedgcock, J. (2005). Teaching ESL Composition: Purpose, Process, and Practice:
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Friere, P. (1974). Liberation through literacy. Port Moresby: University of Papua New Guinea.
Gardner, H. E. (2000). Intelligence Reframed: Multiple Intelligences for the 21st Century: Basic
Books.
Gardner, H. E. (2008). Multiple Intelligences: New Horizons in Theory and Practice: Basic Books.
Gee, J. P. (2012). The old and the new in the new digital literacies. Paper presented at the The
Educational Forum.
Goodman, S. (2003). Teaching youth media: A critical guide to literacy, video production & social
change (Vol. 36): Teachers College Press.
Grabe, W., & Zhang, C. (2018). Discourse Structures. The TESOL Encyclopedia of English
Language Teaching, 1-8.
Halliday, M. (1978). K (1978). Language as social semiotic: The social interpretation of language
and meaning. London: Arnold.
Harste, J. C. (2009). Multimodality: In perspective. In Changing literacies for changing times (pp.
56-70): Routledge.
Hedgcock, J., & Ferris, D. R. (2013). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process, and practice:
Routledge.
Hyland, F. (2003). Focusing on form: Student engagement with teacher feedback. System, 31(2),
217-230.
Hyland, K. (2003). Second language writing: Ernst Klett Sprachen.
Hyland, K. (2007). Genre pedagogy: Language, literacy and L2 writing instruction. Journal of
Second Language Writing, 16(3), 148-164.
Jewitt, C. (2008). Multimodality and literacy in school classrooms. Review of research in
education, 32(1), 241-267.
Kabouha, R. H. (2014). Vocabulary Learning Strategies of Medical English Terminologies: The
Case of Foundation Year Students at Ibn Sina Medical College.
Karchmer-Klein, R., & Shinas, V. H. (2012). 21st century literacies in teacher education:
Investigating multimodal texts in the context of an online graduate-level literacy and
technology course. Research in the Schools, 19(1), 60.
Knobel, M., & Lankshear, C. (2007). A new literacies sampler (Vol. 29): Peter Lang.
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age: Routledge.
Kress, G. (2009). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication:
Routledge.
Long, M. H. (2018). Interaction in L2 Classrooms. The TESOL Encyclopedia of English Language
Teaching, 1-7.
Lotherington, H., Fisher, S., Jenson, J., & Lindo, L. M. (2016). Professional development from the
inside out: Redesigning learning through collaborative action research. New literacies and
teacher learning professional development and the digital turn, 65-87.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

295

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

Lotherington, H., & Jenson, J. (2011). Teaching multimodal and digital literacy in L2 settings:
New literacies, new basics, new pedagogies. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 31,
226-246.
Martínez-Álvarez, P., Cuevas, I., & Torres-Guzmán, M. (2017). Preparing bilingual teachers:
Mediating belonging with multimodal explorations in language, identity, and culture.
Journal of Teacher Education, 68(2), 155-178.
Martínez-Álvarez, P., & Ghiso, M. P. (2014). Multilingual, multimodal compositions in
technology-mediated hybrid spaces. In Handbook of Research on Digital Tools for Writing
Instruction in K-12 Settings (pp. 193-218): IGI Global.
Moffett, J. (1982). Writing, inner speech, and meditation. College English, 44(3), 231-246.
Murray, D. M. (1984). Writing and teaching for surprise. College English, 46(1), 1-7.
Nunan, D. (1989). Designing Tasks for the Communicative Classroom: Cambridge University
Press.
Perelman, C., & Olbrechts-Tyteca, L. (1969). The new rhetoric (J. Wilkinson & P. Weaver,
Trans.). Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.(Original work published 1958).
Quinn, S. C., & History, A. M. o. N. (2006). Windows on Nature: The Great Habitat Dioramas of
the American Museum of Natural History: Harry N. Abrams.
Raimes, A. (1983). Techniques in teaching writing: ERIC.
Raimes, A. (1991). Out of the woods: Emerging traditions in the teaching of writing. Tesol
Quarterly, 25(3), 407-430.
Rajab, H., Khan, K., & Elyas, T. (2016). A Case Study of EFL Teachers’ Perceptions and Practices
in Written Corrective Feedback. International Journal of Applied Linguistics & English
Literature, 5(1), 119-131.
Selfe, R. J., & Selfe, C. L. (2008). “Convince me!” Valuing multimodal literacies and composing
public service announcements. Theory Into Practice, 47(2), 83-92.
Shin, D.-s., & Cimasko, T. (2008). Multimodal composition in a college ESL class: New tools,
traditional norms. Computers and composition, 25(4), 376-395.
Shukri, N. A. (2014). Second Language Writing and Culture: Issues and Challenges from the Saudi
Learners' Perspective. Arab World English Journal, 5(3).
Silva, T. (1990). Second language composition instruction: Developments, issues, and directions
in ESL. Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom, 11-23.
Simpson, J., & Bogan, B. (2015). Searching for a common language on differentiated instruction.
Journal of Education and Human Development, 4(2), 34-40.
Smeda, N., Dakich, E., & Sharda, N. (2014). The effectiveness of digital storytelling in the
classrooms: a comprehensive study. Smart Learning Environments, 1(1), 6.
Smith, B. E. (2017). Composing across modes: A comparative analysis of adolescents’ multimodal
composing processes. Learning, Media and Technology, 42(3), 259-278.
Spada, N. (2016). Focusing on Language in Meaning-based and Content-based Instruction1.
Paper presented at the JACET International Convention Selected Papers Volume 4.
Stafford, B. M. (1995). An Image of One's Own: Design Discipline vs. Visual Studies. Design
Issues, 11(1), 66-70.
Steeves, R. W. (1969). Handbook for Teachers of English as a Second Language;
Americanization-Literacy.
Sullivan, P. (2001). Practicing safe visual rhetoric on the World Wide Web. Computers and
composition, 18(2), 103-121.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

296

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019
The Value Students and Instructors Place on Multimodal

Alghamdi & Reed

Takayoshi, P., & Selfe, C. L. (2007). Thinking about multimodality. Multimodal composition:
Resources for teachers, 1-12.
Valdés, G. (2004). Between support and marginalisation: The development of academic language
in linguistic minority children. International Journal of Bilingual Education and
Bilingualism, 7(2-3), 102-132.
Valeo, A., & Spada, N. (2016). Is there a better time to focus on form? Teacher and learner views.
Tesol Quarterly, 50(2), 314-339.
Walker, M. C. (2017). Exploring what motivates adolescent males to compose in digital formats.
Fordham University,
Whitehead, D., & Schneider, Z. (2007). Mixed-methods research. Nursing and Midwifery
research: methods and appraisal for evidence-based practice, 249-267.
Wilkinson, R. (2018). Content and language integration at universities? Collaborative reflections.
International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 21(5), 607-615.
Wright, V. H. (2010). Professional development and the master technology teacher: The evolution
of one partnership. Education, 131(1).
Zare-ee, A. (2011). Fluctuations and Directions in Teaching Second Language Writing. Sino-US
English Teaching, 8(9), 556-564.
Zheng, B., & Warschauer, M. (2017). Epilogue: Second language writing in the age of computermediated communication. Journal of Second Language Writing, 36, 61-67.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

297

