Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.17

Pp.213-224

Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students
Yusop Boonsuk
Department of Western Languages, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences,
Prince of Songkla University, Pattani, Thailand
Eric A. Ambele (Corresponding author)
Department of Western Languages, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences,
Prince of Songkla University, Pattani, Thailand

Abstract
This paper discusses the commonly realised social speech act of refusal strategies in English
among university students in the Southern part of Thailand, in explaining how they say ‘no’ to
request and the effects of this speech act on the hearer’s face. Using Discourse Completion Test
(DCT) to collect oral data in naturally-occurring situations, together with a qualitative analysis of
the transcribed data according to Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliss-Weltz (1990) classification scheme
of refusal, the study affirms that there are two major common ways of realising refusals to request
in English among these students, namely: direct and, overwhelmingly, indirect refusal strategies.
The findings also reveal that the last strategy of the classification scheme, adjuncts to refusals, was
not found in the data. Similarly, not all the indirect refusal sub-strategies were found in the data.
However, two novel sub-strategies: giving advice/explanation, and lack of empathy were found in
the analysis. The findings have implications for better socio-cultural communication and
interaction in a multicultural university context.
Keyword: Refusal strategies, social speech act, Thai EFL university students
Cite as: Boonsuk, Y., & Ambele, E.A. (2019) Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL
University Students. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2) 213-224.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.17

213

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

Introduction
Speech acts or ‘social speech acts’ are expressions that serve a function in communication, such
as apology, request, promising, refusing and greeting (Kasper, 1997; Reinard, 1994). These
utterances are seen as essential elements of language which can better understand how human
communication is carried out using linguistic behaviour (Austin, 1962; Olshtain & Blum-Kulka,
1985; Tanck, 2003). To be more precise, Tanck (2003, p. 2) opines that ‘speakers employ a variety
of speech acts to achieve their communicative goals’ which include wider seminal speech
categories (Searle, 1969) including commissives, declaratives, directives, expressives and
representatives, in addition to more specific acts such as apologies, requests, complaints and
refusals (Kasper, 1997).
Since culture is regarded as communication, just as communication is culture (Al-Khateeb,
2009), this explains why various cultural and social interactions affect discourse language choices.
Put differently, “cultural and contextual factors inextricably play a role in developing various ways
of communication in a given speech community” (Ambele, 2014, p. 13). It is recommended that
we observe social interaction rules that influence language choices, especially when expressing
speech acts that affect human behaviour. To this notion, Sarfo (2011, p. 1) states that “one of such
acts which influence human behaviour is refusals”. Due to its significance to daily interaction and
communication, this social speech act of refusal is very crucial. Speakers can choose either to
refuse or accept a request. The speaker may, however, risk offending the listener if the hearer
whose request has been refused does not know how a refusal is made in the speaker's culture
(Fishman, 1972; Meier, 1995, 1997; Richard & Schmidt, 1983). The research therefore aims,
because of its importance, to explore the frequently used cultural-specific direct and indirect
refusal strategy (among Thai university learners in Thailand). It also tries to study the connection
between the message transmitted and its affect / emotional impacts on the hearer. In order to
achieve this, the classification scheme of refusal approach by Beebe, Takahashi and Uliss-Weltz
(1990) has been implemented.
Refusal Study and Its Place in Thailand
Searle (1969) defines the speech act of refusal as the negative counterparts to acceptance and
consenting. Refusals are face-threatening (Barron, 2007; Brown & Levinson, 1986) as we refuse
because of complex personal (Chen, Ye & Zhang, 1995) reason like gender, juniority, education,
power and hierarchy (Ambele, 2014; Fraser 1990; Gass & Houck, 1999; Sarfo, 2011; Smith 1998).
They are also often negotiated over several turns and involve some degree of directness and
indirectness, usually depending on the status and age of the interlocutors and the cultural contexts
(Sarfo, 2011). It seems, of course, that speakers have a challenge to be able to dismiss their
requests. Refusing to accept request or saying ' no ' not only involves linguistic understanding, but
also pragmatic understanding. It is more difficult in Thailand, because of its cultural diversity, to
refuse requests. This is because each culture communicates rejection policies in a distinct way, as
Al Kahtani (2005) has shown, who indicates that individuals from distinct cultural backgrounds
reject the same language code (English). Differences like these could result in misunderstanding
or pragmatic failure when people from different cultures need to interact with each other and one
could risk offending the listener who might have had another cultural orientation (Sadler & Erӧz,
2001). The speaker must therefore understand the suitable type of refusal to use, its function and
the time when it should be used, according to ethnicity and cultural-linguistic values.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

214

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

Although culturally universal, it is hard to correctly use refusals in English, whether by native
speakers or by foreign language students (Ilmiani, Wijayanto, & Hikmat, 2016). It could be
misleading to deploy inappropriately, ruining the mood of the parties involved in the interaction.
This communication breakdown, often triggered by the transcultural expectation of linguistic
selection, perception, hierarchical differentiation, rights, obligations etc. is called "sociopragmatic
failure" (Thomas, 1984, p. 226). When a person is perceived to have committed a linguistic error,
it is easy to ignore the act because of the poor language skills of the speaker. However, the speaker
could be perceived as rude or disrespectful if the act is perceived as a sociopragmatic error.
Many studies suggested various approaches for refusal (eg, Blum-Kulka and Olshtain, 1984;
Campillo, 2009; Kwon, 2004). However, the strategies suggested by Beebe et al. (1990), which
offer the means of refusal speech-acts, of invitations, offers and suggestions, are acknowledged as
the most advanced (Ilmiani, Wijayanto, & Hikmat, 2016).
It was also commonly used and adapted to study refusals in distinct languages between native
and non-native speakers (Al-Shboul, Gol, 2013; Maros, & Mohd Yasin, 2014; Sahin, 2011;
Sahragrad & Javanmardi, 2011; Wannaruk, 2008; Wijayanto, 2011). In particular, Bebee et al.
(1990) states that the refusal strategies are widely divided into two groups: direct and indirect
refusal strategies, replaced with communicative supplementation indicating an unambiguous
decline without uttering “I decline”. For Bebee et. al (1990), formulaic expressions of refusals
consist either of a performative refusal (e.g., "I refuse"), or of a non-performative refusal (e.g. “I
can’t”, “I don’t think so”, “No”). With respect to indirect refusal approaches, Bebee et al. (1990)
suggest most popular, but not restricted, indirect refusal strategy as (I'm sorry.../I feel terrible...),
wish (I wish I could help you...), excuse, reason, explanation (My children will be home tonight),
and proposing alternatives (e.g. “I can do X instead of Y”, “I’d prefer ...”, “Why don’t you ask
someone else?”), set conditions for future acceptance (e.g. “if I am not busy, I will…”), and make
a promise of future acceptance (e.g. “I’ll do it next time.”). The difference between direct and
indirect refusal is important because refusal is confronted with threatening acts which need to be
mitigated with different communicative strategies (Ambele, 2014; Blum-Kulka & Olshtain 1984;
Gass & Houck 1999). Knowledge is often required of culture-specific social interaction standards
in order to express strategies of direct and indirect refusal appropriately. As stated above, the
function of various rejection strategies is to reassure the hearer that he is still approved and thus
mitigate the threat to the positive face of the hearer. The speaker can use multiple negotiations
approaches to minimize the danger of causing an offense, such as the offer of an option, besides
providing a decent sufficient reason for refusal.
Apparently, many scholars have researched on the phenomena of pragmatic transfers in refusals
(e.g., Al-Shboul, Maros, & Mohd Yasin, 2014; Amarien, 2008; Gol, 2013; Henstock, 2003; Kwon,
2003; Nelson, Carson, Al Batal & El Bakary, 2002; Sahin, 2011; Sahragrad & Javanmardi, 2011;
Umale, 2008; Wannaruk, 2008; Wijayanto, 2011; Yamagasira, 2001). With regards to English as
a foreign language (EFL) learners in particular have been studied based on how distinct cultural
groups use refusal in several socio-pragmatic research in English as either native, second or foreign
language (Al-Issa, 2003; Chen, 1996; Chen et al, 1995; Félix-Brasdefer, 2006; Garcia, 1996;
Ikoma & Shimura,1993; Kanemoto, 1993; Laohaburanakit, 1995; Liao & Bresnahan, 1996;
Moriyama, 1990; Nelson et al, 2002; Shimura, 1995; Takahashi & Beebe, 1987; Ueda, 1974;
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

215

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

Sadler & ErÖz, 2001). The studies show that learners’ L2 speech performances were significantly
influenced by refusal strategies (Byon 2004; Hassall 2003; Huth 2006). For instance, Beebe,
Takahashi and Uliss-Weltz (1990) demonstrate two ideas about Japanese English students and
their pragmatic refusal transfers that suggest that the refusal generated in Japanese or Japanesemade English 1) appeared significantly less direct than that of American learners ; and 2) were
affected by the social status of interlocutors indicating the connection between cultural
consciousness and changes in communication.
The notion of refusal as a social speech act or saying ' no ' in Thai English discourses, especially
among Thai university learners, was under-investigated when looking back to Thailand where this
survey was performed. Wannaruk (2008) notes that Thai English students deploy three refusal
strategies: 1) regret sentences, particularly with interlocutors of higher status; 2) future acceptance
with people of lower status; and 3) Soft-spoken statements and modest explanations. The
approaches reflected three pragmatic transfers from Thai cultural context in corresponding orders:
i) softening refusals; ii) maintaining beneficial relationships with subordinates; and iii) showing
humility. Moreover, after examining 1) the Thai and English speech acts of apology; and 2) the
pragmatic English approaches of Thai undergraduates, Thijittang (2010) discovers that a) there are
more methods of apology in English than in Thai; and b) sociolinguistic influences: social class,
hierarchical differentiation and severity of offense are key variables in apology. While this study
aims to examine refusals, Thijittang (2010) aims to explore apologies. While it was not a direct
comparison, it was relatively relevant to the Thai context. Therefore, since most of the previous
studies are based on their exploration outside of Thailand, it is a novel area to investigate the
different ways in which these students realize refusal in English and their emotional effects on the
hearer when interacting with interlocutors with different cultural norms and values. Subsequently,
this empirical study will become crucial to the awareness of communication and the rightful
realization of this speech act, which is usually considered face-threatening. It will enable
participants in the discourse (students) to have a better social operation, thus enhancing
intercultural and interethnic communication among Thai university students.
Research Methodology
The current research explores the strategies used by Thai university learners to study English,
particularly in the southern part of Thailand, by stating' no' to request. The information collection
technique adopted for this research was Discourse Completion Test (DCT) (Blum-Kulka (1982).
It is important to point out here that this is the most common technique of obtaining information
in the speech act of refusal studies in a single language or culture, rather than cross-cultural
research (Hahn, 2006; Kasper & Dahl, 1991; Nittono, 2003). This is because it is very accurate
because it represents what speakers actually say in a specified speech case rather than what they
believe they would say (Bardovi-Harlig & Hartford, 1993). Data was gathered by observing and
participating in speeches at Thai universities where speakers (students) use this act of refusal in a
natural condition in English to say' no' to request.
The information were analyzed qualitatively using analytical frameworks at the discourse level
to gain a clearer knowledge of how (frequently) Thai university learners negotiate refusals. To
start with, all recorded information were transcribed according to Beebe, Takahashi, and UlissWeltz (1990)'s suggested classification system. Regardless of the relationship between the refuser
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

216

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

and the refusee, such as status, age, education, gender, jobs and ethnic-cultural background, the
refusal strategies were recorded as observed. This was undertaken to be informed of learners and
speakers ' frequently used refusal strategies, knowing when and what strategy to use depending on
how they want the listener to feel. According to this system, in relation to adjuncts to refusals,
refusal strategies are categorized into direct and indirect refusals. The classification scheme is
applicable to our dataset as exemplified in the next section.
Findings and Discussion
In order to analyze the information gathered, Beebe, Takahashi and Uliss-Weltz (1990)
Classification Scheme of Refusal Strategies were adopted. Although old, this classification scheme
is still applicable to present studies into refusal. It relates to the refusal coding system proposed by
Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliss-Weltz (1990) in their research of refusals in Japanese, English, and
Japanese English learners ' speech. Their classification scheme comprises of three primary
classifications: direct refusals, indirect refusals, and adjuncts to refusals. However, it is worth
noting here that only two of the primary methods (direct refusals and indirect refusals) were
identified from the information gathered and analyzed. In this research, the speakers did not use
the last approach (adjuncts to refusals). The salient refusal strategies observed in the analysis will
be outlined in the following parts with examples from the data.
4.1 Direct Refusals
This is Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliss-Weltz's (1990) first major refusal strategy directed at direct
or direct behavior. There are two "Performative" and "Non-performative" kinds of direct refusals.
The direct performative refusal refers to the use of the expression of actual or definite refusal (e.g.
I refuse). Without any redressive face action, this strategy is a direct way to say things. Here, the
speakers intentionally used face-threatening phrases in a straightforward, clear and concise way to
allow the hearer to comprehend his / her point of view (of' no') on the request. The impact of this
sort of direct refusal speech acting on the emotion of the hearer is that it makes the hearer feel
ashamed, scorned, disrespected and humiliated, whether in private or public areas. On the other
side, non-performative direct refusal strategy also has two kinds: flat' no' which has the same
mental impact as performative direct refusal on the hearer and adverse readiness or capacity
without the word' no'. Although still a face-threatening act, non-performative direct refusal strategy
of negative willingness or ability is a bit soft and the hearer does not really feel hurt and humiliated
as the direct performative. It should be observed that in these universities, the use of direct refusal
strategy among learners was not as prevalent as in the event of indirect refusal strategies. This is
corroborated by Chen et al (1995) reporting that, regardless of their backgrounds, Americans and
Japanese often do not immediately refuse. It also coincides with Ikoma and Shimura (1993) results.
They believe that because of its face-threatening nature, it is not prevalent. Direct refusals can be
referred to as refusing strongly (Ambele, 2014; De Devitiis et al, 1989). It involves what Brown
and Levinson (1983, p. 33) referred to as “bald on-record”. From the data analysed, four types of
direct refusals were identified. They include: (a) the direct performative (e.g. ‘I refuse’, ‘I
decline’); (b) definite or actual ‘no’ without any other expression (e.g. ‘No, no, no); (c) negative
expressions without the word ‘no’ (e.g. ‘I can’t’, ‘I won’t, ‘impossible’); and (d) definite ‘no’ but
with some other expressions (e.g. ‘I don’t need anything from you’, sorry, I can’t accept it’, ‘it’s
impossible to accept’).
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

217

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

4.2 Indirect Refusals
Indirect refusals refer to speech acting methods that speakers use to minimize or soften the
illocutionary force of their refusals to save or maintain the favorable face of the listener (Ambele,
2014; Brown & Levinson, 1987). Indeed, it has been discovered that this indirect strategy is used
more often than the direct ones (Al-Issa, 1998; Carson, Al Batal & El Bakary, 2002; Nelson,
Stevens, 1993). The effect of this strategy on the hearer's emotion is based on their observation
that he / she really feels appreciated, loved and happy even when his / her request cannot be
granted. Below are discussed the outstanding sub-strategies of this key strategy.
Apologising, giving excuses and postponement
Within this category, the students of the Thai EFL begin by apologizing for their failure to grant
the request of the hearer, a finding that supports related research (Al-Issa, 1998; Al-Shalawi, 1997).
Here are some instances of how the sub-strategy of apology was used from the data:
•
•
•

Unfortunately, I’m too busy now to go home with you.
I’m sorry, my parents didn’t tell me to hang around with friends.
Sorry, I can’t always be begging on your behalf.

The learners would offer an excuse as another strategy to soften the rejection closely related to
apologizing. It was used to decrease the refusal's illocutionary power by communicating to the
hearer that if not for some reason or excuse, the speaker would acknowledge it. Such excuses can
be made in detail while others can be made in a vague way. This problem is particularly crucial
because in certain cultures such as Japanese (Beebe et al., 1990) and Arabic (Al-Issa, 1998; AlShalawi, 1997), as well as Thai (our emphasis), speakers tend to offer vague reasons and excuses
when refusing to do so. Speakers, however, tend to be more particular in American society. Data
examples demonstrate this:
•
•
•
•

My mom is very sick and is in the hospital.
I really have to be somewhere after work.
I’m really busy now studying.
I forgot the notes at home.

From apologizing to providing an excuse and later postponing why they refuse to do so. While
stating no to someone's request seems to leave that individual bitter and dissatisfied, nevertheless
the strategic and linked use of apologizing, giving the students an excuse and future assistance in
their discourses is quite interesting.
This sub-strategy was operationalized by Takahashi and Uliss-Weltz's (1990) and BardoviHarlig and Hartford (1990) as an avoidance approach used by speakers to divert their listeners’
attention from the illocutionary force of their refusals. It seeks to minimize the danger to the
favorable face of the interlocutor. It is essential to note, however, that this approach is comparable
to, but also distinct from, the promise strategy of future recognition. In postponement, the
participant postpones its decision to comply with the request or accepts the offer in the future to
some extent (Morkus, 2009). The following examples show this:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

218

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Boonsuk & Ambele

Can I talk with my mom and sister and get back to you?
I have to think about it.
I’ll get back to you next week.
Let me check with her first and hear what she thinks and get back to you.
I have to talk with my roommate before you can come live with us.
Could you give me time to think about it?
But, I’ll have to see, I can’t give you an answer about this now.
Let’s think about it, maybe we can do it another time.
I could do it, um, another time, it’s tough now.
I will consider it.

Giving alternative option
Again, this seems to be another strategy most frequently used to realize the refusal speech act. This
strategy is the attempt by the speaker to negotiate the request to minimize the threat to the positive
face of the hearer. The objective of the speaker here is to soften the negative's illocutionary force
by providing other alternatives to the interlocutor. Beebe et al. (1990) suggests two kinds of this
sub-strategy: 1) I can do X instead of Y, and 2) Why are you not doing X instead of Y? (Morkus,
2009, p. 3,). This difference is not provided in the current research, however, as in the following
examples:
• Isn’t there someone else you can take the notes from?
• You can read the text books from the library and make your own notes.
• Can I call you tomorrow and we talk about it over the phone?
• After lecture study, we can meet.
• I’d be willing to work an extra three hours on a different day.
Setting conditions for acceptance while giving advice or explanation
In this strategy, the speaker sets conditions for accepting the request while, at the same time,
providing advice or explaining something related to his / her request to the listener. It is a new
trategy that Morkus (2009) discovered and has not been reported in another research after him.
This is what makes this strategy interesting. This sub-strategy shows: 1) if the situation were
different, the speaker would be willing to comply, 2) distracting the listener from the impact of the
refusal and minimizing the threat to the face of the hearer. In both situations, the speaker assumes
a position of someone who feels he / she is entitled to give advice to the hearer or to explain
something to him / her about the request. In other refusal surveys such as the' chiding' or'
reprimand' (Al-Issa, 1998), similar techniques have been discovered (Stevens 1993). However,
because the present research did not concentrate on understanding the participant's intention and
whether the interlocutor is providing genuine advice or chiding or reprimanding him / her, Morkus'
(2009) definition of this sub-strategy was adopted in this research. This is clarified by the
following examples from the data:
•
•

If you had told me before, it would have been possible, you have to attend classes so
that you would be a good person in your life.
If it was yesterday, that would have been possible, at some point, you’ve got to start
copying notes for yourself.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

219

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

•

Boonsuk & Ambele

Maybe, if you had let me know beforehand, I would have done something, you have
to always attend lectures. I mean, time spent at the university is important, yes, if
you don’t experience education for yourself, then you’ve missed a lot. You should
try to go to class everyday.

Lack of empathy
This is the final sub-strategy which has not been discovered in the Egyptian Arabic research of
Morkus in 1999. This strategy was not discovered in Beebe et al. (1990). This is interesting as
speakers used it to demonstrate that they do not care or sympathize with the listener's issue. Instead
of mitigating the illocutionary act of refusal, this strategy aggravates and threatens the positive
face of the hearer as it shows that the speaker does not express solidarity with the hearer and does
not show that his / her needs and desires are also the hearer. The following are some examples
from the data:
• I have a problem too
• That’s not my problem.
• But I have problems with my girlfriends too.
• That’s not my fault.
• We all, always have problems.
• And this is not my problem.
The following sub-strategies were the most outstanding reported in the data. However, other substrategies were also noted in the data, but not so frequently used. They include I the willingness of
the speaker to assist his or her hearer but at the same moment his or her failure (wish) to do so; (ii)
request the hearer's consideration and comprehension that the speaker cannot comply
(consideration of understanding) with the request; (iii) remind the hearer that the speaker is doing
his / her utmost and that his / her rejection should not diminish that fact (try to dissuade the hearer).
Conclusion and Implications
This finding favors Al-Kahtani's stance (2005), which states that various cultures take a difference
in the expression of refusal. This research examines how Thai EFL university learners in Thailand
often say' no.' The impacts of the refusal act on the face of the hearer are also discussed. The
influence of age nor any other socio-economic factors in determining the linguistic choice of
refusals among these EFL students were not considered in this study. The study shows only two
main strategies for refusal (direct refusal, indirect refusal and adjunct refusal): direct and
overwhelmingly indirect refusal. The data show that only two have been apparent. That
demonstrates that the research only partially confirmed that of Beebe, Uliss-Weltz and Takahashi
(1990). Four kinds of direct refusals have also been recognized. These include: (a) direct
performative; (b) definitive or real' no' in the absence of any other phrase; (c) adverse phrases with
no phrase, and (d) specific' no,' but some other phrases. The result of these strategies in the
presence of the listener, whether private or public, is that the listener feels embarrassed, underrespected and humiliated.
In the study, these learners used rejection strategies to reject requests. The two new strategies
that were not recorded in Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliss-Weltz (1990) refusal classification systems
implemented by students in this study are the establishment of conditions for explanation (4.2.3)
Arab World English Journal
220
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

and the lack of empathy (4.2.4). The implication of this strategy on the face of the hearer is that he
/ she really feels appreciated, loved and happy, even if he / she cannot be granted the request. The
Thai learners choose not to risk their interpersonal connection or to threaten their interlocutor's
face. The speech refusal act is seen as an "a significant intercultural stinking point of ESL / EFL
learners'," which could lead to an unintended crime and communication breakdown, according to
Beebe, Takahashi, and Uliß-Weltz (1990).
All in all, they seem to mean that distinct cultures, based on their own contextual experiences,
have a very special and distinctive way of stating no in English. In this way, it would seem that
our learners are ideally compromised to equip our learners with intercultural abilities,
understanding and expertise to become interculturally conscious and skilled, in order to safeguard
their interlocutors ' favorable face when they say no to their demands. This has some consequences
for educating ESL / EFL learners. Within its socio-cultural context, the findings here can
contribute to communicative action studies. Previous research suggested the need to teach L2
pragmatics to develop the lexical and grammatical pragmatic knowledge of the student. The
findings suggest that foreign language teaching may not promote the students’ metalinguistic
awareness without this pragmatic focus. Lastly, this study supports the view that, through proper
planning of classroom activities, pragmatic ability can actually and indeed be systematically
developed.
About the Authors
Yusop Boonsuk, Ph.D, is an English lecturer/researcher in the Department of Western Languages,
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Prince of Songkla University. His research interest
focuses on World Englishes, Language Variation, English as a Lingua Franca, Intercultural
Communication, Sociolinguistics, and Language Ideology and Identity. https://orcid.org/ 00000002-3923-6163
Eric A. Ambele is an English lecturer/researcher in the Department of Western Languages,
Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Prince of Songkla University. His research interest
focuses on Variations in languages, Discourse Analysis, World Englishes, Sociolinguistics,
Intercultural Communication, and Innovative Research Methodology. https://orcid.org/00000003-2206-8746

References
Al-Kahtani, S.W. (2005). Refusals realizations in three different cultures: A speech act
theoretically-based cross-cultural study. Journal of King Saud University, 18, 35-57.
Al-Khateeb, S. (2009). The Speech Act of Thanking as a Compliment Response as used by the Arab
Speakers of English a Comparative Intercultural Study. Unpublished MA Thesis, An Najah
National University, Nablus, Palestine
Al-Issa, A. (1998). Sociopragmatic transfer in the performance of refusals by Jordanian EFL learners:
Evidence and motivating factors. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Indiana University of
Pennsylvania, Indiana, Pennsylvania.
Al-Shalawi, H. G. (1997). Refusal Strategies in Saudi and American cultures. Unpublished Master’s thesis.
Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.
Al-Shboul, Y., Maros, M., & Mohd Yasin, M.S. (2014). An intercultural study of refusal

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

221

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

strategies in English between Jordanian EFL and Malay ESL postgraduate students. 3L: Language,
Linguistics, and Literature, 18(3), 29-39.
Amarien, N. (2008).Interlanguage Pragmatics: A Study of the Refusal Strategies of
Indonesian Speakers Speaking English. Thesis. Politeknik Unibraw Malang
Ambele, A. E, (2014). Sex Differences and the Politeness Principle in Cameroon’s Media.
Saarbrucken, Germany: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Austin, J. L. (1962). How to do things with words. Oxford, England: Calderon Press.
Bachman, L.
Bardovi-Harlig, K & Hartford, B. S. (1991). Saying ‘no’: Native and non-native rejections. In L. Bouton&
Y. Kachru (Eds.) Pragmatics and Language Learning 2 (pp.41-58). Urbana Champaign, IL:
University of Illinois.
Bardovi-Harlig, K., & Hartford, B. S. (1993). Refining the DCT: Comparing open questionnaires and
Dialogue Completion Tasks [Monograph]. Pragmatics and Language Learning, 4,143-165.
Barron, A. (2007). Ah no honestly we’re okay”: Learning to upgrade in a study abroad context. Intercultural
Pragmatics, 4(2): 129-166.
Beebe, L., M., Takahashi, T., & Uliss-Weltz, R. (1990). Pragmatic transfer in ESL refusals. In R. C.
Scarcelle, E. Anderson, & S. C. Krashen (Eds.), Developing communicative competence in a
second language (pp. 55-73). New York: Newbury House.
Beckers, A. (1999). How to say “No” without saying “No”: A study of the refusal strategies of Americans
and Germans. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Mississippi, Mississippi.
Berlo, D. K. (1960). The process of communication: An introduction to theory and practice.
USA: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, Inc.
Blum-Kulka, S. (1982). Learning how to mean in a second language: A study of the speech act performance
of learners of Hebrew as a second language. Applied Linguistics, 3(1), 30-59.
Blum-Kulka, S., & Olshtain, E. (1984). Requests and apologies: A cross-cultural study of speech act
realization patterns (CCSARP). Applied Linguistics, 5, 196-213.
Brown, P. & Levinson, S. (1987) Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge,
MA: The M. I. T. Press.
Byon, A.S. (2004). Sociopragmatic Analysis of Korean Requests: Pedagogical Settings. Journal of
Pragmatics, 36(1), 673-704.
Campillo, P. S. (2009). Refusal strategies: A proposal from a sociopragmatic approach. Revista Electronica
de Linguistica Aplicada, 8: 139-150.
Chen, A. (2004). Understanding speech act realization across cultures and languages: How Taiwanese
students negotiate their meaning comprehensibly to American students through the use of e-mail.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Indiana University of Pennsylvania, Indiana, Pennsylvania.
Chen, X., Ye, L. & Zhang, Y. (1995). Refusing in Chinese. In: G. Gasper (Ed.), Pragmatics of Chinese as
a native and target language. (pp. 119-163). Honolulu HI: University of Hawaii Press.
Chen, H. J. (1996). Cross-cultural comparison of English and Chinese metapragmatics in refusal. USA:
Indiana University.
De Devitiis, G., Mariani, L., and Malley, K. (1989). English grammar for communication.
London/New York: Longman.
Fe´lix-Brasdefer, J. (2006). Linguistic politeness in Mexico: Refusal strategies among male speakers of
Mexican Spanish. Journal of Pragmatics, 38, 2158-2187.
Fishman, J. A. (1972). The sociology of language. In: P. Gigliolo (ed.), Language and social context (pp.4558). London: Penguin Education.
Fraser, B. (1990). Perspectives on Politeness. Journal of Pragmatics, 4: 219-36.
Garcia, C. (1996). Teaching speech act performance: Declining an invitation. Hispania, 79 (2), 267-277.
Gass, S., & Houck, N. (1999). Interlanguage refusals: A cross-cultural study of Japanese-English. Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

222

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

Gol, N, K. (2013). A Contrastive Study of the Speech Act of Refusal: Iranian ESL Learner and Native
English Speaking Americans. Thesis. The University of Toledo.
Hahn, J. (2006). Apologizing in Korean. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Hawaii,
Honolulu, Hawaii.
Hassall, T. (2003). Requests by Australian Learners of Indonesian. Journal of Pragmatics, 35: 1903-28.
Henstock, M. (2003). Refusals: A language and cultural barrier between Americans and Japanese.
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana.
Huth, T. (2006). Negotiating Structure and Culture: L2 Learners’ Realization of L2 Compliment-Response
Sequences in Talk-in-interaction. Journal of Pragmatics 38(20), 25-50.
Ikoma, T., & Shimura, A. (1993). Eigokaranihongoeno pragmatic transfer. “Kotowari”
toiuhatsuwakouinitsuite (Pragmatic transfer from English to Japanese: The speech act of refusals)
Nihongoyouiku. Journal of Japanese Language Teaching, 79, 41-52.
Kanemoto, M. (1993). A comparative study of refusal assertion in the United States and Japan. Ryudai
Review of Language and Literature, 38, 199-212.
Kasper (1997). Beyond reference. In G. Kasper & E. Keller (Eds.), Communication strategies:
Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspectives (p. 345-360). London: Longman.
Kasper, G., & Dahl, M. (1991). Research methods in interlanguage pragmatics. Studies in
Second Language Acquisition, 13, 215-247.
Kwon, J. (2003). Pragmatic transfer and proficiency in refusals of Korean EFL learners. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation. Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
Kwon, J. (2004). Expressing refusals in Korea and in American English. Multilingua, 23: 339-364.
Laohaburanakit, K. (1995). Refusal in Japanese: A Comparison of Japanese textbooks and actual
conversation data. Nohongo Kyouiku. Journal of Japanese Language Teaching, 87, 25-39.
Liao, C. & Bresnahan, M. J. (1996). A contrastive pragmatic study on American English and Mandarin
refusal strategies. Language sciences, 18(3-4), 703-727.
Ilmiani, D., Wijayanto, A., & Hikmat, M. (2016). Politeness in EFL refusals: the comparison between
Indonesian and Thai learners of English. Proceeding of NCPPAP’04: Nasional conference paper
of postgraduate association programs. Surakarta: Muhammadiyah University
Meier, A. J. (1995). Passages of politeness. Journal of Pragmatics, 24, 381-392.
Meier, A. J. (1997). Teaching the universals of politeness. ELT Journal, 51(1), 21-28.
Morkus, N. (2009). The realization of the speech act of refusal in Egyptian Arabic by American learners of
Arabic as a foreign language. Unpublished Ph.D Thesis. University of South Florida: USA.
Moriyama, T. (1990). Kotowari‟ no houryaku: TaijinkankeiCcouseitokomunieishon
(Strategies of refusals: Interpersonal adjustments and communication). Gengo. Language, 19(8),
59-66.
Nelson, G., Carson, J., Al Batal, M., & El Bakary, W. (2002). Cross-cultural pragmatics: strategy use in
Egyptian Arabic and American English refusals. Applied Linguistics, 23(2), 163-189.
Nittono, M. (2003). Japanese hedging in friend-friend discourse. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation.Columbia University, New York, New York.
Olshtain, E., & Blum-Kulka, S. (1985). Cross-cultural pragmatics and the testing of communicative
competence. Language Testing, 2(1), 16-30.
Ramos, J. (1991). No . . . because: A study of pragmatic transfer in refusals among Puerto Rican teenagers
speaking English. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Columbia University, New York.
Reinard, J. C. (1994). Introduction to Communication Research. USA: Brown and Benchmark.
Richards J. C., & Schmidt, R. W. (1983). Language and communication. New York:Longman.
Sadler, R. & Eröz, B. (2001). I refuse you: An examination of English refusals by native speakers of English,
Lao, and Turkish. University of Minnesota: CARLA

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

223

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Refusal as a Social Speech Act among Thai EFL University Students

Boonsuk & Ambele

Sahin, S. (2011). American English, Turkish and Interlanguage Refusals: A cross-cultural Communication
and Interlanguage Pragmatic Study. Unpublished Master thesis. Middle East Technical University.
Sahragrad, R., & Javanmardi, F. (2011). English Speech Act Realization of Refusals among Iranian EFL
Learner. Cross-Cultural Communication. 7(2), 181-198.
Sasaki, M. (1998). Investigating EFL students’ production of speech acts: A comparison of production
questionnaires and role plays. Journal of Pragmatics, 30, 457-484.
Sarfo, E. (2011). Variations in Ways of Refusing Requests in English among Members of a College
Community in Ghana. African Nebula, 3, June 2011.
Searle, J. (1969). Speech acts. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Shimura, A. (1995). "Kotowari" toiu hatsuwa kouiniokeru taiguu hyougentoshiteno syouryakuno hindo,
kinou, kouzouni kansuru chuukanngengo goyouron kenkyu ‘Frequency, function, and structure of
omissions as politeness expressions in the speech act of refusal.’ Keiougijyuku Daigaku Hiyoshi
Kiyou (Keio University at Hiyoshi, Language, Culture, Communication, 15, 41-62.
Smith, C. (1998). Can Adults “Just Say No?: How Gender, Status and Social Goals Affect
Refusals. Unpublished doctoral dissertation: University of South Florida.
Stevens, P. B. (1993). The pragmatics of “No!”: Some strategies in English and Arabic. IDEAL, 6, 87-110.
Tanck, S. (2003). Speech acts sets of refusals and complaint: A comparison of native and non-native English
speakers’ production. TESL Second Language Acquisition,1-22
Takahashi, T. and Beebe, L. M. (1987). The Development of pragmatic competence by Japanese Learners
of English. JALT Journal, 8(2), 131-155.
Siriruck, T. & Thao, L. (2010). Pragmatics Strategies of English of Thai University Students. Paper
presented at the AARE.
Thomas, J. (1984). Cross-cultural Discourse as “Unequal Encounter”: Towards a Pragmatic
Analysis. Applied Linguistics, 5: 226-35.
Ueda, K. (1974). Sixteen ways to avoid saying “no” in Japan. In J.C. Condon & M. Saito (Eds.),
Intercultural encounters with Japan: Communication- contact and conflict (pp. 185-192). Tokyo:
Simul Press.
Umale, J. (2008(. Pragmatic Failure in Refusal Strategies: British Versus Omani Interlocutors. Arab World
English Journal, 2(1), 18-46.
Wannaruk, A. (2008). Pragmatic Transfer in Thai EFL Refusals. RELC Journal, 39(3), 318-337.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0033688208096844
Wijayanto, A. (2011). Interlanguage Pragmatic of Refusal Strategies by Javanese EFL Learners.
Dissertation. The University of Aberdeen.
Yamagashira, H. (2001). Pragmatic Transfer in Japanese ESL Refusals. Kagoshima Immaculate Heart
College, English Department, 4-22-1:259-275

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

224

