Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Pp. 84-93

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.8
Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction
Oudah S. Alenazi
Department of English Language and Translation
College of Languages and Translation
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC) is acknowledged to represent a social space where
people interact with others who may not necessarily know them. They can also recreate their own
identities in the course of their interaction. This study investigates ways in which the identities of
speakers can be revealed by their use of language in multiple-participant conversations. In
particular, the study aims to elicit the strategies that speakers employ the most by analysing the
way they talk at a micro-analytic level, and the ways in which they organise and sequence their
turns at talking. The results show that the processes of turn-taking and topic development are
subject to distraction and breakdown in computer-mediated environments. There are many
instances of pauses caused by frequent overlaps between participants. The accents of participants
are considered the main feature which can constitute one’s identity in voice-based chat-rooms.
Other factors such as communication and technical skills, systems and server speeds could also
have an effect on such communication. Additionally, the participants seem to employ certain
strategies to overcome interactional limitations of CMC systems, such as the use of pauses, quiet
and loud intonation, and stress of particular syllables of some words. These strategies can
contribute to determining the speaker’s identity.
Keywords: Identity, online interaction, computer-mediated communication, conversation analysis
Cite as: Alenazi, O. S. (2019). Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction. Arab World English
Journal, 10 (1)84-93.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no1.8

84

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

Introduction
Various studies of social interaction describe identity as a social, dialogic, and negotiable entity
(Antaki & Widdicombe, 1998). However, research on identity has generally examined distal,
larger social contexts rather than contiguous social contexts, whereby a learner’s identity is
discursively formed through social interaction. Understanding each other’s identities can help
speakers form better and more positive impressions about their interlocutors, and reduce
uncertainty. In face-to-face meetings and even telephone conversations, crucial aspects of identity
are usually revealed, such as gender, age, and race. Nonetheless, these features of identity are
entirely masked by Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC); all that is shown is what we
decide to reveal (Stone, 1996).
Computer-Mediated Communication is considered a recent cultural phenomenon that may
appear puzzling to those outside the field. Early research on language use in CMC has concentrated
on language features unique to the medium (Prantl, 2016). As CMC has become more popular
among people, the registers used in CMC have extended, and research emphasis has moved from
“mapping genre specific language features to analysing interactional patterns” (Prantl, 2016, p. 1).
There are two main CMC modes, i.e., synchronous and asynchronous, which may be used for
different purposes. The main impact on language use in CMC, according to Herring (2004), is the
difference between synchronous and asynchronous CMC. Generally speaking, in synchronous
communication users participate in real-time interaction, whereas in asynchronous communication
they have more opportunity to think and answer (Abrams, 2003). In other words, synchronous
communication forms involve users who are logged in simultaneously, allowing for practically
direct feedback, which in turn leads to messages scrolling out of sight swiftly. In asynchronous
communication forms such as emails or web forums, users are not required to be all present at the
same time; thus, messages are stored and available for extended periods of time. This division,
nevertheless, might not always be useful. “Some forms of what might be considered asynchronous
CMC, such as comments on blog posts, might temporarily become synchronous or nearsynchronous” (Prantl, 2016, p. 8).
In normal interaction, speakers often encounter some sort of disruption or overlapping
during their talk. This situation may be exaggerated in the absence of nonverbal cues (as is the
case in voice-based conversations) where speakers cannot see each other. However, anonymity
can sometimes have positive value as it creates opportunities for the participants to reformulate
alternative versions for themselves and to engage in new forms of interaction (Myers, 1987). On
the other hand, a lack of the speakers’ identities may have an impact on floor management in
conversation. Herring (1999) indicates that in interaction where speakers cannot see each other,
knowing when to take a turn during talk is a potentially difficult task, and this results in the turn
adjacency becoming disjointed. Thus, knowing the speakers’ identities in such situations seems
pivotal in avoiding any potential problems.
It is true that technology overcomes time and space barriers that would otherwise hinder
people’s communication. Technology also enables them to interact with each other almost
wherever and whenever they want. However, computer-mediated communications are often
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

85

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

marked as impersonal when compared to face-to-face interactions. An explanation could be that
CMC deprives us of most, if not all, forms of non-verbal features that have an essential role in our
everyday lives. Research shows that linguistic and paralinguistic features (e.g., facial expressions,
gestures) are both essential for most communicative processes (Clark, 1996).
This study aims to investigate how the use of language in multiple-participant conversations can
help to reveal the speakers’ identity. Specifically, we will look at the strategies employed most by
the participants through analysing their talk at a micro-analytic level, and how they organise and
sequence their turns during conversation.
Theoretical background on identity
Researchers working in the fields of social sciences have taken an intense interest in what
constitutes the term ‘identity’. Thus, a variety of definitions has been proposed to describe this
term (e.g., Hogg & Abrams, 1988, Deng 1995, Jenkins 1996). However, Fearon (1999) argues that
dictionary definitions have failed to depict the word’s current meanings in everyday and social
science contexts. ‘Identity’ can be described as a social category, defined by membership rules
and alleged distinctive attributes or estimated behaviours; or, it could be socially unique features
or views in which speakers take a special pride as constant but socially consequential (Fearon,
1999). Additionally, ‘identity’ can be referred to as a modern formulation of dignity, pride, or
honour that are perfectly connected to social categories.
Baggioni and Kasbarian (1996) differentiate two types of identity, i.e., the personal and the
collective. They also name ‘identification’ as the process connecting the personal to the collective.
This latter type of identity is mostly studied in the field of discourse analysis under the name of
social identity, which is defined as “that part of an individual’s self-concept that came from
knowledge of his/her membership in a social group, together with emotional significance attached
to it” (Duszak, 2002, p. 2).
Young (2008: 108) argues that identity has two paradoxical meanings emphasising that:
In one sense it is the stable sense of self-hood attached to a physical body which, although it
changes over time, is somehow the same; in a second sense, it refers to what we do in a particular
context, and of course we do different things in different contexts.( P. 9)
Young indicates that the first sense of identity facilitates distinguishing an individual from
another, even if they have the same name. However, individuality may be more important in some
cultures than others. For example, individuals value their distinctive identity by wearing different
clothes, speaking differently, or by competing in order to differentiate themselves from others.
However, in some other cultures it could be more valued not to discern oneself from others, i.e.,
by wearing the same clothes, talking in similar ways, or sharing in teamwork.
With regard to identity in social processes, Zimmerman (1998) offers a practical
framework for considering the way identities are positioned in processes working over different
time-scales, when he differentiates between:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

86

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

a) Discourse (or interactional) identities, for example ‘story teller/story recipient’,
‘questioner/answerer’, ‘inviter/invitee’, which we are continuously taking on and
leaving as talk progresses;
b) Situated (or institutional) identities, such as ‘teacher/student’, ‘doctor/patient’, which
come into play in particular kinds of institutional settings;
c) Transportable identities which are hidden, move with people through their daily
routine, and are potentially relevant at any time (e.g., old man, working class woman).
d)
Zimmerman (1998) further suggests that “…it is important to distinguish between the registering
of visible indicators of identity and orient to identity which pertains to the capacity in which an
individual should act in a particular situation.” (p. 91) Consequently, a participant may classify a
co-interactant as a young person or a female with no orientation to those identities being related to
the instant interaction.
Additionally, Park (2007) argues that an identity is “conceptualized as an inherently social
product that is jointly created by interactants, rather than as a pre-determined, psychological
construct that is lodged within each individual’s mind.” (p. 341) Conversations work on a turn-byturn basis, i.e., “the speaker’s understanding and analysis of a prior turn is reflected in the way that
a current turn is constructed” (Park, 2007, p. 341). Furthermore, Schegloff and Sacks (1973)
accentuate that the sequential organization of talk manifests how identity is invoked in people’s
talk, engaging others to orient to that identity and reveal how it has been understood.
Another key theoretical basis for understanding identity co-construction is participation,
which is organised through turn-taking as well as turn internally occurring embodied actions.
“Participation places a particular emphasis on a hearer’s role as an active co-participant” (Park,
2007, p, 431). Analysis of participation shows that a hearer can participate in constructing his/her
identity along with constructing an activity through talk and the body.
Furthermore, identity is viewed as “a situated, emergent construct that arises from the
contingencies of local interaction. Identity ascription is thus highly context-specific” (Park, 2007,
p. 341). In fact, this view is in line with Sacks’ (1972) idea of Membership Categorization Device
(MCD), where words can act as ‘devices’ that force a set of otherwise arbitrary objects into a
‘category’ with ‘members’. Sacks (1972) asserts that people have some knowledge about
collections of categories (e.g., male/female, native-speaker/non-native speaker). This knowledge
enables us to describe people in a certain way in a given sense, and construct their identities. In
addition, Sacks has introduced another term, ‘category-bound activities.’ This means that, when
we put someone in a category, we imply that each category has its set of members. However, each
member has his/her own set of behaviours, rights, beliefs and obligations that go together with the
role.
The final point to be made in this respect is the fact that identity is immensely negotiable
and that it can be explained in terms of the relative positioning of people toward each other. We
may choose to explicitly show our identity, but in many cases these identities are revealed without
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

87

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

any intervention on our part. For example, the selection of the garments we put on is largely a
voluntary choice to show identity. On the other hand, the accent with which we speak can give
away our identities to the people with whom we speak (Alenazi, 2014).
Analysis and Discussion
The data analysed in this study is drawn from a 27-seconds conversation of multi-participants’
voice-based CMC. For the analysis of the data, conversation analysis (CA)i has been used to
investigate the speakers’ identities in a multi-participant chat-room at a micro-analytic level. The
analysis of CMC interaction in simulated environments can reveal some features of the learners’
identity (Alonso-Belmonte & Vinagre, 2017). The aim of using CA is to give a clear understanding
of the interactional nuances of what happens in the interactions under study. A detailed overview
of conversation analysis is beyond the scope of this study. However, it is noteworthy that the CA
framework has been applied to a range of different settings, such as courtrooms, classrooms, and
computer-mediated communication (Drew & Heritage, 1992).
The following section aims to present the data; this will be done using a two-tier approach. That
is, it will start by a general description of the extract, and then it will be followed by a deeper
analysis of the interaction at hand. The following extract demonstrates different characteristics of
multiple participants’ talk:
Extract 1:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7

S1:
S2:
S3:
S1:

hhh (.) uh::: [yes
[I’m Romanian
(0.6)
< who is uh:: (0.3) Romanian  ? ((in a Boratii voice))
(0.9)
Robin. was  ((inaudible))
(2.0)

The conversation starts by S1 laughing and saying yes, which indicates that he has finished his
turn and is now aiming to give the floor to another speaker. Then S2 overlaps the end of S1’s turn
when he introduces himself in a Borat voice, such that the word ‘yes’ and the sentence “I’m
Romanian” are said at the same time. This overlap leads to a short pause (0.6), after which S3 joins
the conversation, trying to imitate S1 (i.e., speaking in a Borat voice). S3 might have deliberately
spoken in the same accent as S1 as a way of constructing his own identity, since knowing the
identity of the co-speakers is crucial to understanding the interaction (Donath, 1999). Voice-based
CMC is an opportunity for participants to construct their identities by themselves, since in the real
world it is framed by others. Therefore, self-presentation can be a new form of identity constitution.
In line (4) the word uh:: is elongated and stretched, and there is a (0.3) pause before S3 utters the
word “Romanian.” Again, there is another pause in line (5) before S2 tries to respond to the
previous question proposed by S3; however, the end of his response is inaudible. This
simultaneous talk is followed by a (2.0) pause that would be considered relatively long in natural
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

88

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

talk. As we can see in this short extract, there are frequent pauses in the conversation and
comprehensibility does not seem to be achieved. This could be because the participants did not get
acquainted with each other at the beginning of their talk. Also, these overlapping utterances and
pauses are some of the features associated with multi-participant CMC chat-rooms where
nonverbal elements are absent.
Extract 2:
8
S3:
9
S1:
10
S3:
11
12
S1:
13
S3:
14

[hh ah ]
Do you [know something about-]
[I
was
bor]n
(1.1)
na:[:::
[I was bo:rn in. eh. Romania ((in a Borat voice))
(1.4)

In this extract, S3 rejoins the floor as in line (8) in a relatively quieter voice than the previous turn;
this could indicate that he has some trouble understanding S1’s initiation. However, S1 does not
try to clarify his speech; rather, he shifts the focus of the speech and posts an incomplete initiation.
No response is received as it overlaps with S3’s response. This overlap between S1 and S3 causes
a momentary pause (1.1). The sudden stop in articulation is interactionally relevant, for two
reasons:
a) it is strategically located after an utterance that has been produced at almost the same
time, and
b) it momentarily opens the floor as it represents a turn transition relevant place for S2 to
regain the floor (Jenks, 2009).
Subsequently, S1 displays a negative stretched response, ‘na:[::’, in line (12) which is overlapped
by S3’s utterance in the same Borat voice. Both S1 and S3 respond to this overlapping conversation
by letting the floor open for more than a second (i.e., 1.4). This pause resets the floor and gives the
speaker the chance to renegotiate speakership. Jenks (2009) considers such placement after many
overlapping utterances as an example of a strategy that the speakers use to prevent the uncertainty
that results from more than one participant speaking at the same time. Moreover, it is noticeable
that the turn-taking in CMC does not stick to the ideal that speakers’ turns alternate in an orderly
way. The speakers are unable to predict whether their interlocutor is going to respond; they may
have been impatient, thus initiating another question before a response to the first has been
received. This results in unfinished and interleaved exchange sequences (Condon & Cech, 1996).
Extract 3:
15
S4:
16
S1:
17
18
S4:
19

are you t-[are y- ]
[have you] ever
(.)
eh(0.3)

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

89

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

20
21
22
23
24
25
26

S1:
S4:

S2:
S3:

Alenazi

‘ve you been=
= > are you trying to mimic Borat  ? (0.6) you see someone
(always) trying to mimic Borat 
(0.7)
Borat yes was (.) filmed in uh:: Romania
(0.8)
yeah::: hhh.he·hh ((Borat voice))

This extract begins with S4 asking a question and then stopping suddenly, as there is an overlap
with S1 in the second part of his utterance. As can be seen, there are frequent overlaps between S1
and S4 from the beginning of the conversation; both of them are heard producing two simultaneous
utterances. In lines 16 and 20, S1 does not complete his utterances, which may indicate a lack of
linguistic repertoire or communication skills. For this reason, a new set of linguistic skills and
communication strategies is needed when frequent overlapping utterances occur (Lamy, 2004).
The frequent multiple initiations may reflect the difficulty participants have in determining whose
turn is next. S4 tries to take part in the conversation, perhaps wanting to demonstrate membership
knowledge as in the following example:
21
22

S4:

= > are you trying to mimic Borat  ? (0.6) you see someone
(always) trying to mimic Borat 

Noticeably, S4 stops in the middle of his talk for (0.6) and then re-establishes the floor and
continues to talk. In this case, he is being disruptive by coming in quickly and there is no evidence
in line 20 that S1 wants to give up the floor. This example highlights the value of using pauses to
avoid overlapping talk as they help to facilitate a transition between the speakers; also, pauses are
the socially acceptable thing to do when multiple overlapping talks happen (Jenks, 2009).
In order to show his knowledge, S4 is trying to relate S1’s voice to the famous character of Borat.
It is obvious that lines 20 and 21, connected by two equal signs, are by different speakers; this
means that S4 follows S1 with no discernable silence between them, and is ‘latched’ to it.
One interesting point that could be noted is what Tracy (2002: 18) calls master identities, which
she defines as “...those aspects of personhood that are relatively stable and unchanging.” These
master identities are indexed by the idea of habitus, which refers to socially acquired inclinations,
tendencies, or predispositions that are revealed in many ways, including ways of talking. An
example of habitus could be the person’s accent, which contributes greatly to establishing the
master identity of people as it enables us to categorise their national origin or ethnic identity. From
S4’s accent, one can categorise him as an Indian speaker.
Going back to the extract, we notice a short pause in line 23, which may indicate that the
other speakers had no idea about Borat; lack of membership knowledge can impede the flow and
dynamics of the interaction. Iwasaki (1997) points out that when a speaker communicates
unknown information, he or she is more likely to control the floor; thus, less participation is
expected. Then in line 24, S2 provides some information about Borat; however, no response or
comments are offered, and it is followed by another pause. After all, S3 mocks the previous
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

90

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

statement (line 26) somewhat by the rise and fall of agreement tokens and laughing, imitating S1’s
accent. This behaviour brings Boudourides’ (1995) view to mind, that the anonymity of the
participants increases the absence of typical social ties. Anonymity has a double effect: while it
lessens the level of social pressure on the participants, the level of the unpleasant communication
is likely to increase with the liberation of the people (Boudourides, 1995).
Conclusion
Computer-mediated communication (CMC) refers to any human communication that happens
through the use of two or more electronic devices. CMC activities can be either asynchronous,
such as writing emails and posting responses to a discussion board online, or virtual synchronous
conversations, such as those held in chat rooms (AbuSeileek & Qatawneh, 2013). This study has
shown that, in multi-participant communication, there are few cues to identity. This results in
frequent overlaps between the participants, which lead to many instances of pauses. This could be
an explanation of the apparent inconsistency and incomprehensibility of the interaction, as CMC
has been claimed to be interactionally incoherent. Particularly, the processes of turn-taking and
topic development are subject to distraction and breakdown in computer-mediated environments.
The accent of the participants can be considered as the main feature that can constitute one’s
identity in voiced-based chat-rooms. In extract 1 we have seen how S2’s accent, in the incipience
of the conversation, turned the subsequent talk to be about accent and culture. This attracted others’
attention to engage in the talk and initiate different utterances about cultural identities. In most
chat-rooms there are multiple participants who are unable to see each other; thus their roles do not
necessarily follow a logical sequential order. Other factors such as communication and technical
skills, systems, and server speeds could have an impact on such communication. Moreover, the
participants seemed to employ certain strategies to overcome any interactional limitations of CMC
systems, such as the use of pauses, quiet and loud intonation, and stress of some syllables of the
words. These strategies can contribute to determining the speaker’s identity.

Acknowledgements:
The author would like to thank the Deanship of Scientific Research, King Saud University, for
funding this research project.
About the Author:
Dr. Alenazi is an assistant professor at the Department of English Language and Translation,
College of Languages and Translation, King Saud University in Saudi Arabia. His main research
interests include applied linguistics, EFL, sociolinguistics, world Englishes, and the use of
technology in learning English. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-9260-4511
References
AbuSeileek, A., & Qatawneh, K. (2013). Effects of synchronous and asynchronous computermediated communication (CMC): oral conversations on English language learners’
discourse functions. Computers & Education, 62, 181-190.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

91

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

Alenazi, O. (2014). The Employment of Native and Non-Native Speaker EFL Teachers in Saudi
Higher Education Institutions: Programme Administrators’ Perspective. Unpublished
PhD Thesis. Newcastle University. Newcastle Upon Tyne: UK.
Alonso-Belmonte, I., & Vinagre, M. (2017). Interculturality and identity in computer-mediated
communication: findings from L2 teaching contexts. Computer-assisted Language
Learning, 30 (5), 343-350.
Antaki, C. & Widdicombe, S. (1998). Identities in Talk. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Boudourides, M. (1995). Social and Psychological Effects in Computer-Mediated
Communication. Available at: http://www.math.upatras.gr/~mboudour/articles/csi.html.
Clark, H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Condon, S. & Cech, C. (1996). ‘Discourse Management Strategies in Face-To-Face and
Computer-Mediated Decision Making Interactions’, Electronic Journal of
Communication/La Revue Electronique de Communication, 6 (3).
Deng, F. (1995). War of Visions: Conflict of Identities in the Sudan. Washington, DC: Brookings.
Donath, J. (1999). ‘Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community’, in P. Kollock and
Smith, M.(eds) Communities in Cyberspace. London: Routledge.
Drew, P. & Heritage, J. (1992). Talk at work: Interaction in institutional settings. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Duszak, A. (2002). Us and others: an introduction. In: A. Duszak (ed.), Us and Others. Social
identities across languages, discourses and cultures. Amsterdam: Benjamins, pp. 1-28.
Fearon, J. (1999). What is Identity (As we now use the word)? Department of Political Science:
Stanford University.
Herring, S., (1999). ‘Interactional Coherence in CMC.’ Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 4 (4).
Hogg, M. & Abrams, D. (1988). Social Identifications: A Social Psychology of Intergroup
Relations and Group Processes. London: Routledge.
Iwasaki, S. (1997). ‘The Northridge earthquake conversations: the floor structure and the loop
sequence in Japanese conversation’, Journal of Pragmatics 28 (6), pp. 661–693.
Jenkins, R. (1996). Social Identity. London: Routledge.
Jenks, C. (2009). ‘When is it appropriate to talk? Managing overlapping talk in multi-participant
voice-based chat rooms’, Computer Assisted Language Learning, 22 (1) 19 - 30
Lamy, M. (2004). ‘Oral conversations online: Redefining oral competence in synchronous
environments’, ReCALL, 16 (2), 520–538.
Myers, D. (1987). ‘A new environment for communication play’, in Fine, G. (ed.), Meaningful
Play, Playful Meaning. Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics Publishers, 231-245.
Park, J. (2007). ‘Co-construction of Nonnative Speaker Identity in Cross-cultural Interaction’,
Applied Linguistics, 28 (3), pp. 339-360.
Prantl, A. (2016). Identity Construction in The Comments Section of TomandLorenzo.com
(Unpublished master’s thesis). University of Jyv¨askyla.
Sacks, H., Schegloff, E. & Jefferson, G. (1974). ‘A simplest systematics for the organization of
turn-taking for conversation’, Language, 50 (4), 696-735.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

92

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 1. March 2019

Speakers’ Identities in Online Interaction

Alenazi

Schegloff, E. & Sacks, H. (1973). ‘Opening up closings’, Semiotica 8, 289-327.Stone, A. (1996).
The War of Desire and Technology at the Close of the Mechanical Age. Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Tracy, K. (2002). Everyday Talk: Building and Reflecting Identities. New York: The Guildford
Press.
Young, F. (2008). Language and Interaction: An advanced resource Book. (Routledge Applied
Linguistics). London and New York: Routledge.
Zimmerman, D. (1998). ‘Identity, context, interaction’, in Antaki, C. and Widdicombe, S.(eds)
Identities in Talk. London: Sage, 87-106.

Appendix
Transcription Conventions (Atkinson and Heritage, 1984)
[[ ]]
[]
=
(0.4)
(.)
:
.
,
?
__
↑↓
[° °]
hhh
.hhh
.hh.
>>
<<
(( ))

Simultaneous utterances – (beginning [[ ) and ( end]])
Overlapping utterances – (beginning [ ) and (end])
Contiguous utterances
Represents the tenths of a second between utterances
Represents a micro-pause (1 tenth of a second or less)
Sound extension of a word (more colons demonstrate longer stretches)
Fall in tone (not necessarily the end of a sentence)
Continuing intonation (not necessarily between clauses)
An abrupt stop in articulation
Rising inflection (not necessarily a question)
Underlined words indicate emphasis
Rising or falling intonation (after an utterance)
Surrounds talk that is quieter
Audible aspirations
Inhalations
Laughter within a word
Surrounds talk that is faster
Surrounds talk that is slower
Analyst’s notes

The analysis is based on transcription conventions in Atkinson and Heritage (1984, see Appendix).
Borat is an American film which was written and produced by the British comedian Sacha Baron Cohen, who also
played the role of Borat. He represented a fictitious character of a Kazakh journalist travelling through the United
States and recording real-life interactions with Americans. Baron Cohen won the 2007 Golden Globe Award for Best
Actor: Musical or Comedy, as Borat, and the film was nominated for Best Motion Picture in the same category.
i

ii

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

93

