A prospect of staying? Differentiated access to integration for asylum seekers in
Germany
Caroline Schultz 1
Chair of Political Sociology, University of Bamberg, Bamberg, Germany

ABSTRACT
This paper investigates the normative permissibility of differential inclusion
policies, taking Germany as a case study. In the face of mounting asylum
applications, Germany introduced new administrative rules differentiating access
to integration for asylum seekers. The paper normatively examines whether this
practice is consistent with two conventional liberal concepts: special obligations
grounding the moral commitments of the liberal state towards its own citizens and
the principle of legal certainty grounding its moral commitments towards
everyone under its jurisdiction, including asylum seekers. Combining these two
usually separately employed perspectives, it argues that while differential
inclusion is in principle consistent with these liberal principles, the crude criterion
of the country of origin does not comply with both perspectives. The paper
contributes to the debate on the ethics of immigration by scrutinizing this realworld instrument of differential inclusion from a political philosophy perspective.
ARTICLE HISTORY Received 20 August 2018; Accepted 19 June 2019

KEYWORDS
Asylum seekers, integration, liberalism, special obligations, legal certainty, Germany

Differential inclusion is the predominant mode of today’s immigration policy regimes
(de Haas, Natter, and Vezzoli 2018; Helbling et al. 2017). States use immigration
policies to select who is allowed to enter under which conditions and who is denied
1

Caroline Schultz: caroline.schultz@uni-bamberg.de, https://twitter.com/Caroline14108

access to the state’s territory (Shachar and Hirschl 2014). Differential inclusion – a term
coined in this context by Mezzadra and Neilson (2012) – describes how selection does
not only occur at the external state border: borders follow the immigrant inside, in the
form of differentiated rights and obligations within the destination country (Bosniak
2007; Song 2016). Dissolving the binary between inclusion and exclusion, a myriad of
different sociolegal statuses is thus produced (Mezzadra and Neilson 2012). This paper
investigates the normative permissibility of differential inclusion policies for migrants
in a precarious status, taking Germany’s asylum policies as an example. “Precarious
residents” (Gibney 2009, 10), i.e. migrants residing in a country who hold few rights
and enjoy limited opportunities to advance to a more secure residence status can be
found all over the world, with asylum seekers constituting an important sub-category.
The related dilemma that policy-makers in practically all receiving countries face is
this: which rights to grant people in the limbo situation of awaiting the decision on their
asylum claim, which due to both complex legal structures and mismanagement of
asylum systems can take several months and even years. Both psychological (e.g.
Pernice and Brook 1996; Sinnerbrink et al. 1997) and social science research (e.g.
Hainmueller, Hangartner, and Lawrence 2016; Jackson and Bauder 2014) have shown
the detrimental effects of waiting time on asylum seekers’ psychosocial health and
(socio-)economic integration. The negative societal effects are often exacerbated by
policies restricting access to the health system (Bozorgmehr and Razum 2015) or the
labour market (Marbach, Hainmueller, and Hangartner 2018). However, as granting
access to education and employment can establish rights to remain in the receiving
country independent of the asylum decision, policy-makers are reluctant to broaden
these opportunities for persons whose asylum claim has not yet been approved.

The resulting policy-makers’ dilemma has become especially visible in
Germany (cf. Lehner 2016; Thym 2016), owing to the unprecedented numbers of
asylum applications the country received in 2015 and 2016. As the asylum system
struggled to cope, a new administrative category was introduced to speed up processing
and to enable ‘early integration’. 1 This category is the Bleibeperspektive, literally
translated the ‘prospect of staying’, i.e. the prospect of long-term residence. It
determines i.a. an asylum seeker’s rights to economic integration, by making only those
with an allegedly ‘good prospect of staying’ eligible for integration programmes such as
language courses prior to their asylum decision. This differentiation and thereby
expansion of bureaucratic categories for asylum seekers is part of a longer-term trend in
states seeking to manage ‘refugee crises’ (Sigona 2018).
This article asks whether this specific type of differentiated access to integration
using a country-of-origin differentiation is normatively permissible based on two
conventional arguments of the normative debate on migration. The German example
can be taken as a typical case of the more profound question regarding the tension
inherent in the Western nation-state, which continuously struggles between its two
founding blocks: universalistic liberalism postulating equal rights and liberties and
particularistic nationalism presupposing the exclusion of non-members (Cole 2000;
Hampshire 2013). Even though the number of asylum applications has considerably
decreased since the height of the ‘refugee crisis’, the issue of prolonged waiting periods
in refugee status determination processes remains salient (ECRE 2016). At the end of
March 2018, there were 892.355 pending asylum cases in the EU, 420.305 of which in
Germany (Eurostat 2018). The presence of migrants in this and similar limbo situations
is an EU-wide phenomenon (Rosenberger and Küffner 2016) and similar to situations
all over the world (Gibney 2009), and so the question of normative permissibility of

differential treatment of these ‘unwanted’ migrants will remain significant. As Shachar
(2014, 122) argues regarding “the current state of affairs in immigrant democracies”, it
is precisely “the proliferating ‘in-between’ categories [i.e. categories in-between
members and non-members which] must be closely monitored” (cf. also Mezzadra and
Neilson 2012, 62).
While a larger part of the literature on the ethics of immigration is concerned
with the question of whether the liberal state 2 has a sovereign right to restrict entry of
non-citizens at its external borders (Abizadeh 2008; Blake 2006; Carens 1987; Miller
2009; Walzer 1983), this article focuses on what the liberal state owes or does not owe
in terms of socio-economic integration to those who have already passed the first gate
of entry. 3 The fact that asylum seekers usually pass the external border without the
state’s legal consent – due to the paradox that the international asylum system
presupposes irregular entry (Nußberger 2016) – does not matter here: Their presence in
the state’s territory is regularized by the asylum application they lodge. 4
There are three main positions on the question of whether the liberal state can
rightfully exclude non-members (Wilcox 2009): The conventional view postulates that
the state has a broad right to exclude at the border. One of the traditional arguments for
the conventional view is the special obligations argument. Famously spelled out by
communitarian Michael Walzer (1983), it maintains that a national community should
legitimately prioritize its compatriots over non-members. Both liberal egalitarian and
cosmopolitan positions have challenged this view. Idealist liberal egalitarians have
argued for a human right to migrate (most prominently Carens 1987). Cosmopolitan
proponents of more porous state borders have argued that global justice requires states
to admit immigrants, as in the face of global inequalities barriers to immigration set by
affluent states arbitrarily deny some the opportunity to improve their life prospects (e.g.

Pogge 2005). Strikingly, the phenomenon of forced migration has largely been absent in
the normative debate on the state’s right to exclude non-citizens (Gibney 2016).
Recently, however, the literature on the ethics of asylum has been growing. This
increasing interest might be rooted in the growing critical awareness of state attempts to
circumvent humanitarian obligations through externalization and deterrence policies
(e.g. Gammeltoft-Hansen 2014) and the introduction of meritocratic elements in asylum
policies (Schammann 2017). It also accompanies a gradual shift within the normative
debate on migration itself, which has become less absolutely divided in proponents and
opponents of open borders: today, most scholars agree that the state may control its
borders, differing merely about the exact extent of and justification for it (Bader 2012).
This paper seeks to contribute to the literature on the ethics of immigration in
two ways. First, it combines two perspectives that are usually separated, approaching
the legitimacy of states’ actions regarding migrants both from the perspective of what
the state owes its own citizens and the rights of non-citizens. Second, its case selection
of a recently introduced administrative policy targeting asylum seekers allows
grounding the often somewhat detached normative debate on migration, while also
covering an understudied group in this literature. The approach thus allows testing some
of the arguments commonly brought forward on a real-world dilemma faced by a liberal
state. Departing from two minimal, conventional views on states’ commitments, the
paper argues that while differential inclusion is in principle a legitimate policy, the
liberal state seems obliged to extend these privileges to all those to whom it fails to act
in a timely manner.
The ‘prospect of staying’ construction is not a ‘hard’ legal category, but a ‘soft’
administrative one defined and re-defined by state agencies, which implies that it cannot
be appealed against (Lehner 2016). This paper does therefore not explicitly analyse

whether the construction is compatible with constitutional or human rights
commitments. While such a legal analysis would certainly have its own merits, this
article’s main contribution lies in scrutinizing this instrument of differential inclusion
from a political philosophy perspective on the meta level, going beyond the question of
what is compatible with the law to address what is compatible with broader normative
commitments of the liberal state (that ultimately underlie legal provisions). What we
can gain from such an analysis is thinking beyond the law on paper, challenging the
institutions often taken as given.

Introduction of the ‘prospect of staying’ category
The term ‘prospect of staying’ was first introduced in German law and policy on asylum
in the heat of the ‘refugee crisis’ in October 2015 with the
Asylverfahrensbeschleunigungsgesetz (law to speed up the asylum procedure).
According to its explanatory memorandum, “people who have a good prospect of
staying should be integrated into society and the labour market as quickly as possible”
(publication no. 18/6185 of the German Parliament, author’s translation). The law
stipulates to grant access to integration courses 5 to the thus designated group, and the
relevant passage in the Residence Act now reads as follows: “This regulation applies
accordingly […] to foreigners who […] are in possession of a temporary residence
permit of asylum applicants during the asylum process and for whom a regular and
long-lasting stay is to be expected” (§ 44 Abs. 4 S. 2 AufenthG, author’s translation and
emphasis). The passage continues clarifying that “[f]or an asylum seeker originating
from a safe country of origin in accordance with § 29a of the asylum law it is assumed
that a regular and long-lasting stay is not to be expected” (ibid., author’s translation).
The ‘prospect of staying’ is thus only partially and negatively defined in the legal text
itself. The explanatory memorandum of the Asylverfahrensbeschleunigungsgesetz,

however, gives some further information: included are “asylum seekers […] from a
country with a high recognition rate or for whom a resilient outlook for the asylum
application to be successful exists” (publication no. 18/6185 of the German Parliament,
author’s translation). The category has found entry into German law on two more
occasions since then, most recently in the Integration Act which entered into force in
August 2016, establishing preferential treatment mainly in the form of access to socioeconomic integration measures for a subgroup of asylum seekers. 6
It is crucial to note that the ‘prospect of staying’ is an administrative rather than
a legal category: who counts as having a ‘good prospect of staying’ is determined by
subordinate state agencies, i.e. the Federal Agency for Migration and Refugees (BAMF)
and the Federal Agency for Employment (BA). 7 The recognition rate 8 of the respective
country of origin group serves to determine the likelihood of a long-lasting stay: if it
was above 50 per cent, the ‘prospect of staying’ is assumed to be ‘good’ or ‘high’ – it is
determined biannually which countries this applies to. Currently, this is understood to
apply to Syria, Iran, Iraq, Eritrea and Somalia. 9
Why was the category introduced? Arguably, this was driven by an economic
logic that has become an important determinant of migration and integration policies
(cf. e.g. Mezzadra and Neilson 2012; Ong 2006; Shachar and Hirschl 2014). The
immediate aim of providing newcomers early access to education and the labour market
(and even making integration obligatory, as the Integration Act partly stipulates) is to
minimize the dependence of residents on the welfare state, following a broader trend of
integration policies of Western European countries (Joppke 2007). The category’s
introduction occurred against the backdrop of increasing numbers of arrivals and the
correspondingly mounting backlog of asylum applications. As the Federal Ministry of
the Interior (BMI) put it, the idea was “to speed up the [asylum] processes so that it

becomes clear early on that those who stay are being integrated and those who are not
allowed to stay leave our country” (BMI 2015, author’s translation) – it was thus an
attempt to address the above-mentioned policy-makers’ dilemma; enabling those likely
to stay to become ‘productive’ members of the society as soon as possible, while
preventing the integration of those who will likely not receive a permit to stay, as this
would make it more difficult to later enforce their return. 10 In other words, the ‘prospect
of staying’ was thought to help operationalize the likelihood of a positive return on
investments in language competence and employability.

Two moral benchmarks for state action
Borders constitute social institutions that are crucial factors for stratifying the social and
economic world at local, regional, national and international level (Balibar 2004;
Bosniak 2007; Mezzadra and Neilson 2012). In the words of Balibar (2004, 111),
borders have moved to the inside of states, “from the ‘edge’ to the ‘center’ of public
space.” The ‘prospect of staying’ category is a form of positive selection of some into
“programmes of social inclusion […which can] also function as devices of
hierarchization and control” (Mezzadra and Neilson 2012, 67). It can hence be
understood as one of the many boundaries within the state. Just as immigration control
at the external border works as a filter into the country, regulations and administrative
practices such as the ‘prospect of staying’-differentiation serve as filters into society,
assigning different degrees of utility and potential belonging to individuals. To
approach the question of the normative legitimacy of this particular filtering
mechanism, two moral benchmarks for state action – one towards its citizens and one
towards all individuals present on its territory – can be identified. These two are chosen
as both imply a minimal and conventional understanding of what the liberal state owes
non-citizens. Hereby, the threshold for a policy’s normative permissibility is set

deliberately low.

The special obligations argument as a justification for excluding non-members
In the normative debate on migration, the conventional view postulates that the state has
a broad right to exclude at the border. One of the traditional arguments for this view is
the special obligations argument. Famously spelled out by Michael Walzer (1983), the
special obligations argument maintains that a national community should prioritize its
compatriots over non-members. In the words of Miller (2009, 297), it generally takes
the following form: “principles of distributive justice apply to people who have a certain
relationship to one another. It is by virtue of being so related that they can advance
particular claims of justice against one another, invoking distributive principles”.
As Walzer (1983, 31) explains, “[t]he idea of distributive justice presupposes a
bounded world within which distributions take place”. While it is clear that distributive
justice works within a group of people that have a certain relationship to one another, it
remains controversial who forms that group and which principles determine
membership. Affiliations between family members seem to be an obvious case: parents
have special concern for the well-being of their own children that they do not have for
the well-being of someone else’s children. This is not deemed unjust, but “potentially
constitutive of every person’s well-being” (Abizadeh 2016, 108). It is less morally
intuitive, however, to claim that there is a special relationship between compatriots that
results in them owing each other special obligations. This question – should priority be
given to compatriots or not – has been thoroughly debated by political philosophers and
theorists (see the discussion in Bader 2005). The important issue here is that the special
obligations concept underlies the currently practiced approach of liberal states, where
social justice is understood to be “justice within the boundaries of independent states
whose members have a common national identity” (Miller 2009, 304). 11

The aim here is not to analyse the special obligations argument in its entirety,
but to show the possibility to derive the permissibility of differential access to
integration from this well-accepted, conventional argument. For the sake of the
argument, let us assume that the state is in fact morally obligated to prioritize the
interests of its own citizens.

The principle of legal certainty
While a conventional approach to the question of whether state exclusion of nonmembers is normatively justified is easily palpable, due to the scarcity of respective
literature it is harder to identify a similarly classical approach of moral commitments of
the liberal state towards asylum seekers on its territory. A minimal – and therefore, one
could argue, consensual – approach would be to assume that the liberal state needs to
guarantee legal certainty for every person under its jurisdiction, regardless of legal
status.
Constitutionalism makes it generally difficult for the liberal state to exclude
internally. This is pointed out by Joppke (2005, 51), who maintains that the modern
liberal state’s possibilities for internally excluding non-members “are even more limited
than excluding them externally”, for “[n]ow a democratic logic enters, according to
which immigrants […] are owed equal consideration by the state under whose roof they
have come to reside, and on whose protection they now depend”. The fact that someone
is due to their physical presence on a state’s territory subject to that state’s power and
coercion generates certain rights and responsibilities for that person. “Ethical
territorialists”, as Bosniak (2007, 395) calls them, even argue that the fact that all
‘territorial insiders’ – i.e. people physically located on the state’s territory regardless of
their way of entry – are subject to state power should generate equal rights for them
(Bosniak 2007; Song 2016; Walzer 1983). One does not have to go to such lengths to

acknowledge that everyone present in a state should be subject to the rule of law. The
rule of law is a crucial characteristic of constitutionalism, and the principle of legal
certainty is one of its central preconditions. This principle “recognizes the right of
individuals to make long-term plans for their lives by requiring that state action be
reasonably predictable and nonarbitrary” (Ellermann 2014, 293). 12 The principle of
legal certainty also requires the state to act in a reasonably timely manner.

Analysis: is the ‘prospect of staying’ legitimate?
Against the benchmarks of special obligations and legal certainty, is the ‘prospect of
staying’ category a legitimate policy instrument? Is it consistent with the moral
commitments of the state towards both its own and territorially present non-citizens as
conventionally understood?

Is differentiation permissible at all?
The ‘prospect of staying’ implies differentiated access to economic integration.
Nationals from a country with an assigned ‘good prospect of staying’ have advance
access to integration courses and labour market education and training programmes.
The latter include for instance job application training, skill assessment, employment
education programmes for up to eight weeks (including occupation language training)
and funding opportunities for job applications, travel costs, and costs for the recognition
of foreign certificates (BMAS 2017).
Differentiated access to economic integration can be framed as a question of
distributive justice. The conventional approach to the distribution of rights within a
territorially bounded state is the status-based approach, where rights are derived from
the respective legal status of a person, with only citizens enjoying the full rights
spectrum. 13 Differentiation in the liberal state e.g. along the lines of immigration status

is not the exception, but the rule (Bosniak 2007). The principle of equality, a
cornerstone of the liberal state, does not require treating everyone the same, but treating
everyone with equal concern and respect (cf. Dworkin 1973). However, is
differentiation normatively permissible in respect to economic integration?
According to the special obligations argument, the state may exclude noncitizens at the external border. The question remains whether this also applies to
migrants who have already entered the country. Applied to internal boundaries, the
principle of prioritizing citizens would justify some barriers to accessing institutions
such as the labour market for non-citizens, as they prevent what could be regarded as
unfair competition to local workers. It is the protective function of the border here that
justifies differential exclusion (cf. Newman 2003). The other side of the coin,
differential inclusion can also be justified from this perspective, as it is arguably least
costly for the society as a whole if economic integration is offered (only) to those who
will likely stay, minimizing the chances of welfare dependence. If migrants were
exluded for a long period, this would lead to welfare loss. Thus, differentiation is in
principle consistent with the special obligations argument.
According to the principle of legal certainty, state action has to be timely and
predictable. Both differentiation according to legal status and graduation – i.e. that the
set of rights increases “in extent and significance the closer to the status of citizenship
the individual progresses” (Bosniak 2007, 391) – seems permissible from that
perspective, as long as the respective regulations are comprehensible and accessible for
those concerned. Hence, differentiation is in principle consistent with the moral
commitments of states towards asylum seekers, too.
Let us consider the alternative scenario ‘access for all’ (i.e. non-differential
inclusion). This in fact breaches both principles, which strengthens the argument made.

In practice, an individual asylum seeker’s real prospect of staying is not only
determined by whether or not a protection status is granted, but in case of a negative
decision also by whether the person actually leaves the country. Opening early
integration measures for all, including those who will very likely have to leave due to a
rejection of their asylum application might a) be an investment in vain if the person
leaves 14 (and hence not in line with special obligations), and b) in the case of persons
not leaving voluntarily after a negative asylum decision ironically make it more difficult
for the liberal state to enforce their departure (cf. Gibney 2008). The better integration
outcomes are already during the asylum process, the more unfortunate it seems if later,
after the rejection of the asylum application, a deportation decision is taken (cf. Lehner
2016) – one could argue that the principle of legal certainty becomes destabilized. 15
Hence, differentiation can be consistent with both the special obligations
argument and the principle of legal certainty.

Is it legitimate to apply group-based differentiation?
Instead of being clearly defined in the law, the category ‘prospect of staying’ is
determined “schematically, with the aid of the coarsest scale the asylum and residence
law has in store, namely the country of origin” (Lehner 2016, author’s translation). A
three-tier system has emerged since the introduction of the category, distinguishing
1) those assumed to have a ‘good prospect of staying’ from 2) those from a ‘safe
country of origin’ (designated by law) 16, and 3) all other asylum seekers (hybrid group).
In addition to determining access to economic integration, the category also used to
determine the length of the asylum process, as cases in group 1 and 2 were processed by
the BAMF as a priority in 2016 and 2017 (BAMF 2017, 2018; BMI 2015; Will 2018).
[Table 1 near here]

The cut-off value of 50 per cent, above which a ‘good prospect of staying’ is to
be expected, seems arbitrary (Table 1). Technically, the criterion also applies to several
other countries of origin: these are primarily countries with low case numbers (such as
Ruanda, Myanmar, Nepal), but among them we find also one of the most important
countries of origin: Afghanistan, which is in the ‘hybrid’ category (Voigt 2016).
Afghanistan’s recognition rate in 2016 was above the threshold (55.8 per cent), but
Afghan asylum seekers were still not allowed to participate in integration courses. 17 In
2017, the recognition rate of Afghans went slightly below the 50 per cent threshold
(44.3 per cent).
Moreover, the duration of proceedings needs to be considered. The average time
from when the asylum application is submitted until a final decision is taken varies a lot
between countries of origin (Table 1, last column). Statistics indicate that asylum
seekers in the hybrid group such as Afghans and Nigerians are “doubly disadvantaged”
(Brücker 2016, 380, author’s translation): First, their asylum processes are usually
lengthy, which has a negative impact on economic integration (Hainmueller,
Hangartner, and Lawrence 2016). Second, during this long waiting period, they are
excluded from key state integration programmes.
Against this backdrop, it seems that the ‘prospect of staying’ category does not
comply with the two normative benchmarks proposed above. The connecting element of
both principles employed here is time. From the special obligations perspective, the
question arises whether asylum seekers during the oftentimes considerable waiting
period between submitting an application for asylum and receiving a final decision from
the authorities develop de facto relationships with the national community that then
establish special obligations. Although asylum seekers often live in centralized housing,
one could argue that “[w]hatever their legal status, individuals who live in a society

over an extended period of time become members of that society, as their lives
intertwine with the lives of others there. These human bonds provide the basic contours
of the rights that a state must guarantee” (Carens 2005, 16; cf. also Gibney 2009).
Among these rights would arguably be the one to not being excluded from certain
integration services. 18
Yet, even if one deems it far-fetched to consider asylum seekers as gradually
becoming members and thereby establishing rights and would rather keep the group of
state members narrowly defined, the ‘prospect of staying’ tool cannot do justice to
protect the rights of the narrowly-defined group of state members, i.e. nationals. To
protect the native population from economic harm, supporting the integration of those
who stay and hence their path to economic independence is an investment in the future
that promises reduced social costs and higher benefits (e.g. taxes). Departing now from
the premise that the state has special obligations toward its citizens and therefore needs
to ensure that asylum seekers will not pose an economic burden on the society in the
future, it is crucial to point out that the assumptions of the ‘prospect of staying’ category
do not comply with reality:
First, the empirical premise of the differentiation – that Syrians, Iranians,
Eritreans, Somalis and Iraqis will likely stay for a considerable amount of time and
others such as Afghans will likely not – is very shaky, as the recognition rates indicate
(Table 1). Second, for a variety of reasons is has proven difficult to return rejected
asylum seekers to countries of origin (Ellermann 2009; Eule 2014; Gibney 2008). So
even if it contradicts political interests of migration control, the reality is that regardless
of the asylum decision, many applicants will likely stay for a considerable amount of
time. By not granting them early access, it seems no exaggeration to caution that the

“integration problem of tomorrow is being created” (Brücker 2016, 380, author’s
translation).
One could object that the practical matter of how asylum and return policies are
implemented is not relevant for the legitimacy of differential integration policies, as this
argument would disappear once these issues are resolved. However, a non-idealistic
argument needs to take into account real-world circumstances and it is arguably
unlikely that these issues will be solved in the foreseeable future (for the difference
between realistic and idealistic approaches to the ethics of migration, cf. Carens 1996;
for the persistence of the “deportation gap”, see Rosenberger and Küffner 2016). 19
In addition to this, from the legal certainty perspective, it can be argued that the
state is obliged to guarantee a decision about asylum applications in due time. In a first
step, territorial presence establishes the right to obtain a permission to remain as an
asylum seeker (in Germany, the Aufenthaltsgestattung § 55 Abs. 1 AsylG). This status
then in a second step establishes further (graduated) rights towards the receiving state,
i.a. the right to legal certainty. It can be argued that the failure to decide about an
asylum application in a timely manner as well as the non-facilitation of return of
rejected asylum seekers amount to a type of state failure. In the absence of state action
in a timely manner, the principle of legal certainty requires that individuals concerned
can move on with their lives and plan for their future. Denying access to economic
integration programmes is therefore not consistent with the principle of legal certainty.
In other words: during an unreasonably long time in limbo, asylum seekers in the hybrid
group grow into a legal position in which it becomes considerably harder for the liberal
state to deny them rights to integration. However, one would have to differentiate
between long waiting times through no fault of one’s own and self-inflicted ones due to
non-cooperation with the authorities. 20

That long wait times should lead to certain rights is in fact widely accepted
(Carens 2010; Ellermann 2014), but usually as an a posteriori decision: The longer a
person waits in limbo, the more rights they should be granted. 21 However, it is argued
here that the principle of legal certainty warrants that access to integration programmes
should be a priori granted to all asylum seekers who at least have an earnest chance of
remaining (be it due to a positive asylum decision or the non-feasibility of return). This
would be a just measure because of the central inconsistency of the ‘prospect of staying’
category with the principle of legal certainty, which consists in the fact that the category
is an administrative and not a legal one, and can hence not be appealed against.
To clarify this point, it is instructive to briefly look at the historical development
of immigration admission policies: liberal states have turned from a group-based mode
of exclusion to the current individual-based one. Early immigration policies in countries
such as the USA, Australia and the United Kingdom were explicitly racially
discriminatory – an often mentioned example is the ‘White Australia Policy’ which
remained in force until the early 1970s (Cole 2000). Today, immigration policies seek
to select individuals primarily on the basis of market values, i.e. skills, talents and
financial resources (Shachar and Hirschl 2014), or in other words based on the
expectation of their ability to integrate into the host society: Pre-arrival civic integration
policies that “discourage the immigration of unwanted groups without explicitly naming
ethnic categories” (FitzGerald et al. 2018, 30) are one example of how “systematic
group biases” remain, or have maybe even become more prevalent, in immigration
policies of liberal countries (Ellermann and Goenaga 2019, 87). However, explicit
ethnic or national criteria for group-based categorical exclusion have vanished from
liberal democratic migration policies.

The ‘prospect of staying’ poses a problem to this general liberal agreement of
non-selectivity based on citizenship and ethnicity precisely because it is non-refutable:
“the apodictic practice of state agencies regarding integration measures normatively
does not seem to be sufficiently verified and differentiated” (Lehner 2016, author’s
translation). The ‘prospect of staying’ cannot be changed ex post, but has an impact on
one’s socio-economic integration opportunities – which ironically in turn influence
one’s real prospect of staying, as good integration outcomes can improve a migrant’s
chances of obtaining permanent residence and later citizenship status. Insofar as the
category assigns a group characteristic to an individual qua their nationality, one could
even argue that it contains a racializing element. In short, the country of origin based
criterion seems incoherent with the requirements of the principle of legal certainty, too.

Conclusion
Drawing on insights from the normative debate on external migration control, and
taking Germany’s asylum policies as a case study, this paper has argued that
differentiated access to early integration is in principle a legitimate measure taken by
the liberal state. Using the country of origin as the criterion to determine a person’s
eligibility, however, seems normatively questionable as it does not comply with
conventional views about the state’s moral commitments towards both citizens and noncitizens. Additionally, the analysis also suggests that the tool is practically unwise, as it
seems hardly able to meet its stated objectives. Policy-makers face significant
constraints in dealing with the phenomenon of precarious residence (Gibney 2009;
Rosenberger and Küffner 2016; Thym 2016). A liberal state, however, needs to be able
to reconcile the apparent trade-off between migration control and integration
management more competently than with a country-of-origin based instrument, as seen
in the case study analysed here. An alternative to this fixed ‘prospect of staying’

category could be individual-based access rules that take into account the (likely)
duration of asylum proceedings. If these exceed a certain timeframe, access to
integration measures should be granted regardless of the person’s nationality. 22 This
alternative procedure would be consistent with both the special obligations argument
and the principle of legal certainty.
Several lessons can be drawn from this case of differential inclusion of asylum
seekers in Germany for the broader debate on liberalism and migration. Looking at the
seldom analysed case of asylum and providing a reality check of the often employed
special obligations argument for closed (external) borders, this paper sheds light on
unresolved issues in the normative debate on migration and integration. The analysis
has pointed out that the special obligations argument does not always result in the
seemingly obvious conclusion: to protect its own citizens, it might in certain
circumstances be the state’s obligation to facilitate inclusion rather than exclusion of
territorial insiders, as this will pay off in the long term. While the legitimacy of states’
actions on migration and integration has usually been approached either from the
perspective of what the state owes its own citizens or which rights non-citizens have,
this paper combined the two. Departing from two rather minimal, conventional views
on states’ commitments, the analysis has come to the conclusion that while privileged
access to integration opportunities is in principle a viable policy, the liberal state seems
obliged to extend these privileges to all those to whom it fails to act in a timely manner.
The main limitation of this paper consists in its focus on economic rationales regarding
the special obligations argument, i.e. leaving aside questions of national and cultural
identity also frequently used to legitimate external migration control for the sake of
prioritizing citizens’ needs. Although this focus can be justified by the fact that an

economic logic was underlying the introduction of the category in the first place, future
research focusing on the cultural dimension would be welcome.

Notes

1

Already from November 2014 onwards, the German government had liberalized the
regulations of labour market access for asylum seekers (cf. e.g. Thränhardt 2015).

2

For the purpose of this paper, a ‘liberal state’ is understood to be a constitutional state built on
the core principles of liberty and equality (cf. Hampshire 2013).

3

In the tradition of the debate on distributive justice, I am not concerned with the state’s
obligation to provide for basic material needs and basic human rights (concept of
minimalist justice), but with the rules the state sets that regulate access to socio-economic
integration and upward social mobility (concept of maximalist justice) (Miller 2009).

4

As signatory to the Geneva Convention the state also commits to the principle of nonrefoulement, which could be taken as consent to enter into a relationship with the
individual asylum seeker.

5

Integration courses were introduced with the immigration law in 2005 and are primarily
language courses, but also include an ‘orientation course’ on German history, culture and
the legal system.

6

The phrase “regular and long-lasting stay to be expected” is also used in § 421 of the Third
Book of the Social Security Code about the support of language courses (§ 421 Abs. 1 S. 1
SGB III) (Lehner 2016) and it also figures in § 132 of the Third Book of the Social
Security Code on the promotion of vocational training of foreigners.

7

It is assumed, however, that the specific categorization has been coordinated within the federal
government; see e.g. an e-mail by the Federal Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs
(BMAS): http://biaj.de/images/stories/2015-12-07_bmas-schreiben-421-sgb3-anlage.pdf,
last accessed 14.06.2018.

8

The recognition rate is calculated as the sum of asylum recognitions (Basic Law Art. 16a),
refugee recognitions (Geneva Convention), subsidiary protection statuses and
determinations of a deportation ban, relative to the total number of decisions in a given
time period (publication no. 18/12623 of the German Parliament).

9

https://www.bamf.de/SharedDocs/FAQ/DE/IntegrationskurseAsylbewerber/001bleibeperspektive.html, last accessed 30.07.2018.

10

The aim of speeding up asylum processes has been reached to some extent at least regarding
new applications, but it is debated whether this came at the cost of decreasing quality of

decisions. The case backlog has not disappeared with faster processing, but shifted to the
courts (publication of the German Parliament no. 19/3148).
11

This principle even holds in the EU, which has still not advanced to become a social union.

12

Ellermann (2014) employs the principle of legal certainty to ground the right to stay of
undocumented immigrants.

13

In calling the status-based approach the ‘conventional’ one, it shall not be concealed that
elements of territorial-based rights (in addition to status-based ones) do play a role in
many liberal democratic countries (cf. Bosniak 2007, 393).

14

Although there might be other legitimate reasons for providing these services even in those
circumstances (in line with the special obligations argument): returnees might use newly
obtained skills in their country of origin, thereby fostering development and (i.a.
economic) transnational links.

15

Arguably, this ‘unfortunate’ situation stems from the somewhat artificial separation between
asylum and non-asylum migration law.

16

For insights into the historical evolution and critical analyses of current practices of the ‘safe
country of origin’ concept, cf. e.g. Engelmann (2014).

17

Afghans were never included into the ‘good prospect of staying’ category, although they were
likely to stay in Germany even in case of a negative asylum decision, as they were subject
to a deportation stop unless classified as a criminal or potential threat. This was effective
from December 2016, but was heavily debated again in June 2018 (see
https://www.zeit.de/politik/deutschland/2018-06/asyllagebericht-abschiebestoppafghanistan-aufhebung-angela-merkel, last accessed 22.06.2018). The BMAS decided to
open labour market integration programmes for Afghan asylum seekers for the second half
of 2017 (see http://ggua.de/fileadmin/downloads/
ausbildungsfoerderung/RD-Weisung_Afghanistan.pdf, last accessed 21.06.2018).

18

For a discussion of the right to stay, see Carens (2010) and Ellermann (2014).

19

From the said normative perspective, a prospect of staying instrument that includes not only
protection, but also deportation rates would be easier to justify – however, politically
certainly unfeasible.

20

This is increasingly recognized in German law, see e.g. §60a Abs. 6 AufenthG, §1a Abs. 3
AsylbLG.

21

One could read e.g. the EU Reception Conditions Directive in such a way. For instance,
Article 15 stipulated that access to the labour market has to be granted to an asylum seeker
no later than nine months after the application ((https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legalcontent/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:32013L0033&from=EN, last accessed 15.02.2019)

22

In case of non-cooperation on the part of the asylum seeker, these rights could be revoked.

Acknowledgements
Earlier versions of this article were presented at the KOSMOS-Workshop at HU Berlin
in 2016, the IMISCOE Spring Conference at Middlesex University London in 2017 and
at the BAGSS Joint Doctoral Workshop at the University of Trento in 2017. I would
like to thank all participants and colleagues who have provided valuable comments on
the draft, especially Stephan Simon, Holger Kolb, Tobias Eule and Marc Helbling, as
well as the anonymous reviewers.

References
Abizadeh, Arash. 2008. “Democratic Theory and Border Coercion.” Political Theory
36(1): 37–65.
Abizadeh, Arash. 2016. “The Special-Obligations Challenge to More Open Borders.” In
Migration in Political Theory. The Ethics of Movement and Membership, eds.
Sarah Fine and Lea Ypi. Oxford, 105–24.
Bader, Veit. 2005. “The Ethics of Immigration.” Constellations 12(3): 331–61.
Bader, Veit. 2012. “Moral, Ethical, and Realist Dilemmas of Transnational Governance
of Migration.” American Behavioral Scientist 20(10): 1–18.
Balibar, Étienne. 2004. We, The People of Europe: Reflections on Transnational
Citizenship. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
BAMF. 2017. Asylgeschäftsstatistik Für Den Monat Dezember 2016. Nürnberg.
BAMF. 2018. Asylgeschäftsbericht Für Den Monat Dezember 2017. Nürnberg.
Blake, Michael. 2006. “Universal and Qualified Rights to Immigration.” Ethics and
Economics 4(1): 1–6.
BMAS. 2017. Ein Leitfaden Zu Arbeitsmarktzugang Und -Förderung Flüchtlinge.
Kundinnen Und Kunden Der Arbeitsagenturen Und JobCenter, Stand April 2017.
Berlin.
BMI. 2015. “Änderung Und Beschleunigung von Asylverfahren Beschlossen, Nachricht
29.09.2015.”
http://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Kurzmeldungen/DE/2015/09/kabinettbeschliesst-asylverfahrensbeschleunigungsgesetz.html (December 7, 2016).
Bosniak, Linda. 2007. “Being Here: Ethical Territoriality and the Rights of
Immigrants.” Theoretical Inquiries in Law 8(2): 389–410.
Bozorgmehr, Kayvan, and Oliver Razum. 2015. “Effect of Restricting Access to Health
Care on Health Expenditures among Asylum-Seekers and Refugees: A QuasiExperimental Study in Germany, 1994–2013.” Plos One 10: e0131483.
http://dx.plos.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0131483.
Brücker, Herbert. 2016. “Integrationsgesetz: Das Vertrauen in Den Markt Fehlt.”
Wirtschaftsdienst 96(6): 380.
Carens, Joseph H. 1987. “Aliens and Citizens: The Case for Open Borders.” The Review
of Politics 49(2): 251–73.
Carens, Joseph H. 1996. “Realistic and Idealistic Approaches to the Ethics of
Migration.” International Migration Review 30(1): 156–70.
Carens, Joseph H. 2005. “On Belonging. What We Owe People Who Stay.” Boston
Review 30(3–4): 16–19.
Carens, Joseph H. 2010. Immigrants and the Right to Stay. Boston: Boston Review
Books.
Cole, Philip. 2000. Philosophies of Exclusion: Liberal Political Theory and
Immigration. Edinburgh.
Dworkin, Ronald. 1973. “The Original Position.” The University of Chicago Law
Review 40(3): 500–533.

ECRE. 2016. The Length of Asylum Procedures in Europe, Asylum Information
Database, October 2016. Brussels.
Ellermann, Antje. 2009. States Against Migrants - Deportation in Germany and the
United States. Cambridge, M. A.: Cambridge University Press.
Ellermann, Antje. 2014. “The Rule of Law and the Right to Stay: The Moral Claims of
Undocumented Migrants.” Politics & Society 42(3): 293–308.
Ellermann, Antje, and Agustin Goenaga. 2019. “Discrimination and Policies of
Immigrant Selection in Liberal States.” Politics & Society 47(1): 87–116.
Engelmann, Claudia. 2014. “Convergence against the Odds - the Development of Safe
Country of Origin Policies in EU Member States (1990-2013).” European Journal
of Migration and Law 16(2): 277–302.
Eule, Tobias. 2014. Inside Immigration Law. Migration Management and Policy
Application in Germany. Abingdon: Routledge.
Eurostat. 2018. “Persons Subject of Asylum Applications Pending at the End of the
Month by Citizenship, Age and Sex Monthly Data (Rounded), Last Update
15.06.2018.”
http://appsso.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/nui/show.do?dataset=migr_asypenctzm&lang=
de (June 15, 2018).
FitzGerald, David S., David Cook-Martín, Angela S. García, and Rawan Arar. 2018.
“Can You Become One of Us? A Historical Comparison of Legal Selection of
‘Assimilable’ Immigrants in Europe and the Americas.” Journal of Ethnic and
Migration Studies 44(1): 27–47.
Gammeltoft-Hansen, Thomas. 2014. “International Refugee Law and Refugee Policy:
The Case of Deterrence Policies.” Journal of Refugee Studies 27(4): 574–95.
Gibney, Matthew J. 2008. “Asylum and the Expansion of Deportation in the United
Kingdom.” Government and Opposition 43(2): 146–67.
Gibney, Matthew J. 2009. Precarious Residents: Migration Control, Membership and
the Rights of Non-Citizens, UNDP Human Development Reports Research Paper
2009/2010. New York.
Gibney, Matthew J. 2016. “Political Theory, Ethics, and Forced Migration.” In The
Oxford Handbook of Refugee and Forced Migration Studies, eds. Elena FiddianQasmiyeh, Gil Loescher, Katy Long, and Nando Sigona. Oxford, 48–59.
de Haas, Hein, Katharina Natter, and Simona Vezzoli. 2018. “Growing Restrictiveness
or Changing Selection? The Nature and Evolution of Migration Policies.”
International Migration Review 52(2): 324–67.
Hainmueller, Jens, Dominik Hangartner, and Duncan Lawrence. 2016. “When Lives
Are Put on Hold: Lengthy Asylum Processes Decrease Employment among
Refugees.” Science Advances 2(8): 1–7.
Hampshire, James. 2013. The Politics of Immigration. Contradictions of the Liberal
State. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Helbling, Marc, Liv Bjerre, Friederike Römer, and Malisa Zobel. 2017. “Measuring
Immigration Policies: The IMPIC Database.” European Political Science 16(1):
79–98.

Jackson, Samantha, and Harald Bauder. 2014. “Neither Temporary, nor Permanent: The
Precarious Employment Experiences of Refugee Claimants in Canada.” Journal of
Refugee Studies 27(3): 360–81.
Joppke, Christian. 2005. “Exclusion in the Liberal State: The Case of Immigration and
Citizenship Policy.” European Journal of Social Theory 8(1): 43–61.
Joppke, Christian. 2007. “Beyond National Models: Civic Integration Policies for
Immigrants in Western Europe.” West European Politics 30(1): 1–22.
Lehner, Roman. 2016. “Gehen Oder Bleiben? Der Gesetzgeber Kann Sich Nicht
Entscheiden, 6. Juni 2016.” Verfassungsblog. http://verfassungsblog.de/gehenoder-bleiben-der-gesetzgeber-kann-sich-nicht-entscheiden/ (December 7, 2016).
Marbach, Moritz, Jens Hainmueller, and Dominik Hangartner. 2018. “The Long-Term
Impact of Employment Bans on the Economic Integration of Refugees.” Science
Advances (4): 1–7.
Mezzadra, Sandro, and Brett Neilson. 2012. “Between Inclusion and Exclusion: On the
Topology of Global Space and Borders.” Theory, Culture & Society 29(4/5): 58–
75.
Miller, David. 2009. “Justice and Boundaries.” Politics, Philosophy & Economics 8(3):
291–309.
Newman, David. 2003. “On Borders and Power: A Theoretical Framework.” Journal of
Borderlands Studies 18(1): 13–25.
Nußberger, Angelika. 2016. “Flüchtlingsschicksale Zwischen Völkerrecht Und Politik:
Zur Rechtsprechung Des EGMR Zu Fragen Der Staatenverantwortung in
Migrationsfällen.” Neue Zeitschrift für Verwaltungsrecht 35(12): 815–22.
Ong, Aihwa. 2006. “Mutations in Citizenship.” Theory, Culture & Society 23(3): 499–
505.
Pernice, Regina, and Judith Brook. 1996. “Refugees’ and Immigrants’ Mental Health:
Association of Demographic and Post-Immigration Factors.” Journal of Social
Psychology 136(4): 511–19.
Pogge, Thomas. 2005. “World Poverty and Human Rights.” Ethics & International
Affairs 19(1): 1–7.
Rosenberger, Sieglinde, and Carla Küffner. 2016. “After the Deportation Gap: NonRemoved Persons and Their Pathways to Social Rights.” In Migration and
Integration: New Models for Mobility and Coexistence, eds. Roland Hsu and
Christoph Reinprecht. Vienna: Vienna University Press, 137–50.
Schammann, Hannes. 2017. “Eine Meritokratische Wende? Arbeit Und Leistung Als
Neue Strukturprinzipien Der Deutschen Flüchtlingspolitik.” Sozialer Fortschritt
66: 741–57.
Shachar, Ayelet. 2014. “Introduction: Citizenship and the ‘Right to Have Rights.’”
Citizenship Studies 18(2): 114–24.
Shachar, Ayelet, and Ran Hirschl. 2014. “On Citizenship, States, and Markets.” The
Journal of Political Philosophy 22(2): 231–57.
Sigona, Nando. 2018. “The Contested Politics of Naming in Europe’s ‘Refugee Crisis.’”
Ethnic and Racial Studies 41(3): 456–60.

Sinnerbrink, Ingrid et al. 1997. “Compounding of Premigration Trauma and
Postmigration Stress in Asylum Seekers.” Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary
and Applied 131(5): 463–70.
Song, Sarah. 2016. “The Significance of Territorial Presence and the Rights of
Immigrants.” In Migration in Political Theory. The Ethics of Movement and
Membership, eds. Sarah Fine and Lea Ypi. Oxford, 225–48.
Thränhardt, Dietrich. 2015. Warum Das Deutsche Asylsystem Zu Einem
Bearbeitungsstau Führt, Gutachten Im Auftrag Des Mediendienst Integration.
Berlin.
Thym, Daniel. 2016. “Integration Kraft Gesetzes? Grenzen Und Inhalte Des
‘Integrationsgesetzes’ Des Bundes.” ZAR 36(8): 241–73.
Voigt, Claudius. 2016. Bleibeperspektive - Kritik Einer Begrifflichen Seifenblase.
Münster.
Walzer, Michael. 1983. Spheres of Justice. A Defense of Pluralism and Equality. New
York: Basic Books.
Wilcox, Shelley. 2009. “The Open Borders Debate on Immigration.” Philosophy
Compass 4(5): 813–21.
Will, Anne-Kathrin. 2018. “On ‘Genuine’ and ‘Illegitimate’ Refugees: New Boundaries
Drawn by Discriminatory Legislation and Practice in the Field of Humanitarian
Reception in Germany.” Social Inclusion 6 (3): 172–189.

Table 1. Recognition rates of top 10 countries of origin in Germany, 2016 and 2017

Country

Administrative
Category
(as of June 2018)

Number of (first)
Applicants

Recognition
Avg. time until
Rate
admin. decision
(Adjusted) (%)
(months)
2016 2017
2016
2017** 2016
62,4 53,0
71,4
10,0
7,1

Recognition
Rate (%)

Avg. time until
final decision
(months)
Jan.-June 2017
12,6

2017
2016
2017
Total
198.317 722.370 43,4
thereof:
Syria
Good prosp. of staying 48.974 266.250 91,5 98,0 99,9
99,9
6,1
3,8
9,1
Iraq
Good prosp. of staying 21.930 96.116 56,1 70,2 64,5
77,2
8,0
5,9
10,8
Afghanistan Hybrid
16.423 127.012 44,3 55,8 47,4
60,5
13,1
8,7
12,9
Eritrea
Good prosp. of staying 10.226 18.854 82,9 92,2 97,6
99,3
7,1
10,7
10,8
Iran
Good prosp. of staying 8.608
26.426 49,4 50,7 57,1
60,6
10,6
12,3
12,0
Turkey
Hybrid
8.027
5.383
28,1
8,2
33,6
17,5
9,2
16,3
17,1
Nigeria
Hybrid
7.811
12.709 17,3
9,9
24,2
17,3
13,5
14,2
18,5
Somalia
Good prosp. of staying 6.836
9.851
60,8 71,1 82,9
89,2
11,7
17,3
17,7
Russian Fed. Hybrid
4.884
10.985
9,1
5,2
13,9
10,4
14,3
15,6
13,1
unsettled*
Hybrid
4.067
14.659 50,6 84,4 63,2
91,6
11,1
7,3
13,1
Source: publication no. 18/11262, 19/185 and 19/1371 of the German Parliament; BAMF (2017, 2018); own compilation.
Note: Recognition rates and average time only apply to those applications that have been decided upon in 2016 (2017), the number of which is
smaller than the number of applicants.
*Most of these appear to be Kurds and Palestinians from Syria, who do not have Syrian identification papers, but can nonetheless prove their
protection need. **3rd quarter of 2017 (no other data available)

