Citation:
Brown, Dustin C., Joseph T. Lariscy, and Lucie Kalousová. (2019). Comparability of Mortality
Estimates from Social Surveys and Vital Statistics Data in the United States. Population
Research and Policy Review 38(3): 371–401.

Comparability of Mortality Estimates from Social Surveys and Vital Statistics Data
in the United States

Dustin C. Brown1 ∙ Joseph T. Lariscy2 ∙ Lucie Kalousová3

Corresponding Author: Dustin C. Brown, email: dbrown@soc.msstate.edu

1

Department of Sociology and Social Science Research Center, Mississippi State University,
P.O. Box C, 207 Bowen Hall, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA,
email: dbrown@soc.msstate.edu
2

Department of Sociology, University of Memphis, 223 Clement Hall, Memphis, TN, 38152,
USA, email: joseph.lariscy@memphis.edu

3

Nuffield College, University of Oxford, 1 New Road, Oxford OX1 1NF, United Kingdom,
email: lucie.kalousova@nuffield.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Social surveys prospectively linked with death records provide invaluable opportunities for the
study of the relationship between social and economic circumstances and mortality. Although
survey-linked mortality files play a prominent role in U.S. health disparities research, it is unclear
how well mortality estimates from these datasets align with one another and whether they are
comparable with U.S. vital statistics data. We conduct the first study that systematically compares
mortality estimates from several widely-used survey-linked mortality files and U.S. vital statistics
data. Our results show that mortality rates and life expectancies from the National Health Interview
Survey Linked Mortality Files, Health and Retirement Study, Americans’ Changing Lives study,
and U.S. vital statistics data are similar. Mortality rates are slightly lower and life expectancies are
slightly higher in these linked datasets relative to vital statistics data. Compared with vital statistics
and other survey-linked datasets, General Social Survey-National Death Index life expectancy
estimates are much lower at younger adult ages and much higher at older adult ages. Cox
proportional hazard models regressing all-cause mortality risk on age, gender, race, educational
attainment, and marital status conceal the issues with the General Social Survey-National Death
Index that are observed in our comparison of absolute measures of mortality risk. We provide
recommendations for researchers who use survey-linked mortality files.

Keywords Mortality ∙ Vital statistics ∙ Record linkage ∙ Survey-linked mortality files ∙ National
Death Index

Introduction
Several nationally-representative surveys in the United States are linked to death records in the
National Death Index (NDI). Survey-linked mortality files (SLMFs) contain detailed, often selfreported, information about survey respondents’ demographic attributes, socioeconomic status,
health behaviors, and medical history collected several years, even decades, prior to death or
censoring (Muennig et al. 2011; Preston and Taubman 1994; Rogers et al. 2000). These and other
individual-level risk factors are measured less comprehensively in other mortality data sources in
the United States such as vital statistics or medical claims data. Consequently, SLMFs play a
prominent role in U.S. health disparities research because they contain information about key
individual-level mortality risk factors that are not available elsewhere.
Population health researchers use SLMF data extensively to monitor adult mortality
disparities in the United States. However, basic information about the comparability of SLMF
mortality estimates in the United States is limited. A few methodological reports compare
mortality data from the National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files (NHIS-LMF;
Ingram et al. 2008) and, more recently, the Health and Retirement Study (HRS; Weir 2016) with
U.S. vital statistics data. These studies generally show that mortality estimates based on the NHISLMF and HRS are comparable to those based on vital statistics data. Several additional studies
that use SLMF data to address substantive research questions largely corroborate these results
(Brown et al. 2012; Hayward and Gorman 2004; Lariscy et al. 2015; Warner and Hayward 2006).
These studies include ancillary results comparing life expectancies and/or age-specific mortality
rates based on vital statistics data with those based on NHIS-LMF (Brown et al. 2012; Hummer et
al. 1999; Lariscy et al. 2015), HRS (Brown et al. 2012), and National Longitudinal Survey of Older

1

Men data (Black et al. 2017; Hayward and Gorman 2004; Warner and Hayward 2006) and imply
that mortality estimates in these SLMFs and vital statistics are comparable.
Although the studies described above are informative, additional research is needed to
obtain a more holistic understanding of SLMF data comparability. No single study
comprehensively compares mortality estimates from several SLMFs with official mortality
estimates reported in U.S. vital statistics data. Prior research that systematically cross-validates
results from multivariate models across SLMFs is also sparse. As a result, it is unclear how well
SLMF-based mortality estimates align with one another and whether they are comparable with
U.S. vital statistics data. These issues warrant further examination because SLMFs are the major
data source used in research examining social and economic determinants of U.S. adult mortality
risk. Public health initiatives that aim to reduce adult mortality disparities often draw upon research
based on SLMF data, and policymakers need accurate information to design efficacious policies.
How comparable are mortality estimates from leading survey-linked mortality files in the
United States? To answer this question, we compare mortality estimates from four major surveylinked mortality files: the National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files (NHIS-LMF),
Health and Retirement Study (HRS), Americans’ Changing Lives (ACL), and General Social
Survey National Death Index (GSS-NDI). We assess SLMF mortality estimate comparability in
two ways. First, we compare mortality rates and life expectancies derived from several commonlyused nationally-representative surveys in the United States that have prospective mortality followup with mortality estimates from vital statistics data. Second, we compare results from multivariate
hazard models that regress all-cause mortality risk on key sociodemographic characteristics across
SLMFs to determine whether the various methods used to establish vital status across data sources
influence the comparability of their estimates of mortality disparities. The first approach focuses

2

on differences in absolute mortality risk, and the second approach focuses on differences in relative
mortality risk. Finally, we outline general recommendations for future research with survey-linked
mortality files based on our findings. Our results will help improve understanding of the overall
quality of adult mortality research in the United States.

Background
Survey-Linked Mortality Files
Mortality estimates may vary between survey-linked mortality files for several reasons. 1
Differences in the performance of the NDI record linkage algorithm is one potential source of
variability between surveys. The algorithm probabilistically links decedent survey records and
NDI death records using personally identifiable information (PII) recorded in both data sources.
The identifiers used in the record linkage process include Social Security Number (SSN), first
name, middle initial, last name, father’s surname, birth date, sex, race, state of birth, state of
residence, and marital status (National Center for Health Statistics [NCHS] 2018). Both data
sources must contain accurate PII to match respondents who died during the follow-up period to
their death records. The algorithm can still perform as intended when only a subset of these
identifiers are present and accurate, and more unique identifiers (e.g., SSN) are given more weight
in the matching process than others (e.g., marital status). However, matching errors can occur
when PII in either data source is missing and/or inaccurate (Curb et al. 1985; Harron et al. 2015;

1

We focus on potential sources of systematic bias. Sampling error will cause mortality estimates
to vary between SLMFs when survey samples are different (Crimmins et al. 2004). However,
sampling error should have modest effects on mortality estimate comparability because it is
randomly distributed in surveys that contain large probability samples which are designed to be
nationally-representative of the non-institutionalized U.S. adult population. The survey samples
contained in most SLMFs, including the ones analyzed herein, meet these criteria.
3

Lariscy 2011, 2017; Rogers et al. 1997). False negatives occur when the NDI matching algorithm
fails to match survey records and death records among deceased respondents causing them to
appear “statistically immortal” (Pablos-Méndez 1994:1237). False positives occur when the NDI
matching algorithm incorrectly identifies respondents who survive the follow-up period as
deceased when a surviving respondent and decedent have similar PII. These technical problems
have substantive implications because matching errors can distort results. Mortality risk will be
overestimated when false positives are abundant and underestimated when false negatives are
abundant.
Matching error is a potential source of systematic bias because it results from variations in
the propensity to report key identifiers between subpopulation groups, data collection periods,
and/or surveys. For instance, prior research with the NHIS-LMF has shown that racial/ethnic
subgroup differences in record linkage can affect estimates of mortality disparities since members
of some groups are more likely to be linked to the death certificates than members of other groups
(Black et al. 2017; Lariscy 2011, 2017; Palloni and Arias 2004; Rogers et al. 1997). Matching
errors can also arise when survey respondents either refuse or are not asked to provide certain
identifiers. Assuming it is recorded and reported accurately, SSN is the most important identifier
in the matching process because, unlike other linkage items such as name or date of birth, it
uniquely identifies individuals. The matching algorithm is much more likely to link survey records
and death records correctly when both files contain accurate SSNs. However, respondents
increasingly refuse to report SSNs to interviewers, and some surveys with NDI linkages, such as
the GSS, have not always collected SSNs (Kim et al. 2015; NCHS Office of Analysis and
Epidemiology 2009). Consequently, linkage errors may have increased over time in some SLMFs
because respondents are reluctant to provide SSN due to identity theft concerns (Dahlhamer and

4

Cox 2007). For instance, among male NHIS respondents, SSN was missing for only 17% in 1986
but 72% of respondents by 2004 (NCHS Office of Analysis and Epidemiology 2009).
The extent to which a survey relies on vital status ascertained via the matching algorithm
may also influence SLMF comparability. Surveys linked to the NDI use different strategies to
prospectively ascertain respondents’ vital status. Some surveys rely exclusively on passive followup (i.e., linking records based on PII) while others incorporate active follow-up (i.e., re-contacting
surviving respondents or collecting decedent information from knowledgeable proxies). SLMFs
that contain cross-sectional survey data are most susceptible to problems associated with passive
follow-up because respondents are not re-interviewed. SLMFs that contain longitudinal survey
data have an inherent advantage over those that contain cross-sectional survey data because they
can incorporate active and passive follow-up techniques. Consequently, SLMFs with longitudinal
survey data may have lower false positive/negative error rates than ones with cross-sectional
survey data because interviewers have repeated opportunities to collect and/or update missing or
inaccurate personal identifiers. Having an opportunity to re-interview respondents may have
particularly important implications for obtaining sensitive identifiers, such as SSNs, which
respondents are often reluctant to provide.
Some SLMFs may be more susceptible to the issues discussed above than others due to
variations in PII reporting between surveys. A comparative analysis is especially important for the
GSS-NDI. The GSS-NDI has only been publicly available since 2011, but it has quickly become
a popular resource for establishing social disparities in U.S. adult mortality risk. The GSS is a
veritable goldmine for population health researchers because it contains variables not available in
any other dataset. The GSS-NDI has been used in studies linking social characteristics such as
exposure to individual- and institutional-level discrimination, sexual minority status, happiness,

5

political ideology, emotion suppression, observed skin tone, and other statuses, attitudes, and
behaviors with adult mortality risk (Chapman et al. 2013; Lawrence et al. 2015; Lee et al. 2015;
Morey et al. 2018; Muennig et al. 2013; Pabayo et al. 2015; Stewart et al. 2018). Researchers could
not have established these associations with any other nationally-representative datasets.
Problems in the GSS-NDI may arise if the NDI matching algorithm performs suboptimally. Recall that the NDI record linkage algorithm is probabilistic, and PII must be recorded
accurately in both data sources to match decedent survey records with NDI death records.
Although the algorithm uses several personal identifiers in the matching process, record linkage
success rates are much higher when both data sources contain SSNs because, when accurate, SSNs
uniquely identify an individual respondent. However, GSS respondents were not asked to provide
SSNs prior to the 1993 survey.
The central role that SSN plays in the matching process is evident when one considers the
classification scheme NCHS uses to gauge match quality. NDI record linkage uses a five-class
system to describe match quality, where classes 1 and 2 are considered the most reliably-matched
decedents whereas the match quality for decedents placed into classes 3 and 4 is less certain
(NCHS 2018). Class 5 matches are assumed to have survived the follow-up period. Muennig et al.
(2011:3) state that “for the GSS-linked records there were no class 1 matches and a limited number
of class 2 matches due to the lack of Social Security information.” In contrast to the small
proportion of GSS-NDI decedents in classes 1 and 2, among NHIS-LMF respondents who are
identified as having died during follow-up, 61% of matches are in class 1 and 15% are in class 2
(Lariscy 2011). The absence of GSS-NDI deaths from classes 1 and 2 signals lower quality in
mortality ascertainment relative to other survey-linked mortality files. This could have major

6

consequences for GSS-NDI mortality data quality because it implies that matching error rates are
high.

Comparability of Survey-Linked Mortality Files and Vital Statistics Data
Mortality data in vital statistics may differ from survey-linked data since they include the entire
U.S. population whereas most survey samples only include non-institutionalized respondents.
Mortality rates are higher among institutionalized populations, particularly nursing home
residents, than non-institutionalized populations. Thus, SLMFs should produce lower mortality
rates and higher life expectancies when compared with vital statistics data. Discrepancies between
SLMF and vital statistics mortality estimates should also increase with age as people increasingly
enter nursing homes and other institutional settings that are excluded from most household-based
survey sampling frames.
Although mortality rates based on vital statistics data provide a more complete
representation of mortality patterns within the population than SLMF mortality rates because they
include institutionalized and non-institutionalized persons, they may also have errors that
undermine their precision. The most well-known problem is numerator-denominator bias, which
arises because vital statistics mortality rates combine data from two sources: death certificate data
(numerator) and mid-year population estimates provided by the U.S. Census Bureau
(denominator). Content or coverage errors in either data source can bias the resulting mortality
rates. Other studies have identified issues in vital statistics data that could bias mortality rates
among racial/ethnic minority populations, such as age misreporting, misclassification of
race/ethnicity on death certificates, and census undercounts (Arias et al. 2010; Hogan et al. 2013;

7

Preston et al. 1996). These attributes presumably are recorded more accurately in SLMFs than
vital statistics because survey respondents typically self-report this information.

The Current Study
This study addresses the following unresolved question: How comparable are mortality estimates
from leading survey-linked mortality files in the United States? To answer this question, we
compare mortality estimates from four major survey-linked mortality files in the United States.
The analyses have two key components. The first component focuses on differences in absolute
mortality risk between SLMFs and U.S. vital statistics data. The second component focuses on
differences in relative mortality risk between SLMFs. We explain each component in greater detail
below. We expect to document four key patterns related to survey-linked mortality file
comparability. First, we anticipate that most SLMF mortality estimates will correspond closely
with ones based on vital statistics data. However, mortality rates should be lower and life
expectancies should be higher in SLMFs relative to those based on vital statistics data because the
survey samples exclude institutionalized respondents at baseline while vital statistics data include
the entire population. Second, we expect that differences between SLMF and vital statistics
mortality rates and life expectancies will increase with age. This pattern is evident in prior research
and presumably exists because most institutionalized adults in the United States, especially at older
ages, are nursing home residents, a group with higher mortality risk than the overall population.
Third, we expect results between SLMFs to vary more in analyses of absolute mortality risk
(mortality rates and life expectancies) than in analyses of relative mortality risk (multivariate Cox
models). The control variables in the multivariate models should constrain variability between
SLMFs because these variables are correlated both with mortality risk and the propensity to report

8

personal identifiers used in the record linkage process. Finally, we anticipate that the GSS-NDI
will diverge the most from vital statistics data because it contains fewer high-quality NDI matches
than the other SLMFs.

Methods
Data
We compare mortality estimates from the following survey-linked mortality files: National Health
Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files (NHIS-LMF), Health and Retirement Study (HRS),
Americans’ Changing Lives (ACL), and General Social Survey National Death Index (GSS-NDI).
Although other surveys also contain prospective mortality follow-up, we limit our analyses to these
datasets for several reasons. First, these SLMFs are used extensively in U.S. population health
research. Second, they all contain nationally-representative data, surveys with high response rates,
several decades of mortality follow-up, and many decedents. Third, multivariate results can be
easily compared between these surveys because key sociodemographic and socioeconomic
variables are measured similarly between surveys. Each dataset is described below (also see Table
1).
The NHIS is a nationally-representative cross-sectional survey of the non-institutionalized
U.S. adult population ages 18+. NCHS conducts the survey annually. The public-use version of
the NHIS-LMF prospectively links the 1986–2009 NHIS to the NDI through 2011 (NCHS 2013).
The 1986–2011 NHIS-LMF contains survey records for 1,605,246 respondents deemed eligible
for NDI follow-up (N = 265,751 decedents). Respondents with missing values on race (n = 7,686,
0.5%), marital status (N = 7,016, 0.4%), or educational attainment (N = 21,057, 1.3%) are listwise
deleted. We also exclude respondents younger than age 25 (N = 205,573) at baseline or whose

9

ages are top-coded (N = 12,914) to increase comparability among datasets. Our NHIS-LMF
analytic sample contains 1,112,685 individual respondents and 250,230 decedents. We
downloaded public-use NHIS-LMF data from the National Health Interview Series on the
Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) Health Surveys website at the University of
Minnesota (Blewett et al. 2018). Additional information about the NHIS-LMF is available
elsewhere (NCHS 2013).
The HRS is a nationally-representative longitudinal survey of U.S. adults ages 51+ and
their spouses regardless of age-eligibility. HRS respondents were first interviewed in 1992 and
follow-up interviews have generally occurred bi-annually through the present. The HRS sample
transitioned to a steady-state design in 1998. The redesigned HRS includes respondents from the
Assets and Health Dynamics of the Oldest Old study (AHEAD) and incorporates refresher cohorts.
AHEAD respondents were ages 70+ in 1993 when they were first interviewed (Soldo et al. 1997).
Refresher cohorts are added every six years to replenish the sample and ensure the survey remains
representative of the 51+ population (Sonnega et al. 2014). The HRS contains approximately
15,000–20,000 respondents in any given interview wave and over 12,000 deaths as of 2011.
Respondents with missing values on race (N = 78, 0.2%), age (N = 1, 0%), marital status (N = 17,
0.05%), or educational attainment (N = 121, 0.4%) are listwise deleted.
Our analyses are based on a harmonized version of the 1992–2014 HRS created by the
RAND Corporation (RAND HRS, Version P; Bugliari et al. 2016). The public-use HRS contains
all-cause mortality data. The HRS Tracker file records respondent vital status across interview
waves. Mortality is also ascertained in the HRS via the NDI (HRS: 1992–2011, NDI: 1992–2011).
To increase comparability with the other datasets, our HRS analyses only include NDI deaths.
Ancillary analyses (available from first author) show that death counts based on the Tracker file

10

and the NDI are very similar. This is encouraging because it implies that the NDI matching
algorithm performs well in the HRS. Additional information about the HRS (Sonnega et al. 2014)
and HRS RAND File (Bugliari et al. 2016) is available elsewhere.
The ACL is a nationally-representative survey of U.S. adults ages 25+ (see House 2014 for
details). Respondents were first interviewed in 1986 (N = 3,617) and follow-up interviews were
conducted in 1989 (N = 2,867), 1994 (N = 2,562), 2001/2 (N = 1,787), and 2011 (N = 1,427). The
sample is a closed cohort, and all respondents have complete information on all covariates included
in the models. Our analyses are based on the restricted-use ACL which contains links to NDI death
records through 2011 (N = 1,832 deaths). The analyses also exclude three respondents in the 1986
ACL who were under age 25 at interview. A public-use version of the ACL that does not include
respondents’ vital status is available from the Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
Research at the University of Michigan.
The GSS is a nationally representative cross-sectional survey of the non-institutionalized
U.S. adult population ages 18+ conducted by the National Opinion Research Center (NORC) at
the University of Chicago. The 1972–1993 GSS was conducted annually (except 1979 and 1981)
and it has been conducted biannually since 1994. The GSS-NDI links the 1978–2010 GSS (N =
44,174) with NDI death records in 1979–2014 (N = 12,558) (Muennig et al. 2016). To increase
comparability with the other SLMFs, the analyses are restricted to the 1986–2010 GSS with NDI
follow-up through 2011 (35,371 respondents and 7,056 decedents). We also exclude members of
the 1987 black oversample (N = 316, 0.7%) and listwise delete observations missing age (N = 50,
0.1%), educational attainment (N = 89, 0.2%), or current marital status (N = 8, 0.02%). We also
restrict the GSS-NDI analyses to respondents ages 25–88 at interview to increase comparability
with the other surveys. Our final individual-level GSS-NDI sample (GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–

11

2011) contains 31,480 respondents and 6,560 decedents. GSS-NDI data are available publicly from
NORC (2016). Additional information about the GSS-NDI is available elsewhere (Muennig et al.
2011, 2016).
We compare mortality rates and life expectancies from the NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and
GSS-NDI with U.S. vital statistics data for women, men, and both genders combined. We
downloaded period life tables constructed using U.S. vital statistics data from the Human Mortality
Database (HMD 2018). Mortality rates and life expectancies based on vital statistics data are
averaged over the 1986–2011 period to approximately match the follow-up years most SLMFs in
our analyses covered. Predicted mortality rates estimated from each respective SLMF represent
the average age-specific mortality rate over the follow-up period. Thus, the SLMF life
expectancies are averages because we construct life tables from predicted mortality rates that
incorporate multiple follow-up years.

Measures
All-cause mortality risk (0 = alive, 1 = dead) is the dependent variable in all SLMF analyses. Vital
status of survey respondents at the end of the follow-up period is determined through probabilistic
linkage with the NDI. Exposure to the risk of death is measured in calendar years. Survivors
receive a partial year of exposure the first year they are interviewed (calculated based on interview
month/quarter) and one year of exposure thereafter until the end of the follow-up period. Decedents
receive a partial year of exposure the first year they are interviewed (calculated based on interview
month/quarter), a full year of exposure each year they survive, and a partial year of exposure the
year they die (calculated based on month/quarter of death).

12

Age and exposure have slightly different specifications in the models used to construct life
tables. In these analyses, we reformat each SLMF into a person-year file containing time-varying
measures of age, mortality status, and exposure. Each row in the person-year file represents one
calendar year of exposure and the number of rows each respondent contributed equals the total
number of years (partial or complete) survived. Exact age on January 1st in each year is calculated
based on self-reported birth dates 2 (month and year) and interview dates (month and year for the
GSS, HRS, and ACL and quarter and year for the NHIS-LMF) and calculated using interview
quarter and year. We use this information to calculate age x on January 1st in year t, where age x
ranges from exact age x – 0.05 to exact age x + 0.49. Other studies take a similar approach (Brown
et al. 2012). In the models used to create life tables for each SLMF, this approach predicts mortality
rates that closely approximate traditional occurrence-exposure rates (i.e., life table mx). Results are
similar in ancillary analyses (not shown) with more precise age and exposure specifications.
Covariates in the Cox proportional hazard models include self-reported age (in years),
gender (male and female), race (white, black, and other race), legal marital status (currently
married, previously married, and never married), and educational attainment (less than high
school, high school graduate, some college, and bachelor’s degree or more). Covariates are all
measured at baseline and coded uniformly across datasets to increase comparability. Race, for
example, is measured in three categories because this is how it is measured in the 1986–2010
public-use GSS, and Hispanic ethnicity was not assessed in the GSS until 2000. Educational
attainment is categorized as follows from variables that measure completed years of schooling:

2

Respondents’ birth month is not available publicly in the 2000–2010 GSS, but the survey contains
respondents’ zodiac sign. This information is used to randomly impute missing birth months in the
2000–2010 GSS. Zodiac sign is missing when birth month is missing in the 1986–1998 GSS.
Births are assumed to occur mid-year when both birth month and zodiac sign are missing.
13

less than high school (0–11 years), high school diploma (12 years), some college (13–15 years),
and college degree or more (16+ years). Marital status is recoded from questions asking
respondents to report their current legal marital status. Marital status and educational attainment
are measured at baseline even though these attributes may vary over time to facilitate comparisons
between SLMFs that contain longitudinal (ACL and HRS) and cross-sectional (NHIS-LMF and
GSS-NDI) survey data.

Analyses
Our analyses proceed in two stages. The first stage focuses on differences in absolute mortality
risk between SLMFs and U.S. vital statistics data. Specifically, we compare age-specific mortality
rates and life expectancies from the NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, GSS-NDI, and U.S. vital statistics
data. We estimate parametric hazard models to predict age-specific mortality rates and construct
life tables with the SLMF data. Exploratory analyses (available by request) were performed to
determine the optimal specification of the baseline hazard and showed that exponential models
generally fit best. Structural constraints on the relationships examined are minimized by predicting
adult mortality risk as a function of age in years (i.e., the models only control for a linear age term
that varies over time).
We use coefficients from these models to obtain age-specific mortality rates (mx) and
construct life tables using a multivariate life table approach (Teachman and Hayward 1993). This
approach allows us to estimate age-specific mortality rates in each SLMF which we then use to
construct life tables and ultimately calculate life expectancy. We estimate confidence intervals for
mortality rates and life expectancy based on 1,000 Monte Carlo simulations (Andreev and
Shkolnikov 2010). We perform analyses on person-year files and estimate separate models for

14

women, men, and both genders combined. Mortality rates and life expectancies based on SLMF
data and vital statistics data are compared using graphs, tables, and rate ratios. Mortality rates and
life expectancies based on vital statistics data should be thought of as the benchmark or reference
data that we use to compare and contrast results between data sources. We do not imply that vital
statistics data represent a gold standard.
The second stage of the analysis focuses on relative mortality risk between the NHIS-LMF,
ACL, HRS, and GSS-NDI. We estimate two nested semi-parametric hazard models (i.e., Cox
proportional hazard models) for each SLMF. Model 1 regresses all-cause mortality risk on age in
years, gender (reference group [ref.] = men), and race (ref. = whites). Model 2 regresses all-cause
mortality risk on age in years, gender (ref. = men), race (ref. = whites), marital status (ref. =
currently married), and educational attainment (ref. = college education). The analyses are
performed on individual-level files and all covariates are measured at baseline. The models are
parsimonious to increase comparability between our analyses and other studies that use SLMF
data. Sample weights are applied and complex variances are computed in all SLMF analyses
(StataCorp 2013). Online supplements include complete life tables for each SLMF, ancillary
results, and the Stata code necessary to replicate our results.

Results
Mortality Rates and Life Expectancies
Figures 1 (women) and 2 (men) display mortality rate ratios at ages 25, 55, and 85 for each SLMF
relative to vital statistics. 3 These three ages were chosen to depict mortality disparities in early

3

Appendix Table A lists the mortality rates (per 100,000) at additional ages from U.S. vital
statistics, NHIS-LMF, ACL, HRS, and GSS-NDI data for the women, men, and both genders
combined.
15

adulthood (age 25), middle adulthood (age 55), and older adulthood (age 85). Rate ratios in the
HRS are not calculated in early adulthood because the survey is designed to represent persons ages
51+. The figures display rate ratios for age- and gender-specific survey-based mortality rates
relative to vital statistics-based mortality rates. For example, the rate ratio for HRS men at age 55
is calculated by dividing the predicted mortality rate for men at age 55 in the HRS by the average
mortality rate for men at age 55 in vital statistics between 1992 and 2011. Rate ratios below 1.0
indicate that SLMF rates are lower than vital statistics rates, and rate ratios above 1.0 indicate that
SLMF rates are higher than vital statistics rates. SMLF and vital statistic mortality rates are
identical when rate ratios equal 1.0.
Figures 1 and 2 show that mortality rates in the NHIS-LMF, ACL, and HRS are lower than
or equivalent to mortality rates in vital statistics. Mortality rates in the NHIS-LMF and ACL are
much lower in comparison to vital statistics in early adulthood, but the discrepancy with vital
statistics narrows in middle and older adulthood. At ages 55 and 85, HRS mortality rates are
somewhat lower than vital statistics rates, mirroring the pattern observed for the NHIS-LMF and
ACL. Unlike the other SLMFs, GSS-NDI rate ratios exceed 1.0 at ages 25 and 55 years. That is,
the GSS-NDI has higher mortality rates in early and middle adulthood relative to the vital statistics
rates. For instance, among women, GSS-NDI rates are more than three times as high as vital
statistics rates at age 25 (risk ratio [RR] = 3.18) and more than twice as high at age 55 (RR = 2.03).
Among men, GSS-NDI rates exceed vital statistics rates by 101% ([2.01 – 1.0] × 100) at age 25
and by 67% at age 55. Like the other SLMFs, mortality rates in the GSS-NDI are lower at age 85
than vital statistics rates, but they diverge more sharply from vital statistics when compared to the
other SLMFs. Differences between mortality rates based on SLMFs and vital statistics data are
thought to exist primarily because the survey samples in the SLMFs exclude institutionalized

16

persons—most notably, nursing home residents—who, on average, have a higher risk of death
than their non-institutionalized counterparts, whereas vital statistics data include mortality
information for the entire population.
Figure 3 displays the difference in life expectancies (in single years of age) between each
SLMF and vital statistics (i.e., SLMF ex – vital statistics ex) for the total population. We show
results for women and men combined because the overall and gender-specific patterns are similar.
Each line in the graph represents the difference between SLMF life expectancies and vital statistics
life expectancies at the same age. Appendix Table B displays the life expectancies from U.S. vital
statistics, NHIS-LMF, ACL, HRS, and GSS-NDI data for both genders combined (top panel),
women (middle panel), and men (bottom panel).
Similar to our findings regarding mortality rate ratios, life expectancy estimates in the
NHIS-LMF, HRS, and ACL reflect more favorable mortality risk when compared with life
expectancy in U.S. vital statistics (Figure 3). Life expectancies calculated from NHIS-LMF and
ACL data are consistently about one year higher than those from U.S. vital statistics. Life
expectancy in the HRS is also generally comparable to vital statistics data, but differences between
the HRS and vital statistics are larger before age 65 and smaller at the oldest ages when compared
with the other surveys. These comparative results resemble those from previous studies; life
expectancies based on SLMF data tend to be slightly higher than those based on vital statistics data
(Hummer et al. 1999; Lariscy et al. 2015). Previous studies have shown similar patterns in the
NHIS-LMF and HRS (Brown et al. 2012), but no published studies document this general pattern
in the ACL.
Figure 3 further shows that the age patterns of GSS-NDI life expectancy are very different
from the other SLMFs and vital statistics. When compared with life expectancies based on U.S.

17

vital statistics data, GSS-NDI life expectancy estimates are much lower at younger adult ages,
similar in midlife where a crossover occurs, and much higher at older adult ages. For example, life
expectancy in the GSS-NDI is approximately three years lower at the youngest ages and four years
higher at the oldest ages. The gender-specific results shown in the middle and bottom panels of
Appendix Table B are very similar to those shown for both genders combined (top panel). These
patterns have not been documented previously in the GSS-NDI.
In sum, comparisons of absolute mortality risk reveal two key patterns. Mortality rates and
life expectancies based on the NHIS-LMF, HRS, and ACL closely correspond with vital statistics
data, but reflect somewhat more favorable survival than vital statistics data. On the other hand,
mortality rates and life expectancies based on the GSS-NDI do not correspond with those based
on other SLMFs or U.S. vital statistics data, and these discrepancies are most evident among
younger and older adults.

Cox Proportional Hazard Models
Tables 2 (ages 25+, excludes HRS) and 3 (NHIS-LMF, ACL, and GSS-NDI: ages 50+, HRS: ages
51+) show descriptive statistics for all variables included in the Cox proportional hazard models.
Covariates are distributed similarly across each dataset, with only a few differences that are
statistically significant yet small. This finding is important because it implies that the problems in
the GSS-NDI uncovered in Figures 1–3 (and Appendix Tables A and B) likely arise from the NDI
linkage process rather than from the sampling and collection of the GSS itself. Another exception
to the similarity across datasets is the higher proportion of deaths during the follow-up period in
the ACL. As Tables 2 and 3 show, a higher proportion of ACL respondents died during follow-up
(35.0% at ages 25+ and 71.8% at ages 50+) than in the other SLMF datasets. In contrast, only

18

16.2% of respondents ages 25+ and 32.3% of respondents ages 50+ died over the same period
(1986–2011) in the NHIS-LMF. At first glance, the ACL seems to have an excess of deaths, but
differences between the ACL sample design and the other surveys are the most likely reason for
these differences in proportion of deaths. The ACL has a closed cohort design while the surveys
in the other SLMFs are either pooled cross sections (NHIS-LMF and GSS-NDI) or longitudinal
surveys that include refresher cohorts (HRS). Consequently, the proportion of deaths rises sharply
over time as the ACL cohort ages. The ACL also oversamples two groups that experience a higher
risk of death than the general population: blacks and persons ages 60+. Thus, differences in death
distributions between the ACL and the other SLMFs are reasonable and expected.
Tables 4 (ages 25+) and 5 (ages 50+, HRS: ages 51+) show results from two nested Cox
proportional hazard models regressing all-cause mortality risk on several sociodemographic
factors. Overall, results from each dataset are similar and all associations are in the expected
directions based on previous research. For example, mortality risk is higher among men than
women, black adults than white adults, the previously and never married than the currently
married, and those with lower educational attainment than those with higher education. Cox
proportional hazard models conceal the problems with the GSS-NDI that are observed in our
comparison of age-specific absolute measures of mortality risk. That is, mortality rates and life
expectancies drawn from our GSS-NDI life table differ substantially from the vital statistics data
and the other SLMFs, yet the GSS-NDI hazard ratios are similar to the other SLMFs. We observe
differences in hazard ratios for some variables across the SLMFs, but no SLMF consistently
performs differently than the others, as was the case with the GSS-NDI in our mortality rate and
life expectancy analyses. Interestingly, despite having relatively few decedents, the ACL performs

19

very well when compared with the other datasets. As Tables 4 and 5 show, hazard ratios in the
ACL are generally between those found in the GSS-NDI and the NHIS-LMF.

Sensitivity Analyses
We performed sensitivity tests to examine several alternative analytic approaches. First, we
conducted extensive tests within each SLMF to determine the optimal specification of the baseline
hazard for the mortality rates used in the life tables (results available by request). We compared
observed (unsmoothed) age-specific mortality with estimated (smoothed) age-specific mortality
rates. The analyses were conducted for the overall samples and did not incorporate sample weights.
Overall, these analyses showed that an exponential model adheres most closely to the observed
age-specific mortality rates within each dataset.
Second, we considered whether our results change if data are limited to years 1993 forward.
Recall that the GSS did not request SSN (i.e., the most important PII for NDI linkage) from
respondents before 1993. At the same time, SSN provision declined in the 1990s across all SLMFs
due to growing concerns of identity theft. To test the robustness of our results, we examine life
expectancy differences between the GSS-NDI and vital statistics and compare with the difference
between NHIS-LMF and vital statistics. For this sensitivity test, we find similar patterns before
1993 versus 1993 forward. That is, GSS-NDI life expectancy estimates remain too low (by as
much as three years) in early adulthood and too high (by as much as four years) in later adulthood,
relative to vital statistics and other SLMFs when data are limited to years 1993 forward.
Third, we compared weighted and unweighted results to gauge the sensitivity of our results
to the way in which sample weights are calculated within each SLMF. We applied sample weights

20

in the life table and multivariate analyses so that our results from the SLMFs are generalizable to
the U.S. non-institutionalized adult population. Some SLMFs, such as the NHIS-LMF, reweight
the sample after excluding respondents without sufficient PII to undergo the NDI linkage process.
In the NHIS-LMF, these respondents are deemed “ineligible” for NDI mortality follow-up and
they are assigned a sample weight of zero. We examined life expectancy differences between GSSNDI and vital statistics and compared with the difference between NHIS-LMF and vital statistics
with and without weights. Substantive results from weighted and unweighted models are the same,
which suggests that differences in sample weight calculations do not explain discrepancies
between mortality estimates based on vital statistics data and SLMF data.

Discussion
Survey-linked mortality files increasingly are an essential source of information on the influence
of various social and economic factors on adult mortality risk. This is the first study to
systematically assess whether mortality estimates based on these data sources are comparable
across surveys and with national mortality estimates in vital statistics data. Our study has four key
findings. First, mortality rates and life expectancy estimates are similar in the NHIS-LMF, ACL,
and HRS. These similarities are even more remarkable when one considers that these surveys have
different sample designs (e.g., NHIS is cross-sectional, HRS is longitudinal with refreshed panels,
and ACL is longitudinal with a fixed panel). Compared with the other survey-linked datasets, GSSNDI mortality rates are much higher at younger adult ages and much lower at older adult ages.
This finding is surprising because the GSS data are high-quality, nationally-representative survey
data with a large sample. Since the underlying survey data are high quality, we suspect that
differences in NDI match quality between the GSS-NDI and the other SLMFs examined are

21

responsible for these discrepancies. Second, life expectancy estimates in survey-linked data are
somewhat higher than in vital statistics data by about one year, likely due in part to the surveylinked datasets excluding the institutionalized population (Hummer et al. 1999). GSS-NDI is again
an exception; life expectancy in the GSS-NDI is approximately three years lower at the youngest
ages and four years higher at the oldest ages. Third, despite the issues with the GSS-NDI observed
in our age-specific absolute mortality estimates, multivariate analyses reveal that relative estimates
of mortality risk (hazard ratios) are similar across SLMFs. These results indicate that researchers
should exercise caution when using the GSS-NDI and underscore the need for researchers to
benchmark results from the GSS-NDI with those from other SLMFs whenever possible. Finally,
our approach illustrates the importance of examining differences in absolute mortality risk (i.e.,
mortality rates and life expectancy) in addition to differences in relative mortality risk (e.g., hazard
ratios from multivariate models) in adult mortality risk. The life tables provide critically important
information about the comparability of mortality estimates across datasets that is not readily
apparent in multivariate analyses.
Our findings are notable because they strongly imply that the NDI record linkage algorithm
performs sub-optimally in the General Social Survey. Probabilistic record linkage depends on PII
reported in both data sources, especially SSN, to correctly match respondents who died during the
follow-up period to their death records (Harron et al. 2015; Rogers et al. 1997). In contrast to the
ACL, NHIS, and HRS, relatively few GSS-NDI decedents have valid SSNs because the GSS did
not collect SSNs before 1993 (Muennig et al. 2011). We expected to find consistently lower
estimated mortality rates in the GSS-NDI than in the other datasets at all ages since few GSS-NDI
respondents are matched on SSN, which would lead to many decedents not being identified (i.e.,
false negatives). However, we find that GSS-NDI mortality rates tend to be higher than the other

22

data sources at younger ages and lower at older ages. We speculate that this finding is a result of
relaxed matching criteria for linkage in the GSS-NDI. That is, the matching criteria are made more
lenient for the GSS-NDI linkage process in order to allow more matches to be made with less PII
matching between sources (Muennig et al. 2011). 4 In the GSS-NDI, relaxing linkage criteria for
all ages may have shifted the vital status of too many cases from survivors to deaths at younger
ages but not enough cases to deaths at older ages. Future research with the restricted-use GSS-NDI
should explore this possibility and, if warranted, take corrective action.

Limitations
Our analyses have several limitations. First, we cannot be entirely certain that poorer linkage
quality in the GSS-NDI than in the other survey-linked datasets is the source of the unanticipated
GSS-NDI mortality estimates since indicators of linkage quality (e.g., NDI match class and NDI
match score) are not available in the public-use GSS-NDI. Second, we limit our analyses to
variables available for all years in each of the four social surveys we compared. Thus, we are
unable to statistically adjust for Hispanic ethnicity or nativity status. Additionally, educational
attainment is measured in years rather than degrees, which may miscode some respondents who
took more or less time to complete degrees (Rogers et al. 2010). Period differences may also exist.
This is true especially in the GSS-NDI, which contains mortality records that span more than three
decades (1979–2014). Future studies should examine these issues more closely. Third, we limit
our analysis to four of the most commonly-used and publicly-available SLMFs. However, our
analysis could be extended to include other established SLMFs, including the National Health and

4

Strategies that analysts can use to alter linkage criteria are described elsewhere (NCHS
2018:18).
23

Nutrition Examination Survey, the National Longitudinal Mortality Study, and Panel Study of
Income Dynamics, or other datasets that have recently been or will be linked to NDI, such as the
National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent to Adult Health and the High School and Beyond
study. Finally, we only examine all-cause mortality risk and do not conduct detailed analyses for
key subpopulation groups. Results for cause-specific mortality risk or certain population
subgroups may diverge more across datasets. These analyses will have less statistical power than
those presented herein because they contain fewer decedents for some causes of death and/or
subpopulation groups, but future research should explore these possibilities.

Recommendations
Based on our findings, we offer several recommendations for researchers using survey-linked
mortality files. First, new SLMFs should be compared with existing mortality datasets before
proceeding to complex statistical models. Researchers should attempt to benchmark results against
multiple data sources because no single dataset is a true “gold-standard” for comparison purposes.
Researchers using newly created, or even recently updated, SLMFs should compare mortality
estimates from these datasets with those from other SLMFs that are more established. Ideally,
researchers should also compare their results with vital statistics data, which offer several
advantages over sample-based mortality data. Second, public-use survey-linked mortality files
should include variables that allow researchers to assess the quality of the linkage between surveys
and NDI records (e.g., match class and match score). Although the PII used to link surveys to death
records contains sensitive information (SSN, names, exact birthdates, geographic identifiers, etc.),
providing additional information about NDI match quality would not raise confidentiality
concerns. Currently, HRS is the only widely-used SLMF that publically releases information about

24

NDI linkage quality. Third, GSS modules, which allow researchers to append supplementary items
to the core survey, could be used to explore ways to improve record linkage within the GSS and
potentially inform similar efforts within other surveys. Experimental modules, for example, could
be used to explore strategies to reduce item non-response on key identifiers conventionally used
in the record linkage process. Adding supplementary questions to the GSS would not have
immediate consequences for GSS-NDI data quality, but GSS modules could improve NDI record
linkage in the future. Fourth, SLMFs linked to the NDI should include recalibrated sample weights
that adjust for whether respondents are eligible for NDI follow-up. Eligibility-adjusted sample
weights are available in many SLMFs including the NHIS-LMF, and other SLMFs should consider
including eligibility-adjusted weights. Fifth, on a more general note, our results imply that
researchers should proceed with caution in analyses that focus on relatively small subgroups within
SLMFs. This is true generally, but our results imply that this is an important consideration
particularly when using the GSS-NDI. Our multivariate results suggest that the GSS-NDI performs
adequately relative to the other SLMFs examined in models that control for key sociodemographic
and socioeconomic attributes. This may or may not be the case, however, in analyses that focus on
relatively small subpopulations because it is difficult to predict how well the GSS-NDI performs.
Finally, a working group of mortality researchers should be convened to discuss SLMF data quality
issues and make recommendations to ensure the quality of linkages across datasets. Members
should have a mix of substantive and methodological expertise and experience with SLMF data.
Members should also represent multiple disciplines (demography, epidemiology, biostatistics,
survey statistics, computer science, etc.).

Conclusion

25

Survey linked-mortality files are an increasingly important source of information on population
health disparities, but few studies have examined how comparable these types of data are to each
other and to vital statistics data. Prior research comparing mortality estimates between multiple
SLMFs is also sparse. Our analyses address these important gaps in extant research. Overall, our
results suggest that not all survey-linked mortality files are created equally. Mortality estimates
based on the NHIS-LMF, HRS, and ACL are comparable to U.S. vital statistics data, but absolute
mortality estimates from the GSS-NDI and vital statistics are not comparable. Differences in
results between SLMFs are less apparent in multivariate hazard models that include age and other
key demographic and socioeconomic controls measured at baseline. The contrast between our life
table results and multivariate results is instructive because it demonstrates how multivariate
analyses can obscure fundamental structural flaws in SLMF mortality estimation. Analyses
examining data quality issues in SLMF mortality data must compare absolute and relative risk
measures (King et al. 2012). Although we cannot be certain without detailed information on
linkage quality, we suspect that the observed differences between the GSS-NDI and the other
surveys arise because the NDI record linkage algorithm performs sub-optimally in the GSS-NDI
due to missing personal identifiers. This means that the GSS-NDI differs from other commonlyused mortality data sources in ascertaining respondents’ vital status. We advise researchers to
exercise caution when using the GSS-NDI to examine absolute U.S. adult mortality patterns.
Estimates of relative mortality risk in the GSS-NDI and other major survey-linked mortality files
generally are comparable in multivariate analyses when age and key sociodemographic attributes
are controlled, but researchers should exercise caution in analyses that focus on relatively small
sub-populations or specific age-groups.

26

Acknowledgements An earlier draft of this paper was presented at the 2016 meeting of the
Population Association of America meeting, Washington, DC. This research received support
from NICHD Center (R24 HD041028) and NIA Training (T32 AG000221) grants to the
Population Studies Center at the University of Michigan and an NIA Training (T32 AG000139)
grant to the Duke Population Research Institute at Duke University. We thank the Americans’
Changing Lives working group at the University of Michigan, Audrey Dorelien, Benjamin
Walker, and three anonymous PRPR reviewers for helpful comments. We also thank the Human
Mortality Database, Minnesota Population Center and State Health Access Data Assistance
Center, National Center for Health Statistics, and National Opinion Research Center for
providing the datasets used in this analysis.

27

References
Andreev, E. M., and Shkolnikov, V. M. (2010). Spreadsheet for calculation of confidence limits
for any life table or healthy-life table quantity. Max Planck Institute for Demographic
Research Technical Report
Arias, E., Eschbach, K., Schauman, W. S., Backlund, E. L., and Sorlie, P. D. (2010). The
Hispanic mortality advantage and ethnic misclassification on U.S. death certificates.
American Journal of Public Health 100(Supplement 1): S171–S177.
Black, D. A., Hsu, Y. C., Sanders, S. G., Schofield, L. S., and Taylor, L. J. (2017). The
Methuselah effect: The pernicious impact of unreported deaths on old-age mortality
estimates. Demography 54(6): 2001–2024.
Blewett, L. A., Rivera Drew, J. A., Griffin, R., King, M. L., and Williams, K. C. W. (2018).
IPUMS Health Surveys: National Health Interview Survey, version 6.3. Retrieved from
http://doi.org/10.18128/D070.V6.3
Brown, D. C., Hayward, M. D., Montez, J. K., Hummer, R. A., Chiu, C. T., and Hidajat, M. M.
(2012). The significance of education for mortality compression in the United States.
Demography 49(3): 819–840.
Bugliari, D., Campbell, N., Chan, C., Hayden, O., Hurd, M., Main, R., Mallett, J., McCullough,
C., Meijer, E., Moldoff, M., Pantoja, P., Rohwedder, S., and St. Clair, P. (2016). RAND
HRS data documentation, version P. Santa Monica, CA: RAND Center for the Study of
Aging.
Chapman, B. P., Fiscella, K., Kawachi, I., Duberstein, P., and Muennig, P. (2013). Emotion
suppression and mortality risk over a 12-year follow-up. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research 75(4): 381–385.
Crimmins, E. M., Hayward, M. D., and Seeman, T. E. (2004). Race/ethnicity, socioeconomic
status, and health. In N. B. Anderson, R. A. Bulatao, & B. Cohen (Eds.), Critical
perspectives on racial and ethnic differences in health in late life (pp. 310–352).
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Curb, J. D., Ford, C. E., Pressel, S., Palmer, M., Babcock, C., and Hawkins, C. M. (1985).
Ascertainment of vital status through the National Death Index and the Social Security
Administration. American Journal of Epidemiology 121(5): 754–766.
Dahlhamer, J. M., and Cox, C. S. (2007). Respondent consent to link survey data with
administrative records: Results from a split-ballot field test with the 2007 National
Health Interview Survey. Proceedings of the Federal Committee on Statistical
Methodology Research Conference. Washington, DC.
Harron, K., Goldstein, H., and Dibben, C. (Eds.). (2015). Methodological developments in data
linkage. West Sussex, UK: Wiley.

28

Hayward, M. D., and Gorman, B. K. (2004). The long arm of childhood: The influence of earlylife social conditions on men's mortality. Demography 41(1): 87–107.
Hogan, H., Cantwell, P. J., Devine, J., Mule, V. T., and Velkoff, V. (2013). Quality and the 2010
Census. Population Research and Policy Review 32(5): 637–662.
House, J. S. (2014). Americans' Changing Lives: Waves I, II, III, IV, and V, 1986, 1989, 1994,
2002, and 2011. [Computer file] ICPSR04690-v7. Ann Arbor, MI: Inter-university
Consortium for Political and Social Research.
Human Mortality Database. (2018). University of California, Berkeley (USA), and Max Planck
Institute for Demographic Research (Germany). www.mortality.org.
Hummer, R. A., Rogers, R. G., Nam, C. B., and Ellison, C. G. (1999). Religious involvement
and U.S. adult mortality. Demography 36(2): 273–285.
Ingram, D. D., Lochner, K. A., and Cox, C. S. (2008). Mortality experience of the 1986–2000
National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files participants. Hyattsville, MD:
National Center for Health Statistics.
Kim, J., Shin, H. C., Rosen, Z., Kang, J. H., Dykema, J., and Muennig, P. (2015). Trends and
correlates of consenting to provide Social Security numbers: Longitudinal findings from
the General Social Survey (1993–2010). Field Methods 27(4): 348–362.
King, N. B., Harper, S., and Young, M. E. (2012). Use of relative and absolute effect measures in
reporting health inequalities: Structured review. BMJ 345(e5774): 1–8.
Lariscy, J. T. (2011). Differential record linkage by Hispanic ethnicity and age in linked
mortality studies: Implications for the epidemiologic paradox. Journal of Aging and
Health 23(8): 1263–1284.
Lariscy, J. T. (2017). Black-white disparities in adult mortality: Implications of differential
record linkage for understanding the mortality crossover. Population Research and
Policy Review 36(1): 137–156.
Lariscy, J. T., Hummer, R. A., and Hayward, M. D. (2015). Hispanic older adult mortality in the
United States: New estimates and an assessment of factors shaping the Hispanic paradox.
Demography 52(1): 1–14.
Lawrence, E. M., Rogers, R. G., and Wadsworth, T. (2015). Happiness and longevity in the
United States. Social Science and Medicine 145: 115–119.
Lee, Y., Muennig, P., Kawachi, I., and Hatzenbuehler, M. L. (2015). Effects of racial prejudice
on the health of communities: A multilevel survival analysis. American Journal of Public
Health 105(11): 2349–2355.

29

Morey, B. N., Gee, G. C., Muennig, P., and Hatzenbuehler, M. L. (2018). Community-level
prejudice and mortality among immigrant groups. Social Science and Medicine 199: 56–
66.
Muennig, P., Johnson, G., Kim, J., Smith, T. W., and Rosen, Z. (2011). The General Social
Survey-National Death Index: An innovative new dataset for the social sciences. BMC
Research Notes 4(385): 1–6.
Muennig, P., Rosen, Z., and Johnson, G. (2013). Do the psychosocial risks associated with
television viewing increase mortality? Evidence from the 2008 General Social SurveyNational Death Index dataset. Annals of Epidemiology 23(6): 355–360.
Muennig, P., Rosen, Z., Johnson, G., and Smith, T. W. (2016). Codebook for the 1978–2010
General Social Survey linked to mortality data through 12/31/2014 via the National
Death Index. Retrieved from www.gssndi.com
National Center for Health Statistics. (2018). The linkage of National Center for Health Statistics
survey data to the National Death Index – 2015 Linked Mortality File (LMF):
Methodology overview and analytic considerations. Hyattsville, MD. Retrieved from
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/LMF2015_Methodology_Analytic_Considera
tions.pdf
National Center for Health Statistics, Office of Analysis and Epidemiology. (2009). National
Health Interview Survey (1986–2004) Linked Mortality Files, mortality follow-up
through 2006: Matching methodology. Hyattsville, MD. Retrieved from
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/datalinkage/matching_methodology_nhis_final.pdf
National Center for Health Statistics, Office of Analysis and Epidemiology. (2013). NCHS 2011
Linked Mortality Files matching methodology. Hyattsville, MD.
National Opionion Research Center. (2016). General Social Survey-National Death Index 1978–
2010. Retrieved from http://gss.norc.org/get-the-data
Pabayo, R., Kawachi, I., and Muennig, P. (2015). Political party affiliation, political ideology,
and mortality. Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 69(5): 423–431.
Pablos-Méndez, A. (1994). Mortality among Hispanics. Journal of the American Medical
Association 271(16): 1237.
Palloni, A., and Arias, E. (2004). Paradox lost: Explaining the Hispanic adult mortality
advantage. Demography 41(3): 385–415.
Preston, S. H., Elo, I. T., Rosenwaike, I., and Hill, M. (1996). African-American mortality at
older ages: Results of a matching study. Demography 33(2): 193–209.
Preston, S. H., and Taubman, P. (1994). Socioeconomic differences in adult mortality and health
status. In L. G. Martin & S. H. Preston (Eds.), Demography of aging. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
30

Rogers, R. G., Carrigan, J. A., and Kovar, M. G. (1997). Comparing mortality estimates based on
different administrative records. Population Research and Policy Review 16(13): 213–
224.
Rogers, R. G., Everett, B. G., Zajacova, A., and Hummer, R. A. (2010). Educational degrees and
adult mortality risk in the United States. Biodemography and Social Biology 56(1): 80–
99.
Rogers, R. G., Hummer, R. A., and Nam, C. B. (2000). Living and dying in the USA: Behavioral,
health, and social differentials of adult mortality. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Soldo, B. J., Hurd, M. D., Rodgers, W. L., and Wallace, R. B. (1997). Assets and health
dynamics among the oldest old: An overview of the AHEAD study. The Journals of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences 52B(Special Issue):
1–20.
Sonnega, A., Faul, J. D., Ofstedal, M. B., Langa, K. M., Phillips, J. W. R., and Weir, D. R.
(2014). Cohort profile: The Health and Retirement Study (HRS). International Journal of
Epidemiology 43(2): 576–585.
StataCorp. (2013). Stata statistical software: Release 13. College Station, TX: StataCorp LP.
Stewart, Q. T., Cobb, R. J., and Keith, V. M. (2018). The color of death: Race, observed skin
tone, and all-cause mortality in the United States. Ethnicity & Disease
Teachman, J. D., and Hayward, M. D. (1993). Interpreting hazard rate models. Sociological
Methods & Research 21(3): 340–371.
Warner, D. F., and Hayward, M. D. (2006). Early-life origins of the race gap in men's mortality.
Journal of Health and Social Behavior 47(3): 209–226.
Weir, D. R. (2016). Validating mortality ascertainment in the Health and Retirement Study.
Retrieved from
https://hrs.isr.umich.edu/sites/default/files/biblio/Weir_mortality_ascertainment.pdf

31

Table 1 Characteristics of the NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and GSS-NDI survey and analysis samples
NHIS-LMF
HRSb,c
ACLb
GSS-NDI
Study Design
Respondents
Age at interview
Survey data
Interview perioda
Interview years
Sample design
Population sampled
Data collection method

Mortality data
Follow-up years
Follow-up source

18+

51+

25+

18+

1986–2009
24
Cross-sectional

1992–2010
21
Longitudinal

1986–2011
5
Longitudinal

1978–2010
25
Cross-sectional

Civilian, noninstitutionalized
In-person

Civilian, noninstitutionalized
In-person at
baseline, by
phone for later
waves

Civilian, noninstitutionalized
In-person at
baseline, by
phone for later
waves

Civilian, noninstitutionalized
Phone

1986–2011
NDI, other
linkaged

1992–2011
NDI linkage,
Tracker file

1986–2011
NDI linkage,
survey follow-up

1979–2014
NDI linkage

Sample Restrictions in the Current Study
Respondents
Age at interview
Age at death/censoring
Survey data
Interview period
Sample design
Population sampled
Mortality data
Follow-up years
Follow-up source

25–84e
25–100+

51–100+
51–100+

25–96
25–100+

25–88
25–100+

1986–2009
Cross-sectional

1992–2010
Longitudinal

1986–2011
Longitudinal

1986–2010
Cross-sectional

Civilian, noninstitutionalized

Civilian, noninstitutionalized

Civilian, noninstitutionalized

Civilian, noninstitutionalized

1986–2011

1992–2011

1986–2011

1986–2011

NDI linkage

NDI linkage

NDI linkage

NDI linkage

Notes: ACL = Americans' Changing Lives study; GSS-NDI = General Social Survey National Death Index;
HRS = Health and Retirement Study; NHIS-LMF = National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality Files;
NDI = National Death Index.
a

Only includes survey cross-sections/waves with mortality follow-up.

b

All respondents are community-dwelling initially (baseline interview). Respondents who subsequently
transition into an institution are re-interviewed (respondent or proxy interviews).
c

The HRS records respondents’ vital status at each interview wave (active follow-up) in addition to NDI
linkages (statistical or passive follow-up). The NDI successfully identifies the vast majority of decedents. To
increase comparability across surveys, we only include NDI deaths in the HRS.
d
The NDI is the primary source for vital status in the NHIS-LMF. However, NHIS survey records are also linked
with Social Security Administration, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, and death certificate data to

32

ascertain respondents’ vital status. The 1986–2011 NHIS-LMF contains very few deaths identified from data
sources other than the NDI (< .5% of all deaths).
e

Age top-codes in the public-use NHIS vary over time: age 99+ (1986–1995), 90+ (1996), and 85+ (1997–
2009).

33

Table 2 Descriptive statistics for respondents ages 25+ in the NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and GSS-NDI
samples
NHIS-LMFa
ACLb
GSS-NDIc
Age (mean)
Female (%)
Race (%)
White
Black
Other
Marital status (%)
Currently married
Previously married
Never married
Educational attainment (%)
Less than high school
High school
Some college
College
Deaths (%)

N = 1,334,010
48.3 (48.2, 48.4)
52.2 (52.2, 52.3)

N = 3,614
47.1 (46.0, 48.2)
52.9 (51.0, 54.8)

N = 31,480
47.6 (47.4, 47.8)
54.8 (54.1, 55.4)

83.4 (83.0, 83.8)
11.0 (10.7, 11.3)
5.6 (5.4, 5.8)

83.5 (79.9, 86.6)
10.9 (8.6, 13.8)
5.6 (3.8, 8.1)

80.9 (80.0, 81.8)
12.3 (11.6, 13.1)
6.8 (6.2, 7.3)

67.3 (67.0, 67.5)
19.9 (19.8, 20.1)
12.8 (12.7, 13.0)

69.4 (66.7, 72.0)
20.4 (18.7, 22.2)
10.2 (8.5, 12.2)

63.6 (62.9, 64.3)
21.9 (21.4, 22.4)
14.5 (14.0, 15.0)

17.1 (16.8, 17.3)
34.3 (34.1, 34.5)
23.8 (23.7, 24.0)
24.8 (24.5, 25.1)
16.2 (16.0, 16.4)

25.6 (22.7, 28.7)
31.4 (29.0, 33.8)
23.3 (20.8, 26.1)
19.7 (17.3, 22.4)
35.0 (32.5, 37.6)

17.9 (17.4, 18.5)
29.6 (29.0, 30.3)
25.8 (25.2, 26.4)
26.7 (25.9, 27.4)
19.5 (19.0, 20.0)

a

National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality File (NHIS-LMF, NHIS: 1986–2009, NDI: 1986–
2011).
b
Americans' Changing Lives study (ACL, 1986–2011).
c
General Social Survey-National Death Index (GSS-NDI, GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–2011).
Notes: The percentages (means) shown in the table are weighted. The analyses are based on individuallevel data.

34

Table 3 Descriptive statistics for respondents ages 50+ in the NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and GSS-NDI
samples
NHIS-LMFa
HRSb
ACLc
GSS-NDId
N = 555,795
N = 31,625
N = 2,070
N = 13,255
Age (mean)
63.9 (63.8, 64.0)
60.6 (60.4, 60.7)
65.0 (64.3, 65.6)
63.2 (63.0, 63.4)
Female (percent)
54.1 (54.0, 54.3)
50.9 (50.2, 51.5)
55.8 (52.6, 58.9)
55.3 (54.4, 56.3)
Race (percent)
White
86.6 (86.2, 87.0)
82.9 (82.4, 83.4)
86.9 (83.4, 89.8)
85.0 (84.0, 86.0)
Black
9.4 (9.1, 9.7)
11.3 (10.9, 11.6)
10.4 (7.9, 13.6)
11.0 (10.1, 11.9)
Other
4.0 (3.8, 4.3)
5.8 (5.5, 6.2)
2.7 (1.6, 4.7)
4.1 (3.6, 4.7)
Marital status (percent)
Currently married
66.5 (66.3, 66.8)
70.8 (70.2, 71.4)
66.6 (63.5, 69.6)
65.3 (64.4, 66.3)
Previously married
28.7 (28.4, 28.9)
23.7 (23.1, 24.3)
29.5 (26.7, 32.3)
29.7 (28.8, 30.6)
Never married
4.8 (4.7, 4.9)
5.5 (5.2, 5.9)
3.9 (3.0, 5.2)
5.0 (4.6, 5.4)
Education attainment
(percent)
Less than high school
24.0 (23.7, 24.3)
23.7 (23.2, 24.3)
42.2 (37.7, 46.8)
25.0 (24.1, 25.9)
High school
35.3 (35.1, 35.6)
31.0 (30.3, 31.6)
30.4 (27.3, 33.6)
31.3 (30.4, 32.2)
Some college
20.1 (19.9, 20.3)
21.9 (21.3, 22.5)
16.0 (13.4, 18.5)
21.1 (20.3, 21.9)
College
20.6 (20.3, 21.0)
23.4 (22.8, 24.0)
11.3 (9.0, 13.7)
22.6 (21.7, 23.6)
Deaths (percent)
32.3 (31.9, 32.8)
28.9 (28.4, 29.5)
71.8 (68.9, 74.5)
33.2 (32.3, 34.1)
a
National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality File (NHIS-LMF, NHIS: 1986–2009, NDI: 1986–
2011).
b
Health and Retirement Study (HRS, 1992–2010).
c
Americans' Changing Lives study (ACL, ACL: 1986–2011, NDI: 1986–2011).
d
General Social Survey-National Death Index (GSS-NDI, GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–2011).
Notes: The percentages (means) shown in the table are weighted. The analyses are based on individuallevel data.

35

Table 4 Cox proportional hazard models predicting mortality risk as a function of covariates in the NHIS-LMF, ACL, and
GSS-NDI, adults ages 25 and older
Model 1
Model 2
a
b
c
a
NHIS-LMF
ACL
GSS-NDI
NHIS-LMF
ACLb
GSS-NDIc
Age (years)
1.09***
1.10***
1.06***
1.09***
1.09***
1.06***
(1.09, 1.09)
(1.09, 1.10)
(1.06, 1.06)
(1.09, 1.09)
(1.08, 1.10)
(1.05, 1.06)
Female
0.67***
0.59***
0.75***
0.62***
0.56***
0.72***
(0.67, 0.68)
(0.53, 0.66)
(0.71, 0.79)
(0.61, 0.62)
(0.50, 0.63)
(0.68, 0.76)
Race
Black
1.29***
1.44***
1.51***
1.13***
1.26**
1.36***
(1.28, 1.31)
(1.26, 1.63)
(1.39, 1.64)
(1.11, 1.15)
(1.09, 1.44)
(1.25, 1.48)
Other
0.78***
1.28
1.08
0.75***
1.17
1.04
(0.76, 0.80)
(0.70, 2.35)
(0.92, 1.26)
(0.73, 0.77)
(0.62, 2.20)
(0.89, 1.21)
Marital status
Previously married
1.26***
1.24**
1.18***
(1.25, 1.28)
(1.08, 1.42)
(1.11, 1.25)
Never married
1.45***
1.19
1.24***
(1.42, 1.47)
(0.87, 1.65)
(1.13, 1.37)
Educational attainment
Less than high school
1.83***
1.78***
1.59***
(1.80, 1.86)
(1.44, 2.21)
(1.46, 1.73)
High school
1.51***
1.35**
1.33***
(1.49, 1.54)
(1.05, 1.74)
(1.22, 1.44)
Some college
1.35***
1.32**
1.22***
(1.33, 1.38)
(1.06, 1.66)
(1.11, 1.33)
Notes: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .001. The table displays hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals are in parentheses. The
results are weighted. Estimates are based on individual-level analyses. The reference categories are as follows: men, white race,
currently married, and college education.
a
National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality File (NHIS-LMF, NHIS: 1986–2009, NDI: 1986–2011).
b
Americans' Changing Lives study (ACL, ACL: 1986–2011, NDI: 1986–2011).
c
General Social Survey-National Death Index (GSS-NDI, GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–2011).

36

Table 5 Results from Cox proportional hazard models predicting mortality risk as a function of covariates in the NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and GSS-NDI, adults ages 50 years
and older
Model 1
NHIS-LMF
Age (years)
Female

1.09***

HRS
1.10***

(1.09, 1.09)

(1.10, 1.10)

a

0.68***
(0.67, 0.69)

b

0.70***
(0.67, 0.73)

Model 2
ACL

GSS-NDI

c

1.10***

d

NHIS-LMF

1.06***

(1.09, 1.11)
0.56***

(1.06, 1.07)
0.77***

1.08***

HRS
1.09***

(1.08, 1.08)

(1.09, 1.10)

a

0.63***

(0.50, 0.63)

(0.72, 0.82)

(0.62, 0.63)

1.30***

1.34***

1.06***

b

0.64***
(0.61, 0.67)

ACLc

GSS-NDId

1.09***

1.06***

(1.08, 1.10)

(1.05, 1.06)

0.53***

0.72***

(0.47, 0.59)

(0.68, 0.78)

Race
Black

1.19***
(1.17, 1.21)

Other

0.72***
(0.70, 0.74)

1.28***
(1.20, 1.36)
0.95
(0.83, 1.09)

(1.14, 1.48)
1.68**

(1.21, 1.48)
0.96

(1.02, 2.75)

(0.75, 1.21)

(1.04, 1.08)
0.69***
(0.67, 0.72)

1.14***
(1.07, 1.22)
0.89
(0.77, 1.03)

1.15*
(0.99, 1.32)
1.56*

1.21***
(1.09, 1.34)
0.92

(0.96, 2.54)

(0.73, 1.17)

1.23**

1.18***

(1.08, 1.41)

(1.10, 1.26)

Marital status
Previously married

1.24***
(1.22, 1.25)

Never married

1.31***
(1.28, 1.35)

1.27***
(1.20, 1.34)
1.48***
(1.31, 1.66)

1.36*

1.12

(0.96, 1.91)

(0.97, 1.30)

1.58***

1.50***

(1.27, 1.96)

(1.35, 1.67)

Educational attainment
Less than high school

1.66***
(1.63, 1.68)

High school

1.38***
(1.36, 1.41)

Some college

1.28***
(1.25, 1.30)

1.56***
(1.45, 1.66)
1.38***
(1.29, 1.47)
1.24***
(1.15, 1.34 )

1.28*
(0.98, 1.66)
1.24*
(0.96, 1.61)

1.32***
(1.19, 1.46)
1.18**
(1.05, 1.33)

Notes: * p < .10, ** p < .05, *** p < .001. The table displays hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals are in parentheses. The results are weighted. Estimates are based on
individual-level analyses. The reference categories are as follows: men, white race, currently married, and college education.
a

National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality File (NHIS-LMF, NHIS: 1986–2009, NDI: 1986–2011).

b

Health and Retirement Study (HRS, 1992–2010).

c

Americans' Changing Lives study (ACL, ACL: 1986–2011, NDI: 1986–2011).

d

General Social Survey-National Death Index (GSS-NDI, GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–2011).

37

Fig. 1 Mortality rate ratios for NHIS-LMF (1986–2011), ACL (1986–2011),
GSS-NDI (1986–2011), and HRS (1992–2011) compared with U.S. vital statisitcs
(1986–2011), women
Mortality rate ratio relative to vital statistics

4.5
NHIS-LMF (1986–2011)
ACL (1986–2011)
GSS-NDI (1986–2011)
HRS (1992–2011)

4.0
3.5

3.18

3.0
2.5

2.03

2.0
1.5
1.00

1.0
0.5
0.0

0.94

0.67 0.57
25

0.87

55
Age

38

0.85

0.86
0.87 0.74
85

Fig. 2 Mortality rate ratios for NHIS-LMF (1986–2011), ACL (1986–2011),
GSS-NDI (1986–2011), and HRS (1992–2011) compared with U.S. vital statisitcs
(1986–2011), men
Mortality rate ratio relative to vital statistics

3.5
NHIS-LMF (1986–2011)
ACL (1986–2011)
GSS-NDI (1986–2011)
HRS (1992–2011)

3.0
2.5
2.01

2.0

1.67

1.5
1.0

0.98

0.92
0.5
0.44
0.0

0.42
25

55
Age

39

0.86

0.82

0.96

0.85
0.59

85

Fig. 3 Difference in life expectancy (in years) for NHIS-LMF, ACL, HRS, and
GSS-NDI vs. U.S. vital statistics data, men and women
4

Difference in life expectancy (in years)

3
2
1
0
–1

NHIS-LMF vs. vital statistics (1986–2011)
ACL vs. vital statistics (1986–2011)

–2

GSS-NDI vs. vital statistics (1986–2011)
–3
–4

HRS vs. vital statistics (1992–2011)
25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60 65
Age

70

75

80

85

90

95

100

Fig. 3 Difference in life expectancy (in years) for NHIS-LMF, ACL, HRS, and GSS-NDI vs. U.S. vital
statistics data, women and men

40

Appendix Table A Age-specific mortality rates per 100,000 in U.S. vital statistics, NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and GSS-NDI
Vital statisticsa

NHIS-LMFb

HRSc

ACLd

GSS-NDIe

Age 25

101.0

51.0
(47.1, 54.8)

—

51.0
(0.0, 138.4)

233.7
(178.0, 289.5)

Age 35

150.7

119.6
(113.9, 125.4)

—

120.7
(27.9, 251.3)

410.3
(337.9, 482.6)

Age 45

302.3

280.5
(272.0, 290.0)

—

285.8
(113.7, 457.6)

720.3
(623.9, 822.2)

Age 55

693.0

658.2
(643.2, 673.9)

568.7
(484.2, 659.4)

676.8
(416.1, 953.7)

1,264.8
(1,129.9, 1,406.7)

Age 65

1,620.2

1,544.2
(1,521.5, 1,566.8)

1,395.8
(1,266.5, 1,527.3)

1,602.5
(1,190.5, 2,092.8)

2,220.7
(2,012.3, 2,401.3)

Age 75

3,760.0

3,623.0
(3,585.3, 3,663.6)

3,425.8
(3,193.3, 3,681.5)

3,794.0
(3,022.6, 4,590.4)

3,898.8
(3,624.0, 4,234.0)

Age 85

10,026.8

8,500.2
(8,422.6, 8,581.4)

8,408.0
(7,956.9, 8,910.0)

8,978.5
(7,432.3, 10,777.6)

6,843.8
(6,334.8, 7,368.2)

Age 25

53.4

35.3
(31.2, 39.6)

—

30.6
(0.0, 104.6)

174.8
(110.4, 238.4)

Age 35

96.0

86.0
(79.4, 93.0)

—

76.6
(0.0, 210.3)

319.0
(237.6, 405.4)

Age 45

216.4

209.7
(198.0, 221.1)

—

192.1
(0.0, 372.6)

582.1
(466.2, 697.0)

Age 55

511.7

511.0
(494.7, 528.4)

424.0
(331.7, 528.6)

481.2
(219.0, 823.6)

1,062.3
(895.2, 1,240.6)

Age 65

1,239.5

1,245.7
(1,218.9, 1,273.8)

1,094.6
(940.1, 1,252.1)

1,202.7
(707.6, 1,718.7)

1,938.5
(1,712.0, 2,169.0)

Age 75

3,002.0

3,036.6
(2,986.5, 3,082.6)

2,825.7
(2,558.2, 3,113.4)

2,989.8
(2,200.9, 3,880.4)

3,537.3
(3,166.0, 3,942.1)

Age 85

8,734.5

7,401.9
(7,308.8, 7,497.9)

7,294.4
(6738.7, 7,859.3)

7,331.6
(5,701.0, 9,047.0)

6,453.6
(5,826.8, 7,090.6)

Age 25

147.4

63.6
(57.3, 70.0)

—

63.5
(0.0, 176.4)

305.0
(217.6, 393.5)

Age 35

205.5

148.7
(139.3, 158.0)

—

152.4
(0.0, 356.6)

519.8
(401.9, 651.8)

Age 45

390.3

347.9
(332.8, 362.1)

—

365.7
(121.5, 670.2)

886.1
(727.8, 1,035.2)

Age 55

886.4

813.7
(791.9, 837.5)

724.1
(597.0, 862.5)

877.8
(450.6, 1,357.8)

1,510.6
(1,284.1, 1,754.3)

Age 65

2,061.2

1,903.4
(1,867.5, 1,940.7)

1,754.4
(1,545.6, 1,973.7)

2,107.1
(1,405.5, 2,982.1)

2,574.9
(2,253.0, 2,918.1)

Total

Women

Men

41

Age 75

4,807.2

4,452.5
(4,387.0, 4,518.7)

4,251.1
(3,861.7, 4,655.9)

5,057.1
(3.718.6, 6,491.5)

4,388.9
(3,902.8, 4,921.8)

Age 85

12,658.7

10,415.2
(10,274.8, 10,554.2)

10,300.6
(9,482.3, 11,182.0)

12,127.0
(8,942.8, 15,649.9)

7,479.3
(6,603.8, 8,370.6)

a

Vital statistics for years 1986–2010.

b

National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality File (NHIS-LMF, NHIS: 1986–2009, NDI: 1986–2011).

c

Health and Retirement Study (HRS, 1992–2010).

d

Americans' Changing Lives study (ACL, 1986–2011).

e

General Social Survey-National Death Index (GSS-NDI, GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–2011).

Notes: Mortality rates are based on weighted analyses. Exponential hazard models are estimated to obtain mortality rates. To
construct the life tables (not shown), age-specific mortality rates are estimated for exact ages 25 to 100+ (HRS: 50–100+). The
predicted mortality rates used to create the life tables are equivalent to exponentially smoothed central death rates (i.e., the mx
column of a life table). Additional information about this approach is available elsewhere (Teachman and Hayward 1993). Other
functional forms were considered, but exploratory analyses indicate that the exponential models fit best. The Appendix contains a
table that displays the coefficients from the exponential models used to construct the life tables.

42

Appendix Table B Life expectancies at selected ages in U.S. vital statistics, NHIS-LMF, HRS, ACL, and GSSNDI
Vital Statisticsa

NHIS-LMFb

HRSc

ACLd

GSS-NDIe

Age 25

52.9

54.2
(54.1, 54.2)

—

53.7
(53.3, 54.2)

49.5
(49.3, 49.7)

Age 35

43.5

44.5
(44.5, 44.6)

—

44.1
(43.7, 44.5)

40.9
(40.7, 41.1)

Age 45

34.3

35.2
(35.2, 35.3)

—

34.8
(34.4, 35.2)

32.8
(32.7, 33.0)

Age 55

25.6

26.5
(26.5, 26.6)

27.1
(26.9, 27.1)

26.1
(25.7, 26.5)

25.5
(25.4, 25.7)

Age 65

17.9

18.7
(18.7, 18.7)

19.0
(18.9, 19.1)

18.3
(18.0, 18.6)

19.2
(19.0, 19.3)

Age 75

11.3

12.2
(12.2, 12.2)

12.3
(12.1, 12.3)

11.8
(11.5, 12.2)

13.9
(13.7, 14.0)

Age 85

6.2

7.3
(7.2, 7.3)

7.2
(6.9, 7.2)

7.0
(6.7, 7.2)

9.7
(9.6, 9.9)

Age 25

55.6

56.4
(56.4, 56.4)

—

56.5
(56.1, 57.2)

51.7
(51.5, 52.0)

Age 35

45.9

46.7
(46.6, 46.7)

—

46.8
(46.3, 47.4)

42.8
(42.6, 43.1)

Age 45

36.5

37.2
(37.2, 37.2)

—

37.3
(36.8, 37.9)

34.5
(34.2, 34.7)

Age 55

27.5

28.3
(28.2, 28.3)

28.9
(28.7, 29.0)

28.2
(27.9, 28.8)

26.8
(26.6, 27.0)

Age 65

19.3

20.1
(20.1, 20.1)

20.5
(20.3, 20.6)

20.1
(19.7, 20.6)

20.0
(19.8, 20.2)

Age 75

12.2

13.2
(13.2, 13.2)

13.3
(13.2, 13.4)

13.1
(12.7, 13.5)

14.4
(14.2, 14.6)

Age 85

6.6

7.9
(7.8, 7.9)

7.8
(7.7, 7.9)

7.7
(7.4, 8.0)

9.9
(9.8, 10.1)

Age 25

50.2

51.8
(51.7, 51.8)

—

50.6
(49.9, 51.3)

47.0
(46.7, 47.7)

Age 35

40.9

42.2
(42.2, 42.3)

—

41.0
(40.4, 41.7)

38.6
(38.3, 38.9)

Age 45

31.9

33.1
(33.0, 33.1)

—

31.9
(31.3, 32.5)

30.9
(30.7, 31.2)

Age 55

23.5

24.5
(24.5, 24.6)

25.0
(24.9, 25.2)

23.4
(22.9, 24.0)

24.0
(23.8, 24.3)

Age 65

16.1

17.0
(17.0, 17.0)

17.3
(17.2, 17.4)

15.9
(15.5, 16.4)

18.0
(17.8, 18.3)

Total

Women

Men

43

Age 75

9.9

10.8
(10.8, 10.9)

11.0
(10.8, 11.1)

9.9
(9.6, 10.4)

13.1
(12.9, 13.3)

Age 85

5.4

6.3
(6.3, 6.3)

6.3
(6.2, 6.4)

5.6
(5.3, 6.0)

9.2
(9.0, 9.4)

a

Vital statistics for years 1986–2011.

b

National Health Interview Survey Linked Mortality File (NHIS-LMF, NHIS: 1986–2009, NDI: 1986–2011).

c

Health and Retirement Study (HRS, 1992–2010).

d

Americans' Changing Lives study (ACL, 1986–2011).

e

General Social Survey-National Death Index (GSS-NDI, GSS: 1986–2010, NDI: 1986–2011).

Notes: Life expectancies are based on weighted analyses. To construct the life tables (not shown), age-specific
mortality rates are estimated for exact ages 25 to 100+ (HRS: 50–100+). The predicted mortality rates used to create
the life tables are equivalent to exponentially smoothed central death rates (i.e., the mx column of a life table).
Additional information about this approach is available elsewhere (Teachman and Hayward 1993). Other functional
forms were considered, but exploratory analyses indicate that the exponential models fit best. The Appendix
contains a table that displays the coefficients from the exponential models used to construct the life tables.

44

