"x"
"1" "Indigenous Language Teaching: Principles and Experiences of Activity Based Language Learning in Scottish Gaelic Karate Classes"
"2" "By:  Alasdair MacMhaoirn"
"3" "Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, Slèite"
"4" "An t-Eilean, Sgitheanach"
"5" "Introduction"
"6" "All over the world  people are working hard to ensure the life of endangered indigenous languages.  A perusal of the copious literature shows demanding situations of endangered languages in nearly every county in the world and how different language circumstances have been de alt with.  Scottish Gaelic, like many other indigenous languages in a comparable situation, has enjoyed some success owing to the hard-won establishment of state immersion education.  It is apparent, however, that the children within Gaelic immersion requi re support beyond the classroom, and  activity based  language learning programmes have been an important part of this support.  Gaelic has been well served by these efforts through youth groups ( Sradagan ), music teaching ( Fèisean nan Gàidheal ), drama groups , media groups and many others.  Despite this support, however, there has been no account of how  activity based  language acquisition can be organised on a practical day to day level within these initiatives. This paper is intended to address this very issu e."
"7" "This paper describes a way in which  activity based  language learning has supported Gaelic language acquisition and cultural awareness.  Out of involvement in the programme, four basic design principles have emerged which have been helpful for langua ge acquisition.    These principles are:"
"8" "1) Focus on specific language goals is helpful."
"9" "2) Repetition is necessary."
"10" "3) Vocal guides to an activity increase participant’s learning and enjoyment."
"11" "4) Embed the language in culture."
"12" "In this paper, the ap plication of these principles in the context of the Gaelic language karate classes will be presented along with language examples in the hope that the day to day experience of these classes will be of interest to anyone involved in activity based language  learning by providing experiential information. Although the programme described here was specific to Scottish Gaelic, it is hoped that these basic principles will be helpful in the design and implementation of any other programme of language learning thro ugh activities."
"13" "At first ,  a brief account of modern Gaelic development may be helpful, which will be followed by a look at the reasons why  activity based  learning outside the classroom is necessary.  This will lead on to the details of the activity prog ramme with examples of the design principles in action.  Finally, a description of attempts to integrate cultural awareness with language learning will be given."
"14" "Modern Gaelic Development"
"15" "With respect to Scottish Gaelic in Scotland, formal  immersion education is a cornerstone of modern Gaelic development and is central to the Government's Gaelic Language Board's national plan.  What is also notable in Scotland is that despite the success of Gaelic Medium Education (GME) with respect to the n umber of children in the system, it has enjoyed less success in producing highly proficient speakers and has had very little apparent effect on intergenerational transmission of Gaelic within the home.  For example, the 2001 census showed only 26.8% of the  3-4 age group in the Western Isles, considered the Gaelic heartland, could speak Gaelic.  (Mcleod, 2015)"
"16" "This scenario, language acquisition and use being heavily dependent upon the school environment, has been observed in GME  schools in Scotland.  (O’Hanlon, Paterson, & McLeod, 2015)   The provision of enjoyable activities outside of the classroom has been among the possible solutions."
"17" "Since 2008, the author has been running classes in karate throug h the medium of Gaelic for students involved in GME.  An initial account of the programme was published in 2011, by the author and Dr. Sìleas Langraf of  Sabhal Mòr Ostaig  in Skye.  (Landgraf & MacMhaoirn, 2011)   Since that initial  publication, the project has moved on considerably. This paper addresses new initiatives undertaken, but with the same basic goal in mind of providing a lively and enjoyable environment to enrich a child's acquisition and use of Scottish Gaelic to contrib ute to the general health of Gaelic in Scotland."
"18" "With respect to the general health of Gaelic in Scotland, the census of 2011 recorded 58,000 speakers, which amounted to approximately 1.1% of Scotland's population.  This was a decrease of 1.2% since 2001.  The 2001 figure of 65,978 speakers was itself a  decrease from 68,652 in 1991.  Of interest, however, is that in 2011, the numbers of speakers decreased in all age groups except for the under 20s, which in fact rose by 0.1%.  (Scottish Government, 2015)   This appears to be relat ed to the popularity of Gaelic Medium Education."
"19" "The beginnings of modern Gaelic Medium Education began with the establishment of Gaelic pre-school playgroups, notably  Comhairle nan Sgoiltean Àraich  (CNSA), The Scottish Gaelic Pre-School Association ,  in 1 983.  Within a few years parents involved in CNSA successfully lobbied the government which established Gaelic Medium education in 1985, with units in Glasgow and in Inverness.  (Macleòid, 2015)   Over the years GME has grown ,  and  in 2013 there were 2,953 children enrolled.  (Scottish Government, 2015)   For the most part GME is offered as a separate unit within English medium schools, but there are now three all-Gaelic schools in Inverness, Glasgow and For t William with plans in place also for Portree."
"20" "Such success is a wonderful achievement, but it is apparent to people working in Gaelic that intergenerational transmission in the home is at a very low level, although hard figures are absent, and also th at the level of fluency used by the children is often restricted.  (Soillse, 2015)   For this reason it is apparent that GME must be supported outside of the schools."
"21" "The Need for Activity Based Learning"
"22" "The question then aris es as to what is the best support that can be given.  For example, should language activities be embedded in culture and cultural values?  Although there may be diverse opinions on this, the successful Hawaiians certainly think it should be, and they have  not only embedded their language learning programmes in cultural values, but have designed their Hawaiian immersion education curriculum to incorporate their own traditions along with modern knowledge.  (Native Hawaiian Education Counc il, 2002)   Looking specifically at the martial arts, it is notable that programmes have been developed within the Native Communities on Turtle Island.  For example, Arming Sisters and Reawakening Warriors addresses the needs of mental, physical, spiri tual and emotional health, particularly but not exclusively for Native women.  (Stonefish & Stonefish, 2017)   Also, a systemized Native Combat Art, Okichitaw has been taught for years with a focus on personal development linked to  Native Culture.  (Lepine, 2017)"
"23" "Having seen how other endangered languages have been taught along with their culture, it is interesting to note that there is little evidence of that in GME.  In fact, the GME curriculum is mere ly a translation of the standard English medium curriculum.  As has been argued elsewhere that it seems obvious that for Gaelic to compete with English it must have something extra, and that should be that it opens the door to core cultural values.  (MacMhaoirn, 2009)   At present there is little or no debate, certainly no consensus, on what core Gaelic cultural values might be."
"24" "Looking at other endangered language situations, it was apparent a wide range of activities can be use d and this was the beginning of the Gaelic karate classes.  (Lujan, 2015)   Initially inspiration was drawn from other methodologies, such as James Asher’s Total Physical  Response system.   Later on , as will be discussed, the teachi ng of broad cultural values was incorporated into the classes."
"25" "Language Principles in the Gaelic Karate Programme"
"26" "There are two karate classes in this programme that draw children from GME units.  One GME is from Tain, Ross-Shire on the east coast of th e mainland, and the other from Sleat on the Isle of Skye off the west coast of the mainland.  The classes have been very fortunate in receiving funding through the  Sradagan  (Sparks) programme run by the Gaelic agency,  Comunn na Gàidhlig .  So far, all child ren have come from the GME units.  They can start early, some as young as 5 or 6 years if they can cope with the class and after a few years they can go on to the adult classes according to their maturity."
"27" "The substance of the classes has evolved over time.  At first the goal was simply to perform the various activities through Gaelic, but with experience more thought was put into focussing upon specific language goals.   The classes involve a wide range of l anguage skills and vocabulary, and frequently these are wider than what the students encounter in school.  Priority skills encompass the use of appropriate language skills for:"
"28" "Saying yes or no"
"29" "Vocabulary range"
"30" "Accurate language skills"
"31" "Using  phrases"
"32" "These priorities reflect important structures in the language and are frequently areas where inaccuracy can occur.  The classes provided an opportunity to listen for patterns where problems occur and to design exercises to carefully correct the di fficulties.   All the children so far have been fluent speakers of English .  Therefore, English is their default language, so to speak.  When Gaelic structures are different, then there can be problems and one of the most common is in the use of the equival ent of “be”."
"33" "In Gaelic the verb  “ be ” is expressed in two ways according to whether something is being defined or described (noun + noun, or noun + adjective)."
"34" "Language Examples 1"
"35" "I am Alasdair:  ‘S  mise Alasdair"
"36" "I am fine:  Tha  mi gu math."
"37" "It will b e noted that in English both sentences begin with, “I am”, but the Gaelic sentences begin in different ways, one with  ‘s  (noun + noun) and the other with  tha  (noun + adjective).  This mode of expression is fundamental to Gaelic speech and must be mastered  for accuracy.  The usual error, for whatever reason, is that  tha  is used in place of  ‘s .  A simple solution can be achieved through the common game of tag/tip/tig."
"38" "In the game of tag/tig the following types of expressions are used almost all the time."
"39" "La nguage Examples 2"
"40" "You’re it!"
"41" "Who ‘s it?"
"42" "Are you it?"
"43" "No, she is."
"44" "The children will almost certainly choose to start their sentences with  Tha , or its variations, which is incorrect."
"45" "Language Examples 3"
"46" "You’re it!  Tha thu e ! (wrong)"
"47" "Who ‘s it?  Cò tha e ? (wrong)"
"48" "Are you it?  A bheil thu e ? (wrong)"
"49" "No, she is.  Chan eil.  Tha ise . (wrong)"
"50" "These are the structures that they need to learn."
"51" "Language Examples 4"
"52" "You’re it!  ‘S tusa e!"
"53" "Who ‘s it?  Cò e ?"
"54" "Is it you?  An e tusa ? (or, Are you it?  An tusa  e? ,  but this is less common.)"
"55" "No, she is.  Chan e. ‘S ise ."
"56" "What is required is a supervisor to immediately say any phrases correctly after hearing any mistakes, but without interrupting the flow of the game.  In a short  time  it  was observed that the children begin to copy what they hear, and change to the correct structures.  It is noticeable that continual reinforcement has been necessary over the long term to keep this aspect correct.  It was frequently observed that the distin ctions could be lost even over short school holiday breaks.  This distinction in structure is so fundamentally different to English structures that related problems also arise, particularly with the expression of  yes  and  no ."
"57" "In Gaelic there is no  particul ar word  for  yes/no .  Instead of answering with a  yes  or  no,  the verb is repeated in response either positively or negatively.  This feature can be another stumbling block for English speakers who again often use  Tha  and its negative  Chan eil  to express yes  and no in all instances.  It certainly can be correct sometimes but just not all the time.  Coincidently, problems with behaviour proved a solution to this language problem."
"58" "The children come to class after their regular school day and can be rather live ly.  This is fine, but their liveliness  has to  be directed properly so they can learn safely.  To try to encourage  both safe learning and respect for learning ,  each class begins with a few minutes in which each student is asked a series of questions that a lso require correct yes/no responses.  These are the questions and the yes/no responses."
"59" "Language Examples 5"
"60" "Are you ready? /  A bheil thu deiseil? / Tha /Chan eil  (yes/no)"
"61" "Will you listen?  An èist thu?  È istidh  / Chan èist  (yes/no)"
"62" "Will you try your best?  An dèan thu do dhìcheall? Nì / Cha dèan  (yes/no)"
"63" "Obviously, it is hoped the child will not respond negatively, but if they  do  they are set to sit with their parent and  are not allowed to participate until they then agree to the class rules.   It can be seen that  tha / chan  eil  is fine when the appropriate verb,  a bheil,  is used in the question, but with different verbs then different yes/no responses are necessary.  As wi th the tag/tig/tip game what is required is monitoring by a fluent speaker and, of course, lots of repetition of the correct forms."
"64" "The acquisition of vocabulary is another example of language reinforced through repetition.  I am often surprised by common  words that the students do not know.   Sometimes the words relate to the outdoors or to personal matters, and sometimes the problem is simply dialect.   A common outdoor word is  bràigh , a slope ,  and the students do not seem to understand the Gaelic word at f irst.   The words for body parts are generally known, but more detailed words ,  such as  gualainn  (shoulder),  cruachan  (hip) and  adhbrann  (ankle) ,  are not.  These words are  repeatedly reinforced in the warm-up exercises at the beginning of each class.  It als o helps to have one of the children lead the warm-up so they can use the words themselves. Sometimes a little prompting is  necessary  but the children do not seem to mind as long as they are not made to feel foolish."
"65" "Another Gaelic language area that need s refinement is the dative case.  The dative case is what happens to nouns when they appear in a sentence after prepositions, such as  to ,  from, at , and  on , and often involve  the .  The pattern used in Gaelic change the sound of the noun according to the fir st letter of the noun.  To reinforce dative patterns the repetitive nature of karate was taken advantage of."
"66" "Karate has repetitive movements which I renamed from their traditional names to make them easier to remember, to involve the dative patterns, an d of course to make them fun.   There are different patterns of noun changes, and they were incorporated into the new verbal descriptions of the basic movements of karate.  One of the first movements a person learns in karate is  Gedan Barai , which involves  one arm moving downward across the other arm which is outstretched.   This movement was renamed to involve a dative pattern in which  some words have a sound change at the beginning which is represented by adding an “h”."
"67" "Example: down / with ( leis ) the  slope ( bràigh ):  Leis a’ bhràigh ."
"68" "As the children perform the movement they recite along with the teacher:"
"69" "Tha a’ ghràineag a’ dol suas, agus (tha e) a’ roiligeadh leis a’ bràigh . (The hedgehog goes  up, and  rolls down the slope.)"
"70" "It is notable that  the children connect the arm movements and the words together very strongly which helps their Gaelic as well as their acquisition of karate."
"71" "Another dative pattern occurs with words beginning with the letter t and d.  In this instance, an h does not enter  the noun. For example, in this instance the t in  toll  (hole) doesn’t become  tholl :"
"72" "Into the hole, out of the hole:  A-steach dhan an toll, a-mach às an toll"
"73" "The name of the basic karate movement called  uchi uke , has been modified to suit the dative as fo llows:"
"74" "Tha an coinean a’ dol a-steach dhan an toll agus a-mach às an toll . The rabbit goes into the hole and out of the hole."
"75" "As before the arm movements accompany the words so the children learn their karate and their Gaelic."
"76" "A third dative pattern o ccurs with  words beginning with an s followed by a vowel, or with an s followed by l, n, r.   So far, we haven’t got a sentence for the  grammar  but we do have one which is fun.  The traditional karate name of  soto uchi uke  becomes:"
"77" "Bidh an iseag a’ sgèith …, splat !  The birdie flies…, splat!"
"78" "The children really enjoy putting their own names, and the teacher’s, into the sentence in place of the birdie ( iseag ) and shouting splat!"
"79" "A final dative pattern occurs with words beginning with a vowel, for  example adhar (air or sky):"
"80" "into the air,  dha  (into) +  an adhar  (the air ): dhan an adhar ( or , dhan adhar)"
"81" "The fourth basic movement, called  Age Uke , involves a movement at head height or above. As the movement is performed the children recite:"
"82" "Suas dhan  an adhar agus … boing ! Up into the air and… boing!"
"83" "As with the other movements, the dative case is reinforced again and again week after week so that the language, and the karate of course, become natural."
"84" "With all the elements mentioned so far, repetit ion class after class is essential.  I remember a class in which I left out some movements.  One little boy, who had only come once before, came up to me afterward and told me all the things we didn’t do.  The lesson was that perhaps I was a bit bored, but  the children were not.   As long as  the repetition is fun, the children don’t get bored easily."
"85" "Karate, of course involves punching.    An important part of punching is to pull the non-striking arm back,  and also  to aim the strike at a central position.   T he easiest way to teach this is to make it fun and to connect it with language.  So, for the fist ,  the phrase ,   a’ tighinn  airson pòg agus (an uair sin) a’ ruith air falbh  (comes for a kiss and then runs away!) is used.  One arm is extended toward the middle line with the hand forming a fist, while the other fist is held on the hip. One fist comes into the centre line to meet the other (comes for a kiss), which is then pulled  back (runs away).   The children copy the movement very well and pick up finer details from the watching the movement itself."
"86" "All of  the above arm techniques eventually combine with footwork and stances.   Stances direct your power/energy/ Qi  so they ar e very important for correct technique.  We use three basic ones, but with descriptions the children can immediately relate to.  The three traditional names are  kenkutsu dachi, kokutsu dachi and kiba dachi .  Kenkutsu dachi  directs power forward and to make  this point clear the children play a game with a partner in which they face each other and try to push each other forward.  Once they get the idea of the  stance  they can experiment to see how different foot positions change the effectiveness of the stance.   Hopefully they will end up with the stance as it should be.  In time, they can become familiar with the traditional name, but at first it is  seasamh   putadh air adhart , pushing forward stance."
"87" "The second stance is the  kokutsu dachi .  It is  similar to  the  previous one, except that weight is partly shifted to the back leg.  This stance can be taught in pairs with the children having a Tug-O-War, which is a game in which partners each hold the end of a rope and try to pull the other towards them.  The childr en can do this with their belts.  As before they can experiment with foot positions to see what works and, hopefully, discover for themselves that the stance works well.  Unfortunately, I don’t know a Gaelic equivalent for Tug-O-War, so the name is used as  it is."
"88" "The third stance is called  kiba dachi  and is often referred to as a horseback stance.  However,  the students themselves started calling it  seasamh a’ mhotorbaidhg , motorbike stance, and the name stuck.  Familiarity means that they learn this stanc e right away, which is useful because it is used throughout the first kata they learn, called Naihanchi. Katas are specific movements arranged in a sequence and are often found in many, but not all, martial arts.  Their interpretation can vary widely from  a performance art to self-defence.  Naihanchi is often taught as an advanced kata, but it has been the author’s experience that children can learn it very quickly, and simple self-defence principles can be drawn out of it to be understood and learned easil y."
"89" "Naihanchi has two parts, with the second part being the same as the first but performed as a mirror image so the movements are practised on both sides of the body.  This is helpful because the children can learn just the first half to participate in  practise drills and they can then acquire the rest as they feel comfortable.  Also, it is simple for the instructor to perform the second half of the kata while the children are performing the first half, which is a mirror image to what the children are do ing ,  and this mirroring helps the students copy the movements correctly."
"90" "As with the basic movements, language is an important aid to learning.  The following verse was designed to help the children learn the kata quickly.  They recite the verse while per forming each of the movements."
"91" "Language Example 7"
"92" "Sgleog dhan an taobh , strike to the side"
"93" "Aon, a dhà, a trì, a ceithir,  one, two, three, four"
"94" "breab ‘s cearcall,  a kick and a circle"
"95" "sìos ‘s suas,  down and up"
"96" "air ais ‘s air adhart ,  backward and forward"
"97" "breab, sgleog,  kick, strike"
"98" "breab sgleog,  kick, strike"
"99" "cupa ’s sàsar , cup and saucer"
"100" "kiai,  (shout in Japanese)"
"101" "The kata that follows Naihanchi in the curriculum is not so easily put into verse, at least so far, and the chi ldren do not learn it as quickly.  In any case, although the curriculum includes other kata Naihanchi is the one that is drilled most often for self-defence purposes."
"102" "Another exercise with an associated verse is an exercise used to loosen the wrists. The  technique is to place four fingers on the thumb of your partner or yourself and then press the back of the hand back on itself with the remaining thumb.  This is a simple wrist throw."
"103" "Language Examples 8"
"104" "Ceithir air an aon:  Four on one (four fingers on  the thumb)"
"105" "Òrdag air a’ chùlaibh:   Thumb on the back (push the back of the hand with the remaining thumb)"
"106" "There is another technique called Shuto Uchi Uke, which the children pick up quickly  and also  has a verse for the hand movements. The movement has a blocking element and a striking element, which can be done to a one, two, three, count:   Bruisig, greimich,  sgleog : brush, grab, strike. The movements are described accurately, easily and in the proper rhythm but reciting the Gaelic words while performing the arm movements."
"107" "Another game that the children really enjoy involves an escape from a grab and then run ning away.  Any sort of grab will  do, and  running away is always a great strategy for defence.  The game is called  Tha Pantar a’ Tighinn :  A Panther is Coming. One child is chosen as the panther, and the others line up with their backs to the panther.  The  children must keep their eyes closed and wait for the “panther” who sneaks up from behind and grabs someone.  The child must perform an escape and then run away.  The game is accompanied in language recited by the fluent adult."
"108" "Language Example 9"
"109" "Dùin d o shùilean .  Close your eyes."
"110" "Tha pantar a’ tighinn,  A panther is coming"
"111" "Cò thèid ithe?   Who will be eaten?"
"112" "Òbh òbh, fhuair e greim air _____!   Oh oh, he’s got hold of _____!"
"113" "Ruith, ruith!   Run run!"
"114" "The children really enjoy this ,  and they can all tak e turns as the panther.  The choice of the panther also raises the  ‘S mise  structures,  similar to  the Tag/Tig game.  As far as self-defence goes, the opportunity to run away is certainly the best idea."
"115" "Developing Cultural Awareness"
"116" "Aside from language,  culture is also important.   As mentioned, GME teaches an English language curriculum and is, therefore, coloured by English language cultural values, or at least does not strongly reflect Gaelic culture.   Individual teachers often, however, do pass on an e normous amount of culture, just because of who they are, and this is often related to interests in music.  Of course, culture is certainly promoted by involvement with Gaelic arts groups, such as  F èisean nan Gàidheal .  As mentioned above, successful langua ge development, as in Hawaii, involves embedding the language in culture. Therefore, some thought was required about how to do this for the children attending the karate classes."
"117" "Many traditional cultures have maintained close links with the land and sea , and this relationship is fundamental to how their cultures shape their physical and spiritual laws.   (McAdam, 2015)   For example the  Anishanaabe  have their Seven Grandfather teachings that have multiple levels of meaning.  They  are wisdom, love, respect, bravery, honesty, humility and truth.   In a broadly similar way, speakers of Gaelic have also maintained strong links with the land and sea.   Many people in the Highlands and Islands still live close to the land and remember the  ways in which the older generation in communities respected the land and the sea.  Therefore, it seems appropriate t o place the language in a cultural context to try to get the children to increase their awareness of the environment around them."
"118" "As is we ll known, the martial arts almost always put their students through a system of different coloured belts to encourage progress.  To reinforce Scottish Gaelic culture, rather than just using belts, the children move through stages identified by different an imals. Each animal is associated with a principle.  A nimals appropriate to Highland Culture were chosen which are a cat, wolf, bull, deer, salmon, and eagle.  In this manner, the children can see their progress, and coincidently learn about the importance  of these animals within Gaelic culture."
"119" "The first stage is associated with cats.   Cats (also  cat  in Scottish Gaelic), both wild and domestic, go back to earliest histories of the Scottish Gaelic people.  They are very familiar to the children, and, therefore, it is easy to start a discussion about cats, which can then progress toward a Cat Teaching,  meaning a lesson to be learned from the behaviour of cats."
"120" "Cat Teaching: Cats are excellent fighters, but regardless of their skills they are likely to avoid trouble and run away if they can.  This is good advice for any self-defence programme."
"121" "The second stage is the  Madadh-Allaidh , the Wolf stage.  Wolves were  once common  through the Highlands and feature in many traditional tales, although not usually in a complementary way.  However, they are prominent in oral traditions and in place-names, so they are important.  The wolf represents humility as well as loyalt y.  In this instance, I have drawn from the  Anishinaabe  traditions in which the wolf represents humility, as well as loyalty, and holds a special relationship with mankind.   The idea is that the wolf always works for the good of the pack.  Working for the  good of the community and neighbours is a vital part of Highland life and is still very much respected in Highland communities."
"122" "Wolf teaching: We must always be humble about our abilities and help others and realise that however strong we become the time  will come when we will also need help."
"123" "The third stage, beginning the second year, is the  Tarbh,  the Bull stage.   The bull represents bravery, and as a bovine represents the central position that cattle have always held in Gaelic society.  Of course, cat tle are still very important in modern agriculture."
"124" "Bull Teaching: Bulls are powerful and brave, and cattle give us food, clothes, and lots of other good things, which show that we can all prosper by sharing."
"125" "Karate training itself involves sharing.  In  the martial arts participants share knowledge and each trusts his/her very bodies to each other during practise, so mutual care and respect is fundamental."
"126" "The fourth stage is the Deer stage.   Fèidh  or deer are to be found throughout Scottish culture, as  food, as family symbols, regimental symbols and in poetry and song.  Again, they are  familiar to children and can be used to set a context for a skill in the martial arts which is relevant to Highland culture."
"127" "Deer Teaching: Deer are strong and fast. They  also symbolise a healthy environment and movement itself.  The students should try to be strong and fast, but also to respect all the other animals and other things around us so we can all benefit from a healthy environment."
"128" "The fifth stage, beginning t he third year, is associated with Bradan, the Salmon.   The salmon represents knowledge and spiritual wisdom.  A salmon image often appears in stories when an important decision must be made."
"129" "Salmon Teaching:  Because the salmon is hidden under water, it  represents the pursuit of and respect for wisdom, especially the knowledge that comes from inside a person,"
"130" "In our Gaelic karate training, we are reminded that we are sharing knowledge and we should learn to try and understand the world around us, and pa rticularly to learn about the knowledge that lies inside of each of us so that we can pursue our own goals."
"131" "The final stage draws its inspiration from the Iolaire, the Eagle.  The eagle can fly very high and represents the courage to rise above the every day world. This symbol reminds the children to let their own spirits soar so their dreams and aspirations can be experienced.  In  Anishinaabe  traditions it is said that the eagle flies closest to the Creator and can carry prayers."
"132" "Eagle Teaching:  The eag le encourages us to develop our own abilities so our own unique spirit can reach its highest expression."
"133" "In karate training, people should develop according to their own nature and be free to choose from a broad curriculum those techniques that are suitab le to themselves as individuals."
"134" "Conclusion"
"135" "That, then, is an account of the practical experience of teaching indigenous Gaelic language and culture through activities that have been developed for Gaelic language karate classes.  As well as the goal of language learning it is also hoped that the cul tural input will help the children to become more aware of perspectives that are traditional in Gaelic culture, which will in turn strengthen their own personal relationship with language, community and environment in a way that is different to what they w ill encounter through English."
"136" "Through involvement in presenting and design of the class four principles emerged that were helpful in reaching language goals."
"137" "1) Focus on specific language goals is helpful."
"138" "2) Repetition is necessary."
"139" "3) Vocal guid es to an activity increase participant’s learning and enjoyment."
"140" "4) Embed the language in culture."
"141" "Although the applications described here are specific to Gaelic and to karate, the principles can be helpful in any activity class, and can be adapted int o numerous other activities for teaching language and culture.  Throughout it almost goes without saying that diligence in maintaining the use of the target language is  absolutely necessary , and it helps if there is more than one fluent speaker present to  reinforce language use and accuracy.  In future, it is hoped that additional language aids and terminology will be created, such as a term for Tug O’ War for example.  As always, these terms evolve through involvement in the classes and frequently the chil dren themselves come up with the most suitable phrases."
"142" "Bibliography"
"143" "Comann na Gàidhlig. (2015, 8 4).  Sradagan . Retrieved from Comann na Gàidhlig: http://www.cnag.org/en/sradagan"
"144" "Landgraf, S., & MacMhaoirn, A. (2011). A’ Cleachdadh na Gàidhli g, a’ Brosnachadh an Spioraid: Buidheann Karate tro Mheadhan na Gàidhlig airson Sgoilearan na Bun-sgoil. In A. Cox, & T. Armstrong,  A’ Cleachdadh na Gàidhlig: slatan-tomhais ann an dìon cànain sa  choimhearsnachd  (pp. 157-166). Clò Ostaig."
"145" "Lepine, G. (2017,  September 12).  Okichitaw Indigenoius Combat Arts . Retrieved from http://okichitaw.com/: http://okichitaw.com/"
"146" "Lujan, P. (2015, 10 9).  Pueblo of Isleta Language Program Overview.  Retrieved from Youtube: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lTgInPKNKTo"
"147" "MacKinnon , K. (2015, 09 22).  Bòrd Gàidhlig na h-Alba: New Thinking for a Fresh Start?  Retrieved from Poileasaidh.celtscot.ed.ac.uk:  http://www.poileasaidh.celtscot.ed.ac.uk/newthinking/firstresults.html"
"148" "Macleòid, F. (2015, August 4). Còmhairle nan Sgoiltean Araich.  (A. MacMhaoirn, Interviewer)"
"149" "MacMhaoirn, A. (2009). Cànan, Dualchas agus Coimhearsnachd: Na M’njikaning, agus Luachan Culturach. In R. Cox,  Dualchas agus an Àrainneachd: Sin am Fearainn Caoin,.  Clò Ostaig."
"150" "McAdam, S. (2015).  Nationhood  Interrupted: Revitalizing nêhiyaw Legal Systems.  Saskatoon: Purich Publishing."
"151" "Mcleod, W. (2015, 08 25).  Gaelic in contemporary Scotland: contradictions, challenges and strategies.  Retrieved from Poileasaidh.celtscot.ed.ac.uk: http://www.poileasaidh.celtsc ot.ed.ac.uk/MCLEODCATALAN2.pdf"
"152" "Native Hawaiian Education Council. (2002).  Nā Honua Mauli Ola Hawai’i Guidelines for Culturally Healthy and Responsive Learning Environments .  Hilo."
"153" "O’Hanlon, F., Paterson, L., & McLeod, W. (2015, 09 1).  Language Models in Ga elic-medium Pre-school, Primary and Secondary Education.  Retrieved from Soillse.ac.uk: http://www.soillse.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Modailean-C%C3%A0nain-ann-am-Foghlam-Ro-sgoile-Bun-sgoile-agus-%C3%80rd-sgoile-Meadhain-Gh%C3%A0idhlig_6.pdf"
"154" "Scottish Governm ent. (2015, 10 13).  Census 2011: Release 2A . Retrieved from scotlandscensus.gov.uk: http://www.scotlandscensus.gov.uk/news/census-2011-release-2a"
"155" "Scottish Government. (2015, 09 22).  Pupil census 2013 supplementary data . Retrieved from The Scottish Governme nt: http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Statistics/Browse/School-Education/dspupcensus/pupcensus2013"
"156" "Soillse. (2015, 22 09).  Young Speakers . Retrieved from http://www.soillse.ac.uk: http://www.soillse.ac.uk/downloads/YoungSpeakers_Final.pdf"
"157" "Stonefish, P., & Stonefish, D. (2017, September 12).  Re-Empowering & Reawakening The Mental, Physical, Spiritual, & Emotional Health Of Indigenous Commun ities Through Self-Defense . Retrieved from Arming Sisters and Reawakening Warriors: http://www.asrw."
