INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

Introduction to Politiphysics

Gary Gindler
e-mail address: ggindler@yahoo.com
(Submitted September 11, 2019, updated February 18, 2021)
A simple classical mechanics model is proposed to describe the political dynamics of human society. The
model provides a mathematical structure for the philosophy of the state-man paradigm. The proposed
model borrows many classical mechanical terms and generalizes them into the political domain. The wellknown political terms (like freedom and revolution) are given mathematical definitions. Several abstract
but solvable problems are presented to demonstrate the general principles of politiphysics, including the
Laffer curve and effects of war, immigration, and random forces on society’s momentum of inertia.

Keywords: Politiphysics, freedom, inequality, equilibrium, Laffer curve, immigration, war, revolution
PACS: 89.20.−a Interdisciplinary applications of physics; 89.65.Gh Economics; Econophysics, financial markets,
business, and management; 89.65.−s Social and economic systems

of America. However, such an idea, albeit

I. INTRODUCTION

remarkably

successful,

was

never

actually

formalized.
The

American

Founding

Fathers

viewed

individual freedom as the cornerstone of the new

Indeed, human society assumes that some

American state. They also understood freedom

abstract “freedom” exists, but a loosely defined

within the framework of the relationship between

“freedom” is open to broad interpretations. As a

a state and man (by analogy with the fact that

result, the word “freedom” is destined to lose its

religion is the relationship between God and

original meaning, like many other terms that fall

man). This state-man paradigm [1] formed the

victim to the everchanging newspeak. This article

basis of the newly established country (although

attempts to define “freedom” in physical terms, to

the Founding Fathers did not use this term).

preserve not just the word but the proper meaning
of freedom itself.

The essence of the superiority of individual
freedom and individual good over the public

Obviously, such a program cannot be realized

good is the mechanism that led to the

within well-known scientific subjects like physics

transformation of the backward British colonies

or mathematics or even wildly popular (and still

of North America into the mighty United States

exponentially growing) Econophysics. Due to the
1

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

lack of this author’s phantasms, let us introduce

Now it is time for physicists to enter the political

politiphysics.

arena to study the political ramifications of the
economic and material life of human society. In

The reason to present this new term is quite

fact, neither econophysicists, sociophysicists,

simple. The well-known term of the last few

economists, nor political scientists can solve

decades,

with

political problems – just ask them what the

financial markets by using tools and concepts of

meaning of “freedom” was to the American

mathematical physics.

Founding Fathers.

Econophysics,

deals

mostly

For over a century,

popular sociophysics studies social phenomena
by using methods of theoretical physics. The only

Last but not least, we have to mention that, in a

area not covered by physicists so far is politics.

sense, politiphysics is reflective of the original
science of the political economy a la Adam

Until the beginning of the 20th century, the stand-

Smith, but now with mathematical precision.

alone science of economics practically did not
exist. The branch of science associated with

II. THE CLASSICAL MODEL

modern economists back then was actually called
political economy (well, people a century or two
ago knew for sure that political power could be

In order to describe a human society as a whole,

gained by utilizing economic power, and vice

we

versa).

According to the man-state paradigm, such

must

introduce

independent

variables.

variables should belong to the economic domain.
Eventually, political and economic branches of

Indeed, the man-state paradigm is based on

the political economy split, creating two scientific

economic power, i.e., wealth allocation between a

subjects – the science of economics and not-

population and a state.

precise-at-all, political science. The absence of
any meaningful kind of precision and undisputed

It is well known that economic power in human

lack of predictive power in economics was quite a

societies sooner or later leads to political power.

bothering factor. As a result, Econophysics was

The precise mechanisms of acquiring political

born at the end of the 20th century (see excellent

power through economic power are not relevant

review in [2].)

at the moment. What is relevant is that economic

2

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

power could play the role of the foundational

wealth of society does not change; however, it

independent variable.

does change if the sources are from other
governments or foreign banks, for example.

If the wealth of a country that belongs to its
people (private wealth) is Wp and the wealth of a

Speed of wealth reallocation between people and

country that belongs to the government is Wg, the

their government  = dx / dt will also play a role

total country’s wealth is Wt = Wp

in our considerations.

+

Wg. For the

one-dimensional model, the variable x = Wp will
be used as a primary independent variable. We

Let us assume the wealth reallocation of a

understand wealth as a sum of money (and other

country could be described as a movement of a

monetary instruments) and assets (physical

classical particle in a potential field U(x) that

products which, from time to time, get assigned a

might look like in Fig. 1.

monetary value) like in [3].
By definition, Wp, generally speaking, is bound
by 0 ≤ x ≥ Wt, but cases when x < 0 and x > Wt
are possible too.
Condition x < 0 means private wealth Wp is
negative, i.e., the country’s population as a whole
is

in

debt

to

the

government

(financial

enslavement or outright slavery or serfdom.)

Fig. 1. The normalized bell-shaped potential field
of human society.

Condition x > Wt means the entire wealth of the
country belongs to its citizens, and there is

In the case of x / Wt  0 the entire wealth of a

nothing left to the government. In other words,

country belongs to the government (this situation

the government wealth Wg, in this case, is

is commonly described as totalitarianism or

negative, i.e., government (or rather whatever is

autocracy.)

left of it) functions by borrowing funds from
some internal or external sources. If the source of

Please note we are not considering the case

borrowing is internal (their citizens), the total

Wt  0 because it means the entire society exists
3

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

in the form of a puppet state of some foreign

In the presence of the potential field U(x),

power (a typical example would be Indian

classical mechanics [4] defines a function called

reservations in the United States.) It does not

force F:

make sense to consider such societies separately

F =−

from their masters. In other words, we always

dU ( x)
dx

(2.1)

assume that the total wealth of society is not
In politiphysics, we postulate that this force is a

negative.

force of freedom or simply freedom. Literally,
freedom in politiphysics is the (first) derivative of

The case x / Wt  1 means government allocation

a country’s potential. The typical form for the

of wealth is zero, i.e., absence of the traditional

freedom F is depicted in Fig. 2.

government (this area is known as anarchy, but
we better call it chaos in order not to incite the
modern ideologues of anarchism.)
The potential energy of the society reaches its
maximum U max at some point xmax when x is near
zero and reaches its minimum when x approaches
 .

The maximum of a society’s potential energy is
associated with totalitarian and autocratic states
because

their

oppressive

governments

Fig. 2. Force of freedom in a society.

can

concentrate (by force, in most cases) human
activities in a particular area (like wars or

At a certain point, freedom F reaches its

scientific research.) The lowest potential energy

maximum Fmax . As x goes to the left toward 0

of a country is either during anarchy ( x  Wt ) or

(i.e., country moves toward totalitarianism),

total enslavement or imprisonment of the

freedom falls to 0, and then near x ≈ 0 becomes

population (x < 0.)

negative. We interpret this as enslavement or
imprisonment of the entire population by the
government. The state of the society under such
conditions resembles a concentration camp on a
4

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

nationwide scale. There are many examples of

This conclusion is not new. In fact, it is well

such societies in human history – North Korea or

known to any person interested in political

communist Cuba, for example.

science where the “left” and the “right” have a
well-known and quite important meaning (which

If the system moves to the right from the point of

is not settled in political science to this day, by

maximum freedom Fmax , freedom also falls (in

the way.) The remarkable thing is that we derived

this case, asymptotically) to zero, even if citizens

such a conclusion by using a very primitive

own the entire wealth of the country.

model from classical mechanics.

A well-known example of such societies was

Intuitively, it is clear that in the described model,

realized in some parts of South Russia (modern

the human society, if left to its own devices, tends

Ukraine) in the wake of the post-communist

to slip into chaos (anarchy) and remain in this

revolution’s bloody civil war of 1917-1922.

state indefinitely. Alternatively, human society

Some prominent anarchists established states

can enter the state of totalitarianism, when

there, which consisted of numerous farm families

x  xmax , indefinitely.

loosely interacting with each other and with the
outside world. The wealth belonged exclusively

The difference is: in chaos, the freedom is

to the people all right, but people’s lives

positive but negligibly small; in totalitarian

resembled self-imprisonment behind the walls of

societies, the freedom is negative and negligibly

their farmhouses. The formal government, law,

small (in politiphysics, we call it a controlled

and order were absent, but the freedom,

entity, or “unfreedom,” but historically it was

understood in terms of the state-man paradigm,

called slavery, serfdom, etc.)

was absent too.
III. EXACT SOLUTION

In other words, a move to the right from the point
of maximum freedom Fmax usually leads to the

As an example, consider the potential of a society

degeneration of the government; the move to the

in a form (see Fig 3)

left from the point of maximum freedom Fmax
usually leads to the degeneration of the

U ( x) =

population.

5

U0
cosh ( x / Wt )
2

(3.1)

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

The model potential (3.1) is slightly different

where mt - total “mass” of the society, i.e., total

from the typical potential in Fig. 1 – it is

population.

deliberately made symmetrical to illustrate the
politiphysical solution better.

As is would be expected, the movement is
symmetrical, and it has a characteristic time

 = Wt

mt
.
2U 0

(3.3)

The force of freedom for potential (3.1) is

F =2

U 0 sinh( x / Wt )
.
Wt cosh 3 ( x / Wt )

(3.4)

Fig. 3. The normalized exactly solvable potential of society

Freedom and “unfreedom” (3.4) reach their

(3.1).

extremums

If movement starts at t=0 at x=0 with zero speed

Fmax = 

(i.e., with total energy E=U0), the first integration
of Newton’s equation

t=

mt
2

U
4 U0
 0.76 0
3/2
3 Wt
Wt

at



x

0

1
xmax =  Wt ln(2 + 3)  0.65Wt
2

dx
E − U ( x)

Because potential (3.1) is symmetrical, forces of
unfreedom are negative for x<0. The movement
in both directions is infinite; the point of

leads to the exact solution for the potential (3.1):

maximum freedom or unfreedom is reached at the


2U 0  
x = Wt arcsinh exp  Wt −1
t  − 1
mt  



time
(3.2)


1
 
tmax = ln sinh  ln(2 + 3)  + 1   0.93
2
 

For large x, asymptotic of the solution (3.2) is

6

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

x=

Wt



t

In other words, for the large t

$ 

 person sec 2  .

 physical

system moves at a constant speed  = Wt /  .
The model we considered so far was deliberately
The reason we introduced such a degenerate

very simplistic. The model was introduced just to

example is not an attempt to describe a political

demonstrate the universe of the problems

system with any degree of precision but rather to

politiphysics is dealing with, and for introducing

enhance the proposed narrative by analyzing the

some new terminology. Nevertheless, the model

dimensions of physical quantities in the model.

correctly described the a priori, a well-known
concept of freedom, as a driving force of human
society in measurable, economic terms.

So, x=Wp and is measured in units of wealth, like
dollars. The variable m is a measure of the
“mass” in a country and should be associated

The more realistic models must acknowledge that

with the number of people or simply persons. If

any human society is an open (in physical terms),

we would leave the unit of time the same as in

non-conservative (again, in physical terms)

physics, seconds, the speed  is measured in

system. In other words, any human society is not

dollars per second, and the units of society’s

isolated; there is an external world that interacts

energy E will have dimension

with society in various ways.


$2 
person
.

sec 2 


IV. NON-CONSERVATIVE MODEL

Under no circumstances, any human society, even

Compare the politiphysical energy units with the

very isolated ones (like Aboriginals on tiny

units of energy in physics:

Pacific atolls), is left alone to its own devices.
Any human society absorbs the energy from


m2 
kg
 sec 2  .



external sources (like the Sun, which delivers
about 1000 Watts per square meter at Earth’s
surface) and is influenced by forces of nature

Finally, the force of freedom in politiphysics is
measured in:
7

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

(some of them are positive, like the Nile’s floods,

The original model (3.1) is, of course, quite

and some are destructive, like hurricanes).

different from reality. We all know that states
with some degree of positive freedom or negative

Sometimes this external energy has an immediate

freedom do exist, and they exist for quite

effect (weather), and sometimes the effect on

prolonged periods of time. In other words,

human society is delayed by millions of years (oil

society’s one-dimensional movement along the x-

and coal). Moreover, of course, there are

axis sometimes comes to a complete stop.

interactions with other human societies, which
could impose positive (like trade) or negative

Of course, one can modify the potential function

(like war) forces.

U(x) by placing a hard-reflecting barrier at some
point xb where U ( xb ) = + (or just sufficiently

What state of society is mostly influenced by

large.) Such a model, under certain conditions,

external forces? The external forces would

would even permit endless oscillating motion of

produce a maximum effect in the areas where the

the society from unfreedom to freedom states.

internal force (freedom in politiphysical terms) is
weak, i.e., in the areas of x ≈ 0 and x ≈ Wt. For

However, the model that treats human society

example, the anarchist states (similar to the

into a particle in the potential well would be

described above in Ukraine) are attractive

nothing more than the proverbial “curve fitting”

takeover targets for the neighboring states (in

(see interesting discussion in [9].) One must

fact, those anarchist states in Ukraine did not last

admit that in reality, human society is (from the

for long.)

physical point of view) an open system that
receives some energy from the outside world and

If anarchists’ societies could not do much to resist

may convert it into some other forms of energy.

an external hostile takeover, the totalitarian

Also, we must introduce some (non-conservative

societies can resist (or make a significant effort to

from the physical standpoint) dissipative forces to

resist) external forces. That is why the society

be present.

must overcome a certain potential barrier at xmax
in Fig. 1 while moving from the left to the right,

Let us assume the external energy absorbed by

from totalitarianism/autocracy to a society with

human society can be transformed into some

some positive freedom.

rotational energy so that the total kinetic energy K
would take the form:
8

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

K=

To visualize the picture further, imagine a car

mt 2 I  2
+
,
2
2

running up a slippery hill. Under certain
conditions, like the elevation angle, the mass of a

where I – society’s moment of inertia, and  –

car, and level of friction between wheels and the

the angular velocity.

road, the car would stop while the engine is still
running, and wheels continue spinning. The

Under such assumptions, a more complex model

friction forces would fully compensate for the

would resemble a rotating wheel in a potential

force of gravity.

field U ( x ) . If we use the mechanical analog
again, the wheel on Fig. 1 could, for example,

The stability of this model mandates the external

rotate counterclockwise and climb up from right

source of energy. In other words, to maintain a

to left (imagine a car running uphill, for

certain positive level of freedom, the proper

example.)

amount of energy must be pumped into the
system.

Total energy E of the system is given by
Of course, the model is unstable without a great

E = U ( x) +

deal of political will. As President Ronald Reagan

m 2 I  2
+
+ Eext − Ediss ,
2
2

said, “Freedom is never more than one generation
away from extinction. We did not pass it to our

where Eext – external energy, pumped into the

children in the bloodstream. It must be fought for,

system, and Ediss – dissipative energy of

protected, and handed on for them to do the

“friction.”

same.”

We do not know for sure the exact mechanism of

Obviously, the energy required to sustain a level

transforming the external energy Eext into the

of positive freedom would be maximal near the
point of maximum freedom and minimal in the

rotational energy within the society; we just

areas of unfreedom or chaos.

assign this property of the society in such a way it
could be described in terms of spinning. Starting

The postulate of the spinning part of the kinetic

with Pauli, such ad hoc considerations are not

energy of the society leads us to assume the non-

new in physics.
9

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

uniform internal structure of the rotating body

Let us assume the society (as a disk) has a wealth

(i.e., society). The moment of inertia of society,

distribution function (see Fig. 4)

like in physics, is a measure of economic
diversity – the wealth Wp is not concentrated in
the dimensionless dot; human society is not an
abstract dot without any internal structure.
On the contrary, people’s wealth is distributed in
such a way that human society more resembles a
rotating non-uniform disk than a dimensionless
dot. Such economic inequality (several orders of

Fig. 4. The wealth distribution function for the model (5.1).

magnitude are not uncommon) allows the
external forces to easily transfer the external

 ( w) =

energy into the rotational kinetic energy of the

 w
mt
w
exp
−  ,
W02
 W0 

(5.1)

society. Finally, here is one more argument in
favor of the non-conservative (in physical terms)

where W0 – some arbitrary scaling parameter,

model: we deal with the wealth here, but wealth,

measured in dollars (it corresponds to the

as it was shown in [3], is not conserved, while

maximum of distribution (5.1), but it is just a

money certainly is.

coincidence,) and normalization factor mt / W02 is
chosen as:

V. ROTATIONAL INERTIA OF
SOCIETY





0

 ( w)w = mt

(5.2)

The physical moment of inertia I is a function of

The wealth distribution function (5.1), of course,

mass distribution in a physical body. In

does not have a power-law like the classical

politiphysics, the moment of inertia I is a function

Pareto distribution [6]. For example, it does not

of

have sufficiently long power tails, but it serves

the

financial

distribution

(i.e.,

wealth

distribution) of people within the society.

the purpose of demonstrating the foundations of
politiphysics. Besides, there is evidence [11] that
income distribution in the United States deviates
10

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

from the Pareto power-law (at least for moderate

Increasing parameter W0 makes the distribution

incomes) and fits exponential distribution (5.1).

function (5.1) wider (while the total wealth also
increases.)

Decreasing

W0

produces

a

Note that the unit of measurement of the wealth

concentration of wealth for the poor segment of

distribution  is [person/$]. Total private wealth

the society.

Wp for the distribution function (5.1) is:
The rotational inertia of a disk with long “tails”
of mass (i.e., wealth) distribution (5.1) is larger



 w (w)w = 2mtW0

(5.2)

than a uniform disk of the same mass. In other

0

words, societies with a high degree of peoples’

The moment of inertia I for the society (5.1) is [5]

inequality are “less dynamic.” Such societies are





0

w2  ( w)w = 6mtW02

more stable and less sensitive to external forces.

(5.3)

It applies both to societies with positive and
negative freedom.

In politiphysics, the moment of inertia I is

The only difference is that

“spinning” in the case of positive freedom is

2

measured in [people∙$ ] (compare it with the

mostly counterclockwise, while unfreedom is

moment of inertia in physics having units

mostly clockwise.

2

[kg∙m ]).
To demonstrate how tails of a wealth distribution
Comparing the moment of inertia (5.3) with the

affect the moment of inertia of society, consider

moment of inertia of a mechanical disk of mass

the following wealth distribution function:

mt and radius R, I = mt R / 2 , we can compute
2

  w 2 
mt
 ( w) = 2 2 w exp  −   
W0
  W0  

the effective radius Reff of the politiphysical disk
(5.1),

Reff = 2 3W0 . As in physics, human

(5.4)

society’s moment of inertia I is linear on a
The wealth distribution function (5.4) has much

number of people mt and depends quadratically

shorter tails than distribution (5.1).

on the characteristic “size” Reff (in dollar terms) of
the society.

Total private wealth of society (5.4) equals (see
[5])

11

 mtW0 . It is slightly less than the wealth of

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

society (5.1). The moment of inertia for

method of computing wealth inequality. If we

2
distribution (5.4) is I = mW
t 0 . Comparing to the

introduce “average” wealth as Wa = Wp / mt and

earlier case (5.1), it is six times less. However,

express the effective radius above in terms of Wa ,

this comparison needs to be clarified. Both
distributions (5.1) and (5.4) are normalized to the

Reff =  Wa .

total number of people (5.2), but the scaling

For society (5.1) with longer tails  = 3 (i.e.,

parameters W0 could be different.

  1 ), and  = 2 /  for the society (5.4) with
Let us demand not only normalization by the

shorter tails (i.e.,   1 ). Note that for the uniform

number of people mt but also normalization by

wealth distribution,  = 1 .

the total wealth. If W0' is the effective scaling
parameter of distribution (5.4) that produces the

The friction force in the considered model is

same

proportionate to the mt and the government

total

wealth

as

distribution

(5.1),

wealth Wg. This friction with the government

W0' = (2 /  )W0 , so that W0' = (2 /  )W0 .

creates the torque that equalizes the force of
freedom and stabilizes the system.

Comparable to the case (5.1) terms, a moment of
inertia of society (5.4) is

Who is dealing mostly with the government? It is
2
I = (4 /  )mW
t 0

the part of the society on the outer banks of

(5.5)

wealth distribution, w / W0

1 , wealthy people.

In other words, society (5.4), by all counts – with

Most of the poor people ( w / W0

the same number of people and the same total

as “clients” or “subjects” of the government.

1 ) are acting

private wealth – has less rotational inertia than
society (5.1) with longer wealth distribution tails,

The poor segment of society is mostly indifferent

thus wider inequality. Comparing society (5.4)

to the political processes in that society because

with the uniform wealth distribution, we can

their linear velocity is close to zero. Some

obtain its effective “radius” Reff = 2W0 .

politicians, however, are capable of shifting the
rotational axis of society. For example, they can
shift the rotation axis toward the center of mass

On a side note, the above introduction of the

of the society, known elsewhere as the middle

effective radiuses of societies could lead to a new
12

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

class. In such a case, it is the middle class who

If the rotational axis shifts toward the center of

becomes indifferent to the political processes in a

wealth Wc , the linear velocity vector of very poor

country. They disengage from reality, and only

people starts moving in the opposite direction

very wealthy people and very poor people

from the velocity of the very wealthy (compare

interact with the government.

this situation with the opposite points of a
rotating wheel.)

It is well-known that politicians are very often
pandering to the middle class. Political pundits

For example, the center of wealth Wc for society

are well aware that it has nothing to do with the

(5.1) is

middle class per se – the goal is not to “help” the

Wc = 2W0

middle class in any way, but rather to shift the
society’s rotational axis from zero to some value

The moment of inertia I c of society (5.1) with the

close to the center of wealth Wc .

axis at the center of wealth is:
2
I c = 2mW
t 0 ,

The moment of inertia of a society spinning
around the center of wealth is minimal, and such
a society can be more easily influenced,

It is three times less than the original (compare to

controlled, and manipulated. The reason is simple

formula (5.3)). (Side note: Huygens–Steiner

– if the axis is located at the center of wealth

theorem also true in politiphysics.) If a politician

Wc  0 , the poor segment of society gets exposed.

manages to shift the axis of society (5.1) from

Their linear speed is no longer a near-zero; they

w=0 into the center of wealth w = Wc , controlling

become active players in the political arena.

and managing the population suddenly becomes
three times easier. As an add-on benefit, the

The polarization of society is the end result of

politician

such a shift. When the rotational axis was at zero

inexperienced (in politics), poor people by

wealth, the entire society’s spin occurs in the

emphasizing their antagonism to the wealthy.

same direction (the angular velocity is the same

Before that shift, the poor were moving in the

for everybody, but the linear speed, even if it

same direction as the wealthy ones and never felt

depends on the rotational radius, i.e., wealth w,

any antagonism toward them.

still has the same direction for everybody.)

13

can

now

deploy

an

army

of

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

In other words, the 19th-century theory of the

I = m1 (W1 − L)2 + m2 (W2 − L)2

(5.6)

class-based antagonism now, in politiphysical
terms, simply means shifting the rotational axis of

It is easy to show that moment of inertia I (5.6)

a society, which leads to the (desired by some

reaches its minimum I c in the case of spinning

politicians) polarization of society. In other

around the center of wealth L = Wc ,

words, politicians are very capable of utilizing
wealth inequality of the unsuspecting population
as leverage to gain extra political points.

Ic =

m1m2
(W2 − W1 ) 2
m1 + m2

(5.7)

To further illustrate the effects of inequality on
society’s kinetic energy, consider the degenerate

Formula (5.6) demonstrates another real (albeit

case of the society whose internal structure looks

always hidden) goal of all politicians – shift the

like a barbell:

rotational axis either to the poor L = W1 or to the
rich L = W2 . By doing so, politicians can nullify

 (w) = m1 (w − W1 ) + m2 (w − W2 ) ,

(5.5)

the contribution of any desired income group to
the rotational kinetic energy of society. The

where  ( x) – Dirac’s delta function, and, for the

common knowledge is that the politicians, in

sake of concreteness, W1<W2. That is the ultimate

most cases, do not even realize the underlying

(albeit very abstract) structure of the society

reason for their actions – they just act on instinct.

where only two groups of citizens exist – the
Typical example – Germany’s National Socialists

number m1 of poor people with average wealth

in the 1930s. They managed to shift the rotational

W1 , and m2 the quantity of reach people with

axis well beyond the center of wealth, thus

average wealth W2 . The center of the wealth of

making the rich people very complacent,

society (5.5) is at

converting the poor into a formidable political
force, and transforming the middle class into very

Wc =

m1W1 + m2W2
m1 + m2

politically active and loyal supporters. The
society got a tremendous rotational catalyst from
the confiscated Jewish wealth [8], and that

The moment of inertia for (5.5) for the arbitrary

pushed them very quickly over the top into

axis L is

unfreedom territory. Moreover, due to the high
14

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

angular speed, the rolling over the potential

Russia passed the point of maximum freedom

barrier – over U max on Fig. 1 – was practically

rather quickly and reached the near-chaotic point

effortless. Indeed, the self-enslavement was

during the financial crisis of 1998. Then Russia

enthusiastically supported by most of the German

turned back and approached authoritarianism

population at the time.

under president Putin, using record-high oil
prices as a catalyst for climbing up Russia’s
potential barrier from right to left in Fig. 1.

Another trick politicians use is advocating for the
minimization of inequality between the wealth

Needless to say, part of the stabilization of any

groups.

society is to take away the political “heat”
Formula (5.7) shows why – the moment of inertia

generated by too much rotational kinetic energy.

shrinks when financial equality is the declared

Such heat sinks are usually played by various

official goal; it goes to 0 in the case of full

humanitarian efforts – libraries, art, museums,

equality ( W1 = W2 ). Such (utopian) society can be

fundamental and large-scale scientific projects,
etc.

manipulated, pushed, led, indoctrinated, and
controlled (“rotated” in mechanical terms) with

The “heat” produced by “friction” of the society’s

ease. Unfortunately, by doing so, politicians
remove

the

only

known

mechanism

spin needs thermodynamic considerations, similar

of

to the excellent review in [9].

stabilization of society. The fallacy of wealth
equality is well-known and very old – it was

Finally, we can conclude that both left and right

Plutarch who wrote over two millennia ago that

ideologies have a right to exist. From the

“An imbalance between rich and poor is the

politiphysical point of view, the left-wing

oldest and most fatal ailment of a republic.”

politicians are advocating for low private wealth
with respect to total wealth, Wp / Wt

When society suddenly starts rotating too fast, it

1 . The

could quickly slip into either anarchy or slavery.

right-wing politicians are advocating for high

It did happen in recent human history, when, after

private wealth with respect to the total wealth,

dissolving the USSR, Russia got an adrenaline

i.e., Wp / Wt

1.

shock of freedom in the 1990s. This shock led
Russia away from totalitarianism thru the point of

There

maximum freedom under President Yeltsin.

between the two camps. Politicians from the left
15

is

another

politiphysical

difference

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

are trying to shift society’s rotational axis from

given society potential U ( x ) is  , any revolution

left to right (from the poor to the rich,) and

mandates

politicians from the right are trying to shift the

 W
W p t

axis from right to left (from the rich to the poor.)
During this process, the left camp is trying to take

p

1.

(5.8)

However, the condition (5.8) is just a necessary

the political power from the rich, and the right

condition. We have to complement it with

camp is trying to take political power from the

another condition

government. In other words, both camps are not
fighting with each other per se; they are fighting

 r 
 t

different battles, but sometimes these battles

(5.9)

1,

overlap.
where  r - characteristic time for the rotational
Both ideological camps are doing so to gain

component of a society. Finally, the true (in

political control over the society by nullifying

politiphysical terms) revolution needs one more

rotational kinetic energy from the target wealth

condition – for the shifting of the rotational axis:

segments. However, due to the wealth inequality,
the right ideologies appear to produce more stable

 r L

societies than the left ones (i.e., societies with
larger momentum

of

inertia.)

L t

1.

(5.10)

Indeed, the

cemetery of world political history is filled with

The conditions (5.8) - (5.10) represent necessary

numerous short-lived leftist societies.

and sufficient conditions for the revolution in
politiphysical terms.

The introduction of the rotational kinetic energy
of a society leads to a formal definition of the

From this perspective, the French Revolution at

term “revolution.”

the end of the 18th century falls in the “true
revolution” category, but on the surface, the

Intuitively, everybody understands that any

American

political revolution means a substantial change in

approximately the same time, does not.

private wealth. If the characteristic time for the

16

Revolution,

which

happened

at

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

I  m1 (W1 − L)(3W1 − L)

In fact, the revolting colonies did satisfy the

(6.3)

change in rotation condition (5.9). However, the
Founding Fathers left the rotational axis at the

Expression (6.3) has one trivial and one non-

same position as the British – near zero, and the

trivial result. The trivial result is that shifting the

wealth redistribution in the original 13 colonies,

rotational axis to the poor, L = W1 , nullifies the

after the Declaration of Independence was signed

rotational effect of immigration completely, as

in 1776, was rather small. However, at that time,

expected. However, the non-trivial result is that

these colonies were part of a different country –

such nullification also occurs at the point of

the British Empire, and for the Empire, all

L = 3W1 , i.e., at the position of the non-existent in

conditions for the revolution had been met.

the model (5.5) middle class with average wealth
three times that of the poor.
VI. IMMIGRATION
That qualitatively explains once more the
The effects of immigration could be demonstrated

pandering of many politicians to the middle class.

on the exaggerated dipole model (5.5). If, for

Politicians want immigration to expand the

example, the total number of poor people

taxpayer and voter base, while concurrently

suddenly increases,

trying to make effects of immigration “not
visible” to the rest of the population.

m1 → m1 + m1 ,
where m1

(6.1)
Now consider simultaneous changes to the poor

m1 , and the wealth of the group

and wealthy segments of the dipole society (5.5).

increases in the same proportion,

W1 → W1 + W1 = W1 + m1

W1
,
m1

Similar to (6.1) and (6.2),

m2 → m2 + m2

(6.2)
and

but the wealth and number of wealthy people do

W2 → W2 + W2 = W2 + m2

not change, the change to the moment of inertia
I for the dipole (5.5) will be (retaining only

W2
.
m2

Simple calculation leads to the suggestion that an

terms linear on m1 ):

increase in the immigration of the poor could be

17

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

fully compensated by changing the number of

This situation did happen in the United States

wealthy people by the amount

when effects of massive immigration from the
poor Latin America countries were fully offset by

m2 = −m1

(W1 − L) (3W1 − L)
(W2 − L) (3W2 − L)

a relatively small number of well-educated Jews

(6.4)

fleeing from the crumbling Soviet Union and her
satellites in Eastern Europe. A similar process

Here we need to consider three cases.

was observed in Israel.

(a) 0  L  W1

(c) 3W1  L  W2

In this case (assuming W2  L ) m2 becomes

In this case, a change in the number of wealthy

negative, i.e., the moment of inertia of the society

people m2 becomes negative again. However,

stays the same only if the number of the wealthy

this time, wealthy people, without any hesitation,

people and their wealth decreases. For L = 0 ,

will

W 
m2 = −3m1  1 
 W2 

revolt

against

immigration

that

simultaneously shifts the rotational axis beyond

2

(6.5)

the middle-class area toward them. There are
numerous examples of the rich’s behavior in this

Note that the square term in brackets above is

case: they will make substantial efforts to keep

very small. In this case, wealthy people can offer

the rotational axis of the society in the area

some resistance to immigration, because such

around zero (or at least below the poor level W1 .)

immigration decreases their number and their
wealth, albeit in practically negligible terms.

VII. WAR

(b) W1  L  3W1

It is well known that during a war, mostly poor
In this case, m2 becomes positive – the number

people die. In politiphysical terms, it means the

of wealthy people must multiply along with their

number of poor people decreases, m1  0 , and

wealth to negate the effect of immigration. The

analysis is similar to the immigration analysis

side effect of this could be, as mentioned before,

above, but with an inverted sign. For the dipole

a politically indifferent middle class.

model (5.5), consider three cases.

18

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

(a) 0  L  W1

That is a very troubling case for the country. The

In this case, the change in the number of rich

number of wealthy people m2 during the war

people m2 becomes positive. In other words, war

increases, along with their wealth, while poor

is beneficial to rich people, even if a number of

people die.

poor people die. However, the entire effect (6.5)
is exceedingly small. Analogous to this kind of

The

rich

become

richer

while

they

war would be American involvement in both

enthusiastically support the war, but, at the same

World Wars.

time, the rotational axis shifts toward the rich,
thus making them politically irrelevant in the end.
After this type of war, the entire cohort of

(b) W1  L  3W1

wealthy people become political hostage to the
all-powerful poor masses. Enter the communist

That is, probably, the evilest scenario for a

coup in Russia in 1917, which happened even as

country. Both poor and wealthy people die during

WWI was still ongoing.

the war while the rotational axis moves toward
the middle class, making it politically irrelevant.

VIII. EQUILIBRIUM STATE
This situation did happen in Great Britain during
both WWI and WWII. As a result, this double-

A necessary (but not sufficient, of course)

war punch reduced not only the number of poor

condition for the dynamic equilibrium demands

people but disproportionally decreased a high

that the force of freedom (2.1) would be equal to

number of the rich British nobleman, too (by the
centuries-old

British

tradition,

the

the “friction” force.

rich

noblemen’s kids were serving mostly in the

The friction force, being a force of interaction

armed forces.) Because the rotational axis shifted

between the people and the government, should

toward the middle class, that made it politically
insignificant,

and

Prime

Minister

be proportional to the government wealth Wg ,

Winston

total mass mt , and angular velocity  :

Churchill lost the electoral base and the very first
post-war elections of 1945.

F (Wp ) = −

(c) 3W1  L  W2
19

U (Wp )
Wp

2
=  mW
t g

(8.1)

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

Where  - dimensionless friction coefficient. The

Wp = Wt , but the formula (8.2) is valid only

reason we postulate the quadratic dependence of

around some equilibrium state, distant from these

the angular speed is based on the well-known fact

points. Besides, the friction coefficient  , most

that resistance in air and fluids, at first

likely, depends on Wp too, and in a non-linear

approximation, is governed by similar law (and,

fashion. In fact, it would be very strange if it

of course, we applied eternally popular in physics

would not be so.

the unit of measurement argument.)

Moreover, of course, angular speed  , strictly

From (8.1) follows

Wg (Wp ) =

F (Wp )

 mt 2

speaking, should not be considered as an
independent variable, especially due to the
possible “relativistic” effects for high rotational

(8.2)

velocity.

Formula (8.2) gives the amount of government

Indeed, society is better modeled not as a rigid

wealth as a function of private wealth. Because

body but as an elastic one, where perturbations of

the force of freedom near the point of maximum

the wealth density  ( w) are disseminated with

freedom has a shape of the inverted parabola for

characteristic speed c.

positive Wp , government wealth as a function of

For any given angular

velocity,  the linear velocity for the rich is

private wealth has the same shape as in Fig. 2 (we

proportional to the “radius” w and can approach

assume that friction, angular velocity, and total

the characteristic speed c.

population do not change in the vicinity of the
equilibrium.)

The existence of “relativistic” effects in human
society is a fascinating perspective because such

It is not difficult to see that (8.2) is a close

effects should be observable (for example, “Mach

mathematical equivalent of the well-known

waves.”) Also, in elastic bodies, different points

Laffer curve [7]. (Arthur Laffer is a prominent

could rotate at different angular velocities, i.e.,

supply-side economist who gained notoriety as a

rotation of points far away from the axis will be

member of President Reagan’s Economic Policy

delayed due to the finite propagation speed of

Advisory Board.) However, the original Laffer

wealth perturbations. From such perspective, the

curve propagates into areas of Wp = 0 and

observed in [12] variations of the Pareto index

20

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

over time are just manifestations of wealth

and

W2 → W2 +  2 W2 ,

perturbations (“wealth waves”) propagating thru
non-uniform media.

 W1 and  W2 - random variables with

where
We deliberately omit discussions about how

zero mean and unitary dispersion, and amplitudes

society can reach the point of the equilibrium.

 1 and  2 are not negative. Correlation function R

However, we have to emphasize that if the

between random variables  W1 and  W2 is

equilibrium is reached, it requires a continuous
supply of external energy to sustain a certain

R =  W1 W2  .

level of positive freedom.

(8.1)

Finally, from (8.2), we conclude that government

The brackets in formula (8.1) denote averaging

wealth Wg

by the ensemble.

(i.e., taxes government collects)

reaches its maximum near the point of the
maximum positive freedom of the society. In

In this case, the average momentum of inertia at

retrospect, everyone understands that.

the center of wealth for the dipole model (5.5) is

 I c =

VIII. RANDOM FORCES

m1m2
(W2 − W1 ) 2 +  12 − 2 1 2 R +  22 ) 
m1 + m2

Let us discuss some of the effects of random

In the simplest case, when changes in the wealth

external forces on society. We will use the

of the poor and wealth of the rich are not

primitive dipole model (5.5) and limit our

correlated, R=0, and

analysis by studying the effects of the random
forces on the rotational inertia of society only.

 I c =

m1m2
(W2 − W1 ) 2 +  12 +  22 
m1 + m2 

(8.2)

Assume that the number of poor people and the
number of rich people is constant, and their

Formula (8.2) differs from formula (5.7) by non-

corresponding wealth could be described as

negative

term

12 +  22 .

In

other

words,

uncorrelated random external conditions increase
the center of wealth, i.e., pushing it away from

W1 → W1 +  1 W1
21

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

the poor and closer to the rich. From the earlier

If 1 =  2 , formula (8.4) represents a very

chapters, we know that such an outcome is

important President Kennedy case, when “a rising

preferred to the left ideologues, and, lo and

tide lifts all boats.” In this case, the second term

behold, we all know that creating unrest is what

in (8.4) vanishes, and formula (8.4) transforms

they often do, but, of course, without a clear

back into (5.7).

understanding of why it helps their cause.
In other words, in a society where fluctuations of
A very interesting case is when the changes in the

wealth between poor and rich segments are fully

wealth of the poor and the rich are anti-

synchronized, its rotational inertia does not

correlated, R = −1. It means that the rich, for

change, i.e., such a society is theoretically

example, increase their wealth exclusively at the

immune from random external influences.

expense of the poor, and vice versa. In this case

 I c =

m1m2
(W2 − W1 ) 2 + ( 2 +  1 ) 2 
m1 + m2

IX.

(8.3)

CONCLUSIONS

The proposed model is so simple that it is perhaps
This situation is very rare because it assumes total

difficult to believe it can contribute that much to

control over the wealth redistribution process. Of

our understanding of political behavior. However,

course, such indignation and stealing from the

there is no compelling reason for repeating the

poor significantly pushes the rich toward political

main points of the article. Instead, let us discuss

irrelevance. And vice versa – outcry confiscations

some important topics not included here and

from the rich push the poor closer to the

future directions.

irrelevancy.
The classical physical particles, as it is known,
If the random changes of wealth between the two

are “brainless” in the sense they do not possess

groups are fully correlated, R = 1 , and
mm
 I c = 1 2 (W2 − W1 ) 2 + ( 2 −  1 ) 2 
m1 + m2

“knowledge” about the entire potential field U(x).
On the contrary, quantum particles somehow
(8.4)

“know” the entire potential field, and that
“knowledge” allows them to tunnel through
classically prohibited potential barriers.

22

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

Human society (not the classical model above, of
course) also, like quantum particles, knows about

The author is grateful to Igor Mandel, Peter

the entire potential field ahead of them. Without

Miller, Ronald Cherry, Gregory Viola, and

doubt, people (well, some of the people for sure)

Valentina Gindler for fruitful and stimulating

in the societies found at x  xmax (Fig. 1), i.e., to

discussions.

the left of the potential barrier between
unfreedom and freedom, are well aware of the
forces of positive freedom that lie to the other

[1] G. Gindler, The Man-State Paradigm,

(right) side of the potential barrier.

American Thinker, January 20, 2019
[2] I. Mandel, D. Kuznetsov, Statistical and

Finally, human society carries so-called long

physical paradigms in the social sciences. Model

correlations, i.e., humans do remember things,

Assisted Statistics and Applications 4, 39–62

and in many (but not all) situations, political

(2009)

decisions are made based on the lessons learned

[3] V.M. Yakovenko, Monetary economics from

from the past. In other words, human societies

econophysics perspective, Eur. Phys. J. Special

sometimes are acting not only on the demands of

Topics 225, 3313–3335 (2016)

the local potential U(x), the level of spin velocity

[4] L.D. Landau, E.M. Lifshitz, Course of

 , and level of energy from the external sources.

Theoretical

Physics,

Vol.

1

(Butterworth-

Heinemann, 3rd edition, 1976)
On the contrary, people’s actions are based on the

[5] I.S. Gradshteyn, I.M. Ryzhik, Tables of

experience of different societies over the entire

Integrals, series, and Products, (Academic Press,

history of humanity, as if most of the society

5th edition, 1994)

know exactly what lies ahead and exactly what is

[6] S. Foss, S. Zachary, D. Korshunov, An

needed to avoid potential problems. That is well

Introduction to Heavy-Tailed and Subexponential

beyond the classical model.

Distributions, (Springer, 2011)
[7] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Laffer_curve

Such cases must be analyzed from the quantum

[8] G. Aly, Hitler’s Beneficiaries, (Picador Paper,

perspective

2008)

and

are

subject

to

future

[9]

politiphysical research.

B.K.

Chakrabarti,

A.

Chakraborti,

A.

Chatterie (eds.), Econophysics and sociophysics:
trends and perspectives (Wiley-VCH, 2006)

X. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
23

INTRODUCTION TO POLITIPHYSICS

[10] F. Lillo, Econophysics and the Challenge of
Efficiency, (Wiley Periodicals, Inc., Vol. 14, No.
3, 2008 - Econophysics)
[11] A. Drăgulescu, V.M. Yakovenko, Evidence
for the exponential distribution of income in the
USA, Eur. Phys. J. B 20, 585–589 (2001)
[12] B. K. Chakrabarti, A. Chakraborti, S. R.
Chakravarty, A. Chatterjee, Econophysics of
Income and Wealth Distributions (Cambridge
University Press, 2013)

24

