Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.4

Pp.41-50

Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning
Harwati Hashim
Faculty of Education
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia
Karmila Rafiqah M. Rafiq
Faculty of Education
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia
Melor Md. Yunus
Faculty of Education
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Selangor, Malaysia

Abstract
Aligning with the Industrial Revolution 4.0, an abundance of high-tech inventions has embarked
their pavements in the educational field. Despite being under the 21st-century umbrella, the
English language proficiency of Asian learners is still a few steps behind. Undeniably, most of
the English as a Second Language (ESL) learners in Asian countries face challenges in learning
ESL grammar. Grammar has been an intricate component to master due to its nature of
complexity. This study aimed at exploring the effectiveness of using online language games in
improving ESL learners' grammar. A total of 30 students in a secondary school were involved in
this research. The research design of the quasi-experimental method was used, employing the pre
and post-test. Data were analyzed using percentages to compare the results after three
interventions of gamified-learning known as Socrative, PowerPoint Challenge Game, and
Kahoot! The main findings indicated that learners’ scores on the grammar post-test showed a
significant increase from the pre-test. The improvements can be seen in the grading system,
whereby, no participant obtained a grade D and E in the post-test as compared to the pre-test.
Hence, the results depicted that gamified-learning is effective in teaching grammar to ESL
learners.
Keywords: English as a second language (ESL), gamified-learning, grammar, online games,
technology-enhanced language learning
Cite as: Hashim, H., Rafiq, K. R. M., & Yunus, M. M. (2019). Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar
with Gamified-Learning. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5). 41-50
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.4

41

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

1.0. Introduction
In this fast-paced world, education is a crucial aspect for an individual. The revolution of the
world has impacted the educational field as well. The reformation in the educational field moves
towards the Industrial Revolution 4.0, whereby 21st-century learning is proposed to achieve the
aim of the National Philosophy of Malaysian Education (NPME), which is to produce a holistic
individual through education (Ministry of Education Malaysia, 2013). In the current education
system, Malaysia integrates the Common European Framework or Reference for Language
(CEFR) into primary and secondary schools. This new curriculum sought to improve English
proficiency among younger learners. "The reform holistically outlines the development of
learners as competent users of the language to enable them to participate fully in both professional
and academic contexts from schools up to tertiary level and also in teacher training” (Azman,
2016, p. 67). This curriculum is hypothesized to provide natural learning to learners.
Despite the reformation of curriculum, “Vocabulary acquisition in a foreign language is a
problematic and time-consuming task” (Yunus, Salehi & Amini, 2016, p. 184). In learning the
English language, a component which inhibits the desire for learners to learn the language is the
English language’s grammar. Grammar is defined as a generalization in linguistics features,
which forms a system of the language (Kapatsinski, 2014). Although learning the English
language sounds easy, ESL learners still have complications in learning it (Misbah, Mohamad,
Yunus & Ya’acob, 2017).
Since primary school, students are equipped with grammar knowledge, yet they still have a
hard time learning English due to limited vocabulary in the language (Misbah et al., 2017).
Aligning with the current trends in the Malaysian curriculum, the integration of Information
Communications Technology (ICT) in schools is beneficial. Incorporating ICT in teaching and
learning has proven to be a better teaching method as learners are more inclined towards the more
relaxing atmosphere of learning (Noureddine, 2017).
However, grammar activities designed in the Malaysian English textbook for secondary
schools are catered for the conventional teaching method (Siaw-Fong, 2017). This shows that
although the curriculum in Malaysian Education has moved towards 21st-century learning, the
content is still designed in an old-fashioned way. Therefore, this study aims to investigate the
effectiveness of using online language games in improving Malaysian’s secondary school
students’ English grammar.
1.1.Computer Assisted Language Learning
Based on the development of the Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL), beginning
from email in 1988, CALL has developed since to become a better learning tool for teachers in
language classrooms (Padmavathi, 2013). Online games can be used to promote better learning
for students. With adequate facilitation from the teacher, online tools are capable to enhance the
language of learners (Krystalli, Arvanitis & Panagiotidis, 2014). Thus, incorporating games into
teaching will ensure the effectiveness of the learning session.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

42

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

1.1.2.ICT and Language Learning
The term Information Communications and Technology (ICT) has been used widely in
communities. ICT has made life easier for many people. Regardless of the various functions of
ICT, currently, ICT serves as an educational tool. Noureddine (2017) states that positive language
learning can be achieved with the integration of technology. Hence, many educationists start using
ICT to monitor and accompany their teaching and learning session. "Due to the fact that students
are familiar with technology and they will learn better within the technology-based environment,
the issue of ICT integration in schools, specifically in the classroom is vital" (Ghavifekr& Rosdy,
2015, p. 175). This shows that ICT provides a positive effect on education by providing an
opportunity for learners to monitor their own learning. Yunus (2018) indicates that the
reformation of technology has beneficially changed the roles of teachers and allows more learnercentered activities to be carried out.
1.1.3.Online Language Games
Online games or digital games vary in terms of the number of players and categories. Digital
games have many types and categories, from individual to large groups and from educational to
fantasy respectively (Kim, Song, & Burton, 2018; Chun, Kern, & Smith, 2016). Additionally,
"language game is a game with rules that have linguistic aims and they are agreed with the
participants" (Ibrahim, 2016, p. 54). Therefore, online language game brings the meaning of a
competitive platform which includes linguistic elements in a game.
Games are said to be beneficial in education. The main reason for a game to be a successful
tool in aiding learning is due to the fact that games provide a competitive platform for learners to
fully engage in the game (Mekler, Rank, Steinemann & Iacovides, 2016; Bullard & Anderson,
2014). This means that many educators nowadays prefer to use a more stimulating way to deliver
their lessons, rather than the talk-and-chalk method. Concepts and experience in the real world
can be fostered through games, which proves to be an effective tool for learning (Hashim, 2018;
Santhanam, Liu & Shen, 2015). As an educator in 21st-century learning, transforming a classroom
into a digital learning environment is crucial.
Education changes over time as can be seen nowadays, where the old method of a teachercentered classroom has been changed to a student-centered classroom. “Indeed, it is necessary for
teachers to possess high adaptability towards changes as changes bring new doors of learning”
(Ling & Yunus, 2017, p. 15). Teachers should adhere to the ever-changing education to ensure
learners achieve a maximized learning experience. With regards to the evolution of technology, a
firm belief that learning can be enhanced using games is ignited (Wiggins, 2016; Krystalli et al.,
2014). Thus, online language games can cater to independent learning as well as enhancing the
language of learners.
1.2.Grammar in ESL Learning
Grammar is the basics of the English language, which allows ESL learners to read, write,
speak and understand English effectively (Cam & Tran, 2017; Turkmen & Ayden, 2016).
Grammar is a complex component in a language, whereby teaching and learning of grammar are
difficult. As stated by Mart (2013), the grammar of the English language is taught in the target
language of learners because it can foster a better understanding and promotes independent
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

43

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

learning. Ibrahim (2016) emphasizes that in order to accomplish a higher proficiency in ESL,
grammar learning is a must. The teaching of grammar should be fun to provide learners with
better performance. As further supported by Yunus, Nordin, Salehi, Sun and Embi (2013),
learners are able to improve their vocabulary acquisition through ICT.
1.3.Related Studies
Previous studies have shown the effectiveness of gamified-learning in improving grammar.
Grammar is a complex aspect in ESL. Still, when teachers incorporate technology in the
classroom, such as online games, learners' grammar learning seems to show improvement. Based
on the research by Perveen, Asif, Mehmood, Khan, and Iqbal (2013), students who learn through
games acquire more vocabularies. The reason lies in the motivation itself (Hamari & Hassan,
2019; Flores, 2015), whereby it is stated that students are more motivated and eager to learn while
playing. Games in the language classroom involve the active participation of students in learning,
which in return provides a solid platform for learners to effectively and positively learn grammar
in ESL (Leaning, 2015; Hamari, Koivisto & Sarsa, 2014).
In another related study, Rao (2014) emphasizes that students gain more words and learn the
correct structures of English when they are engaged in games. It is stated that English games
promote an inexplicable learning experience where students keep looking forward to learn new
words. Online language games also provide a better version of the English language, other than
engaging students in ESL learning (Mullins & Sabherwal, 2018). Furthermore, there is a
difference in the way students acquire vocabularies, whereby they obtain more words based on
online games, compared to the traditional method of teaching (Castaneda & Cho, 2016; Reitz,
Sohny & Lochmann, 2016; Aslanabadi & Rasouli, 2013). According to this research, it can be
seen that ESL learners tend to learn more with the aid of technology because they find it to be
more exciting and appealing (Raba, 2014; Liu, Li & Santhanam, 2013). A traditional method of
teaching is not that effective anymore in imparting knowledge of grammar to students.
In a study by Bullard and Anderson (2014), gamified-learning manages to improve learners'
achievement with regards to the pre and post-test carried out. A similar result is also discovered
in a study by Wichadee and Pattanapichet (2018). Learners perform better after the interventions
due to their engagement in the games (Poondej & Lerdpornkulrat, 2016). Learning through a fun
environment retains a better memory of the lesson learned. This study also portrays the
effectiveness of using online language games in improving learners' grammar skills.
To conclude, online language game is a current method that can be used by teachers to
improve learners’ grammar in ESL. There is no doubt with the development of technology, it is
easier to monitor the effectiveness of the teaching and learning session in schools.
1.4.Objective
This study aims to investigate the effectiveness of using online language games in improving
Malaysian’s secondary school students’ English grammar.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

44

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

1.5.Methodology
This research employed a quasi-experimental study, which included a pre-test with three
sessions of intervention, and a post-test. A total of 30 students from a suburban secondary school
in Malaysia were the targeted participants for this research. The level of proficiency of the
participants was between intermediate to low. The research instruments include giving out a pretest of 20 grammar questions, followed by three interventions using various online language
games such as Socrative, PowerPoint Challenge Game, and Kahoot! for three consecutive weeks,
respectively. A week after the last intervention, a post-test of 20 grammar questions was carried
out. Data collected were recorded in frequency count and scores from the tests were converted
into percentages as standardized by the Ministry of Education Malaysia, whereby each score
belongs to a different grade.
1.6.Results
This study has investigated the effectiveness of using gamified-learning in improving ESL
learners’ grammar. Table 1 and Figure 1 present the findings of this study.
Based on Table 1 and Figure 1, there was an increase in the results of the participants’ posttest. For grade A, it showed an increase by one participant from the pre-test. For grade B, in the
pre-test, only five participants obtained the grade, while in post-test, a total of 16 participants
managed to get the grade. This shows an increase among participants, who received a grade B. The
number of participants who obtained a grade C in the pre-test were 15, whereby in post-test, there
were only 12. The decline in this figure shows that the three participants received a better grade in
their post-test as compared to their pre-test results. In other words, online language games improve
ESL learners' grammar. Eight participants scored a grade D for their pre-tests, but in the post-test,
none of the participants received this grade. Same goes for grade E, where one participant scored
the grade for pre-test, but none of them scored the same grade for post-test. The results proved that
gamified-learning is able to improve ESL grammar of learners. Most of the participants received a
better grade and they were able to improve themselves in grammar learning. Using online language
games, which is also a technology-based learning tool, participants benefit more from it.
1.7.Discussion
The results are analyzed in relation to the aim proposed based on the comparison results of
the pre and post-test. First, the increasing scores from the pre-test proved that all interventions
carried out were effective, which also adheres to the aim of this paper. Using the interventions in
the form of online language games, the results can be seen as positive. It can also be seen that
online language game improves grammar to a certain extent whereby participants no longer get a
grade D or E for post-test. The findings from a study by Perveen et al. (2013) also proves that the
achievement of students unexpectedly increased, in terms of vocabulary acquisition when
students learn through the use of games. The reason behind the improvement is due to the
motivating intervention (Flores, 2015). Ghavifekr and Rosdy (2015) support this claim by stating
that students learn better when they are aroused in the technology-based teaching method used by
the teacher. Aligning with the improved results, gamified-learning is effective.
Many students are able to improve their grammar in ESL with the aid of online language
games because online language games condone to the 21st-century learning (Mullins &
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

45

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

Sabberwal, 2018; Poondej & Lerdpornkulrat, 2016; Learning, 2015). The integration of
technology in the classroom adheres to the tech-savvy learners’ needs (Hashim, 2018; Raba, 2014;
Sohny & Lochmann, 2016). Due to the nature of gamified-learning, learners are able to improve
themselves. Relating to a study by Rao (2014), he mentions that the effectiveness of using games
to improve learners’ achievement, lies in the engagement of learners towards learning and playing
at the same time. Additionally, Aslanabadi and Rasouli (2013) state that students’ achievement in
grammar is closely related to their motivation and eagerness to win a game, which indirectly
impacted their results. The results from these two studies show similar results to this study on the
effectiveness of using gamified-learning in improving grammar.
Learners, especially school students, currently known as the alpha generation, grow up with
technology. For them, without technology, they are unable to do something brilliantly. "For these
learners, technology is not considered an accessory to life, but is viewed as a way of life" (Hashim,
2018, p. 2). Besides, it can be said that students like something new in their normal classroom
routine. Bullard and Anderson (2014) carry out a study and the results obtained are closely related
to this study, whereby learners perform better in the grammar post-test due to their interest and
active participation in ESL classroom. Thus, when students learn something in a new way, they
will appreciate it and their learning spirit will increase as well (Castaneda & Cho, 2016; Reitz
et.al., 2016).
Learners are more independent in fostering their own learning, especially when they are
motivated and have interest in the learning process, which can be aroused using ICT (Yunus et
al., 2013). It can be said that motivation plays a vital role in the success of a learner in ESL
learning. Tahaineh and Dana (2013) state that motivation highly affects the success of learners in
learning a second language and they also implore teachers to use motivating teaching methods in
the classroom. In this paper, an online language game is a motivating tool which makes learners
obtain better results and further proves that online language games improve ESL grammar
learning.
1.8.Conclusion
Based on the findings of this paper, it can be concluded that gamified-learning is effective in
terms of grammar achievement. Learners are able to obtain better results when they learn grammar
using online language games. Some of the factors involved in positive academic achievement
include motivation and fun. An online language game is fun, to begin with. Due to that, it motivates
learners in playing the game. When learners are interested in playing, their confidence level as well
as their self-esteem in learning grammar increases. The traditional method of teaching is
unfavorable for ESL learners. This in return provides a positive feeling towards learning grammar
through online games. As learners have a positive attitude towards learning ESL grammar, they
benefit from it by gaining better results. Therefore, it would be best if teachers start using online
language games in teaching ESL grammar. It is crucial for teachers to effectively integrate
technology in aiding their lessons for an efficient learning outcome. Overall, with the rapid
advancement of technology and gadgets, ESL learners will benefit massively through gamifiedlearning.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

46

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

About the authors:
Harwati Hashim is a Senior Lecturer/Assistant Professor at the Centre for Teaching and
Learning Innovations, Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). She is an
educational technology enthusiast and an e-learning practitioner. Her areas of concentration are
ESL, mobile learning, Mobile-assisted Language Learning (MALL), technology acceptance as
well as language pedagogy and the use of technology in teaching English as a Second Language
(ESL). ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8817-427X
Karmila Rafiqah M. Rafiq is currently a postgraduate student at the Faculty of Education,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). She is currently in her final year of Masters in Education
(TESL). Her fields of interest are English as a Second Language (ESL) teaching and learning and
educational technology. ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8196-0999
Melor Md Yunus is an Associate Professor at the Faculty of Education, Universiti Kebangsaan
Malaysia and is currently the Deputy Dean (Research and Innovation) at the Faculty of Education,
Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia (UKM). She holds a B.A. in English (Linguistics) from the
University of Nevada-Reno, USA and an M.A. in TESL from the Arizona State University, USA.
She then earned her Ph.D. in Education (TESL) from the University of Bristol, UK. Her areas of
concentration are TESL, language pedagogy and the use of technology in TESL. Her expertise is
in the area of Technology-enhanced Language Learning (TELL).
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-7504-7143
References
Aslanabadi, H. & Rasouli, G. (2013). The Effect of Games on Improvement of Iranian EFL
Vocabulary Knowledge in Kindergartens. International Review of Social Sciences and
Humanities, 6, (1), 186-195.
Azman, H. (2016). Implementation and Challenges of English Language Education Reform in
Malaysian Primary Schools. 3L: The Southeast Asian Journal of English Language Studies,
22, (3), 65–78.
Bullard, S.B. & Anderson, N. (2014). “I’ll Take Commas for $200”: An Instructional Intervention
Using Games to Help Students Master Grammar Skills. Journalism & Mass Communication
Educator, 1–12.
Cam, L. & Tran, T.M.T. (2017). An Evaluation of using Games in Teaching English Grammar
for First Year English-Majored Students at Dong Nai Technology University. International
Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational Research, 16, (7), 55-71.
Castaneda, D.A. & Cho, M.H. (2016). Use of a game-like application on a mobile device to
improve accuracy in conjugating Spanish verbs. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 29,
(7).
Chun, D., Kern, R. & Smith, B. (2016). Technology in Language Use, Language Teaching, and
Language Learning. The Modern Language Journal, 64-80.
Flores, J.F.F. (2015). Using Gamification to Enhance Second Language Learning. Digital
Education Review, 27, 32-54.
Ghavifekr, S. & Rosdy, W.A.W. (2015). Teaching and Learning with Technology: Effectiveness
of ICT Integration in Schools. International Journal of Research in Education and Science
(IJRES), 1, (2), 175-191.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

47

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

Hamari, J., Koivisto, J. & Sarsa, H. (2014). Does Gamification Work?--A Literature Review of
Empirical Studies on Gamification. Proceedings of the 47th Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS). Hawaii: USA.
Hashim, H. (2018). Application of technology in the digital era education. International Journal
of Research in Counseling and Education, 1, (2), 1-5.
Hassan, L. & Hamari, J. (2019). Gamification of E-Participation: A Literature Review.
Proceedings of the 52nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Maui HI:
USA.
Ibrahim, N. (2016). Games for Teaching Grammar to Young Learners. Indonesian Journal of
Integrated English Language Teaching (IJIELT), 2, (1), 49-63.
Kapatsinski, V. (2014). What is grammar like? A usage-based constructionist perspective. LiLT,
11, (1), 1-38.
Kim, S., Song, K. & Burton, B.L.J. (2018). What is Gamification in Learning and Education? In
Gamification in Learning and Education (pp. 25-29). Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing.
Krystalli, P., Arvanitis, P. & Panagiotidis, P. (2014). Evaluating Serious Games for Foreign
Language Learning: An Online Grading and Visualization Tool. International Journal for
Cross-Disciplinary Subjects in Education (IJCDSE), 5, (1), 1564-1570.
Leaning, M. (2015). A Study of the Use of Games and Gamification to Enhance Student
Engagement, Experience and Achievement on a Theory-Based Course of an Undergraduate
Media Degree. Journal of Media Practice, 16, (2), 1-16.
Ling, A.T. & Yunus, M.M. (2017). Secondary ESL Teachers’ Receptiveness towards ICT
Integration. The Asian EFL Journal, 7, 5-18.
Liu, D., Li, X. & Santhanam, R. (2013). Digital Games and Beyond: What Happens When
Players Compete? MIS Quarterly, 37, (1), 111-124.
Mart, C.T. (2013). The Grammar-Translation Method and the Use of Translation to Facilitate
Learning in ESL Classes. Journal of Advances in English Language Teaching, 1, (4), 103105.
Mekler, E., Rank, S., Steinemann, S. & Iavocides, I. (2016). Designing for Emotional Complexity
in Games: The Interplay of Positive and Negative Affect. Proceedings of the 2016 Annual
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play - CHI PLAY ’16. Austin, Texas: USA.
Ministry of Education Malaysia (2013). Malaysia Education Blueprint 2013-2025 (Preschool to
Post-Secondary Education). Putrajaya: Malaysia.
Misbah, N. H., Mohamad, M., Yunus, M. M., & Ya’acob, A. (2017). Identifying the Factors
Contributing to Students’ Difficulties in the English Language Learning. Creative Education,
8, 1999–2008.
Mullins, J.K. & Sabherwal, R. (2018). Beyond Enjoyment: A Cognitive-Emotional Perspective
of Gamification. Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International Conference on System
Science. Waikoloa Village, Hawaii: USA.
Noureddine, A. (2017). The Benefits of Using ICT in the EFL Classroom: From Perceived Utility
to Potential Challenges. Journal of Educational and Social Research, 7, (1), 111-118.
Padmavathi, G. (2013). English Teaching and Learning in the Digital Age. International Journal
of Modern Engineering Research, 3, (1), 116-118.
Perveen, A., Asif, M., Mehmood, S., Khan, M.K. & Iqbal, Z. (2016). Effectiveness of Language
Games in Second Language Vocabulary Acquisition. Sci.Int. (Lahore), 28, (1), 633-637.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

48

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

Poondej, C. & Lerdpornkulrat, T. (2016). The Development of Gamified Learning Activities to
Increase Student Engagement in Learning. Australian Education Computing, 31, (2).
Raba, A.A.A.M. (2014). Using Games to Promote Students' Motivation towards Learning
English. Al-Quds Open University Journal for Educational & Psychological Research &
Studies, 2, (5), 11-33.
Rao, R.K. (2014). Enhancing Student’s Grammar by using Games: A Practical Classroom
Experience. International Journal of Academic Research, 1, (3).
Reitz, L., Sohny, A. & Lochmann, G. (2016). VR-Based Gamification of Communication
Training and Oral Examination in a Second Language. International Journal of Game-Based
Learning, 6, (2), 46-61.
Santhanam, R., Liu, D. & Shen, W.C.M. (2015). Gamification of Technology-Mediated Training:
Not All Competitions Are the Same. Information Systems Research, 27, (2), 453-465.
Siaw-Fong, C. (2017). A Communicative Approach to Teaching Grammar: Theory and Practice.
The English Teacher, 34, 33-50.
Supriusman, Yunus, M.M. & Yaasin, M.H.M. (2018). Teachers’ Competencies in Multiple
Questioning Strategies in English Language Learning. International Journal of Innovative
Research and Development, 7, (7), 37-41.
Tahaineh, Y. & Dana, H.A. (2013). Jordanian Undergraduates' Motivations and Attitudes towards
Learning English in EFL Context. International Review of Social Sciences and Humanities,
4, (2), 159-180.
Turkmen, Y. & Ayden, S. (2016). The Effects of Using Online Concordances on Teaching
Grammar. Journal of the Institute of Social Sciences, 20, (1), 145-152.
Wichadee, S. & Pattanapichet, F. (2018). Enhancement of Performance and Motivation
Through Application of Digital Games in an English Language Class. Teaching English with
Technology, 18, (1), 77-92.
Wiggins, B.E. (2016). An Overview and Study on the Use of Games, Simulations, and
Gamification in Higher Education. International Journal of Game-Based Learning, 6, (1),
18-29.
Yunus, M. M., Salehi, H., & Amini, M. (2016). Impact of Using CALL on Iranian EFL Learners’
Vocabulary Knowledge. English Language Teaching, 9, (1), 173–187.
Yunus, M.M. (2018). Innovation in Education and Language Learning in 21st Century. Journal
of Sustainable Development Education and Research, 2, (1), 33-34.
Yunus, M.M., Nordin, N., Salehi, H., Sun, C.H. & Embi, M.A. (2013). Pros and Cons of Using
ICT in Teaching ESL Reading and Writing. International Education Studies, 6, (7), 119-130.

Appendix A.
Table 1. Pre-test and post-test results
Grades
Range of
scores (%)
A
B
C
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

80 – 100
65 – 79
50 – 64

No. of students
Pretest
1
5
15

Posttest
2
16
12
49

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
Improving ESL Learners’ Grammar with Gamified-Learning

D
E
TOTAL

Hashim, Rafiq & Yunus

40 – 49
0 – 39

8
1
30

0
0
30

Appendix B.

Pre-test and post-test results

No.of students

Pre-test

Post-test

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
A

B

C
Grade
n=30

D

E

Figure 1. Pre-test and post-test results

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

50

