Estimating the Economic Impact of
Increases in the Minimum Wage

Kory Fenstemacher | Jared Fisher | Zerina Hadzalic | Brenda Hillebrandt
July 2019

DISCLAIMER:
This is a project performed by M.S. students in Applied Economics. The Applied Project
course is the capstone course for the degree of M.S. in Economics. The course is a threemonth consulting project that takes the student from the proposal stage through the final
presentation and final report.
The students are “hired” as associates in a fictitious consulting company called Applied
Economics Research Group (AER Group). The consulting company is fictitious, and is only
mentioned to enhance the realism of the project.
To further enhance the realism of the projects, we sometimes use hypothetical client requests
for proposals with actual client names. However, the client requests may not be real. Please
contact the Director of the Applied Master’s program at Florida State University to find
out if a client request is real or not.
Although every effort has been made to verify the accuracy of the student projects, Florida
State University makes no claims, promises, or guarantees about the accuracy, completeness,
or adequacy of the projects, and disclaims liability for errors and omissions of content,
statements and conclusions of the projects. In addition, note that these projects are the work of
students, and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Department of Economics or Florida
State University.
Please do not quote, cite or distribute this project without written consent by the Director
of the Applied Master’s program at Florida State University.

Estimating the Economic Impact of Increases in the Minimum
Wage: Executive Summary
Background

Figure 1. Florida’s final proposed minimum wage increase,
Florida’s latest Minimum Wage
$15 per hour, is indicated by the red dashed line.
Initiative (Initiative #18-01) is
Hourly Wage Distributions in Florida
highly likely to appear on November’s
voting ballot. This amendment proposes
raising the current minimum wage of
$8.46 to $10.00 per hour beginning
September 30th, 2021. Each year
following the initial increase, the
minimum wage would increase another
$1.00 per hour until it reaches the goal of
$15.00 per hour by the year 2026, which
is marked by the dotted red line in Figure
1. Based on this information, the Florida
Legislature has tasked AERG with a
multi-stage economic analysis that
involves estimating employment effects,
as well as tax revenue and social services
expenditures.

Methodology
The first step in our analysis was to construct an hourly wage distribution using Integrated Public
Microdata Series (IPUMS) data, the world’s largest individual-level population database. This
distribution is aggregated at
the state level, as the data
contains information on
hourly wages of workers
from all 67 counties in
Florida. As observed in
Figure 2, our distribution
shows over 15% of
Floridians make $10 per
hour or less, while over 35%
of the Floridian working
population make $15 per
Figure 2. A closer look at the wage distribution.
hour or less.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

i

Since the effects of the minimum wage on employment
have been well examined in prior research, much of our
analysis will be based on the estimates found in the
literature. One of our key tasks is to critically assess the
wage elasticities presented therein. We choose to
estimate employment using elasticities reflecting low,
medium, and high disemployment effects. The majority
of the literature we reviewed revolves around lowskilled workers and result in elasticity estimates within
a range of -.1 to -.3. Because of this, we have decided
to use these as our low and high values, respectively.
We chose our medium elasticity, which is -.2, to be a
midpoint between the low and high elasticity ranges.
Figure 3. Tax revenues and social services
In practical terms, these values represent a decrease of
are considered to be indirect effects;
1%, 2%, or 3% in employment per 10% increase in
changes in employment are direct effects.
the minimum wage. We find the most pressing issue
to be the first jump of approximately 18% (from $8.46 to $10.00), thus we focus more closely on
this. Similarly, our analyses relating to tax revenue and social services are also focused on the
initial wage increase. We proceed with using the median elasticity of -.2 to estimate the
economic impact of both the direct and indirect effects, working in conjunction with a dynamic
multiplier model developed by Regional Economic Models, Inc. (REMI).

Results

35% of Floridians

54,503 Jobs
Removed From
Economy

Tax Revenue
Differences: -$730
million;
Social Service
Expenditures
Differences: -$4.7
billion

We estimate the numbers of jobs in Florida
economy to decrease by 27,914 to 79,821 jobs
on average annually over the duration of this
amendment, according to our range of
elasticities. Income and substitution effects
would also take place, resulting in further
disemployment. Our estimates for the
differences in Florida’s tax revenues and social
services expenditures from the baseline
forecast are presented in Figure 4.

Figure 4. Social service expenditures are composed of a variety of welfare programs in Florida.
The graphic displays average differences from the control from 2020 to 2026.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

ii

Table of Contents
Estimating the Economic Impact of Increases in the Minimum Wage
3
Introduction

3

A History of the Minimum Wage

3

Literature Review

5

The “New” Economics of Minimum Wage

5

A Closer Look at Florida Wages

19

Multiplier Software

36

REMI

36

IMPLAN

37

Estimating Employment Effects

38

The Increasing Affected Population

38

Selecting Appropriate Elasticities

39

Spreading Effects between Industries

40

Gradual Wage Adjustments

41

Direct Effects Estimation

42

Differences from the Control

43

Induced Effects Analysis

44

Total Effects Analysis

48

Benefit Cliffs

50

Estimating Effects on Social Service Expenditures

56

Tax Revenue Impacts of Minimum Wage Increases

58

Sales Tax

58

Property Taxes

60

Total State and Local Tax Revenue

61

A Word on Productivity Changes due to Minimum Wage Increases
Non-Constant Elasticity Estimation
Increases in Wage and The Income Effect for Workers

62
64
65

Assessing the Income Effect

65

Leisure as a Good: The Income Effect

67

A Review of the Schooling Effect as Substitution

68

Channels of Adjustment: Education

71

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

1

Quantifying the Schooling Effect

76

Channels of Adjustment: Unemployment

77

Channels of Adjustment: Firm Spillover Effects

79

Channels of Adjustment: Automation

80

Addressing Recent Research

82

CBO: The Effects on Employment and Family Income of Increasing the Federal Minimum
Wage
82
Final Thoughts

85

Appendix 1

87

Appendix 2

88

Appendix 3

89

Appendix 4

90

Appendix 5

91

Appendix 6

92

Appendix 7

93

Bibliography

94

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

2

Estimating the Economic Impact of Increases in the
Minimum Wage

Introduction
In this paper, we will consider multiple facets of the widely debated minimum wage
argument. First, we will assess the prior literature that analyzes and debates this topic in order to
synthesize their estimated effects into a range. Second, and arguably most importantly, we will
consider the key demographics affected by the minimum wage legislation. Included in this
section will be an analysis of wage distributions in Florida. Third, we will attempt to estimate a
range of low, medium, and high effects of increasing the minimum wage in terms of employment
levels. Finally, we will estimate the secondary effects of an increased minimum wage – including
but not limited to: income effects, substitution effects, and schooling effects – with an emphasis
on tax revenue and social services expenditures.

A History of the Minimum Wage
Florida’s minimum wage was initially created on November 2, 2004, after a
constitutional amendment was approved by voters. The following year, the minimum wage was
set to $6.15 per hour - a dollar increase from the federal mandated minimum wage. 1 By 2009, the
minimum wage of Florida reverted to the federal minimum wage of $7.25 per hour. This

1

"Florida Minimum Wage History 2000 to 2019." Oct. 2018. Florida Department of Economic Opportunity. 09 July
2019, http://www.floridajobs.org/docs/default-source/business-growth-and-partnerships/for-employers/posters-andrequired-notices/2019-minimum-wage-poster/florida-minimum-wage-history-2000-2018.pdf?sfvrsn=4.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

3

remained constant until 2011, when a legal ruling was passed to increase the minimum wage to
$7.31 per hour. Over time, the wage has steadily increased to its current value of $8.46 per hour.
This wage includes the majority of employees with a couple of exemptions (tipped employees,
student workers, and other exempt occupations). Typically, the minimum wage increases with
the southern consumer price index on wages (CPI-W) and has, so far, only endured minor
increases. The proposed minimum wage legislation, however, seeks to change that. The structure
of the legislation, which seeks to increase the state-mandated minimum wage to $15 per hour
over six years beginning in 2020, is illustrated below in Table 1.
Table 1. Yearly Increases in the Minimum Wage
Year

Minimum Wage

Percentage Change from Prior Year

2020

$8.46

-

2021

$10.00

18.2%

2022

$11.00

10.0%

2023

$12.00

9.1%

2024

$13.00

8.3%

2025

$14.00

7.7%

2026

$15.00

7.1%

The initial wage hike from $8.46 to $10.00 is an 18.2% increase and represents the second
largest percentage increase in the Florida minimum wage since its inception, rivalled only by the
aforementioned increase from $5.15 to $6.15 in 2005 (an increase of 19.4%). Additionally, the
increases following 2021 dwarf previous adjustments based on CPI, which have been between
.02% and 3% since 2013 (see Appendix 1 for full minimum wage table). Figure 1 graphically

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

4

depicts the extreme separation from the gradual wage increases that we would see if the
proposed legislation passes. We assume that the federal minimum wage would continue to be its
current hourly wage of $7.25, well into 2030.

Figure 1.

Literature Review
The “New” Economics of Minimum Wage
It was not until the mid-nineteenth century that somewhat reliable estimates of a
theorized disemployment effect were reported. Brown, Gilroy, and Kohen’s 1982 paper 2, which
gathers and reviews most of the relevant literature up to that point, is a summary of prior

2

Brown, Charles; Gilroy, Curtis; and Kohen, Andrew. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and
Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2 (June 1982), pp. 487-528.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

5

developments. They state that “time-series studies typically find that a 10 percent increase in the
minimum wage reduces teenage employment by 1 to 3 percent”, and cross-sectional studies
usually “produce a wider range of estimated impacts, which are roughly centered on the range
found in the time-series research”. In both cases, the authors state that the lower end of the
elasticity estimates, such as -.1, are likely more realistic, and that there potentially is some small
negative effect. Additionally, they note that, while there is a substantial lack of information
regarding age groups aside from teenagers, the research on 20 to 24 year-olds leans toward an
even smaller disemployment effect. Even though these results agree with the theory, there was
concern that the prevailing methodology, which utilized national-level time-series data, had
pitfalls. Neumark and Wascher note that “the minimum wage variable used in these studies
exhibits relatively little variation over time, and what variation exists is correlated with changes
in government social welfare and training programs”.3 If this claim is true, any effect on
employment might be confounded, and the minimum wage effect would be difficult to parse out.
In order to avoid this, Neumark and Wascher employ state-level panel data, exploiting the fact
that greater variation exists in the relative state-level minimum wages than in the federallymandated minimum wage (which has changed only ten times in the last forty years) 4. Despite
utilizing data and methodology that seems objectively better, their estimated elasticities remain
essentially the same, with a range of -.1 to -.2 for teenagers aged 16 to 19. Additionally, included
in this paper is a mention of the sub-minimum wage, which had previously been untouched in
the literature. Because service industry jobs – specifically retail and food service – play such a

3

Neumark, David and Wascher, William, (1992), Employment Effects of Minimum and Subminimum Wages:
Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws, ILR Review, 46, issue 1, p. 55-81,
https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:sae:ilrrev:v:46:y:1992:i:1:p:55-81.
4
“History of Federal Minimum Wage Rates Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 1938 - 2009.” Minimum Wage Wage and Hour Division (WHD) - U.S. Department of Labor, www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/chart.htm.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

6

large role in the Florida economy, we suspect that this insight will be particularly valuable to our
analysis.
This comfortable consensus of a small negative effect went generally unchallenged until
Card and Kreuger’s 1994 book.5 Using a natural experiment-style empirical method, they
compared employment in fast-food establishments in New Jersey and Pennsylvania before and
after the minimum wage increased approximately 19% (from $4.25 to $5.05). Since
Pennsylvania did not experience the wage change, it served as a proximate control group, which
allowed for a simple difference-in-difference analysis. Using this methodology, they found
positive employment effects of increasing the minimum wage. This result, and the accompanying
indictment of the prior literature were the jumping-off point for much of the modern minimum
wage debate. Card and Kreuger were cognizant of some of the drawbacks of their approach,
however. Since natural experiments fail to ensure that each participant has a fair chance of being
assigned to a given group, also known as random assignment, it deems impossible to infer a
purely causal relationship. Also, there are ceteris paribus6 violations that occur in natural
experiments, as it is not feasible that all characteristics of both groups continue to persist
throughout the relevant time period.7 Whereas the authors themselves were confident that their
methodology was better than the “traditional econometric approach”, many economists since
have questioned the validity of this assertion. The most common criticism levied against this
study is that it is plagued by inferior data. Additionally, the results themselves seem misleading.
The positive wage elasticity is not determined by an increase in New Jersey employment, but

5

Card, David & Krueger, Alan B, 1994. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of the Fast-Food
Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania," American Economic Review, American Economic Association, vol.
84(4), pages 772-793, September.
6
Latin, meaning “all else constant”
7 Thomas Leonard, (2000), “The Very Idea of Applying Economics: The Modern Minimum-Wage Controversy and
Its Antecedents”, History of Political Economy, 32, (5), 117-144

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

7

rather by a stagnation of New Jersey employment, compared to decreased Pennsylvania
employment. Even though the result is significant and positive, suggesting that this is a purely
positive elasticity seems errant. John Kennan, in “The Elusive Effects of the Minimum Wage”,
provides a good metaphorical comparison, describing these results as “having a drug trial in
which the drug has no effect but the placebo makes people sick”. 8
The recent revival in policy discussion around raising both state-mandated and federallymandated minimum wage has, in turn, sparked an influx of economics literature. The influx of
recent literature involves criticism about econometric methods utilized by past researchers. In
particular, Burkhauser et al.’s (2000a) study9 critiques Card and Krueger’s technique using
pooled cross-sectional CPS (Current Population Survey) data. As aforementioned, Card and
Krueger conclude that a minimum wage increase yields a null effect in employment levels.
Burkhauser et al. dispute this finding, stating that the “macroeconomic controls commonly
included in models where no employment impact is found are inappropriate”.
In order to effectively challenge Card and Krueger, Burkhauser et al. chose to re-estimate
their data. They used CPS monthly data from the years 1979-1997, in contrast to Card and
Krueger’s use of annual data from the month of May during 1973-1989. An advantage of pulling
monthly data rather than annual is a greater sample size, which is aggregated to a state-month
level, due to the increase in the number of observations. This method produced 11,268 statemonth level observations – considerably more than Card and Krueger’s 751 observations. The
controls are kept the same for the purpose of re-estimating. Burkhauser et al. obtain auxiliary

8

Kennan, John. “The Elusive Effects of Minimum Wages.” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 33, no. 4, 1995, pp.
1950–1965. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/2729319.
9
Burkhauser, Richard V., Kenneth A. Couch, and David C. Wittenburg. 2000a. “A Reassessment of the New
Economics of the Minimum Wage Literature with Monthly Data from the Current Population Survey.” Journal of
Labor Economics. Vol. 18, No. 4 (October), pp. 653-680.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

8

regression results in order to demonstrate the loss in variation in the minimum wage variable
occurring when unsuitable macroeconomic controls, such as individual year effects, are used.
Burkhauser et al. argued that the inclusion of year fixed effects capture 93% of the
variation in the variable for minimum wage. The auxiliary regression results show that year
effects, also known as dummy variables for each of the years in the data, lead to an imprecise
estimation of employment level effects because they only allow for 7% variation in state
policies. With the use of equations estimated without year effects, they found elasticities around
the range of -.45, relative to the null effect found on employment after including year effects.
Since year effects have the ability to control for changes in federal policy, any discrete change
during a period of time is dismissed from the regression.
This leads to an enormous problem, as minimum wage increases occur incrementally
year-by-year and typically do not happen more than once in a given calendar year. Though
Burkhauser et al. were able to mitigate some of the problem by using monthly CPS data instead
of annual CPS data, they were unable to fully resolve the problem created by the implementation
of year effects. The year effects lull the possibility of obtaining negative effects on employment
levels by disregarding gradual increases in the minimum wage. Thus, Burkhauser et al. argue
that is not a phenomenon for Card and Krueger to find anything but a null effect on employment
levels without excluding year effects. We suspect that this literature is essential in showing that
including irrelevant macroeconomic variables when estimating Florida’s employment levels may
potentially be more hurtful than helpful.
Aside from year effects, researchers’ curiosities about different demographics were also
reinvigorated. In Zavodny’s 2000 study10, attention is turned toward teen hours of work and
10

Zavodny, Madeline. 2000. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and Hours.” Labour Economics.
Vol. 7, No. 6 (November), pp. 729-750.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

9

employment. This paper refutes a “growing set of papers [which] find that increases in minimum
wage do not significantly lower employment among teens or fast-food workers.” Instead of
simply looking at employment level changes, Zavodny offered another perspective revolving
around the number of hours worked. She pointed out that “there are several reasons why
employers may adjust hours as well as employment when the minimum wage is raised.” Both
state- and individual-level data are used to evaluate the effects on hours worked and teenage
employment levels. State-level data has the advantage of aggregation, which means researchers
can look at total effects more easily. On the other hand, the use of individual-level data assists
Zavodny with more easily calculated probabilities of remaining teenage employees in the
workforce.
The CPS data used by Zavodny consists of rotation groups for the years 1979-1993, ages
16 to 19. Zadovny’s analysis concentrated on the particular age group of 16 to 19 years because,
according to the literature, these individuals are the ones most affected by a minimum wage
increase. The results obtained in the study demonstrate that there may be a small effect on
employment. Taking a look at the individual-level data, there seemed to be no significant decline
in the hours worked by affected teens. However, the aggregated state-level data shows a slightly
different picture: higher minimum wages may result in lower employment rates, but this is
dependent on the choice of the minimum wage variable. According to Zavodny, her research
paints an elusive picture pointing towards the reduction in the probability of workers becoming
employed once minimum wages increase, rather than the probability of remaining employed,
which would potentially explain the slight differentiation between individual-level and statelevel results. This study introduces a new aspect to the dynamic effects of wage increases, which
causes us to investigate secondary effects of wage increases – mainly about the difficulties that

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

10

Floridians might face when it comes to employment if firms choose to stop hiring or begin to
start relying more on automation.
A different technique, discussed by Keil et al. in their 2001 study11, considered lagged
effects when estimating the effect on both aggregate and youth employment levels. Previously,
minimum wage effects on employment were thought to appear quickly in industries, since
previous economists believed firms were staffed and readily equipped to handle changes in labor.
However, modern researchers disagree. Employment effects due to minimum wage increases
may take longer to be felt, as firms often have to start assessing non-labor inputs to better assess
who to fire or hire.
Lagged effects are included in regressions to explain the possibility of adjustment in the
labor force taking longer than expected. Kiel et al. used lagged effects in conjunction with data
from a panel of U.S. states. In order to account for adjustment costs, they decided to lag the
dependent variable of their regression. By the introduction of a lagged dependent variable, their
model became dynamic. The specified model output two ranges of elasticities in the short-run
and long-run for aggregate and youth employment. In terms of youth employment, the model
conveyed elasticities of -.37 in the short run and -.69 in the long run. Total employment’s
elasticities were in the range of -.11 in the short run and -.19 in the long run. This study is
important for us to consider because the inclusion of lagged effects allow for the examination of
gradual effects. Florida’s proposed minimum wage increase is also gradual, which allows us to
consider impacts in various domains (social services expenditures, tax revenues).

11

Keil, Manfred, Donald Robertson, and James Symons. 2001. “Minimum Wages and Employment.” CEPR
Working Paper No. 497.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

11

Apart from different techniques, past researchers have also returned to the topic of wage
increases to re-examine established conclusions – notably, Neumark and Wascher in their 2003
study12 examining schooling effects. The re-examination of evidence comes after criticism by
Evans and Turner (1995) regarding their aforementioned 1992 study, stating that the effects of
minimum wage increases on school enrollment may differ “depending on which definition of
enrollment is used”13. To combat this, Neumark and Wascher re-estimate the model using a new
minimum wage variable specific to October of each year from 1980 to 1998.
Their newly re-estimated results convey consistent negative effects of minimum wages
on school enrollment. In particular, when the 1990s are added to the sample, Neumark and
Wascher report a statistically significant elasticity of -.13, indicating a strong negative effect of
the minimum wage on school enrollment. The most interesting portion is that the results are
consistent regardless of how enrollment is measured in the CPS data, and can sometimes be even
stronger depending on using an enrollment measure that has been defined in recent research.
This study is critical, as it shows consistency in negative effects even when the sample size
increases, and could possibly influence future work revolving around state-specific high school
and college enrollment when it comes to minimum wage policies.
The debate of adverse effects continued with Fiscal Policy Institute’s (FPI) report in
2004.14 The report focused on the retail sector, since it employs the majority of workers at low
wages. FPI aimed to analyze comparisons between states with a higher minimum wage than the

12

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. "Minimum wages and skill acquisition: Another look at schooling
effects." Economics of Education Review 22.1 (2003): 1-10.
13 Evans, W., & Turner, M. (1995). Minimum wage effects on employment and school enrollment: comment.
Mimeo. University of Maryland.
14
Fiscal Policy Institute. 2004. “State Minimum Wages and Employment in Small Businesses.”
fiscalpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2004/04/minimumwageandsmallbusiness.pdf.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

12

federal minimum and all other states. At the time of the report, there were twelve states that had
a higher prevalent wage than the federal wage. Four particular areas were focused on for the
analysis: “total nonfarm employment, total retail employment, employment and average payroll
per worker for all small businesses, and employment and average payroll per worker for small
retail businesses.”
The conclusions drawn from FPI’s research were contrary to most of the research
discussed previously. Data from the CPS and U.S. Commerce Department’s County Business
Patterns (CBP) were used to evaluate the four areas mentioned earlier between the twelve states
with state-specific minimum wages and the rest of the states. In terms of total nonfarm
employment, FPI reports found that eleven of the minimum wage states (plus D.C), compared to
the other thirty-nine states, increased aggregate employment by 6.14%. Retail employment also
grew “more than three times as great” compared to the rest of the states, increasing by a total of
6.11%. The statistics for small businesses seemed to prevail against the rest of the states due to a
number of factors increasing. The number of establishments, employment, total payroll, and
average payroll for ten minimum wage states15 (including D.C) grew at least an average of 3%
across the board. The last focus was on the prosperity of small retail trade businesses in the same
ten states including D.C. Their findings are consistent with the others – small retail trade
businesses seem to increase twice as quickly than in the other forty states, and the number of
employees working for small employers increased by 3.7%. Overall, FPI’s goal of releasing this
report was to provide another side to the argument that an increase in minimum wages will hurt
small retail trade businesses and their employers and employees alike.

15

Maine was excluded from the analysis since it did not raise its minimum wage above the federal minimum wage
in 2002.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

13

In 2006, Joseph Sabia refuted FSP’s claim that there were no adverse effects on small
businesses, citing FPI’s disregard for statistical significance and use of only two time periods
(2008 and 2001).16 Sabia re-estimated, using a much longer time period (1979-2004). Sabia also
pointed out that FPI’s incorporation of state-level socioeconomic and demographic
characteristics could lead to attenuation bias – causing results to lean toward a null effect. This
bias could potentially stem from states raising minimum wages in anticipation of wellperforming economic sectors employing a large number of hourly wage workers. This, in turn,
would cause a failure to abide by the ceteris paribus assumption of economics.
Sabia begins by employing a fixed-effects model seen in both Card and Krueger and
Burkhauser et al.’s approaches. Using the ratio of employment-to-population as the dependent
variable is a common practice in the empirical framework observed in minimum wage literature.
Along with estimating employment effects, Sabia also estimated changes in hours worked by
teenagers in order to provide a picture of some of the byproducts of wages increasing. CPS
Merged Outgoing Rotation Group data from January 1979 to December 2004 were applied to
create a panel of states and months for the segment analyzing overall and retail employment.
Each month contained about 22,000 to 23,000 observations comprised of individuals from age
sixteen to sixty-four. These individual observations were then used to create state-month level
observations, in favor of the “statistical power gained from the increase in the overall sample
size”. In regards to small business employment, a data set was constructed from CPS Outgoing
Rotation Group data found containing March 1989 to March 2005. Instead of state-month level

16

Sabia, Joseph J. “The Effect of Minimum Wage Increases on Retail and Small Business Employment.”
Employment Policies Institute, May 2006, www.epionline.org/wp-content/studies/sabia_05-2006.pdf.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

14

data, Sabia was only able to create state-year level data and seemed to be cognizant of the
weakened statistical power due to an enormous decrease in sample size.
The first estimations produced were in regards to overall retail and small business
employment. The findings were consistent with the majority of minimum wage literature,
indicating declines in retail employment when wages are increased. The range of elasticities
were unwavering compared to past estimates for retail trade industries and were between -.1 and
-.3. With regards to small business employment, a 10% increase in minimum wages is associated
with a 1% decline in employment. As Sabia pointed out, a major drawback of FPI’s analysis is
the inability to distinguish between skilled and unskilled workers in order to examine the way
both groups are affected. Grouping skilled and unskilled workers presents great challenges, as
previous research has often stated unskilled, low-wage workers are more at risk than high wage,
skilled workers. This can unintentionally lead to understating adverse effects.
To compare results to FPI’s study, Sabia adamantly focused on the most at-risk group,
according to modern literature: teenagers. Measuring overall teenage employment effects, a -2.2
to -3.0% decrease in the ratio for employed teens is estimated as a result of an increase in
minimum wage. What Sabia also found is that regardless of the controls (either macroeconomic
controls or year effects), estimates in the range of -1.8 to -3.0% in employed teen ratios are
produced. Additionally, estimates show that there is indeed a reduction of teenage hours worked
with an elasticity of -2.9%. Teenage retail sector employment decreases by a range of between
2.7 and 4.3% when a 10% increase in minimum wage is imposed, and among teens already
employed in the retail sector, a 2.8% decline in hours worked is estimated. Most surprisingly, a
significant reduction between 4.9 and 9.0% in the ratio of teens employed in small businesses,

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

15

and a reduction between 4.8 to 8.8% in hours worked by teens in the retail sector are associated
with a 10% increase in hourly wage.
Overall, Sabia’s results do not deviate from the majority of the literature we have
reviewed. This study emphasizes that low-wage unskilled workers will be the demographic that
is affected most by any increases to the hourly wage, contrary to FPI’s report. The claims of the
report are to “serve as a caution to legislators” and as a “reminder that there is no such thing as a
free lunch”. It also acts to confirm previous results in the counterproductive nature of minimum
wage raising, as researchers believe it will hurt and push more people into poverty than it will
help.
Fast forwarding to more recent literature, we observe Neumark and Wascher revisiting
the topic with their study published in 2014. 17 This is a response to Dube et al. (2010) and
Allegro et al.’s (2011) attempt in constructing more reliable counterfactuals for estimation
purposes. The researchers’ counterfactuals “narrow the source of variation”, focusing on statespecific and intra-regional trends. Because of this particular method, they find null effects on
employment levels, and in turn, argue that negative employment effects often found in the
literature are illegitimate and are caused by various geographic factors that researchers fail to
control for.
Neumark and Wascher began their analyses by examining state-specific trends in
California. They inspected the impact of including recessionary periods (i.e. the Great Recession
and the early 1990s), in their regressions and concluded that the addition of the recessionary
periods actually counter the employment effects estimates by biasing results away from longerterm factors not captured by the other controls. Instead, one of the approaches proposed is to
17

Neumark, David, JM Ian Salas, and William Wascher. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage – Employment Debate:
Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?" ILR Review67.3_suppl (2014): 608-648.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

16

allow state-specific trends to deviate from linearity. This signifies that the state-specific trends
might be better modeled using a polynomial function instead of a linear function, as it would
capture variation and allow the function to have multiple inflection points. Taking their own
advice, Neumark and Wascher apply a nonlinear function to the model, finding significant,
negative effects on teen employment.
To address the complications that arise with concentrating on intra-regional trends,
Neumark and Wascher estimate using control states in the same Census divisions. They reveal
that the estimated effects vary significantly across the nine divisions, along with the ability to
acquire precise estimations. Neumark and Wascher’s results portray elasticity ranges from -.15 to
-.64 for the New England, West North Central, West South Central, and Mountain divisions. For
the East North Central, East South Central, and South Atlantic divisions, the estimates obtained
are also negative, with the estimates obtained from East South Central doubtfully large. The
estimates from the Mid-Atlantic region are positive, and the Pacific divisions have a null effect
on employment. Neumark and Wascher believe these results contradict Dube et al.’s and Allegro
et al.’s findings, as they believe Dube et al.’s and Allegro et al.’s elasticity ranges to be rather
imprecise. Controlling for states within divisions rather than comparing states across divisions,
contrary to previous literature, does not turn out to be helpful in achieving accurate estimations
of employment effects. We believe this finding to be influential because it makes us inquire not
only about Florida, but its surrounding states and industries – mentioned later in this paper.
In the past year, the growth in state legislation revolving around increasing wages has
influenced researchers to home in on specific geographic locations when conducting analyses.
Specifically, Jardim et al.’s 2018 Seattle study18 sparked debate on the impact of low-wage
18Jardim,

Ekaterina, et al. “Minimum Wage Increases and Individual Employment Trajectories.” No. w25182.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

17

employment after changes to the minimum wage occurred. Much like Florida’s proposed
legislation, Seattle’s increase in minimum wage was gradual, beginning in 2014. Every year after
2014 brought incremental changes until the final wage of $15.48/hour was reached in 2018.
Jardim et al. paid particular attention to the short-term effects on employment during the first two
phase-in periods of 2015 and 2016.
Using administrative employment data from Washington State, Jardim et al. were able to
capture quarterly payroll records for all workers in the state, as well as the number of hours
worked. They then employed a difference-in-difference model – an economic technique
commonly used to evaluate the difference before and after the policy change – in order to answer
four key questions:
1) What is the difference in hourly wages for workers who remain employed?
2) What is the probability of workers being employed anywhere else in the state?
3) What is the impact on the hours worked?
4) Do low-wage workers benefit from an increase in wages?
The researchers found that while low-wage workers enjoy faster hourly wage growth
over quarters following the wage increases, they experience a modest reduction in hours worked.
This worked offset their total gains, leading to essentially no change in earnings. Evidence also
showed that employers responded by shifting the workforce toward more experienced workers,
which could be a cause for concern when trying to use minimum wage as a poverty reduction
policy. In fact, this could potentially displace low-wage workers and phase them out of the labor
market completely – making it harder for these individuals to stay employed.
Prior literature is crucial in order to understand the true impact of a moderately-paced
increase in Florida’s minimum wage. Keeping in mind the elasticities we have found in the

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

18

literature, the next segment of our paper focuses on the demographics associated with Florida’s
wages.

A Closer Look at Florida Wages
To explore how increasing the minimum wage would impact the state of Florida, our first
step is to identify who this would directly impact. To do this, we need to answer the following
four questions: Who makes the minimum wage? Where do they live? Where do they work? Who
currently makes the final proposed minimum wage, and what will happen to them? The range of
wages varies greatly between and within Florida’s sixty-seven counties – influenced by the cost
of living, industry prevalence, and various other factors. As a result of the factors contributing to
the wage variation, assuming an increase would affect all Floridians equally would be inaccurate.
Thus, we began to research the economic characteristics of Florida’s different areas. However,
concise data to answer these questions were very difficult to find, and, as such, we used multiple
sources to assess the wage distribution across Florida.
Our first data source was the Current Population Survey (CPS), amassed by the
University of Minnesota into the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS) database. The
observation unit of the CPS is at the individual level, but the selection of individuals is done by
household. Each person has a household identifier and a person identifier. For geographic
purposes, the CPS data are coded by Public Use Microdata Areas (PUMAs). “PUMAs generally
follow the boundaries of whole central cities, Metropolitan Statistical Areas, Primary
Metropolitan Statistical Areas, or non-metropolitan places. If these areas exceed 200,000
residents, they are divided into as many PUMAs of 100,000+ residents as possible.” 19 By

19

Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and Matthew Sobek.
IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019. https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

19

aggregating these PUMAs into areas (mostly at the county level), this gave us the ability to
compare wage distributions between counties. However, there are several nuances to the data
being that the self-reported survey is comprised of a small portion of a 200 question pool. This
signals that although the data is very concise and detailed, it is also prone to inaccuracies and
missing data due to the self-reporting bias. As an example, one of the inaccuracies we found
involved an individual self-reporting that they usually worked forty hours per week, but their
annual income was $4.00. We discuss in detail how we deal with these inaccuracies in our data
configuration section.
After aggregating the PUMAs into the county level, we were able to take a look at the
descriptive statistics of Florida’s counties. These descriptive statistics are detailed in Figure 2.
We find that Martin County has the highest average annual income wage ($69,683) and
Seminole County has the highest median annual income wage ($47,350). Suwannee County has
the lowest average annual income wage ($38,665) and the Heartland Area has the lowest median
annual income wage ($31,026). The median falling below the mean annual income wage
indicates that there are some individuals on the highest end of the spectrum that pull the average
up. We rely on the median as it is generally a more accurate depiction of distributions.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

20

Figure 2. Annual Income Distributions

Our second source of data came from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) and
contained much more succinct data. The data involved a simple list of the average weekly
earnings for the third quarter of 2018 for each of Florida’s sixty-seven counties. By multiplying
these average weekly earnings by 50, we determine that the three counties with the highest
average annual income were Hillsborough ($52,468), Miami-Dade ($52,052), and Palm Beach
($51,272). The three counties with the lowest average annual income were Holmes ($30,567),
Franklin ($30,680), and Calhoun ($31,512). The average weekly earnings of the highest-paid
county is over 70% higher than the lowest-paid county. A visual representation of the differences
in wages by county is below, as seen in Figure 3. As reported by their website:

“The data are derived from summaries of employment and total pay of workers covered
by state and federal unemployment insurance (UI) legislation and provided by State
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

21

Workforce Agencies (SWAs). The average weekly wage values are calculated by
dividing quarterly total wages by the average of the three monthly employment levels of
those covered by UI programs.” 20

Because these data are derived from governmental agencies and reports, we assume they have
some degree of accuracy and statistical integrity. However, this dataset only provides averages,
which can be skewed due to outliers, and do not depict the whole story.
Our third data source is the U.S. Census’ Small Area Income and Poverty Estimates
(SAIPE). Using 2017 data, we find that the three counties with the highest median annual
household income are St. Johns ($63, 299), Clay ($54,867), and Nassau ($54,706). The three
counties with the lowest annual household income are Hamilton ($29,482), Dixie ($30,801), and
Putnam ($31,150). Their definition of “income” is:

“Income, defined as ‘Total income,’ is the sum of the amounts reported separately for:
wage or salary income; net self-employment income; interest, dividends, or net rental or
royalty income or income from estates and trusts; Social Security or Railroad Retirement
income; Supplemental Security Income (SSI); public assistance or welfare payments;
retirement, survivor, or disability pensions; and all other income... [and] is based on one
year of survey data and is created using complex statistical modeling. Modeling generates
more stable estimates for places with small numbers of residents or survey responses.
There are also drawbacks to using modeled data. The smaller the population or sample

20

“County Employment and Wages in Florida – Third Quarter 2018: Southeast Information Office.” U.S. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2 Apr. 2019, www.bls.gov/regions/southeast/newsrelease/countyemploymentandwages_florida.htm#table1.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

22

size of a county, the more the estimates are derived from the model itself and the less
they are based on survey responses. Models make statistical assumptions about
relationships that may not hold in all cases.”21

According to this dataset, the highest paid county earns more than twice of what the lowest
county earns. Unfortunately, this dataset also only includes aggregated county data. Therefore,
we cannot accurately determine the proportion of residents earning each wage.
Regardless of the data source, it is obvious that there are differences in the distributions
of wages from county to county. The economic impact of the proposed minimum wage increases
will affect some counties more adversely than others. By gradually increasing the minimum
wage over several years, this will help mitigate adversities due to the changes, but some areas
will likely have a more difficult time adapting than others.

Data Configuration
Because the IPUMS data set is the most detailed, this is the dataset chosen for further
analyses. The IPUMS data generator allows analysts to choose from hundreds of variables and
either five-year or one-year samples of the American Community Survey (ACS). According to
the IPUMS description page, the one-year sample reflects a “1-in-100 national random sample of
the population”, and we choose this sample from 2017 (the latest year available). After filtering
to include only Florida data, this sample contains 199,644 respondents. With an approximate
state population of 22 million, this accounts for roughly one percent of Floridians. The
definitions of variables collected from the IPUMS data dictionary, along with a simplistic

21

“SAIPE State and County Estimates for 2017.” SAIPE State and County Estimates for 2017, US Census Bureau,
1 Mar. 2019, www.census.gov/data/datasets/2017/demo/saipe/2017-state-and-county.html.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

23

overview of any manipulations performed, is located in Appendix 2. Since this is only a onepercent sample, it is unrealistic to speak about the actual counts of Floridians. Hence, we will
refer to the data as percentages or proportions of Floridians, until we have enough information to
extrapolate our findings.
We begin our analysis by dissecting the state-wide data. The data were filtered to include
only those who reported usually working between 30 and 80 hours per week, employed in
industries other than the Military, and reporting an annual income of over $7,845. This number
was calculated for an individual making only tip wage thirty hours per week, for fifty weeks per
year. We were left with a subset of 69,291 observations – or 34.7% – from our initial sample of
199,644 observations as a result of filtering the data. After the data was imported, we used R
statistical program to construct a distribution of hourly wages, as depicted in Figure 3, for the
entire state.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

24

Figure 3.

Next, we take a closer look at workers making less than $20/hour. According to our
calculations, 16.8% of our sample make ten dollars or less per hour, which is the proposed
minimum wage in the year 2021. Those making between ten and eleven dollars – the proposed
minimum wage in the year 2022 – comprise an additional 3.8%, totaling 20.6% between the two
groups. In the case of eleven to twelve dollars, we observe 3.6% of our sample earning this
amount, totaling 24.2% when added to the other groups. Workers making twelve to thirteen
dollars per hour accounts for 5.7% of our sample, comprising 29.9% in conjunction with the
other wage groups. Those making thirteen to fourteen add an additional 3.3%. Finally, 4.7% of
workers earn between fourteen and fifteen dollars per hour, totaling 37.9% of our sample. Thus,
we arrive to the conclusion that 37.9% of Floridians working thirty or more hours per week make
fifteen dollars or less per hour. This is demonstrated in Figure 4 below.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

25

Figure 4.

If we extrapolate these proportions to the population of roughly 20.6 million Floridians,
we estimate that 7,146,583 Floridians meet our criteria: they are employed more than 30
but fewer than 80 hours per week, are not in the Military industry, and make at least
$7,845 annually. Continuing this extrapolation, we estimate – holding all else constant –
the number of Floridians that would be impacted each year following the passing of the
proposed legislation. These estimations are shown in Table 2, followed by a graphical
representation in Figure 5.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

26

Table 2. Floridians Who Will See Wage Changes
Year Proposed
Minimum
Wage

Additional Floridians
Floridians Earning Less Than
Directly Impacted Each Year the New Minimum Wage

2021 $10/hour

1,202,185

1,202,185

2022 $11/hour

271,977

1,474,162

2023 $12/hour

259,188

1,733,350

2024 $13/hour

408,233

2,141,573

2025 $14/hour

236,291

2,377,864

2026 $15/hour

335,613

2,713,477

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

27

Figure 5.

As illustrated by Table 2, the greatest impact will occur during the first year of the
proposed legislation. This is to be expected, as the largest jump in wages would occur during this
year. An increase in the current minimum wage of $8.46 to $10 per hour in 2021 would be an
increase in magnitude of 18.2%. While our estimation was done thoroughly, it is not without its
pitfalls, which come as a result of our data rather than our methods. Our data contained many
reports of wages that fell below the minimum wage, which will likely result in overestimation.
However, if the reports of below-minimum wage incomes are in fact correct, they may be a
byproduct of being paid “under the table”, a worker being undocumented, or one of many other
labor practices that have the potential to unlawfully pay workers less than $8.46 per hour. One
caveat to this is that employers who overlook the current employment guidelines are likely to
continue doing so, regardless of whether or not the minimum wage increases.
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

28

Once we completed our state-wide analysis, we began to take a closer look at
county/area-specific data. According to the Office of Economic and Demographic Research, 22
counties vary widely in both industrial makeup and wage distribution. The following five
counties exemplify the aforementioned variety of industrial makeup and wage distributions that
Florida counties have to offer: Escambia, Hillsborough, Martin, Miami-Dade, and Osceola
Counties. Figure 6 exemplifies the comparisons between the five counties’ industries.
Figure 6.

Figure 6, shown above, describes several similarities between the counties. First, each of
these five counties’ largest industry is Healthcare and Social Assistance (which is also overall the

22

“Florida County Profiles.” Office of Economic & Demographic Research The Florida Legislature, 25 June 2019,
edr.state.fl.us/content/area-profiles/county/index.cfm.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

29

largest industry in the state). Second, each of these five counties has at least 10% employment in
the Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services industry. Third, only Martin County has less
than 10% of its employees in the Retail Trade industry. However, there are also several
differences. First, Osceola has a relatively low portion of employees in the Finance industry.
This is especially interesting when viewed in conjunction with Figure 7: Osceola has the lowest
portion of workers earning more than $15 per hour. Finance is one of the highest-paying
industries in Florida. Also, Escambia and Osceola have the highest portion of Retail Trade
workers of these five counties, which is a typically low-paying job. Those two counties have the
higest portion of workers earning less than $15/hour. The comparison of these five counties is
just an illustration of how the counties in Florida vary widely in composition.
Looking at this from a different perspective, we are able to investigate the portions of
each county’s residents earning less than $10 per hour, between $10 and $15 per hour, and above
$15 per hour, described in Figure 7.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

30

Figure 7.

As revealed above, almost 50% of residents of Osceola County earn $15 per hour or less,
as opposed to Martin County, where nearly 70% of residents earn an excess of $15 per hour.
This indicates that an increase in the minimum wage would affect a larger portion of residents in
Osceola County than in Martin County.
Further differences can be found between rural and urban areas. 23 As shown in Figure 8,
over 48% of residents in rural areas earn less than $15 per hour, while urban areas have over
60% of residents earning over $15 per hour. With that being said, it is important to point out that
we estimated that only 4.4% of Floridians live in areas that are considered to be rural.

23

“Rural Definition.” Florida Department of Economic Opportunity, www.floridajobs.org/community-planningand-development/rural-community-programs/rural-definition.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

31

Figure 8.

The most striking differences in wages appear when examining differences between
industries. As you can see in Figure 9, the portion of employees earning less than $10 per hour,
$10-15 per hour, and more than $15 per hour vary greatly between industries. While nearly 75%
of employees in the Accommodation and Food and in the Forestry, Fishing, and Hunting
industry earn less than $15 per hour, over 75% of employees in the Finance, Information,
Administrative, Mining, and Utilities industries earn more than $15 per hour. Since the combined
number of employees in those five industries is less than 18% of the total employees in our
sample, a significant number of Floridians will be affected. As illustrated in Figure 10, over 40%
of Floridians earn less than $15 per hour.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

32

Figure 9.

Figure 10.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

33

Even with all of this information, it is important to note that these changes will not occur
in an invariable environment. The estimates we obtain are static estimates, meaning they do not
take into account the dynamics of a changing workforce, industry composition, or preemptive
hiring decisions due to the impending change in labor costs. That being said, it is difficult to
predict how employment will respond to an increase in Florida’s minimum wage. If employment
leans toward being more receptive to the changes in wage, we would anticipate observing larger
than expected declines in employment. On the other hand, if employment is slow to adapt to the
changes in the minimum wage, then increases in the minimum wage would result in smaller
declines in employment. However, we address both direct and induced effects as a result of the
wage changes in an attempt to explain as much of the underlying forces involved as possible.

A Word on Wage Compression
In order to examine and estimate the workers that will be directly affected, it is equally
important to look at those workers that potentially will be indirectly affected. Wage compression
is defined as happening when a portion of the income distribution, often centered slightly above
the minimum wage, begins to tighten. This occurs when increases in mandated wages make new
hires or lower positioned workers earn wages that are comparable to the wages of those that have
longer tenure or a higher position. If wages for those directly above the new minimum do not
increase at a similar rate to the wages of those making the minimum, those above may risk
substantial decreases in real wages, as inflationary pressures in the market will be exerted to push
the workers’ purchasing powers down.
The workers earning hourly wages that fall between the current minimum wage and just
above the proposed minimum wage comprise the population that will be most directly affected
by the proposed minimum wage bill. In addition, it is necessary to analyze wages above the
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

34

proposed minimum wage because they are considered to be located in the “compression wage”
zone. Take, for instance, a hypothetical employee named Sally, who began working at a business
in 2017 when Florida’s minimum wage was $8.10 per hour. Suppose that the proposed minimum
wage increase amendment passes. Due to Sally’s good performance and tenure, she received a
raise of $0.50 per hour each year while employed there. She earned $8.60 per hour in 2018,
$9.10 per hour in 2019, and $9.60 per hour in 2020. In 2019, which is also the latest data we
have available at this time - she is making $.64 above the minimum wage, and enjoys feeling like
a valued member of her company. If she were to leave this firm and find work at a new business,
she would potentially have to begin back at the minimum wage of $8.46 per hour (2019). In
2021, when she would expect to make $10.05 per hour at her current firm, the minimum wage
would be raised to $10.00 per hour. While she is still making above the minimum wage, new
hires to her place of employment would be starting off making only $.05 less per hour than her.
After nearly five years of dedication and service to her employer, a person working there for
only a few days could be making nearly the same amount as her. To demonstrate to tenured
employees that their experience and loyalty is valuable, some employers will increase their
employees’ hourly wages to entice them to stay. However, some employers will not increase
tenured employees’ salaries, or may even forego regular raises to afford the new employees’
salaries, leading to a spike in the distribution of wages on the low end of the spectrum.
Graphically, the area on the low end of the hourly wage distribution is pushed farther to the right,
narrowing the distribution. We show this below in Figure 11.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

35

Figure 11.

After we perform a concise overview of the labor market, the next step entails estimating
the impacts an increase in the minimum wage would have on Florida’s workers. To do so, we
must utilize a dynamic modeling system. We chose to employ REMI as our dynamic modeling
system, which is discussed in further detail below.

Multiplier Software
REMI
Regional Economic Models, INC. (REMI) is a software that uses a dynamic model
aiming to assist researchers in answering questions that fall within the scope of several different
subject areas – including the environment, energy, and for our purpose, economic development.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

36

REMI’s approach to estimation includes four types of techniques: Econometric, General
Equilibrium, Economic Geography, and Input-Output. The central component of REMI is the
Input-Output model, which works to portray the relationships between industries within a region;
for the purposes of our analyses, that region is Florida. REMI has the capability to portray a
long-term general equilibrium in supply and demand accounting for several factors, including
production, imports, exports, consumption, and prices. It also has the ability to portray both the
economic and demographic effects caused by any given policy24.
REMI consists of four different types of models. For our analysis, we choose to employ
the PI+ model as a way to mimic an Input-Output technique. This model adjusts for sub-national
areas for policy and forecasting and can also be used for single and multi-area groupings. Each
region that is incorporated into the model has their own set of demographic and economic
variables. In addition, the PI+ model can control for any economic policy specific to a region,
giving ease to testing changes corresponding to the local economies. Appendix 4 displays a flow
chart of REMI’s model’s structure. It is common practice for government agencies, firms, and
universities to employ this model when analyzing policy impacts. Since we were tasked with
conducting an economic impact analysis, the PI+ model was the best option for us to proceed
with.

IMPLAN
In addition to using REMI, we employ a software known as IMPLAN to cover the fiscal
impacts of the minimum wage legislation. Since IMPLAN is also an input-output (IO) model, we

24

“Regional Economic Models, Inc. (REMI) Model.” Regional Economic Models, Inc. (REMI) Model | Open
Energy Information, openei.org/wiki/Regional_Economic_Models,_Inc._(REMI)_Model.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

37

are able to use the same aggregated employment level shocks that we use in REMI. However,
there are limitations to this model. For one, it does not include the type of dynamic analysis that
REMI does. The effects are computed contemporaneously, and do not consider some micro-level
changes that might be considered in other models (consumer behavior changes, elasticity
changes). This means that IMPLAN is a static model and lacks REMI’s ability to display
dynamic effects. Additionally, IMPLAN has been found to have a tendency to overestimate
some effects in the past. 25 Despite these shortcomings, it is a widely used model for estimating
large-scale impacts of legislation. Also, the sections which are estimated with this software will
be one year shorter than the sections that are estimated otherwise. We are still able to estimate
the entire duration of the amendment, but our inflation adjustment period after 2026 is curtailed
at 2030 due to the ten year limit of the forecast.

Estimating Employment Effects
The Increasing Affected Population
After we have completed our industry analysis, we begin synthesizing the information we
have obtained into a population. First, we use our distributional information to estimate the
population of workers that falls into each of the affected groups. For purposes of estimating
disemployment, we assume that as wages increase, the remainder of the employed population
gets bumped up into the following tier to become a member of the next affected group. For
example, a worker who was previously in the $0.00 to $10.00 group, who does not get pruned as
a result of the first wage bump (from $8.46 to $10.00), subsequently become a member of the
$10.00 to $11.00 group. Members of that group who remain employed through the next increase

25

Rickman, Dan, and R Schwer. “A Comparison of the Multipliers of IMPLAN, REMI, and RIMS II:
Benchmarking Ready-Made Models for Comparison.” The Annals of Regional Science, vol. 29, no. 4, Dec. 1995,
pp. 363–374., doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01581882.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

38

then become members of the $11.00 to $12.00 group, and so on. The values that we use for these
segments of the low-wage population can be found in Figure 5 in the section entitled “A Closer
Look at Floridian Wages”. Note that the numbers displayed in this table are merely the starting
values; we adjust the cumulative numbers downward in our actual analysis, to account for prior
period job losses.

Selecting Appropriate Elasticities
In our literature review, we discuss papers which estimate the disemployment effects
caused by increases in the minimum wage. While most of the literature estimates are slightly
negative elasticities, there are a few prominent papers that report increases in employment as a
result of wage increases. Though most of the literature is centered around elasticities of -.1 to
-.3, the existence of estimates outside of this range convinced us that we should at least consider
and analyze numbers outside of that range, if for no other purpose than to provide a more
encompassing set of estimates. The inspiration for our final elasticity range is displayed in Table
3, alongside authors whose works they stem from. While a majority of these numbers made it to
our estimation stage, the withering reputation of Card and Krueger’s New Jersey study lead us to
doubt the validity of the large positive effects they predict. For this reason, we decide to exclude
this figure from our estimates.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

39

Table 3.

Author(s)

Elasticities

Neumark and Wascher

-.1, -.2, -.6

Kiel et al.

-.1, -.2

Sabia et al.

-.2, -.3

Card and Krueger

.7, .9

Brown et al.

-.1, -.2, -.3

Jardim et al.

-.7

* References and further detail are located in the literature review.

With this in mind, our choice of elasticities to estimate is -.1, -.2, and -.3 Hereafter, we
refer to -.1 as our low end, -.2 as our medium, and -.3 as our high end.

Spreading Effects between Industries
In order to estimate more realistic direct disemployment effects, we attempt to spread the
effects throughout multiple sectors and industries. In its initial form, this analysis used a system
of simple weights based on the percentage of low-wage workers in each sector, as dictated by the
proportions extrapolated from our sample. While this seemed sensible, using these weights
caused us to greatly overestimate the number of jobs removed from certain sectors, often
estimating losses beyond the total number of low-skilled jobs. In order to correct this error, we
changed our weighting to use the proportion of total low-wage workers that each industry
accounts for. This new method fixes much of our initial problem, as industries with low
employment but a large percentage of low wage workers in their pool would now be correctly
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

40

counted. We settle on using this weighting method on 17 different prominent industries in
Florida. Table 4 displays our chosen industries and the weights assigned to them. REMI also
allows for the inclusion of federal employees, but since they are eligible for separate benefits
through the government, we choose to only include non-federal, nonfarm sector jobs in our
analysis.
Originally, we had estimated effects on only the top few industries, but since all
industries have some form of low-wage worker, we decided to include all industries in our
Table 4.

analysis.

Gradual Wage
Adjustments
In addition to
estimating
employment
reductions through the
duration of the
proposed amendment,
we also continue our
analysis forward with
the assumption that
there will be inflation and a corresponding adjustment. While we initially considered basing our
future period inflation adjustments on those of recent years, we adjust these numbers to reflect
the fact that inflation has been unusually low. Appendix 1 contains a list of previous wage
adjustments, wherein our point is illustrated: the difference in wages each year from 2013 to
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

41

2018 was approximately 1.5% on average. Our projection supposes that inflation is only
marginally higher beyond 2026, at 2%, marking a return to a “normal” level.

Direct Effects Estimation
The actual process of estimating the direct disemployment effects was relatively simple.
Using the range of elasticities that we have chosen to examine, we identify the magnitude of
employment change in percentile form. For example, a -.1 elasticity, multiplied by an 18.2%
increase in the minimum wage, would equate to a loss of -1.82% of low-wage jobs. In much of
this estimation, we assume that the elasticities remain the same over the initial six-year span. We
also assume that these elasticities remain constant throughout the remainder of our analysis:
through the year 2031. Per the proposed amendment, the minimum wage will be adjusted for
inflation in the years following 2026. Table 5 below displays our estimates for our selected range
of effects.
Table 5.

Understanding these initial estimates is critical to our analysis. Note the structure of these
decreases: the largest wage increase, captured under the 2021 column, correctly coincides with
the largest employment shock. However, there is a drop off following the first wage hike, after
which the losses seem to ramp back up. While this might seem to contradict the fact that each
wage change after the first represents a proportionally smaller change (an increase of $1, over a
larger base), there is a simple explanation for this phenomena. Recall from previous sections that
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

42

our affected population spills over from the previous year. Estimating constant elasticities
through the ten year period then only leaves variation from population and percentage of wage
change. Population increases outweigh the decreasing percentage change in wage, resulting in an
increasing disemployment effect through time.

Differences from the Control
While the estimates in Table 5 are required for utilizing a multiplier software for our
other analyses, they don’t have any meaningful interpretation by themselves. In order to have
any meaning, we must input these numbers into REMI to “shock” the model of the economy, and
allow REMI to do its complex calculations. This new model shows how the employment levels,
income per capita, benefits per capita, and much more, would look if the amendment passes. We
also run the model without any shocks – a baseline forecast – and can make direct comparisons
by year between the two models. Table 6 displays our median forecast and the baseline.
We report these differences, between the baseline and shocked model, as jobs “missing”
from the economy. We cannot say that these individuals are “losing” their jobs; they are just jobs
that would otherwise likely exist if the amendment does not pass. Therefore, we calculate the
difference from the control group, and present those in the table below.
Table 6.

Note that this table includes the averaged effect over the entire ten-year period, which is made up
of six years of policy related-changes and four years of a supposed inflation adjustment. We
expect that over the ten-year span, there will be an average of 27,914 to 79,821 jobs missing
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

43

from the Florida economy. As the last few years of this estimation have wage increases
substantially smaller than the first six years, the average over the ten-year period may be skewed
to be smaller.

Induced Effects Analysis
As noted previously, our basic estimate of jobs missing from the economy comes from
multiplying the percent increase in wages by the elasticities from the literature. However, once
there are more unemployed members of society, there are trickle-down effects. For instance, if
many members of a mining town are no longer employed, that area’s residents’ spending would
likely decrease. The residents may stop spending money at local restaurants, forcing layoffs of
workers in the Accommodation and Food Services industry. Those former food workers then
may stop spending money in retail – with the trend continuing down the line. REMI is
particularly useful to us because it accounts for population growth, economic trends, shifting
industries, and other confounding factors, using complex models, to predict these trickle-down
effects. Specifically, it is able to calculate how the loss of one job influences losses further down
the line. These are known as “induced effects”. Figure 12 shows the average number of missing
jobs by industry, broken down into direct and induced effects. These numbers are the average
number of missing jobs over the five years of proposed wage increases (2021-2026).

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

44

Figure 12.

As you can see from the graph, many industries 26 see more induced effects than direct
effects. For each one job lost from direct effects, there are, on average, 0.06 jobs lost in the
Utilities industry from induced effects. The Utilities industry has the smallest ratio of direct to
induced effects. The largest ratio is in the Mining industry, where one direct loss is associated
with 25.8 induced losses. Although this number sounds staggering, Mining is Florida’s secondsmallest industry by number of jobs. Thus, this goes back to the point made earlier of how
important it is important to speak in actual counts.

26 *

Full name of industries in chart are Administrative, Support, Waste Management, and Remediation Services

Professional, Scientific, and Technical Services.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

45

Over the years 2021 to 2026, there are 44,077 expected jobs missing due to direct effects,
and 44,814 from induced effects. This results in an overall ratio of 1.02 induced losses for each
one direct loss. Of these direct losses, Retail Trade is the largest contributor, with 5,301 jobs
missing, on average, over the six years. Of the induced losses, Construction is the largest
contributor, with 11,238 jobs missing, on average, over the six years.
Despite these insights, there is no evidence to support that the direct and indirect losses
are linked within industries. It is entirely possible and probable that the industries are
interconnected with their losses. For example, large losses in the Construction industry could
impact Utilities workers down the line, as fewer buildings created would lead to smaller growth
in utility usage.
A downfall to this is that there is also no conceivable way to account for lagged effects. If
this amendment’s passing devastates the Wholesale Trade industry in a town, causing all of the
workers to relocate, the Accommodation and Food Service employees will likely be impacted
soon after that as their customer base leaves the area. A longer term impact may appear in the
Educational Services industry in the following school year. In the future, software may be able to
map which industries induce losses in which other industries. However, at this time, we are only
able to examine aggregate changes. These changes are displayed below in Table 7.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

46

Table 7.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

47

Total Effects Analysis
Figure 13.

To discuss the total effects, otherwise known as the direct effects plus induced effects, it
is important to note that the baseline forecast with no amendment predicts a downturn in
employment beginning in 2022, and lasting until 2027. However, our model predicts an even
larger downturn in employment if the proposed amendment passes. As you will see in Figure 13,
there is a gap between the blue line, representing the baseline forecast, and the red line, which
represents total employment if the amendment passes.
The largest difference between the two occurs in the first year of policy change, which is
in 2021. Because this year has the largest increase in wage of about 18.2%, this is fairly selfexplanatory. Our model predicts there would be 96,372 fewer employees in Florida than if the
amendment does not pass, which is a missing portion of 0.92%. In 2022, our model predicts that
there will be 66,233 fewer employees in Florida, which is a difference of 0.63%. Both the
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

48

baseline model and our predicted values expect a decrease in total employment from 2022 to
2023: exemplified by a decrease of 0.35% in the baseline model, and a slightly larger decrease of
0.41% in our predicted model between the two years. The difference between the baseline model
and the predicted model in 2023 is 72,053 employees, or 0.69%. In 2024, the difference is
79,958, or 0.77%. In 2025, the difference is 80,301, or 0.77%. In 2026, the difference is 83,448,
or 0.81%.
In 2027, the story changes slightly: the predicted model indicates Florida coming out of
its employment downturn one year earlier than if the amendment does not pass, with an increase
in employment of 47,945, or an increase of 0.47%. The base model still shows that employment
is decreasing from 2026, with a decrease of 9,270 or 0.09%. The difference between the two
models begins to decrease. The decrease is only 26,222, or 0.25%. From 2027 to 2028, the
baseline model also predicts an upswing, increasing employment by 14,916, or 0.14%. The
difference between the models is only 25,047, or 0.24%. In the subsequent years, the gap
generally gets smaller: in 2029 it is 23,154, or 0.22%; in 2030 it is 23,022, or 0.22%; in 2031 it is
23,703, or 0.23%. That last number is extremely important: despite an initial difference of 0.92%
between the baseline and the predicted model, the two converge to within less than one quarter
of one percent.
Impact by Industry
As mentioned in previous sections, not all industries would be impacted equally by this
amendment’s passing. For example, for the years 2021 to 2026, the Utilities industry would have
6.34% fewer jobs than the baseline forecast. However, this is Florida’s smallest industry, so that
6.34% equates to only 1,655 jobs. Alternatively, the Retail industry – Florida’s second-largest
industry – would have an average employment of 1,425,272 without the amendment. With the
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

49

amendment, that number decreases by a smaller percentage, 0.81%, to 1,413,683. That equates to
11,589 missing jobs, on average, each year.
We have previously stated that certain industries have larger portions of low-wage
workers than others. These industries would see disproportionate impacts by a minimum wage
increase. In 2017, 69.7% of employees in the Accommodation and Food Services industry were
earning less than $15 per hour. Our model predicts a decrease of 0.63%, or 6,818 jobs, from
1,077,065 to 1,070,247, on average. In contrast, Florida’s largest industry, Healthcare Services,
has only 35.3% of its employees earning less than or equal to $15 per hour. It would see a
decline of 0.55% in employment. Despite having 400,000 more employees than the
Accommodation and Food Services industry, it would have only 1,138 more jobs missing from
its industry, leaving 1,450,929 employees in the workforce.
The industries with the largest number of missing jobs are Construction and Retail Trade.
We have already discussed the Retail industry, but our baseline model predicts that the
Construction industry will employ an average of 740,996 Floridians from 2021 to 2026. Our
shocked model predicts that the average number of Construction employees would decrease by
1.86% to 727,209, leaving 13,788 jobs out of the economy. A full table of these industry-specific
results is located in Appendix 3.

Benefit Cliffs
Much of the conversation surrounding the minimum wage debate pertains to how an
increase in the minimum wage affects the unemployment rate, number of hours worked, tax
revenue, and other economic concepts. Benefit cliffs are usually an area that tends to be less
focused on. These cliffs occur when benefit programs cease disbursements, either immediately or
gradually, as individual or family incomes increase and rise above each program’s income

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

50

threshold. They are also important when it comes to minimum wage legislation because, while
the purpose of an increase in the minimum wage is to benefit people financially, it has the
potential to do the opposite. For example: if a minimum wage worker is taking advantage of
different benefit programs that add up to several thousand dollars’ worth of assistance, and their
wage goes up above those benefits’ thresholds due to a minimum wage increase, they would lose
their benefits. The addition of a few extra dollars per hour to their wage rate may fail to make up
for the loss of thousands of dollars’ worth of aid. The following paragraphs detail several
programs with wage cliffs that people may lose access to if the minimum wage were to increase
to $10 per hour and gradually to $15 per hour.
The first social service to focus on is the Child Care and Development Fund (CCDF),
which helps provide child care subsidies to working parents. In determining eligibility for the
program, states must follow specific federal guidelines. These guidelines include an income
eligibility limit that is no higher than 85% of the state median income, along with work,
education, and other requirements of that nature. For families with children, they establish that
children cannot be older than 12 years of age, or no older than 18 years of age if the child has a
disability. As of 2015, in order to receive this subsidy in Florida, individuals are required to work
15 to 20 hours per week. The monthly income threshold for a three-person family for this
program falls between $838 and $5,279 monthly. In some cases, a monthly copayment of $1 to
$100 needs to be paid in order to receive benefits. The maximum monthly reimbursement for
childcare that a family of three in Florida can receive ranges from approximately $400 to $600,
depending on the type of facility their child receives care from27.

27

“Child Care Subsidies under the CCDF Program.”
www.ccdf.urban.org/sites/default/files/CCDFDatabase2015PolicySummary.pdf.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

51

Additionally, The Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is a federallyfunded program that aims to aid people in purchasing food. Rather than SNAP benefits being
distributed via paper food stamps, they are doled out monthly through an electronic benefits
transfer (EBT) card, similar to a debit card. In Florida, several qualifications must be met before
receiving SNAP benefits.28 It is required that applicants be employed or looking for employment
(and have proof). Being eligible for SNAP benefits has an income component to it as well. 29 If a
one-person household meets the following income criteria, they will be eligible for a maximum
of $505 worth of SNAP benefits: 200% gross monthly income limit is $4,464, the 130% gross
monthly income limit is $2,252, the 100% net monthly income limit is $1,732. For each
additional person added to a household, the 200% monthly income limit will increase by $720,
the 130% gross monthly income limit will increase by $468, the 100% net monthly income limit
will increase by $360, and the maximum amount of SNAP benefits that can be received will
increase by $144.30 Students who are enrolled in college or another form of higher education at
least half time and are between the ages of 18-49 do not qualify for SNAP benefits – however,
there are exceptions. These exceptions include: If a student is not fit mentally or physically, has
to assist a dependent between the ages of 5 and 12 and does not have access to childcare, has to
assist a dependent who is less than age 6, is a single parent with a dependent under 12 years old
while being a full time college student, a beneficiary of Temporary Cash Assistance benefits, in
college due to taking part in a Job Opportunities and basic skills program under the umbrella of
the Title IV of the Social Security Act, are a participant in a work-study program that is funded

28

“What Is SNAP?” What Is SNAP? | Www.gettingsnap.org, www.gettingfoodstamps.org/whatissnap.html.
“Eligibility for SNAP in FL.” Florida, florida-assistance.org/florida-dcf/snap-in-florida/eligibility-for-snap-inflorida/.
30 Food Assistance Program Fact Sheet. Oct. 2018, www.myflfamilies.com/programs/access/docs/fafactsheet.pdf.
29

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

52

by the federal or state government, or work at least 80 hours every month, among more specific
qualifications. SNAP benefits can only be used to purchase nutritious foods. Purchasing things
like premade meals, alcohol, cigarettes, pet food, and medicines are prohibited.
The Low-Income Home Energy Program (LIHEAP) offers grants to both nonprofits and
local governments to help provide low-income people with resources to pay their electricity bills.
In addition to helping people pay their home energy bills, LIHEAP assists in paying fees
associated with crises, as well as weather-related needs. A Florida resident living by themselves
qualifies for LIHEAP if they do not make an excess of $18,735 per year. For every additional
member living in a household, $6,630 is added to the maximum income level requirement to
receive LIHEAP benefits 31. Someone who partakes in SNAP, Supplemental Security Income
(SSI), Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), or qualifies for certain Veteran
benefits, among other programs are often automatically qualified to participate in LIHEAP.
The SSI program, as mentioned above, is funded by all-purpose tax dollars rather than
Social Security tax dollars as the name might suggest. The goal of SSI is to provide income
assistance to blind and/or disabled individuals who are under 65 years of age and have either a
very small income or no income at all. Children may also qualify for this program, depending on
how much their disability affects their everyday lives 32. As of January 2019, for an individual to
be eligible for SSI benefits, they can make no more than $9,259.67 per year. Currently, an
eligible individual can receive up to $771 in SSI benefits. For a couple to be eligible, they can
make no more than a combined $13,887.97 annually. An eligible couple can receive up to $1,157
in SSI benefits in 2019. 33 SSI does not take into account SNAP benefits, the majority of
31

“Welcome to Benefits.Gov.” Welcome to Benefits.Gov | Benefits.Gov, www.benefits.gov/benefit/1553.
Geos Line. Employ Florida - Supplemental Security Income (SSI),
www.employflorida.com/gsipub/index.asp?docid=50.
33 “Social Security.” SSI Federal Payment Amounts for 2019, www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/SSI.html.
32

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

53

programs like LIHEAP and other energy help, the first $20 of income acquired monthly, 150%
of the first $65 earned monthly from working a job, or shelter provided to an individual or couple
by a not for profit, when determining income eligibility for the program 34.
A benefit program designed to aid low-income families with children under the age of 18
is the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). The goals of this program are to help
parents provide for their children, advocate for parents to be active in the workforce, get/remain
married, and provide resources to people to help avoid out-of-wedlock pregnancies 35. This
program works similar to SNAP in that benefits are dispersed through an EBT card, but differs in
that the benefits can be used for more than just food. In order to qualify for TANF in Florida,
adults must fulfill a work requirement that ranges from 20 to 55 hours per week, depending on
family composition and circumstances. Families must also have no more than $2000 in countable
assets and may not own vehicles that combine to be worth more than $8,500 36. TANF monthly
payments vary as well, but in addition to varying based on family makeup, payments also depend
on each family’s cost of shelter/rent. Shelter costs are broken up into three categories, more than
$50 per month, between $0.01 to $50 per month, and $0 per month. Being that TANF is
temporary, recipients are only eligible to receive TANF benefits for up to five years 37.
Low-income individuals may qualify to receive an Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC).
This tax credit helps reduce the number of tax dollars that low-income individuals owe to the
government. For a single person without any qualifying dependents to qualify to receive an EITC
in 2019, they cannot make more than $15,570 a year, and a single person with three or more

34

Dickey, Elizabeth. “Income and Asset Limits for SSI Disability Eligibility.” Www.nolo.com, Nolo, 19 Jan. 2017,
www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/income-asset-limits-ssi-disability-eligibility.html.
35 Florida Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), www.welfareinfo.org/benefits/florida-temporaryassistance-for-needy-families-tanf-1657.
36 “Florida TANF Application.” TANF Program, www.tanfprogram.com/florida-tanf-application-ta9.
37 Temporary Cash Assistance Fact Sheet. www.myflfamilies.com/service-programs/access/docs/tcafactsheet.pdf.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

54

qualifying dependents cannot make an excess of $50,162. For a married couple filing their taxes
jointly and without any qualifying dependents, the most they can make and still receive an EITC
is $21,370. If a jointly-filing married couple has three or more qualifying dependents, the most
they can make and still receive these benefits is $55,952. The tax credit received ranges from
$529 for someone without any qualifying dependent children to $6,557 for someone with three
or more qualifying dependent children38. In order for a child to be considered qualified, they
have to live with the person receiving the tax credit, must be the child of the person receiving the
tax credit (biologically, adopted, step, foster, and grandchildren all count), and be below the age
of 19 at the conclusion of the filing year. If the child is a full-time student and younger than 24
years old, they qualify. A disabled child qualifies regardless of age 39. The EITC can be
beneficial to people and families but is often not taken advantage of 40.

38

“EITC Income Limits Maximum Credit Amounts Next Year: Internal Revenue Service.” EITC Income Limits
Maximum Credit Amounts Next Year | Internal Revenue Service, www.irs.gov/creditsdeductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/eitc-income-limits-maximum-credit-amounts-next-year.
39
“Qualifying Child Rules.” Internal Revenue Service, www.irs.gov/credits-deductions/individuals/earned-incometax-credit/qualifying-child-rules.
40 “The Earned Income Credit.” All Florida Tax & Financial Solutions, 2 Jan. 2015, www.allfloridatax.net/blog/theearned-income-credit/4560.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

55

Estimating Effects on Social Service Expenditures
Table 8. Percent Difference from Baseline Estimation

In addition to estimating the effect on employment, we also estimate how the proposed
minimum wage increase would affect social service expenditures in Florida. Being that we
estimate a sizeable decrease in employment, we expect a corresponding increase in benefit
spending; the idea being that fewer people would be working and receiving a paycheck, which
would lead to more people being in need of government aid. This presumption holds true in our
estimation for 2021 across all elasticity levels, but the magnitude is much smaller than
anticipated. As shown in Table 8, the percentage change from the baseline estimates range from
-0.231% to 0.029%. Our estimation shows that, if the proposed minimum wage goes into effect,
slightly more will be spent on social service benefits than if the bill does not pass. The small
magnitude percent changes remain constant across years and elasticities, but after 2021, the
percent changes become negative, denoting that we estimate that Florida will spend slightly less
on benefits if the bill passes.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

56

Table 9. Percent Difference from Baseline Using -0.2 Elasticity
Estimation

Table 9 shows the percent difference between our estimation and the baseline estimation
with a -0.2 elasticity for several prominent benefit programs. When examining these programs,
we see much of the same trends: positive, but miniscule changes for 2021, and small, negative
changes for 2022 through 2026. The difference between our estimation and the baseline for State
Unemployment Insurance Compensation is so small that the percent change is nearly zero. For
more estimates regarding benefit programs, please Appendices 5 and 6.
As previously mentioned, after estimating such large decreases in the unemployment rate
throughout the duration of the proposed legislation, we expected large, positive changes in social
services spending, which wound up being far from what we estimated. To explain this, we need
to take another look at benefit cliffs. It is plausible to conclude that, of the minimum wage
workers who would remain employed after the implementation of the proposed legislation, many
were benefiting from social service programs. Due to their increase in income, they will likely no
longer qualify for many of the benefit programs they previously utilized. In turn, there would be
a large decline in benefit spending in Florida. On the flip side, many of the workers who lose
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

57

their jobs, pursuant to the minimum wage, hike will now require government assistance, thus
increasing social service expenditures. The balancing act between people gaining access to
benefits after losing their jobs, and minimum wage workers who priced out of receiving benefits,
is likely to be at the root of the small estimated changes in Florida’s spending on social services.

Tax Revenue Impacts of Minimum Wage Increases
Since there is no personal income tax in Florida, a majority of government income is
collected in the form of ad valorem taxes. An ad valorem tax is a tax that is imposed in addition
to the price of a good. Our analysis will be centered on the two forms of the ad valorem tax
which yield the greatest revenue to the state. These are identified as being the sales tax (on
general consumption) and property tax. We also consider how total tax revenue will be affected.
For the calculation of tax revenue forecasts, we focus on our middle elasticity value and the
corresponding employment changes.

Sales Tax
In large part, the damages or benefits caused by minimum wage changes are tied to
changes in consumption. This effect is amplified substantially in Florida, since government
income is so closely tied to consumption-based taxes. It is typically uncertain how consumption
taxes will be affected by wage increases. For example, if one becomes unemployed, there are a
few separate possible outcomes. Depending on how much they make, they may stand to only
lose a small amount of actual spending power (via the benefits cliffs, as discussed in the prior
section). In this case, consumption may be largely unaffected. Additionally, depending on the
consumption smoothing habits of the person, they may have prepared for a period of little to no
earnings, in which case their consumption may remain essentially constant. We expect that this is
not the case for many low-income workers, as low-income is often tied to a higher marginal
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

58

propensity to consume. 41 Essentially, it is expected that many workers in the minimum wage
earner category would be spending a larger portion of their transitory42 and permanent income
than those in higher income categories. This also may serve to obscure some of the reduced
consumption effects expected as a result of large scale disemployment. If those who remain
employed still spend a large percentage of their income, as income increases across the board,
they may cancel each other out.
Figure 14.

In Figure 14 shown above, we plot the sales tax difference from the baseline IMPLAN
forecast until 2030. We expect that during the initial wage hike, sales tax revenue will be reduced
by approximately 925 million dollars. However, we also predict a recovery in the following year.
Despite this, the average differential over the 10-year span that we expect from the baseline

41

Carroll, C., Slacalek, J., Tokuoka, K. and White, M. N. (2017), The distribution of wealth and the marginal
propensity to consume. Quantitative Economics, 8: 977-1020. doi:10.3982/QE694
42Transitory (temporary) income was originally supposed to be saved, and permanent spent. This is being debunked,
however, and an MPC of .2 to .4 is often tied to transitory income for low earning individuals.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

59

IMPLAN forecast is around 450 million dollars. The later year forecasts, although closer to the
control, do not seem to be returning to the non-amendment values soon. While we are limited by
IMPLAN’s forecast range, disemployment effects due to the inflation adjustment period from
2026 onward would lead us to believe that even a more-extended forecast would fail to return to
the control values.

Property Taxes
While property taxes still make up a large proportion of Florida’s total tax receipts, they
are not collected at the state level. Accordingly, the property tax figures that we predict using
IMPLAN are essentially aggregated values that represent the total across all local governments
in the state. In Figure 15, we show property tax estimates for Florida in the form of differences
from the control group.
Figure 15.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

60

Note that the shape of this plot closely resembles the sales tax differences in Figure 14,
with a fairly dramatic decrease resulting from the initial wage jump, and a stair-stepped structure
ending with a plateau that begins in 2027. We estimate that the total property tax revenue will be
approximately 650 million dollars less than the control forecast. On average, there is a reduction
of 300 million property tax revenue dollars if the amendment passes.

Total State and Local Tax Revenue
In Figure 16, we present a plot of the predicted tax revenue differences over the next ten
years. While these figures may initially look jarring, it is critical to consider the proportion of
total tax revenues that this represents. The United States Census Bureau calculates total receipts
for Florida at around 165 billion dollars. A reduction of 2 billion would then be a 1.2% reduction
in total tax revenues. On average, we expect that tax revenues will be reduced by one billion
dollars annually. While we are unsure of what this equates to in terms of spending changes,

Figure 16.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

61

recent year spending increases lead us to believe that large revenue losses may damage Florida’s
government solvency sometime in the future.

A Word on Productivity Changes due to Minimum Wage Increases
One of the strongest cases made by proponents of increasing the minimum wage often
relates to increases in productivity that are supposed to follow wage hikes. While equating
productivity spikes to increases in an employee’s hourly rate likely overstates the motivational
effect of a marginal wage increase, it seems more reasonable that systematic changes in the
hiring process and the composition of the workforce could result in productivity increases over
time.
If employers are faced with rising costs of employees despite stagnant productivity, there
will be an increased incentive to intensify the labor searching process and layoff the bottom tier
of employees. Additionally, we expect that the market for low-skill jobs will be flooded with an
increased supply of laborers, as their expected returns to labor increase. If the influx of laborers
includes those who are more productive, the employer also stands to benefit, as the opportunity
cost of searching for more highly skilled labor decreases. There are also proportional decreases
in the relative cost of employing these higher-skilled employees as their lower-skilled
counterparts begin to command higher wages. The end result of this process is a shift toward a
more productive workforce, as those with higher productivity are increasingly employed over
their less productive counterparts. Though there will likely be fewer workers employed in total,
the net effect of this switch toward a smaller workforce might be essentially zero from a
production standpoint. Figures 17 and 18 offer graphical representations of two possible
outcomes.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

62

Figure 17.
Reduction in Force Typically Equates to
Decreased Total Output

Figure 18.
Can Total Productivity Break Even?

If productivity does not expand, such as in Figure 17, and quantity of labor decreases, we
expect outright decreases in total productivity. However, Figure 18 paints a different picture,
where the expanded production function, PF*, may actually eclipse total productivity lost from
reducing the number of employed from Q to Q*. We expect that this will occur, but in a much
lesser form. There are several reasons for these expectations. For one, it is unlikely that a shift
toward a smaller base of marginally higher skilled employees will provide enough additional
productivity to account for the loss of a number of less-productive employees. As an example, if
two employees are laid off and replaced by one, would we expect that employee to produce
twice as much output? Barring the expansion of increased/improved capital or employee training

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

63

programs, it seems unrealistic to think that a sizable reduction in force wouldn’t reduce
productivity significantly.

Non-Constant Elasticity Estimation
Up to this point, all of our estimations have assumed that the elasticity for low-wage
employment remains constant over our relevant period. In reality, we expect that the elasticity
will change over time. Recall the previous section. For one, as the amendment pushes the cost of
lower-wage workers higher, there is a corresponding decrease in the relative cost of employing
higher-skilled workers that are above the mandated wage level. This pattern repeats for each
year’s wage hike, with every increase bringing wages of low-skill workers closer to those of
high-skill workers (see wage compression). As the wage differential between skilled and
unskilled workers becomes increasingly smaller, we expect that the aforementioned
compositional employment change will hasten, increasing the disemployment effects for lowskilled workers.
Following these assumptions, we construct a final model using an elasticity that begins at
our median value of -0.2 in 2021 and increases in magnitude by 0.025 every year following.
Since we are uncertain of the actual magnitude of the elasticity change (there are essentially no
papers that attempt to show how disemployment effects change over time), we will only briefly
discuss these effects, limiting our analysis to employment changes. Figure 19 illustrates the
control, the medium estimate, and our new model’s forecast.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

64

Figure 19.

Using the same industry and population figures as our other models, we find that the nonconstant elasticity model predicts some sizable employment differences from our constant -0.2
forecasts. Most notably, employment in 2025 and 2026 is shown to be reduced by approximately
40,000 jobs when compared to our median estimate. Also, the inflation adjustment period after
2026 seems to have a lower level of employment, indicating that employment would struggle to
return to the level of the control if the assumptions of this model are valid in reality.

Increases in Wage and The Income Effect for Workers
Assessing the Income Effect
In economics, we make the fundamental assumption that a consumer’s objective is to
maximize his/her level of utility, also known as the concept of utility maximization. In regards to
this concept, consumer choice theory focuses on utility maximization by the consumption of
goods. Market good consumption can be equally adversely and positively affected by the
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

65

increase in minimum wages for individuals. The first effect we choose to focus on is known as
the income effect, which describes the change in the consumption of goods as a result of a
change in a consumer’s purchasing power. Purchasing power increases as real income increases.
If the market prices of goods are stagnant while nominal income increases, consumer demand for
most goods will rise.
We say “most goods” because consumer goods are typically split into two categories: goods that
are normal and goods that are inferior. Normal goods have a positive income elasticity of
demand, signaling that the demand for these goods will increase parallel to the increase in
consumer income. Inferior goods, on the other hand, are known to experience declines in
consumer demand when consumer incomes increase. These goods are inferior because the
demand for their substitutes, which are often costly, increases when consumer income increases.
Inferior goods are usually of a lower quality, thus they are heavily impacted by substitute goods
when income increases. Simply stated, consumer demand will rise as a result in an increase in
consumer wages.
It is not uncommon to expect that an increase in the minimum wage would give lowwage workers more disposable income to buy market goods with. Generally, an increase in
consumer spending would result in an economic boom. We decided to put this to the test and
analyze worker incomes by comparing the dynamic multiplier model’s baseline forecast to our
forecast produced by the median elasticity estimate. The forecast produced by our elasticity
estimate of -.2 denotes that there is an overall decline in incomes relative to the baseline forecast.
In fact, we observe an average decrease in the incomes of workers to be about .47% in the years
2021 to 2026. We do, however, observe the decrease in workers incomes to shrink after 2027.
This trend is observed in Figure 20. It is also important to note that although the declines in

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

66

incomes get smaller as the years pass, workers would still be worse off after the passing of the
amendments in regard to real income. When looking at the difference between our forecast and
the baseline during the years 2027 to 2031, we observe an average decline of about .24%.
Our analysis provides support to countering the income effect argument. Over time, we
do perceive that the real incomes of workers will decline after the passing of the minimum wage
amendment. Contrary to popular belief, this signifies the possibility that workers will not spend
more money on consumer goods, perhaps limiting the benefits for Florida’s economy.

Figure 20.

Leisure as a Good: The Income Effect
Though income effects primarily affect the demand for market goods, the demand for
leisure can additionally be affected. This is where the substitution effect comes into play,
depending on which effect takes dominance. Utility maximization for individuals can also derive

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

67

from the availability of leisure time, which is defined to be any time away from work. If leisure
is constructed as a normal good, an increase in income will ultimately lead to an increase in the
demand for leisure. This concept also holds true for the labor market. For example: if an
employee experiences an increase in income, the labor supply of a firm can potentially be
negatively affected due to a greater inclination by the employee to take time off from work.
Thus, the employee’s total hours worked decreases, which could affect firms in the long run.
A decrease in total hours worked is one of the possible implications that arise due to an
increase in wage. In this situation, it is vital to differentiate between a low-wage worker and a
high-wage worker. This differentiation assists in the evaluation of how different types of earners
react to the possibility of obtaining leisure time. For example, a worker earning $25 per hour,
whom we would consider being a high-wage worker, would associate giving up an hour of work
in order to enjoy leisure time to be worth at least $25 per hour. In the case of the low-wage
worker, however, the costs are not as high to enjoy an hour of leisure time - resulting in a willing
mindset to trade an hour of work for leisure.
Aside from leisure time, a minimum wage increase would also impact educational
opportunities for Florida’s population, often referred to as the schooling effect. Recent literature
cites the population most affected by this, in particular to be a mixture of teenagers and those
enrolled in post-secondary education, which results in large implications for the state of Florida.
This will be discussed in detail below.

A Review of the Schooling Effect as Substitution
As discussed, raising the minimum wage will result in grand implications to the state of
Florida. One of the major affected areas will be education – which will introduce some of the
counterproductive byproducts of passing this legislation. For both current and future economic

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

68

prosperity, education remains to be a vital source of skills and training for individuals entering
the workforce. Often, the intentions of labor policymakers are benevolent; they are concerned
with attempting to lift the less-prosperous out of poverty by raising worker incomes. However,
we fear that this legislation may be counterproductive, as it may come at a cost to those it intends
to help.
It is essential to begin by incorporating previous research on the topic, as there has been a
rather contemporary uproar about the minimum wage and its effect on schooling. Neumark and
Wascher first began to tackle this underlying complication in the 1990s, with their analysis of the
minimum wage and school enrollment published in 1992. More recently, the duo revisited the
topic in 2001, due to the importance of “reduced training opportunities or lowered educational
attainment”.43 They find that minimum wages reduce the acquisition of skills by the young. This
conclusion has been criticized by the authors mentioned in the literature review, such as Evans
and Turner (1995), who believe that the minimum wage variable used by Neumark and Wascher
was misspecified in their model. The primary source of misspecification referenced by Evans
and Turner comes from the definition of the school enrollment variable used in the model.
In order to refute the claims made, Neumark and Wascher utilize CPS data ranging from
the late 1970s through the 1980s. They also choose to employ a broader definition of school
enrollment suggested by critics, constructing it independently of employment. Their results are
estimated in three different ways with data ranging from the months of May to October of each
year. All three methods produce consistent results illustrating declining school enrollment. In
addition to updating their estimation techniques, Neumark and Wascher decide to re-estimate
through 1998 and still find a declining trend in school enrollment.
12

Neumark, David, and William Wascher. "Minimum Wages and Skill Acquisition: Another Look at Schooling
Effects." Economics of Education Review 22.1 (2003): 1-10.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

69

To conclude their findings, Neumark and Wascher emphasize their persistent findings of
negative effects of minimum wages on school enrollment; they appear to not differ much based
on the definition of school enrollment as critics have mentioned. The prevalence of a minimum
wage seems to decrease the proportion of enrolled teenagers in school, reducing skill acquisition
among those who need it the most.
More currently, a researcher in the Department of Economics at the University of
California, Santa Barbara released a paper analyzing the impact of the minimum wage and state
college enrollment patterns. Chang Hyung Lee’s 2018 study44 primarily focuses on data between
1990 and 2010. Lee emphasizes state college enrollment because most individuals enrolled are
typically not as interested in pursuing the completion of a degree or certificate. The decision to
enroll in state college is based on the availability or attractiveness of other alternatives, such as
full-time employment.
Lee’s estimation strategy involves looking at labor markets with various minimum wage
setting authorities across boundaries. He pairs colleges located near state borders by distance in
order to examine whether differing minimum wage policies in neighboring states result in any
oddities in state college enrollment. State college enrollment can easily be influenced by a
change in the minimum wage, as students are less likely to receive work-study or state-funded
scholarships than their peers in universities. Thus, students are more likely to take out loans or
pay their way through school, making the option to go to state college less affordable.
The data contains 914 state colleges and 16,021 school-by-year observations,
concentrating on the Atlantic coast, Midwest, and South regions. The analysis also groups
44

Lee, Chang Hyung. “Minimum Wage Policy and Community College Enrollment Patterns.” ILR Review, June
2019, doi:10.1177/0019793919855003.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

70

individuals based on their current and past work experience. Using the pair-by-year model, Lee
finds a 10% increase in the minimum wage leads to a 4.4 to 5% decrease in the total enrollment
of state college students. Moreover, in terms of part-time enrollment, Lee also finds a 10%
increase leads to a 5.2 to 6.1% decrease while the effect on full-time state college enrollments is
insignificant and close to zero. These results suggest that part-time enrollments are primarily
driving the results. The main finding might be the most surprising – as Lee comments that the
negative correlation observed is only among individuals employed for at least 50 weeks prior to
the survey.
His findings elicit discussion in regards to why a negative correlation between an
increase in the minimum wage and a decrease in school enrollment exists. For one, individuals
with stable employment pursuing part-time schooling might find it more cost-effective to return
back to work after a hike in the minimum wage, as part-time students might perceive an
opportunity cost in terms of lost income by deciding to enroll in school rather than work.
However, it is quite possible that this effect might reverse when individuals returning back to the
labor force are better informed of their abilities and desire additional schooling to attain better
skills.

Channels of Adjustment: Education
The Florida Department of Education estimates the number of high schoolers in the state
of Florida during the academic year of 2017-18 to have been 1,062,897, and the number of high
schoolers during the 2018-19 academic year to be 1,065,948.45 The Annual Outcomes Report is
also comprised of a section titled “Florida Continuing Education Data”, which details the next

45

“Annual Outcomes Report.” Florida Department of Education, 2018, Florida Education and Training Placement
Program.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

71

steps of high school graduates. The most recent year contributing to this section is the academic
year of 2016-17, which includes responses from 124,645 high school graduates. Out of those,
roughly 60% of respondents (74,749) answered with the intention to continue their education.
We believed the two most surprising differences to be between the amount of respondents
enrolling in state college and the amount enrolling in Florida’s university system. These
differences, with the main categories in bold, are discussed in Table 10.
Table 10.

As outlined in Lee’s study, we observe the majority of survey respondents from the 201617 academic year to be more drawn to state college rather than attending a university. The
number of respondents going to state college after graduating from high school was roughly
twice as much as those going to university, and out of those enrolling in state college, 70% were
attending in pursuit of an AA degree.
Being that this is a survey, there are some potential drawbacks to take note of. Response
bias – or the feeling to answer what is socially acceptable – might have skewed these answers. In
practical terms, this signifies that respondents could have answered untruthfully to conform to
societal norms. Additionally, nonresponse bias could have played a part in obtaining results.
Nonresponse bias occurs when respondents do not answer, which is usually a problem of
surveys, deeming them unreliable. Since the current academic year is 2018-19, the survey results
are outdated – signaling that answers could have changed in later years in favor of an increase in
respondents attending universities or vice versa. Nevertheless, we assume that results would stay
consistent in the years following the 2016-17 academic year, with little to no variation in the
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

72

answers. We make this assumption because state college “is the primary access to higher
education for Floridians, including recent high school graduates and returning adult students” 46
and is a cheaper alternative for most students than attending a university. Access to a state
college could similarly play a role in graduates deciding between the two types of schooling to
pursue. Students that are geographically closer to one of the 28 community and state colleges
might prefer to stay nearby and save money (i.e. living at home vs. renting an apartment) instead
of moving to attend one of the 12 universities in the state of Florida.
Researchers like Lee continue to make strides towards understanding the true effect of
wages increases on school enrollment. In the state of Florida, we believe this will lead to massive
declines in the number of skilled workers in the long run. The population at stake will be those
enrolled at the high school or state college level, as they have not yet entered into four-year
universities, and thus, will have less to lose by going into the workforce immediately after the
occurrence of a spike in the minimum wage. The decision by low-skilled workers to disregard
education in the hopes of finding a job has many repercussions. Figure 21 demonstrates the labor
market operating at equilibrium, with dotted lines representing the optimal wage and quantity of
labor. As the higher minimum wage policy is implemented, market inefficiencies are exposed.
These inefficiencies are represented by the triangle labeled deadweight loss in Figure 22.

46

“The Florida College System.” Home | The Florida College System, www.floridacollegesystem.com/.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

73

Figure 21.

Figure 22.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

74

Figure 22 also displays what happens to consumer surplus as the minimum wage
increases. Consumer surplus (otherwise known as the employer’s surplus) decreases as the
producer surplus and deadweight loss grow to inhibit some of the original consumer surplus.
Producer surplus (otherwise known as the employee’s surplus) increases – but it also decreases
by the small triangle of deadweight loss. The quantity demanded of labor, shown by the vertical
blue line, decreases in comparison to the equilibrium quantity of labor demanded. The supply of
labor, however, increases. This causes an excess in the supply of labor, as there are more lowskilled workers than demanded by firms. Unemployment is the main result of an excess supply in
labor.
This is a major concern for Florida if the implementation of the minimum wage policy
goes through. The effects on education will be detrimental, as individuals desiring to obtain more
skills by going to school will turn to working as a result of being lured by the higher wage. As
previously established, the majority of individuals attending college in the state of Florida are
state college enrollees. This particular proportion of the school population is more susceptible to
joining the labor force because they are usually paying out-of-pocket costs to attend college. If
the minimum wage increases, these students will stop attending school due to the nature of the
low costs associated with leaving a state college. In the short-run, more workers in the labor
force might signal economic prosperity for Florida. However, in the long-run, the labor force
will fall into the trap of continuing to be comprised of low-skilled workers with little to no
educational training. An unskilled labor force will simply wreak havoc on the future of Florida’s
economy and will ultimately result in a less prosperous outcome for residents. In the worst case

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

75

scenario, this will dissuade people from moving to Florida and encourage people to move out of
Florida in search of new and better opportunities.

Quantifying the Schooling Effect
In order to appropriately describe the impact that the schooling effect would have on
Florida, we choose to quantify the number of total state college students that would be affected
by an increase in the minimum wage. Our first step in our methodology involves finding the total
number of state college students enrolled in the state. We find there to be 733,000 students
enrolled in Florida’s state colleges, according to The Florida College System.47 Just as estimating
changes in employment required elasticities, we deem elasticities necessary to calculate the
affected schooling population. We gather the required elasticities from the paper previously
mentioned, written by Lee. His method concentrated on the following three regions: the Atlantic
coast, Midwest, and South regions. For this reason, we are able to estimate the changes due to
the schooling effect, as the elasticity pertains to the specific coast Florida is located on.
Lee’s study results in the conclusion that a 10% increase in the minimum wage will lead
to between 4.4 to 5% decrease in total state college enrollments. Subsequently, we proceed to use
the percent changes in the increase of the minimum wage from the years 2021-2026,
demonstrated in the table found in Appendix 7. In order to find the percent decrease in state
college enrollments with respect to both the 4.4 and 5% elasticity, we perform a point estimation
and divide each numerical decrease by 100 to get them into percent form.

46

“The Florida College System.” Home | The Florida College System, www.floridacollegesystem.com/.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

76

The penultimate step to finding the total number of state college enrollments affected by
the amendment each year during 2021 to 2026 is to take the percent decrease and multiply it to
the original number of state college enrollments reported by The Florida College System. For
instance, if interested in the 4.4% elasticity in conjunction with the number of college
enrollments affected in 2021, we simply take the reported percent decrease (0.08) and multiply it
by the initial number of enrollments (733,000). This results in a numerical decrease of 58,640
state college enrollments during the year of 2021. We then subtract this numerical decrease from
the starting point of state college enrollees, which is 733,000, to get 674,360 total state college
enrollments for the year 2021. In order to calculate 2022’s change in total state college
enrollment, we use the new number mentioned earlier (674,360) as our baseline. Each year
follows this method. We follow this method for the 5% elasticity as well.
As a result, we predict a decline of total state college enrollment to occur throughout the
course of the six years, both during and after the passing of the amendment. Specifically, in
terms of the 4.4% elasticity, we expect a decrease of 175,111 total state college enrollments. The
5% elasticity results in a decrease of 209,446 total state college enrollments. Both of these
numbers factor in part-time and full-time enrollment. The implications of these results are
tremendous, as they foreshadow a potential danger for the future of the Florida economy. An
increase in the amount of Floridians leaving state college for the possibility of earning a higher
minimum wage will hurt them in the long run, as they may forego higher earnings in the future
and will miss out on necessary skills needed for career development.

Channels of Adjustment: Unemployment
As illustrated in Figure 21, the labor surplus that can primarily be attributed to the influx
of individuals in pursuit of employment will eventually lead to unemployment through various

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

77

mechanisms in Florida and is our main concern. In addition to the introduction of unskilled
workers, employment in Florida will also be heavily affected. Unemployment will be presented
in many forms for workers – such as a loss of hours or a loss of employment benefits.
Our economic impact study revolves around the impacts on employment. With the
research that has already been conducted (which has been detailed in our literature review), we
find unemployment effects to be a cause for concern for Floridians. Previous research outlines
unemployment elasticities which we use to reach a conclusion about the loss of jobs for the state
of Florida. Likewise, research has also been conducted to study the changes in employee hours.
Conducted in a state with similar economic conditions, Jardim et al. (2017)48 examined
unemployment as a result of raising the minimum wage in Seattle. Evidence demonstrates that
the hours of low-skilled workers fell by 6.9% during the three quarters when the minimum wage
was raised from $9.47 to $13 per hour in 2016. This resulted in a loss of around 3 million hours
worked per calendar year and approximately 5,000 jobs. More importantly, Jardim et al. report
that though wages were increased, the monetary value of the hours lost outweighed the increase
in wages. The researchers calculated the monthly salary of a low-wage worker, which was
$1,900. Reducing employee hours resulted in a loss of $130 per month, while the increase in
wage would only recover $56 of this loss. The net loss would then be $74, which is quite sizable
for the low-wage worker.
Taking into consideration the current research, we emphasize the impacts that raising the
minimum wage will have on Florida’s workers. A low-wage worker might not necessarily lose

47

Jardim, Ekaterina, et al. “Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, and Low-wage Employment: Evidence from
Seattle.” No. w23532. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

78

their job, but they would see either a reduction in hours worked or a loss in benefits.
Additionally, an increase in the minimum wage will create barriers to entry in the labor market
for workers, making it harder to find a job for those that are not yet in the labor force and will
cause an increase in unemployment for the state. Going back to the Seattle studies, an update to
Jardim et al.’s (2017) paper published in October 2018 which was mentioned in the literature
review claims “Seattle’s minimum wage ordinance appears to have delivered higher pay to
experienced workers at the cost of reduced opportunity for the inexperienced.” 49 Extending this
to Florida, we fear that an increase in wages will induce hardships when finding jobs among lowskilled workers. This will contribute to the overall increase in the unemployment rate in Florida,
and will not be conducive to building a flourishing economy.

Channels of Adjustment: Firm Spillover Effects
Spillover effects are known to be secondary effects coming from primary effects. In this
context, we relate spillover effects to be concerned with firms in Florida. To evaluate any
spillover effects that increasing the minimum wage might have on firms, it is vital to examine
any neighboring states. Florida’s neighboring state is Georgia, which has their state minimum
wage set at $5.15 per hour. 50 Since the state minimum wage is less than the federal minimum
wage, workers covered by the federal Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) are subject to being paid
the federal minimum wage, which is $7.25 per hour.
The fact that a neighboring state has a lower mandated minimum wage might be
problematic for firms in Florida. If the legislation of increasing the minimum wage passes, firms

47

Jardim, Ekaterina, et al. “Minimum Wage Increases and Individual Employment Trajectories.” No. w25182.
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
49
Brainerd, Jackson. “State Minimum Wages: 2019 Minimum Wage by State.” State Minimum Wages | 2019
Minimum Wage by State, 7 Jan. 2019, www.ncsl.org/research/labor-and-employment/state-minimum-wagechart.aspx#Table.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

79

would be required to pay their low-skilled employees up to $15 per hour - even if they feel as
though their employees are not worth as much. If a firm believes they can find cheaper labor
elsewhere – like in the state of Georgia – this will pose as a good opportunity for firms to
relocate in search of the alternative, which is cheaper labor. This could potentially drive firms
out of the state of Florida into neighboring states. Moreover, Florida’s state government will
have to spend more money to design incentive packages in order to make firms reconsider
staying in the state.
An increase in the minimum wage would lead to unintended consequences, making both
firms and employees suffer. Florida’s future would also be at stake, as firms would view this
state as being less attractive to stay in or move to. As a result, this would lead to the loss of jobs
and opportunities for lower-skilled workers to enter the labor force. If firms choose to relocate,
Florida’s tax revenues would substantially decrease. Just in the year of 2018, businesses
generated 2.2 billion dollars in corporate income taxes. Thus, when imposing legislation aimed
to increase the minimum wage, we caution to think about the spillover effects that could occur
and the long-lasting effects they would have on Florida.

Channels of Adjustment: Automation
The final adjustment channel to be discussed is relatively new but is becoming a large
threat to jobs. The advancement of technology in recent years has spurred automation. We see
evidence of this already happening, with restaurants and grocery stores incorporating self-order
and check-out machines. The emergence of automation in these low-skilled labor industries is a
threat, as technology is typically of much lower cost relative to employees of a firm. It might
also be easier for firms to substitute a portion of low-skilled jobs with self-service machines
which are able to operate on their own.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

80

In particular, Grace Lordan and David Neumark (2018)51 study the effect of minimum
wage increases on automatable jobs, focusing on low-skilled labor. Using CPS data from 19802015, Lordan and Neumark distinguish between occupations that are intensive in automatable
tasks. They, in addition, account for urban and non-urban areas in each state. Their results find
that increasing the minimum wage significantly declines the share of automatable jobs held by
low-skilled labor. The manufacturing sector has the largest effects on the share of automatable
tasks, of which the elasticity is -0.18. To add to that, they find that the largest effects occur for
the oldest and youngest workers, for females, and for African-Americans. Though the impact on
low-skilled workers is investigated, Lordan and Neumark also suggest that the increases in the
minimum wage will shape the type of jobs low-skilled workers will hold in the future, and will
also generate employment hardships for them. Similarly, they find that some of the adverse
effects felt by low-skilled workers will be offset by increased employment opportunities for
higher-skilled workers. This implies that most of the low-skilled workers will suffer in the long
run, as businesses will turn to automation to gradually phase out manual labor tasks.
Automation is yet another unintended consequence of raising the minimum wage. We
fear that this would phase out the jobs that are predominantly comprised of low-skilled workers.
The hospitality and food service industries could in fact make a quick and easy switch to
choosing technology over employing workers – which would be unfortunate for the future of
Florida’s workers and needs to be put into consideration when proposing a legislative change
concerning an increase in the minimum wage.

50

Lordan, Grace, and David Neumark. "People Versus Machines: The Impact of Minimum Wages on Automatable
Jobs." Labour Economics 52 (2018): 40-53.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

81

Addressing Recent Research
CBO: The Effects on Employment and Family Income of Increasing the Federal Minimum
Wage
While we were concerned with studying the impact on Florida due to increasing the
minimum wage, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) also seemed to share the same concern.
In July of 2019, the CBO released their own study regarding the effects of employment and
family income after increasing the federal minimum wage52. In order to analyze the impacts of
increasing the minimum wage by the year 2025, they focused on three minimum wage points in
comparison to the federal mandated minimum wage of $7.25 per hour: $10 per hour, $12 per
hour, and $15 per hour. These wage points are referred to as “options” by the CBO; an overview
of the results for each option can be viewed in Table 11 below.

Table 11.

51

"The Effects on Employment and Family Income of Increasing the Federal Minimum Wage." Congressional
Budget Office. 8 July 2019. 16 July 2019 <https://www.cbo.gov/publication/55410>.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

82

Because our economic impact study involved us devising an estimation method to
estimate changes in Florida’s employment levels, we were particularly interested in how the
CBO went about estimating employment changes in the entirety of the United States. Similar to
one of our steps, the CBO utilized a range of elasticity estimates found in the academic literature
to generate their own lowend, medium-, and high-end estimates. The range of elasticity estimates
CBO found can be seen in Table 12. As you can see, CBO’s medium estimate of -0.25 only
differs from our mid-range employment elasticity estimate by 0.05.
Table 12.

In terms of the methodology, the CBO analysis encompasses a wide range of the U.S.
population. For example, the demographics of the population they were concerned with were
teenagers, part-time workers, adults without a high school education, non-workers, and children.
For the purpose of our study, we placed a greater emphasis on low-wage workers ages 18 to 64.
They gathered information on these demographics from the CPS, using sample weights as each
observation in the survey respectively represents a number of people. Our approach differs with
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

83

respect to theirs – instead of using sample weights to represent a number of people, we used
industry codes and found the proportion of low-wage workers in each industry to use as our
sample weights. Florida’s data was a bit messy, as we were missing data from certain PUMAs.
This resulted in the inability to correctly assign weights to each observation, leading us to use the
industry weight strategy. It appeared as though the CBO also ran into the same difficulty as we
did, with many of the survey respondents choosing to not report their hourly wages. We
encountered this difficulty with workers tending to under-report their hourly wages in
conjunction to sometimes neglecting to report any wages at all. To fix this, the CBO calculated
the hourly wages as usual, defining it to be the earnings per week divided by the usual hours.
They, in addition, moved non-reported wages closer to the mean wages of workers with similar
characteristics. Our way of addressing these discrepancies in the data were to exclude low-wage
workers that did not earn, at the bare minimum, the tipped wage in Florida. Our weights were
distributed differently across our central populations; nevertheless, the ideology between both us
and the CBO remains consistent.
The next comparison we were most interested in was a comparison of results between our
study and the CBO’s. Their medium estimate reports a job loss for 1.3 million workers in the
United States. Using a report by the U.S. Department of Labor detailing the labor force status of
the civilian non-institutional population for both Florida and the United States 53, we are able to
find out if our results align. To obtain an average of Florida’s civilian labor force in 2018, we
add up the seasonally adjusted population and divide by 12. This results in 9,864,083 workers. In

52"Labor

Force Status of the Civilian Noninstitutional Population." 21 June 2019. U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau
of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics Program, in cooperation with the Florida Department of
Economic Opportunity, Bureau of Workforce Statistics and Economic Research. 16 July 2019
<http://lmsresources.labormarketinfo.com/library/press/fl-us.pdf>.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

84

order to obtain the average for the United States civilian labor in 2018, we follow the same
method to get a total of 1,869,169,000 workers. This signals that Florida’s civilian labor force
comprises 5% of the country’s total labor force. Instrumenting this logic, we then apply Florida
as 5% of the CBO’s estimated job loss due to the median elasticity estimate. We find that in
terms of the CBO’s estimate, Florida’s civilian labor force contributes 65,000 jobs to the United
States civilian labor force. This is good news, as it shows that indeed our estimates do align. Our
economic impact analysis results in a job loss of 43,461. Although the CBO’s estimate is roughly
22,000 greater than our estimate, it is also important to keep in mind that the elasticity they use
to calculate job loss is 0.05% greater than ours, which would explain the differences in estimates
between our studies.
The CBO concludes that although the earnings and incomes of most low-wage workers
would increase, this increase in income would certainly come at a steep price. They fear other
low-wage workers would become jobless, causing a drastic decrease in family income. In some
cases, the fall in family income would push workers and their families below the poverty
threshold, which would demonstrate how the increase in the federal minimum wage could be
counterproductive for some of the workers it desperately attempts to help. Overall, our results
appear to mimic the findings that the CBO estimates and draws a similar conclusion.

Final Thoughts
In conclusion, there are several key takeaways from our analysis. For one, the
academic literature most commonly estimates effects that coincide with the conceptual
framework laid out in classical theory. We suppose that there is merit to using the most
frequently occurring estimates, as they result from independently identified models across many

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

85

papers. Secondly, our distribution and industry analyses warn us that Florida may be particularly
vulnerable to mandated wage increases, as there are high numbers of low-wage workers all
around the state. More specifically, there are 2.7 million Floridians that earn an hourly rate at or
below $15 per hour. Thirdly, we expect that there will be fairly sizable reductions in employment
over the duration of the amendment, and during the adjustment period that follows. Our central
models using elasticities of -0.1 to -0.3 predict reductions of 40,650 to 117,289 jobs on average.
Finally, we consider some of the numerous indirect effects that we may see as a result of these
wage increases.
Our models predict that there will be a reduction in total social services expenditures on
average over the six years of the policy, with only the first wage hike eliciting an increase in
expenses. While we did not expect these results, they likely come as a result of reduced benefits
paid to those who have risen above the income threshold for certain programs. Regardless, the
magnitude of these reductions represents an average reduction of .01% to .03% of total benefits
expenditures in Florida. We also estimate total tax receipts for state and local governments
would be reduced by approximately one billion dollars on average annually over the duration of
the policy. The social services and tax revenue effects are critical to understanding the total
impact of this legislation, but they do not complete the picture. Last but not least, our final
sections discuss some of the lesser-known, more-nuanced risks of raising minimum wages.
Amongst these are reduced education level, increased automation, and compositional shifts in the
labor force. The former of which threatens future earning power in exchange for current
earnings, and the latter two potentially damaging employment opportunities for low-skill
workers in general. Overall, the results presented in this report indicate that we should expect net
adverse effects if the proposed minimum wage amendment passes.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

86

Appendix 1
Year

Minimum Wage

Percent Change from Prior year

2005

6.15

19.4%

2006

6.40

4.1%

2007

6.67

4.2%

2008

6.79

1.8%

2009

7.21

6.2%

2010

7.25

0.6%

2011

7.31

0.8%

2012

7.67

4.9%

2013

7.79

1.6%

2014

7.93

1.8%

2015

8.05

1.5%

2016

8.08

0.4%

2017

8.10

0.2%

2018

8.25

1.9%

2019

8.46

2.5%

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

87

Appendix 2
Variable Definition
PUMA As discussed earlier, the PUMA is a Public Use Microdata Area where the housing
unit was located during the survey. A crosswalk file from the IPUMS website was
used to aggregate PUMAs into counties or similarly sized areas (i.e. the Apalachee
Region) for geographical analysis.
EMPSTAT “EMPSTAT indicates whether the respondent was a part of the labor force – working
or seeking work – and, if so, whether the person was currently unemployed.”
RURAL This is a dummy variable for whether or not the area is considered “rural” if it is “[a]
county with a population of 75,000 or less” or is “[a] county with a population of
125,000 or less which is contiguous to a county with a population of 75,000 or less.”
21

UHRSWORK “UHRSWORK reports the number of hours per week that the respondent usually
worked, if the person worked during the previous year. The census inquiry relates to
the previous calendar year, while the ACS and the PRCS uses the previous 12 months
as the reference period.”
IND “IND is an un-recoded variable that reports the type of industry in which the person
performed an occupation”
INCWAGE

“INCWAGE reports each respondent's total pre-tax wage and salary income - that is,
money received as an employee - for the previous year. [F]or the ACS and the PRCS,
the reference period was the past 12 months. Sources of income in INCWAGE
include wages, salaries, commissions, cash bonuses, tips, and other money income
received from an employer.”

HRLYWAGE This variable was computed by dividing the INCWAGE by the UHRSWORK per
year, which was computed by multiplying UHRSWORK by fifty-two (the number of
weeks in a year):
HRLYWAGE=INCWAGE/(UHRSWORK*52)

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

88

Appendix 3
Industry Baseline
Forecasted Difference %
2017
%<$15/hour
Avg 2021- Avg 21-26
Different Median
2026
Wage
Utilities
26,119
24,464
-1,655
-6.336
27.4
17.06
Mining
30,885
30,346
-539
-1.745
24.04
18.3
Administrative, 1,006,847 1,001,847
-5,000
-0.497
23.08
20.03
Support, Waste
Management, and
Remediation Services
Information
176,801
175,844
-957
-0.541
24.04
23.26
Finance and Insurance
712,382
708,037
-4,345
-0.610
22.65
25.17
Wholesale Trade

437,922

435,549

-2,373

-0.542

20.51

29.56

Educational Services;
Private

252,094

249,284

-2,810

-1.115

19.23

31.91

Manufacturing
Professional,
Scientific, and
Technical Services

387,542
912,527

384,513
904,634

-3,029
-7,893

-0.782
-0.865

20.83
21.15

32.91
33.24

Healthcare and Social
Assistance

1,458,885

1,450,929

-7,956

-0.545

19.23

35.32

Transportation and
Warehousing

441,977

438,548

-3,429

-0.776

19.23

37.77

Construction
Other Services (Except
PublicAdministration)

740,996
889,419

727,209
885,197

-13,787
-4,222

-1.861
-0.475

17.31
14.42

41.03
53.45

Arts, Entertainment,
and Recreation

369,671

366,876

-2,795

-0.756

14.42

54.64

Retail Trade
Forestry, Fishing, and
Hunting

1,425,272
62,591

1,413,683
62,058

-11,589
-533

-0.813
-0.852

14.33
11.54

55.76
63.05

Accommodation and
Food Services

1,077,065

1,070,247

-6,818

-0.633

11.54

69.65

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

89

Appendix 4

Source: http://www.remi.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/06/Model-Equations-v2_2.pdf

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

90

Appendix 5
Percent Difference from the Baseline Estimate for a -0.1 Elasticity

This chart shows the percent difference between out estimation the baseline forecast for several
different benefit programs with a -0.1 elasticity.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

91

Appendix 6
Percent Difference from the Baseline Estimation for a -0.3 Elasticity

This chart shows the percent difference between out estimation the baseline forecast for several
different benefit programs with a -0.3 elasticity.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

92

Appendix 7

This chart demonstrates how we’ve come up with the schooling effect estimates based off of the
number of state college enrollments provided by The Florida College System.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

93

Bibliography
Title Page Image: Jackson, Lucas. Reuters, https://slate.com/business/2019/02/new-research-15dollar-minimum-wage-good-for-workers.html.
1."Florida Minimum Wage History 2000 to 2019." Oct. 2018. Florida Department of Economic
Opportunity. 09 July 2019, http://www.floridajobs.org/docs/default-source/business-growth-andpartnerships/for-employers/posters-and-required-notices/2019-minimum-wage-poster/floridaminimum-wage-history-2000-2018.pdf?sfvrsn=4.
2. Brown, Charles; Gilroy, Curtis; and Kohen, Andrew. "The Effect of the Minimum Wage on
Employment and Unemployment." Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. 20, No. 2 (June 1982),
pp. 487-528.
3. Neumark, David and Wascher, William, (1992), “Employment Effects of Minimum and
Subminimum Wages: Panel Data on State Minimum Wage Laws”, ILR Review, 46, issue 1, p.
55-81, https://EconPapers.repec.org/RePEc:sae:ilrrev:v:46:y:1992:i:1:p:55-81.
4. “History of Federal Minimum Wage Rates Under the Fair Labor Standards Act, 1938 - 2009.”
Minimum Wage - Wage and Hour Division (WHD) - U.S. Department of Labor,
www.dol.gov/whd/minwage/chart.htm.
5. Card, David & Krueger, Alan B, 1994. "Minimum Wages and Employment: A Case Study of
the Fast-Food Industry in New Jersey and Pennsylvania," American Economic Review,
American Economic Association, vol. 84(4), pages 772-793, September.
7. Thomas Leonard, (2000), The Very Idea of Applying Economics: The Modern MinimumWage Controversy and Its Antecedents, History of Political Economy, 32, (5), 117-144
8. Kennan, John. “The Elusive Effects of Minimum Wages.” Journal of Economic Literature,
vol. 33, no. 4, 1995, pp. 1950–1965. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/2729319.
9. Burkhauser, Richard V., et al. “A Reassessment of the New Economics of the Minimum Wage
Literature with Monthly Data from the Current Population Survey.” Journal of Labor
Economics, vol. 18, no. 4, 2000, pp. 653–680. JSTOR, www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/209972.
10. Zavodny, Madeline. 2000. “The Effect of the Minimum Wage on Employment and Hours.”
Labour Economics. Vol. 7, No. 6 (November), pp. 729-750.
11. Keil, Manfred, Donald Robertson, and James Symons. 2001. “Minimum Wages and
Employment.” CEPR Working Paper No. 497.
12. Neumark, David, and William Wascher. "Minimum wages and skill acquisition: Another
look at schooling effects." Economics of Education Review 22.1 (2003): 1-10.
Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

94

13. Evans, W., & Turner, M. (1995). “Minimum Wage Effects on Employment and School
Enrollment: Comment.” Mimeo. University of Maryland.
14. Fiscal Policy Institute. 2004. “State Minimum Wages and Employment in Small
Businesses.” fiscalpolicy.org/wp-content/uploads/2004/04/minimumwageandsmallbusiness.pdf.
16. Sabia, Joseph J. “The Effect of Minimum Wage Increases on Retail and Small Business
Employment”. Employment Policies Institute, May 2006, www.epionline.org/wpcontent/studies/sabia_05-2006.pdf.
17. Neumark, David, JM Ian Salas, and William Wascher. "Revisiting the Minimum Wage –
Employment Debate: Throwing Out the Baby with the Bathwater?." ILR Review67.3_suppl
(2014): 608-648.
18. Jardim, Ekaterina, et al. “Minimum Wage Increases and Individual Employment
Trajectories”. No. w25182. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2018.
19.Steven Ruggles, Sarah Flood, Ronald Goeken, Josiah Grover, Erin Meyer, Jose Pacas, and
Matthew Sobek. IPUMS USA: Version 9.0 [dataset]. Minneapolis, MN: IPUMS, 2019.
https://doi.org/10.18128/D010.V9.0
20. “County Employment and Wages in Florida – Third Quarter 2018: Southeast Information
Office.” U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, 2 Apr. 2019,
www.bls.gov/regions/southeast/news-release/countyemploymentandwages_florida.htm#table1.
21. “SAIPE State and County Estimates for 2017.” SAIPE State and County Estimates for 2017,
US Census Bureau, 1 Mar. 2019, www.census.gov/data/datasets/2017/demo/saipe/2017-stateand-county.html.
22. “Florida County Profiles.” Office of Economic & Demographic Research The Florida
Legislature, 25 June 2019, edr.state.fl.us/content/area-profiles/county/index.cfm.
23. “Rural Definition.” Florida Department of Economic Opportunity,
www.floridajobs.org/community-planning-and-development/rural-community-programs/ruraldefinition.
24. “Regional Economic Models, Inc. (REMI) Model.” Regional Economic Models, Inc. (REMI)
Model | Open Energy Information,
openei.org/wiki/Regional_Economic_Models,_Inc._(REMI)_Model.
25. Rickman, Dan, and R Schwer. “A Comparison of the Multipliers of IMPLAN, REMI, and
RIMS II: Benchmarking Ready-Made Models for Comparison.” The Annals of Regional
Science, vol. 29, no. 4, Dec. 1995, pp. 363–374., doi:https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01581882.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

95

27. “Child Care Subsidies under the CCDF Program.”
www.ccdf.urban.org/sites/default/files/CCDFDatabase2015PolicySummary.pdf.
28. “What Is SNAP?” What Is SNAP? | Www.gettingsnap.org,
www.gettingfoodstamps.org/whatissnap.html.
29. “Eligibility for SNAP in FL.” Florida, florida-assistance.org/florida-dcf/snap-inflorida/eligibility-for-snap-in-florida/.
30. “Food Assistance Program Fact Sheet.” Oct. 2018,
www.myflfamilies.com/programs/access/docs/fafactsheet.pdf.
31. “Welcome to Benefits.Gov.” Welcome to Benefits.Gov | Benefits.Gov,
www.benefits.gov/benefit/1553.
32. Www.geosolinc.com. Employ Florida - Supplemental Security Income (SSI),
www.employflorida.com/gsipub/index.asp?docid=50.
33. “Social Security.” SSI Federal Payment Amounts for 2019, www.ssa.gov/oact/cola/SSI.html.
34. Dickey, Elizabeth. “Income and Asset Limits for SSI Disability Eligibility.” Www.nolo.com,
Nolo, 19 Jan. 2017, www.nolo.com/legal-encyclopedia/income-asset-limits-ssi-disabilityeligibility.html.
35. “Florida Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)”,
www.welfareinfo.org/benefits/florida-temporary-assistance-for-needy-families-tanf-1657.
36. “Florida TANF Application.” TANF Program,
www.tanfprogram.com/florida-tanf-application-ta9.
37. Temporary Cash Assistance Fact Sheet. www.myflfamilies.com/serviceprograms/access/docs/tcafactsheet.pdf.
38. “EITC Income Limits Maximum Credit Amounts Next Year: Internal Revenue Service.”
EITC Income Limits Maximum Credit Amounts Next Year | Internal Revenue Service,
www.irs.gov/credits-deductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/eitc-income-limitsmaximum-credit-amounts-next-year.
39. “Qualifying Child Rules.” Internal Revenue Service, www.irs.gov/creditsdeductions/individuals/earned-income-tax-credit/qualifying-child-rules.
40. “The Earned Income Credit.” All Florida Tax & Financial Solutions, 2 Jan. 2015,
www.allfloridatax.net/blog/the-earned-income-credit/4560.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

96

41. Carroll, C., Slacalek, J., Tokuoka, K. and White, M. N. (2017), The distribution of wealth
and the marginal propensity to consume. Quantitative Economics, 8: 977-1020.
doi:10.3982/QE694
44. Lee, Chang Hyung. “Minimum Wage Policy and Community College Enrollment Patterns.”
ILR Review, June 2019, doi:10.1177/0019793919855003.
45. “Annual Outcomes Report.” Florida Department of Education, 2018, Florida Education and
Training Placement Program.
46. “The Florida College System.” Home | The Florida College System,
www.floridacollegesystem.com/.
47. Jardim, Ekaterina, et al. Minimum Wage Increases, Wages, and Low-Wage Employment:
Evidence from Seattle. No. w23532. National Bureau of Economic Research, 2017.
49. Brainerd, Jackson. “State Minimum Wages: 2019 Minimum Wage by State.” State Minimum
Wages | 2019 Minimum Wage by State, 7 Jan. 2019, www.ncsl.org/research/labor-andemployment/state-minimum-wage-chart.aspx#Table.
50. Lordan, Grace, and David Neumark. "People Versus Machines: The Impact of Minimum
Wages on Automatable Jobs." Labour Economics 52 (2018): 40-53.
51. "The Effects on Employment and Family Income of Increasing the Federal Minimum Wage."
Congressional Budget Office. 8 July 2019. 16 July 2019
<https://www.cbo.gov/publication/55410>.
52. "Labor Force Status of the Civilian Noninstitutional Population." 21 June 2019. U.S.
Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Local Area Unemployment Statistics Program,
in cooperation with the Florida Department of Economic Opportunity, Bureau of Workforce
Statistics and Economic Research. 16 July 2019
<http://lmsresources.labormarketinfo.com/library/press/fl-us.pdf>.
Appendix 4. “What Does REMI Say?” REMI, www.remi.com/.

Fenstemacher | Fisher | Hadzalic | Hillebrandt

97

