Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.21

Pp.307- 318

EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences
Nadjat Khenioui
Department of English
Constantine University I, Constantine, Algeria
Abstract
Ubiquitous learning, also known as U-learning, refers to the learner’s ability to learn at any place
at any time. This paper argues that U-learning represents a new perspective in terms of pedagogy.
The main contributor to this process is foremost the teacher, who has to adhere to the everchanging language learning/teaching scenery. This study aims at setting the fundamentals of
materials development at the intersection of two major areas of contemporary education, namely
the needs of the ‘net generation’ students and the educational potential of the evolving social web
and digital technology. It seeks to answer the following questions: What is digital technology and
how does it lead to U-learning? What is web 2.0 and how does it affect classroom pedagogy,
practice, and the design of quality teaching/learning materials? How does it help teachers improve
their practice and materials development procedures? And how can teachers transform today’s
innovative technology into ubiquitous learning experiences, promoting learner autonomy,
regardless of any geographical or institutional boundaries? We will illustrate the whole procedure
with a framework for web 2.0 integration that identifies the crucial features underpinning the
extramural, ubiquitous learning experiences, in which learners can engage.
Keywords: experiential tasks, materials development, ubiquitous knowledge building, ubiquitous
learning, web 2.0
Cite as: Khenioui, N. (2019). EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences.
Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL (5). 307- 318.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/call5.21

307

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

Introduction
The vast use of digital technology and the internet has dramatically changed the educational
landscape throughout the world. There has been a strong drive towards the significant impact that
digital technology can bring to the language classroom in the context of the 21st-century education.
The latest profit to language teaching is the new teaching/learning modalities and the network
open, collaborative learning space that the hypermedia participatory nature of the second web (web
2.0) applications provide. This network-based environment has expanded the learner’s
opportunities for engagement, communication, self-directed and ubiquitous learning, where shared
content and resources are at hand with a few clicks of a mouse in a way that promotes collaborative
learning. Considerable studies (e.g., McLaughlin & Lee, 2010; Glassman & Kang, 2010) support
the positive impact that such technologies can bring to instruction and learning, by broadening the
learner’s horizons beyond the walls of the classroom, allowing them to explore and discover their
learning paths, while they can bridge learning and instruction spaces across school, home, and the
wider community. As a result, technology literacy and incorporation to support classroom learning
became major concerns to most institutions and teachers alike. Nevertheless, most initiatives in
this respect were technology-driven, and much has been the focus on technology accordance and
literacy; little consideration, if any, has been given to the pedagogical aspects of the teaching/
learning process.
This paper aspires to divert attention to that educational aspect of the technological
endeavor yet extensively neglected; namely the pedagogical element of the instructional act. It
aims at setting the fundamentals of materials development by English language teachers at the
intersection of two significant areas of contemporary education. The most critical of these is the
practical demands of the subject matter and the needs of the ‘net generation’ students. The second
is the educational potential of the evolving social Web and digital technology, incarnating the
socio-cultural factors involved in modern learning. It commences by addressing the theoretical
foundations of Web 2.0 pedagogy, and then, sheds light on the essential contributions that it can
bring to the language classroom and materials development. The paper shifts focus, after that, to
the teachers and learners’ changing roles in light of these new modalities. At the end of the paper,
we will give some suggestions on how to exploit this knowledge to create task-based ubiquitous
learning experiences for students.
Ubiquitous Language Learning
With the rapid development of information technology, ubiquitous computing devices (e.g.,
mobiles, IPods, Laptops, etc.) and their global interconnection via the internet has permeated
almost every aspect of our life including learning. These have a different cultural and epistemic
logic from the old drilling practice and stimulus-response patterns ensured by cassettes,
microphones, and headphones mostly used in language laboratories in the previous decades.
Eventually, the linear presentation of materials has been displaced by “authentic multimodal
content, simultaneous interactions for everyone, and more responsive feedback and assessment
systems” (Kalantis & Cope, 2015), bringing within ample opportunities for a corresponding ‘new
learning’.”
The concept of ubiquitous learning has gradually emerged over the years to become one of
the critical terms of the 21st-century education. It indicates an extension of previous learning
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

308

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

paradigms (traditional learning and e-learning), and represents a new approach to learning with a
new delivery model for activities that transcend the physical confines of the classroom via the use
of ubiquitous computing devices. In that sense, ubiquity sketches the opportunity for learning to
take place everywhere and heralds higher chances for more varied, inspiring, and learner-centered
experiences. One major methodological challenge for instructors, then, is to fully harness these
technologies to engage learners not only as informants but also as creators of the information used
to study their learning styles. According to Stanly (2013)
The proliferation of hand-held devices, such as mobile phones, digital cameras, tablets,
mp3 players and voice recorders, has led to what, for some teachers, is sometimes a
bewildering choice of potential activities and resources.The use of mobile devices is
expected to lead to language learning becoming more informal and personal (...). This
revolution in mobile learning is happening both inside and outside the classroom. (p.3)
As such, these networked digital devices brought with them the promise of exciting new venues
for language learners. They are seen to involve them in more interactive learning scenarios that
have significant potential to change language-learning practices in and outside the classroom.
Pedagogy 2.0
In the landscape of these technologies, the internet has evolved from a source of information,
within web 1.0, into “a network of virtual spaces built on the dynamics of social communities”
(Sturn, Kennel, Mcbride, & Kelly, 2009, p. 370), bringing within new pedagogical openings that
magnified their effect in English as a Foreign Language (EFL) settings. This new generation of
the World Wide Web has come to be known as web 2.0, interchangeably named social web;
embracing interactive, social and collaborative features that can fuel new types of learning
experiences through new task types. These significantly new social affordances have opened new
interactive web spaces for learners, where user-generated content, peer dialogue, and coconstruction of knowledge are key components of a newly emerging learning paradigm. Under
which, the learner is at the foreground, and acts as a creator rather than just a receiver while the
teacher steps into the background and fulfills his role as guide, coach, and facilitator. Within this
scope, Conole (2007) states that three fundamental shifts in technology-enhanced learning have
emerged because of the web 2.0 technological revolution. These include:
•
•
•

A change from a focus on content to communication
A change from a passive to a more interactive engagement of students in the educational
process
A change from a focus on individual learners to more socially-situated learning

This noticeable swing of the pendulum in English Language Teaching (ELT) methodology
learning has given shape for a new networked, collaborative and interactive method of learning
known as ‘Pedagogy 2.0’. The concept of Pedagogy 2.0 signifies a distinct step-change in language
learning methodology, from teacher-centered didactic pedagogy, where learners are consumers of
content created for them, to a more learner-centered one that encourages learner’s voice and
production ensured by technology. In addition to learner’s empowerment, interactivity, and
collaboration; web 2.0 serves as an open environment for learners to explore and practice their
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

309

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

skills, an inventory of a wide array of multimodal content originating from a variety of authentic
resources, and a means for more responsive assessment and feedback systems. Podcasting and
vodcasting tools allow learners to move beyond handwriting and will enable them to represent
their meanings independently and simultaneously in different modes through creating their audio
or video productions at no cost. Blogs, Facebook, and Youtube sites have opened classroom walls
and served as platforms where learners can display their works to the outside world, thus creating
small learning communities. As such, language learning becomes fun and incredibly motivating.
In this vein, web 2.0 technologies inherently echo core aspects of learner-centered
approaches that are more in line with recent social constructivist theorizing and learners’ need to
create meaning; deeply rooted in the socio-cultural theory. With the social constructivist
perspective, social interaction has become the first and most significant contributor to learning,
and learning is a process of interpretation and meaning-making. On par with, Sturn et al. (2009,
p.371) see “earning as a social dialectic process of meaning” that moves the locus of knowledge
from the teacher to the learner and decentralizes the learning and teaching concepts; reshaping the
teacher, the learner, and the materials in light of these emerging web technologies.
The Material
As the Internet makes its way into the hands of teachers, the daunting task of providing
comprehensible input to their learners has become more comfortable. It has produced a myriad of
authentic materials, and tremendous search capabilities that allow instant access to up-to-theminute information, on a variety of topics; from which they can select those most appropriate to
fuel classroom discussions when exposing their learners to real-life tasks. It is also useful for those
willing to mount their pedagogical material online both as a support for its creation and a means
for content preparation.
This bounteous harvest of materials, that the internet provides, assists in the development
of authentic material (both computer-based or not) since the actual use of the language and the
correlation of different types of resources that echo those learners apply in everyday life are the
basis of the selection of content. According to Bell (2005), cultural richness and reflection of reallife complexities, associated with authentic materials, seem to be undermining any potential demotivating backwash effects. Most said, online materials are culturally more abundant, have the
potential to echo real-life complexities and, hence, they are more productive, understandable,
meaningful, and more attractive to learners compared to conventional content. Yet, with this
plethora of material on the net, the problem seems to be one of selection of appropriate materials,
to weed out those poor in quality and linguistically inappropriate, thereby “allow a more thorough
integration of language, content and culture than ever before and provide students with
unprecedented opportunities for autonomous learning” (Warschauer & Meskill, 2000, p.13).
In addition to the primordial role of internet technology as resource retrieval, multimodality
and non-linear structure of information have brought interactivity and dynamism to the materials
as well as to the teaching/learning environment. The old linear, static nature of materials has been
replaced by hypermedia; different modes of representation (aural, written, visual, audio, and
dataset) juxtaposed together in digital media, offering new types of activities and more learner
engagement. Accordingly, web 2.0, allows learning content, aggregated from different sources
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

310

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

using various tools, to be presented non-linearly in a text, graphical, audio, and video formats, in
one place, on a digital device. This non-linearity will breathe new life into the most static material
and increase comprehensibility through learner control, and multimedia annotations.
Along with this, the interactive, social, and collaborative features of web 2.0 technologies
are seen to be also inflicting their full impact on the ideas, topics and experiences that can be
explored using digital technologies, and, hence, promoting new activity types and tasks hardly
realised using other materials (Reinders & White, 2010). Multimedia annotations, video tutorials,
communication, and assessment tools can increase the array of learning scenarios, in which
learners engage. They offer open realistic contexts, not confined to classrooms, to generate and
develop suitable activities/tasks that create opportunities to work smoothly across boundaries with
others with different cultures, values, and interests. A case in point is telecollaboration tasks
designed and channeled through synchronous web 2.0 communication technologies that were
shown to mitigate attrition rates of students, contribute to students feeling a sense of communal
belonging and engagement that result in intercultural exchanges and understanding unattainable
with traditional methods. Moreover, these attributes include a novelty of features, which allow
students to have a go with experimenting with the language in new and original ways that reflect
their real-life needs. In light of this, experience provides the basis for activities, readiness to learn
is ensured via topics most relevant to learner’s job or personal life, and learning is problem-based
rather than content-oriented. Many of these tasks can culminate with student-developed output
based on the objectives of the lesson and, or the activity at hand.
The social participatory nature of web 2.0 has initiated an ‘authoring revolution’ that allows
teachers and learners alike become content creators, thereby subverting the vertical top-down
development of materials and opening out increased opportunities for the bottom-up and horizontal
development frameworks. To this end, “ownership, autonomy, and contextualization will be core
features of materials and materials-rich pedagogies” (Banegas, 2013, p. 12). This can enhance the
quality of materials development and opens up new avenues of formative feedback to instructors
and fertile environments for student’s self-directed learning processes and strategy use, where the
locus of knowledge creation, distribution, and discussion became a shared commodity between the
instructor and students that can take place inside and outside the classroom. Accordingly,
ubiquitous learning, with varying degrees of constraints (e.g., access to the internet), represents a
new dimension of learning promoted by and through materials and tasks.
The Teacher
Above, we have already discussed the change in the traditional classroom hierarchy. As the
learners gained more voice and responsibility, the lines that once demarcate traditional student/
teacher roles blurred, subverting the supremacy of the teacher as the primary fountain of
knowledge. The result of such a change is a more balanced relationship, where students are no
longer empty vessels to be filled with knowledge but rather active producers of content. The
instructor then moves away from the classroom’s limelight, leaving the center-stage for the new
protagonist, ‘the learner.’
This shift from the teacher-centered classroom to the learner-centered one has its bearing
on the teachers’ role. Within this paradigm shift of the process of learning, they act as guides,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

311

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

facilitators, negotiators of content and operation, and encouragers of learner self-expression and
autonomy. Behind this role change, looms the broader issue of technology integration and teacher
responsibility. Sawhill (2008, last para) claims that “our emerging role as teachers and
technologists in the 21st century is to prepare ourselves, our colleagues, our schools and our
classrooms for the linguistic and cultural realities of the teaching in a world where everyone and
everything is connected, or ‘intertwined’.” We suspect technology on its own is not a magic
wound, nor marvelous are its affordances for themselves. Students, more often than not, get excited
with the wow and apprehension surrounding new technologies at the expense of their learning,
which leads to a bleak effect on their learning and development. To overcome this gap between
the promising potential of these technologies and learners’ actual practice, teachers need to help
them make the most out of using them; the issue is how to promote and support this use. For this
end, the teacher is in front of the additional roles of designer, integrator, organizer, and coordinator
within this learner-centered environment.
As a designer, the instructor has to articulate a plan for technology uptake that aligns learner
characteristics, content, pedagogy, and technology to develop tasks and activities for engaging in
this participatory digital landscape, where students are a real part of a relevant community of users.
Per se, any effective use of technology is mainly dependent on the methodological approach
underpinning its application (Qashoa, 2013). For instance, in an intercultural goal-oriented
telecollaboration exchange task, the teacher has to set goals, objectives, decide on the contact tool
(e.g., video conferencing via Skype), and make contact with possible partner classes through online
exchange networks. This way, benefit, and relevant engagement are only possible if he provides
structure for most web 2.0-supported initiatives, activities, and tasks.
Despite the evident promising mix of web 2.0 affordances, their integration is another kettle
of fish. Teachers should have a clear vision for infiltrating web 2.0 tools-based activities and tasks
into their curriculum, to ensure an agile integration approach, where they are an integral part of
classroom practices and a severe part of the learning process. As Joseph Shed (Education
Exchange, 2004) puts it “the point is not to show that you can dazzle people with lots of digital
wizardries. It is to show that you can use technology in thoughtful, well-planned ways to promote
more effective learning” (p.3 ). Again, the teacher is called to act as ‘expert’ who provides explicit
guidance for learners to fully harness the benefits of the unlimited panorama of linguistics and
cultural information in developing their communication skills, through supporting their learning
processes, and increasing language learning opportunities in and outside the classroom. Therefore,
the payoff of enriching classroom materials with Computer Assisted Language Learning (CALL)
materials (online dictionaries, videos, podcasts, etc.), or integrating interaction exchange sessions
(e.g., emails, Skype, video conferencing) in ELT classes, in terms of academic achievements,
interest, motivation, and educational transforming results, is excellent.
In truth, successful integration of web 2.0 activities is dependent on several interconnected
factors, the most important of which are teachers’ readiness and willingness to take risks. This still
requires a substantial investment of time and effort. Some hindrances may emerge along the way,
and cause frustration and undesirable results, such as hardware and software playing up,
dependence on computer lab schedules, etc. In the case of telecollaboration, obstacles range from
time constraints if the two classes are from different time zones, student absences, demotivation,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

312

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

etc. To surmount this, teachers need to set smooth well-planned steps to guarantee gradual progress
from extension activities/tasks directly linked to classroom immediate needs and practices towards
more ambitious future actions.
All too often, within the decentralization of authority in the learner-centered classroom, the
univocal transmission of knowledge has been replaced by recursive participation that values
learners’ voice and own operations. Even so, this does not signify a passive role for teachers. On
the contrary, digitization (including the internet) has further burdened teachers with new pedagogic
tasks such as planning, coordinating, improving learning strategies, and leveraging students’
metalinguistic awareness of CALL genres (Warschauer, 1996). For this end, this often entails
reconsidering teaching practices and may even call for training to cultivate the necessary skills to
gear up with technological advances, to cater to the various changing needs of their learners.
The Learner
Continuing to examine the impact of web 2.0 technologies and the changed context of English
language learning, one can notice a significant role change for learners; surpassing their ability to
consume information to creating it. This fact necessitates a decentralization of the
teaching/learning concepts, providing higher chances for increased bottom-up control and
horizontal learning contexts, where the learner is a negotiator of learning content and modes of
learning, more responsible of his studies, and has the opportunity to develop his learning strategies
and study skills. This way, the more students do for themselves, the more they will learn.
One significant advantage that web 2.0 tools have blessed English as a foreign language
(EFL) learners with is time, as they provide extra opportunities to engage in meaningful language
learning tasks- all after the school has closed down for the day. Learners utilize these tools in
diverse contexts. An example of such uses include blogging that permits the learners to develop,
create, and share their work online wherever they are, at any time; they discuss, negotiate meaning,
and get feedback from a worldwide audience all while ‘just browsing the net.’ This way, they
become more vigorous, more creative, and more autonomous.
The increased importance of online communication through these collaborative dialogical
platforms is also contributing to new, safer and anonymous English practice spaces. Through
which, reticent, shy, and uncomfortable students in ‘on the spot’ class discussions can develop
self-confidence in their English communication abilities, thus maximizing their participation and
engagement rates. Learners’ inhibition decreases especially when they are in control of their
learning once given a chance to produce their works in a controlled setting (Ramirez, 2010). The
setting up of a video or audio file will allow learners to practice and polish their work until they
are satisfied with the final product. They also provide a means of getting feedback in an error
forgiving environment wherein students express a keenness to practice the language and
collaborate with other peers in cyberspaces.
By virtue of its user-centric nature and focus upon active engagement of learners, web 2.0
supports the development of their problem-solving skills since they are required not just to find
information but to judge its efficacy as well. Besides, its open features that focus on the user and
collaborative content generation, through peer review and communal feedback, has increased
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

313

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

creativity and led to the evolution of collective intelligence within learning groups (Jimoyiannis
op.cit, Ramirez, op.cit); intensifying the legacy processes of knowledge production. There is, thus,
a strong emphasis on the traces of knowledge production processes which are as important as the
final product. For instance, the setting up of a wiki will allow learners to look for appropriate
sources, get peer feedback during the making, and produce collaboratively created works.
One pivotal pedagogical advantage that is often underestimated is that social networks are
fun! A considerable base of research espouses the positive link between technology and learners’
motivation, learning styles, and, or improvement in specific skill areas. It has been found that web
2.0 tools use in the classroom increases learners’ motivation (Goodwin-Jones, 2005), raises their
interest (Stanley, 2006), and caters for multiple learning styles since the material is presented in
different formats (text, graphical, audio, and video); all at the same time on the same digital device.
Related to this, Svedkauskaite, Reza-Hernandez, & Clifford (2003, “Frameworks for Successful
LEP Learners” section) have also found that:
Technology has evolved from its support function to play a role in initiating learning
processes. It can provide a flexible learning environment where students can explore
and be engaged.Hypermedia, for example, individually addresses levels of fluency,
content knowledge, student motivation, and interest, allowing the inclusion of LEP
[limited English proficient] students, who can thus monitor their comprehension,
language production, and behavior.( para 4)
Additionally, the projected inherent features of web 2.0 have a profound impact on students’
cultural awareness. Mostly because of the increased and easy contact with their worldwide online
partners, there will be an open window-channel to discuss and reflect on their own as well as
others’ cultures. Within these intercultural exchanges, students will have the chance to look at how
others look at their culture, can themselves expand and refine their views of others’ cultures, and
reflect on and criticize some aspects of these cultures. The juxtaposition of these different views
illustrates how students’ concepts and their cultural and intercultural awareness are evolving and
will change in the future.
All in all, Web 2.0 ubiquity, its various services, and its penetrating in the social, economic,
and cultural life have a noticeable observable impact on today’s learners and their needs. Seeing
that they hold great potential to benefit language learning/teaching through multiple means, the
demand to cultivate these benefits has increased proportionately,which implies a fresh look at
‘what students learn,’ ‘how they learn,’ and ‘where and with whom they learn.’
Towards a Ubiquitous Learning Experience
As has been discussed, digitization (including web 2.0) provide a ripe context for the emergence
of experience as an essential factor in active knowledge-making. It endows language learners with
new challenges and opportunities to tackle a wide range of human experience when used as a tool
for inquiry, communication, and construction. This way, they facilitate a pedagogical movement
away from vicarious experiences presented through old drill and practice media and materials;
allowing them to learn by doing things themselves. Within this scope, non-linearity of information,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

314

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

active knowledge creation, negotiation of content, and what to explore, all contribute to developing
more flexible thinking skills among learners.
In this vein, experience (including mistakes) can provide the basis for most learning
activities/tasks, and what we really need to do, as teachers, is to expand our vision of the learning
process “from what technology can do for the student to what the student can do with technology”
(Godwin- Jones 1999, p. 49). Hence, teachers should be actively involved in empowering students
in that direction through a clear vision of the possible extramural activities that they can undertake
along with ways to assist and assess the learning that could evolve out of this endeavor by the
learners. Like so, with well-planned learning tasks, we can help ensure that any technological
uptake can be met hassle-free. Surely the primary intention is not to limit students’ web 2.0 use,
but rather to leverage this use from a simple technological asset to become a learning platform to
accelerate language acquisition.
Learning by experience is seen as one of the most fundamental means of learning. It
approaches learners as active knowledge constructors who link action, reflection, and transfer of
knowledge and experience. To use Kolb’s (1984, p. 41) words “[learning ] is the process whereby
knowledge is created through the transformation of experience. Knowledge results from the
combination of grasping and transforming experience” and equally important from the reflective
practice (individual and/ or collective) of that process. Following this line of thought, Silberman
(2007) advocates that experiential learning refers to:
(a)The involvement of learners in concrete activities that enable them to experience
what they are learning about and (b) the opportunity to reflect on those activities.
Experiential learning can be based on both real work/life experiences (e.g., working
on a current project) and structured experiences that stimulate or approximate real
work/life.(p.7)
This way, it is a learner-centered approach driven by action, reflection, and transfer of knowledge
and experience.
It has been pointed out earlier in this paper that digitization (including the internet) provide
experiential tools combined with a web 2.0 ubiquitous setting that support more interaction,
engagement, knowledge creation and participation among EFL learners. Accordingly, web 2.0
ubiquitous learning tasks can improve experiential learning scenarios, in which learners may take
part . This is a tremendous asset for EFL acquisition as it would encourage ubiquitous knowledge
building under the design of web 2.0 interactive, collaborative tasks that are more often supported
by the experiential tools and materials that digitization affords.
Towards achieving a ubiquitous learning experience for learners, some of factors are evident:
• The importance of demonstrating the added value of Web 2.0 as a learning platform rather
than a tool to support learning
• The need to understand and take account of the experiential tools that web 2.0 provides
• The complexity of the relationship between pedagogical changes and their impact on
teacher’s practice
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

315

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

•

Khenioui

Recognition that the characteristics of web 2.0 tools align well with the perceived wisdom
of “good pedagogy” (inquiry-based learning, project-based learning, ubiquitous learning,
dialogic and collaborative learning, constructivism and active engagement), and, hence,
experience and ubiquity need to be the cornerstone of any design perspectives.

Figure 1 outlines a framework for web 2.0 integration, which captures these factors. It
demonstrates how effective its implementation can only be achieved if three interrelated
aspects; namely design, pedagogy, and practice, are considered in conjunction. Each element
informs the other two, and vice versa. So, pedagogy 2.0 principles and opportunities should be
used as guidance to inform design and influence practice. Practice (be it student- or teacher
directed along with their perspectives, changing roles, and responsibilities should also inform
design, but also help to guide future pedagogical considerations (both inside and outside the
classroom). Design also has its bearing on both pedagogy and practice.

pedagogy 2.0
Interactio
n

Learner Directed
Learning

Ubiquitous
Learning
Experience

Activity/
Task

Design

practice

Figure 1. Conceptualising a ubiquitous learning experience
In summary, the following crucial features underpin the extramural, ubiquitous learning
experiences resulting from the proposed framework:
Learner validity: it makes use of activities and tools that learners usually employ in their
everyday lives, which reflects their needs and interests, and involves them in using
technologies in ways that reflect their out-of-class practices.
Collaborative and autonomous learning: it allows students to develop collaborative skills
through collaborative feedback and content generation leading to collective intelligence. It also
helps in the development of the skills needed for autonomous learning by guiding them to
recognize their role in managing their learning.
Multimodality: students have the chance to not only make use of authentic multimodal input
but also creating it.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

316

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

Reflection: Reflecting on their learning process lets students identify the tasks and tools that
they prefer when learning, which has a direct impact on their motivation and, hence, success.
Ubiquitous knowledge building: the extramural activities, in which students engage, allow
for flexibility and convenience of learning so that learners have control over their place, mode,
and manner of learning.

Conclusion
The purpose of this paper was to drive attention to the impact of web 2.0 technologies on
materials and task design and the teaching/learning process. It is designed to initiate discussion
rather than be the final word in it. The paper tries to reveal the way web 2.0 is crucial and how
it affects teachers, learners, and materials. It argues that teachers can transform their attributes
into practical ubiquitous learning experiences for learners when used as an effective learning
space to be exploited in instructional practices. To this end, we have presented a framework
aiming to support learner’s web 2.0 experience and teachers’ control and guidance over outof-classroom practices. The paper ends with three main conclusions. First, it is important to
look at web 2.0 as an open, ubiquitous learning platform that goes well beyond the simple use
of technology as an instructional asset. It is imperative for teachers to support learners’
initiatives with web 2.0 through promoting transformational interactive EFL learning
environments that comprise reflection, ubiquitous knowledge building and experiential tools
(materials) so that students engage in active learning scenarios. Finally, to realise the former
two, it is important to look beyond the classroom itself.
About the Author:
Mrs. Nadjat KHENIOUI (Magister, 2012) is a full time assistant lecturer at Algiers University
3 and Ph.D. candidate in Applied Linguistics and Language Teaching at Constantine
University 1. Her research interests include Didactics, CALL, materials design and evaluation,
ESP and EST. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-3458-4062
References
Banegos, D.L. (2013). Teacher, What Page Today? A look at materials development. In A.
Leceta & R.I Cuneo (Eds.). V Jornads en Actualizacion de la Ensenaza Delinglés (pp.
6-13). San Juan : Universidad Nacional de San Juan.
Bell, F. (2005). Comprehension Aids, Internet Technologies and the Reading of Authentic
Materials by Adult Second Language Learners. Ph.D. Dissertation. Department of
Modern Language and Linguistics, Florida State University.
Conole, G. (2007). Describing Learning Activities: Rethinking pedagogy for a digital age.
Designing and Delivering E-learning 81-91
Education Exchange, (Fall 2004). Incorporating Technology in the Classroom. A publication
of the school
of the school of education, Syracuse University
Glassman, M. & Kang, M.J. (2010). Pragmatism, Connectionism and the Internet: A mind’s
perfect storm.
Computers in Human Behaviour (26) 1412- 1418
Godwin-Jones, R. (1999). Web Course Design and Creation for Language Learning. CALICO
Journal 17(1) 43-58
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

317

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Special Issue on CALL Number 5. July 2019
EFL Teachers as Designers of Ubiquitous Learning Experiences

Khenioui

Godwin-Jones, R. (2005). Emerging Technologies: Skype and Podcasting: Disruptive
technologies for language learning. Language Learning and Technology 9(3) 9-12
Jimoyannis, A., Tsiotakis, P., Roussinos, D. & Siorenta, A. (2013). Preparing Teachers to
Integrate Web 2.0 in School Practice: Toward a framework for pedagogy 2.0.
Australasian Journal of Educational Technology 29/2: 248- 267
Kalantzis, M. & Cope, B. (2015). Learning and New Media. In Scott, D; & Hargreaves (ed.).
The Sage Handbook of Learning. London: SAGE
Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential Learning: Experience as the Source of Learning and
Development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mcloughlin, C. & Lee, M.J.W. (2010). Personalized and Self-regulated Learning in the Web
2.0 era: International exemplars of innovative pedagogy using social software.
Australian Journal of Education Technology 26/1: 28-43
Quarshoa, S.H. (2013). The Role of Internet Technology in EFL Syllabus Design. Asian
Journal of Education and E-Learning ¼: 184-198
Ramirez, L.L. (2010). Empower English Language Learners with Tools from the Web. Crowin
Reinders, H. & White, C. (2010). The theory and Practice of Technology in Materials
Development and Task Design. In N. Harwood (ed.). English Language Teaching
Materials: Theory and practice ( 58-80). Cambridge: CUP
Sawhill, B. (2008). The Changing Role of the Language Teacher/Technologist. The IALLT
Journal, 40/1.
Silberman, (2007). The Handbook of Experiential Learning. San Francisco: John Wiley &
Sons Inc
Stanley, G. (2006). Podcasting: Audio on the Internet comes of age. TESL-EJ 9/4
Stanley, G. (2013). Language Learning with Technology: Ideas for Integrating technology in
the classroom. Cambridge: CUP
Sturn, M., Kennel, T., McBride, R. & Kelly, M. (2009). The Pedagogical Implications of Web
2.0. In M, Thomas (ed.). Handbook of Research on Web 2.0 and Second Language
Learning (pp. 367-384). New York: Information Science Reference
Svedkauskaite, A., Reza-Hernande, L. & Clifford, M. (2003). Critical Issue: Using Technology
to Support limited-English-proficient (LEP) Students’ Learning Experiences. North
Central Regional Educational Laboratory. Available at: http://www.ncrel.org
Thorne, S. & Payne, J. (2005). Evolutionary Trajectories, Internet-mediated Expression, and
Language Education. CALICO 22/3: 371-397
Warschauer, M., Meskill, C. (2000). Technology and Second Language Learning. Available
at: http://www.gse.uci.edu/person.warschauer_m/tslt.html

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

318

