WASTE RECYCLING IN MALAYSIA: TRANSITION FROM DEVELOPING TO
DEVELOPED COUNTRY
Innocent A. Jereme
PhD Candidate, Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: innoviva2001@yahoo. com
Chamhuri Siwar
Emeritus Professor
Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: csiwar@ukm.my
Md. MahmudulAlam
PhD Student, Institute for Environment and Development (LESTARI)
National University of Malaysia (UKM), Malaysia
E-mail: rony000@gmail. com

Citation Reference:
Jereme, I.A., Alam, M.M. and Siwar, C. 2015. Waste Recycling in Malaysia:
Transition from Developing to Developed Country, Indian Journal of Education and
Information
Management.
Vol.
4
(1),
pp.
1-14.
(online)
http://ijeim.informaticspublishing.com/index.php/ijeim/article/viewFile/80238/62033

This is a pre-publication copy.
The published article is copyrighted by the publisher of the journal.

1

WASTE RECYCLING IN MALAYSIA: TRANSITION FROM DEVELOPING TO
DEVELOPED COUNTRY
ABSTRACT
The issue of sustainable waste management has become an important priority for
policymakers and other relevant stakeholders of Malaysia as the country prepares to project
itself as a developed nation. Despite several attempts by the government, such as enactment
of new laws and pursuing privatisation, Malaysia is still lagging behind significantly in
sustainable waste management practices, particularly in the area of recycling. Based on
studies conducted in the Selangor state of Malaysia, this paper attempts to analyse the current
waste management practices of Malaysia along with their problems and prospects, and
examine the steps taken by the government and other stakeholders for attaining sustaining
waste management practices. The paper will help the policy makers, waste management
strategists, local administrators and researchers in the field to formulate sustainable policies
and identify further areas of study in the relevant field.
Keywords: Waste management, recycling, solid waste, informal sector

1. INTRODUCTION
The issue of waste disposal management has recently gained widespread attention in virtually
all states of Malaysia. With the communities facing rapidly increasing disposal costs, the
opinion leaders denouncing the amount of materials being thrown away as environmentally
and ethically unsound, the lawmakers struggling for sustainable solutions – pressure is
mounting on manufactures and packagers of consumer goods to minimise the amount of
refuse. Amidst these changing circumstances, some laws have recently been passed making
waste management a national issue in Malaysia and many others have similar laws on their
agenda (Yahaya 2007a).
Hand in hand with the high rate of economic growth in the past few decades, the
population of Malaysia have grown from 21,793293 in 2000 to 28,339273 in 2010/11.
Considering these economic and population growths together, Malaysia is generating more
wastes now in comparison to any previous point of time in history. It is estimated that about
18,000 tons of wastes are generated in Malaysia per day and this figure is expected to
increase at the rate of 2% every year. Out of these, 75% of the wastes generated are collected
and disposed at dumpsites or landfills that are not sanitary. In Kuala Lumpur, only 5% of the
wastes generated in the city are recycled and the rest goes to landfills (Yassin 2006).
As of April 2007, there were 291 landfill sites in Malaysia to dump wastes, out of
which only ten were sanitary landfills; of these 291 sites, 112 were closed and the remaining
179 were still in operation. It is expected that solid waste generation in Malaysia will reach
30,000 tons per day in 2020 (Yahaya 2007a). A waste reduction study conducted by the
Local Government Authority indicates that food waste and other organic waste constitute
47% of the total wastes generated, followed by paper 15%, plastics 14%, and others
constitute the rest (Yassin 2006). In 2020, there is target to recycle 20% of the total wastes
generated, 15% for intermediate processing and the remaining 65% to be deposited at various
landfill sites. Besides, the existing legislations on waste management were reviewed to
2

improve solid waste management by privatizing it and to increase recycling awareness in the
country (MHLG 2003).
This alarming situation in waste disposal management prompted the Malaysian
Government to launch the 6th Malaysia Plan (MP) for 1991-1995, with an emphasis on
diversifying the sources of growth of the wastes. The 7th Malaysia Plan (MP) for 1996-2000
also focused on the quality of life and the environment. As the population continued to grow
and available lands were becoming scarce for acquiring landfill sites due to opposition by
residents and community leaders, in the 8th Malaysia Plan (MP) for 2001-2005, a National
Recycling Program was re-launched with these objectives as follows:
a. Inculcate the habit of recycling among the population;
b. Reduce operational cost of solid waste management;
c. Minimize the volumes of waste disposal by landfills;
d. Reduce utilization of raw materials; and
e. Improve awareness and cooperation among stakeholders (MHLG 2003).
Under the 9th-10th Malaysia Plans and with the implementation of the Solid Waste
Management Bill, the recycling and disposal of solid waste will be privatised in order to
improve services, relinquish the financial burden and include the private sector. These
concessionaries are responsible for collection, storage, transportation, treatment and recycling
of all of the country‟s non-hazardous wastes (Market Watch 2011).
Recycling on the other hand means to compost and regenerate materials for original
purpose or for other purposes (Lewis and Hall 1990). Recycling should be seen therefore as
the means by which we seek to minimize the environmental impact of both raw material
production and waste disposal. The popular meaning of recycling in most developed
countries has come to the widespread collections and reuse of various items such as
newspapers and drinks bottles. They are collected and sorted out into common types so that
the raw materials from it could these items can be used again to create new products.
Therefore this study explores to understand the waste management in Malaysia and how it
linked with the transition from developing to developed country.
2. WASTE RECYCLING IN MALAYSIA
Malaysia started the privatization of waste management operation in 1994 (Budzik et al.
2002). Gradually waste collection and public space cleansing service are being taken over by
Alam Flora Sdn Bhd. To smooth the process, the consortia were instructed to take over the
solid waste management over an interim period. The full-flash privatization is still to be
determined by the government pending legislation based on the new National Waste Bill.
Until the privatization is fully implemented, most aspects of solid waste management will be
continued to be in the realm of Local Government.
Although the current large–scale privatization entails a more comprehensive transfer
of activities and function than the previous semi-privatization measures, the public sector
cannot pass all responsibilities onto the private sector. Since the waste management
privatization was initiated on national level, the Federal Government will be responsible for
ensuring that the consortia conform to the standards, and rules and legislation as required by
the Government. This is done via the Department of Local Government at the Ministry of
Housing and Local Government (MHLG) while the Department of Environment (DOE) its
responsibilities lie mainly in general pollution control and Environmental Impact Assessment
3

(EIA) of waste treatment facilities (Hassan 2002). The federal government has now taken
over management of solid waste with the creation of the National Solid waste Department
and the bill was signed into law this 2011.
The actual operationalization of the MHLG‟s responsibilities lie significantly with the
local authorities, who will remain central in terms of enforcing laws and regulations and
ensuring that private sector meets required standard and quality (MHLG 2003). As part of the
privatization process, the fees for the waste management services are now no longer the
responsibility of the local authorities but must be managed by the waste management
company. The particulars of this financial aspect of the waste services have not yet been
addressed, but as the fee is not planned to be included in the semi-annual assessment rates
imposed by the local authorities, a separate fee must be introduced. The introduction of such
a fee meets some political and public opposition in Malaysia (Hassan 2002). The fees have
not been settled till date between the private companies with the government as it has some
political undertone because the public don‟t want to pay for perceive unseen service.
The interim period status of the solid waste service provision has resulted in
uncertainty by both the concessionaires and the Local Authority‟s especially the wait for the
imminent National Waste Bill and the issues of service fees are creating some implications in
regards to further development and final realization of the privatization process. It can be
argued that these uncertainties pertain to a reluctance to invest in new resources and
equipment by various stakeholders has resulted in relative short-term planning.
2.1 Waste collection and transport
Waste collection in Selangor is managed by the Alam Flora Sdn, though they employ private
collection companies to deal with the actual waste collection. In the waste concession area of
Alam Flora Sdn Bhd, private waste contractors are responsible for more than 50% of the total
amount of waste collected. Community collection initiatives so called community self-help or
“gotongroyong” activities also have a role in collection activities. Collections times vary
from 2-3 times a week, and collection methods will also vary, common collection points e. g.
containers where household are required to bring their waste in front of the house for easy
collection. Door to door is another common collection method in Selangor especially for
individual houses and link houses (Karen et al. 2003).
2.2 Waste recycling in Malaysia
In Malaysia, there are three types of recyclables such as Paper, plastics and bottles, but very
little of the waste is recycled. In Kuala Lumpur for example, the current recycling rate is at 4.
5% of the waste generated. There is a plan to increase it to 16% by 2005 and 20% by 2020
(MHLG 2003), which is still valid till date.
A newspaper article published in The New Sunday Times, describes the Malaysia
attitude towards recycling as a Not-In-My-Backyard (NIMBY) syndrome when it comes to
issues of waste. People are also wary but still Malaysians only recycle less than 5% of all the
waste (New Sunday Times 2002). This opinion is supported by other sources that claim that
the waste consciousness in Malaysia is poor, and most people don‟t wish to take a more
personal endeavour in a matter mostly associated with dirt, filth and odours.

4

However true this statement may be, Malaysians have begun to recycle more as
Malaysia launched first official recycling program in the peninsular Malaysia at sometimes in
1993 and was initiated by the MHLG. The stated objectives of the national recycling program
was (i) to divert valuable resource in the waste stream from disposal and (ii) to help control
cost of managing waste (Karen et al. 2003). The recycling program of most Local
Government was envisioned as comprising of setting up of buy-back centres and the
placement of drop off containers for recyclables at strategic locations such as schools,
shopping malls, and so on. According to the report at the start of the national recycling
program, 23 Local Government of peninsular Malaysia had volunteered to become
participants of the program. But because of poor planning and lack of public participations
the number of participants of the program declined to only 10 Local Government in 1998,
many of the Local Government then chose not to continue with their recycling program.
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG) re-launched the recycling
programs in December 2000 to make a difference from the first failed launching of the
program. In this second launching of the recycling program, participants were chosen by the
MHLG, 29 Local Government of Peninsular Malaysia were chosen based on several criteria.
One of these criteria was the volume of waste generated by the municipalities. MHLG
provided every participant with special drop-of containers for recyclables and these
containers must be placed at strategic locations of the municipalities.
To encourage public participation in this second recycling program, the MHLG
engaged the services of one of the local public relation company in the city to carry out
productions of pamphlets, posters and billboards, and commercial advertisement, and even
recycling song to spice up the occasion. Also in addition to this, many of the major cities in
Malaysia several buy-back centres established for easy deposition of recycling materials.
Another big difference in this second national program was the MHLG involved
several companies that were known to be major producers of recyclable materials to
participate in the recycling program. It initially involved only 23 municipalities when the
program was first launched but later evolved up to 145 municipalities across the country. The
main objectives are to reduce the costs of solid waste management/operation as well as to
conserve resources.
Although recycling activities could be said to be on the rise, the materials recycling
industry in Malaysia is demanding much larger quantities of recyclables. For example,
Malaysia News Print Industries Sdn Bhd was forced to import 50% of its materials, and
Kuala Lumpur Glass Manufacturing Sdn Bhd also imported 20% of their materials (New
Sunday Times 2002). This data is still same as the material recycling rate is still 5% till now,
and raw material is not enough for these local companies.
2.3 Waste treatment
In Malaysia waste treatment and disposal facilities for waste in general is still lacking behind.
The few incinerators that do exist do not have the capacity to deal with the exiting amount of
waste and direct dumping are therefore the most applied method to dispose waste. No waste
to energy facilities exists in Malaysia; although composting alternatives are being studied but
no concrete activities have been undertaken (CAP 2001). Plans are underway to construct
several new incineration plants in Malaysia; public opposition plays a large role in the

5

approval of incineration site. One incineration is located in Southern Kuala Lumpur with a
capacity of 1. 500 tons/day, taking about 50% of Kuala Lumpur‟s daily waste generations.
In 1990 there were about 230 Landfills in Malaysia with an average of 15 hectares
each. More than 80% of the landfills have an estimated remaining lifetime of two years.
Almost all landfills in Malaysia are developed and operated on ad-hoc basis and the
management and operation are generally poor as a result of this. About 60% are open dumps
and do not have adequate facilities such as weighing bright, fence and cover materials.
Furthermore, no site suitability studies have been undertaken and there is a lack of pollution
control and measuring in particular for leachate and gas emissions (Karen et al. 2003).
3. WASTE RECYCLING IN DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Developing countries in Asia are still backward on the issues of waste recycling as there is
not much awareness of waste recycling and also ineffective policies. But in many developing
countries of Asia, municipal solid wastes contain around 50% organic matters and 30%
recyclable materials on an average, leading to a potential of recycling 80% of the total wastes
(Habitat 1994a). In comparison to industrialised nations, these wastes are tense and are
potentially composed of high moisture contents because of their origins in organic materials
(Habitat 1994b). The per capita waste generation rate in developing countries are lower than
their industrialised counterparts because of the comparative lower level of prosperity and
consumption, and widespread recovery and reuse of materials before and during collection
(Jindal 1998). A growth in urban population and an increase in consumption level result in
increased waste generation as well, while industrialisation and modernisation result in a
change in the waste compositions as materials such as plastic bags replace traditional banana
leaves for packaging. Uncontrolled dumping is widespread in many Asian countries because
of rapid urbanisation on one hand and shortage of landfill sites for a lack of funding and
resources on the other (Jindal 1998). Separation of household wastes is unpopular in
developing countries because of the people‟s perception of considering handling of wastes as
something being „below an accepted level of social dignity‟ (Habitat 1994b).
The absence of separation of solid wastes at source increase inefficiency in the
recycling cycle and as a consequence the waste materials become contaminated and dispersed
(Jindal 1998). In comparison to wastes picked out of mixed waste streams, recycling of
wastes through separation at source provide materials that are of better quality (Furedy 1997).
However, separation at source is a relatively new theme in the study on waste pickers. In
order to reduce the waste disposal cost, burden on landfills and impacts on environment, the
4Rs of waste management, namely waste reduction, reuse, recycle and recovery have been
introduced and promoted.
Among many benefits, the environmental benefits of these 4Rs include a reduction of
greenhouse gases, a reduction of air, water and land pollution, preservation of water, energy
and other resources, and a reduction of quantity of wastes requiring disposal. Recycling
industries in the major cities of Asia already possess the technological skills and equipments
to process for recycling most kinds of wastes (Habitat 1994b). However, a significant
quantity of solid wastes still remain for disposal in these countries, indicating that there exists
a potential to recycle a larger quantity of wastes (Jindal 1994). A waste management study
conducted in Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur, Bangkok, Manila and Karachi indicate that the average
waste recycling rate for these cities is 7.5% against an estimated potential of 70-80% (Habitat
1994a).
6

The feasibility of full scale recycling operations there depends of local circumstances
as well as organisational and economic considerations (Jindal1998). The success story of
hundreds of reprocessing enterprises in the developing nations demonstrates the feasibility of
recycling ventures (Ladinois and Klundert 1995). However, virtually all of the opportunities
for easy and profitable recovery have already been exploited (Jindal 1998). Establishing
recycling as a viable venture is a challenging task because of the collection, transportation,
sorting, cleaning and processing costs required to upgrade the recycled material quality
(Jindal et al. 1997).
Waste management planners who are interested to increase the possibility of waste
recovery must address the challenges associated with the mixed wastes, which constitute
most of the solid wastes that are disposed off without any recovery (Janeen 2004). Waste is
viewed as a valuable resource when an economic incentive is associated with it. However, an
economic incentive to recover materials exist when the materials are pre-separated
beforehand, concentrated and comparatively uncontaminated, such as in the industrial sector
where the materials contain a high inherent value and the processing cost is also relatively
low (Janeen 2004). Provided that the investment requirements are reasonably low, waste
materials are fairly cheap and the production process is relatively reliable and technologically
not challenging, local small processing industries can make reasonable amounts of profit
(Lardinouis and Van de Klundert 1995).
3.1 Informal sectors and waste recycling
The division of waste collectors and dealers into “formal” and “informal” sectors have been
elaborated in details in various academic literatures, predominantly with reference to housing
and employment. The “formal” sector refers to public or private sector corporations and
registered businesses with capital investment, technological equipments and an organised
labour force governed by labour laws. The “informal” sector, on the other hand, refers to
unregistered and unregulated activities of waste collection and processing by individuals or
small-scale family enterprises with low capital investment, local materials and labour
intensive ways of work (Furedy 1989).
In most cities of the developing countries of Asia, the informal sector predominantly
manages the resource recovery (Jindal 1998). These labour intensive waste recycling
activities help generate employment and are cheaper to operate than their western
counterparts (Janeen 2004). The informal sector is commonplace in these countries not
because of ecological concerns, but as a means of alleviating poverty and improving the
economic livelihood of people (Janeen 2004). Materials of value are recovered at different
stages of the waste management cycle, such as storage, collection, transfer and disposal.
Although it may apparently seem casual, the waste recovery activities by the informal sector
can be highly organised (Jindal 1998). Estimates from Indonesian cities alone show that the
waste pickers reduce refuse quantities by a third (Janeen 2004).
It is not known the number of people that participate in informal recycling and the
quantity of waste they reduce in the Selangor yet, but few numbers of people are engaged in
the informal sector. Malaysia could be seen collecting recyclable waste at bus stop, illegal
dumping sites, etc. The reason for the few numbers are not farfetched, the high economic
growth witnessed in the country over a decade and people‟s attitude towards waste pickers as
people with no education and mental derailed and thus look down on them. Also, a high level
7

of specialisation in materials selected for recovery might be found in addition to a high level
of creativity involved with home based recycling activities (Furedy 1998). Roaming waste
buyers travel door to door to purchase household waste items. The waste pickers recover
materials of value along the streets at transfer stations and dump sites. Municipal waste
collectors also salvage materials of value in some countries during the collection (Jindal
1998). These materials are first sold to the waste dealers, who in turn sell them to various
wholesalers and manufacturers (Janeen 2004).
Waste pickers in many developing countries of Asia do not use any safety equipment,
such as facemasks, earplugs, gloves and proper footwear, which means they should be
provided with health and safety related education (Furedy 1998). The lack of necessary
precautionary measures, unsafe practices, noise, high temperature, polluted atmosphere –
such as dust and hazardous chemicals –, contaminated wastes and long working hours pose
health hazards to the waste pickers (Lardinois and Klunder 1995). Professional standards and
health and labour regulations are in need of further improvements, but even when regulations
exist, some of the informal recycling activities do not comply with them (Lardinois and
Klunder 1995). In general, lack of proper enforcement of legislations is a common problem in
most of the developing countries of Asia. There is need to educate them on the implications
of sorting waste without precautionary measures (Jindal 1998).
3.2 Economy of waste recycling
The economic importance of waste recycling cannot be over emphasized, but it can play a
crucial role in a community where it is understood and also well implemented. Recycling of
wastes can reduce the waste disposal cost for local authorities by extending the lifecycle of
landfills, reducing the need to invest in vehicles and transportation equipments, reducing
vehicle operations and maintenance cost, and reducing fuel consumption for transportation of
wastes (Habitat 1994a). Businesses are provided with low-cost raw materials. In several
countries businesses, particularly steel, paper and glass industries depend on recyclable
materials (Jindal et al. 1997). The reliance on recycled materials cuts the need of importing
raw materials.
The local circumstances affect the attractiveness of recycling for neighbouring
entrepreneurs. The costs for using recycled raw materials can be higher than virgin materials
if the later are available in a concentrated area and consist of a more homogenous
composition (Janeen 2004). It is easy to fins markets for readily accessible and high quality
waste materials. Mixed contaminated and low-value waste materials offer less potentials for
recovery and reprocessing, a recycling rate of 7.5 per cent contributes to annual cost
reduction of more than US$ 1 million in each city; therefore, the potential saving of cost from
recycling has improved the recycling rate even greater (Habitat 1994a).
An average of US$ 1 million is spent annually in Bangkok, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur,
Karachi and Manila for collection and disposal of wastes in each of these cities (Habitat
1994). The stages of collection and transportation are usually the most expensive components
of the overall system (Janeen 2004). Although the municipal authorities spend 30 to 50 per
cent of their total operating budget on solid waste management, they are usually able to
collect only 60 to 70 per cent of the solid wastes in their respective cities (Habitat 1994a). It
has been estimated that approximately 1 per cent of the urban population are involved in the
waste recycling sector, but if it reaches its full potentials it is believed that this sector can
employ up to 2 to 3 per cent of the urban population (Habitat 1994b).
8

Recycling is a labour intensive industry with a relatively low start-up cost that
provides employment opportunities and income generation opportunities for a significant
number of people as waste pickers, itinerant waste purchasers, waste dealers, and workers
employed at recycling enterprises, their managers and entrepreneurs (Lardinois and Van de
Klundert 1995). The waste recycling sector often serves as an entry point into the urban
economy that provides participants with economic benefits, on-the-job training, business
opportunities and a higher social status (Janeen 2004).
4.WASTE RECYCLING IN DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
Developed countries have achieved a high rate of above 50% of waste recycling in their areas
(Child 2004). Many studies have been conducted on recycling and waste diversion over the
past decades in developed countries. However, recycling program and approaches to waste
diversion differs in these countries based on several issues.
4.1 Economics of Recycling
Many municipalities and cities continue to tax for solid waste services, creating an invisible
cost to consumers. Unit pricing has been utilized as a method for decreasing and increasing
recycling rates in developed countries. This strategy increases the cost to households is based
upon the reality of resource costs and environmental impacts. As „pay-as-you-throw-away‟
become a commonality program in the 1990s. Athens in Ohio State, US implemented this
method in 1990 (Reschovsky and Stone 1994). It appears from the literature to be most
effective when accompanied by a recycling program that is understood by the citizenry
especially curbside pickup.
Quantity-based pricing of waste disposal was found to impact recycling behaviour,
with greatest increases when curbside recycling was implemented. Hong and Adams (1993)
examined price incentives and their impact on recycling in Portland, Oregon. They found that
increases in the charges according to waste generated by communities and disposed were
positively related to recycling increases. It's understood that people chose to divert their
waste into recycling. The authors concluded that solid waste costs were so small to overall
household budgets that recycling was an important component of cost reductions rather than
the result of a conscious effort to decrease consumption.
A follow-up study by Hong and Adams (1999) examined container size pricing
schemes and their impacts on recycling. With solid waste pricing in Portland, Oregon
significantly higher than the current charge in Athens, $35.90 for two 32-gallon cans as
compared to $9.50. The authors suggest that unit pricing itself is not effective in diverting
waste. However, when accompanied by „aggressive recycling programs‟ recycling may
increase while solid waste collection sources decrease. They found that when households
contract for a given volume of solid waste disposal container size, recycling rates are
positively impacted. With a wide variety of choices and very large container sizes and costs,
it would see enlightenment is a key component when providing solid waste services within a
community.
Jenkins et al. (2003) researched curbside and drop-off recycling effectiveness among
middle and upper income households in 20 metropolitan statically areas. Curbside recycling
was found to be the most effective as compared to transporting specific recycling materials to
9

drop off recycling services. Drop-off recycling services maintained an important role in
recycling for a community with constrains that would not allow curbside recycling. The
impact of price unit pricing was found to increase recycling and consumption choices
towards recyclable materials but may be different to detect by examination the% of a material
a household recycles. The findings were supported by a unit pricing project in Marietta
(1993-1994) and studies by the environmental Protection Agency as well as Van Houtven
and Morris (1999) receptacle and bag programs were implemented and compared through
weighting.
A cost efficiency analysis of diverting waste through “throw away‟‟ and increased
recycling programs cost, supported unit pricing with 36% reductions bags and 14% by
receptacles. The cost of recycling as compared to cost of solid waste collection and disposal
was examined by Folz (1999). Viewing recycling as the environmental success story of the
1990s decade, the author advises that showing cost effectiveness is a key motivator at both
the individual and municipal level of solid waste management. A study of recycling
coordinators indicated that budget discussions were often directed by the belief that recycling
was not cost-effective and thereby acted to validate ending recycling programs. Comparing
costs of recycling to solid waste disposal unit costs indicated that recycling was very
competitive, if not lower, in comparison to waste disposal and therefore should be considered
economic incentive.
As recycling is the primary means of diverting solid waste, the literature suggests that
city and state government should simultaneously allocate funding to maximize recycling and
actively promote decreasing barriers. Macdonald and Vopni (1994) suggest that the
centralized separation of recycled materials is less expensive for a municipality than a source
separation and can potentially increase recycling rates. Kinnaman and Fullerton (2000)
studied 114 communities with a user fee for a solid waste disposal. These were viewed as
having benefited effects reducing solid waste into landfill, raising revenue and providing
incentives for recycling, composting and source reduction.
The authors also estimate that demand for garbage collection and recycling collection
as a comparable function of the price of garbage. The user fee decreases the weight of solid
waste more than it increased the weight of recycling. Local policy choices found that raising
solid waste rates from 0 to $1 per bag results in a 412pound decrease per capita while
recycling increased by 30 pounds per capital. Regarding missing solid waste, the authors
concluded that source reduction, composting and illegal dumping are all potential
consequences of user fees, that reduces per capital solid waste disposal. The authors also
assert that the creation of local policy has a greater impact on solid waste decision rather than
policy made at the state or national government level.
Similarly, Callan and Thomas (1997) believe that Local Government solid waste
policies are an appropriate method to utilize when implementing programs as compared to
larger State mandated policies. Each community, its population and region specific influences
are viewed as effecting local responses and outcomes. Recycling and unit pricing research in
Massachusetts found that a community implementing unit pricing can expect an annual
recycling rate increase of 6. 6 points. An additional increase of 5. 5 points are predicted if the
pricing plan is accompanied by the provision of curbside recycling services. The authors also
propose that economic and demography can influence the success of a recycling, thus
officials should make informal local policy decisions utilizing this information and design
initiatives to accommodate the population of their city or municipality. Interesting and
10

importantly, the state of Massachusetts has a material recycling facility that provides free
recycling and marketing facilities to 97 communities in western Massachusetts, recycling
approximately 200tons of materials per day! This is a privately run, state owned facility. The
accompaniment of this to the State Solid Waste Master Plan increased recycling programs
within various municipalities from 190 to 341 in 1992. This is a substantial and productive
approach to increase recycling in the state. There is need for feedback for effective recycling
in a community for effective recycling programs to be achieved (Loraine 2006).
In a study households in a community group signed a letter making public
commitments to recycle and giving permission to publish their names in a local Paper while
feedbacks on pounds of recyclable papers generated. A combined intervention and no
intervention group were observed. Combined intervention and feedback group intervention
were found to increase recycling while the other groups did not (Deleon and Fuqual 1995).
Oskamp et al. (1991) found that home owners and separate-house dwellers were more likely
to recycle than residents of apartments if the community is enlightened and educated. This is
applicable to individuals as they typically rent apartment or live collaboratively in houses.
4.2 Policy effects on recycling
Policy implementation with regard to solid waste recycling appears to be strongly correlated
with the community where the problem is development. Various methodologies have been
leading to the conclusion that it is important to have citizen impute in policy formation,
development of diversionary goals, education, and outreach campaigns. Folz et al. (1991)
studied on New Jersey and found that policy and community involvements were very
important, with citizens likely to participate in collective efforts when they are involved in
policy initiation and program design. The state implemented a mandatory recycling program
in 1987 requiring each municipality to establish rules and regulations for the separation and
collection of designated waste.
The study suggested that recycling convenience was a key inducement. Recycling
containers should be placed in accessible locations each such as shopping malls, shopping
centres, grocery stores and schools. In addition, participants emphasized education program
to inform the public about the advantages of recycling as well as the publicity campaign for
recycling information. Fines were seen as an effective extrinsic motivator (Nyamwange
1996). Recycling was suggested to be a multifunctional activity and thus education and
campaigns should include a persuasive approach that involves multiple dimensions.
Individuals with environmental motivations were found to maintain the responsibility of
recycling (Loraine 2006).
Scott (1999) worked on four communities in the Toronto area exploring
demographics, motivation, knowledge and environmental attitudes. He suggested that
marketing strategies as a result of this work should include providing up-to-date program
information, materials and sorting techniques.
Empirical studies reviewed by Schultz et al. (1995) identified four areas of recycling
predictors – environmental attitudes, knowledge, demographic, and personality variables. The
authors suggested that recycling should be treated as a multifaceted pattern of behaviour and
community leaders should be involved in shaping public policy.

11

Oskamp et al. (1998) mentioned that educational efforts should focus on the benefits
of recycling, relating it to environmental concerns within the community and country,
emphasize its importance with regard to energy needs, landfill and natural resources impacts.
Utilizing European data by Yi et al. (1999) found that waste behaviour was very specific to
the culture and variations found within households. This is critical to understanding the
complexities of implementing recycling programs. Replication in various settings was viewed
as difficult with the suggestion that programs must be developed for specifics of the
community.
A national mailings of respondents on the measurement of ecological conscious
consumer behaviour found that education regarding environmental issues will encourage
behaviours such as recycling and environmentally appropriate consumer choices (Roberts and
Bacon 1997). Extrinsic motivation through verbal commitments was utilized as an approach
to increase curbside recycling among community members (Loraine 2006). A study by the
International Council for Local Initiatives Council, that provides liaison services in
environmental management to Local Governments, revealed that Governments need to
clarify their role in solid waste management and direct policy input was needed by waste
disposers and private sector product manufactures, encouraging incentives for source
separation, markets for recyclables and allocating the increased cost of waste management
(Macdonald and Vopni 1994).
Oskamp et al. (1996) concluded that residents will participate in recycling if the
system is convenient, as well as when large variety of items is collected. Menses and Palacio
(2003-2004) explored encouraging and strengthening recycling behavioural changes. Reward
techniques verses block leader techniques that included a written agreement encouraged the
participant to fulfil the act of recycling. Rewards were seen as minimizing environmental
impacts while block leaders acted as a constant environmental educational source.
Noehammer and Byer (1997) analysed the effectiveness of municipal recycling
programs was when researching of mandatory versus voluntary program materials collected
and number of segregations, collection containers provided, collection frequency, collection
coordination with solid waste retrieval, collection vehicle type, presence of education
program, economic incentives. The study suggests that designing programs must first address
the needs and goals of the community and consider the effectiveness of design variables.
Loraine (2006) studied residential curbside recycling programs throughout Toronto,
evaluated the materials recovery rate utilizing two factors as mandatory verse voluntary
recycling and convenience as measured by container provision, collection frequency and
collection day relative to municipal solid waste collection. The study found that collection
rates increased when mandatory programs were implemented. This may or not be a result of
the implementation of the law or may be related to the increased publicity around the
mandatory ordinance. Provision of containers did create a statistically different outcome,
while interestingly, recycling collection on the same day as the solid waste collection
appeared to have a negative effect on recycling rates.
When evaluating behaviour in suburban and urban communities, Lansana (1993)
concluded that recycling programs must be tailored to fit the diversity in needs and
preferences of specific communities while a careful planning and implementation of solid
waste management and program. The more information and awareness of the recycling and
solid waste program within the community, the less likely that residents will complain about
12

the time and inconveniences associated with the recycling activity, which increase the
tendency of participation by the community.
Lober‟s studies on source reduction included bringing bags to the grocery rather than
utilizing a store offered bag, refusing grocery when not needed, and preference of cloth
diapers over disposable diapers, refilling laundry products rather than buying new containers
each time. The result indicates participants preferred recycling to source reduction while the
very term generated confusion and a lack of agreement.
Recycling is still an important component of waste reduction and diversion, as well as
an entryway for participants in environmental awareness. Recycling has the potentials to be a
daily activity, taught within the elementary classroom and home environment. Individuals
recycle for different reasons, but the basic purpose is that of environmental concerns and
economy. It can be used as an entrée to other environmental issues as reduced consumption,
energy issues, water and air pollution, land use and global warning. Recycling is a better way
of disposing waste generated at the individual level than simply throwing it to perpetual
landfills which is not sustainable. It involves a complex claim of behaviours that involves
state legislation and funding and Local Government support through policy decisions,
education and distribution of information and services that encourage recycling by citizens
and community members. Finally it does not make sense to throw away waste when it can be
recycled.
5. MALAYSIA IN THE TRANSITION OF WASTE RECYCLING
Malaysia like every other developing country is facing problem of waste management. Waste
management and recycling is largely influenced by the lack of planning and implementation
in accord with the waste management hierarchy of reduce, reuse and recycling (3R)
(Agamuthu et al. 2009). This has resulted in a waste management system based almost on
waste disposal on landfills. Solid waste disposal is therefore one of the major issues in
Malaysia waste management practices today.
Many landfills are not properly managed and maintained, and few or none of the
landfills have EIA or other site suitability evaluations performed. Due to this, landfills are
often located too close to residential areas or other public areas. Many landfills are also
located near streams and rivers, which not only cause river pollutions, but also ground water
is at risk of contaminations. Uncontrolled emissions of greenhouse gasses are also
problematic-especially methane. Waste are dumped in rivers, drains and streams that often
not collected, and little or nothing or no waste is composting take place which means that the
waste takes up spaces, and landfill life time are often much shorter than their expected time
of existence. The issue of illegal dumping is also relevant in this regard (Wai 2007).
A significant challenge facing developing countries is the search for appropriate
solution for collecting, treating and disposal of waste or reuse of waste materials generated in
municipal and community areas. Recycling of waste is a challenge confronting many
developing countries as urban cities are in the increase of population and so is the waste
generated. There is low level of recycling in many developing countries; either because of
ignorance or apathy towards recycling (Wai 2007).
Recently the Selangor state government is considering a proposal to recycle and turn
it into an income generating venture as most local council spend up to 30% of their local
13

budget on rubbish collection and some up to 60% (Daily Metro 2008). The recent creation of
a National Solid Waste Department is stepping in the right direction as this will relieve the
Local of the financial burden of managing waste (Yahaya 2007a).
The traditional method that the country has been using is to use the landfills for waste
disposal of waste, and overtime buries them with soil. But Landfills require huge plots of
land and usually fill up very quickly. Some big landfills have been closed down due to
reaching their capacity, as well as the suitability of the locations which use to be far away
from residential areas, but are no more due to population and township growth. Some
examples are the Kelana Jaya dumpsite (now filled with condos, a stadium and commercial
development). Subang Airport road used to stink badly whenever you use the road to airport,
but is now a residential area with condos and houses. Sri Kembangaan/ Air Hitan were also
closed down and also Selaying Landfills (Wai 2007).
The alternatives of landfills like incinerators, particularly of gigantic types but still
unknown status Broga incinerator in Semenyih which courted controversy due to questions
about its location in a catchment area as well as the Japanese contractor which has a
questionable project back in his home country. Nobody likes to have a waste processing plant
behind his or her backyard. The incinerator was first proposed to be in Puchong but was
relocated due to residence and political pressures. Something has to be done to cope with its
ultimate disposal. The government is to tackle the problem even though the idea of smaller,
more efficient and manageable incinerator would be idea than the biggest incinerator.
People living in the peninsula especially Selangor should be encouraged to cultivate
the habit of reducing waste by recycling as in developed countries where it has become of
thing habitually even from younger age (Wai 2007). The high economic growth in recent
years in Selangor requires a sustainable means of managing waste. The recently created
National Waste Department has been a way forward to that effect.
Selangor government could borrow a leaf from Europe where recycling has become a
habit of life as in the case of the Cliff Borough Council in East London. The Cliff Borough
Council in East London, in 2001-2002, recycling rate was just 9. 7% but it jumped to 48% in
2003-2004, and reached to 50% by December 2004, suggesting that CBC may become UK‟s
biggest performing local authority. The study of RCR suggested that a well-designed
communication campaign and an effective marketing strategy is the key to achieving success
in recycling programs.
There is a proposal by the government for some years to enforce compulsory garbage
separation in Selangor. It is not an easy thing to do even though it could have succeeded in
some countries like Taiwan, as their culture values and geographical location differs from
that of Malaysia. The fact that policy worked in Taiwan does not mean it workshere;
therefore Malaysia should find policy that should be wholly accepted by her citizenry (Wai
2007).
The state has now intensified its effort through integrated waste management system
of reducing waste through sustainable waste management of 3R and final disposal.
Awareness of this program is being carried out through campaigns, mass media and lectures.
At the same time the State Government is facilitating through the Ministry of Housing and
Local Government to provide facilities such as waste bins and collection centres households
(MHLG 2006).
14

Recently residents in Selangor are required to separate their waste into organic and
inorganic waste for easy collections and recycling by Alam Flora Sdn Bhd. Although the new
rule attracts no penalty for failing to do so, household waste could be refused to be collected
by Alam Flora for failing to separate their waste accordingly (Bavani 2009). On the other
hand Shopping Malls in the state are now required not to give plastic bags on every last
Saturday of the month to shoppers. Shoppers who insist on collecting bags are required to pay
20 cents for each plastic bag collected and the money will be channelled to the charity homes
in Selangor chosen by the state. Below are Figures 2 and 3 showing the current recycling rate
and recycling target for Selangor in the year 2020.

Waste hierarchy






5% recovery

Reduce
Reuse
Recycling
Intermediate
Processing
Disposal

95% landfill

Figure 2: The current waste management system in Selangor
Source: Ministry of Housing and Local Government (2003)
From the figure 2, it shows that the current waste recycling and recovery is only 5%
of the total waste generated in the state while the rest 95% is sent to landfill. Land has been
the traditional method system of waste disposal in Selangor.
This trend has been going on for ages in Malaysia, as there are abundant lands to
deposit waste. But with the increase in population and high growth of economy in Malaysia
in the last decade, there are calls for a more sustainable system to dispose waste without
much environmental effect as land is running out and becoming expensive to build landfills.
The use of “sustainable landfills” by some authorities could have been the reason
behind the recent construction of the biggest landfill in Malaysia, the Bukit Tagar sanitary
landfill in Ulu Selangor 50 km north from Kuala Lumpur in Selangor which started operation
in 2005 occupying a capacity of 1,700 acres of land with 120 metric tons of air space.
But the use of such term by some authorities suggests that the concept of
sustainability is not well understood correctly. How could landfills which take objects, many
manufactured from finite resource and bury them in the ground under conditions which
generate gases and liquids for periods which are in excess of the present generation be
considered sustainable? (Waite 1995)
Malaysia has to develop sustainable methods of waste management, but at the same
time accept that achieving this goal is long way off. But for the moment recycling is the only
sustainable method to reduce waste.
15

Figure 3 shows the strategic recycling target of Selangor Government with integrated
waste management of reduce, reuse, recycling, intermediate processing and final disposal to
increase waste recycling rate and recovery in the 8MP till 2020. This target is feasible if
appropriate policies and technology are in place.

Waste hierarchy
(Target 2020)

15% recovery






20% recycle



Reduce
Reuse
Recycling
Intermediate
Processing
Disposal

65% landfill

Figure 3 Waste recycling targets for Selangor in the 8MP for 2020
Source: Ministry of Housing and Local Government (2003)
There is still insufficient emphasis being played by local authorities and others on the
whole of question of re-use. We are all familiar with these sticky labels that enable us to
reuse old envelopes, but have many of operators of business or local authorities that can reuse
our items. That notwithstanding, the Selangor Government is encouraging, households;
offices to either give out their old materials to those in need when refurnishing their offices or
homes than throwing it into the waste stream. Reusable bags are sold at some shopping malls
that are also biodegradable. People are encouraged to buy household items that are refillable,
like hair cream, beverages and some soft drinks with plastic bottles etc. so as to reduce waste
at households‟ level.
Recycling has become a known issue since the launching of the first national
recycling program in 1993 and the launched of it in December 2000 in Malaysia. The
Selangor Government has in many ways disseminating this massage to her citizens, that
recycling is a sustainable means of managing waste so as to attain the state target of 20%
diversion of waste sent to landfills in 2020.
This is being made possible by provisions of waste bins at strategic places in the state
and privatizing waste management. Households are encouraged to separate their waste into
wet and dry waste for easy collections and recycling, though not compulsory. But for
Malaysia to achieve her target of 20% recycling rate in 2020 more proactive measures has to
be taken by making waste separation compulsory at household levels and with the imposition
of fines for failing to separate their waste.
Other waste hierarchy plans of Selangor to be achieved in 2020 is the establishing of
an intermediate processing facility in state where recyclable materials will be sorted by types,
compacted, baled and sold to many manufacturing companies in the countries that use
16

secondary raw materials for productions and also for export. Intermediate processing
facilities will process and market newspapers, mixed paper, cardboard, plastic, tin can, glass
and aluminium received from various parts of the state of the country and for export as well.
5.1 Post waste material management and disposal
Transportation and collections of waste are another concern in Malaysian waste management
practices, especially in urban areas, e. g Kuala Lumpur, where some streets are narrow and
compactor trucks are unable to pass (Mokhtar et al. 2002). The most visible part of solidwaste management is collection and transportation. After the collection of waste from their
homes, offices, or industries people have no interest in where it is taken or what is done to it.
Very few residents have seen disposal sites such as incinerators or landfills. Door-to-door
collection is provided to all landed properties. Those living in apartments and illegal
settlements have to bring their waste to the community bins. Generally the collection of waste
is done three times a week on alternate days except on Sunday. In some apartments, shops,
and business offices the collection of waste is done daily, except Sundays. In vegetable
markets the collection is done daily including Sunday. In areas of unplanned or illegal
settlements, collection is done once or twice a week.
But on festive occasions such as Chinese New Year or the end of Ramadan (fasting)
month, frequent collection service is provided. The collection and transportation system in
Malaysia is fairly common. From the 1980s this activity has been privatized (Lee 2007).
Since major settlements are under local authorities, collection and transportation is available
to all residents except those living in isolated areas such as the hilly region. On Penang
Island, the infrastructure is relatively better, and almost 95% of the residents are provided
with a solid-waste collection service. There is no special service provided to collect garden
waste as it is included in household waste. Sometimes it is left along the roadside or burned.
Some bigger municipal authorities provide a special service once a week to collect garden
waste.
For this service, the owners need to cut the waste into manageable pieces or bag the
leaves to facilitate collection. On-call, chargeable service is also available in some local
authorities. The local authorities are required to submit reports on the status of recycling in
their areas. Unfortunately, according to the ministry, the response has been poor, and with
unreliable data (New Strait Times 2001).
5.2 Future plan for sustainable waste management practices in Malaysia
The SWM Act 2007 introduced by the Government which has now become legal emphasis
compulsory system of waste hierarchic of the 3Rs: reduce, reuse, and recycle. This is an
important campaign included in the Act. The implementation and enforcement of the 3Rs
are also listed in the Act under. Solid waste generators are required to reduce the generation
of solid waste; to use environmentally friendly materials; to limit the generation, import,
use, discharge, and disposal of specified products; to implement coding and labelling on
products to promote recycling; and to utilize any method to reduce the adverse impacts of
municipal solid waste on the environment, i. e. to reduce, reuse, and recycle of MSW (Lee
2007). Therefore adoption of the SWM Act encompassing solutions for all the identified
gaps and implementation of the specific waste component management options is expected
to significantly narrow the gaps and enhance the MSW management situation in Malaysia
to be on par with other developed world.
17

Although waste minimization is emphasized in the Act, the techniques to reduce
waste generation are not specified and the options are too generalized (Agamuthu et al.
2009). Failure to comply with the law will make the offender liable to a fine of up to
RM10,000 (US$2632) or up to 6 months imprisonment, or both. The government of Malaysia
has plans to manage household waste efficiently to ensure a clean, fresh, and sustainable
environment. For all these initiatives yield the desirable results, it should be followed by
monitoring to insure if the goals set up are being achieved.
These operators will be subjected to a stringent performance management regime
linked to KPIs such as the coverage of service, compliance to schedule and frequency of
collection, number of complaints and soiling of roads from leachate. Payments to
concessionaires will be linked to the achievement of these KPIs. Contract negotiations with
the concessionaires are expected to be completed by end 2010. Measures to drive efficiencies
in operations will include optimizing transportation costs by utilising the best available route
to the disposal sites, the most suitable system of vehicle and the optimum number of crew.
And standard 120-litre bins for every household will also reduce the problem of leachates and
improve overall hygiene conditions. Under this effort over 5,600 shared premises including
wet markets, parks, food courts and other such facilities will be provided frequent and
reliable cleaning services. This is expected to provide a conducive and attractive environment
for people to congregate as they carry out their daily activities.
Again the new solid waste acts, incentives such as a deposit refund scheme and take
back will be implemented. This system allows consumers to receive refunds upon return of
used recyclable products and requires manufacturers and supplier to take back specified
products after (10th MP,2010).
6. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Developing countries are still far behind when compared with developed countries as the
informal sector still plays a significant role in waste recycling but in developed countries the
situation is different (Habitat 1994a). This is because of the health implication associated
with informal waste disposal and also the economic advancement of the developed countries
does not encourage informal waste recycling methods. The developing countries lack
effective recycling policies as leaders of communities are not involved in policy formation
that affects them (Folz and Hazlett 1991). Without following the western model blindly, the
developing countries should follow certain policies based on community values, and
appropriate local technology (Polprasert 1998).
Educated community tends to understand their roles towards environmental issues
unlike communities that are not educated. Recycling convenience is still lacking as some
communities are without wheel bins at the shopping mall, wet market area, schools unlike
developed countries where bins are placed in convenient places for easy collection
(Nyamwange 1996). There is no enlightenment program to create awareness of the benefits
of recycling as this contributes apathy towards recycling, whereas in developed countries it
has become a thing of habit to recycle because of their environmental concern (Menses and
Palacio 2005).
Developing countries tend to recycle not for the act of altruism but for economic
reasons only while the developed countries recycle for their environmental consciousness and
18

intrinsic believe that a clean environment is worthy activities. Volunteerism in the issue of
environment is practiced among few middle class and high class members of the society
(Hopper and Neilsen 1991) while this habit is inculcated among teenagers in their formatives
years in school in developed countries (Ka-chi Wai 2007).
Recycling has become a way of life in developed countries resulted in high recycling
rate due to policies and logistics that are user friendly. Although the economic benefits are
the same, this has not been fully utilized by developing countries (Habitat 1994a).
Informal sectors still plays a major role in waste recycling in Asian developing
countries because of high level of poverty. This should be reorganized and integrated into
system hence due to economic reasons they will still play vital role in waste management.
Recycling activities is gradually being embraced by Asian developing countries as it can help
reduce disposal cost for local authorities, reducing vehicle maintenance and its economic
benefits (Habitat 1994b).
Many developed countries have greatly accepted the policy of „pay-for what -you
throw-away “program. Unit pricing has been an effective means to reduce waste through
increasing cost for households. It is generally believed by the developed world that when you
know that if you generate much waste you will pay for it. That intrinsic believe of high cost
of waste disposal by households will surely compel them to be careful how to generate waste
in their households and to recycle more of their waste. This policy has highly motivated
households to cultivate the recycling habit more than developing countries who still look to
the government to dispose waste for them as paying for the waste generated at home could
have a political undertone for opposition parties.
Policy implementation whereby communities are involved in policy formation is very
important for effective recycling program as it helps create sense of belonging and ensure the
policies effectiveness in their locality. In addition recycling should be made mandatory rather
optional and as well as source separation of waste at households. There is need for recycling
convenience as it suits the community. Recycling has the potentials as seen in the review to
reduce waste generation and at the same time an entrée point for participation in
environmental awareness.
Malaysia can learn a lot from developed countries how their recycling rate has
increased. Generally, many of the Malaysian SWM policies especially those related to waste
management recycling activities have been implemented in an informal basis due to a lack of
legislative empowerment. However, even though the enactment of the SWM Act in 2007 has
provided the legislative framework for SWM, it is yet to be seen how effective it will be as
implementation of policies has always been the bane of developing countries. Furthermore,
the initial enforcement of the SWM Act is only expected to be in areas related to SWM
facilities and services as opposed to SWM activities since the SWM Corporations are
expected to adopt a non-regulatory approach in addressing 3R activities in the initial stages.
There is no political will on the part of the government to introduce pay-as-you-through-away
system which has been effective in many developed countries in reducing waste drastically
and lack of availability of fund for policy initiatives, manpower and appropriate technology.
Consequently one of the potential key policy gaps observed in waste management
policies is the delay in the formal adoption and compulsory implementation of 3R policies for
all households in Malaysia. Source separation is not fully implemented. There is a significant
19

policy gap between theory and practice since without the formal adoption or enforcement of
the policies; policy implementation can only be done informally and in an ad-hoc manner by
SWM stakeholders. Thus, the key challenge in the Malaysian 3R practices is gap reduction
between SWM policy and its implementation either due to stakeholder acceptability of 3R
policies or policy implementation obstacles from political interference or policy
impracticality due to direct adoption of SWM policy practices from other countries. Why
allow people to pay 20cent for plastic bag on Saturdays while there is campaign to discourage
the use of plastics for shopping because of its environmental effects. This is contradictions
from policy makers on the whole aim of reducing plastic use. There should be strong political
will to implement policies though not convenient at the beginning but have over all benefit to
the society in future. Therefore adoption of the SWM Act encompassing solutions for all the
identified gaps and implementation of the specific waste component management options is
expected to significantly narrow the gaps and enhance the MSW management situation in
Malaysia to be on par with other developed world.
REFERENCES
Agamuthu, P. , Hamid, F. S. and Khidzir, K. 2009. “Evolution of solid waste management in
Malaysia: impacts and implications of the solid waste Bill 2007,” Journal of Mater
Cycles Waste Management, 11: 96-103
Bavani, M. 2009. Metro, Separate your waste from June 1. April 29, 2009.
Budzik, M. Jonathan, M. Luciano, A. & Juliana, P. 2002. Waste Management Overseas.The
Malaysian experience. Dec. 2002
Callan,S. J. & Thomas, J. M. 1997. The impact of state and local policies on the recycling
effort. Eastern Economic Journal. 23 (4), 411-423.
Child, R 2004.Resource Conservation and Recycling Cliff. Borough Council Recycling
Progres Report in Eastern London. P. 1-25
Connett, P. 1994. Incineration; A poor solution for the 21st century; Slideshare publication
2010.
Consumers Association of Penang (CAP). 2001. The proposed thermal waste treatment Plant
for waste management in Kg Bohol, Mukin Sungai Besi, Kuala Lumpur, http;//www.
surfforever.com/sam/pressurelease/kgbohol.
Deleon, I. G. &Faqual, R. W. 1995.The effects of public commitment and group feedback on
curbside recycling. Environment and Behaviour. 27 (2), 233-250.
Folz, D. H. &Hazlett, J. M. 1991. Public participation and recycling performance; Explaining
program success. Public Administration Review 59 (4), 336-345.
Folz, D. H. 1999. Municipal recycling performance: A public sector environmental success
story. Public Administration Review. 59 (4) 336-345.
Furedy, C. 1989. Urban Waste Picking in Low-Income Countries, Knowledge and Action
Furedy Research and Adverting Inc. Canada.
Furedy, C. 1997. Reflections on some dilemmas concerning waste pickers and waste
recoveryP ,1-7 Furedy Research and Advertising Inc. Canada.
Goldenhar, L. M. & Connel. C. M. 1991-1992. Efforts of educational and feedback
interventions on recycling knowledge, attitudes, beliefs and behavours. Journal of
Environment of Environment System 20(4),321-333.
Habitat International, 1994a.Appraisal of solid waste collection and private sector
involvement in Dar re Salaam City, Tanzania. Habitat International. 29 (2) 353 -366
Habitat International, 1994b.International co-operation for habitat and urban development.
Hassan, M. 2002. Environmental Management in Malaysia: E. I. A process in Malaysia.
Ministry of Resources and Environment.
20

Hong, S. & Adams, R. M. 1999.Household response to price incentives for recycling some
further evidence. Land Economics. 75 (4), 505-514.
Hong, S. , Adams, R. M. & Love, H. 1993. An economic analysis of household recycling of
solid waste: The case of Portland Oregon. Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management. 25. 136-146.
Hopper, J. R. & Nielsen R. M. 1991.Recycling as altruistic behavour; Normative and
behaviour strategies to expand participation in a community recycling program.
Environment and Behavour. 23 (2), 195-220.
Janeen, T. 2004. A case study of a hotel solid waste management in Bali, Indonesia‟s thesis,
University of Waterloo, Ontario Canada.
Jenkins, R. R. ,Martinez. S. A. ,Palmer, K. & Podolsky. 2003. The determinant of household
recycling; A material-specific analysis of recycling program features and unit
recycling. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.25,294-318.
Jindal, B, Harada, H. & Shikura, S. 1997. Municipal Solid waste management in Nepal:
practices and challenges. Waste Management. 25 (5), 555-562.
Jindal, B. 1994.Environmental pollution control & energy conservation. Steel Authority of
India.
Jindal, B. 1998. Waste recycling policies in Hong Kong. International Journal of Material
Recycling 10 (3), 205-230.
Karen, A. K. , Nash, A. May, L. C. & Knudsen, 2003. Household Hazardous Waste
Management and Stakeholder‟s involvement in Kuala Lumpur.
Kinnaman, T. & Fullerton, D. 2000.Garbage and recycling with indigenous local policy.
Journalof Urban Economics 48,419 - 449.
Ko-chi Wai. 2007. Being Unreasonable; Reduce, Reuse and Recycle.
www_lancashire_gov_uk-environment-waste-reduction. P 1-9 (26 June 2007).
Lansana, M. 1993. A comparative analysis of curbside recycling behavour in suburban
Communities. Professional Geography, 45 (2), 169-179.
Lardinois, I, & Van de Klunder, A. 1995.Plastic Waste. Netherlands. Tools Publications and
waste consultants.
Lee, G. B. 2007. Solid Waste Management: Issues and Challenges in Asia ;Published by the
Asian Productivity Organization Tokyo. Japan
Lewis, E. & Healv.Jr. H, L. 1990.Packaging and Solid Waste Management Strategies. New
York American Management Association.
Lober,D. I. 1996. Municipal solid waste policy and participation in household source
reduction. Waste Management and Research, 14, 125 – 145.
Loraine, A. McCosker, 2006. Barriers to recycling in Athens, Ohio. Msc thesis. College of
Arts and Science of Ohio University
Macdonald, D. & Vopni, P. 1994. Policy barriers to 50% diversions of municipal solid waste.
Waste Management and Research 12 (3), 257 – 270.
Meneses, G. & Beerli Palacio, A. 2003-2004. Comparison of two techniques to promote
recycling: Block leader verses reward .Journal of Environmental Systems. 30 (2),
105-134.
Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG) 2003.Overview of solid waste
management in Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. Local Government Department.
Ministry of Housing and Local Government (MHLG) 2006.Waste management and the
Challenges.Money in recycling. 2008. Daily Metro, 7 May.
Mokhtar, M. B. Peterson, P. J. & Fariz, A. 2002.Approaches towards sustainable
environmental and national resources management for ASEAN regions. Lestari, UKM
Bangi, Selangor
New Strait Times, 16 April 2001. Waste management‟s and recycling problems; data issues
21

New Sunday Times. October 2002. Not-In-My-Back-Yard Syndrome (NIBM)
Noehammer, H. & Byer, P. H. 1997. Effects on variables on participating in residential
curbside recycling programs. Waste Management and Research 15, 405-427.
Nyamwange M. 1996. Public perceptions of strategies for participations in recycling
programs Journal of Environmental Education 27 (4), 19-24.
Oskamp, S., Burkhardt, R. L. Schultz, P. W., Hurin, S., & Zelezny, L, 1998. Predicting three
dimensions of residential curbside recycling: Am observational study. Journal
Oskamp, S., Harrington, M. J., Edwards, T. C., & Shewood, D. L. 1991. Factors influencing
household recycling behavour. Environmental and Behavour 23 (1), 494 – 519.
Oskamp, S., Zelenzny, L., Schultz, P., Hurin, W., & Burkhardt, R. 1996. Commingled verses
separated curbside recycling: does sorting matter? Environment and behavour.28 (1),
73-91.
Perunding, 2001. Solid Waste Management in Malaysia: Overview and Information Paper,
Danish Coopration in Environment and Development.
Polprasert, C. 1998. Organic waste recycling program. Thailand: Asian Institute of
Technology.
Reschovsky, I. & Stone, S. 1994. Market incentive for household waste recycling. Paying for
what you throw away. Journal of policy analysis and management. 13 (1), 120-139.
Roberts, J. A. & Bacon, D. R. 1997. Exploring the subtle relationships between
environmental concern and ecologically conscious behavour. Journal of Business
Research, 40.79-89, 1165.
Schultz, P., W., Oskamp, S., & Mainieri. T. 1995. When recycles and when? A review of
personal and situational factors. Journal of Environmental, Pyschology.15,105-121.
The
10th
Malaysia
Plan:
http://www.
epu.
gov.
my/html/themes/epu/html/RMKE10/rmke10_english. html10 June 2010
Van Houtven, G. & Morris, E. 1999. Household behavour under alternative pay-as you throw
Van Houtven, G. & Morris, E. 1999.Household behavour under alternative pay-as
you, 75 (4), 515-537.
Waite, R. 1995. Household Waste Recycling, London: Earthscan Publications Ltd.
Waste Management and Research 12 ( 3), 257 – 270
Yahaya, N. 2007a. Solid waste management: Conference on climate change preparedness.
National Solid Waste Department. Kuala Lumpur. 11 September.
Yahaya, N. 2007b.The New National Solid Waste Department. The New Sunday Time, 1
January
Yassin, S. M. 2006. Waste Management Conference, Ministry of Local Government and
Housing Kuala Lumpur 16 May 2006
Yi, Y. ,Harloff, S. L. & Meyer, P. B. 1999. Factors affecting household-level environmental
decision making: A three county comparison of the determination of household
recycling. UrbanEcosystem. 3, 149-168.

22

