1
Running head: INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES

Meta-Analyses of Sex Differences in Responses to Sexual Versus Emotional Infidelity: Men and
Women are More Similar than Different
Christopher J. Carpenter
Western Illinois University

This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Sage Publications in Psychology of
Women Quarterly on November 3, 2011, available online:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0361684311414537

Author Note
Christopher J. Carpenter, Department of Communication, Western Illinois University.
The author would like to thank Fred Oswald & Brent Donnellan for their helpful
suggestions.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to: Christopher J. Carpenter,
Department of Communication, Western Illinois University, 318 Memorial Hall #1 University
Circle, Macomb, IL 61455-1390. Email: cj-carpenter2@wiu.edu Twitter: @DrCJCarpenter

2
Running head: INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Abstract
From 54 articles, 172 effect sizes were meta-analyzed to determine if men and women are
differentially distressed by emotional versus sexual infidelity. Predictions were derived and
tested from an evolutionary psychology perspective (Buss, Larsen, Westen, & Semmelroth,
1992), a social-cognitive perspective (Harris, 2003a), and the double-shot perspective (DeSteno
& Salovey, 1996). The data were not consistent with the evolutionary psychology predictions
because men tended to respond in the predicted manner in only the U.S. student samples whereas
the rest of the data were largely consistent with the social-cognitive theory. Specifically, both
sexes tended to be more upset by emotional than sexual infidelity when forced to choose which
type of infidelity was more distressing. Both sexes indicated that sexual infidelity was more
distressing than emotional when asked to rate their level of distress separately for each using
continuous measures. The lesbian and gay samples were mostly consistent with the double-shot
hypothesis as they tended to respond in the opposite way as heterosexuals. Analysis of the
scenarios designed to test the double-shot hypothesis found somewhat smaller effects when the
possibility of both types of infidelity was ruled out. These findings suggest that professionals
seeking to address problems associated with jealousy in romantic relationships would profit from
avoiding sex-linked assumptions about which aspect of infidelity is likely to be more upsetting.
Keywords: infidelity, theory of evolution, social cognition, social perception, sexual
attitudes, sexual orientation, sexual partners, human sex differences

3
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Meta-Analyses of Sex Differences in Responses to Sexual Versus Emotional Infidelity: Men
and Women are More Similar than Different
A controversy has developed in the romantic jealousy literature concerning sex
differences in response to different types of infidelity (Buss et al., 1992; Harris, 2003a; Sagarin,
2005). Sexual infidelity occurs in situations such that one partner has sex outside her or his
primary romantic relationship. Emotional infidelity occurs when one partner develops an intense
emotional attachment outside her or his primary romantic relationship. Some evolutionary
psychologists (Buss et al., 1992) have argued that men are likely to be more upset if they
discover their partner has engaged in sexual infidelity than if they discover their partner has
engaged in emotional. They also argued that women are likely to be more upset if they discover
that their partner has engaged in emotional infidelity than sexual. Other researchers working
from a social-cognitive perspective have argued that such sex differences do not exist (Harris,
2003a) or that they can be explained by prevailing stereotypes about the co-occurrence of the
two types of infidelity at once (DeSteno & Salovey, 1996).
Resolving this issue is of importance to social scientists for several reasons. First, Cano
and O’Leary (1997) argued that jealousy is an important emotion to address in couple’s therapy.
The different reactions that men and women have to jealousy based on different types of
infidelity can have an important impact on how therapists should seek to address jealousy in their
sessions. Furthermore, this issue has become an important area of controversy regarding whether
or not sex differences are rooted more in biology or socialization (Harris, 2003a). Several
researchers have singled this prediction out as one of the most compelling demonstrations of the
heuristic value of theories derived from an evolutionary psychology perspective (Goetz &

4
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Shackelford, 2006; Sesardic, 2003). Before presenting the results of a series of meta-analyses of
the research in this area, I will review the varying perspectives concerning this issue.
Evolutionary Psychology Perspective
Buss (2000) explained that one of the fundamental postulates of evolutionary psychology
(EP) is that men and women have always faced different challenges associated with
reproduction. This theorizing focuses on the reproductive challenges of heterosexual couples.
These separate problems produced different solutions as humans adapted to their environment.
Specifically, men were predicted to be more upset at the discovery of their mate’s extradyadic
sex than their mate’s extradyadic emotional involvement. Women were predicted to be more
upset over the discovery of their mate’s extradyadic emotional involvement than their mate’s
extradyadic sex.
Buss et al. (1992) suggested that this difference stems from evolutionary pressures. A
man, they pointed out, could never be certain if he is the biological father of his mate’s child
during the long period of human evolution. Clearly a man can get genetic testing now, but from
this perspective, jealousy is thought to be based on the human male’s biological characteristics
that were developed long before genetic testing. If his mate does not birth his children, his genes
will not be passed on; therefore, any genetic variation that helps men prevent other men from
having sex with his mate will be selected. Buss et al. claimed that sexual jealousy evolved to fill
that need.
According to Buss et al. (1992), women face a different reproductive problem. Whenever
a woman bears a child, she is absolutely certain that her genetic material will be passed on in that
child so that the sexual faithfulness of her mate is irrelevant. However, if her mate becomes
emotionally attached to another female, he may decide to devote his resources to the rearing of

5
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
that woman’s child rather than her own. The loss of her mate’s resources may significantly
reduce the survival of, and eventual reproduction by, her genetic child. Because of this problem,
Buss et al. suggested that women were genetically predisposed to be motivated to prevent their
mate from becoming emotionally attached to other women. They noted that “cues to the
development of a deep emotional attachment have been reliable leading indicators to women of
potential reduction or loss of their mate’s investment” (p. 251). The EP perspective thus
proposed that men would be more upset if their partner engaged in sexual infidelity than
emotional infidelity whereas women would be more upset if their partner engaged in emotional
infidelity than sexual.
Social-Cognitive Perspective
Harris’s (2003a) social-cognitive theory of jealousy offers predictions that are distinct
from those derived from the EP hypothesis. Harris argued that evolving a mechanism that
focuses on either type of infidelity would not have been adaptive. She suggested that men would
not want to focus on cues to sexual infidelity because it would likely be too late for them to
prevent infidelity by the time overt sexual cues were present. She also pointed out that in many
cases the cues of emotional and sexual infidelity overlap substantially and vary from culture to
culture. These problems would necessitate a general mechanism for detecting infidelity rather
than a content-specific one.
Harris (2003a, p. 119) argued that “jealousy can be induced when any important aspect of
an interpersonal relationship is threatened.” Whenever a rival appears to be threatening an
individual’s relationship, that individual makes a judgment about how threatening that behavior
is and what he or she should do about it. Harris noted that the cognitive appraisal literature on
jealousy finds that interpretation of the partner’s behavior is a key part of jealousy arousal. For

6
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
example, when an individual sees her or his mate talking to a desirable potential rival,
evaluations are made of how threatening the rival is and what the meaning of their interaction is.
If the mate is acting in ways that can be interpreted as flirtatious in one’s culture, then jealousy is
aroused. This general detection mechanism allows both cultural and cognitive elements to play a
role in jealousy arousal. Harris pointed out that an overall drive to make appraisals about threats
to one’s primary relationship could just as easily have evolved similarly for both sexes and
would have provided an adaptive advantage for both. Thus Harris proposed that there are no sex
differences in the types of jealousy that are upsetting to women and men.
Double-Shot Perspective
Another critique of the EP position was provided by DeSteno and Salovey (1996) who
proposed what they called the “double-shot hypothesis.” In the original Buss et al. (1992)
studies, participants were shown two pairs of scenarios (referred to in this paper as scenario pair
1 and 2). In each pair of scenarios, one of them described emotional infidelity and the other
described sexual infidelity. The participants were asked to choose which situation was more
distressing. The double-shot hypothesis argued that the participants do not perceive each
scenario as presenting only one type of infidelity; rather, because of common stereotypes about
how each sex becomes romantically attached, emotional and sexual infidelities were perceived
intertwined in a "double shot."
DeSteno and Salovey (1996) argued that when a man learns that his female partner has
had sex with another man, he assumes that she is also in love with him because women are
stereotypically believed to have sex only with individuals with whom they are also emotionally
involved. Thus sexual infidelity by women is perceived by stereotyping men as both sexual and
emotional. In contrast, stereotyping men can envision emotional attachments by women devoid

7
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
of sexuality. If the double-shot interpretation then was an accurate description of how women's
sexual infidelity is perceived by men, men would logically choose sexual infidelity as more
distressing because it probably involves both forms of infidelity.
At the same time, DeSteno and Salovey (1996) predicted that gender stereotyping by
women would follow an opposite logic. They argued that stereotyping women believe that men
who form deep emotional attachments with women are probably also having sex with them
whereas men often have sex without emotional attachment. So for the women, emotional
infidelity should be rated as more distressing because women assume that sexual infidelity is also
occurring. Both forms of gender stereotyping then would work in tandem to increase the gap in
women's and men's infidelity ratings, and indeed this hypothesized similarity was what DeSteno
and Salovey found. Furthermore, the description of sexual infidelity they showed to participants
in Buss et al.’s (1992) study described it as “passionate sexual intercourse” (see Table 1,
scenario pair 1), possibly further conflating sexual with emotional infidelity.
In order to tease apart the influence of sexuality and emotions, Buss et al. (1999)
developed four additional pairs of scenarios that directly addressed both sexual and emotional
infidelity. The first added scenario pair asked participants to imagine that both types of infidelity
had occurred and then asked which was more distressing (see Question 3 in Table 1). This
forced-choice directly takes the differential base rates of both occurring suggested by the doubleshot into account by forcing the participants to consider both types at one time. The additional
three scenarios specify one transgression without the other (see Scenario pairs 4, 5, and 6 in
Table 1). In these meta-analyses, if the predicted sex difference emerges across studies using
these scenario pairs, such a finding would be inconsistent with the double-shot hypothesis.
Several researchers have examined the problem using this methodology (e.g., Brase, Caprar, &

8
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Voracek, 2004; Henline, Lamke, & Howard, 2007; Ward & Voracek, 2004), and these results
will be included in the present meta-analyses. These studies generally find the statistically
significant interactions predicted by EP between sex of the participant and the type of infidelity
chosen as more distressing. Yet it remains to be seen if the effect sizes associated with responses
to the double-shot scenarios are as large as those found for the original scenarios.
Other researchers have argued that the double-shot hypothesis can be tested by examining
the responses of gay men and lesbians. Dijkstra and colleagues (2001) suggested that gay men
and lesbians perceive infidelity similarly to heterosexuals of the other sex, basing their
stereotyped expectations on the sex of their partner rather than on their own sex. Based on this
interpretation, stereotyping gay men, like heterosexual women, would assume that if their male
partner had committed emotional infidelity, that partner was also having sex; however, they
would not necessarily equate sexual involvement with emotional connection. Stereotyping
lesbians, like heterosexual men, would assume that the sexual infidelity of their female partner
implies emotional infidelity as well, whereas they would not necessarily equate emotional
sharing with sexual transgression. Dijkstra et al. claimed that consistently finding that gay men
are more concerned about emotional, and lesbians with sexual, infidelity would be consistent
with the double-shot hypothesis. This prediction suggests that the sex difference in infidelity
reactions is not a product of innate differences in jealousy, but rather a stereotypic response to
the expected behavior of one’s partner. If gay and lesbian samples show a parallel pattern then
based on the sex of their partner, then that finding would be consistent with the double-shot
hypothesis.
It is important to note that this hypothesis does not imply that lesbians are more likely
than heterosexual women to possess male characteristics or that gay men are more likely to

9
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
possess female characteristics than heterosexual men. Instead, the hypothesis proposes that
everyone has the same gender-stereotypical assumptions about men and women and that they
apply those assumptions to their partner’s behavior. Theoretically, bisexual individuals of either
sex would be more upset by sexual infidelity when they happen to have a female partner but
would be more upset by emotional infidelity when they have a male partner. Unfortunately, no
research has been conducted on that hypothesis. Thus samples of gay men and lesbians will be
used to test the double-shot hypothesis in the present meta-analyses.
Previous Meta-Analyses
Harris's (2003a) meta-analysis of 32 studies found insubstantial and inconsistent sex
differences in response to the different types of infidelity consistent with the social-cognitive
perspective Harris proposed. That meta-analysis also found that sexual orientation moderated the
relationship between sex and response to infidelity such that the same partner-focused pattern
was found for samples of gay men and lesbians. This finding was consistent with the double-shot
perspective. The Harris meta-analysis also found that the effect sizes were larger when student
samples were used than non-student samples. Harris proposed that student samples find a larger
effect because young males have a heightened sex drive than they do at other points in their life
which might cause them to have an increased focus on sex.
The current meta-analyses will expand on Harris’s (2003a) excellent review in several
ways. First, the 66 new studies that have been conducted since then will triple the total size of the
sample of studies. Furthermore, Harris also argued that continuous measures of jealousy do not
find sex differences in the amount of jealousy aroused by the two types of infidelity. At the time
of Harris’s publication, there were not enough studies employing continuous measures to test
that assertion meta-analytically. The current meta-analyses will be able to test the claim that the

10
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
effects are smaller when the participants are rating each type of infidelity on continuous response
scales instead of the dichotomous forced-choice items. Also, the current meta-analyses will
examine the average effect size for the first time for the studies that employed the four new pairs
of scenarios (Buss et al., 1999) that were designed to test the double-shot hypothesis.
Furthermore, Harris's (2003a) meta-analysis examined the issue of cross-cultural
variability but did not have enough international samples to determine the effects of different
cultures on reactions to emotional and sexual infidelity. Although some minor cultural variability
is expected under the EP predictions (Sagarin, 2005), as Buss et al. (1999) explained in their
seminal article:
...the underlying psychology of jealousy is proposed to contain design features that reflect
solutions to the recurrent adaptive problems that each sex faced over the long expanse of
human evolutionary history. These design features are hypothesized to be universal, and
hence are predicted to be found across cultures. This provides an additional arena for
empirical testing and potential falsification. (p. 126)
In order to test this hypothesis, samples from different cultures will be compared in the present
meta-analyses. If the predicted set of findings emerges in some cultures and the opposite pattern
in others, Harris argues that such differences would be consistent with the social-cognitive
perspective because the circumstances that indicate threats to the relationship vary from culture
to culture. These two perspectives thus offer competing hypotheses. Although the current metaanalyses do not contain enough international samples for a culture-by-culture comparison, there
is sufficient data to test whether the United States differs from the rest of the world. Ideally,
cultural-specific hypotheses would be derived and tested from the social-cognitive theory based

11
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
on culture specific triggers of jealousy; however, such detailed comparisons await future
research.
Method
Literature Search
Several steps were taken in order to find the maximum number of studies. Two databases
were searched using the term “infidelity” including Communication and Mass Media Complete
and PsychINFO. Web of Science was used in order to find all the articles that cited the seminal
work in this area by Buss et al. (1992). The references sections of all obtained articles, especially
the research reviews by Harris (2003a) and Buss (2000, 2007), were also combed to find
additional research articles. The possibility of my search missing an unacceptable number of null
unpublished findings is belied by the presence of several articles that were published focusing on
null findings in this area (DeSteno, Bartlett, Braverman, & Salovey, 2002; Grice & Seely, 2000;
Harris, 2000, 2003a, 2003b; Sheets & Wolfe, 2001).
Study Selection
There have been several other dependent variables examined including using fMRI scans
(Takahashi et al., 2006), physiological measures (Buss et al., 1992; Grice & Seely, 2000) and
purely cognitive reactions (Schützwohl & Koch, 2004). Because there are not enough articles
using any of these methodologies to be meta-analyzed, my review is limited to articles that report
studies using participant self-report of emotional reactions to both types of infidelity. From this
set of articles, 172 effect sizes were coded. For scenario pair 1, there were 54 studies (N =
10,632); for scenario pair 2, 29 (N = 5,035); for scenario pair 3, 14 (N = 2,519); for scenario pair
4, 18 (N = 4,115); for scenario pair 5, 7(N = 1,561); and for scenario pair 6, 8 (N = 1,561). There
were 42 (N = 7,876) studies that reported data from continuous measures.

12
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Coding
The coding and effect sizes for each study can be obtained by contacting the author.
Aspects of the sample that were coded include whether or not it used a student sample, the region
from which the sample was drawn (U.S. or international), the sexual orientation of the sample
(heterosexual or lesbian and gay), and the size of the sample including the breakdown by
participants' sex. Next the methodology of the studies was coded for whether the study used the
forced-choice format or a continuous measure as well as the infidelity scenarios presented to the
participants. Reliabilities for the continuous measures were also recorded when they were
reported.
In addition, several different effect sizes were calculated. For the forced-choice measures,
the man:woman odds ratio was computed by calculating the odds of a man choosing sexual
infidelity as more distressing than emotional infidelity divided by the odds of a woman choosing
sexual as more distressing than emotional. The natural log of each odds ratio was used to
calculate the weighted mean odds ratio in order to place a null effect at zero and allow more
accurate statistical analysis (Haddock, Rindskopf, & Shadish, 1998). From the odds ratio,
Digby’s (1983) tetrachoric correlation approximation was calculated. Positive correlations would
indicate that men are more likely than women to choose sexual infidelity as more distressing
than emotional; negative correlations, that women are more likely. The correlation coefficient
was not transformed to Fisher’s z because recent simulation studies have shown that this
transformation tends to reduce accuracy in meta-analyses (Schulze, 2007).
Correlations were also calculated using the continuous measure data. The correlation was
computed by calculating the d statistic and converting it to the correlation coefficient. Both the
within-subject comparisons and the between-subject comparisons were calculated this way as per

13
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
the recommendations in Dunlap, Cortina, Vaslow, and Burke (1996). There were four
correlations calculated for each study. First, the difference between men’s scores in response to
sexual versus emotional infidelity were created. Positive correlations indicate that the men
reported that sexual infidelity would cause stronger emotional reactions than emotional
infidelity. The second correlation calculated was the same difference women, with positive
scores indicating that the women in that sample thought sexual infidelity would cause them to
feel more distress than emotional. The third and fourth were when men and women were then
compared within type of infidelity, and scores were calculated to show if men thought each kind
of infidelity would produce stronger emotions than reported by the women in their sample (as
indicated by positive correlations).
Controversies have arisen concerning which statistical comparison is the proper way to
test the EP predictions (Buller, 2005; Buss & Haselton, 2005; Harris, 2005, Sagarin, 2005).
Buller (2005) explained that when one conducts a study measuring which type of infidelity is
more upsetting to which sex, there are a number of ways to analyze the resulting dataset. Buller
suggested that each sex should be examined separately, and the size of the preference for that
sex’s predicted type of infidelity should be measured. Essentially, one looks at how much more
men are distressed by sexual infidelity than emotional and then one looks at how much more
women are distressed by emotional infidelity than sexual. This choice preserves the original EP
predictions of Buss et al. (1992) that men would be more likely to be upset by sexual infidelity
than emotional and women would be more likely to be upset by emotional than sexual (Lishner,
Nguyen, Stocks, & Zillmer, 2008). Buller’s recommendations will be used here to analyze my
data.

14
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Data Analysis
The effect sizes were averaged using the sample size weighting method outlined in
Hunter and Schmidt (2004). There were several pairs of scenarios commonly used in the
literature that were based on Buss et al.’s (1992) and Buss et al.’s (1999) scenarios. Many of the
studies using Buss et al.’s (1999) forced-choice items asked participants to respond to more than
one of the six pairs of scenarios. Effect sizes for the forced-choice data were grouped and
averaged based on which of Buss et al.’s (1992; 1999) pairs of scenarios they tested in order to
determine if the different pairs of scenarios are substantially different from each other and to
avoid non-independence of data. The scenarios in the studies were coded based on which of the
Buss et al. pairs of scenarios the authors used (see Table 1 for the scenarios).
Some of the studies that used the forced-choice items asked the participants to indicate
which type of infidelity would produce a stronger emotional reaction for several different
emotions. In such cases, participants' ratings of “distress” were used in keeping with the seminal
Buss et al. (1992) study. If distress was not measured, upset (followed by jealousy) was used. For
those studies using continuous measures, the effect sizes were corrected for attenuation due to
error of measurement using Hunter and Schmidt’s (2004) artifact distribution method.
The correlation coefficient was used to perform the statistical tests to determine if further
moderator searches were necessary. If 75% or more of the obtained variance can be explained by
sampling error and artifacts, the remainder can be assumed to be accounted for by uncorrected
artifacts so that further moderator analysis is deemed unnecessary (Hunter & Schmidt, 2004).
Accounting for more than 75% of the obtained variance also indicates that the estimate of the
population correlation probably represents one population of studies (a fixed effects estimate,
also called a homogeneous effect), whereas if less than 75% of the variance can be explained,

15
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
then the estimate is the mean of a range of population correlations (a random effects estimate,
also called a heterogeneous effect).
Credibility intervals indicate how wide the population effect sizes are expected to vary
because of the undetected moderators and uncorrected artifacts (Hunter & Schmidt, 2000). They
represent an index of how heterogeneous the findings are. The wider the credibility interval, the
more heterogeneous the body of studies is. If 100% of the variance can be attributed to sampling
error and artifacts, then there is no credibility interval, and the effect is thought to be an accurate
point estimate of the population parameter. Confidence intervals were not calculated because
they are often biased in the presence of heterogeneity (Hunter & Schmidt, 2000). Hunter and
Schmidt (2000) noted that the same problem applies to calculating statistical significance tests of
effect size estimates. Because of these considerations, credibility intervals were reported, and
neither confidence intervals nor statistical significance tests were calculated.
Results
Summary
In general, the results were not consistent with the EP predictions. For the most part, both
men and women were more likely to report that emotional infidelity would be more distressing
than sexual infidelity when forced to choose. For the continuous data, both men and women
indicated that sexual infidelity would be more upsetting. The data were consistent with the
social-cognitive predictions because there were no consistent sex effects, especially for the
continuous data. The data were also consistent with the double-shot hypothesis prediction
concerning gay men and lesbians such that the effect was parallel according to the sex of the
raters' partner. Below, I first will examine the data tables, followed by the data relevant to each
perspective.

16
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Data Tables
Table 2 contains the forced-choice data such that participants were asked to indicate
which type of infidelity would be more distressing. It is divided according to which of the six
pairs of scenarios participants were responding and further subdivided by moderator (students,
region, and sexual orientation). Table 3 presents the summary of the meta-analyses of the studies
that used continuous measures of emotional reaction to each type of infidelity separately. The
effect sizes are broken down by the comparisons of sexual with emotional infidelity and of men
and women.
Evolutionary Psychology Perspective's Predictions
Recall that according to the EP predictions men would consider sexual infidelity to be
more distressing than emotional. Examination of Column 6 in Table 2 shows the extent to which
men consider sexual infidelity to be more distressing than emotional. For the first and fourth
pairs of scenarios, heterosexual men tended to be slightly more likely to be more distressed by
sexual infidelity than emotional as indicated by the odds being higher than 1.0. For the other four
pairs of scenarios, men were consistently more likely to consider emotional infidelity to be more
distressing as indicated by the odds of men choosing sexual infidelity to be more distressing than
emotional being consistently below 1.0. Table 3 shows that men’s ratings of how distressing
sexual infidelity would be are higher than their ratings of how distressing emotional infidelity
would be. For none of these estimates did sampling error explain enough variance to indicate a
homogeneous set of effect sizes. This heterogeneity suggests the presence of moderators. The
forced-choice data are not consistent with the prediction that men would find sexual infidelity
more distressing than emotional but the continuous data were consistent with that prediction.

17
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
According to the predictions derived from EP, it was also predicted that women would
consider emotional infidelity to be more distressing than sexual. Table 2 shows that the odds of a
heterosexual woman choosing sexual infidelity as more distressing than emotional are
consistently below 1.0 for every pair of scenarios. This finding is consistent with the EP
hypothesis. On the other hand, Table 3 shows that women who rated how distressing each type
of infidelity was separately consistently rated sexual infidelity as more distressing than
emotional. This finding is inconsistent with the EP hypothesis. Essentially, the forced-choice
data show that both sexes tended to regard emotional infidelity as more distressing but the
continuous data showed that both sexes regarded sexual infidelity as more distressing. Although
the two measurement techniques produce different results, both sexes generally chose the same
type of infidelity as more distressing.
According to Buss et al. (1999), EP would predict that although the effect size may vary,
men in every culture would perceive sexual infidelity as more distressing than emotional
whereas women would consistently perceive emotional infidelity as more distressing than sexual.
Examination of the odds of heterosexual men reporting that sexual infidelity would be more
distressing than emotional found in Column 6 of Table 2 shows that the odds are in the predicted
direction (greater than 1.0) for the U.S. samples for scenario pairs 1, 3, 4, 5, and 6, but not 2. The
odds for the international samples are in the predicted direction only for scenario pair 4. In every
other case, heterosexual men living in countries outside the United States were more likely to
indicate that emotional infidelity by their partner would be more distressing than sexual. Given
that U.S. men do tend to find sexual infidelity to be more distressing than emotional, but the men
from the rest of the world do not, the data are not consistent with the EP-derived prediction of
cross-cultural consistency. Heterosexual women were consistently more likely to indicate that

18
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
emotional infidelity would be more distressing than sexual − every moderator subdivision for
heterosexual women contained odds of less than 1.0. This finding was consistent with the EP
hypothesis of cross-cultural consistency for women.
Social-Cognitive Perspective's Predictions
Social-cognitive theory predicted that there would be no substantial sex differences
concerning which type of infidelity participants would rate as more distressing. As stated above,
for most subsamples responding to the force-choice items, both sexes tended to report that
emotional infidelity would be more distressing than sexual. Also, both sexes indicated that
sexual infidelity would be more distressing than emotional on the continuous measures data
displayed in Table 2. This result is consistent with the social-cognitive hypothesis.
In the explication of the social-cognitive hypothesis, Harris (2003a) also included the
prediction that student status would increase the size of the sex differences because young men
tend to be more focused on sexuality than older men. There were only enough non-student
samples to subdivide the results for scenario pairs 1 and 2. The only subsample of heterosexual
men who responded to scenario pair 1 who were likely to indicate that sexual infidelity would be
more distressing than emotional were the group of samples from U.S. students. American nonstudents and the international samples of men were consistently more likely to choose emotional
infidelity as more distressing than sexual. This finding is consistent with the social-cognitive
perspective. Every subsample of male heterosexual participants who responded to scenario pair 2
was more likely to indicate that emotional infidelity would be more distressing that sexual.
Although the meta-analysis of scenario pair 2 did suggest that students responded in the same
way as non-students, none of the samples who responded to this scenario produced results
consistent with the EP perspective.

19
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Double-shot Perspective's Predictions
According to the double-shot prediction, when the possibility of one type of infidelity
implying the presence of both was controlled for, the sex differences were predicted to be
insubstantial. There is some support for this hypothesis in that the point estimates of the overall
effect sizes found in Column 2 of Table 2 are somewhat larger for the first two scenario pairs
than the effect sizes for the remaining four double-shot scenario pairs. This finding should be
considered with caution because the credibility intervals are so wide given the heterogeneity of
variance that there appear to be moderators that could make the effect sizes equivalent.
The double-shot hypothesis also predicted that gay men would consider emotional
infidelity to be more distressing than sexual infidelity. Table 2 shows that gay men considered
emotional infidelity to be more distressing for every scenario pair for which there was enough
samples to calculate an average effect. (For scenario pairs for which there is not a set with
lesbians and gay men listed in Table 2, it is because there was only one study with lesbians and
gay men in the set of studies available for that scenario pair). This finding is consistent with the
double-shot hypothesis. The double-shot hypothesis also predicted that lesbians would consider
sexual infidelity to be more distressing than emotional. The data were consistent with this
prediction such that lesbians were much more likely to consider sexual infidelity as more
distressing than emotional. For scenario pair 1, the odds of a lesbian choosing sexual infidelity as
more distressing was nearly equal to her chances of choosing emotional. For scenario pair 2,
lesbians were more likely to report that emotional infidelity would be more distressing than
sexual. Despite this inconsistency, for scenario pairs 1 and 4, lesbians were more likely than gay
men to choose sexual infidelity as more distressing than emotional. This finding is the exact
opposite of the standard EP prediction for women; instead, the data from lesbians were largely

20
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
consistent with the double-shot hypothesis. Overall, the support for the double-shot hypotheses
was somewhat equivocal, but the data did tend towards consistency with the double-shot
predictions.
Discussion
The EP hypotheses predicted that men would be more likely to indicate that sexual
infidelity would be more distressing than emotional. In general, the data were not consistent with
this hypothesis because most samples who responded to the forced-choice questions indicated
that emotional infidelity was more distressing than sexual, regardless of their sex. Furthermore,
the samples who responded to the continuous questions consistently indicated that sexual
infidelity was more distressing than emotional, again regardless of their biological sex.
The EP hypothesis found the strongest support from U.S. students. Most non-student men
and men from other countries were more likely to indicate that emotional infidelity would be
more distressing than sexual. These data suggest that the EP predictions are only able to explain
the choices of American heterosexual male students. If, however, the EP hypothesis can only
explain the behavior of these U.S. students, it seems unlikely that an evolutionary hypothesis is
an appropriate explanatory mechanism. Perhaps these data show a case where student samples
produce the distorted view of human nature that Sears (1986) predicted. Harris (2003a)
suggested this difference was due to young men’s heightened interest in sexuality.
The EP hypothesis also predicted that women would find emotional infidelity to be more
upsetting than sexual. The data were largely consistent with this hypothesis, although this finding
may simply be a reflection of the more general pattern that both men and women tend to choose
emotional infidelity as more distressing than sexual. On the other hand, even though most people
chose emotional infidelity as more distressing, heterosexual women were more likely to choose

21
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
emotional infidelity as more distressing than heterosexual men. This result is consistent with EP
predictions if one uses the more liberal criteria of Sagarin (2005) that only required an
interaction between participants' sex and the type of infidelity that distresses them more.
The findings were largely consistent with Harris’s (2003a) social-cognitive approach. She
argued that men and women did not evolve separate, content-specific mechanisms for detecting
relational cheating. Instead, she argued that they both evolved a general vigilance against
indicators of infidelity. This general vigilance causes people to look for cues of infidelity and to
use their specific cultural lens to interpret them. From this perspective, both types of infidelity
would probably be perceived as threatening. Thus she predicted no sex differences and cultural
variability in the direction of the effects. The forced-choice data found that for the most part,
men and women are likely to consider emotional infidelity to be more distressing than sexual.
The finding that American male students tended to consider sexual infidelity more distressing
whereas most other samples of men did not is consistent with her prediction of cultural
variability.
The continuous data were the most inconsistent with the EP predictions and most
consistent with Harris’s (2003a) social-cognitive prediction of no sex differences. Harris
predicted that both sexes would simply make an assessment of a given behavior by their partner
and use their cultural lens to determine if there is a threat to their relationship. There was no
substantial interaction between sex and type of infidelity. Both sexes rated sexual infidelity as
more distressing than emotional and women in general rated both types of infidelity as more
distressing than men. All the findings in the continuous response scale data, even after correcting
for measurement error, were still quite small.

22
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
The present evidence was more consistent than inconsistent with the double-shot
predictions. The double-shot scenarios did find smaller sex differences than the original
scenarios, but the heterogeneity of variance in those added sets of effect sizes makes this
conclusion tenuous. When comparing gay men's and lesbians' responses to those of
heterosexuals, they were similar based on the sex of the rater's partner. These results are
consistent with the double-shot hypothesis (Dijkstra et al., 2001) in that: (a) most people whose
partner is a man (i.e., gay men and heterosexual women) will consider a report of emotional
infidelity to likely imply the co-occurrence of sexual infidelity whereas sexual infidelity does not
imply emotional and (b) most people whose partner is a woman (i.e., lesbians and heterosexual
men) will believe that if their partner is having extradyadic sex, there is also an emotional
attachment whereas an emotional attachment does not imply a sexual one. This line of research
suggests that the effects found in previous studies were not rooted in the nature of their
participants' sexual orientation, but rather in their perceptions of the likely pattern of behavior
appropriate to stereotyping of their partner’s gender.
Interestingly enough, this pattern emerged for the studies using samples of gay men and
lesbians who responded to scenario 4 which stated clearly that only one type of infidelity was
occurring and that the other was not. The scenarios designed to test the double-shot hypothesis
may have failed to convince people that the presence of one type of infidelity did not imply that
the other was also occurring. Dijkstra et al. (2001) suggested that even if the scenario specifies
that only one type of infidelity is taking place, the devastating effect of the co-occurrence of both
warrants increased vigilance even if only one type appears to be present. It is also possible that
an explanation other then the double-shot is required to explain the results from the samples of
gay men and lesbians.

23
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Methodology Differences
The results from the forced-choice meta-analyses consistently found that heterosexual
women were more likely to indicate that emotional infidelity would be more distressing than
sexual. On the other hand, the results from the meta-analyses of the continuous scale studies
found that women were consistently more likely to be distressed by sexual infidelity than
emotional. DeSteno et al. (2002) argued that when faced with the forced-choice methodology,
participants put forth more cognitive effort than when rating emotional responses on Likert
scales. They demonstrated that when their participants were under cognitive load, the sex
difference was substantially diminished. They suggested that continuous measures are a better
indicator of jealousy because they tap a less thoughtful and more emotional reaction.
Shackelford, Buss, and Bennett (2002) argued that continuous measures are problematic because
they allow respondents to indicate that both types of infidelity would be equally distressing. This
possibility did not appear to be a problem in the continuous measure studies reviewed here
because differences were reliably detected. These differences, however, were not in the direction
specified by the hypotheses derived from EP.
Comparison to the Harris Meta-Analysis
The current analysis replicated Harris’s (2003a) findings concerning the effects of sexual
orientation and student status. That meta-analysis did not find that culture moderated the size of
the sex difference, but Harris noted there may not have been enough international studies to
detect differences. The current meta-analyses included more international samples and was able
to detect a difference between U.S. and international samples. These findings greatly expanded
Harris’s initial work on the nature of jealousy. Also, the current meta-analyses of the continuous
response scale data provided the strongest rebuttal to the EP hypothesis. By examining these

24
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
additional data (including dozens of additional studies), the current meta-analyses were able to
strengthen Harris’s critique of the EP explanation of jealousy. Future work should expand
Harris’s argument by empirically demonstrating the particular features of cultures that moderate
the types of behaviors that arouse jealousy. This expansion would make Harris’s position more
falsifiable than the current broad prediction of cultural heterogeneity.
Limitations
First, the lack of more studies conducted outside the United States prevented these metaanalyses from conducting a stronger test of the competing hypotheses concerning cross-cultural
consistency of the direction of the predicted sex difference. Until more research is conducted in
more countries, especially based on aspects of the particular cultures in question, the support for
the social-cognitive perspective must remain tentative. Given the small sample of non-U.S.
countries, my sample may also be biased towards particular regions of the world. As it stands,
American students seem to be the only group in which men are consistently more likely to
perceive sexual infidelity as more distressing than emotional in response to a forced-choice
question. Future work is needed to identify the moderators of this effect. Harris (2003a)
suggested it was young men’s elevated focus on sex. Future work might find cultures with a
heightened focus on sex to determine if one or both sexes are more or less distressed by sexual
infidelity in that culture. Additionally, the meta-analyses reported are only related to self-reports
of distress in reaction to hypothetical scenarios. More recent work has been conducted on recall
of cues to each type of infidelity (Schützwohl & Koch, 2004) and if cognitive load can change
how individuals react to each type of infidelity (DeSteno et al., 2002). Research that goes beyond
the simple self-report of distress will continue to enrich this literature.

25
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Conclusion
The evidence was not consistent with the EP predictions. My meta-analyses failed to
consistently find that men are more likely to perceive sexual infidelity as more distressing than
emotional, and this finding weakens the explanatory power of the EP hypothesis about jealousy.
The continuous response scale data suggested that both sexes perceive sexual infidelity as more
distressing than emotional. The data were largely consistent with Harris’s (2003a) socialcognitive perspective and the double-shot perspective (DeSteno & Salovey, 1996).
Rather than conducting further replications of the same six forced-choice scenarios,
future work would profit from using the various perspectives to test different cognitive and
behavioral predictions. For example, Schützwohl (2008a) has conducted some intriguing studies
demonstrating that men are more distracted by cues to sexual infidelity and women are more
distracted by emotional cues. Schützwohl (2008b) has also expanded the research in this area
beyond jealousy and into relief − such that men are more relieved when sexual jealousy is
disconfirmed and women are more relieved when emotional jealousy is disconfirmed. Although
the traditional self-report measures in this area are not consistent with the EP predictions, more
subtle means for investigating the proposed sex differences (such as Schützwohl’s program of
research) may find additional evidence consistent with the EP predictions. Also, research with
bisexual samples would provide an interesting test of the double-shot hypothesis given that these
individuals would be predicted to respond based on their current partner rather than their own
sex.
Broadly speaking, these meta-analyses suggest that men and women do not differ in the
types of infidelity that they find distressing. Instead, men and women seem to become distressed
to the extent that their partner’s behavior threatens their relationship rather than affects their

26
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
long-term reproductive ability. This finding is fitting given that jealousy was thought to evolve in
order to help individuals maintain their close relationships in a hostile environment that required
help from others for survival.

27
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
References
References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the meta-analyses.
*Abraham, W. T., Cramer, R. E., Fernandez, A. M., & Mahler, E. (2001). Infidelity, race,
and gender: An evolutionary perspective on asymmetries in subjective distress to
violations-of-trust. Current Psychology, 20, 337-348.
*Ahrndt, S. M., & Dindia, K. (2006, November). Distress in response to infidelity: An
examination of the evolutionary perspective. Paper presented at the meeting of the
National Communication Association, San Antonio, TX.
*Becker, D. V., Sagarin, B. J., Guadagno, R. E., Millevoi, A., & Nicastle, L. D. (2004). When
the sexes need not differ: Emotional responses to the sexual and emotional aspects of
infidelity. Personal Relationships, 11, 529-538.
*Berman, M. I., & Frazier, P. A. (2005). Relationship power and betrayal experience as
predictors of reactions to infidelity. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31,
1617-1627.
*Bohner, G., & Wanke, M. (2004). Priming of AIDS and reactions to infidelity: Are sex
differences in jealousy context-dependent? Zeitschrift fur Sozialpsychologie,
35, 107-114.
*Brase, G. L., Caprar, D. V., & Voracek, M. (2004). Sex differences in response to
relationship threats in England and Romania. Journal of Social and Personal
Relationships, 21, 763-778.
Buller, D. J. (2005). Evolutionary psychology: The emperor’s new paradigm. TRENDS in
Cognitive Sciences, 9, 277-283.
Buss, D. M. (2000). The dangerous passion. New York: The Free Press.

28
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Buss, D. M. (2007). The evolution of human mating. Acta psychological Sinica, 39, 502512.
Buss, D. M., & Haselton, M. (2005). The evolution of jealousy. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 9, 506-507.
*Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., & Semmelroth, J. (1992). Sex differences in
jealousy: Evolution, physiology, and psychology. Psychological Science, 3, 251-255.
*Buss, D. M., Shackelford, T. K., Kirkpatrick, L. A., Choe, J. C., Lim, H. K., Hasegawa,
M., … Bennett, K. (1999). Jealousy and the nature of beliefs about infidelity: Tests of
competing hypotheses about sex differences in the United States, Korea, and Japan.
Personal Relationships, 6, 25-150.
*Buunk, B. P., Angleitner, A., Oubaid, V., & Buss, D. M. (1996). Sex differences in
jealousy in evolutionary and cultural perspective: Tests from the Netherlands, German,
and the United States. Psychological Science, 7, 359-363.
*Cann, A., & Baucom, T. R. (2004). Former partners and new rivals as threats to a
relationship: Infidelity type, gender, and commitment as factors related to distress and
forgiveness. Personal Relationships, 11, 305-318.
*Cann, A., Mangum, J. L., & Wells, M. (2001). Distress in response to relationship
infidelity: The roles of gender and attitudes about relationships. The Journal of Sex
Research, 38, 185-190.
Cano, A., & O’Leary, K. D. (1997). Romantic jealousy and affairs: Research and
implications for couple therapy. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 23, 249-275.
*Cramer, R. E., Abraham, W. T., Johnson, L. M., & Manning-Ryan, B. (2001). Gender

29
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
differences in subjective distress to emotional and sexual infidelity: Evolutionary or
logical inference explanation? Current Psychology, 20, 327-336.
*Cramer, R. E., Lipinski, R. E., Bowman, A., & Carollo, T. (2009). Subjective distress to
violations of trust in Mexican American close relationships conforms to evolutionary
principles. Current Psychology, 28, 1-11.
*Cramer, R. E., Lipinski, R. E., Meteer, J. D., & Houska, J. A. (2008). Sex differences in
subjective distress to unfaithfulness: Testing competing evolutionary and violation of
infidelity expectations hypotheses. The Journal of Social Psychology, 148, 389-405.
*Cramer, R. E., Manning-Ryan, B., Johnson, L. M., & Barbo, E. (2000). Sex differences in
subjective distress to violations of trust: Extending an evolutionary perspective. Basic
and Applied Social Psychology, 22, 101-109.
*De Souza, A. A. L., Verderane, M. P., Taira, J. T., & Otta, E. (2006). Emotional and
sexual jealousy as a function of sex and sexual orientation in a Brazilian sample.
Psychological Reports, 98, 529-535.
*DeSteno, D., Bartlett, M. Y., Braverman J., & Salovey, P. (2002). Sex differences in
jealousy: Evolutionary mechanism or artifact of measurement? Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83, 1103-1116.
*DeSteno, D. A., & Salovey, P. (1996). Evolutionary origins of sex differences in
jealousy? Questioning the “fitness” of the model. Psychological Science, 7, 367-372.
Digby, P. G. N. (1983). Approximating the tetrachoric correlation coeffiecient. Biometrics,
39, 753-757.
*Dijkstra, P., Groothof, H., Poel, G., Laverman, T., Schrier, M., & Buunk., B. (2001). Sex

30
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
differences in the events that elicit jealousy among homosexuals. Personal Relationships,
8, 41-54.
Dunlap, W. P., Cortina, J. M., Vaslow, J. B., & Burke, M. J. (1996). Meta-analysis of
experiments with matched groups or repeated measures designs. Psychological Methods,
1, 170-177.
*Edlund, J. E., Heider, J. D., Scherer, C. R., Farc, M. M., & Sagarin, B. J. (2006). Sex
differences in jealousy in response to actual infidelity. Evolutionary Psychology, 4, 462470.
*Edlund, J. E., & Sagarin, B. J. (2009). Sex differences in jealousy: Misinterpretation of
nonsignificant results as refuting the theory. Personal Relationships, 16, 67-78.
*Fernandez, A. M., Vera-Villarroel, P., Sierra, J. C., & Zubeidat, I. (2007). Distress in
response to emotional and sexual infidelity: Evidence of evolved gender differences in
Spanish students. Journal of Psychology, 141, 17-24.
*Gaulin, S., Silverman, I., Phillips, K., & Reiber, C. (1997). Activational hormonal
influences on abilities and attitudes. Evolution and Cognition, 3, 191-199.
*Geary, D. C., DeSoto, M. C., Hoard, M. K., Shildon. M. S., & Cooper, L. (2001).
Estrogens and relationship jealousy. Human Nature, 12, 299-320.
*Geary, D. C., Rumsey, M., Bow-Thomas, C. C., & Hoard, M. K. (1995). Sexual jealousy
as a facultative trait: Evidence from the pattern of sex differences in adults from China
and the United States. Ethology and Sociobiology, 16, 355-383.
Goetz, A. T., & Shackelford, T. K. (2006). Modern application of evolutionary theory to
psychology: Key concepts and clarifications. American Journal of Psychology, 119, 567584.

31
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
*Goldenberg, J. L., Landau, M. J., Pyszczynski, T., Cox, C. R., Greenberg, J., Solomon,
S., & Dunnam, H. (2003). Gender-typical responses to sexual and emotional infidelity as
a function of mortality salience induced self-esteem striving. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1585-1595.
*Green, M. C., & Sabini, J. (2006). Gender, socioeconomic status, age, and jealousy:
Emotional responses to infidelity in a national sample. Emotion, 6, 330-334.
Grice, J. W., & Seely, E. (2000). The evolution of sex differences in jealousy: Failure to
replicate previous results. Journal of Research in Personality, 34, 348-356.
Haddock, C. K., Rindskopf, D., & Shadish, W. R. (1998). Using odds ratios as effect sizes
for meta-analysis of dichotomous data: A primer on methods and issues. Psychological
Methods, 3, 339-353.
Harris, C. (2000). Psychophysiological responses to imagined infidelity: The specific innate
modular view of jealousy reconsidered. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
78, 1082-1091.
*Harris, C. (2002). Sexual and romantic jealousy in heterosexual and homosexual adults.
Psychological Science, 13, 7-12.
Harris, C. (2003a). A review of sex differences in sexual jealousy, including self-report
data, psychophysiological responses, interpersonal violence, and morbid jealousy.
Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7, 102-128.
*Harris, C. (2003b). Factors associated with jealousy over real and imagined infidelity: An
examination of the social-cognitive and evolutionary perspectives. Psychology of Women
Quarterly, 27, 319-329
Harris, C. (2005). Male and female jealousy, still more similar than different: Reply to

32
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Sagarin (2005). Personality and Social Psychology Review, 9, 76-86.
*Harris, C., & Christenfeld, N. (1996). Gender, jealousy, and reason. Psychological
Science, 7, 364-366.
*Henline, B. H., Lamke, L. K., & Howard, M. D. (2007). Exploring perceptions of online
infidelity. Personal Relationships, 14, 113-128.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2000). Fixed effects vs. random effects meta-analysis
models: Implications for cumulative research knowledge. International Journal of
Selection and Assessment, 8, 275-292.
Hunter, J. E., & Schmidt, F. L. (2004). Methods of meta-analysis: Correcting for error
and bias in research findings. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
*Hupka, R., & Bank, A. (1996). Sex differences in jealousy: Evolution or social
construction? Cross-Cultural Research, 30, 24-59.
*Landolfi, J. F., Geher, G., & Andrews, A. (2007). The role of stimulus specificity on
infidelity reactions: Seeing is disturbing. Current Psychology, 26, 46-59.
*Levy, K. N., & Kelly, K. M. (2010). Sex differences in jealousy: A contribution from
attachment theory. Psychological Science, 21, 168-173.
*Lishner, D. A., Nguyen, S., Stocks, E. L., & Zillmer, E. J. (2008). Are sexual and
emotional infidelity equally upsetting to men and women? Making sense of forced-choice
responses. Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 667-675.
*Mathes, E. W. (2003). Are sex differences in sexual vs emotional jealousy explained
better by differences in sexual strategies or uncertainty of paternity? Psychological
Reports, 93, 895-906.
*Mathes, E. W. (2005). Men’s desire for children carrying their genes and sexual jealousy:

33
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
A test of paternity uncertainty as an exploitation of male sexual jealousy. Psychological
Reports, 96, 791-798.
*Murphy, S. M., Vallacher, R. R., Shackelford, T. K., Bjorklund, & Yunger, J. L. (2006).
Relationship experience as a predictor of romantic jealousy. Personality and Individual
Differences, 40, 761-769.
*Miller, J. K., & Maner, S. L. (2009). Sex differences in response to sexual versus
emotional infidelity: The moderating role of individual differences. Personality and
Individual Differences, 46, 287-291.
*Penke, L., & Asendorpf, J. B. (2008). Evidence for conditional sex difference in
emotional but not in sexual jealousy at the automatic level of cognitive processing.
European Journal of Personality, 22,3-30.
*Pietrzak, R. H., Laird, J. D., Stevens, D. A., & Thompson, N. S. (2002). Sex differences
in human jealousy: A coordinated study of forced-choice, continuous rating-scale, and
physiological responses on the same subjects. Evolution and Human Behavior, 23, 83-94.
*Pines, A. M., & Friedman, A. (1998). Gender differences in romantic jealousy. The
Journal of Social Psychology, 138, 54-71.
*Russel, E. B., & Harton, H. C. (2005). The “other factors”: Using individual and
relationship characteristics to predict sexual and emotional jealousy. Current Psychology,
24, 242-257.
*Sabini, J., & Green, M. C. (2004). Emotional responses to sexual and emotional
infidelity: Constants and differences across genders, samples, and methods. Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1375-1388.
Sagarin, B. J. (2005). Reconsidering evolved sex differences in jealousy: Comment on

34
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Harris (2003). Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 9, 62-75.
*Sagarin, B. J., Becker, D. V., Guadagno, R. E., Nicastle, L. D., & Millevoi, A. (2003).
Sex differences (and similarities) in jealousy: The moderating influence of infidelity
experience and sexual orientation of the infidelity. Evolution and Human Behavior, 24,
17-23.
*Sagarin, B. J., & Guadagno, R. E. (2004). Sex differences in the contexts of extreme
jealousy. Personal Relationships, 11, 319-328.
Schulze, R. (2007). Current methods for meta-analysis: Approaches, issues, and
developments. Journal of Psychology, 215, 90-103.
* Schützwohl, A. (2004). Which infidelity type makes you more jealousy? Decision
strategies in a forced-choice between sexual and emotional infidelity. Evolutionary
Psychology, 2, 121-128.
* Schützwohl, A. (2007). Decision strategies in continuous ratings of jealousy feelings
elicited by sexual and emotional infidelity. Evolutionary Psychology, 4, 815-828.
Schützwohl, A. (2008a). The disengagement of attentive resources from task-irrelevant cues
to sexual and emotional infidelity. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 633-644.
Schützwohl, A. (2008b). Relief over the disconfirmation of the prospect of sexual and emotional
infidelity. Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 668-678.
Schützwohl, A., & Koch, S. (2004). Sex differences in jealousy: The recall of cues to
sexual and emotional infidelity in personally more and less threatening context
conditions. Evolution and Human Behavior, 25, 249-257.
Sears, D. O. (1986). College sophomores in the laboratory: Influences of a narrow data

35
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
base on social psychology’s view of human nature. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 51, 515-530.
Sesardic, N. (2003). Evolution of human jealousy: A just-so story or a just-so criticism?
Philosophy of the Social Sciences, 33, 427-443.
*Shackelford, T. K., Buss, D. M., & Bennett, K. (2002). Forgiveness or breakup: Sex
differences in responses to a partner’s infidelity. Cognition and Emotion, 16, 299307.
Sheets, V. L., & Wolfe, M. D. (2001). Sexual jealousy in heterosexuals, lesbians, and gays. Sex
Roles, 44, 255-276.
*Takahashi, H., Matsuura, M., Yahata, N., Koeda, T. S., Suhara, T., & Okubo, Y. (2006).
Men and women show distinct brain activations during imagery of sexual and emotional
infidelity. NeuroImage 32, 1299-1307.
*Ward, J., & Voracek, M. (2004). Evolutionary and social cognitive explanations of sex
differences in romantic jealousy. Australian Journal of Psychology, 56, 165-171.
*Whitty, M. T., & Quigley, L. L. (2008). Emotional and sexual infidelity offline and in
cyberspace. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 34, 461-468.
*Wiederman, M. W., & Allgeier, E. R. (1993). Gender differences in sexual jealousy:
Adaptationist or social learning explanation? Ethology and Sociobiology, 14, 115-140.
*Wiederman, M. W., & Kendall, E. (1999). Evolution, sex, and jealousy: Investigation with a
sample from Sweeden. Evolution and Human Behavior, 20, 121-128.

36
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES

Table 1
Buss et al.'s (1999) Items
Scenario Pair 1: Which of the following events would be more distressing?
A. Imagining your partner forming a deep emotional attachment to that other person
(emotional infidelity), or
B. Imagining your partner enjoying passionate sexual intercourse with that other person
(sexual infidelity).
Scenario Pair 2: Which of the following events would be more distressing?
A. Imagining your partner falling in love with that other person (emotional infidelity), or
B. Imagining your partner trying different sexual positions with that person (sexual
infidelity).
Scenario Pair 3: Imagine your partner both formed an emotional attachment to another person
and had sexual intercourse with that other person. Which aspect of your partner’s involvement
would upset you more?
A. The sexual intercourse with that other person (sexual infidelity), or
B. The emotional attachment to that other person (emotional infidelity).
Scenario Pair 4: Which would upset or distress you more?
A. Imagining your partner having sexual intercourse with that person, but you are certain that
they will not form a deep emotional attachment (sexual, without emotional infidelity), or
B. Imagining your partner forming a deep emotional attachment to that person, but you are
certain that they will not have sexual intercourse (emotional, without sexual, infidelity).
Scenario Pair 5: Which would upset or distress you more?
A. Imagining that your partner is still sexually interested in the former lover, but is no longer
in love with this person (sexual, without emotional infidelity), or
B. Imagining that your partner is still emotionally involved with the former lover, but is no
longer sexually interested in this person (emotional, without sexual, infidelity).
Scenario Pair 6: Which would upset or distress you more?
A. Imagining your partner having sexual intercourse for just one night with another person,
with no chance of any further involvement (sexual, without emotional infidelity), or
B. Imagining your partner becoming emotionally involved with another person, with no
chance of any sexual involvement (emotional, without sexual, infidelity).

37
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Table 2
Results of the Forced-Choice Measures Separated by Scenario and Moderator
1

Column

Scenario
Moderator

2
Weighted
Mean r
for the
overall
Number of sex difStudies ferencea

3

80%
Credibility
intervalb

4

5

6

7
Weighted
% of
Weighted
mean odds of
variance
mean odds of
women
explained by Weighted men choosing
choosing
sampling mean odds sexual over
sexual over
error
ratioc
emotional
emotional

Scenario 1: Emotional vs. Sexual

54

0.40

.15 < ρ < .65

8.60

3.23

1.12

0.35

U.S. Students

37

0.45

.32 < ρ < .58

24.26

3.88

1.51

0.37

U.S. Non-students

4

0.31

.18 < ρ < .44

25.83

2.42

0.82

0.34

International Students

8

0.40

.23 < ρ < .58

13.51

3.22

0.74

0.25

International Non-students

3

0.23

.12 < ρ < .35

32.88

1.91

0.56

0.29

Lesbian and Gay

2

-0.23

-.29 < ρ < -.18

74.21

0.53

0.51

0.97

29

0.49

.25 < ρ < .72

9.01

4.25

0.64

0.14

U.S. Students

17

0.32

.10 < ρ < .54

28.97

5.74

0.91

0.15

International Students

8

0.43

-.06 < ρ < .92

4.89

3.60

0.52

0.13

Non-students

2

0.49

-

100.00

4.27

0.41

0.09

Lesbian and Gay

2

0.09

-.48 < ρ < .66

2.93

1.31

0.26

0.18

14

0.27

-.06 < ρ < .59

6.95

2.21

0.78

0.37

U.S.

7

0.44

-.05 < ρ < .91

6.42

3.72

1.45

0.39

International

6

0.22

-.07 < ρ < .52

17.06

1.85

0.52

0.29

Scenario 4: One Not the Other

18

0.33

.05 < ρ < .60

7.05

2.62

1.30

0.41

U.S.

8

0.44

.31 < ρ < .57

19.93

3.61

1.14

0.29

International

7

0.28

.04 < ρ < .54

9.05

2.32

1.60

0.58

Lesbian and Gay

2

-.18

-

100.00

0.62

0.87

1.40

Scenario 5: Former Lover

7

0.22

-.01 < ρ < .45

11.36

1.83

0.88

0.48

U.S.

2

0.42

-

100.00

3.27

1.24

0.38

International

4

0.24

.18 < ρ < .30

61.27

1.93

0.77

0.42

8

0.13

.01 < ρ < .50

10.76

2.15

0.57

0.59

U.S.

2

0.65

-

100.00

8.03

1.64

0.20

International

5

0.13

-.03 < ρ < .30

23.25

2.72

0.57

0.33

Scenario 2: Love vs. Sexual Positions

Scenario 3: Both Occurred

Scenario 6: One But No Chance of Other

Note. The subdivisions by world region and student status do not include the samples of gay men and
lesbians.

38
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
a

A positive correlation indicates that men are more likely than women to report that sexual infidelity is

more distressing than emotional infidelity; a negative correlation, that women are more likely than men to
report that sexual infidelity is more distressing than emotional infidelity.
b

c

Shows how widely the effect size is expected to vary based on the influence of moderators.

Calculated by taking the odds of a man indicating that sexual infidelity was more distressing than

emotional and dividing it by the odds of a woman indicating that sexual infidelity was more distressing
than emotional.

39
INFIDELITY SEX DIFFERENCES
Table 3
Results of the Continuous Measures

Comparison

Weighted and
corrected
80% credibility
mean r
interval

% of variance
explained by
sampling error and
corrected artifacts

By Type of Infedility
Men: Sexual - Emotionala

0.24

.06 < ρ < .42

41.69

Women: Sexual - Emotionalb

0.09

-.18 < ρ < .35

21.93

Sexual: Men - Womenc

-0.06

-.20 < ρ < .08

36.34

Emotional: Men - Womend

-0.21

-.33 < ρ < -.10

43.60

Of Men and Women

a

The extent to which men reported that sexual infidelity was more distressing than emotional.

b

c

The extent to which women reported that sexual infidelity was more distressing than emotional.

How much more distressing men considered sexual infidelity to be than women did.

d

How much more distressing men considered emotional infidelity to be than women did.

