The Search for Satisfaction: A Journey Through Drive,
Jouissance And Repetition Incorporating Neuroscience
Mila Petkova PhD, Elena Carolina Díaz Ruiz
Universidad Complutense Madrid
/Presented as poster at the 20th World Congress of Neuropsychoanalysis in 2019 in Brussels/
Abstract:
Understanding drives is essential because they tell us about that original encounter in which a somatic stimulus touches something of the mental
representations. This work is an attempt to recollect previous research and construct a parallel of psychoanalytic concepts and neuroscientific
findings such as the correspondence between drive and libido and the dopaminergic seeking system. We are mind, body and language.
In our research we present the hypothesis that there are three existing paths of obtaining certain level of satisfaction – pleasure, jouissance and
death drive, led by the pleasure principle of partial satisfaction and the Nirvana principle of (impossible) complete satisfaction.
In Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud reviews his own drive theory incorporating a new term - death drive. Freud theorized about compulsion
repetition, a cycle in which a behavior is carried out repeatedly and repressed material is lived instead of remembered, let alone elaborated. He
observes that some are not guided by the principle of pleasure seeking, which reveals a complacency of the subject with the suffering of his
symptoms, beyond their conscious yearning for healing. While the goal of the life drives is self-preservation, sexual satisfaction, creation and
procreation, the final goal of the death drive appears to be to completely reduce tensions and return the living individual to the inorganic state
of stillness and repose which is unachievable.
When Jacques Lacan introduces the concept of jouissance (enjoyment), he refers to this mythical state of complete satisfaction before the barrier
of the castration as such.
The way to achieve this state of minimum tension, can as well be mediated by addiction and/or compulsive behavior as we have seen before,
suppressing the internal tension of stimulus and surrendering to the principle of Nirvana and the death drives – complete reduction of any tension.
Now we know that the frontal cortex is responsible for regulating the instinctual reactions and puts them in social context. But when one appears
to be struggling to achieve satisfaction by harmful or unpleasant actions this can be common consequence of the dopaminergic reward functions,
resulting in a paradoxically dysfunctional behavior. Repetition is an important brain function. Repetition is involved in learning processes and
improves performance. In this theoretical research we would like to review and differentiate between efficient, rewarding repetition and
repetition compulsion in order to further clarify how satisfaction can be achieved and up to what point.

In Freudian theory there are two categories of drives - life drive and death drive. The life drives,
also referred to as Eros, include both sexual urges and self-preservation urges driven by the
pleasure principle. The drive that opposes them is designated by Freud as death drive or
Thanatos.
In his 1920 work Beyond the Pleasure Principle, Freud reviews and critiques his own theory
incorporating a new term - death drive. The political and social events of the time make him
reflect on man's ability to obtain satisfaction and to ask himself whether there is anything beyond
the pleasure principle.
Until then in Freudian theory there is the division of drives as ego drives (partial) and sexual
drives. The first are born and are satisfied within the same organ, for example hunger is a partial
drive that is satisfied in the digestive system with food, while sexual drive can take different
routes to obtain satisfaction. However, this satisfaction is always incomplete.
One of the reasons that led Freud to establish the existence of a death drive was to consider the
phenomena of repetition that he observes in patients, which cannot be reduced to the search for
the pleasure of libido or the attempt to control unpleasant experiences. Moreover, Freud
1

observes a series of paradoxical facts that contradict the supposed orientation of the subject
guided by the principle of pleasure seeking. Freud observes the negative reaction, which reveals
a secret complacency of the subject with the suffering of his symptoms, beyond his conscious
yearning for healing. While the goal of the life drives is self-preservation, sexual satisfaction,
creation and procreation, the question stands is the final goal of the death drive to completely
reduce tensions and return the living individual to the inorganic state of stillness and repose
which is unachievable. The general goal of life drives is to keep the organism and species alive
while the goal of death drives is the complete discharge of tension/return to an inanimate,
inorganic state.
It is important to mention that at this stage of Freudian theory the principles that regulate psychic
life are defined as the principle of pleasure and the principle of reality.
Freud defines pleasure and displeasure as the reduction and increase of an amount of excitement
present in the nervous system at any moment (Freud S. Beyond the pleasure principle,1920). The
principle of pleasure supposes that the psychic apparatus strives to keep the level of excitation
as low as possible or at least constant. while the principle of reality regulates the levels of
excitement through the demand of ego drives and the characteristics of the physical or social
environment preventing the subject of achieving satisfaction in an unacceptable or dangerous
way. Now we know that the frontal cortex is responsible for regulating the instinctual reactions
and puts them in social context. But do we know what happens when one appears to be
struggling to achieve satisfaction by harmful or unpleasant actions?
In 1953 Jacques Lacan introduces the concept of jouissance (enjoyment) in his first seminar, but
he develops the concept more rigidly in 1960 where he refers to this metical state of complete
satisfaction before the barrier of the castration as such. It is then kidnaped by the symbolic order
of the language and it remains forever limited to the possibilities that the social being has and is
able to express in words. This leaves significant part of the pre-Oedipical enjoyment out of reach,
creating symptoms in the desperate attempt of regression to a joyful state.
The concept of jouissance adds valuable theocratization Freud’s Beyond the Pleasure Principle
because clinical experience contradicts both principles - that of pleasure and that of reality
especially in phenomena such as masochism, destruction and self-destruction.
The way to achieve this state of minimum tension, can as well be mediated by addiction and/or
compulsive behavior as we have seen before, suppressing the internal tension of stimulus and
surrendering to the principle of Nirvana and the death drives – complete reduction of desire. On
fig.1 you can see our model of the economic problem of the drives where the excitation is
presented as pendulum where the jouissance and the pleasure of seeking (Bazan, 2013) are on
the high end of excitation, while the Nirvana principle represents the idealization of the complete
discharge.

2

This idea that the death drive and the impulse to return to inorganic matter forms the theory
that every living being has been before in a mythical nonliving time, so, the satisfaction of the
drive would be a return to an earlier state. According to Freud, part of this aggressive and selfdestructive drive is put at the service of sexuality, for example in the case of sadism and
masochism. In the case of masochism, the aggressive drive remains in the organism.
In The Economic Problem of Masochism of 1924, Freud asks himself again about the dominance
of the principle of pleasure in every aspect of life. According to him we are tempted to call the
principle of pleasure, the guardian of our life, but then the task is to investigate the relations of
the pleasure principle with the two types of drives we have differentiated: the death drives and
the erotic (libidinous) life drives.
Seems that Lacan with his concept of jouissance consolidates this motion in the same psychical
mechanism of a discharge. But while Freud’s libido is always object oriented, therefore
incomplete, his death drive seeks complete discharge in the most extreme form and it is rarely
attached to an object outside of the body and the psyche of the subject. It is the same motion
but lead to an extreme. It is visible in addictions, compulsions, eating disorders, toxicomania etc.
In his Seminar VII Jacques Lacan observes the subject of the death drive. He agrees with Freud's
idea that the impulses of life and death are part of the psyche and have great importance in the
construction of the psyche.
The need for destruction comes along with creation because too perfect a harmony would have
even more drawbacks than disorder. But the death drive is much more than disorder. Death is
the natural order and a feature of humanity, a state of absolute rest, at least to a certain limit
state of universal equilibrium (Lacan J. Seminar VII 1960).
On neurological level the reward system in the brain involves the mesolimbic and the
mesocortical pathways which connect the Ventral Tegmental Area in the hypothalamus to the
Nucleus Accumbens in the mesolimbic area and finally to the frontal cortex. This system is mostly
regulated by Dopamine, the neurotransmitter responsible of the reward response. The circuit
releases Dopamine when a reward is received. When the reward is higher or unexpected the
amount of Dopamine released is higher. On the other side, when the reward is lower of the
expected or keeps the same for a long time, the levels of Dopamine released are lower. This
system creates an important vital function which is repetition, guaranteeing that those acts that
generate rewards (ie: drinking water, feeding, sexual intercourse) are repeatedly sought to get
the wellness feeling produced by Dopamine.
Repetition can be distorted with some conducts, that cause mental and physical damage
(addictions, excessive feeding), even though they prompt release of Dopamine. The relation
between Dopamine release and addiction is well known, being a clear example of how higher
levels of Dopamine, produce angst and suffering instead of pleasure. In a recent study (Yang,
2018), the authors found that dopaminergic system in the Nucleus Accumbens has different
pathways which work in different and opposite ways. Therefore, when one of the dopaminergic
3

circuits is stimulated it generates reward seeking, and when the other one does, it generates
behavior inhibition. Consequently, we can argue that the higher levels of Dopamine in the
Reward system are not necessarily related with higher wellness and satisfaction. This can be also
represented in the concept of jouissance (Bazan, 2013).
Another possible explanation for Lacan's death drive is the desire to unite with the outside world
and eliminate the heterogeneity that distinguishes one's own body and the outside world. He
considers that there is something that intervenes, that introducing that element of structure, this
is the distinction between the animate organism and the inanimate organism. This heterogeneity
introduces the conflict in the level of the living structure, as such.
The question of the death drive, in the first place, is represented in an energetic discourse as a
complete discharge that can be produced in the death of the body uniting it with nature and the
inanimate world.
As an example of the desire to unite to the outside, to something that once belonged to the body
but was lost in an earlier mythical time of Oedipus. Freud takes for example the myth about
androgynous, told by Aristophanes in Plato's Banquet. In this myth is expressed the need to look
for the lost stocking that will cure all the incompleteness that the individual feels. We all are all
to some degree influenced by this fantasy, aren’t we?
The ethical-social discourse of the death drive can be observed in the context in which Freud
writes Beyond the Principle of Pleasure but, as Lacan observes, Freud does not take a progressive
discourse in the observation of the psychic processes that represent destruction, sadomasochism
and repetition. His intention has always been the analysis of the unconscious processes that
occurs in human beings and not in the development of ideas that can take a political imputation.
At the philosophical level the essence of human life is related to its fundamental trait - finality.
That is why there should be a psychic instance dedicated to bringing all personal experience to
an end, but its enigmatic nature however the possibility of understanding it would be limited
since the principles that regulate it are mostly inaccessible by reason.
Finally, the energetic question of the death drive is also expressed by Lacan in the analysis of
Sade's work and the enjoyment (and discharge) that occurs through reading and sadomasochistic
fantasies, but also in the extreme cases of invasion of the enjoyment without an object of desire
such as addictions, compulsions, eating disorders, toxicomania. Neuropsychoanalysis1 can
research the nature of this attempt for complete discharge and study the connection between
death drive, enjoyment and satisfaction on neurological level.

1

The existence of death drive was a topic of discussion on the World Congress of Neuropsychoanalysis in 2019 titled Satisfaction at Last. A few
factors came up in every discussion: first, from neuroscientific point of view life resist entropy and maintains its existence. There is no solid
scientific data that confirms the impulse of the organism to seize to exist. On the other hand, clinical practice has witnessed abundant number of
cases where psychological life drives to an end the biological.
This topic remains under discussion, but one thing is clear – the desire to end the excitation related to suffering is closely related to the death
drive and the Nirvana principle.

4

Fig.1

REFERENCES:
Freud, S. (1955/1920) “Beyond the Pleasure Principle,” in The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological Works
of Sigmund Freud, ed. J. Strachey, trans. (London: Hogarth Press).
Freud S. (1955/1924) “The Economic Problem of Masochism” in The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological
Works of Sigmund Freud, ed. J. Strachey, trans. (London: Hogarth Press).
Lacan, J. (1986/1959–1960) The Ethicsof Psychoanalysis,Seminar VII (D.Porter, trans.) Paris: Seuil.
Yang H. et al. (2018) Nucleus Accumbens Subnuclei Regulate Motivated Behavior via Direct Inhibition and
Disinhibition of VTA Dopamine Subpopulations, Neuron
Bazan A., Detandt S. (2013) ”On the physiology of jouissance: interpreting the mesolimbic dopaminergic reward
functions from a psychoanalytic perspective”, Frontiers in Human Neuroscience

5

