UCCities – Global Urban Research at the University of Calgary
Working Paper #2, June 2019, DOI: 10.31235/osf.io/xgz2s

Title: Waterfront Toronto: Privacy or Piracy?
NAME: KYLE PEEL AND ELIOT TRETTER
DEPARTMENT OF GEOGRAPHY , UNIVERSITY OF CALGARY

Abstract:
Toronto's Portlands neighborhood is the target of an
enormous redevelopment effort that will infuse
smart-city technologies into the urban morphology.
The quasi-governmental Waterfront Toronto agency
has partnered with the Alphabet subsidiary company
Sidewalk Labs to plan and build out the neighborhood, essentially from the ground up, and embedded
it with sophisticated technologies. The redevelopment plan details a digital layer made up of sensors
that will collect and process locational information,
tracking movement and usage patterns. Yet the project has been mired in controversy, mainly because of
questions about data ownership and management.
While there will be the amassing of an unfathomable
amount of data, it is not clear who will control it and
how it will be processed and used. Critics of the project have pointed out that the potential value of the
data is enormous and if a private company has exclusive domain over it, that company could decide to sell
it at will. Securely storing citizen’s data is another
problem. This paper provides a description of the
popular newspaper accounts of the Waterfront Toronto Project. It discusses how the project and redevelopment authority came to be, how Alphabet became the primary partner, the redevelopment vision,
and controversy that has engulfed this smart-city
project.

Keywords: [Smart Cities, data generation, urban development, digital privacy, Canadian cities]

The Waterfront Toronto Project is
the first of its kind in Canada and will potentially be a precedent-setting case for private-public partnerships and data collection
in smart cities in North America. This paper
describes the Waterfront Toronto project
from conception to the present. It focuses
on the redevelopment plan, the proposed
systems of data generation and collection,
and the controversy surrounding the project. The purpose of this paper is to summarize popular news sources, both nationally
and internationally. For this study about 870
newspaper articles from 2014-2019 that
mention the term “Sidewalk Toronto” were
surveyed. The only primary source consulted was the Waterfront Project Vision, the
planning document released by Sidewalk
Labs in 2017.
As part of Canada’s 2008 bid to host
the Summer Olympics in Toronto, thenPrime Minister Jean Chrétien, Premier Mike
Harris, and Mayor Mel Lastman announced
the creation of a task-force that would oversee, and advise on, redevelopment on Toronto's waterfront. When the International
Olympic Committee awarded Beijing the
bid, the three divisions of government decided that Toronto’s waterfront revitalization should proceed. In November 2001 the
Toronto Waterfront Revitalization Corporation (later renamed Waterfront Toronto)
was formed and tasked with supervising all
planning and development of associated

Citation: Peel, Kyle & Eliot Tretter (2019) Waterfront Toronto: Privacy or Piracy? UCCities
Working Paper # 2. DOI: 10.31235/osf.io/xgz2s.
Articles published as UCCities working papers are licensed under a Creative
Commons Attribution–NonCommercial–ShareAlike 4.0 International License.

Peel & Tretter

projects within the over 800 hectares of land
in and around Toronto’s Portlands (Cherney,
2001). In fact, this is considered one of North
America’s largest areas of underdeveloped
urban land (“New,” 2017). The area is known
for derelict buildings, a lack of private investment, and a dearth of regular visitors
(Pringle, 2017).
More than a decade and a half after
the formation of the Corporation, in March
2017, Waterfront Toronto issued a request
for proposals (RFP) regarding the development on 12 acres of land within its Portlands
area remit (McConnell, 2017). Ten months
prior, Dan Doctoroff, Sidewalk Labs' CEO
and co-founder, had announced that Sidewalk was looking to find a large-scale urban
district to act as a test bed for its smart technology in Toronto (Rider, 2017). Sidewalk
Labs is a subsidiary of Alphabet, made up of
a team of urban experts who helped guide
New York City’s post-9/11 resurgence. Their
work is distinguished by their efforts to interweave urban spaces with advanced technology (New, 2017). Sidewalk offered its services to Waterfront Toronto when the RFP
was announced, and by as early as May 2017
it was reported that the company’s proposal
was being considered for the bid (Bergen,
2017). By early October, it was reported that
Sidewalk Labs was in-fact close to completing a deal with Waterfront Toronto (GeorgeCosh & Brown, 2017).
On October 18, 2017, the public-private partnership between Sidewalk and the
Waterfront was officially announced in Corus Quay, on the eastern waterfront. Will
Fleissig and Dan Doctoroff, Sidewalk Labs'
two CEOs, made the official announcement,
with Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau, Ontario Premier Kathleen Wynne, and
Toronto Mayor John Tory all in attendance.
The federal, provincial, and municipal governments had recently committed a

2

combined $1.25B to Waterfront Toronto to
provide flood protection and infrastructure
improvement in the area. Now Sidewalk was
committing an additional $50M in initial
funding for joint planning and pilot project
testing (George-Cosh, 2017). Soon after the
announcement, Sidewalk Labs released a
planning document that presented the project's future (Waterfront Project Vision,
2017). Overall, the plan split the redevelopment into two parts: the physical layer and
the digital layer.
The physical layer is broken up into
four subsections: buildings, mobility, the
public realm, and infrastructure. Sidewalk’s
vision for the Waterfront consists of mixeduse flexible spaces that can easily mutate as
user needs change. The company’s modular
concept is centered around building designs
that are supple and reconfigurable (Waterfront 110). The flexible loft concept is described as being one in which all users are
provided with a base design that can be
readily altered. Its plan delineates between
two different styles of loft: the ‘core loft’ and
the 'next-gen bazaar.' The core lofts change
with the community's needs and could span
months or years. A parking garage space, for
example, could change as a result of less automobile dependence. Floors needed for
parking in 2019 might evolve into retail
space by 2029. The ‘next-gen bazaar,’
meanwhile, is distinguished by retail spaces
that are malleable and receptive to daily
changes. Examples of this kind of temporary
use may include a tech start-up that needs a
collective workspace only for a day or two or
a fashion pop-up hosting a one-day sale.
Mobility is also one of the central aspects and innovations of Sidewalk Lab's Waterfront planning vision. From increasing pedestrian and cyclist walkways to introducing
new automated, driverless transportation,
the Waterfront will be redeveloped to be a

Peel & Tretter

testbed for the rollout and implementation
of new smart-city technologies that increase
traffic throughput, reduce congestion, and
increase the availability and safety of all
transit options. Sidewalk intends to use sensors to track and collect data on transit infrastructure usage, even by pedestrians and cyclists, in order to allow site managers to understand local traffic dynamics, locate potential bottlenecks, and monitor and solve
problems that arise. For example, Sidewalk
is planning to use a special on-demand traffic space allocation system where LED lights
can switch to indicate that lanes have become pedestrian lanes (Waterfront 28).
Moreover, Waymo, another subsidiary of Alphabet, is developing a taxibot network to
be a significant source of motor traffic
within the area (Ohnsman, 2017). Finally, a
'managed parking' system will control and
direct where automobiles can park. In addition to reducing ambient emissions, this will
mitigate congestion, allowing narrower
roads to become more utilized, and free up
spaces for pedestrians and cyclists. Within
the Waterfront development, Sidewalk
planners anticipate the use of personal vehicles will be 15 percent of trips while 35 percent will be walking and cycling; currently,
on average, Torontonians use personal vehicles for about 55 percent of their trips and
walking or biking for about 15 percent. (Waterfront 133).
In order to create a more desirable
public realm, the company wants to utilize a
range of new weather-mitigating technologies and all-seasons infrastructure to draw
people outdoors year-round (Waterfront
19). For example, Sidewalk plans to place retractable canopies in public spaces throughout the area and use heated bike and pedestrian paths to melt snow.
The final aspect of the physical layer
is infrastructural improvements that will be

3

placed mostly underground, beneath the
city streets. A network of underground utility channels will be built to house electrical
wiring, telecommunication conduits, and
plumbing pipelines, as well as provide the
core system for the circulation of small-scale
robots to move among buildings and complete deliveries (Waterfront 23). Examples
of this include ClearPath and Amazon’s Kiva,
where autonomous robots are being designed to move packages and waste
throughout communities (Waterfront 145).
Sidewalk suggests they will virtually eliminate the need for delivery vehicles and
waste-removal trucks, thereby freeing up
the streets for more pedestrian traffic.
Sidewalk Labs' proposal for the community's digital layer is equally ambitious
and made up of four components: sense,
model, map, and account. The sense feature
is comprised of a network of sensors that
will collect real-time data about the environment and residents in order to measure and
provide more precise knowledge about how
people are interacting with the space. The
model component will simulate ‘what if’ scenarios and learn from the collected data,
which will then be used to improve longerterm planning decisions. The map component will involve the collection of a variety of
locational information, often at a fine-grain
scale, gleaned from the recording of the
neighborhood. Finally, the account feature
will provide special portals that will allow
residents or renters to access place-specific
services. For example, residents will be able
to use the portals remotely to give maintain
workers access to their homes for necessary
services.
About four months after the official
announcement of Waterfront Toronto's formation, the motivation for Alphabet's and
Sidewalk Labs' involvement in the project
began to come into question. Numerous

Peel & Tretter

Toronto city councillors began to criticize
the secrecy surrounding the deal, particularly Waterfront Toronto’s refusal, for 'commercial reasons,' to release the text from the
agreement in October (Gray, 2018a). Critics
also noted that as data is becoming an increasingly valuable commodity, it was not
clear what rights were being granted to Alphabet private companies regarding the use
and processing of the data it collected
(Kane, 2018a). In an attempt to address
these concerns and placate increasingly vocal criticism, Sidewalk held a public
roundtable discussion. This public-relations
effort seemed to assuage some critics on the
issue of transparency, but the thornier issue
of who would own the data and where it
would be housed remained unaddressed
(Gray, 2018b). In a move to further mollify
critics, Waterfront Toronto appointed an independent advisory panel, headed by Michael Geist, a distinguished law professor
from the University of Ottawa (Gray, 2018c).
In early September, reports surfaced
that Sidewalk Labs was stipulating that any
building-design partners had to hand over
all the intellectual property rights on their
designs. In other words, Sidewalk would be
granted all potential future revenues from
the further commercialization of design innovations implemented in the area. Critics
again charged that Toronto, and Canada,
may not be getting their fair share from the
intellectual property. Then in the fall of
2018, the tumult escalated following the
resignation from the advisory panel of Ann
Cavoukian (a former Ontario privacy commissioner), Julie Di Lorenzo (a member of
Waterfront's board), and two digital-strategy advisers, Saadia Muzaffar and John Ruffolo. All claimed to have significant concerns about Sidewalk's heavy-handed approach. Especially damming were Cavoukian’s parting comments: “I wanted this

4

to become a smart city of privacy – not a
smart city of surveillance” (Kane, 2018b).
Under increasing attack, Sidewalk
responded by releasing a more detailed site
plan in November 2018. The company also
insisted it was committed to creating nearly
4000 jobs in Toronto and that at least 20
percent of the new housing built in the community would be affordable (Boxikovic &
Kane, 2018). However, critics remained unappeased. They underscored that Sidewalk
had again failed to reveal any specific plans
regarding data ownership or control within
Waterfront.
The imbroglio continued to escalate. A few weeks after the release of the detailed site plan Ontario’s auditor-general
found that Waterfront Toronto had given
Sidewalk Labs special treatment during the
RFP selection process. The report pointed
out that numerous parts of the process had
been rushed and not allowed time for sufficient public-sector input (Kane, 2018c). Almost immediately, Ontario's government
announced that the three provincially appointed directors on Waterfront's board
would be fired (Kane, 2018d). Intragovernmental tensions flared. In opposition to the
Province, the municipal and federal governments came out in support of the fired board
members. However, Sidewalk Toronto capitulated, choosing to honor the wishes of
the Provincial government and remove the
directors (Kane, 2018e). Finally, the situation came to a head in mid-February 2019
when Waterfront's business plan was leaked
to the press. Its contents were scintillating,
revealing plans for the development of talltimber buildings and the expansion of Toronto’s transit system to the redevelopment
site. It also noted Sidewalk’s demand that a
fraction of the property taxes and development fees be retained exclusively for the
Waterfront area. Normally, these revenues

Peel & Tretter

would go to the city's general coffers. Additionally, while the original bid took in only 12
acres, Sidewalk was actually requesting 350
acres (Skok, 2019).
Currently, the fate of the Waterfront
Toronto Project is murky. It does not appear
there is an easy resolution that will satisfy all
parties. Concerns about data and its generation, collection, control, and reuse have
plagued the project since its inception and
have not abated since. These concerns have
been compounded by Waterfront Toronto's
determined resistance to transparency. At
first this resistance only concerned data, but
it’s become increasingly clear that the company has not been forthcoming about the
scope of its redevelopment plans or its attempts to retain as much of the financial
benefits from the development as possible.
Waterfront's post-hoc efforts at public relations have not worked either, oftentimes
because they have been undermined by
later disclosures. Sidwalk's attempt to cloak
itself in the veil of legal privacy has done
nothing to diminish its reputation among its
critics as nothing more than a new-urban pirate: a stealer of public data and public land.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bergen, Mark. 2017. “Alphabet Looking at Toronto for 'Digital City'.” Bloomberg, 11 May.
Boxikovic, Alex, and Josh O Kane. 2018. “Sidewalk Labs Reveals Toronto Neighbourhood
Site Plan, Sidestepping Major Criticisms.”
The Globe and Mail, 3 Dec.
Cherney, Elena. 2001. “Toronto Presses On
With Its Redevelopment Project for Waterfront.” The Wall Street Journal, 28 Nov.

5

George-Cosh, David. 2017. “Alphabet's Sidewalk Labs to Create 'Smart' Neighborhood
on Toronto Waterfront.” Dow Jones Institutional News, 17 Oct.
George-Cosh, David, and Eliot Brown. 2017.
“Alphabet's City-Building Unit Nears Development Deal in Toronto.” Dow Jones NewsWire, 4 Oct.
Gray, Jeff. 2018. “Cracks Appear in Sidewalk
Labs’ Toronto Waterfront Plan after Fanfare; Google Affiliate’s Plans for Tech Utopia
Face Privacy, Development Concerns.” The
Globe and Mail, 23 Feb. a.
Gray, Jeff. 2018. “Sidewalk Labs Aims to Address Privacy Concerns in Designing HighTech Toronto Neighbourhood.” The Globe
and Mail, 20 Mar. b.
Gray, Jeff. 2018. “Talks between Google’s
Sidewalk Labs and Waterfront Toronto
Months behind Schedule.” The Globe and
Mail, 2 May. c.
Kane, Josh O. 2018. “Ontario to Fire Three Waterfront Toronto Directors over Sidewalk
Labs Partnership.” The Globe and Mail, 6
Dec. d.
Kane, Josh O. 2018. “Ottawa and Toronto
Stand by Waterfront Toronto Board.” The
Globe and Mail, 7 Dec. e.
Kane, Josh O. 2018. “Privacy Expert Ann Cavoukian Resigns from Sidewalk Toronto
Smart-City Project: ‘I Had No Other
Choice'.” The Globe and Mail, 20 Oct. b.
Kane, Josh O. 2018. “Sensor City: Sidewalk
Labs’ Toronto Project Triggers Debate over
Data.” The Globe and Mail, 23 Feb. a.

Peel & Tretter

Kane, Josh O. 2018. “Sidewalk Labs' Toronto
Project Needs More Oversight, AuditorGeneral Warns.” The Globe and Mail, 6 Dec.
c.
McConnell, Josh. 2017. “The Android of Cities:
Alphabet's Smartphone-Inspired Vision for
Toronto's Waterfront.” Postmedia Breaking
News, 18 Oct.
“New District in Toronto Will Tackle the Challenges of Urban Growth.” 2017. Canada
NewsWire, 27 Oct.
Ohnsman, Alan. 2017. “Alphabet's Futuristic
Urban Vision Includes Waymo 'Taxibots'.” Forbes, 17 Oct.

6

Pringle, Ramona. 2017. “Google Plans to 'Fix'
Toronto by Building Smart City.” CBC News,
20 May.
Rider, David. 2017. “Google Firm Poised to Invest in High-Tech Toronto Neighbourhood.”
Metro News, 5 Oct.
Skok, David. 2019. ”Cracks in the Sidewalk.”
Macleans, 20 Feb.

Waterfront Project Vision. 2017. Sidewalk Labs
& Waterfront Toronto.

