Published in Clio Volume 28, Issue 2 (Summer 2019), 6, 20-24.

The Patrimonial Turn in the American State
Jeffrey D. Broxmeyer
The University of Tol edo
aristocracy (Cato 1787). Spoils were in fact the primary
motor of party organization for nearly the entire
nineteenth century. The battle to strip personal use from
public office was epic, lasting decades (Hoogenboom
1986; Parillo 2013). That struggle for reform has long
since receded from public memory. Still, the parallel is
instructive. Trump’s reliance on partisan networks of
personal loyalty is similar to how ambitious
entrepreneurs built coalitions throughout the nineteenth
century by disbursing the material perquisites of office.
The public justification of his ongoing business
enterprise recalls the most strident defenses of the spoils
system during the Gilded Age.

Trumpism signals a “patrimonial turn” in the American
state. Consider the implications of this tendency toward
rule by family and friends, and what it means for
democracy. The incumbent president has superimposed
the Trump Organization, a family business, and relatives
who manage it, upon the political system. There has
simply never been a sitting president who profited from
business of this scale while in office, fusing together
individual wealth accumulation with public authority. In
this way, patrimonial rule is a departure from the rule
bound, insulated technocratic order that has
characterized the modern administrative state.

Patrimonialism Then and Now
What we have, then, is a tendency that feels new and
strange but is hardly unique in historical or comparative
perspective. As Max Weber outlined in his classic work,
patrimonialism is a form of political authority that rests
upon the personal whimsy of a leader rather than
established rules or legal processes. Any separation
between the state and the leader collapses into a
“household” model. The patriarch assumes personal
ownership of the means of administration (“my
generals,” per Trump), and governs through kinship
networks and personal loyalty (Weber 1947, 341-7; Hall
2017, 577-8). This mode of governance is typically
delimited pre-modern. But there are caveats to drawing
strict analytic or temporal bounds.

And yet, there are clear antecedents in American political
development. The spoils system from days of yore, run
by personalistic exploitation of public office, is an
obvious point of reference. Trump’s wealth
accumulating practices suggest that he fully understands
that offices of “honor, Trust or Profit,” so referenced in
the Constitution, are a species of property. Political
office is not necessarily a capitalist form of property or
even one that is naturally subsumed into competitive
markets (Gibson-Graham 1996, xiii). However, under
certain historical circumstances officeholding can—and
has been—leveraged as a mode of private wealth
accumulation (Broxmeyer, Forthcoming). Such practices
have deep roots. There was a vibrant debate in the early
Republic over emoluments that codified safeguards
directly into the U.S. Constitution (Teachout 2014).
Antifederalists worried that a future president might
distribute appointments to generate a “numerous train
of dependents,” fostering relationships that smacked of

The “familial state” played a key role in the development
of early merchant capitalism, particularly the joint-stock
corporation (Adams 2005). We know that feudal
lineages carried over to America (Orren 1991). The
nineteenth-century American state, for instance,
distributed monopoly resources in patrimonial fashion
like access to land and other grants or privileges (Hall
2015). Mass democracy was made possible, in part, by
channeling mobilization through clientelistic networks
of office-hungry partisans. Gilded Age reformers
complained that party spoils produced a host of evils:
waste, nepotism, pelf, and the appointment of
“dishonest henchmen or incompetent supernumeraries”
(Eaton 1881, 14). (continued on p. 20)
6

Left and the Movement for Social
Democracy
Theory and Society
Çınar, Alev. Negotiating the
Foundations of the Modern State:
The Emasculated Citizen and the
Call for a Post-Patriarchal State at
Gezi Protests
de Souza Leão, Luciana and Gil
Eyal. The Rise of Randomized
Controlled Trials (RCTs) in
International Development in
Historical Perspective
Heller, Patrick. Divergent
Trajectories of Democratic
Deepening: Comparing Brazil, India,
and South Africa
William & Mary Quarterly
Dixon, Bradley J. ‘His One Netev
Ples’: The Chowans and the Politics

of Native Petitions in the Colonial
South
World Politics
Barber, Benjamin and Charles Miller.
Propaganda and Combat Motivation:
Radio Broadcasts and German
Soldiers’ Performance in World War
II
Bendor, Jonathan and Jacob N.
Shapiro. Historical Contingencies in
the Evolution of States and Their
Militaries
Cirone, Alexandra and Brenda Van
Coppenolle. Bridging the Gap:
Lottery-Based Procedures in Early
Parliamentarization
González, Yanilda. The Social
Origins of Institutional Weakness
and Change: Preferences, Power,
and Police Reform in Latin America

Broxmeyer (continued from p. 6) More recently,
scholars have demonstrated that elements of
patrimonialism exist in a wide range of historical and
comparative contexts, including modern societies
(Adams and Charrad 2015). Patriarchy in gender
relations remains hegemonic at the peak of social and
political institutions. Last year, 95% of all Fortune 500
CEOs were men (Zarya 2018); all presidents have been
up to present. During the 2016 elections, Trump
demonstrated the political viability of a program to
reconstitute social hierarchies anew in the face of
evolving gender norms and family structure. Within the
economy, family businesses like the Trump
Organization play an important role, even in the age of
corporate consolidation. It is no coincidence that
dynastic inheritance itself is a defining feature of the
exploding wealth gap (Picketty 2015, 24, 290-303, 411,
414). Generational wealth transfer has proven a central
project of The Long Reagan Coalition, which places a
first-order emphasis on elimination of the Estate Tax
(Martin 2013, 182-194). Trump’s evasion of personal
and corporate taxes over the decades aligns him as a
beneficiary of tax policy to unburden wealthy families
(Barstow, Craig, Buettner 2018).

Hope, David and Angelo Martelli.
The Transition to the Knowledge
Economy, Labor Market
Institutions, and Income Inequality
in Advanced Democracies
Nathan, Noah L. Electoral
Consequences of Colonial
Intervention: Brokers, Chiefs, and
Distribution in Northern Ghana
Paik, Christopher and Jessica
Vechbanyongratana. Path to
Centralization and Development:
Evidence from Siam
Paine, Jack. Democratic
Contradictions in European Settler
Colonies
Petrova, Margarita H. Naming and
Praising in Humanitarian Norm
Development

since the 1980s. We must also see the contemporary
patrimonial turn from a comparative lens. We live in a
new golden age of state-led capitalism (Kurlantzick
2016). Goals of the nation-state and its leading firms are
increasingly blurred. The Chinese model, managed by
the so-called “princelings,” or the children of senior
officials, is one of the more successful variants. Given
China’s rising global profile, we should be wary of
dismissing the possibility that the cutting-edge of
political economy might once again be patrimonial.
Why Patrimonialism?
Patrimonial rule is how Trump looks to solve problems
of collective action. For one, Trump’s partisanship has
little to do with meaningful group affiliation or ideology
in the conventional sense, even as he benefits from a
polarized landscape. But it is also true that today’s
Republican Party itself is having difficulty coordinating
by conventional means (Noel 2018). There appears to be
little internal consensus outside of tax policy, and thus,
there was little policy innovation during unified party
control of government from 2017-2019. Much of the
Republican Party’s traditional office holding caste
declined to serve in the administration or took
themselves out of party markets by signing public letters
condemning Trump. Under these circumstances, ad hoc
coordination by personal rule binds together, if
tenuously, party regulars and vested partners (singleissue groups, the business lobby, or mega-donors), with
far right movement figures.

Herein lies the rub. Patrimonialism is about congealing
capital into state privileges as part of an intensifying
circuit of accumulation. One major question is whether
Trump is leading the charge or following. There is a
general trend domestically in finance, health, and energy
sectors toward codifying state privileges—one way to
interpret the veritable revolution in corporate lobbying
20

Most conspicuous is the patrimonial turn in staffing the
executive branch. Trump appointees appear to have little
formal expertise relevant to their posts. Technocrats like
H.R. McMaster, the former National Security Advisor,
or Gary Cohn, the former Goldman Sachs CEO turned
economic advisor, do not last very long or retain much
influence. By contrast, the president’s personal
entourage is empowered precisely because of proximity
to Trump and his level of comfort with them. One
example is the appointment of Keith Schiller, Trump’s
longstanding personal bodyguard, to senior positions in
the White House. Another example is the nomination of
the president’s doctor, Ronny Jackson, to head the
Department of Veterans Affairs, among the largest and
most complex bureaucracies in the federal government,
with a budget of $200 billion and over 377,000
employees. The Senate declined to confirm precisely due
to the chasm between the department’s political salience
and Jackson’s lack of credentials. The pattern is also
emblematic of Ben Carson’s placement at Housing and
Urban Development, with whom Trump enjoys a warm
personal rapport, and Secretary of Commerce Wilbur
Ross, a longtime business associate. Patrimonial-style
appointments with “acting” instead of permanent
powers are becoming the norm. Meanwhile, party
functionaries and ideologues are increasingly rare, or
have embraced the patrimonial style to adapt.

wealthy individuals. When political scientists speak of
the state’s “relative autonomy” from any one social class
or group, we identify political institutions as a force in
their own right (Skocpol 1985). For example, the
contemporary bureaucratic rulemaking process insulates
policy from some direct outside pressures. Even the
most propertied organized interests must sustain a high
level of collective action to influence desired outcomes,
especially if they seek to overturn or replace current
rules. Any political program to remove the federal
administrative burden would, in theory, allow for the
objectives of political actors to be achieved quicker, far
more directly, and without public consultation.
President Trump has taken steps in this direction. The
administration’s first proposed budget, overseen by
OMB Director Mick Mulvaney, a founding member of
the House Freedom Caucus, outlined a visionary
blueprint to defund federal agencies outside of the
national security apparatus. “America First: A Budget To
Make America Great Again” called for sweeping
spending reductions across 18 agencies, with cuts to the
Departments of Agriculture, Labor, and State that would
have effectively shuttered most functions. Congress has
not embraced the president’s plan for retrenchment.
Nevertheless, administrative capacity has undergone
significant decomposition. For one, the president’s
political team has weaponized workforce attrition. At the
State Department, 60% of top-ranking career diplomats
left within the first two years of the Trump
Administration. An exodus of thousands of
Environmental Protection Agency officials has also left
without any plans for their replacement, shrinking the
department by 8% in the first year (Stephenson 2018;
Dennis, Eilperin, Ba 2018). Year Two’s 35-day
government shutdown—the longest in American
history—had the effect of shock therapy. More hammer
than scalpel, federal agencies were brought to a
screeching halt, causing personnel dislocations and farreaching damage to governing capacity.

Traditional chiefs of Staff like Reince Priebus and John
Kelly failed because they enjoyed none of tools necessary
to manage White House operations. Neither had the
ability to hire and fire staff, nor gatekeeping control over
access to the president or his schedule (Cohen 2018).
Under Trump, no single figure is allowed to coordinate
the administration’s political agenda with the policy
process. Trump’s family—Ivanka and her husband,
Jared Kushner—fill the subsequent power vacuum. The
“Javanka” duo enjoy the quintessential patrimonial
portfolio: everything is their prerogative, while they are
experts in nothing. The leader has brushed away legal
obstacles like anti-nepotism rules and security
clearances. Lack of expertise and Javanka’s ever-shifting
gaze means there is little sustained attention to major
foreign or domestic issues with which they engage, from
Mideast diplomacy to government shutdowns.

Superficial connection to the traditional agency decisionmaking and information-sharing process gives Trump’s
Twitter pronouncements a quality akin to those of ancien
régime sovereigns. Kings, tsars, and viziers frequently
announced initiatives to great fanfare. New policy
directions were often celebrated but ignored, and the
world quickly moved on to the next fashionable item or
crisis (Skocpol 1979, 47-99). Along with Trump’s
emphasis on marketing, top agency officials pay so little
attention to the Administrative Procedure Act, the main
obstacle to arbitrary rule in the executive branch, that
federal judges have overturned an unprecedented
number of decisions for basic process violations

Deconstructing the Administrative State
The patrimonial turn is an unexpected consequence of
The Long Reagan Coalition’s program to de-construct
the modern administrative state. Described on its own
terms, the principal aim is to unleash free enterprise by
deregulating the economy. The goal requires diminishing
or abolishing federal agencies that write and enforce
rules constraining the investment behavior of firms and
21

(Barbash and Paul 2019). Then again, who will enact new
rules, however they are decided? Three years into this
administration, nearly one-quarter of top positions
requiring Senate confirmation are vacant. High turnover
continues to be an ongoing obstacle (Partnership For
Public Service 2019). Without administrative capacity to
make decrees happen, policy is poorly implemented or
even blocked entirely by competing interests.

The collapsing distinction between public and private
money is a quintessential feature of patrimonialism.
Central to governance under Trumpism is how the
president prefers to build alliances via the mutual
accumulation of wealth. For one, property binds people
together who might not otherwise have much in
common, politically, culturally, or ideologically. Donald
Trump’s ever-changing cast of political advisors, for
instance, has cycled out of official positions and set up
their own companies to monetize access to the president
(“Essential Services LLC”), with the intention of
servicing clients with deep pockets. Selling influence is a
risky venture for political entrepreneurs, not only for the
unwanted public scrutiny, but also for potential legal
pitfalls. High profile former Trump advisors, including
Michael Cohen, Paul Manafort, Richard Gates, Roger
Stone, George Papadopoulos, and Michael Flynn,
solicited millions in fees from corporate clients and
foreign governments. Several of them ended up
cooperating with investigations by Special Prosecutor
Robert Mueller that placed the Trump presidency in
political jeopardy. Transactional alliances based on
property tend to be shallow, temporary, and prone to a
constant renegotiation of terms.

Rebuilding the Familial State
Has the Trump family business supplanted federal
agencies as the focal point of executive lobbying? The
process of administrative “deconstruction” is occurring
as the Trump Organization moves to the center of public
life. Since the inauguration, Trump properties have
become prime venues for spending by interest groups,
businesses, and foreign governments looking for
presidential favor. Most clearly, the Trump International
Hotel is a new locus of party spoils. Located just down
the street from the White House, the hotel runs on a
government lease (GSA 2019). Its grand opening was
timed as the president took office. The D.C. hotel alone
reported $40 million in profits for 2018, or about 10%
of the Trump Organization’s total revenue (Eder,
Lipton, and Armendiaz 2019). Other emoluments garner
attention for their potential foreign policy implications.
The Saudi government single-handedly rescued the
profitability of the president’s New York hotel in 2018.
More recently, the communications giant T-Mobile
spent $200,000 at Trump International while seeking
regulatory approvals (Maritz and Elliot 2018;
Fahrenthold and O’Connell 2018). No fewer than 53
members of Congress have patronized the full spectrum
of Trump properties, raising novel questions about the
separation of powers.

Paths Before Us
Will patrimonialism take hold in America over the long
term? After all, the presidency is the institution that
carries our politics onto new ground, periodically
reconstructing the American state (Skowronek 1997). It
is premature to assess whether rule by family and friends
is here to stay. Still, the “search for American political
development” is about roads taken and those abandoned
(Ritter 1999, 9-25; Orren and Skowronek 2004). One
possibility is that an overwhelming public reaction
empowers Congress or the courts to foreclose
patrimonialism, much as presidential discretion was
limited after prior abuses. If any such public consensus
were forged, the subsequent reaction to presidential
power would likely be filtered through the lens of our
current party polarization. Today, political obstacles in
public opinion and party are layered on top of the already
substantial inertia built into the Madisonian system of
separated powers.

Becoming a client of the Trump Organization is a unique
way to patronize the president directly, as a public
demonstration of loyalty. The top four spenders in the
Trump International Hotel’s first year were the
Republican National Committee, the president’s own
election campaign, the Republican Governor’s
Association, and a pro-Trump SuperPAC. Party
spending is part of a circuit of capital that flows among
donors and various political vehicles, from law firms and
political nonprofits to party committees (CREW 2018).
If reporting is accurate, Trump even describes political
contributions as his own money (Woodward 2018, 42;
Lewis 2018, 20-2). He also considers public money at
personal disposal. Executive branch officials spend
freely at Trump properties. The State Department now
employs a credit card whose exclusive purpose is
covering expenses at Mar-a-Lago (Kravitz and Willis
2018; Kravitz 2019).

Another route that lies before us is the spread of
patrimonialism via the presidency’s demonstration
effect. Looking at the Trump model, ambitious political
entrepreneurs might unleash a host of experiments at the
national, state, or local level. The fusion of personal
business and government could well become a standard
feature of the party system, or perhaps by crystalizing
only within the Republican Party, yet another artifact of
asymmetric polarization (Grossmann and Hopkins
22

2016). Still another distinct path is a middle ground: the
incoherence of maladministration. Max Weber was the
first to argue that the arbitrariness of patrimonial rule lies
in tension with legal-rational administration.
Conceivably, the partial implantation of patrimonial
modes could persist within the interstices of the
American state, never fully prohibited or legitimized.
Scholars of comparative politics would recognize such
an institutional matrix, where the rule of law is weak but
the consolidation of power into the hands of a political
elite provides elements of stability and continuity.

presumptions. Before 2016, the idea that the
technocratic strata of the state might be undone, say by
a patrimonial revival, would have been considered
fanciful by most scholars of American politics. The
Obama Administration’s embrace of technocratic
solutions certainly places the patrimonial turn in sharp
relief. And thus, the Trump moment upends a whiggish
view of public administration that prevails not only
among journalists and commentators but also political
scientists. The modern administrative state is not the
permanent future, after all. If it were to be successfully
deconstructed, we might do well to ask ourselves what
exactly follows in its place.

At minimum, the debate over Trump’s impact on the
political system is a call to reevaluate longstanding

References
Adams, Julia. The Familial State: Ruling Families and Merchant Capitalism
in Early Modern Europe. Cornell University Press, 2005.
Adams, Julia and Mounira Charrad. “(Old) Patrimonial Forms Made
New,” Political Power and Social Theory 28 (2015): 1-5.
Barbash, Fred and Deanna Paul. “The Real Reason the Trump
Administration Is Losing in Court,” Washington Post, March 19, 2019.
Barstow, David, Suzanne Craig, and Russ Buettner. “Trump Engaged
in Suspect Tax Schemes as He Reaped Riches from His Father,”
New York Times, October 18, 2018.
Broxmeyer, Jeffrey. Electoral Capitalism: The Party System in New York’s
Gilded Age. University of Pennsylvania Press, Forthcoming.
Cato. “Various Fears Concerning The Executive Department,”
Antifederalist Number 67 (1787).
Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington. Profiting from
the
Presidency,
January
19,
2018,
https://www.citizensforethics.org/profitingfromthepresidency/.
Cohen, David. “John Kelly Was Always Doomed To Fail,” The Hill,
December 8, 2018.
Dennis, Brady, Juliet Eilperin, and Andrew Ba Tran. “With Shrinking
EPA, Trump Delivers On Promise To Cut Government,”
Washington Post, September 8, 2018.
Eaton, Dorman. The Spoils System and Civil Service Reform. G.P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1881.
Eder, Steve, Eric Lipton, and Agustin Armendiaz, “Trump’s Financial
Disclosure Shows Mixed Results For His Business In 2018,” New
York Times, May 16, 2019.
Fahrenthold, David and Jonathan O’Connell, “Saudi-Funded
Lobbyist Paid for 500 Rooms At Trump’s Hotel After 2016
Election,” Washington Post, December 5, 2018.
Gibson-Graham, J-K. The End of Capitalism (As We Knew It): A Feminist
Critique of Political Economy. University of Minnesota Press, 1996.
General Services Administration. “Evaluation of GSA’s Management
and Administration of the Old Post Office Building Lease,” January
16, 2019.
Grossmann, Matthew and David Hopkins. Asymmetric Politics:
Ideological Republicans and Group Interest Democrats. Oxford University
Press, 2016.
Hall, John. “Patrimonialism,” Handbook of Political Behavior. Sage Press,
2017.

23

___. “Patrimonialism in America: The Public Domain in the Making
of Modernity, From Colonial Times To The Late Nineteenth
Century.” Political Power and Social Theory 28 (2015): 7-41.
Hoogenboom, Ari. Outlawing the Spoils: A History of the Civil Service
Reform Movement, 1865-1883. University of Illinois Press, 1986.
Kurlantzick, Joshua. State Capitalism: How The Return of Statism Is
Transforming The World (Oxford University Press, 2016).
Kravitz, Derek. “How Taxpayers Covered a $1,000 Liquor Bill for
Trump Staffers (and More) at Trump’s Club,” ProPublica, May 1,
2019.
Kravitz, Derek and Derek Willis. “Paying the President,” ProPublica,
June 27, 2018, https://bit.ly/2T1Ywc2.
Lewis, Michael. The Fifth Risk. W.W. Norton, 2018.
Maritz, Ilya and Justin Elliot. “Trump Inauguration Paid Trump’s
Company—With Ivanka in The Middle,” ProPublica, December 18,
2018.
Martin, Isaac. Rich People’s Movements: Grassroots Campaigns to Untax the
One Percent. Oxford University Press, 2013).
Noel, Hans. “The Activists Decide: The Preferences of Party Activists
In The 2016 Presidential Nominations.” Journal of Elections, Public
Opinion, and Parties 28:2 (2018): 225-244.
Orren, Karen. Belated Feudalism: Labor, Law, and Liberal Development in
the United States. Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Orren, Karren and Stephen Skowronek. The Search for American Political
Development. Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Parillo, Nicholas. Against the Profit Motive: The Salary Revolution in
American Government, 1780-1940. Yale University Press, 2013.
Partnership for Public Service. “Tracking How Many Positions
Trump Has Filled So Far,” Washington Post, updated May 20, 2019,
https://wapo.st/2JIA7nz.
Picketty, Thomas. Capital in the Twenty-First Century, A. Goldhammer,
trans. Belknap Press, 2015.
Ritter, Gretchen. Goldbugs and Greenbacks: The Antimonopoly Tradition
and the Politics of Finance in America, 1865-1896. Cambridge University
Press, 1999.
Skocpol, Theda. States and Social Revolutions. Cambridge University
Press, 1979.
___. “Bringing the State Back In: Strategies of Analysis in Current
Research,” Bringing the State Back In, P. Evans, D. Rueschemeyer, T.
Skocpol, eds. Cambridge University Press, 1985.

Skowronek, Stephen. The Politics Presidents Make: Leadership from John
Adams to Bill Clinton. Belknap Press, 1997.
Stephenson, Barbara. “Time To Ask Why,” American Foreign Service
Association, December 2017.
Teachout, Zephyr. Corruption in America: From Benjamin Franklin’s Snuff
Box to Citizens United. Harvard University Press, 2014.

Weber, Max. Theory of Social and Economic Organization, A.M. Henderson
and T. Parsons, trans. Oxford University Press, 1947.
Woodward, Bob. Fear: Trump in the White House. Simon and Schuster,
2018.
Zarya, Valentina. “The Share of Female CEOs in the Fortune 500
Dropped By 25% in 2018,” Fortune, May 21, 2018.

Tesser (continued from p. 7) Recent historical
research shows that a significant nationalist uprising
never appeared in the Ottoman Empire before WWI,9
with much of the population resisting nationalist appeals
even into the 20th century.10 Under such circumstances,
the sporadic application of the nation-state concept in
the Balkans owed much to great power policy. Edin
Hajdarpasic provides a glimpse of the performative
effects. The precedent-setting recognition of the Greek
Kingdom and a semiautonomous Serbian principality,
following regional revolts, facilitated a post-1830s shift
in local activism towards the planning of other uprisings
to create new states such as Bulgaria, Macedonia and
Bosnia, or at least the enlargement of the Greek and Serb
areas, even if such goals were considered unattainable or
rejected by many sympathizers.11

states’ emergence, the absence of indigenous roots for
nationalism in Ottoman lands signals the influence of
the European-style nation-state concept on local actors’
self-presentation.
Major powers often facilitated the de facto autonomy, if
not independence, they eventually recognized.14 The
powers turned towards the nation-state concept
primarily to undercut imperial competitors by
supporting particular nationalist activists or to reach
agreement on post-conflict settlement. During WWI,
Allied policy-makers tended to support nationalists who
offered military forces for their respective war aims.
While national self-determination served as a key policy
goal at Versailles, troop locations largely determined the
location of borders.15 By the interwar period, further
application of the nation-state concept in diverse areas
facilitated irredentisms for new or expanded states and
helped give national identity substantial traction across
Eastern Europe.

The 1878 Berlin Treaty recognizing Romania, Serbia,
Montenegro, and an autonomous Bulgaria signaled a
change of major powers’ focus to the ethnonational
identity of populations.12 According to Ron Suny,
European powers unintentionally sanctioned nationalist
activism as a means to acquire European acceptance of
territorial claims to secure political freedom for various
peoples.13 These new states in turn facilitated
irredentisms, spurring further competition among
nationalists to win the support of local Balkan
populations. While local actors were essential for nation-

Shifting to the second major Western-oriented
“Europeanization” project involving the granting of EU
membership to eastern countries, we see a more
intentional, systematic effort occurring within a much
shorter time. In setting policy, Western powers again
prioritized their interests and were initially reluctant to
“Europeanize” these territories. As before, the Western-

Frederick F. Anscombe, State, Faith, and Nation in Ottoman and Post-Ottoman Lands (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2014), 21,
107. The tendency to label rebellions as ‘nationalist uprisings’ endures, particularly within political science, despite the often awkward
fit between such categorization and the actual drivers of rebellion. For example, the Greek Revolution features Greek expatriates as
the more genuine nationalists rather than the indigenous rebels themselves, while the 1909-12 Albanian revolts were largely a response
to Ottoman centralization policies.
10 Siniša Malešević, “Obliterating heterogeneity through peace: Nationalisms, states and wars, in the Balkans,” in Nationalism and War,
ed. John A. Hall and Siniša Malešević (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2013), 269, 271.
11 Edin Hajdarpasic, Whose Bosnia? Nationalism and Political Imagination in the Balkans, 1840-1914 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2015),
93-94, 96.
12 The point on focus was made by Weitz 2008, 1313-1343, 1320-1321 (though Weitz uses the terminology of the time – nation or
race – rather than ethnonational). Yet, official recognition of these new states stemmed from the principle of uti possidetis, given preexisting autonomy within the Ottoman Empire, and de facto independence.
13 Ronald Grigor Suny, ‘They Can Live in the Desert but Nowhere Else:’ A History of the Armenian Genocide (Princeton and Oxford: Princeton
University Press, 2015), 104.
14 Lynn M. Tesser, “Identity, contingency, interaction: Historical research and social science analysis of nation-state proliferation,”
Nationalities Papers (forthcoming).
15 Latter point by Pieter Judson, The Habsburg Empire: A New History (Cambridge and London: Harvard University Press, 2016), 441.
9

24

