1

Why still marry?
The role of feelings in the persistence of marriage as an institution

Francesco C. Billari (*) & Aart C. Liefbroer (**)

(*) Department of Sociology and Nuffield College, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
E-mail: francesco.billari@nuffield.ox.ac.uk
(**) Netherlands Interdisciplinary Demographic Institute, The Hague and Department of Social
Research Methodology, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
E-mail: liefbroer@nidi.nl
This version: Final draft post-refereeing
Original article published on the British Journal of Sociology, Volume 67, Issue 3,
September 2016, pages 516-540. https://doi.org/10.1111/1468-4446.12202

2

ABSTRACT
Despite cohabitation becoming increasingly equivalent to marriage in some of the most
“advanced” Western European societies, the vast majority of people still marry. Why so?
Existing theories, mostly based on various approaches tied to cognitive decision-making, do not
provide a sufficient explanation of the persistence of marriage, when cohabitation is the
alternative. In this article, we argue that feelings attached to marriage, i.e. the affective
evaluation of those involved in a partner relationship concerning marriage as opposed to
cohabitation, explain the persistent importance of marriage as an institution. We argue that
socialization, biological and social-structural factors affect these affective evaluations. We
provide a test of our hypotheses using a longitudinal study of young adults in the Netherlands.
The results of our analyses are consistent with a central role of feelings in the decision to marry,
as well as with a role for key moderating factors such as gender.

Word count (including references): ca 8,526 now

3

Age at marriage has significantly risen on both sides of the Atlantic, and the majority of young
adults opt for unmarried cohabitation rather than for direct marriage (Billari and Liefbroer 2010;
Heuveline and Timberlake 2004; Kennedy and Bumpass 2008; Kiernan 2002). These trends are
consistent with the spread of a “Second Demographic Transition” that influences new living
arrangements (see, e.g., Lesthaeghe 2010) or of “pure relationships” detached from social
recognition (Giddens 1991; Giddens 1992). The process of de-institutionalization of marriage
(Cherlin 2004), in combination with the declining normative disapproval of unmarried
cohabitation (Liefbroer and Billari 2010; Thornton and Young-DeMarco 2001) and the
increasing legal equalization of cohabitation and marriage (Bradley 2001; Perelli-Harris and
Sánchez Gassen 2012), lead to the question why young adults would still marry. Cohabitation, in
fact, seems to affect the postponement of marriage rather than the final prevalence of marriage
(Kalmijn 2007). While legal and economic incentives to marry still play a role (e.g., Baizán, et
al. 2004; Moffitt, et al. 1998), it is unlikely that decisions to marry are nowadays solely based on
a rational, cognitive evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages of cohabitation and
marriage. For instance, Cherlin emphasizes the symbolic importance marriage may still carry: “if
marriage is now optional, it remains highly valued. As the practical importance of marriage has
declined, its symbolic importance has remained high and may even have increased” (Cherlin
2005). This view suggests that affective and symbolic considerations matter a great deal in
marriage decisions today, next to, or even instead of, rational considerations.
We here suggest that in countries where unmarried cohabitation has become a ‘standard’
element in the transition to adulthood, the decision to marry is the outcome of both cognitive and
affective evaluations of the advantages and disadvantages of marriage compared to cohabitation.
If that is the case, in order to better understand the persistence of marriage as an institution it is

4
paramount to study the social origins of cognitive and affective evaluations, and the social
differentials in their relative importance. Our theoretical framework draws on several different
strands of literature – social demography and economics, the sociology of emotions and socialpsychological theories of decision-making. We shall focus specifically on heterosexual
partnerships, although our arguments may also apply to same-sex partnerships.
We illustrate our theoretical ideas by presenting the results of longitudinal analyses on a unique
panel dataset of Dutch young adults, through which we aim to answer three related research
questions. First, do both affective and cognitive evaluations of cohabitation and marriage
influence whether and when Dutch young adults marry, net of other relevant background factors?
Second, do cognitive and affective evaluations of cohabitation and marriage differ by social
background and current social position? And third, does the relative importance of cognitive and
affective evaluations in predicting entry into marriage differ by young adults’ social background
and current social position?

Cognitive and affective considerations in marriage decision-making

Several scientific traditions provide building blocks in our development of a framework to
understand the relative role of cognitive and affective considerations in the decision to marry.
These approaches have arisen as separate traditions, which we present in turn.

New home economics and social demography

5
In the “new home economics” tradition, theoretical thinking about marriage, developed
originally by Gary Becker (1973; Becker 1974), starts from the idea that prospective partners are
rational decision-makers acting in a marriage market. In this approach, spouses gain from
marriage like countries gain from trade. Since Becker, the economic approach to marriage has
developed considerably, and the recent treatise by Browning et al. (2014) – while also stating
that emotional “gains from marriage” are important – lists five broad sources of potential gains
from marriage: the sharing of public (nonrival) goods; the division of labour to exploit
comparative advantage and increasing returns to scale; extending credit and coordination of
investment activities; risk pooling; and coordinating childcare. Cohabiting partnerships may be
able to provide the same benefits, but the importance of marriage as a formal contract that
regulates the complex relationships between two partners is emphasized in the transaction cost
approach (Ben-Porath 1980; Lundberg and Pollak 1993; Pollak 1985).
A substantial part of the recent sociological and demographic literature on marriage arises
as a reaction to Becker’s “gain from trade” approach. With female educational expansion,
decreases in gains-from-marriage lead to decreases in the attractiveness of marriage
(Oppenheimer 1997). Oppenheimer (1988; 1994) gives a central role to the fact that work
structures young people’s lifestyles and therefore early work careers, especially for men,
constrain their choices to marry. Blossfeld and Huinink (1991) argue that marital choices are
constrained by sequencing norms, prescribing that marriage cannot take place as long as young
adults are enrolled in education.
The “Second Demographic Transition” thesis, proposed by Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa
(Lesthaeghe 1995; Lesthaeghe 2010; Lesthaeghe and van de Kaa 1986; van de Kaa 1987; van de
Kaa 2001) puts the emergence of cognitive considerations about marriage at its heart, as it posits

6
the “rational “utility” evaluation of marriage in terms of the welfare of both adult partners first
and children second” (Lesthaeghe 2010). The proponents of the Second Demographic Transition
also emphasize the importance of secularization in shaping demographic choices, and marriage
in particular. In fact, several researchers have documented the role of religiosity in shaping
marital attitudes and behavior (Clarkberg, et al. 1995; Kalmijn 2007; Lesthaeghe 2010; Manning
and Smock 2002; Manting 1996; Wilcox and Wolfinger 2007).
Within the “new home economics” and social demography tradition, research has
therefore emphasized the importance of different types of constraints in the decision to marry,
viewing this decision as the result of (potentially subjective) rational considerations of
advantages and disadvantages of marriage compared to other living arrangements. This tendency
to view decision-making mainly as the outcome of rational considerations has been explicitly
criticized by the Basu (2006): “Birth, death and marriage, underlying staples of demographic
research, are heart-over-head matters. And yet, if there is one organ that is palpably missing from
the discourses of demography, it is the heart”. To overcome this one-sidedness, insights from
other traditions are needed.

The sociology of emotions

Although early sociologists like Durkheim already paid attention to human emotions in their
theories (Fisher and Chon 1989; Shilling 1999), the sociology of emotions has mainly flourished
since the last decades of the twentieth century (Hochschild 1979; Kemper 1981; Shott 1979).
According to Turner and Stets (2006) “the analysis of emotions can be seen as one of the cutting
edges in theoretical work in sociology” (see also Thoits (1989)).

7
The social embeddedness of emotions has been one of the prime foci in this area, with an
important emphasis on various dimensions of social stratification. In the work of Hochschild
(1979), the socialization process leading to emotions management is an instrument of social
reproduction: middle-class families better prepare their children for emotion management than
lower-class families do. Social contexts contain “emotion cultures”, with normatively
appropriate feelings and expressions of feelings on specific situations, and this appropriateness is
socially stratified, including by gender (Simon 2014). In Giddens’ (1992) view, emotional ties
are crucial in the definition of pure relationships, with women leading the way..
Marriage can be specifically analysed from the point of view of “dramaturgical” theories
of human emotions, considering the type of embodied emotions that have to be experienced and
expressed during the process leading to marriage (e.g., when communicating the decision to
marry to relevant others such as parents), if not at the wedding ceremony per se. Religious
upbringing, in particular, might instil in individuals “appropriate” feeling rules about wedding
ceremonies (Hochschild 1983). Marriage can also be analysed from the “interaction ritual” set of
theories of human emotions, inspired by the work of Durkheim and Goffman (Turner and Stets
2005).

Theories of decision-making under risk and uncertainty

Psychological and economic theories of decision-making are also relevant for understanding
marriage choices. As Loewenstein and Schkade put it, “getting married involves a prediction of
one’s long term feelings towards one’s spouse” (1999). However, the affective dimension is
noticeably missing from the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB) developed by Fishbein and

8
Ajzen (1975) and Ajzen (1988; Ajzen 1991) that has guided a series of studies on family choices.
According to the TPB, behaviour is influenced by two ‘proximate’ determinants, viz. the
behavioural intention and the actual control over the behaviour under scrutiny. In addition, three
more ‘distal’ factors play a role, viz. attitudes or beliefs, subjective norms and perceived
behavioural control. These factors directly influence people’s intentions and indirectly influence
their behaviour. Liefbroer and de Jong Gierveld (1993) use this approach to study the choice
between cohabitation and marriage and Billari and Liefbroer (2007) use it to study young adults’
choice to leave home (e.g. in order to live with a partner). However, this type of theory has been
criticized for being consequentialist, and therefore viewing feelings as epiphenomenal, as a mere
consequence of cognitive activities (Loewenstein, et al. 2001). An extensive discussion of the
limitation of Fishbein and Ajzen’s theory as applied to fertility decision-making is provided by
Bachrach and Morgan (2013), who explicitly call for inputs from cognitive and decision
sciences.
Several non-consequentialist theories of decision-making have been developed. Building
on the TPB, Perugini and Bagozzi (2001) suggest that desires provide a direct impetus for
intentions. Desires are themselves a function of the three determinants mentioned in the TPB
(attitudes, subjective norms and perceived behavioural control) and an additional determinant,
i.e. anticipated emotions about the behaviour. Anticipated emotions can also be seen as
expressing the “affective” dimension of attitudes. A related framework is the “risks-as-feelings”
model developed by Loewenstein and colleagues (Loewenstein, et al. 2001), in which feelings
complement cognitive evaluations in decision-making. This distinction between cognitive and
affective evaluations fits in nicely with the more general social-psychological literature showing

9
that cognitive beliefs and affective beliefs are distinct (Trafimow and Sheeran 1998; Van den
Berg, et al. 2005).
Additional contributions on the role of emotions, outside an expected utility framework,
are found at the intersection of behavioural economics and neuro-experimental psychology.
According to de Souza, emotions enable to choose among options none of which is rationally
superior to the other (de Souza 1987). The somatic marker hypothesis (Damasio 1994) has a
fundamental tenet: “emotions play a role in guiding decisions, especially in situations in which
the outcome of one’s choices, in terms of reward and punishment, are uncertain” (Naqvi, et al.
2006). Researchers interested in consumers’ behaviour have also discussed the use of feelings as
a heuristic that is adopted for effective consumer decisions. Schwarz and Clore defined the
“How-do-I-feel-about-it?” (HDIF) heuristic (Schwarz and Clore 1988), in which affective
evaluations are seen as important pieces of information in decision-making.

Evolutionary biology

A further field that can provide a better understanding of choices in the family domain and for
the transition to adulthood is that of evolutionary biology (Seltzer, et al. 2005; Shanahan 2000).
While it is clear that mating plays a crucial role in evolution—a role that is so central that it has
in practice shaped the evolution of human nature (Miller 2000), there is no specific evolutionary
reason for marriage. Stable parental partnerships are advantageous to children’s survival, but in
cases in which the stability of partnership and support may be guaranteed also within
cohabitation, there is no specific place for marriage. However, biology can help explaining the
importance of emotions in union formation. As an instance, some neurotransmitters are

10
associated with human romantic passion (Buss 2003; Fisher 2004; Lieberwirth and Wang 2014)
and there is recent evidence that variation in oxytocin receptor genes are associated with pair
bonding (Walum, et al. 2012).

Context and hypotheses

The context: cohabitation and marriage in the Netherlands
The popularity of unmarried cohabitation has increased steadily in the Netherlands since the
1960s. Among cohorts born in the 1940s, less than 20 per cent of all first unions started as an
unmarried cohabitation, but this has increased to over 80 per cent among cohorts born in the
1970s. This percentage is comparable to that in countries like Norway and France and is among
the highest in Europe (Hiekel 2014). Thus, among recent cohorts, only a small minority enters
into marriage without previous cohabitation. At the same time, the median duration of
cohabitation has increased from 24 months among cohorts born in the 1940s to 46 months
among cohorts born in the 1970s (Hiekel 2014). Still, for the large majority of people, unmarried
cohabitation is a temporary living arrangement, either followed by marriage or by separation. In
2008, more than 70 per cent of all cohabiters aged 18 to 29 intended to marry their partner in the
near future (de Graaf 2010).
In the Netherlands, cohabitation has developed into a legally and socially accepted
alternative to marriage (Poortman and Mills 2012; Soons and Kalmijn 2009). From a legal point
of view, cohabitation and marriage have become increasingly similar. However, quite some
variation among cohabiters remains in the legal arrangements that they have made about their
cohabiting relationship. Three main categories can be distinguished: cohabiters without any legal

11
contract, cohabiters who have drawn up a cohabitation contract, and cohabiters who have
officially registered their partnership. What all these three categories of cohabiters have in
common is that they are treated the same way as married partners with regard to tax regulations
and social security benefits. The government bases its arrangements in these matters on whether
people live in the same household rather than whether they are officially married or not. At the
same time, there are clear differences between the three categories of cohabiters as well. A
cohabitation contract is drawn up by a notary and consists of financial regulations concerning
income, wealth and inheritance. If cohabiters want to acquire a mortgage for buying a house, a
cohabitation contract stipulating joint financial responsibility usually is a prerequisite. Since
1998, it is also possible for cohabiters to enter into a registered partnership (Boele-Woelki, et al.
2007). A registered partnership secures cohabiters equal rights as married people – with the
exception of regulations concerning parenthood – and is entered into at the town hall. The key
difference between all three categories of cohabitation and marriage is linked to fatherhood. If
cohabiters have children, the father has officially to recognize the child and the couple has to
apply for joint parental authority. Although both of these actions can be arranged without much
effort, they do need the cooperation of both partners. Only if partners marry, are these issues
related to fatherhood automatically resolved. Over time, the percentage of cohabiters who have
not made any legal arrangements at all has decreased. The percentage with a cohabitation
contract has gone up from 45 per cent in 2003 to 50 per cent in 2008 (de Graaf 2010). At the
same time, the number of registered partnerships between heterosexual partners has increased as
well, from about 1,300 in 2000 to about 9,000 in 2013. Still, this number is much smaller than
the number of marriages that are contracted (63,000 in 2013) (Statistics Netherlands 2015).

12
Thus, the Netherlands can be viewed a society in which the incentives to marry have to a
large extent – but not yet completely –diminished. Almost everybody enters his or her first union
without being married. At the same time, marriage is still a preferred choice for most people –
even cohabiters – at some stage of their life course. Therefore, the Netherlands constitutes an
ideal country to study which factors predispose young people to make the choice to enter
marriage.

Hypotheses
The context of our research is the Netherlands and this will also influence the formulation of our
hypotheses. Integrating the different strands of literature discussed above with reference, our
central assumption is that the persistence of marriage, in an era of individualization and of
widespread cohabitation, cannot be explained solely by the (subjective) expected utility of
marriage. Of course, in societies in which legal or financial incentives to marry are large, these
incentives are expected to be crucial, even if emotions will generally still play a role. The role of
affective evaluations, in line with Cherlin’s idea, may become increasingly important in societies
where the economic and legal incentives to marry keep decreasing. In such societies, emotions
linked to marriage, in general feelings about marriage, could become the key factor that explains
the persistence, and potentially the future, of marriage.
As we learn from research on the sociology of emotions, feelings are influenced by, and
interact with, biological, cultural and social factors. Feelings about marriage should be no
exception. Parents, religious organizations, the state and the market all play a role in maintaining
(or dismantling) these feelings.

13
To formulate testable empirical hypotheses, we start from the general idea that the
decision to marry is constantly weighted against cohabitation. This is in contrast to the approach
of Manning and Smock (2005), who state that the decision is cohabitation versus being single
rather than cohabitation versus marriage. In our view, Manning and Smock’s idea may be
relevant in a society where cohabitation is mainly viewed as a relatively short-term, temporary
living arrangement, but is less important in the Netherlands.

Hypotheses on feelings about marriage (versus cohabitation)

Our first set of hypotheses is on the factors that influence people’s affective evaluation of
marriage and cohabitation. We hypothesize that culture and socialization play a key role in
shaping how individuals feel about marriage. A relevant socialization agency is the church, and a
key cultural factor is religion (Wilcox and Wolfinger 2007). Religious education might explicitly
or implicitly emphasize the ritual, and emotional meaning of marriage, and religious upbringing
might provide feeling rules that trigger marriage (Hochschild 1983). Therefore we hypothesize
that:
H1A: Individuals with a religious family background have a more positive affective evaluation of
marriage than other individuals.

Another crucial socialization factor is the example of parents (Amato 2000). Given that
the experience of a parental separation or divorce almost invariably elicits negative feelings
among children, it could also negatively influence affective evaluations about marriage.
Therefore our subsequent hypothesis on the origins of feelings is as follows:

14
H1B: Individuals with separated or divorced parents have a more negative affective evaluation
of marriage than other individuals.

Hypotheses on the effect of the affective evaluation of marriage on the propensity to marry

Our second hypothesis focuses on the actual effect of affective evaluations on behaviour. Our
general expectation is that affective evaluations matter in addition to the actual social-structural
position of individuals, and to the cognitive evaluation of the pros and cons of marriage and
cohabitation. This is consistent with theories concerning the relevance of affective factors in
decision-making (Loewenstein, et al. 2001; Perugini and Bagozzi 2001) and with the idea that
emotions play a specific role when material rewards are less clear (de Souza 1987). More
specifically:
H2: The affective evaluation of marriage influences the propensity to marry, net of other factors.

Hypotheses on social differentials in the effect of the affective evaluation of marriage on the
propensity to marry

Until now, we assumed that the effect of affective evaluations of marriage and cohabitation is the
same for all young adults. In this section, this assumption is relaxed and hypotheses are
formulated on social differentials in the strength of this effect.
In Giddens’ (1992) framework, women lead the way to allow emotions to shape pure
relationship. From that idea, one would expect affective evaluations to matter more for women
than for men. A similar effect could be hypothesised by starting from a feminist perspective,

15
considering the decision to marry as reinforcing traditional differences between gender
(Jamieson 1999). However, research on the sociology of emotion has cast doubt on the
usefulness of juxtaposing emotions and reason (Turner and Stets 2005). Based on Hochshild’s
(1983) statement that women are better in “emotion management”, one could even argue that
women may be less influenced by affective evaluations in decision-making. Therefore, we
formulate two competing hypotheses:
H3A: The effect of affective evaluations on the propensity to marry is stronger for women than
for men.
H3B: The effect of affective evaluations on the propensity to marry is stronger for men than for
women.

Above, we already discussed that we expect people with a religious upbringing to hold
more positive affective evaluations about marriage. We also expect that people with a religious
upbringing are more inclined to rely on feelings in their choice to marry—this might be linked to
the fact that they might be socialized using feeling rules (Hochschild 1983) that allow marriage
to be linked with emotions more than to rational calculations. Therefore, we hypothesize:
H3C: The effect of affective evaluations on the propensity to marry is stronger for individuals
with a religious upbringing than for other individuals.
The literature on the sociology of emotions, and in particular Hochshild (1979),
emphasizes the role of formal education in teaching individuals how to manage emotions. At the
same time, the higher educated are constantly trained in rational reasoning and decision-making.
In our framework, this idea translates in a hypothesis that human capital is interacting with the

16
effect of feelings, so that individuals with higher human capital are less affected by emotions
when choosing to marry.
H3D: The effect of affective evaluations on the propensity to marry is stronger for lower
educated than for higher educated individuals.

A final hypothesis concerns the interplay between partnership status and emotions.
Cohabiting couples are already in a de facto marriage-like situation, and it could be expected that
they are rather continuously weighting the pros and cons of whether or not to marry, i.e. are more
involved in decision-making about marriage. In other words, for cohabitors the question “Why
marry?” is of more immediate relevance (Manning and Smock 1995). According to the somaticmarker hypothesis, emotions, which are marked by changes in bodily stated are elicited during
decision making so “to ‘‘mark’’ certain options as advantageous and other options as
disadvantageous” (Naqvi, et al. 2006). Feelings should therefore matter more for cohabiting
individuals than for individuals who are single or in a dating relationship. Therefore, we
hypothesize:
H3E: The effect of affective evaluations on the propensity to marry is stronger for cohabitors
than for individuals who are single or dating.

Methods

Data

17
Our data that are from the Panel Study on Social Integration in the Netherlands (PSIN)
(Liefbroer and Kalmijn 1987), a panel study designed to examine the process of social
integration of young adults within the life-domains of living arrangements and family formation
on the one hand, and education and occupation on the other hand. It consists of six waves of data
collection among a sample of Dutch young adults from the birth cohorts 1961, 1965 and 1969.
Data were collected in 1987 (Wave 1), 1989 (Wave 2), 1991 (Wave 3), 1995 (Wave 4),
1999/2000 (Wave 5), and 2005/2006 (Wave 6). Respondents were approximately aged 18, 22,
and 26 at the time of the first survey wave in 1987.
In 1987, a two-stage stratified random sample of Dutch males and females
(approximately equal in number) born in 1961, 1965 and 1969 was drawn. In the first wave
1,774 interviews were conducted. The response rate was 63.4%. In the oldest cohort married
respondents were somewhat overrepresented. Furthermore, students and those living in large
cities were somewhat underrepresented. Apart from the underrepresentation of students, a
comparison with data from other surveys showed that the educational attainment of the sample
corresponded quite well with that of other surveys. In Wave 2, 1,410 respondents participated
(79.9% of the original sample), in Wave 3, 70.9% of the original sample participated, in wave 4
54.2%, in wave 5 47.1% and in the last wave, 43.4%. The most important cause of attrition was
change of address, as many respondents were students at the start of the study and moved a lot
without leaving new addresses. In the current study, all independent variables are measured at
the time of the first wave, whereas the dependent variable of interest (the timing of the first
marriage) is based on information from subsequent waves. Respondents who have not
experienced a first marriage at their last participation in the panel are censored at that time. In
this way, the influence of panel attrition is reduced. Respondents who already experienced a first

18
marriage before the first wave of the panel are excluded from the analyses. In all, information on
1,083 respondents is available. Liefbroer and Kalmijn (1997) provide a detailed description of
sampling, fieldwork procedures, non-response patterns and representativeness.

Analytical strategy

The two variables of primary importance are respondents’ cognitive and affective evaluations of
the consequences of the choice for marriage. Given that in a country like the Netherlands most
young adults cohabit unmarried before they enter into marriage (Manting 1996), and if they do
not yet cohabit, the choice is between cohabitation and direct marriage, the main evaluation
respondents have to make when deciding whether or not they want to marry is how marriage
compares to unmarried cohabitation. Therefore, we compare respondents’ evaluations of
unmarried cohabitation and marriage and use the difference in that evaluation as the basis for the
main independent variables of interest.
Within social psychology, a multitude of different ways to measure the cognitive and
affective evaluation of objects can be distinguished. The key difference between the two types of
evaluations is that affective evaluations focus on feelings or emotions that are associated with an
object, whereas cognitive evaluations focus on thoughts or beliefs associated with it (Haddock
and Huskinson 2004; Van den Berg, et al. 2005; Verplanken, et al. 1998) This has clear
implications for the way in which these two types of evaluations are measured. For instance,
Verplanken et al. (19981998) in a study on attitudes towards brand names, measured respondents
affective evaluations by inquiring into the ‘feelings’ that the brands elicited on a number of

19
bipolar adjectives, including positive-negative, whereas cognitive evaluations were measured by
inquiring into their ‘thoughts’ on bipolar adjectives as well, e.g. useful-unuseful.
In this study, we constructed an index of respondents’ cognitive evaluation of marriage
and cohabitation, based on a set of five items in which they were to rate on a five-point scale
separately how suited unmarried cohabitation and how suited marriage was for realizing a set of
important life goals. These goals included ‘opportunities to raise children in a responsible
manner’, ‘your freedom to do as you please’, ‘your sense of feeling secure’, ‘the attention you
can pay to your education or career’, and ‘your contacts with friends’. A sample question was
‘How much attention could you pay to your education or career if you are married’, and answers
could range from ‘little’ (1) to ‘much (5). Next, the same question was posed for cohabitation. In
a different part of the interview, respondents were asked to rate on a five-point scale how
important each of these goals were in their lives. The overall cognitive evaluation of marriage
was constructed by subtracting their score on each cohabitation item from their score on the
corresponding marriage item, multiply this score by the importance they attach to that particular
goal and summing the resulting score over all five goals. A positive score implies that
respondents have a more positive cognitive evaluation of marriage than of unmarried
cohabitation, whereas a negative score implies the opposite. The score on this measure can
potentially range from -20 to +20. The mean score is 0.07, and the standard deviation is 1.42. On
average, most people see little difference between unmarried cohabitation and marriage with
respect to realizing a set of important life goals. The evaluations on the five cognitive aspects are
only weakly correlated (between -0.08 and +0.30), so the items constitute an index rather than a
scale.i

20
Respondents’ affective evaluation of marriage was based on their response to a question
about their feelings about marriage and unmarried cohabitation. Specifically, they were asked to
evaluate what their overall feeling was about being married and about cohabiting unmarried on a
seven-point scale ranging from ‘negative feeling’ (1) to ‘positive feeling’(7). Their score on the
question about unmarried cohabitation was subtracted from their score on the question on
marriage. The positive score implies that respondents hold more positive feelings about marriage
than about unmarried cohabitation. A negative score implies the opposite. The score on this
measure can potentially range from -6 to +6. The mean score of respondents on this affective
evaluation measure is -0.22 with a standard deviation of 2.26. So for both the cognitive and the
affective evaluation the mean is close to the middle of the scale, but the variation in the affective
score is much larger than in the cognitive score. To be better able to compare the effects of
respondents’ cognitive and affective evaluations, both measures were standardized.
The key dependent variable of interest is the duration between the first wave and the
timing of entry into a first marriage. This is measured in months since the first wave. The median
duration between Wave 1 and the timing of marriage was 128 months, so between 10 and 11
years after the first data collection.
[ TABLE 1 ABOUT HERE ]
A number of additional categorical variables are used in the analysis, either for
substantive reasons or as mere controls. They are listed, together with the distribution of
respondents in each of their categories in Table 1. The construction of most of these variables is
straightforward, but a few remarks are in order. Relatively few respondents born in 1961 are
included in this study, because some have already married before entry into the panel study.
Respondents were classified as highly educated if they were – at age 16 – enrolled in a secondary

21
education track preparing them for entry into university or a comparable type of tertiary
education. It was decided to use educational attainment at age 16 rather than at wave 1, because
of the age differences between respondents of different birth cohorts. If respondents indicated
that their parents were reasonably or strongly religiously involved when the respondent was aged
16, respondents were classified as having ‘religiously involved’ parents. Information on whether
parents were separated or divorced was provided by respondents.
To test our first set of hypotheses, t-tests were performed on subgroup differences in the
scores on the cognitive and affective evaluation dimensions. To test the second and third set of
hypotheses, Kaplan-Meier estimates of survivor functions by subgroups and a series of Cox
hazard regression models for the timing of entry into marriage were estimated.

Results

Social differences in affective and cognitive evaluations of marriage
To test hypothesis H1 on differences in feelings towards marriage among respondents with or
without a religious upbringing (H1A) and among children with or without separated/divorced
parents (H1B), results on differences in affective evaluations of marriage for these subgroups are
presented in Table 2. In addition, information for some other relevant categories, and for
differences in cognitive evaluations are presented as well.
[ TABLE 2 ABOUT HERE]
Table 2 shows that respondents whose parents were religiously involved have a more
positive affective evaluation of marriage than respondents whose parents were not very
religiously involved. This confirms H1A. At the same time, children of religious parents also

22
have a more positive cognitive evaluation of marriage than children of parents who were not or
only marginally religiously involved. Feelings about marriage of children of separated/divorced
parents are significantly more negative than the feelings of their counterparts, in accordance with
H1B. Whether a respondent’s parents had divorced or not did not influence the cognitive
evaluation of marriage.
Results in Table 2 also show that highly educated respondents hold less positive affective
and cognitive evaluations of marriage than respondents with a relatively low level of education.
Whether respondents cohabit or not and their gender does not seem to influence their cognitive
evaluation of marriage, but gender and whether respondents already cohabit clearly matters for
their affective evaluation score. Female respondents’ affective evaluation is – on average –less
positive than that of males, whereas cohabiting respondents also evaluate marriage less positive
than respondents who are not cohabiting at the time of Wave 1. For both results, selection could
play a key role. Because females – on average – enter into a union two to three years earlier than
males, more females than males with very positive feelings towards marriage could already have
married before the study started. Respondents who are cohabiting could also be a selective
group, in the sense that strong positive emotions towards cohabitation could lead to early entry
into cohabitation and to less impetus to transform that cohabitation into a legal marriage.

The effect of affective evaluations about marriage on the propensity to marry
[FIGURES 1 AND 2 ABOUT HERE ]
A descriptive analysis of the transition to marriage by subgroups is provided in Figure 1 (where
subgroups are defined according to their score on cognitive evaluations) and in Figure 2 (where
subgroups are defined according to their score on affective evaluations). Estimates are obtained

23
from Kaplan-Meier survivor functions separately by gender, and defining groups as having the
most favourable evaluations (score higher than 1), medium evaluations (score between -1 and 1),
and the least favourable evaluations (score lower than -1). As predicted by H2, individuals with
the more favourable affective evaluations are indeed marrying earlier than other individuals. The
same is true for cognitions; those with more favourable cognitive evaluations marry earlier than
others. Between-group differences are always statistically significant at p<0.02 using the
standard log-rank test of equality between survivor functions.
[TABLE 3 ABOUT HERE ]
Table 3 presents the results of a series of Cox proportional hazards models on the timing
of marriage where H2 is tested by controlling for a progressively larger set of factors. We start
our discussion from Model 1 in which only affective and cognitive evaluations about marriage
are included. It turns out that the cognitive evaluation of marriage has a positive influence on the
transition rate to marriage. However, the effect is almost twice as strong for affective
evaluations, with the hazard ratio increasing by 23% per standard deviation.
In Model 2, a number of antecedents to evaluations about marriage are included. When
controlling for these antecedents, the effect of affective evaluations becomes larger, while the
effect of cost-benefit evaluations is diminished. The other effects in Model 2 are largely in line
with previous findings in the literature. Respondents who are young, highly educated and male,
enter into marriage at a lower rate than their counterparts. Children of separated or divorced
parents have a slower transition to marriage. The same is true for children of highly educated
parents, while neither parental religiosity nor paternal occupation have a significant effect.
In Model 3, partnership status at wave 1 is included. This variable is clearly related to the
variable of interest, as cohabiters in particular are more likely to be self-selected among

24
individuals with more negative dispositions about marriage, and therefore might absorb the
effect of evaluations. While this is the case for cognitive evaluations, the effect of affective
evaluation remains and becomes even stronger. In addition, partner status clearly matters –
respondents who are dating at Wave 1 enter into marriage sooner than respondents who do not
have a partner at Wave 1, and cohabiting respondents have the highest rate of entry into a first
marriage.

The differential effect of affective evaluations about marriage on the propensity to marry
In hypotheses H3A through H3E, it is suggested that affective evaluations are not equally strong
predictors of entry into marriage for all people, that their importance varies by gender, religious
background, level of education and partner status. To test these hypotheses, we added
interactions between these statuses and affective and cognitive evaluations to the Cox regression
models. Results are graphically displayed in Figures 3A through 3D, where the effects on a loghazard scale, together with 95% confidence intervals, are shown.
[ FIGURES 3A THROUGH 3D ABOUT HERE ]
Figure 3A displays results on gender differences in the effect of affective and cognitive
evaluations. As predicted by H3A, and contrary to H3B, the effect on the transition to marriage
is stronger for women than for men—however the difference is only statistically significant at
the p<0.10 level (p=0.083). There is no significant gender difference in cognitive evaluations.
Figure 3B displays the results of the model in which interactions are included between
evaluations and religious upbringing. While there is no significant difference for cognitive
evaluations, affective evaluations have a stronger effect (p=0.045) for respondents with more
religious parents, consistently with H3C.

25
Figure 3C shows the results of models including interactions between the effect of
evaluations and respondent’s education. These results do not support H3D, i.e. the effect of
affective evaluations is not significantly different according to educational level. However,
cognitive evaluations are significantly important only for the highly educated—therefore the
relative importance of affective vs. cost-benefits evaluations is larger for lower educated
individuals.
H3E, on the difference between cohabiters and individuals who are either single or in a
dating relationship, is tested in Figure 3D. Consistent with this hypothesis, cohabiters are more
strongly influenced by affective evaluations than single or dating respondents—indicating that
feelings are more relevant for individuals who are more advanced in the decision-making process
about marriage.

Discussion
In this article, we argued that, in contemporary advanced societies where unmarried cohabitation
has become a viable alternative to marriage, the choice of when and whether to marry is based on
both cognitive and affective evaluations of the value of marriage compared to that of
cohabitation. Our empirical analyses provide empirical support for this thesis. The implications
are far-reaching. Even if financial, legal or normative incentives to marry would wane, as long as
the emotional content of positive feelings attached to marriage (versus unmarried cohabitation)
persists and is socially reproduced, marriage will persist. Our analyses focus on the Netherlands,
a society in which the path towards diminishing incentives to marry has been already taken and
in which marriage is still a vastly majoritarian choice.

26
Results of our analyses were in accordance with the hypothesis that individuals with a
religious background and without the experience of parental separation or divorce have more
positive feelings for marriage vs. cohabitation. This might indicate that the persistence of
positive feelings might decrease over time if secularization and marital instability increase over
time, thereby challenging the potential of affect as a force influencing the persistence of
marriage. In addition, higher educated young adults evaluated marriage less favourable, both in
affective and cognitive terms, than young adults with a low level of education. This could
suggest that higher educated young adults value tradition less strongly than their lower educated
counterparts.
The key finding of our analyses is that affective evaluations of marriage and cohabitation
are better predictions of the actual entry into marriage than cognitive evaluations, suggesting that
the choice between cohabitation and marriage is more strongly dependent on emotions than on
rational considerations. Our additional hypotheses on the differential strength of affective
evaluations for different population subgroups met mixed evidence, with larger effects observed
for women (albeit only statistically significant at the p<.10 level), for individuals with religious
parents and for people who are currently cohabiting. At the same time, cognitive evaluations
were found to be more influential for higher educated young adults than for young adults with a
low level of education.
Our finding that affective evaluations are strong predictors of marriage behaviour might
have more general implications for research on life course transitions and decision-making. We
expect that such evaluations are relevant for other life course choices, such as parenthood,
leaving home and divorce or separation, as well. However, more theoretical reflection and
empirical data collection is needed in this area. For instance, our own empirical analysis has been

27
conducted using data that are not explicitly designed for the purpose of assessing the role of
emotions and affective evaluations in the propensity to marry. Future research should aim to
specify and test the association between emotions and marriage behaviour more thoroughly, with
multiple methods. Future research would also profit from a more purposively designed empirical
strategy, and in particular more comprehensive measures of affective and cognitive evaluations.
Although we applied a panel approach and controlled for several important antecedent factors
that affect both feelings and the transition to marriage in our hazard analysis, our analysis is still
vulnerable to endogeneity issues. It would also be interesting to supplement our approach with
more qualitative research on the accounts of young adults themselves on why – and under which
circumstances – they opt for cohabitation or marriage. Finally, neuroscientific experiments could
be useful to improve our understanding of the role of emotions in the decision to marry or not to
marry.

References
Ajzen, I. 1988 Attitudes, Personality and Behavior, Milton Keynes: Open University Press.
— 1991 'The theory of planned behavior', Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 50(2): 179-211.
Amato, P. 2000 'The consequences of divorce for adults and children', Journal of Marriage and
the Family: 1269-1287.
Bachrach, C. A. and Morgan, S. P. 2013 'A Cognitive–Social Model of Fertility Intentions',
Population and Development Review 39(3): 459-485.
Baizán, P., Aassve, A. and Billari, F. C. 2004 'The interrelations between cohabitation,
marriage and first birth in Germany and Sweden', Population and Environment 25(6): 531-561.

28
Basu, A. M. 2006 'The Emotions and Reproductive Health', Population and Development
Review 32(1): 107-121.
Becker, G. S. 1973 'A Theory of Marriage: Part I', The Journal of Political Economy 81(4): 813846.
— 1974 'A Theory of Marriage: Part II', The Journal of Political Economy 82(2): S11-S26.
Ben-Porath, Y. 1980 'The F-Connection: Families, Friends, and Firms and the Organization of
Exchange', Population and Development Review 6(1): 1-30.
Billari, F. C. and Liefbroer, A. C. 2007 'Should I stay or should I go? The impact of age norms
on leaving home', Demography 44(1): 181-198.
— 2010 'Towards a new pattern of transition to adulthood?', Advances in Life Course Research
15(2-3): 59-75.
Blossfeld, H.-P. and Huinink, J. 1991 'Human Capital Investments or Norms of Role
Transition? How Women's Schooling and Career Affect the Process of Family Formation',
American Journal of Sociology 97(1): 143-168.
Boele-Woelki, K., Curry-Sumner, I., Jansen, M. and Schrama, W. 2007 Huwelijk of
geregistreerd partnerschap? Evaluatie van de wet openstelling huwelijk en de wet geregistreerd
partnerschap [Marriage or registered partnership? An evaluation of the same-sex marriage act
and the law on registered partnership], Deventer: Kluwer.
Bradley, D. 2001 'Regulation of unmarried cohabitation in west-European jurisdictions determinants of legal policy', International Journal of Law, Policy and the Family 15(1): 22-50.
Browning, M., Chiappori, P.-A. and Weiss, Y. 2014 Economics of the Family, New York, NY:
Cambridge University Press.
Buss, D. M. 2003 The Evolution of Desire, Revised Edition 4 Edition, New York: Basic Books.

29
Cherlin, A. J. 2004 'The deinstitutionalization of American marriage', Journal of Marriage and
Family 66(4): 848-861.
— 2005 'American Marriage in the Early Twenty-First Century ', The Future of Children 15(2):
33-55.
Clarkberg, M., Stolzenberg, R. M. and Waite, L. J. 1995 'Attitudes, Values, and Entrance into
Cohabitational Versus Marital Unions', Social Forces 74: 609-632.
Damasio, A. 1994 Descartes' error: Emotion, reason and the human brain, New York, NY:
Putnam and Sons.
de Graaf, A. 2010 'Steeds meer samenwoners hebben een samenlevingscontract [An increasing
number of cohabiters have a cohabitation contract].' CBS Webmagazine, Voorburg: CBS.
de Souza, R. 1987 The Rationality of Emotion, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Fishbein, M. and Ajzen, I. 1975 Belief, Attitude, Intention, and Behavior: An Introduction to
Theory and Research, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Fisher, G. A. and Chon, K. K. 1989 'Durkheim and the Social Construction of Emotions',
Social Psychology Quarterly 52(1): 1-9.
Fisher, H. 2004 Why We Love: The Nature and Chemistry of Romantic Love, New York: Henry
Holt.
Giddens, A. 1991 Modernity and self-identity. Self and society in the late modern age,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
— 1992 The transformation of intimacy. Sexuality, love & eroticism in modern societies,
Cambridge: Polity Press.

30
Haddock, G. and Huskinson, T. L. H. 2004 'Individual differences in attitude structure', in G.
Haddock and G. R. Maio (eds) Contemporary perspectives on the psychology of attitudes, Hove,
UK: Psychology Press.
Heuveline, P. and Timberlake, J. M. 2004 'The role of cohabitation in family formation: The
United States in comparative perspective', Journal of Marriage and Family 66(5): 1214-1230.
Hiekel, N. 2014 The different meanings of cohabitation across Europe. How cohabiters view
their unions and differ in their plans and behaviors, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Hochschild, A. R. 1979 'Emotion Work, Feeling Rules, and Social Structure', American Journal
of Sociology 85(3): 551-575.
Hochschild, A. R. 1983 The Managed Heart: Commercialization of Human Feeling, Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press.
Jamieson, L. 1999 'Intimacy Transformed? A Critical Look at the 'Pure Relationship'', Sociology
33(3): 477-494.
Kalmijn, M. 2007 'Explaining cross-national differences in marriage, cohabitation, and divorce
in Europe, 1990-2000', Population Studies 61(3): 243-263.
Kemper, T. D. 1981 'Social Constructionist and Positivist Approaches to the Sociology of
Emotions', American Journal of Sociology 87(2): 336-362.
Kennedy, S. and Bumpass, L. L. 2008 'Cohabitation and children's living arrangements: New
estimates from the United States', Demographic Research 19(47): 1663-1692.
Kiernan, K. 2002 'The State of European Unions: An Analysis of FFS Data on Partnership
Formation and Dissolution', in M. Macura and G. Beets (eds) Dynamics of Fertility and
Partnership in Europe: Insights and Lessons From Comparative Research, New York and
Geneva: United Nations.

31
Lesthaeghe, R. 1995 'The second demographic transition in Western countries: An
interpretation', in K. Oppenheim Mason and A.-M. Jensen (eds) Gender and Family Change in
Industrialized Countries, Oxford: Clarendon.
— 2010 'The Unfolding Story of the Second Demographic Transition', Population and
Development Review 36(2): 211-251.
Lesthaeghe, R. and van de Kaa, D. 1986 'Twee demografische transities?', in R. Lesthaeghe
and D. van de Kaa (eds) Bevolking: Groei en Krimp, Deventer: Van Loghum Slaterus.
Lieberwirth, C. and Wang, Z. 2014 'Social Bonding: Regulation by Neuropeptides', Frontiers
in Neuroscience 8.
Liefbroer, A. C. and Billari, F. C. 2010 'Bringing Norms Back In: A Theoretical and Empirical
Discussion of Their Importance for Understanding Demographic Behaviour', Population, Space
and Place 16(4): 287-305.
Liefbroer, A. C. and De Jong Gierveld, J. 1993 'The Impact of Rational Considerations and
Perceived Opinions on Young Adults' Union Formation Intentions', Journal of Family Issues
14(2): 213-235.
Liefbroer, A. C. and Kalmijn, M. 1987 'Panel Study of Social Integration in the Netherlands
1987-1995 (PSIN8795). Codebook' ICS Occasional Papers and Documents Series, Utrecht:
Interuniversity Center for Social Science Theory and Methodology.
Loewenstein, G. and Schkade, D. 1999 'Wouldn't It Be Nice? Predicting Future Feelings', in D.
Kahneman, E. Diener and N. Schwarz (eds) Well-Being: The Foundation of Hedonic
Psychology, New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Loewenstein, G. F., Weber, E. U., Hsee, C. K. and Welch, N. 2001 'Risk as feelings',
Psychological Bulletin 127(2): 267-286.

32
Lundberg, S. and Pollak, R. A. 1993 'Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market',
Journal of Political Economy 101(6): 988-1010.
Manning, W. D. and Smock, P. J. 1995 'Why Marry? Race and the Transition to Marriage
among Cohabitors', Demography 32(4): 509-520.
Manning, W. D. and Smock, P. J. 2002 'First Comes Cohabitation and then Comes Marriage?:
A Research Note', Journal of Family Issues 23(8): 1065-1087.
— 2005 'Measuring and Modeling Cohabitation: New Perspectives From Qualitative Data',
Journal of Marriage and Family 67(4): 989-1002.
Manting, D. 1996 'The changing meaning of cohabitation and marriage', European Sociological
Review 12(1): 53-65.
Miller, G. 2000 The Mating Mind. How Sexual Choice Shaped the Evolution of Human Nature,
New York: Doubleday.
Moffitt, R. A., Reville, R. and Winkler, A. E. 1998 'Beyond Single Mothers: Cohabitation and
Marriage in the AFDC Program', Demography 35(3): 259-278.
Naqvi, N., Shiv, B. and Bechara, A. 2006 'The role of emotion in decision making: A cognitive
neuroscience perspective', Current Directions in Psychological Science 15(5): 260-264.
Oppenheimer, V. K. 1988 'A Theory of Marriage Timing', American Journal of Sociology
94(3): 563-591.
— 1994 'Women's Rising Employment and the Future of the Family in Industrial Societies',
Population and Development Review 20(2): 293-342.
— 1997 'Women's Employment and the Gain to Marriage: The Specialization and Trading
Model', Annual Review of Sociology 23: 431-453.

33
Perelli-Harris, B. and Sánchez Gassen , N. 2012 'How Similar Are Cohabitation and
Marriage? Legal Approaches to Cohabitation across Western Europe', Population and
Development Review 38(3): 435-467.
Perugini, M. and Bagozzi, R. P. 2001 'The role of desires and anticipated emotions in goaldirected behaviours: Broadening and deepening the theory of planned behaviour', British Journal
of Social Psychology 40: 79-98.
Pollak, R. A. 1985 'A Transaction Cost Approach to Families and Households', Journal of
Economic Literature 23(2): 581-608.
Poortman, A.-R. and Mills, M. 2012 'Investments in Marriage and Cohabitation: The Role of
Legal and Interpersonal Commitment', Journal of Marriage and Family 74(2): 357-376.
Schwarz, N. and Clore, G. L. 1988 'How do I Feel about it? The Informative Function of
Affective States', in K. Fiedler and J. Forgas (eds) Affect, Cognition and Social Behavior,
Toronto: Hogrefe.
Seltzer, J. A., Bachrach, C. A., Bianchi, S. M., Bledsoe, C. H., Casper, L. M., ChaseLansdale, P. L., DiPrete, T. A., Hotz, V. J., Morgan, S. P., Sanders, S. G. and Thomas, D.
2005 'Explaining Family Change and Variation: Challenges for Family Demographers', Journal
of Marriage and Family 67(4): 908-925.
Shanahan, M. J. 2000 'Pathways to Adulthood in Changing Societies: Variability and
Mechanisms in Life Course Perspective', Annual Review of Sociology 26: 667-692.
Shilling, C. 1999 'Towards an embodied understanding of the structure/agency relationship',
British Journal of Sociology 50(4): 543-562.
Shott, S. 1979 'Emotion and Social Life: A Symbolic Interactionist Analysis', American Journal
of Sociology 84(6): 1317-1334.

34
Simon, R. W. 2014 'Sociological Scholarship on Gender Differences in Emotion and Emotional
Well-Being in the United States: A Snapshot of the Field', Emotion Review 6(3): 196-201.
Soons, J. P. M. and Kalmijn, M. 2009 'Is Marriage More Than Cohabitation? Well-Being
Differences in 30 European Countries', Journal of Marriage and Family 71(5): 1141-1157.
Statistics Netherlands 2015 'Huwen en partnerschapsregistraties: kerncijfer [Marriage and
partnership registrations; key figures]', Vol. 2015, Voorburg: Statistics Netherlands.
Thoits, P. A. 1989 'The Sociology of Emotions', Annual Review of Sociology 15: 317-342.
Thornton, A. and Young-DeMarco, L. 2001 'Four Decades of Trends in Attitudes Toward
Family Issues in the United States: The 1960s Through the 1990s', Journal of Marriage and
Family 63(4): 1009-1037.
Trafimow, D. and Sheeran, P. 1998 'Some Tests of the Distinction between Cognitive and
Affective Beliefs', Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 34(4): 378-397.
Turner, J. H. and Stets, J. E. 2005 The Sociology of Emotions, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
— 2006 'Sociological Theories of Human Emotions', Annual Review of Sociology 32(1): 25-52.
van de Kaa, D. J. 1987 'Europe’s Second Demographic Transition', Population Bulletin 42(1).
— 2001 'Postmodern Fertility Preferences: From Changing Value Orientation to New Behavior',
Population and Development Review 27(Supplement: Global Fertility Transition): 290-331.
Van den Berg, H., Manstead, A. S. R., Van der Pligt, J. and Wigboldus, D. H. J. 2005 'The
role of affect in attitudes toward organ donation and donor-relevant decisions', Psychology &
Health 20(6): 789-802.
Verplanken, B., Hofstee, G. and Janssen, H. J. W. 1998 'Accessibility of affective versus
cognitive components of attitudes', European Journal of Social Psychology 28(1): 23-35.

35
Walum, H., Lichtenstein, P., Neiderhiser, J. M., Reiss, D., Ganiban, J. M., Spotts, E. L.,
Pedersen, N. L., Anckarsäter, H., Larsson, H. and Westberg, L. 2012 'Variation in the
Oxytocin Receptor Gene Is Associated with Pair-Bonding and Social Behavior', Biological
Psychiatry 71(5): 419-426.
Wilcox, W. B. and Wolfinger, N. H. 2007 'Then comes marriage? Religion, race, and marriage
in urban America', Social Science Research 36(2): 569-589.

36
Table 1. Descriptive statistics for covariates (N=1,100)
Mean
Characteristics of the respondent
Born in 1961a

0.20

Born in 1965

0.36

Born in 1969

0.44

Femalea

0.49

Male

0.51

Not highly educateda

0.50

Highly educated

0.50

In educationa

0.40

Employed

0.53

Non-employed

0.07

No partnera

0.48

Dating

0.36

Cohabiting

0.16

Characteristics of the parental family

s.d.

37
Occupational status of father

-0.14

0.96

3.03

1.31

(min=-1.71, max=2.21)

Importance of religion for
parents
(min=1, max=5)

Parents’ highest educational

0.52

level lower than secondary a
Parents’ highest educational

0.48

level greater or equal to
secondary

Neither separated nor divorceda

0.89

Separated or divorced

0.11

a

Reference category

38

Table 2. Scores on cognitive and affective evaluations for marriage vs. cohabitation
for selected subgroups: comparison of means (standardized variables)
Cognitive evaluation

Affective evaluation

High parental religiosity

0.134

a

0.272

b

Lower parental religiosity

-0.087

a

-0.180

b

Parents neither divorced nor
separated

0.020

0.036

c

Parents divorced or separated

-0.164

-0.299

c

Men

0.018

0.067

d

Women

-0.019

-0.070

d

Highly educated

-0.089

e

-0.094

f

Not highly educated

0.087

e

0.094

f

Cohabiting

-0.026

-0.519

g

Not cohabiting

0.004

0.097

g

Note: Groups with the same superscript differ at p<.05

39

Table 3. Cox proportional hazards model of entry into marriage: estimates of regression coefficients
Model 1
b

Model 2
se

Model 3

b

se

b

se

Cognitive evaluation

0.11

** 0.04

0.07

†

0.04

0.05

0.04

Affective evaluation

0.21

** 0.05

0.31

**

0.05

0.44

** 0.05

0.12

0.06

0.12

Born in 1965

-0.11

Born in 1969

-0.90

**

0.13

-0.41

** 0.14

Highly educated

-0.18

†

0.10

-0.16

0.10

Male

-0.43

**

0.10

-0.29

** 0.10

Parental religiosity

-0.02

0.04

-0.01

0.04

Parents separated or divorced

-0.59

**

0.20

-0.84

** 0.20

Parents highly educated

-0.18

†

0.11

-0.21

†

Father’s occupational level

0.00

0.06

0.04

0.06

Dating

0.90

** 0.11

Cohabiting

1.88

** 0.14

-Log likelihood

2587.4

2803.4

2711.11

number of respondents

1083

1083

1083

number of marriages

458

458

458

Note: ** p < .01, * p < .05, † p <.10

0.11

40

Figure 1. Timing of marriage by cognitive evaluation of marriage and gender (Kaplan-Meier
estimates of survivor function)

Note: log-rank test for the equality of survivor functions p=0.0110 for women, p=0.0053 for
men.

41
Figure 2. Timing of marriage by affective evaluation of marriage and gender (Kaplan-Meier
estimates of survivor function)

Note: log-rank test for the equality of survivor functions p=0.0000 for women, p=0.0159 for
men.

42
Figure 3a. Effects (log-hazard scale) of cognitive and affective evaluations on the timing of
marriage by respondent’s gender
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Cognitive-Men

Cognitive -Women

Affective - Men

Affective - Women

Note: the graph depicts point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of estimates from a Cox
hazard regression model which includes cohort, gender, parental religiosity, parental separation
or divorce, parental educational level, father’s occupation, relationship status. Tests for the
difference between the coefficients for men and women had respectively p=0.318 for cognitive
evaluations and p=0.083 for affective evaluations.

43
Figure 3b. Effects (log-hazard scale) of cognitive and affective evaluations on the timing of
marriage by level of parental religiosity
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Cognitive-High religiosity

Cognitive -Low religiosity

Affective - High religiosity

Affective - Low religiosity

Note: the graph depicts point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of estimates from a Cox
hazard regression model which includes cohort, gender, parental religiosity, parental separation
or divorce, parental educational level, father’s occupation, relationship status. Tests for the
difference between the coefficients for low and high religiosity had respectively p=0.483 for
cognitive evaluations and p=0.045 for affective evaluations.

44
Figure 3c. Effects (log-hazard scale) of cognitive and affective evaluation on the timing of
marriage by respondent’s level of education
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Cognitive - High education Cognitive - Low education Affective - High education Affective - Low education

Note: the graph depicts point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of estimates from a Cox
hazard regression model which includes cohort, gender, parental religiosity, parental separation
or divorce, parental educational level, father’s occupation, relationship status. Tests for the
difference between the coefficients for high and low education had p=0.014 for cognitive
evaluations and p=0.177 for affective evaluations.

45
Figure 3d. Effects (log-hazard scale) of cognitive and affective evaluation on the timing of
marriage by respondent’s partnership status
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
Cognitive - Cohabiting

Cognitive - Single or dating

Affective - Cohabiting

Affective - Single or dating

Note: the graph depicts point estimates and 95% confidence intervals of estimates from a Cox
hazard regression model which includes cohort, gender, parental religiosity, parental separation
or divorce, parental educational level, father’s occupation, relationship status. Tests for the
difference between the coefficients for cohabiting and single/dating had p=0.629 for cognitive
evaluations and p=0.001 for affective evaluations.

i

Sensitivity analyses (results not shown) in which the separate cognitive evaluations rather than

the index is used show that the effect of the affective evaluation is not sensitive to how the

46

cognitive evaluation is included in the model. Among the cognitive evaluations, the consequence
of marriage for one’s freedom is the only statistically significant effect in that model. Just like in
the models presented below in Table 2, this effect becomes statistically non-significant after
introducing the sets of additional control variables. Thus our results are robust to different types
of specification of the cognitive evaluation variable.

