Intersections between Sexual Identity, Sexual Attraction,
and Sexual Behavior among a Nationally Representative
Sample of American Men and Women
Emma Mishel,
New York University
Forthcoming in Journal of Official Statistics. August 24, 2019 version.
Abstract: Social scientists struggle in how to best operationalize and measure sexual
orientation. Depending on the survey, researchers can use self-reports of lesbian, gay, or
bisexual (LGB) identity, same-sex partner cohabitation, same-sex sexual attraction, or same-sex
sexual behavior. All measures come with their own limitations. To illuminate differences in these
measures, this study examines the intersections between self-reported sexual identity, attraction,
and behavior among a nationally representative sample of U.S. men and women aged 15-45. I
explore how and when the three measures align, examine the determinants of self-identifying as
gay or bisexual based on sexual behavior and attraction, and assess gender differences in the
patterns. I find that about 20% of women and 10% of men aged 15-45 would comprise the LGB
community if it were defined to include those who report at least one of the following: gay or
bisexual identity, any same-sex attraction, or same-sex sex in the last year. This is much higher
than the 6.4% of women and 3.6% of men aged 15-45 who self-identify as LGB. I conclude with
recommendations that can aid in measurement of the LGB population, and discuss implications
for using certain measures over others when conducting research on the LGB community.
Keywords: Sexual orientation, sexuality, gay, population, quantitative

Author Contact Information:
Emma Mishel
New York University
295 Lafayette St. 4th Floor, Rm 4147
New York, NY 10012
emmamishel@nyu.edu
Acknowledgements:
I gratefully thank Paula England, Mike Hout, and David Greenberg for their helpful feedback,
as well as the editors of Journal of Official Statistics for their helpful comments.

Intersections between Sexual Identity, Sexual Attraction,
and Sexual Behavior among a Nationally Representative
Sample of American Men and Women
Emma Mishel,
New York University
Forthcoming in Journal of Official Statistics. August 24, 2019 version.
1. Introduction
Much research on sexual minorities in the United States is qualitative due to challenges
of collecting quantitative data on the lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGBi) population. One
challenge is that questions about sexual orientation are not always asked about on large,
nationally representative surveys. Another is that, of the national surveys that do ask about
sexual orientation, measures are not always consistent, and some surveys include more than one
measure. For example, the concept of sexual orientation involves three main elements: the label
we attach to our sexuality (sexual identity), the gender of those whom we engage in sexual
activity with (sexual behavior), and the gender of those whom we experience attraction to
(sexual attraction). Researchers must thus select which measure(s) to use as their indicator of the
LGB community – sometimes a crucial decision, as research results may differ depending on the
measure used. An additional challenge is that responses to questions of this nature can be
especially vulnerable to response bias.
Since there is much complexity in operationalizing and defining sexual orientation, there
is also difficulty in how to best estimate the size of the LGB population. Accurate measurement
of the LGB population is vital, however, as researchers use these estimates to study inequalities
between heterosexuals and LGB individuals across dimensions such as urban amenities, health,
fertility and morbidity, educational attainment and investment, economic earnings, and
household divisions of labor (e.g., Baumle et al. 2009; Berg and Lien 2002; Black et. al 2002;
Black et. al 2003; Carpenter 2009; Harper 2007). Psychologists, evolutionary biologists, and
geneticists also use these estimates in their respective fields (e.g., Cochran et al. 2003; Gavrilets
and Rice 2006), and policy-makers take these estimates into account when assessing civil rights
arguments and non-discrimination bills.
If using a self-identification measure to estimate the size of the lesbian, gay, and bisexual
community, researchers from the Williams Institute have suggested that LGB individuals make
up about 3.5 percent of the U.S. population (Gates 2011). Yet, self-identifying as lesbian, gay, or
bisexual may put one at risk for employment discrimination (Tilcsik 2011; Mishel 2016),
housing discrimination (Friedman 2013), as well as at risk for procuring negative social stigmas
from others, specifically surrounding one’s own morality and competency (Mize and Manago
2018a; Webster 1998). Thus, it is likely that not all Americans who feel some same-sex
attraction, or who engage in same-sex sexual activity, also identify as lesbian, gay or bisexual,
and this may translate into not marking it on a survey.
In this vein, this study analyzes the links between the three commonly used measures of
sexual orientation: sexual identity, sexual attraction, and sexual behavior, using a nationally
Mishel 2

representative sample of the U.S. Specifically, I pool four waves of a nationally representative
dataset of U.S. men and women aged 15-45, and explore the a) patterns and links between selfreported sexual identity, attraction, and behavior, b) determinants of self-identifying as lesbian,
gay, or bisexual based on self-reported sexual behavior and sexual attraction, and c) gender
differences in these patterns. Based on the findings, I put forth arguments for using certain
measures over others when conducting research on the LGB community, and I provide
recommendations that can aid in measurement and analysis of the LGB population. In all, this
research seeks to shed light on the complexity of defining, measuring, and operationalizing
sexual orientation, while providing insights that can aid researchers in conducting quantitative
data analysis on the LGB population.
2. Past Research
To conduct research on the LGB population, researchers must make an important
decision about the specific measure they choose to use as their indicator of LGB identity. Some
studies use self-identification as lesbian, gay, or bisexual as their measure (e.g., Carpenter and
Eppink 2017; Cochran 2003); others use reports of same-sex sexual behavior, either recently or
ever (e.g., Badgett 1995; Berg and Lien 2002; Black et al. 2003); some use reports of same-sex
sexual attraction (e.g., Busseri et al. 2006); others use reports of same-sex partner cohabitation
(e.g., Baumle and Poston 2011; Fischer 2016); and yet others use a combination of one or more
of these measures (e.g., Bostwick et al. 2010; England et al. 2016; Mize 2016). The decision of
which measure to use is vital, as past studies show disjunctures between a person’s selfdescribed sexual identity and with whom the individual engages in sexual behavior, or to whom
the individual is sexually attracted (Epstein et. al 2012; Igartua et. al 2009; Kinsey et al. 1953;
Laumann et al. 1994), and these disjunctures have been shown to change research results,
depending on the measure of sexual orientation used (Bostwick et al. 2010; Compton et al. 2015;
Korchmaros et al. 2013; Mize 2016).
To understand the correlations between sexual identity, sexual desire, and sexual
behavior, previous studies conducted in Britain and Australia have used nationally
representative, country-specific data to analyze the patterns between the three measures among
its citizens (e.g., Geary et al. 2018; Richters et al. 2014; Smith et al. 2003; Wellings et. al 1994).
For Australian men and women, same-sex attraction and same-sex sexual behavior were more
common than gay or bisexual identity would suggest (Richters et al. 2014; Smith et. al 2003),
and similar results were found in Britain (Geary et al. 2018; Wellings et. al 1994).
Past studies based in the U.S. have examined patterns between sexual identity, attraction,
and behavior as well (e.g., Laumann et al. 1994). The more recent studies to do so have either
used smaller and unrepresentative samples, such as adolescents/young adults from one
Southwestern city (Korchmaros et al. 2013), young women (Diamond 2008), men from New
York City (Pathela et al. 2006), or have focused on bisexuality (Compton et al. 2015), asexuality
(Poston and Baumle 2010), or on health risks for the LGB community (Bostwick et al. 2010).
Two reports from the Center for Disease Control’s National Health Statistics Department use
nationally representative data of the U.S. to give a cursory glance at the links between sexual
behavior, attraction and identity (Chandra et al. 2011; Copen et al. 2016); however, these reports
do not go beyond mere descriptive tables, and with their focus on heterosexual behavior, they are
not able to list values in many figures pertaining to non-heterosexual identity, same-sex sexual

Mishel 3

behavior, or different levels of same-sex attraction due to small sample size.
This research builds upon previous studies by pooling four waves of a large
representative sample of U.S men and women aged 15-45 to examine the links between sexual
identity, sexual attraction, and sexual behavior. I go beyond descriptive statistics to estimate
relationships using regression analysis, which allows me to control for important demographic
characteristics when assessing these patterns. I also examine gender differences in patterns, and
discuss implications for using different measures of sexual orientation. I conclude by discussing
which measure(s) of sexual orientation may be most useful depending on the research objectives,
and by discussing how this analysis has policy implications, as estimates for and research on the
LGB community are used to inform a host of different research fields.
3. Data and Measures
I use the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) to conduct this research. The NSFG
is a nationally representative survey of the U.S. household population, with in-person interviews
conducted with men and women between 15 and 45. The survey collects information on family
life, marriage and divorce, pregnancy, infertility, use of contraception, health, and sexuality. The
NSFG uses three measures of sexual orientation: sexual identity, sexual attraction, and sexual
behavior, which allows me to compare responses from all three variables. To obtain the largest
sample size of sexual minorities, I pool data from four NSFG survey waves: 2002, 2006-2010,
2011-2013, and 2013-2015. In wave 2002, 7,643 women and 4,928 men (12,571 total) were
sampled; in wave 2006-2010, 12,279 women and 10,403 men (22,682 total) were sampled; in
wave 2011-2013, 5,601 women and 4,815 men (10,416 total) were sampled; and in wave 20132105, 5,699 women and 4,506 men (10,205 total) were sampled, making my total sample size
55,874. All analyses were conducted using the designated weights from NSFG. As such, results
in all tables and figures reflect the general U.S. population among those aged 15 to 45.
Participants were included in analysis if they answered specific items that assessed sexual
identity, sexual attraction, and sexual behavior measures, as well as relevant demographic
measures, for each table and regression in question; if not, they were excluded from the
analysisii. Below, I describe how I operationalize each sexual orientation measure, and provide
details on NSFG’s question ordering and relevant pathways.
3.1 Sexual Orientation Measures
Sexual identity. To assess sexual identity, I use a question that asked respondents
whether they see themselves as “heterosexual or straight,” “homosexual, gay, or lesbian,” or
“bisexual.” Note that for brevity, and to facilitate comparing analyses across genders, I use the
term “gay” when referring to the men and women who marked “homosexual, gay, or lesbian.” I
use the term “straight” when referring to the men and women who marked “heterosexual or
straight.” In the 2002 wave and part of the 2006–2010 wave (through June 2008), respondents
were also given the option of choosing “something else” to describe their sexual identity; and, in
every wave except 2002, respondents were also given the option of choosing “don’t know” to
describe their sexual identity. Thus, I create a fourth category, “something else/ don’t know,”
which combines these two additional sexual identity options across survey waves. I include and
combine “something else” and “don’t know” sexual identities, as I believe it is important to get a

Mishel 4

sense of the proportions of individuals who do not select one of the standard sexual identities
when other options are given.
Sexual attraction. To assess attraction, I use the following question in the NSFG:
“People are different in their sexual attraction to other people. Which best describes your
feelings? Are you...” Male respondents were then shown categories for: only attracted to
females, mostly attracted to females, equally attracted to males and females, mostly attracted to
males, and only attracted to males. Response options for women were the same, but gender order
was reversed. Thus, I coded attraction on a 5-point scale, as follows: only attracted to the other
sex, mostly attracted to the other sex, equal attraction to both sexes, mostly attracted to the same
sex, and only attracted to the same sexiii.
Sexual behavior. I include measures for lifetime and recent sexual behavior using the
following questions: “Thinking about your entire life, how many [male/female] sex partners have
you had?” and “Thinking about the last 12 months, how many [male/female] sex partners have
you had?” I operationalize these variables to assess whether someone had ever had a same-sex
sex partner (0 for no, 1 for yes), and whether they had one in the last year (0 for no, 1 for yes). I
also use these measures to assess how many same-sex sexual partners they have ever had, and
had in the last year, coded as follows: 0, 1, 2-4, or 5 or more. Lastly, I include a measure of
whether the respondent has had sexual partners of both sexes, both ever and in the last year (0 for
no, 1 for yes).
3.2 NSFG’s Survey Design and Question Pathways
In this section, I describe the question pathways for the relevant sexual orientation
measures. Women were first asked if they have ever performed oral sex on, or received oral sex
from, another female. If they said no, they were then asked if they had “ever had any type of
sexual experience of any kind with another female.” If they said yes to any of these questions,
they were then asked about their number of female sexual partners ever, and in the last year. (If
they said no to any of the questions above, they were assumed to have no same-sex sex partners.)
Then, women were asked about their sexual attraction towards men and women, and about their
sexual identity. Men were first asked if they have ever had oral or anal sex with another male,
either given or received. If they answered yes to any of these questions, they were then asked
about their number of male sexual partners ever, and in the last year. (If they said no to any of
the questions above, they were assumed to have no same-sex sexual partners.) Then, men were
asked about their sexual attraction towards women and men, and about their sexual identity.
Note that, as indicated above, the pathways used to screen respondents for questions
about same-sex partners were slightly different for men and women. At first glance, NSFG
seems to have created a higher bar for men to report a same-sex partner compared to women.
That is, men weren’t asked how many male sexual partners they had had (and thus were assumed
to have had none) unless they said they had oral or anal sex with a man, whereas women could
be classified as having had sex with a woman if they said they had had “any” sexual experience
with a woman, even if they did not report having had oral sex with a woman. Recent attention to
the prevalence of women kissing women on dance floors and at parties (Rupp et al. 2014;
Hamilton 2007) raises the question of whether women reporting sexual experience with women
are referring to experiences such as these, or to more private sexual contact involving genitals. In
analyses not shown, I ascertained that 88 percent of the women who said they had sex with a
woman in the last year (regardless of whether they also said they had sex with a man) also
reported that they had ever had oral sex with a woman, as did 86 percent of (the overlapping

Mishel 5

group of) women who reported having sex with both men and women in the last year. This
suggests that the vast majority of those who say they have had a female sexual partner have had
private sexual experiences with women beyond kissing. Thus, I am relatively unconcerned that
the measures artifactually create a higher bar for men than women reporting on sexual behavior.
For questions deemed particularly sensitive by NSFG, Audio Computer-Assisted SelfInterview (ACASI) was used, which enables respondents to answer questions privately—that is,
without the interviewer seeing their response. Questions about sexual identity, behavior, and
attraction were asked in the ACASI portion of the survey, which came at the very end of the
NSFG survey. Other questions included in the ACASI part of the survey were about things like
household income, unemployment, getting expelled from school, drug use, HIV/STDs, and
experiences of sexual assault. Use of ACASI may reduce reporting bias on sensitive questions
compared to other surveys that do not use this approach (Betts 2009; O’Reilly et al. 1994;
Villarroel et al. 2006; Tourangeau and Smith 1996). Overall, NSFG reports that response rates
for their recent data releases are around 69 percent (Centers for Disease Control 2018).
4. Analytical Approach.
4.1 Descriptive Statistics
I perform several analyses to examine the links between sexual identity, sexual attraction,
and sexual behavior. First, I provide descriptive statistics of men’s and women’s self-reported
sexual identity by self-reported sexual attraction and various sexual behaviors. Then, I assess
whether there are statistically significant gender differences in these estimates by performing
standard two-tailed t-tests. Following this, I examine the self-reported sexual attraction levels
and sexual identities of men and women who report having had same-sex sex in the past year.
These analyses all help to illuminate the patterns and links between sexual identity, attraction,
and behavior among men and women aged 15-45 in the U.S., and to assess whether there are
gender differences in these patterns.
4.2 Regression Analysis
After analysis of the descriptive statistics, I move to regression analysis. I estimate 8
logistic regression models that predict bisexual identity (4 for women and 4 for men) and 8
logistic regression models that predict gay identity (4 for women and 4 for men). The dependent
variable is either bisexual identity (compared to not bisexual identity) or gay identity (compared
to not gay identity). The 4 main predictors are: (1) self-reported sexual attraction on a five-point
scale, (2) whether the individual has ever had same-sex sex, (3) whether the individual has had
partners of both sexes in the past year, and (4) whether the individual has had only same-sex
partners in the past year. Each regression also controls for race, age, age-squared, mother’s
education, immigrant status, and metropolitan area, as well as survey wave. These regression
models seek to assess how certain sexual behaviors and sexual attraction levels predict whether a
man or woman age 15-45 takes on a gay or bisexual identity. Such analysis helps to illuminate
the links between sexual identity, attraction, and behavior; and, it goes beyond descriptive
statistics in a useful way, as it predicts when someone may take on a gay or bisexual identity—
arguably the most common measure for counting the LGB population—after controlling for
important demographic characteristics.

Mishel 6

4.3 Predicted Probabilities
Calculated from the regression results, I plot the predicted probabilities for identifying as
gay or bisexual, separately for men and women. I first plot the predicted probabilities
corresponding to the 4 logistic regressions models predicting bisexual identity, and then plot the
predicted probabilities corresponding to the 4 logistic regressions predicting gay identity,
separately for men and women. Predicted probabilities were obtained using an average marginal
effects (AME) approach, and they are adjusted for race, mother’s education, immigrant status,
metropolitan city, and survey wave. Each plotted predicted probability includes bars to indicate
confidence intervals at the 95% level.
5. Results
Table 1 displays the proportion of men and women who identify as straight, bisexual,
gay, and something else/don’t know. Table 1 also displays the proportions of men and women
who have engaged in same-sex sex (such as whether they have ever had a same-sex sexual
partner, whether they have had partners of both sexes within the last year or ever, whether they
have had only same-sex partners in the past year, and the number of same-sex partners they have
ever had and had in the past year), as well as their self-reported sexual attraction level, by sexual
identity. When examining women’s self-reported sexual identities, Table 1 shows that overall,
92.2% of the 30,861 women identify as straight, 4.9% as bisexual, 1.5% as gay, and 1.4% said
either something else or don’t know. When examining the self-reported sexual identities of men,
Table 1 shows that 95.1% of the 24,357 men identify as straight, 1.7% as bisexual, 1.9% as gay,
and 1.3% said something else or don’t know.
The estimates for those who identify as gay or bisexual are slightly larger here compared
to the proportion of people who identify as gay or bisexual in Britain and Australia (see Geary et
al. 2018; Ritchers et al. 2014); however, this is to be expected with a younger sample, as NSFG
only sampled Americans aged 15-45 while Britain sampled adults aged 16-74 and Australia
sampled adults aged 16-69. Indeed, many studies show that younger individuals are more likely
to identify as non-heterosexual compared to older individuals (see Bridges and Moore 2018;
England et al. 2016; Mishel et al. 2018a).
Table 1 also shows that there are many gender differences when assessing how men and
women age 15-45 label their sexual orientation: significantly more women than men identify as
bisexual, and significantly more men than women identify as gay. This pattern is also seen in
data from Australia (Richters et al. 2014) and Britain (Geary et al. 2018), and is consistent with
past research in the U.S. (England et al. 2016; Gates 2011; Korchmaros et al. 2013).
[Table 1 about here]
5.1 Sexual Identity by Sexual Attraction
How does sexual identity relate to sexual attraction among U.S. men and women aged
15-45? Table 1 shows some results that may be different from what one might expect. For
example, Table 1 shows that about 9.1% of gay women, 3.9% of bisexual women, 8.4% of gay
men, and 14.3% of bisexual men report that they are only attracted to the other-sex. In addition,
over 11% of self-identified straight women report some level of same-sex attraction, while a
smaller percentage of straight men (about 3.7%) report the same. Furthermore, only 56.9% of

Mishel 7

self-identified gay women report only same-sex attraction, while 67.1% of gay men report the
same.
Some of these disjunctures may be surprising. For example, if an individual identifies as
gay or bisexual, surely they have some level of same-sex attraction. Indeed, this disjuncture is
also found among Australian men and women (about 6% of self-identifying Australian gay
women reported only sexual attraction to men, and about 2% of self-identifying Australian gay
men reported only sexual attraction to women) (Richters et al. 2014). Why someone who
identifies as gay or bisexual does not report any same-sex attraction can only be speculated. One
possible reason for this disjuncture is simple measurement error. Indeed, DeMaio et al. (2013)
show that measurement error can be a big issue when conducting research on the LGB
population; they find that about 28% of reported same-sex couple households in Census 2010 are
likely to be other-sex couple households, where either the man or woman was wrongly coded as
the other gender (and as a result, the 2010 Census how now issued a “preferred” set of state-level
estimates of same-sex couples, which are much lower). Other researchers also conclude that the
number of same-sex married couples reported in the 2010 Census is likely inflated because
gender was mismarked (e.g., Black et al. 2007; O’Connell and Gooding 2006). Coding errors,
while not typically a big problem in probability-based analyses, can be a serious issue when
analyzing a numerically small group of people, such as those who identify as LGB. While
miscoding of gender is not very likely in analysis of NSFG data, since men and women were
given different ACASI surveys that asked gender-specific questions about pregnancy and
genitalia (see Section 3.2), it is nonetheless possible that responses to other questions were
miscoded.
Besides attributing this disjuncture to coding errors, it may also be the case that the
respondent did not understand either the sexual identity question or the attraction question, or
both. After taking a closer look at the individuals who report gay identity and only other-sex
attraction in the NSFG, these respondents are disproportionately immigrants (37% immigrant,
compared to 15.6% of the entire sample); have less education compared to the entire sample
(35% did not graduate high school compared to 21% in the entire sample), and are less likely to
be white (37% white, compared to 60% white in the entire sample) (analysis not shown). This
may suggest that some of these respondents did not understand one or both of the questions due
to a language or cultural barrier. However, when analyzing the sexual behavior of these same
respondents, 31% indicate that they have had same-sex sex, compared to just 10% of the entire
sample who reported same-sex sex. This suggests that there may be more going on than
respondents simply misunderstanding the question or marking the wrong answer. In other words,
perhaps some individuals legitimately do not feel attracted to members of the same-sex, but still
identify with a gay or bisexual label for whatever reason—one possible reason being that they
engage in same-sex sex. In any case, whether due to measurement error or due to unique and
complex cases of how people align their sexual identity with their sexual attraction and sexual
behavior, this finding is indeed puzzling, and it motivates further research perhaps using
qualitative methods.
Other disjunctures in Table 1 may be less surprising. For example, Table 1 shows that
11.6% of self-identified straight women age 15-45 report some level of same-sex attraction, as
do about 3.7% of self-identified straight men age 15-45. The fact that there are some Americans
who feel same-sex attraction but do not identify as gay or bisexual is not surprising, as perhaps
they do not feel strongly enough about it to identify as anything other than straight, or are

Mishel 8

dissuaded from doing so due to the potential for experiencing stigma or discrimination
(Friedman 2013; Herek 2009; Mishel 2016; Tilcsik 2011).
Table 1 also shows that about 43% of self-identified gay women report some level of
other-sex attraction, as do about 33% of self-identified gay men. If we think of sexuality as on a
spectrum, one might assume that gay men and women are only attracted to the same-sex, while
straight men and women are only attracted to the other sex. This seems to be the case for most
straight men and women, as an overwhelming majority of straight women and men age 15-45
report only other-sex attraction (88% of women and 96% of men). But sexual attraction levels
for gay women and men aged 15-45 seem to be much more flexible: only 57% of gay women
and 67% of gay men report only same-sex attraction. Results in Table 1 also reveal that selfidentified straight women are significantly more likely to report same-sex attraction compared to
self-identified straight men.
5.2 Sexual Identity by Sexual Behavior
How does sexual identity relate to sexual behavior for U.S. men and women aged 15-45?
Again, we see some disjunctures, and some significant gender differences. First, Table 1 shows
that over 10% of self-identified straight women and 2.6% of self-identified straight men report
having had same-sex sex sometime in their life. Furthermore, about 9% of self-identified gay
women have had both male and female sexual partners in the past year, while about 2.1% of gay
men report the same. Of course, it’s important to note that these reported sexual experiences
could simply be a result of previous sexual exploration, since the survey is measuring current
sexual identity and current sexual attraction, but asking about past sexual behaviors. In addition,
just because someone engages in sexual behavior with a certain gender does not mean that they
identify with a sexual identity that is consistent with that behavior, nor does it automatically
mean that they feel attracted to that particular gender; sexual preferences and/or identities may
change over time (Diamond 2008).
The gender differences on these estimates are statistically significant, such that
significantly more self-identified straight women than straight men report having had same-sex
sex sometime in their life, and significantly more self-identified gay women than gay men report
having both male and female sex partners in the last year. Among those who identify as bisexual,
76.4% of women report having had same-sex sex sometime in their life, compared to 63.3% of
men—again a statistically significant difference. Among all men and women age 15-45 in the
U.S., about 15% of women report having had same-sex sex sometime in their life, as do about
5% of men—also a significant difference by gender.
Interestingly, Table 1 shows that a large proportion of self-identified bisexual and gay
individuals aged 15-45 have had 0 same-sex sexual partners: about 16% of self-identified gay
men and 16% of self-identified gay women report 0 same sex partners, as do about 23.7% of
self-identified bisexual women and about 36.7% of self-identified bisexual men. (In comparison,
only about 12% of straight men and about 12% of straight women report 0 lifetime other-sex
sexual partners.) When assessing the number of same-sex sex partners for those who identify as
gay or bisexual, Table 1 shows that gay and bisexual men report significantly more lifetime
same-sex sex partners compared to gay and bisexual women. For example, 62.6% of gay men
report 5 or more lifetime same-sex sex partners compared to just 42.6% of gay women, as do
20% of bisexual men compared to just 11.8% of bisexual women—both significant differences.
Along the same lines, significantly more self-identified gay and bisexual women report just 1
lifetime same-sex sex partner compared to gay and bisexual men.

Mishel 9

5.3 Other Sexual Minority Identities
Table 1 also shows that, relative to the number who identified as gay or bisexual, a
sizeable portion of both men and women age 15-45 identified as something else or don’t know.
About 1.3% of men marked something else or don’t know, compared to 1.7% men who marked
bisexual and 1.9% who marked gay. About the same proportion of women marked something
else or don’t know (1.4%) as those who marked gay (1.5%). Selecting a non-normative identity
could be a sign of resistance against traditional sexual identification categories, as more and
more individuals who report same-sex attraction or same-sex sexual behavior are taking on other
identities, such as “queer.” Rejection of normative sexual identity categories (i.e., gay, lesbian,
bisexual) and adoption of other identity categories (i.e., queer, pansexual) has been shown to
occur more among younger individuals (see Stein 2010; Risman 2018), which is of note since the
upper bound of the NSFG sample is age 45. In this case, we might thus expect that individuals
who select a non-normative sexual orientation category are, on average, younger, and will have
similar self-reported sexual attractions and behaviors to individuals who identify as gay or
bisexual. However, Table 1 shows that these individuals seem to be more similar to straight
respondents in terms of sexual attraction and behavior. We do see some higher percentages of
same-sex sexual behavior among women who reported something else/don’t know identities
compared to straight women: 19.7% of women who selected something else or don’t know
reported having had same-sex sex, compared to just 10.2% of straight-identified women, for
example. These percentages were slightly higher for men as well, in that 8.9% of men who
selected something else or don’t know identities reported having had same-sex sex, compared to
just 2.6% of straight-identified men.
In results not shown, I analyzed the age of respondents who selected something else or
don’t know as a sexual identity, and found 23% of those who selected something else or don’t
know were between the ages of 15 to 19, a higher proportion than the proportion of 15 to 19 year
olds in the entire sample (16%). Thus, in addition to the possibility that these individuals would
prefer to identify as queer or another sexual identity that is not listed as an option (or do not wish
to identify with a label at all), it could also be that they are just not sure of their sexual
orientation and are engaging in sexual exploration to find out, or it could be that they did not
understand the question – or a combination of all three.
When assessing whether there are gender differences in sexual behavior among those
who identified as something else or don’t know, patterns generally follow those found for
straight men and women – that significantly more women than men who marked something
else/don’t know reported having same-sex sex sometime in their life (19.7% versus 8.9%,
respectively). There were no significant differences by gender when analyzing sexual attraction
levels among those who marked something else/don’t know.
5.4 Sexual Attraction and Identity among Those Reporting Same-Sex Sex in Past Year
As several studies use recent sexual behavior as their measure of the LGB community
(e.g., Badgett 1995; Berg and Lien 2002; Black et al. 2003), I further examine the sexual
attraction and behavior of the sub-sample of individuals who reported having same-sex sex in the
last year. Figures 1 and 2 display the self-reported sexual identities (Figure 1) and self-reported
sexual attraction levels (Figure 2) among the men and women who reported having had same-sex
sex in the past year.

Mishel 10

Figure 1 shows that, among women aged 15-45 who have had same-sex sex in the past
year, their sexual identities are more or less evenly distributed between straight (34%), bisexual
(39%), and gay (25%). In contrast, over half of men aged 15-45 who report same-sex sex in the
past year identify as gay (56%), while 27% identify as bisexual and 15% identify as straight.
Similarly, when looking at sexual attraction for men aged 15-45 who report same-sex sex in the
last year (Figure 2), about 44% report only being attracted to the same sex, compared to just 17%
of women who report the same. These gender differences are quite compelling—among those
aged 15-45 who report same-sex sex in the past year, women’s sexual identity and attraction
levels are much more evenly distributed among the straight, bisexual, and gay identity
categories, as well as all attraction categories. In contrast, the majority of men who have had sex
with men in the past year identify as gay and report only same-sex attraction. Generally
speaking, results displayed in Figures 1 and 2 are striking: among U.S. men and women age 1545 who have recently had same-sex sex, their self-reported sexual identity and attraction levels
vary greatly.
[Figures 1 and 2 about here]
5.5 Combining Measures: Identity, Attraction, Behavior
My analysis on how sexual identity, attraction, and behavior relate to each other allows
me to assess what estimates for the LGB population in the U.S. may look like (for those age 1545) if not solely based on sexual identity questions, but rather, if they were based on individuals
who had checked at least one of the following: gay or bisexual identity, same-sex sex in the last
year, or any same-sex attraction. Using this combination of measurement, 6,277 women in the
sample (about 20%) reported at least one of the following: gay or bisexual identity, same-sex sex
in the last year, or some level of same-sex attraction, and 2,470 men in the sample (about 10%)
also reported at least one of the three measures. Thus, of those aged 15-45, about 20% of women
and about 10% of men would comprise the LGB community if it were defined to include all
individuals who report a non-heterosexual identity, any same-sex attraction, and/or sex with a
same-sex partner in the last year. This is much higher than the observed 6.4% of women and
3.6% of men aged 15-45 who self-identify as gay or bisexual.
5.6 Predicting Gay or Bisexual Identity from Regressions with Controls
Next, I plot the predicted probabilities for identifying as bisexual (Figure 3) or gay
(Figure 4) from self-reported sexual attraction and various sexual behaviors. Predicted
probabilities are calculated from logistic regression models that predict either gay or bisexual
identity from sexual attraction levels and various sexual behaviors, and all models include
sociodemographic controls. (Please see Appendix A-1 for a description of all control variables
used, and please see Appendix A-2 and A-3 for logistic regression results.)
Figures 3 and 4 show that predicted probabilities for identifying as gay or bisexual based
on sexual attraction are quite similar for men and women. Specifically, men and women age 1545 who report equal attraction to both sexes have about a 75% chance of identifying as bisexual
(Figure 3), while men and women age 15-45 who report only same-sex attraction have just under
a 90% chance of identifying as gay (Figure 4). The distributions of the predicted values are also
about what we would expect to see in terms of how self-reported sexual attraction predicts gay
and bisexual identity: the highest probability for bisexual identity is attraction to both sexes,

Mishel 11

while the highest probability for gay identity is only same-sex attraction, for both men and
women.
[Figures 3 and 4 about here]
While results are similar for men and women when examining how sexual attraction
predicts sexual identity, there are clear gender differences when examining how sexual behavior
predicts sexual identity for men and women age 15-45. For example, Figure 3 shows that women
age 15-45 who report only same-sex sex in the last year have about a 30% chance of identifying
as bisexual, while men age 15-45 who report only same-sex sex in the last year have only about a
17% chance of identifying as bisexual. We also see a large difference between men and women
in Figure 4 predicting gay identity, in whether they have ever had same-sex sex, and whether
they have had only same-sex sex in the last year; probabilities for men are much higher than for
women in both cases. Specifically, women age 15-45 who report only same-sex sex in the last
year have about a 60% chance of identifying as gay, while men age 15-45 who report only samesex sex in the last year have about an 80% chance of identifying as gay. Similarly, women age
15-45 who report ever having had same-sex sex have about a 10% chance of identifying as gay,
but men age 15-45 who report ever having had same-sex sex have about a 30% chance of
identifying as gay. In other words, while having had same-sex sex sometime in one’s life and
having had only same-sex partners in the last year both have positive effects on identifying as
gay for men and women, the effect is much larger for men than for women in both cases.
6. Discussion
6.1 Intersections between Sexual Identity, Sexual Attraction, and Sexual Behavior
This paper pools four waves of a nationally representative dataset to examine the
relationship between self-reported sexual behavior, sexual identity, and sexual attraction among
U.S. Americans aged 15 to 45. Results reveal some disjunctures between the three measures.
First, I find that more Americans age 15-45 report same-sex sexual experience and/or same-sex
attraction than identify as gay or bisexual. About 15% of women and 5% of men age 15-45
report having same-sex sex sometime in their life, and about 17% of women and 7% of men age
15-45 report some level of current same-sex attraction. This is compared to just 6.4% of women
and 3.6% of men age 15-45 who self-identify as either gay or bisexual. The finding that more
men and women report same-sex sexual experience or same-sex attraction than report gay or
bisexual identity is consistent with past research (e.g., Compton et al. 2015; Gates 2011;
Korchmaros et al. 2013), and there may be many reasons for this. One possible reason is fear of
discrimination, as much research provides causal evidence of discrimination against out LGB
individuals when they seek employment (Mishel 2016; Tilcsik 2011) and apply for housing
(Friedman 2013). Another reason could be negative stereotypes and social stigma often
associated with identifying as gay or bisexual. Research by Ward (2008) and Silva (2016) show
that some men who sleep with men still choose to identify as straight, and purposely distance
themselves from any sort of queer identity to construct (and reinforce) ideals of normative
masculinity. Studies have also shown that out LGB individuals are sometimes viewed as less
competent, less moral, less trustworthy, and less warm than straight individuals (Mize and
Manago 2018a; Webster 1998). In addition, a whopping 23 percent of the American public still
believe that gay and lesbian relations between consenting adults should be illegal (Gallup 2018).
Mishel 12

Results from these past studies suggest that fear of stigma and social penalties may be one reason
that many individuals who have sex with or are attracted to those of the same sex do not take on
a non-heterosexual identity.
A further reason that more Americans report same-sex sexual behavior and same-sex
attraction than report gay or bisexual identity could be rejection of such labels all together.
Research shows that some individuals who report engaging in same-sex sex or who report samesex attraction also express discomfort in labeling their sexual orientation, saying that current
definitions of sexual identity categories do not accurately describe them, that they find them to
be restrictive, or that they preference other identities over non-heterosexual identity labels
(Budnick 2016; Diamond 2008; Savin-Williams and Vrangalova 2013). Previous research has
also documented the strong heteronormative expectations and proscriptions—such as promoting
gender conventionality and heterosexuality as the norm and “correct” way to be—that exist as
background context in contemporary U.S. culture (e.g., Neilsen et al. 2000; Pascoe 2012), which
some people may be responding to when asked to label their sexual identity, regardless of their
sexual desires and history.
Findings from this study also illustrate that the extent to which sexual identity, attraction,
and behavior aligns differs by gender. For example, I find that straight women age 15-45 are
significantly more likely to report same-sex attraction and same-sex sexual experience than
straight men of the same age. As another example, I find that gay women age 15-45 are
significantly more likely to report other-sex attraction and sex with both sexes, both ever and in
the last year, compared to gay men of the same age. This suggests that sexual identity may be
more aligned with attraction and behavior for men than for women. And, it suggests that women
are more sexually fluid in terms of same-sex sex and same-sex attraction compared to men.
England et al. (2016) and Mishel et al. (2018a) argue that there is more same-sex sex
among women than men due to the asymmetry of the gender revolution. Specifically, they argue
that the gender revolution sent the message that gender nonconformity was more acceptable than
before; and, given that deviations from exclusive heterosexuality are seen as gender
nonconforming, part of the implicit message was permission to have same-sex sex. But, this
message was received much more strongly by women than men, because society continued to
devalue anything seen as feminine. This meant that the gender revolution was largely a one-way
street—i.e., seen as less applicable to men. Thus, the social costs of any kind of gender
nonconformity, including deviating from exclusive heterosexuality, decreased much more for
women than men (Mishel et al. 2018a). What’s more, many researchers have documented the
strong ties between cultural notions of masculinity and of heterosexuality (e.g., Bridges 2014,
Connell 1995; Connell and Messerschmidt 2005; Plummer 1999; Silva 2016; Ward 2008), which
may also explain why women may be more sexually fluid in terms of same-sex sexuality
compared to men. Indeed, Pascoe (2012) finds that boys in high school engage in what she terms
“fag discourse,” a form of gender policing where boys routinely call each other ‘fags” to
socialize one another into performing normative masculine behaviors and to enforce their
heterosexuality, while such policing is not found among girls (2012).
Figures 3 and 4 also revealed that men’s predicted probabilities of identifying as gay are
significantly higher than women’s if they ever have engaged in same-sex sex. Recent
experimental research by Mize and Manago (2018b) may shed some light as to why this may be.
Mize and Manago (2018b) show that people allow women more freedom to experiment with
same-sex sex without assigning them a lesbian sexual identity, while men are not allowed this
same freedom to experiment with same-sex sexuality without people perceiving them to be gay.

Mishel 13

The argument put forth is that men’s—but not women’s—heterosexuality is an especially
privileged identity that is easily lost if engaging in same-sex sexual behavior. Along the same
lines, a study by Mishel et al. (2018b) analyzes Google Trends data, and finds that people turn to
Google to ask whether their sons, dads, boyfriends, husbands, brothers, and other boys/men are
“gay” at consistently higher rates than analogous searches regarding their daughters, moms,
girlfriends, wives, sisters, or other girls/women. Mishel et al. (2018b) argue that because men’s
heterosexuality is seen as more precarious and more difficult to uphold than women’s
heterosexuality, it follows that people would question the heterosexuality of men and boys in
their life more frequently than the women and girls they know. My findings seem to be
consistent with this theory, in that, my results illustrate that men and women self-identify in
alignment with the notion that men’s heterosexuality is more precarious than women’s
heterosexuality. I posit that, due to the growing acceptance of same-sex sexuality among women
but not men, and due to the more severe consequences for men when they break gender roles or
identify as anything but heterosexual (Page and Yee 1985; Pascoe 2012; Pelligrini 1992), men
are less likely than women to explore engaging in same-sex sex unless they are comfortable
enough to also take on a gay or bisexual identity. Additional, qualitative research would be
beneficial to further explore this notion.
Next, my analysis also reveals that a sizeable portion of Americans age 15-45 select
“something else” or “don’t know” when asked to label their sexual identity. Most research on the
LGB community will typically exclude those who do not identify with a normative sexual
identity such as lesbian, gay, or bisexual – so that individuals choosing something else or don’t
know identities would be dropped from analysis. As a fraction of those who do not identify as
straight, the proportion of men and women who would be dropped from analysis is quite
substantial. As such, excluding those who do not choose a normative sexual identity category
when conducting analysis on the LGB community or to explore measurement of the LGB
population becomes problematic.
As a supplemental analysis, in results not shown, I ran the same logistic regressions with
the same controls as in Tables A-2 and A-3 but used something else/don’t know identity as the
outcome variable, and then calculated predicted probabilities from these regressions. Predicted
probabilities were very low for every attraction level and every sexual behavior measure (most
under 3%, for both men and women). Because it is difficult to interpret non-normative sexual
identity categories, some social scientists argue for utilizing open-ended responses when asking
respondents to label their sexual identity (e.g., Better and Simula 2015), as it allows respondents
to use their own words when defining their sexual identities. Others have recommended simply
not including “other” or “something else” as a response option for sexual identity, and that if
including “don’t know” as responses, to make sure to specify two options: “I don’t know yet,”
and “I don’t know what this question means” (Badgett et al. 2009; Saewyc et al. 2004). I agree
that using an open-ended response may be most accurate, but note that doing so may not be the
most useful to quantitative researchers, as responses may vary greatly and grouping categories
may become theoretically difficult. Yet, this may also illuminate ordinarily puzzling findings in
the data, such as reports of same-sex sex but no same-sex attraction, which may be explained by
someone’s sexual identity as asexual, for example (see Poston and Baumle 2010). I also agree
with Badgett et al. (2009) and Saewyc et al. (2004) that if national surveys include “I don’t
know,” as a response option for sexual identity, then it is imperative to clarify whether the
respondent does not understand the question, or just does not know how to label their sexual
identity yet.

Mishel 14

6.2 Measure Limitations, Recommendations, and Implications
This research sheds light on the complexity of defining sexual orientation using one of the
three commonly used measures of identity, attraction, or behavior. This section will summarize
some limitations of using each measure to define the LGB population. First, using only a sexual
identity measure to define the LGB community can be limiting as more Americans report samesex sexual behavior and same-sex attraction than report gay or bisexual identity. As discussed,
there may be many reasons for this, including fear of societal costs and negative social stigma, or
rejection of normative sexual identity categories altogether. In this sense, using only sexual
identity to define the LGB community may lead to underestimation of the LGB population.
Second, using only sexual attraction to define the LGB population can be limiting as
more people report some level of same-sex attraction than report same-sex sexual experience or
non-heterosexual identity. Yet, stigma and strong heteronormative scripts in American society
may discourage these individuals from ever acting on their same-sex desire. Moreover, these
individuals may not feel strongly enough about their same-sex attraction to ever act on it. In this
sense, using only sexual attraction to define the LGB population may lead to overestimation of
this population.
Finally, there are limitations to defining sexual orientation using only sexual behavior
measures. For example, using only same-sex sexual behavior as the LGB measure omits large
proportions of individuals who self-identify as gay or bisexual but who have no same-sex sexual
experience. (And, how it affects proportions depends on whether straight individuals are defined
using sexual experience with other-sex partners— in this scenario, virgins would not be counted
as heterosexual.) Recall that about 24% of bisexual women and about 16% of gay women aged
15-45 report 0 lifetime same-sex sexual partners, while about 37% of bisexual men and about
16% of gay men aged 15-45 report 0 lifetime same-sex sexual partners. Indeed, this phenomenon
is also seen when analyzing sexual behaviors of Australian men and women aged 16-69, though
percentages are slightly lower: 17% of Australian bisexual men and 9% of Australian bisexual
women report 0 same-sex sexual partners, as do 3% of Australian gay men and 4% of Australian
gay women (Richters et al. 2014).
One reason that large proportions of self-identified gay and bisexual respondents have
never had same-sex sex could be due to stigma around having same-sex sexual relations, as
different moral and social implications come with homosexuality (Herek 2009); another reason
could simply be due to a lack of access to other non-heterosexuals to date (Ghaziani 2014;
Rosenfeld and Thomas 2012). In any case, the lack of same-sex sexual experience among some
self-identified bisexual and gay individuals age 15-45 in America is important to note, as it
suggests that measuring the LGB community using only sexual behavior may lead to
underestimation of the LGB population. On the other hand, using this measure alone may
incorrectly count self-reported straight individuals who have had same-sex sexual experiences
for experimentation purposes in the past but no longer do so, or have no intention of doing so in
the future—which may lead to overestimating the size of the LGB community. In this sense, it is
difficult to say whether using only measures of sexual behavior to define the LGB community
would lead to over- or underestimation of this population. Another consideration is whether to
use recent sexual behavior or lifetime sexual behavior; lifetime behavior typically produces
larger estimates, but recent behavior may be more accurate if seeking to assess the LGB
community’s current reach.

Mishel 15

Because of these limitations, deciding which measure to use to define the LGB
population in quantitative analyses can be a very difficult decision. Some researchers argue that
recent sexual behavior is the best measure (Black et al. 2003); others argue that sexual attraction
is the best measure, if limited to a single measure and analysis is on adolescents (Saewyc et al.
2004); others argue for a combination of the three measures (e.g., Baumle et al. 2009; Laumann
et al.1994); and yet other researchers argue that the specific research question should drive the
measure (Compton et al. 2015). I agree with Compton et al. (2015): the specific measure of
sexuality used in research on the LGB community should depend on the study’s research
question. After all, using a sexual behavior measure may be most appropriate for studies
interested in examining sexually transmitted infections among sexual minorities, while it may be
more appropriate to use a combination of sexual orientation measures for researchers interested
in political and social change (Compton et al. 2015). Thus, social scientists interested in this
topic should let their research question drive their measure of sexual orientation, while being
transparent and clear about the measure they use to indicate LGB identity, and address any
potential limitations of their measure of choice. If the research question does not strongly justify
using one measure over another, researchers should consider conducting the same analysis using
more than one measure or using multiple measures combined (if the data allow them to), and
address if and how results vary based on how they define the LGB community. After all,
previous studies show differences in findings based on the measure of sexual orientation used.
For example, Bostwick et al. (2010) find that identifying as LGB is associated with higher odds
of anxiety disorders compared to identifying as straight, for both men and women; however, they
also find that women who report only same-sex sexual partners in their lifetime had the lowest
rates of most disorders. As another example, Compton et al. (2015) find that, if using a behavior
dimension of sexual orientation, bisexual men self-report as significantly less healthy compared
to straight men; however, they find no significant differences in self-reported health between
bisexual men and straight men when using an attraction or identity measure of sexual orientation.
As for what measure(s) to use to best assess the size of the LGB community, it ultimately
depends on how one defines the “LGB community.” As discussed, using sexual identity as the
barometer of interest for the LGB population can be limiting, as fear of discrimination, stigma
around non-heterosexual identity, prominence of heteronormative social scripts, and/or rejection
of sexual identity labels may influence individuals who engage in same-sex sex or who feel
same-sex attraction to not explicitly take on an LGB identity, which may translate to not marking
it on a survey. In this sense, using multiple measures to assess the LGB population may be the
most useful in calculating its reach. As such, this research allowed me to assess what the estimate
for the LGB population may look like for those aged 15-45 if using a combination of sexual
identity, behavior, and attraction. Specifically, I assessed what it would look like if estimates
were based on individuals who checked at least one of the following: gay or bisexual identity,
same-sex sexual behavior in the past year, or any same-sex attraction. Using this combination of
measurement, I find that about 20% of women and 10% of men would comprise the LGB
community (among those aged 15-45). This is much higher than the 6.4% of women and 3.6% of
men aged 15-45 who self-identify as gay or bisexual.
In general, understanding how sexual attraction, sexual behavior, and sexual identity are
linked is an important aspect of sexuality research and research on the LGB community. The
disjunctures between self-reports of non-heterosexual identity, same-sex sexual behavior, and
same-sex attraction among men and women age 15-45 in the U.S. that this study finds have
implications to the current methods of measurement for the size of the LGB community–

Mishel 16

measurement that is critical as these figures inform a host of public policies, human rights issues,
and anti-discrimination laws.
One limitation of this analysis is that there are no individuals above the age of 45, which
motivates further research on the links between sexual identity, attraction, and behavior among
U.S. adults older than 45. In any case, results from this analysis suggest that researchers should
be open to more complex definitions of sexuality. In this regard, there has been increasing
interest among social scientists to explore and analyze sexual identities and measures that exist
on the borders of heterosexuality and homosexuality, such as queer, asexual, pansexual, fluid, or
heteroflexible (Bridges 2014; Callis 2014; Compton et al. 2015; Savin-Williams and Vrangalova
2013; Silva 2016; Ward 2008). In general, more research is needed to fully understand whether
estimates of health and well-being disparities, inequalities, and victimization of LGB individuals
differ according to the measure of sexual orientation that is used, as oftentimes, researchers do
not have a choice in this decision when using existing secondary data. Because of the
disjunctures between the three measures, and the fact that more men and women age 15-45
report same-sex attraction and same-sex sexual behavior than identify as gay or bisexual, it is
important for surveys to ask other measures of sexual orientation rather than just identity (such
as attraction or behavior), and for researchers to utilize multiple measures whenever appropriate,
in order to obtain more accurate and all-encompassing analysis on the LGB community.

References
Baumle, Amanda K., D’Lane Compton, and Dudley L. Poston, Jr. 2009. Same Sex Partners: The
Demography of Sexual Orientation. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Baumle, Amanda K. and Dudley L. Poston. 2011. “The Economic Cost of Homosexuality: Multilevel
Analyses.” Social Forces 89(3):1005–31. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/89.3.1005
Betts, Peter. 2009. “Developing Survey Questions on Sexual Identity: Cognitive/In-Depth
Interviews.” Office for National Statistics.
Badgett, M.V. Lee. 1995. “The Wage Effects of Sexual Orientation.” ILR Review 48(4): 726-739.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/001979399504800408
Badgett, M.V. Lee, Sexual Minority Assessment Research Team (SMART). 2009. “Best Practices for
Asking Questions about Sexual Orientation on Surveys.” UCLA: The Williams Institute.
Retrieved from https://escholarship.org/uc/item/706057d5
Berg, Nathan, and Donald Lien. 2002. "Measuring the Effect of Sexual Orientation on Income:
Evidence of Discrimination?" Contemporary Economic Policy 20(4): 394-414. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1093/cep/20.4.394
Better, Alison and Brandy L. Simula. 2015. “How and for Whom Does Gender Matter? Rethinking
the Concept of Sexual Orientation.” Sexualities 18(56):665–80. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460714561716
Black, Dan, Gary J. Gates, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. 2007. “The Measurement Error of
Same-Sex Unmarried Partner Couples in the U.S. Census.” California Center for Population
Research.
Black, Dan, Gary Gates, Seth Sanders and Lowell Taylor. 2002. "Why Do Gay Men Live in San
Francisco?." Journal of Urban Economics: 54-76. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1006/juec.2001.2237

Mishel 17

Black, Dan A., Hoda R. Makar, Seth G. Sanders, and Lowell J. Taylor. 2003. "The Earnings Effects
of Sexual Orientation.” Industrial and Labor Relations Review 56(3): 449-469. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/001979390305600305
Bostwick, Wendy B., Carol J. Boyd, Tonda L. Hughes, and Sean Esteban McCabe. 2010.
“Dimensions of Sexual Orientation and the Prevalence of Mood and Anxiety Disorders in the
United States.” American Journal of Public Health 100(3):468–75. DOI:
10.2105/AJPH.2008.152942
Bridges, Tristan. 2014. “A Very ‘Gay’ Straight? Hybrid Masculinities, Sexual Aesthetics, and the
Changing Relationship between Masculinity and Homophobia.” Gender and Society 28(1): 5882. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243213503901
Bridges, Tristan and Mignon Moore. 2018. “Young Women of Color and Shifting Sexual Identities.”
Contexts 18: 86-88. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1536504218767125
Budnick, Jamie. 2016. “‘Straight Girls Kissing’?: Understanding Same-Gender Sexuality beyond the
Elite College Campus.” Gender & Society 30(5):1–24. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243216657511
Busseri, Michael, Teena Willoughby, Heather Chalmers, and Anthony Bogaert. 2006. Same-sex
attraction and successful adolescent development. Journal of Youth and Adolescence 35: 563–
575. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10964-006-9071-4
Callis, April. S. 2014. “Bisexual, pansexual, queer: Non-binary identities and the sexual borderlands.”
Sexualities 17(1/2): 63–80. DOI:10.1177/1363460713511094
Carpenter, Christopher. 2009.“Sexual Orientation and Outcomes in College.” Economics of Education
Review 28: 693-703. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.econedurev.2007.10.010
Carpenter, Christopher S. and Samuel T. Eppink. 2017. “Does It Get Better? Recent Estimates of
Sexual Orientation and Earnings in the United States.” Southern Economic Journal 84(2):426–
41. DOI: http://doi.wiley.com/10.1002/soej.12233
Centers for Disease Control. 2018. “About the National Survey of Family Growth.” Retrieved
November 2018. (https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nsfg/about_nsfg.htm).
Chandra, Anjani, William D. Mosher, Casey Copen, and Catlainn Sionean. 2011. “Sexual behavior,
sexual attraction, and sexual identity in the United States: Data from the 2006–2008 National
Survey of Family Growth.” National health statistics reports; no 36. Hyattsville, MD: National
Center for Health Statistics. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-007-5512-3_4
Cochran, Susan D., J. Greer Sullivan, and Vickie M. Mays. 2003. "Prevalence of mental disorders,
psychological distress, and mental health services use among lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults in
the United States." Journal of consulting and clinical psychology 71(1): 53-61. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0022-006X.71.1.53
Compton, D’Lane R., D.Nicole Farris, and Yu-Ting Chang. 2015. “Patterns of Bisexuality in
America.” Journal of Bisexuality 15:481–97. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1080/15299716.2015.1048919
Connell, Raewyn. W. 1995. Masculinities. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Connell, Raewyn. W., and James W. Messerschmidt. 2005. Hegemonic masculinity: Rethinking the
concept. Gender & Society 19:829-59. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243205278639
Copen, Casey, Anjani Chandra, and Isaedmarie Febo-Vazquez. 2016. “Sexual behavior, sexual
attraction, and sexual orientation among adults aged 18–44 in the United States: Data from the
2011–2013 National Survey of Family Growth.” National health statistics reports; no 88.
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics.

Mishel 18

DeMaio, Theresa. J., Nancy Bates, and Martin O’Connell. 2013. “Exploring Measurement Error
Issues in Reporting of Same-Sex Couples.” Public Opinion Quarterly 77(S1): 145–158. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfs066
Diamond, Lisa. 2008. “Female Bisexuality from Adolescence to Adulthood: Results from a 10-Year
Longitudinal Study.” Developmental Psychology 44 (1): 5-14. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.44.1.5
England, Paula, Emma Mishel, and Monica L. Caudillo. 2016. “Increases in Sex with Same-Sex
Partners and Bisexual Identity Across Cohorts of Women (but Not Men).” Sociological Science
3: 951-970. DOI: 10.15195/v3.a42
Epstein Robert, Paul MckInney, Shannon Fox, and Carlos Garcia. 2012. “Support for a fluidcontinuum model of sexual orientation: A large-scale internet study.” Journal of Homosexuality
59(10): 1356–1381. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2012.724634
Fischer, M.M. 2016. “Identifying same-sex couples in cross-national survey data: a comparison of
same-sex couples’ demographic and socio-economic traits in six European countries.” In R
Meuleman, G Kraaykamp & M Wittenberg (Eds.), Nederland in context: verschillen en
overeenkomsten (pp. 50-79). Den Haag: DANS.
Friedman, Samantha, Angela Reynolds, Susan Scovill, Florence Brassier, Ron Campbell, and
McKenzie Ballou. 2013. “An Estimate of Housing Discrimination against Same-Sex Couples.”
Prepared for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2284243
Gallup. 2018. “Gay and Lesbian Rights.” Retrieved November 2018.
(http://www.gallup.com/poll/1651/gay-lesbian-rights.aspx).
Gates, Gary. 2011. “How Many People are Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender?” Williams
Institute Report. Retrieved from https://escholarship.org/uc/item/09h684X2
Gavrilets, Sergey, and William R. Rice. 2006. "Genetic models of homosexuality: generating testable
predictions." Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 273.1605. 3031-3038.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2006.3684
Geary, Rebecca S., Clare Tanton, Bob Erens, Soazig Clifton, Philip Prah, Kaye Wellings, Kirstin R.
Mitchell, Jessica Datta, Kirsten Gravningen, Elizabeth Fuller, Anne M. Johnson, Pam
Sonnenberg, and Catherine H. Mercer. 2018. “Sexual identity, attraction and behaviour in
Britain: The implications of using different dimensions of sexual orientation to estimate the size
of sexual minority populations and inform public health interventions.” PLOS One. 13(1):
e0189607. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0189607.
Ghaziani, Amin. 2014. There Goes the Gayborhood? Princeton University Press.
Hamilton, Laura. 2007. “Trading on Heterosexuality: College Women’s Gender Strategies and
Homophobia." Gender & Society 21: 145-72. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243206297604
Harper, Gary. 2007. “Sex isn’t that simple: Culture and context in HIV prevention interventions for
gay and bisexual male adolescents.” American Psychologist, 62(8): 806–819. DOI:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.8.806
Herek, Gregory. 2009. “Sexual Stigma and Sexual Bias in the US: A Conceptual Framework.”
Contemporary Perspectives on Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Identities 54: 183–195. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-0-387-09556-1_4
Igartua, Karine, Brett Thombs, Giovani Burgos and Richard Montoro. 2009. “Concordance and
discrepancy in sexual identity, attraction, and behavior among adolescents.” Journal of
Adolescent Health 45(6): 602–608. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2009.03.019

Mishel 19

Kinsey, Alfred, Wardell Pomeroy, and Clyde Martin. 1953. Sexual Behavior in the Human Female.
Philadelphia, PA: WB Saunders.
Korchmaros, Josephine, Claudia Powell and Sally Stevens. “Chasing Sexual Orientation: A
Comparison of Commonly Used Single-Indicator Measures of Sexual Orientation.” Journal of
Homosexuality 60: 596-614. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/00918369.2013.760324
Laumann, Edward O., John Gagnon, Robert Michael., and Stuart Michaels. 1994. The social
organization of sexuality: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press
Mishel, Emma. 2016. “Discrimination against Queer Women in the U.S. Workforce: A Résumé Audit
Study” Socius: Sociological Research for a Dynamic World 2: 1-13. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/2378023115621316
Mishel, Emma, Paula England, Jessie Ford, and Mónica L. Caudillo. 2018a. “Increases in Sex with
Same-Sex Partners Across U.S. Cohorts Born 1920-1998: A Race-Gender Intersection.” NYU
Abu Dhabi Division of Social Science Working Paper Series. No. 20180014. Retrieved from
https://nyuad.nyu.edu/content/dam/nyuad/academics/divisions/social-science/workingpapers/2018/0014.pdf.
Mishel, Emma, Tristan Bridges, and Mónica L. Caudillo. 2018b. “Google, Tell Me. Is He Gay?:
Masculinity, Homophobia, and Gendered Anxieties in Google Search Queries about Sexuality.”
SocArXiv. November 7. DOI:10.31235/osf.io/4se75.
Mize, Trenton D. 2016. “Sexual Orientation in the Labor Market.” American Sociological Review
81(6):1132–60. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122416674025
Mize, Trenton D. and Bianca Manago. 2018a. “The Stereotype Content of Sexual Orientation.” Social
Currents 1–21. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/2329496518761999
Mize, Trenton D. and Bianca Manago. 2018b. “Precarious Sexuality: How Men and Women Are
Differentially Categorized for Similar Sexual Behavior.” American Sociological Review. DOI:
10.1177/0003122418759544.
Neilsen, Joyce McCarl, Glenda Walden, and Charlotte A. Kunkel. 2000. “Gendered
Heteronormativity: Empirical Illusions in Everyday Life.” Sociological Quarterly 41 (2): 283-96.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1533-8525.2000.tb00096.x
Ortman, Jennifer M., Nancy Bates, Anna Brown, and R.Chase Sawyer. 2017. “Optimizing Self and
Proxy Response to Survey Questions on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity.” Presented at
Population Association of America’s Annual Conference.
O’Connell, Martin, and Gretchen Gooding. 2006. “The Use of First Names to Evaluate Reports of
Gender and Its Effect on the Distribution of Married and Unmarried Couple Households.” Paper
presented at the Population Association of America Meeting, Los Angeles.
O’Reilly, James M., Michael L. Hubbard, Judith Lessler, Paul Biemer, and Charles Turner. 1994.
“Audio and Video Computer Assisted Self-Interviewing: Preliminary Tests of New Technologies
for Data Collection.” Journal of Official Statistics 10(2): 197-214.
Page, Stewart and Mary Yee. 1985. “Conception of Male and Female Homosexual Stereotypes
among University Undergraduates.” Journal of Homosexuality 12: 109-118. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1300/J082v12n01_06
Pascoe, C.J. 2012. Dude You’re a Fag: Masculinity and Sexuality in High School. Los Angeles, CA:
University of California Press.
Pathela, Preeti, Anjum Hajat, Julia Schillinger, Susan Blank, Randall Sell, and Farzad Mostashari.
2006. “Discordance between Sexual Behavior and Self-Reported Sexual Identity: A Population-

Mishel 20

Based Survey of New York City Men.” Annals of Internal Medicine 145: 416-425. DOI:
10.7326/0003-4819-145-6-200609190-00005
Pelligrini, Ann. 1992. S(h)ifting the terms of Hetero/sexism: Gender, power, homophobia. In
Homophobia: How We All Pay the Price. Edited by W.J. Blumenfeld. Boston: Beacon Press. 3956.
Plummer, David. 1999. One of the boys: Masculinity, homophobia, and modern manhood. New York:
Harrington Park Press.
Poston, Dudley L. and Amanda K. Baumle. 2010. “Patterns of Asexuality in the United States.”
Demographic Research 23(18):509–30. DOI: 10.4054/DemRes.2010.23.18
Richters, Juliet, Altman Dennis, Badcock Paul B., Smith Anthony M. A., de Visser Richard O.,
Grulich Andrew E., Rissel Chris, Simpson Judy M. 2014. “Sexual identity, sexual attraction and
sexual experience: the Second Australian Study of Health and Relationships.” Sexual Health 11:
451-460. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1071/SH14117
Risman, Barbara J. 2018. Where the Millennials Will Take Us. Oxford University Press.
Rosenfeld, Michael J. and Reuben J. Thomas. 2012. “Searching for a Mate: The Rise of the Internet
as a Social Intermediary.” American Sociological Review 77(4): 523-547. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122412448050
Rupp, Leila, Verta Taylor, Shiri Regev-Messalem, Alison Fogarty, and Paula England. 2014. ”Queer
Women in the Hookup Scene: Beyond the Closet?" Gender & Society 28: 212-235. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243213510782
Saewyc, Elizabeth M., Greta Bauer, Carol Skay, Linda Bearinger, Michael Resnick, Elizabeth Reis,
and Aileen Murphy. 2004. “Measuring sexual orientation in adolescent health surveys:
Evaluation of eight school-based surveys.” Journal of Adolescent Health 35: 345: 1–15. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2004.06.002
Savin-Williams, Ritch and Zhana Vrangalova. 2013. “Mostly Heterosexual as a Distinct Sexual
Orientation Group: A Systematic Review of the Empirical Evidence.” Developmental Review 33
(1): 58-88. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2013.01.001
Silva, Tony. 2016. “Bud-Sex: Constructing Normative Masculinity among Rural Straight Men That
Have Sex With Men.” Gender & Society XX(X):1–23. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1177/0891243216679934
Smith, Anthony, Chris Rissel, Juliet Richters, Andrew Grulich, Richard de Visser. 2003. “Sex in
Australia: Sexual identity, sexual attraction and sexual experience among a representative sample
of adults.” Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health 27 (2):138-145. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-842X.2003.tb00801.x
Stein, Arlene. 2010. “The Incredible Shrinking Lesbian World and Other Queer Conundra.”
Sexualities 13(1):21–32. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1177/1363460709352724
Tilcsik, András. 2011. “Pride and Prejudice: Employment Discrimination against Openly Gay Men in
the United States.” American Journal of Sociology 117(2): 586-626. DOI:
https://doi.org/10.1086/661653
Tourangeau, Roger and Tom W. Smith. 1996. “Asking Sensitive Questions: The Impact of Data
Collection Mode, Question Format, and Question Context.” Public Opinion Quarterly 60: 275304. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1086/297751
Villarroel, Maria A., Charles F. Turner, Elizabeth Eggleston, Alia Al-Tayyib, Susan M. Rogers,
Anthony M. Roman, Philip C. Cooley, and Harper Gordek. 2006. “Same-Gender Sex in the
United States: Impact of T-Acasi on Prevalence Estimates.” Public Opinion Quarterly
70(2):166–96. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/poq/nfj023

Mishel 21

Webster, Murray Jr., Stuart J. Hysom, and Elise M. Fullmer. 1998. “Sexual Orientation and
Occupation as Status.” Advances in Group Processes 15: 1-21.
Ward, Jane. 2008. “Dude-sex: White masculinities and ‘authentic’ heterosexuality among dudes who
have sex with dudes.” Sexualities 11(4): 414–434. DOI:10.1177/1363460708091742
Wellings, Kaye, Julia Field, Anne Johnson and Jade Wadsworth. 1994. Sexual Behavior in Britain:
The National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles. Penguin Books.
Endnotes
i

LGBT is a common acronym for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender. The terms lesbian, gay and bisexual
represent sexual orientation identities, while transgender represents one’s gender identity, or a term describing
people who express their gender identity differently from what most people expect. The acronym has many
variations, such as GLBT or LGBTQ. (HRC 2018: http://www.hrc.org/resources/entry/glossary-of-terms). Note that
I shorten the acronym to LGB in this paper, as this study provides no analysis on transgender individuals, nor does it
explore various measures of gender identity from national surveys. For exploration of gender identity measures on
household surveys, see Ortman et al. (2017); for population-based estimates of transgender individuals in the United
States, see Gates (2011).
ii Nonresponse rates for the 3 measures of sexual identity, attraction, and behavior were as follows: 349 (0.63%) of
the 55,874 respondents refused to answer the sexual identity question, and 188 (0.34%) of the 55,874 respondents
refused to answer the sexual attraction question. Responses were not ascertained from another 164 of the 55,874
respondents (0.29%) on both of these measures. Thus, in total, 0.92% of respondents either refused to answer the
sexual identity question or their answer to this question was not ascertained, and 0.63% of respondents refused to
answer the sexual attraction question, or their answer to this question was not ascertained. Responses to ever having
a same-sex sexual experience was not ascertained from 163 (0.29%) of the 55,874 respondents.
iii Throughout the paper, I use the term “other sex” rather than “opposite sex” when referring to women in relation to
men and vice versa, because men and women are not the opposite of each other. When referring to women reporting
sex with women, and men reporting sex with men, I use the term “same-sex” to describe the sexual behavior. I
prefer language that refers to an other sex rather than the other sex so as not to imply that there are only two sexes,
given that some individuals identify as nonbinary. However, the NSFG provided only “male” or “female” as
categories for respondents and their sex partners, so in these data male is the only other sex choice for women and
vice versa. Thus, I use language consistent with the limitations of the data.

Mishel 22

Table 1: Sexual Identity by Sexual Attraction and Sexual Behavior, U.S. Men and Women Age 15-45
Straight
Women
Total
Sexual Attraction
Only OS
Mostly OS
Equal
Mostly SS
Only SS
Sexual Behavior
Total percent who have:
Ever Had SS Sex
Ever Had OS & SS Sex
Had Only SS Sex LY
Had SS & OS Sex LY
# of SS Partners Ever
0
1
2 to 4
5 or more
# of SS Partners LY
0
1
2 to 4
5 or more
N

Bisexual
Men

Women

Men

Women

Men

*

1.9%

*

92.2%

***

95.1%

4.9%

***

1.7%

1.5%

88.4%
10.8%
0.7%
0.0%
0.1%

***
***
***
*

96.3%
3.4%
0.2%
0.0%
0.2%

3.9%
35.9%
52.6%
7.4%
0.2%

***

14.3%
32.8%
41.0%
11.7%
0.2%

9.1%
1.6%
4.1%
28.3%
56.9%

10.2%
10.0%
0.1%
1.7%

***
***
*
***

2.6%
2.5%
0.0%
0.4%

76.4%
72.0%
11.9%
25.0%

***
***
*

63.3%
55.4%
17.2%
22.3%

83.9%
53.2%
71.1%
9.0%

89.8%
7.0%
2.9%
0.3%

***
***
***

97.5%
1.7%
0.6%
0.2%

23.7%
28.7%
35.8%
11.8%

***
*
***
**

36.7%
20.9%
22.4%
20.0%

16.1%
12.3%
29.0%
42.6%

98.3%
1.5%
0.2%
0.1%
28,217

***
***
**

99.6%
0.3%
0.1%
0.1%
23,017

63.1%
26.8%
8.6%
1.6%
1,648

*

60.5%
21.7%
13.7%
4.2%
471

19.9%
57.1%
20.3%
2.7%
508

**

Something else/
Don't Know

Gay

Men

Women

Men

1.4%

1.3%

100.0%

100.0%

8.4%
0.9%
1.3%
22.4%
67.1%

74.5%
16.2%
4.5%
3.5%
1.4%

81.0%
11.2%
3.1%
1.6%
3.2%

83.1%
11.9%
3.2%
0.8%
0.9%

***
***
***

19.7%
16.5%
3.9%
5.4%

***
***

8.9%
7.7%
3.0%
2.2%

14.7%
13.7%
1.8%
3.0%

***
***

***

84.0%
41.6%
74.5%
2.1%

**
***
***

16.0%
6.0%
15.4%
62.6%

80.3%
10.4%
7.9%
1.4%

***
**
**

91.1%
4.1%
2.3%
2.5%

85.4%
8.2%
5.0%
1.5%

***
***
***

94.9%
2.2%
1.3%
1.7%

23.4%
30.2%
28.7%
17.8%
573

90.7%
7.4%
1.8%
0.1%
488

94.8%
2.0%
1.4%
1.8%
296

95.3%
3.6%
0.9%
0.2%
30,861

***
***

97.5%
1.2%
0.9%
0.5%
24,357

*

*

***
*
***

Women

Total

*

**
*

93.1%
3.9%
0.9%
0.7%
1.4%

***

5.2%
4.1%
1.8%
0.8%

***

***

Notes: Stars indicate significant differences between men and women at alpha levels ***p<.001, **p<.01, and *p<.05. OS is Other
Sex; SS is Same Sex; LY is Last Year. In 2002 only, “Don’t know” was not an option; in 2009-2015 only, “Something else” was not
an option.

Table, Mishel (forthcoming)

Figures
70%

56%

60%
50%

34%

40%
30%
20%

39%
27%

25%

15%

10%
0%

3% 3%
Straight

Bisexual
Men

Gay

Something Else or
Don't Know

Women

Figure 1: Self-Reported Sexual Identity among U.S. Men and
Women aged 15-45 who Reported Having Same-Sex Sex in the Last
Year (n=2,392)
Note: Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

Figures, Mishel (forthcoming)

60%

44%

50%
40%

31%

30%
20%

23%
16%
12%

15%

10%

20%
14%

17%

10%
0%

Only to Other Mostly to Other Equal to Both Mostly to Same
Sex
Sex
Sexes
Sex
Men

Only to Same
Sex

Women

Figure 2: Self-Reported Sexual Attraction among U.S. Men and
Women aged 15-45 who Reported Having Same-Sex Sex in the Last
Year (n=2,337)
Note: Bars indicate 95% confidence intervals.

Figures, Mishel (forthcoming)

Figure 3: Predicted Probabilities for Bisexual Identity among U.S.
Men and Women age 15-45
Note: Predicted probabilities correspond to logistic regressions and have been adjusted for race,
age, mother’s education, immigrant status, MSA, and survey wave. Bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals. LY is Last Year.

Figures, Mishel (forthcoming)

Figure 4: Predicted Probabilities for Gay Identity among U.S. Men
and Women age 15-45
Note: Predicted probabilities correspond to logistic regressions and have been adjusted for race,
age, mother’s education, immigrant status, MSA, and survey wave. Bars indicate 95%
confidence intervals. LY is Last Year.

Figures, Mishel (forthcoming)

