Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.30

Pp. 407 -419

Professional Learning through Coaching: toward the Enhancement
of the Teachers’ Pedagogical Competence
Siti Tarwiyah
Department of English Language Education
Universitas Islam Negeri Walisongo Semarang Indonesia
Warsono
Department of Language Education, Post-graduate Program
Universitas Negeri Semarang, Indonesia
Dwi Anggani Linggar Bharati
Department of Language Education, Post-graduate Program
Universitas Negeri Semarang, Indonesia

Djoko Sutopo
Department of Language Education, Post-graduate Program
Universitas Negeri Semarang, Indonesia
Abstract
Coaching is mainly purposed to build teacher capacity to enhance the success of learning
and the quality of education in general. This paper is aimed at describing the coaching
materials, methods, and the effectiveness of coaching in English Foreign Language (EFL)
learning to strengthen the teachers’ pedagogical competence. Six Junior High School EFL
teachers of Central Java, Indonesia (T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, and T6) attended three-month
weekly coachee-centered coaching leading to the implementation of student-centered
learning. Observation of the teaching-learning process, review of the lesson plan, and an
interview with the EFL teachers through Focus Group Discussion were done before coaching
was carried out to identify the coachees’ preliminary pedagogical competence and needs.
The coaching materials encompassed using songs in EFL class, learning principles and
activity-based learning, teaching methods, teaching vocabulary, teaching grammar, teaching
the four language skills, assessing attitude, knowledge, and skill, and process skills.
Coachee-centered coaching was implemented to present the materials through such methods
as Demonstration, Scientific Approach, Lecturing and Discussion, Problem-Based Learning,
Task-Based Learning, Inquiry Learning, Presentation-Practice-Production.
Key words: professional learning, coaching, pedagogical competence
Cite as: Tarwiyah, S., Warsono, Bharati, D. A.L., & Sutopo, D. (2018). Professional Learning through
Coaching: toward the Enhancement of the Teachers’ Pedagogical Competence. Arab World English
Journal, 9 (4), 407 -419. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.30

407

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

Introduction
Building teacher capacity and professional culture are demanded to improve and sustain
professional practices. Professional learning may bridge the implementation of effective teaching
practices. Through professional learning a teacher will interact with other teachers to involve in
such activities as an academic discussion, sharing, peer lesson, lesson study, mentoring, etc. The
rapid change of science and technology boosts teachers to equip themselves with adequate
competence to bring students to the standardized outcome.
The emergence of studies on the implementation of coaching in educational practices
represents the importance of that matter. Rivera-McCutchen & Panero (2014, pp. 86-101) examine
the effectiveness of highly detailed “low-inference” transcripts (LITs) of peer coaching
conversations to explore the kinds of interactions that led peers to be more reflective about their
instructional practice. The transcripts were drawn from two public US high schools in New York
City and used to identify an “Aha!” moment; a moment of the shift of the peer’s prior belief about
their instruction and/or planning. Findings suggested that “Aha!” moment involved a thoughtful
and strategic use of the low-inference transcripts during the coaching conversation and passive use
of the transcripts was less successful. Butler & Yeum (2016, pp. 72-89) studied the dialogic
competence of five Korean primary school English teachers in online peer coaching. It was found
that, teachers need to (a) engage in internal dialogues (intradialogues) using their own knowledge
and experience in order to interpret their peers’ behaviors and intentions and then (b) verbalize
their intradialogues into interdialogues, in the process of modifying and negotiating the content
with others. Meng & Tajaroensuk (2013, pp. 44-53) investigated the activities and effectiveness
of a workshop as a part of Multilayered Peer Coaching Model (MPC Model) developed for twelve
Guiyang University’s EFL teachers in-service professional development . The results showed that
the workshop was effective in the follow-up teaching practice. Eastman (2016, pp. 105-115) used
fictional characters to develop coaching practice of post graduate students. A cohort of students
played as the source of hypothetical scenarios. It was directed to simulate workplace problems and
functioned as a simulative context in which coaching students could apply theoretical models. The
success of its implementation was assessed qualitatively using the excerpts of the students’ written
work. The result suggested literary fictional texts supported the enhancement of coach training
since it could facilitate coach students to create stronger and more creative narratives in their workbased projects. Foen Ng, Confessore & Abdullah (2012, pp. 191-204) assess the effect of a fiveweek coaching intervention on Learner Autonomy Profile (LAP) scores and academic success of
pre-diploma university students in Malaysia. It used quasi-experimental designed. Participants
completed the LAP pre- and post-intervention. 35 students of the experimental group participated
in five-week learner autonomy coaching and wrote reflection logs in the computer between
meetings. Fifty-two students of the control group received no intervention. Students who got
intervention experienced significant increases in the mean post- over pre-intervention LAP scores
or in GPA. Jauregi & Melchor-Couto (2017) find coaching effective in teacher competence
development for telecollaboration.
Literature Review
Professional Learning
Cole (2012,) defines professional learning as “the formal and informal learning experiences
undertaken by teachers and school leaders that improve their individual professional practice and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

408

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

the school’s collective effectiveness as measured by improved student engagement and learning
outcomes” (p. 4) The term of professional learning is commonly embraced with professional
learning community. This is due to learning may not be assured effectively unless through others.
International Center for leadership in Education (2016) suggests that professional learning
community is a self-supportive and created learning. Professional learning brings the participants
to be professional; to be able to execute their tasks at any time, in any situation. Professional
learning is mainly characterized by “a shared intellectual purpose and a sense of collective
responsibility for student learning.” (Wei, 2009, p. 11).
Other characteristics of professional learning are posited by Newmann and Associates
(2002) as cited in Vescio, 2006, pp. 3-4). In their opinion, professional learning should meet five
essential characteristics: (1) shared values and norms in relation to such points as the views about
children and children’s ability to learn, school priorities for the use of time and space, and the
proper roles of parents, teachers, and administrators, (2) clear and consistent focus on student
learning, that it is not simply to ensure that students are taught but also learn, (3) reflective dialogue
about curriculum, instruction and student development, (4) group collaboration.
Professional learning requires interaction among members to share and learn each other
about current educational issues and practices. Through professional learning teachers meet on a
regular schedule in learning teams organized by shared responsibility for their students’
success and based on the determined plan. The plan is made after examining student data
and identifying the areas of student needs. The learning team engages in developing
powerful lessons and assessments, applying new strategies in the real learning process.
Professional learning stimulates teachers to leave their comfort zone by having more challenging
teaching.
Coaching
Coaching is devoted primarily to teaching participants new skills. There are four steps
required to deliver the skills. The steps are: (1) presentation of the theory or skill, (2) demonstration
of the skill, (3) repeated opportunities to practice the skill under both simulated and actual
classroom conditions, (4) repeated feedback on the practice efforts (Keith & Robert, 1991, pp.
200-204).
Lofthouse, Leat & Towler (2010, p. 8) define coaching as focused professional dialogue
aims at aiding the coachees in developing certain professional skills to improve their teaching
repertoire. The coachees are commonly given space to experiment with new classroom strategies.
As it purposes to enhance teaching repertoire, coaching needs to meet the following key qualities:
(1) promoting professional dialogue on teaching issues that are of interest to the coachees, (2)
planning, developing and evaluating teaching activities in collaborative ways, (3) facilitating
experimentation and reflection, (4) fostering reflection that will help effective teachers when
planning and evaluating their teaching by discussing pedagogical issues in their teaching
(McGrane & Lofthouse, 2010, p. 188).
“Coaching is inherently a reflective process.” (Jackson, 2004, p. 57) As a reflective process,
coaching is directed at making better changes to the sector becoming its focus of attention. In the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

409

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

educational field, a coaching program is a form of teacher professional development expected to
improve the quality of teaching-learning process, which ends up with the quality of student
outcomes. In EFL class, reflective practices may be done through journal writing, peer
observation, lesson report, and classroom action research. The area may be covered in the
reflection are teachers’ and learners’ beliefs, teacher decision making, teachers’ role, the structure
of a lesson, classroom interaction, classroom activities, and language use (Richard, 2007, pp. vvii). Such a comprehensive reflection contributes to the better EFL class and students’ language
competence and performance.
Based on the notions of coaching above it may be concluded that coaching in EFL learning
is directed to improve the EFL teachers’ repertoire in teaching based on the content, process, and
assessment. An efficient coaching may be reached through a thorough plan, attentive control to
the process, and appropriate follow up.
Pedagogical Competence
Indonesian Government Regulation No. 19 Year 2005 on National Standard of Education
Article 28 Sub-article 3 defines pedagogical competence as the competence to manage the learning
of learners which covers understanding learners, planning and implementing a lesson, evaluating
products of learning, and developing learners to actualize their potentials. In addition, the
addendum of the Indonesian Minister of Education’s Decree No. 16 Year 2007 on the standard of
academic qualification and teacher competence mentions the cores of pedagogical competence as
follow: (1) understanding students’ characteristics from physical, moral, spiritual, social, cultural,
emotional, and intellectual aspects, (2) mastering theories and principles of learning, (3)
developing curriculum in relation to the taught subject, (4) conducting educational learning; (5)
employing information and communication technology for the purpose of learning, (6) facilitating
the development and the actualization of learners’ potential, (7) communicating with learners
effectively, emphatically, and politely, (8) conducting assessment and evaluation of the process
and the product of learning, (9) making use of assessment and evaluation for learning purposes,
and (10) doing reflective activities to improve the quality of learning.
Akhyak (2013, p. 4) defines pedagogical competence as the competence to organize
teaching learning process of learners. It consists of three competences, i.e. planning, process, and
assessment and evaluation. The competence in planning teaching learning process comprises
describing objectives, selecting materials, determining methods and strategies, determining
learning sources and media, designing assessment and evaluation instruments, determining
assessment and evaluation techniques, and allocating time. Teaching learning process competence
is reflected in the competences in opening a lesson, delivering materials, using media and methods,
using communicative language, motivating students, organizing activities, interacting with
students communicatively, concluding a lesson, providing feedback, conducting assessment and
evaluation, and using time effectively. The competence of assessment and evaluation comprises
choosing questions based on the level of difficulty and discriminating power, repairing problems,
checking the answers, classifying and processing the results, making interpretation, determining
the correlated problems, arranging follow-up programs, identifying the need for follow-up,
carrying out follow-up, and analyzing the results of evaluation.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

410

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

Pedagogical competence takes the biggest portion of all the four competences, i.e.
pedagogical, interpersonal, social, and professional competences. The rest of three competences
are blended in the realization of teaching learning processes.
Methods
This descriptive study describes coaching materials, procedure, and the enhancement of the
teachers’ pedagogical competence after the coaching program was administered. Six Junior High
School EFL teachers of Central Java, Indonesia (T1, T2, T3, T4, T5, and T6) attended ten-week
coachee-centered coaching leading to the implementation of student-centered learning.
Observation of teaching-learning process, review of the lesson plan, and an interview with the EFL
teachers through Focus Group Discussion (FGD) were done before coaching was carried out to
identify the coachees’ pedagogical competence and needs. The same procedure, except FGD was
carried out to identify the teachers’ pedagogical competence after being coached in EFL learning.
Presentation and demonstration of theory and skills were conducted in six weekly meeting which
was continued with implementation in twice individual classroom teaching and peer reflection in
the following four weeks. Peer reflection was done after each individual teaching. In the first and
the fourth teaching the teachers’ pedagogical competence before and after the coaching program
was compared to identify its enhancement.
Results
The Coaching Materials and Methods
The coaching program implemented was coachee-centered coaching. It was aimed at giving
a model of participant-centered activities. The modeling might energize the coachees to bring it
into their classroom practice (read: learner-centered learning). The material presentation spent six
meetings in six weeks. Each meeting lasted 70 minutes. The table below shows the materials
presented and discussed from the first to the ninth meetings together with the methods of delivery:
Table 1. List of Materials and Methods
Week
Material
1
Using Songs in EFL Class
Learning Principles and Activity-Based Learning
2
Teaching Vocabulary
Scientific Approach
Inquiry Learning
3
Teaching Grammar
Problem-Based Learning
Genre-Based Instruction
4
Teaching Listening and Speaking
Contextual Learning
5
Teaching Reading and Writing
Assessing Attitude, Knowledge, Skill
6
Process Skills (Planning, Implementing, Assessing
and Evaluating A Lesson)
7
The Implementation of Materials
8
Reflection
9
The Implementation of Materials
10
Reflection

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Method
Demonstration
Scientific Approach
Demonstration
Problem-Based Learning
Task-Based Learning
Demonstration
Scientific approach
Task-Based Learning
Lecturing and discussion
Lecturing and discussion
Lecturing and discussion
Inquiry Learning
Presentation-PracticeProduction
Individual Teaching
Peer Reflection
Individual Teaching
Peer Reflection

411

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

The implementation of participant-centered sessions was represented through the choice of
method in every session. Before starting the session, the researcher usually shared or invited the
teachers to share some teaching strategies, warmer, or filler in the form of a game or song. Each
material was supported with individual or pair worksheet. As the materials were packed based on
need analysis of the teachers, they joined almost every session enthusiastically. The big problem
of the presentation session was the limitation of time. Two learning hours (2 x 35 minutes) were
not enough to discuss every matter.
Peer reflection was administered after every individual teaching through which there had
been a kind of peer lesson among the coachees. Hence, significant improvement was made in the
following teaching.
The figure describes how each activity is related to another activity. First is determining
the coaching materials from the researcher’s perspectives based on first teaching (pre-coaching
teaching) and from the teachers’ perspectives through FGD. The confirmed materials are presented
in the agreed specified times and places. To make sure the teachers’ understanding, the materials
are implemented in the second teaching. Teaching problems are identified and solved through
reflection meeting. The improvement of the teachers’ pedagogical competence is identified
through the third teaching.
If an action research in education were conducted, the coaching program might be
continued by re-identifying the teachers’ needs if the significant improvement was not made. If
the significant improvement had been made but the teachers still expected to continue their
professional learning the coaching program might be followed with the mentoring program.
1) The Enhancement of the Teachers’ Competence in Planning an English Lesson
Coaching seems to be instrumental to innovate teachers’ pedagogical competence.
Effective coaching facilitates teachers to work more properly. The coaching program which had
been done could strengthen almost all aspects of the teachers’ pedagogical competence. The
score falls into 5 categories, i.e. excellent (8≥), good (7-8), fair (6-7), bad (5-6), and very bad
(≤5).
The average score of the teachers’ competence in planning an English lesson before and
after being coached in EFL learning improves 1.073 points from 5.646 (bad) to 6.719 (fair).
The detailed quantitative data below show the difference of the mean score of the teachers’
competence in planning before and after being coached in ELF learning.
Table 2 The Score of the Teachers’ Competence in Planning an English Lesson before and after being
Coached in EFL Learning
Aspect
Before
After
Coaching
Coaching
Formulating Objectives and/or Indicators
8.217
9.283
Preparing Materials
Planning the Activities
Determining Learning Sources, Media

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

3.367
8.100
4.450

7.383
9.583
7.533

412

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching
Designing Assessment and Evaluation
Instrument
Allocating Time
Remedial and Enrichment Program
Overall Arrangement
Mean

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

6.117
6.333
.000
8.583
5.646

5.424
5.333
0.833
8.833
6.719

Among the eight aspects of planning, designing assessment and evaluation instrument and
allocating time are two aspects with decreasing scores. The former decreases from 6.117 to 5.424
or 0.693 points, the later reduces from 6.333 to 5.333 or 1.000 points. The researcher will only
highlight the two aspects.
Four of eleven indicators of designing assessment and evaluation instrument get no
improvement (check the shadowed cell of table 3).
Table 3 The Score of each Indicator of Designing Assessment and
Evaluation Instruments
Indicators of Designing Assessment and
Before
After
Evaluation Instruments
Coaching
Coaching
1. Assessment techniques are appropriate
with indicators
2. Assessment instruments are appropriate
with indicators
3. Designing instruments for assessing
attitudes
4. Designing instruments for assessing
knowledge
5. Providing instruments for assessing
skills
6. Preparing appropriate scoring rubric for
assessing attitude
7. Preparing appropriate scoring rubric for
assessing knowledge
8. Preparing appropriate scoring rubric for
assessing skill
9. The instruments for assessing
knowledge comprise LOTS
10. The instruments for assessing
knowledge comprise HOTS
11. There are clear instructions

9166

9166

7000

7500

5.500

3.333

5.000

6.667

8.333

8.333

7.500

3.333

5.000

.000

3.750

4.166

6.667

8.333

5.333

3.333

5.833

8.333

The decrease of the scores might be due to the lack of time to prepare a complete written
lesson plan before teaching. When the researcher asked them the reasons for not completing the
lesson plans, they said that they were busy doing some other school work, i.e. completing the
school data, preparing national exam for the ninth-year students. If their previous teachings were
always based on lesson plans, they would not have consumed a significant amount of time to
prepare lesson plans for the next teachings. They would only have modified the used ones.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

413

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

Regarding designing instruments for assessing attitudes all the teachers designed the
instrument. In term of preparing appropriate scoring rubric for assessing attitude, T1 prepared a
rubric for assessing respect, care, self-confidence, T4 prepared it for assessing responsibility and
team work but with inappropriate indicator, T5 provided it for assessing seriousness,
responsibility, care, team work, and love, which were too many focused characters. All of them
used so frequent, frequent, sometimes, ever, and never or always, frequent, sometimes, and never
as indicators. They are not indicators but score criteria. They do not show the students’
performance indicating the assessed attitudes.
Dealing with putting questions measuring High Order Thinking skill (HOTs) in assessing
knowledge T1 and T4 were the only teachers who covered HOTs questions in their assessment.
T1 had his students write a post card telling their holiday to their old friends after reading a text
about someone’s holiday to Bogor. T4 got his students to conclude the reasons for bold typing and
underlining parts of a song.
Surprisingly, in the lesson plan designed after the coaching program, no teacher prepared
an appropriate scoring rubric for assessing knowledge. Scoring rubric for assessing knowledge is
the simplest rubric since usually the aspect assessed is the accuracy of students’ answer, either
based on text or based on the corresponding meaning or definition. If the questions are
considerably difficult to answer teachers may score 2 for the correct answer and score 1 for the
wrong answer. If the questions are easy, the score is 1 for the correct answer and 0 for the wrong
answer. The common maximum score is 10. Teachers are suggested to inform the rubric to the
students doing an assignment.
Four teachers designed assessment for attitude, knowledge, and skill (T1, T3, T4, T5). T2
only planned to assess skill and T6 only prepared an assessment instrument to assess knowledge.
Basically, when a teacher assesses skill, he also automatically assess knowledge, which is the
prerequisite to perform the assessed skill. But the task scaffolding is unclear if the teacher does not
design cognitive assessment implicitly.
Pertaining to time allocation, T4 and T5 did not plan their time, T2 had proportional time
allocation, T1, T3, T6 should have 10 minutes for opening activities instead of having 5 minutes.
2) The Enhancement of the Teachers’ Competence in Implementing an English Lesson
The improvement of the teachers’ competence in implementing an English lesson is shown
by the mean score of the competence after the program, which reaches 7.129 (good). Before being
coached the mean score of the competence is 3.976 (very bad) or it improves 3.153 points.
The scores of all the aspects of implementing competence improve after the coaching
program. The most dramatic improvement happens to the aspect of opening a lesson, which
increases 4.734 points from 2.683 to 7.417. There are eight activities in the opening stage, i.e. (1)
motivating and making students ready to learn, (2) explaining the learning goals, (3) explaining
how the presented material is related to the previous one, (4) informing the coverage of the
materials, (5) explaining the techniques and the stages of learning, (6) informing the scope of
assessment, (7) informing the technique of assessment, and (8) getting information about the level
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

414

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

of students’ understanding of the lesson. All the teachers performed at least six activities or
indicators except T5 who performed four indicators only. The score improvement of all aspects of
implementing competence is covered in table 4.
Table 4 The Score of the Teachers’ Competence in Implementing an
English Lesson before and after being Coached in EFL Learning
Competence
Implementing

Aspect

Before Coaching

After Coaching

Opening a Lesson

2.683

7.417

Organizing the Activities

6.050

8.850

Using Media

5.467

8.600

Using
Communicative
Language

5.317

5.767

5.833

9.567

4.167

9.333

2.292

7.500

3.976

7.129

Motivating Student
Using Time Effectively
Closing a Lesson
Mean

Using communicative language gains the least improvement, with only 0.450 points from
5.17 to 5.767. There are some points to ponder in using a language as a medium of instruction.
They are (1) using a comprehensible language, (2) using correct word choice, grammar, (3) using
appropriate language, and (4) using correct pronunciation, stress, and intonation. Improving the
teachers’ language performance needs time, commitment, and consistence in regular learning and
practice.
Another aspect needs to be highlighted is using time effectively. This aspect decreases 1.000
point in the planning stage but increases 5.166 points from 4.167 to 9.333 in implementing stage.
T1, T2, T3, T4 managed their time effectively. Meanwhile, T1 did not have enough time for
reflection and T2 did not cover communicating stage. Overall, the teachers’ time management in
implementing stage is better than in the planning stage. This is to say that continues practise makes
teachers equip themselves with automatic controlling/managing skills. One of the skills is
managing time.
Organizing the activities also reaches considerable enhancement from 6.050 to 8.850 or
2.800 points. Table 5 provides the score of each indicator of organizing the activities.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

415

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

Table 5 The Score of each indicator of organizing the activities
Indicators of Organizing the Activities
Before
Coaching
1. Activities are systematically implemented
6.333
and facilitate the achievement of learning
goals
2. Activities are learner-centered
6.555
3. Activities facilitate the learning of knowledge
7.833
4. Activities facilitate the learning of a skill
4.000
5. Activities develop students’ collaboration
6.666
skill
6. Activities develop students’ critical
3.833
thinking skill
7. Activities develop students’ creativity
5.333
8. Activities develop students’ spiritual
5.000
attitude
9. Activities develop students’ social attitude
5.000
10. Teacher uses concrete examples and
5.000
illustration
11. Teacher models good behavior
10.000
12. Teacher implements varied kinds of
6.166
activities and/or interaction patterns
13. The teacher plays a variety of roles
7.000

After
Coaching
10.000

10.000
8.333
7.500
9.166
5.833
9.166
5.000
10.000
10.000
10.000
10.000
10.000

Two indicators make the most significant enhancement, from 5.000 to 10.000 or 5.000
points. They are: (1) teacher uses concrete examples and illustration, (2) activities develop
students’ social attitude. Regarding the use of concrete examples and illustration, T1 used the song
‘My Uncle Came’ to model text. The song was translated from an Indonesian song Paman Datang
‘My Uncle Came’, which was familiar in the students’ ears. T2 provided some concrete
advertisements to visualize advertisement text more clearly. T3 described a student in the class to
model descriptive text, T4 exposed profession through a song, T4 and T5 described themselves
and one of their students to give examples of describing professions. Concrete examples facilitate
students’ understanding since they concretize a concept, bring the concept closed to students.
Besides, students may also be brought to real-life activities. Some of them can be used to enhance
students’ awareness of honesty when they create a genre (Mustikasari, 2013, p. 143).
The twelfth indicator, teacher implements varied kinds of activities and/or interaction
pattern, enhances 3.834 points, from 6.166 to 10.000. Varied activities are commonly represented
through varied kinds of interaction pattern, i.e. from (1) Teacher-Students (T – Ss), (2) TeacherStudent-Teacher (T – S – T), (3) Teacher-Student-Student (T – S – S), (4) Student-Teacher (S –
T), Student-Student (S – S), and Student-Students (S – Ss) pattern. By building interaction in
different ways students develop their social attitude. Varied interaction facilitates students to
collaborate in different ways. ‘… recognition between being weak or strong in teaching lies behind
the way teacher interacts with the student.’ (Cole & Chan as cited in Setiananingrum & Saleh,
2016, p. 12) Through varied kinds of interaction teachers prioritize the process of learning.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

416

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

3) The Enhancement of the Teachers’ Competence in Assessing and Evaluating an English
Lesson
Coaching in EFL learning also enhanced the teachers’ competence in assessing and
evaluating competence mainly in implementing stage. It is proven by the mean score of the
competence which reaches 8.113 (excellent) from 4.571 (very bad). The score of the competence
improves 3.542 points.
Similar to allocating time which decreases in the planning stage but increases in
implementing stage, the score of assessment and evaluation also decreases in the planning stage
but increases in implementing stage. There was a kind of hidden plan of the teachers’ which were
not put in the lesson plans. The difference of score of the teachers’ competence in assessing and
evaluating an English lesson before and after coaching is showed through table 6.
Table 6 The Score of the Teachers’ Competence in Assessing and
Evaluating an English Lesson before and after being coached
in EFL learning
Competence

Aspect

Before
Coaching
assessing and Assessing
Attitudes, 3.017
evaluating
Knowledge, and Skills
Classifying and Processing 5.833
the Result
Making
Interpretation, 6.667
Determining the Correlated
Problems
Identifying the Needs for 2.767
Follow up
Mean
4.571

After
Coaching
4.667
10.000
10.000

7.783
8.113

Among the four aspects of assessing and evaluating competence, the aspect of identifying
the needs for follow up reaches the biggest improvement. It improves 5.016 points from 2.767
to7.783. The teachers had been aware of the importance of giving remedial or enrichment. All the
teachers provided remedial learning only. After being confirmed, they told the same reason for not
giving enrichment learning. It was time to give one to one service through correcting and giving
feedbacks to the students’ work gradually until the minimum standard was reached. One third of
the students in each class commonly needed remedial learning. The teachers prioritized remedial
program to facilitate the participants to catch up with those who had met the standardized score.
Assessing attitudes, knowledge, and skills gain the least improvement. It is 1.650 from 3.017
to 4.667. The problem mostly the teachers had was using an appropriate rubric for assessing
attitudes. They still did not use appropriate indicators. They used such criteria as always,
sometimes, seldom, hardly ever, and never only. Without employing clear indicators, assessment
will be subjective. It is very dependent on what is in the assessor’s mind at the time of assessment.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

417

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

Conclusion
Coachee-centered coaching maximizes the coachees’ participation and activeness in the
coaching program. Hence, more time is given to the coachees to learn by doing, which in turn
enhances the skill of implementing the coaching materials. The coaching program is proven to
enhance the teachers’ pedagogic competence.
Experiencing in taking the benefit of involving in the model of coaching, the coachees
inspire to implement learner-centered learning. The learning model is also expected to improve
the effectiveness and the efficiency of learning which is proven through the attainment of
standardized learning outcomes.
About the Authoors:
Siti Tarwiyah is a lecturer of English at Universitas Islam Negeri Walisongo, Indonesia. Her
research interest falls within the area of professional development, and methodology in English
language teaching and learning. ORCId ID: https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3388-9147.
Warsono is a lecturer at Language Education of Post-Graduate Program of Universitas Negeri
Semarang. His research interest includes methodology in English language teaching and learning
professional development.
Dwi Anggani Linggar Bharati is a lecturer at Language Education of Post-Graduate Program of
Universitas Negeri Semarang who has contributed varied kinds of research articles on professional
development and English language teaching and learning methodology to some reputable journals.
Djoko Sutopo is a lecturer at Language Education of Post-Graduate Program of Universitas
Negeri Semarang who has written a lot of articles on discourse studies for reputable journals.

References
Akhyak. et al. (2013). Implementation of Teachers Pedagogy Competence to Optimizing Learners
Development in Public Primary School in Indonesia. International Journal of Education and
Research, 1 (9), 1-10.
Bharati, D.A.L. (2010). Teachers’ Professional Development through an Observation in Immersion Classes
Based on the Documents and Teaching and Learning Processes. Language Circle: Journal of
Language and Literature, 4 (2), 91-101.
Butler, Y.G. & Yeum, K. (2016). Dialogic Competence of Primary School English Teachers in Online Peer
Coaching: A Case Study in South Korea. The Journal of Asia TEFL, 13 (2), 72-89.
Eastman, C. A. (2016). Coaching in Organizations: How the Use of Fictional Characters Can Develop
Coaching Practice. International Journal of Mentoring and Coaching in Education, 5 (4), 105-115.
Cole, Peter. (2012). Insight: Linking effective professional learning with effective teaching
Practice. Melbourne: Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership Limited (AITSL).
Foen Ng, S., Confessore, G.J. & Abdullah, M. (2012). Learner autonomy coaching: enhancing learning and
academic success. International Journal of Mentoring and Coaching in Education, 1 (3), 191-204.
Indonesian Government. (2005). Government Regulation of Republic Indonesia No. 19/2005 on National
Standard of Education. Jakarta.
Indonesian Ministry of Education. (2007). Minister of Education’s Decree No. 16 Year 2007 on the
standard of academic qualification and teacher competence. Jakarta.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

418

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

Professional Learning through Coaching

Tarwiyah, Warsono, Bharati & Sutopo

International Center for leadership in Education. 2016. Professional Learning Communities: Communities
Continuous
Inquiry
and
Improvement.
Accessed
March
17,
2016
from
www.archford.org/.../Professional%20Learning%.
Jackson, P. (2004). Understanding the Experience of Experience: A Practical Model of Reflective Practice
for Coaching. International Journal of Evidence-Based Coaching and Mentoring, 2 (1), 4-14.
Jauregi, K. & Melchor-Couto, S. (2017). The Role of Coaching in Teacher Competence Development for
telecollaboration. Alsic, 20 (2), 1-30.
Lofthouse, R., Leat, D. & Towler, C. (2010). Coaching for teaching and learning: a practical guide for
schools. Guidance Report. National College for Leadership of Schools and Children’s Services: CfBT
Education
Trust.
Retrieved
August
25,
2016,
from
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/327944/coaching-forteaching-and-learning.pdf
McGrane, J. & Lofthouse, R. (2010). Developing Outstanding Teaching and Learning: Creating a Culture
of Professional Development to Improve Outcomes. London: Optimus Education.
Meng, J. & Tajaroensuk. (2013). The Workshop in the Multilayered Peer Coaching Model for Tertiary EFL
Teachers’ In-Service Professional Development. English Language Teaching, 6 (8), . 44-53.
Mustikasari, Rr. D.W. (2013). Real-Life Activities: Boosting My Students’ Awareness of Honesty in
Creating Genre. Proceeding from 2nd English Language Teaching, Literature and Translation
International Conference (pp. 143-151). Semarang: English Department of UNNES.
Richard, J. C. & Lockhart, C. (2007). Reflective Teaching in Second Language Classrooms. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Rivera-McCutchen, R.S. & Panero, N.S. (2014) Low-inference transcripts in peer coaching: a promising
tool for school improvement. International Journal of Mentoring and Coaching in Education, 3 (1),
86-101.
Setiananingrum, D. & Saleh, M. (2016.) Classroom Interaction Patterns in Higher Education. English
Education Journal, 6 (2), 10-16.
Sutopo, D. & Mahardika, S.M. (2016). The Use of Communication Strategies among Indonesian Young
Learners of English in Early Total Immersion Program. Arab World English Journal (AWEJ), 7(3),
215-237.
Vescio, Vicki et al. 2006. “A review of research on professional learning communities: What do we know?”
Presented at the NSRF Research Forum, January, 2006.
Wei, R. C., Darling-Hammond, L., Andree, A., Richardson, N., Orphanos, S. (2009). Professional learning
in the learning profession: A status report on teacher development in the United States and abroad.
Dallas, TX. National Staff Development Council.
Warsono (2016) Language Transfer in Leaeners Language. Edulite:Journal of English, Education,
Literature, and Culture. 1 (1), 103-113.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

419

