90

ISSN 2072-3334
Development Compilation
Volume 15. Number 01. October 2019

RURAL CULTURE IN THE 21ST CENTURY FILMS OF BANGLADESH
Md. Sayeed Al-Zaman*
Abstract: Bangladesh film industry had to battle against obscenity
and disorientation for a long time. However, films of the 21st
Century are forwarding to revive its lost identity. Few films have
been made so far focusing the pre-modern rural society of the
country.Due tosocio-economic and cultural reasons,rural area has
immense importance.Therefore, the representation of rurality in
audio-visual production demands careful attention.This study has
analyzed and presented how the films represent the rural culture
and society. For this purpose, certain dominant Bangladesh filmsof
the 21st Century, which portray the rural culture, have been
studied.The analyses have found that the films encompass a
widespread view of rural society, and delineate rural culture on
certain contexts. Furthermore, it has been found that,in order to
bringmodernity replacing traditionality in rural society, the films are
subtlyplaying an important role throughrepresentation.
Keywords: Rural culture, media, woman, religion, traditional,
Bangladesh.

Introduction
Art is the most influential media in every society throughout human
civilization. In modern time, film has emerged as a wing of technocratic art,
the art through “camera eye”, which encompasses some other arts, such as
literature, music, photography, play, etc. From the dawn of the twentieth
Century, after the invention of motion picture recorder to till now, filmhas
been becoming more inseparable part of people’s life. Beyond providing
mere entertainment, film has some other functions too:influence, educate,
motivate, represent, construct and shape opinion, provoke thought and
responsibility, spread propaganda, etc.(Reeves, 1993; Swain, 2013; Wanger,
1941) Unlike all forms of art, film has an immediate and absolute economic
consequence. Post-revolutionary movies of Soviet Union and post-World
War I movies in Germany helped to revive the national economy of both
nations(Cook & Sklar, 2019; Kepley, 1996).Iranian films presentits social,
cultural and political, humanitariancrises, and social norms and
attitudes(Masud, 2013).

*

Lecturer, Department of Journalism and Media Studies, Jahangirnagar University,
Savar, Dhaka, Bangladesh.

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019

Film, to a certain degree,has becomethe interpreter of the world. It convinces
the audience what is truth and what is history, provides constructed view of
politics and events, fabricates the morality and ideology, and even ideates
how the other people and nationalities should be treated like. Film as an
audio-visual production puts significant impact on the community it
represents, and thus creates a pseudo-world of notion, belief, thought,
ideology and attitude. Movie spectators in United States, for an instance, are
strongly influenced by Hollywood films as they start believing everything
depicted in the film is true (Giannetti, 2014). They are mainly affected by,
asBaudrillard (1994) says, simulation, the process in which a representation
of something comes to replace the thing whichis in fact represented, and
therefore, the representation becomes more real than “the reality”. However,
film merely represents a limited version of reality, and often a distorted one.
Bangladesh is a country of villages and rural people consist bulk of the total
population. A lion share of national economy is still based on rural
societyalthough the prior scenario has been changing from the past few
decades due to heavy industrialization. Hence, forlearning Bangladesh
society, knowledge ofits rural society is imperative. Media as an important
vehicle of culture in Bangladesh and elsewhere in the worldoften
representsthe rural culture.Film of Bangladesh, a dominant form and/or
content of media, has alsobeen playing an important role particularly from
the 2000s interpreting the rural socio-cultural environment through audiovisual productions. In Bangladesh like elsewhere in the world, film industry is
basedon urban. Filmmakers, actors, crews, and other persons involved
during the whole production are also from the urban culture. Therefore, it is
essential to observe how these urban people depict rural culture in their
creative productions, and whether these interpretationsare accurate, or
merely attribution. Generally speaking, films of a particular era illustrate the
version of social reality of that period. Therefore,this study deals with the
nature and critical aspects of the representation of rural culture in the 21st
Centuryfilms of Bangladesh.
Rural Culture
The term “rural”generally indicates countryside having the features: values,
traditions, and customs opposite to urban’s. Rural society is the reservoir as
well as preserver of culture whereas urban is considered as the cornerstone
of civilization(Ahmed, 2011).In nature, rural society is monogamous and
having no or little dissimilarities from village to village unlike the
urban(Slama, 2004). Culture is the sum of what and how people do in a
given society, moreover, how they lead their life.Contents of culture can be
both material, such as building, weapon, machine, clothing, and nonmaterial, such as belief, values, behavior (Henslin, 2014). Therefore,rural
culture is the culture from and of the villagers and villages. The utmost
difference between urban and rural culture is that rural society is traditional in
nature,therefore
less
capable
to
adapt
or
move
towards

Rural Culture in the 21st Century Films of Bangladesh

91

modernity.Bangladesh rural society is based on agrarian economy, and
socio-cultural lifeof such society is widely known as “rural way of life”
(Bodenstedt, 1990).
Films of Bangladesh
Bangladesh emerged as a nation-state after two conflictual
consecutiveevents: (a) the Great Indian Partition in 1947 that created two
sovereign states namely India and Pakistan (undivided); and (b) the
Liberation War in 1971 that separated East Pakistan as sovereign
Bangladesh from West Pakistan. However, legacy of films in Indian
subcontinent lies on the British colonial period. Besides, the films those have
made before and after 1971 in what now is called “Bangladesh” has been
designated as the films of Bangladesh.Films in this region have been
evolving from time to time.Thegolden era of Bangla cinema was vanishing
from 1980s and 1990s due to heavy commercialization and lack of creative
endeavors in Bangladesh film industry(Kader, 1993). From 1971 to 1977,
total of163 films were released throughout the country where only 25 films
were made with original story(Nasreen & Haq, 2008).After a heavy downfall
in 1990s, the film industry of Bangladesh is reviving again since the
beginning of the 21stCentury. Apart from commercial movies, some creative
brains are engaging in producing something “new”. Although two major lines:
(a) traditional and BFDC1-based mainstream films; and (b) independent and
creative films in Bangladesh film industry have been evident, both represent
society, people, and culture of the country, to some extent, differently.
Research Method
Based on socialrepresentation, the 21stCentury Bangladeshi films can be
divided into three broaddivisions: (a) urbanrepresentation; (b)
ruralrepresentation; and (c) mixed representation.Since urban population is
the prime consumers of films and theatres, they are the main target audience
of the production. For that reason, story, set, actor and actress, and
ambience surround the urban Bangladesh in most of the films. However, a
new genre of “rural films” has recently been introduced in Bangladesh
cinema industry, and some independent filmmakers in coalition with few
media corporations are making films on rural life. These films are the
combination of both novel-based and original stories.The point should not be
overlooked that novel adaptation in films often paint a social scenario of a
particular period from past so it can be inconsistence with the present
situation. On the other hand,commercial“formulafilms”often use the mixed
but “utopian”representation of urban and rural society with the central focus
on hero-heroin’s chemistry.Based on the discussed features, the
secondcategory of films those represent rural society and the way of life
therehave been considered relevant for this study.The qualitative study is
mainly based of content analysis, and to do so, nine dominant and popular
Bangladeshi films of the21stCentury, more precisely from 2000 to 2016, have

92

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019

been selected andanalyzedthoroughly. The studied films are: Srabon Megher
Din (2000), Lalsalu (2001), Matir Moyna(2002),Hazar Bachhor Dhore(2005),
Molla Barir Bou(2005),Monpura (2009), Television (2012), Jalaler Golpo
(2014), Oggatonama(2016).The representational and cultural analyses of
these films are based ondialogue and discourse, characterization, story, and
few other necessary aspects. Furthermore, carefulobservation of the rural
society along with pondering few secondary sources have also been
conducted for relative purpose.
Rural Culture in Bangladesh Films
To analyze and discuss the relevant representation of the 21stCentury
Bangladesh films, distinctive propositions have been made based on sociocultural perspective: religion, language, education, entertainment, outfit, food
and healthcare,rural women, relationship, political culture, myths and
superstitions, and views toward modernity. Therefore, on these
specifiedeleven grounds, a brief discussionon the representation of rural
culture in these filmsare being presented here.
Religion:Religion seems an inseparable part ofrural life which has explicit
and/or implicit impact on individuals. Islam is the most practiced religion in
rural society and Muslims consist the largest religious communitywhereas
Hindu is the largest religious minority. In rural area, some are puritanical
Islamistwhile some believe in greater humanity.In Oggatonama (2016),
Kefayet Uddin Paramanikopines:
Whether he is a Hindu or Muslim, he must be a son of any parents.
This version of expression is an indication of religious openness as well as
liberal worldview which has ostensibly emerged fromfalsafa2. On the other
hand, two types of people religious followers exist in rural society: regular,
and seasonal.The rural elites, such as wealthy, well-educated, established,
aged, and politically powerful usually control the religious environments and
systems. They are the constant and regular attendance in rites and
occasions whereasordinary villagers are seasonal. Farmers, day laborers,
and other field-workers have been presentedas the least pious as they are
too busy in earning their livelihood:
Village head : Don’t you know the scriptures!
Farmer
: I’m a poor man, can’t even eat.
Although this factionseems fearfulto God, they are unable toperform daily
religious practices due to excessive workload.Pious as well as solvent
Muslim villagers actively attend and perform weekly prayer of Jummah and
occasions like Shab-e-Baarat, Shab-e-Kaadar,Ramadan, Eid-ul-Fitr, andEidul-Adha. On the other hand, ordinary Hindu villagershave been seen less
apathetic to regular prayer. Muslims and Hindus have more faith in their own
religion-mates than their opposites’, although Hindus trust Muslims more
than Muslims do to Hindus(Johansson Stenman et al., 2009).Belief in fate is
acrucialcomponent of“rural religion”. Illiteracy and ingenuousnesswith fear

Rural Culture in the 21st Century Films of Bangladesh

93

appeal often make the ordinary rural people more frightened towards
Islam.Like Mosque, Mazarhasalso been considered to illiterate rural people
as a sanctuary for beggingsalvation from all their sins. They also bestow their
goods such as domestic animals, first crop of their land, money etc. in
exchange of dua3 for their betterment. Religious deception of pir-fakir is a
common picture. Even beggars also beg singing religious songs:
On the holy Friday, please, donate something
in the name of Allah and Muhammad!
Pir, Maulana,Maulovi,Fakir, Huzur, Imam,4 and other religious clergies as
“holy man” stimulate and nurture the sense of religiosity among
ruralinhabitants. These “Godly” persons make religion more mystic,
heavenly, and spiritual in front ofothers through their waaz, boyan, nosihot,
khutbah, dawat,5 etc.Anyone whorepudiate or question the obligations and
regulations in the name of religion, they usually get slandered by
thedominants and their followers. In Television (2012):
An ordinary
: If you don’t mind, I want to say that nowhere in our
Villager
religion enunciate on the prohibition of television.
Amin (a rural : Don’t want to be a pandit with your little knowledge.
elite)
Women perceive as more religious than men. Many women recite theQuran
in dawn and say their prayer. In rural reality, women have none but the
Almighty, so they are more dependent and believer of religion. Interestingly,
age and piousness have apposite and parallel relationship: when an
individualhas becomeolder, he has alsobecome more pious fearing the
forthcoming death. In movies, old men have been identified more religious
and attendants than the youths.
Language: Rural people usedialect in their everyday conversation.These
dialects vary region to region: local language of Dhaka does not match up
with Sylhet’s, Barisal’s and Chittagong’s are different too. In manyfilms,the
characters use local languagethat seems interesting as well as a bit spooky,
but very much relative with the rural context.
Table: Use of Language in Films
Dialect
Conventional form
Distortion
Meaning
Tenara
Tara
t(en)ara
they
Tani
Tini
t(a/i)ni
(s)he
Thakon
Thaka
thak(on/a)
to stay or live
Boson
Bosa
bos(on/a)
to sit
Pinda
Pora
p(ind/or)a
to wear
Source: Prepared by the Researcher
The table depicts how conventional forms of words have been used as
dialects in films. Although the differences of them are very tiny: en, a/i, on/a,
ind/or.In films directed byHumayun AhmednamelyShrabon Megher Din

94

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019

(2000), two social rural entities: elite people and ordinary people have been
seen to use two different accents during conversation. Of them, wealthy elite
and the remaining ancestors of Zamindars talk in colloquial language, and
general villagers use local dialects. It, to some extent, contradicts the rural
reality as most of the inhabitants of a certain village share the same accent
and language patterndue to the cultural coexistence unless some of them
are migrated from different areaand ethnicity.Besides, conventional
commercial films of Bangladesh in the 21stCentury combine both the urban
and rural accents, andlanguage of these films is often colloquial and often
forced endemic.Using slangs and foul wordsin conversation isapopular
practice in rural society. In Lalsalu (2001):
Wife (to her son)
: You bastard! Are you human born? Is money
thatcheap?You are son of bitch!
Husband (to wife) : You bitch! It’s your womb’s fault.
Wife (to husband) : And you old imbecile! What’ve you thought?
Thought you’ve fathered them (the children)!
Allah is witness, they are not from your semen.
The gesture-call system of language is also seen in movies. Kinesics6 and
paralanguage7asimplicit but crucial methods of interaction, such as
beaconing, crying and laughing for certain reasons and often to draw
attention, winking, etc. (Haviland, 1999)have also been discerned in every
films.
Education: Many rural parents want their children to be a genuine and loyal
disciple of Madrasa, and become a religious and righteous person rather
than a well-educated being.Often, modernity purveyed by educated people
and traditional and religious orthodoxy collide,Tanvir Mokammel depicts this
situation in Lalsalu (2001). In lieu of establishing a modern school in village,
the local Huzur asked the Chairman for an Islamic school:
Huzur : I intended to establish an Islamic school in the
village. Children are remaining ignorant about
Islamic scriptures.
Moktob is another religious school where children go for Islamic education.
Thebelittling tendency of real world and ideological hegemony of rural elite
often drives ordinary rural people to deny the advance and modern education
system addressing it as an “education of evil”.Concept of heaven and inferno
shapes the education and learning process in rural society.However, social
modernization is forcing this condition to be changed so that the literacy rate
is increasing(Mannan, 2003).
Entertainment: Scopes ofentertainment in rural societyareremarkably
limited. Lack of technology,inability of innovation, scarcity of money, and lack
of willingnessremained the ways of entertainment inrural area traditional. In
most cases, villagers are deprived ofmodern taste of life. They try and
overuse their narrowoptions of recreation. Music and game are the two

Rural Culture in the 21st Century Films of Bangladesh

95

ancient forms of amusement in rural area of Bangladesh for decades. Even
farmers work in the field singing some popular local songs altogether.
Evening is the prime time when villagers often gather in an open placeto
enjoyAshor, rural music program performed by local music groups and/or
musicians. Matir Moyna(2002), Lalsalu(2001), andShrabon Megher
Din(2000) have represented a smaller portion of such arrangement. Usually
jaari, shaari, murshidi,and baulfolk and antique music is performed in such
programs. Tone, taste, and flavor of village have been embodied in these
songs.The vocalsare often called boyati. The lyrics of the songs contain
spiritual, educative, rational, andemotional contents. They perform with some
traditional musical instruments:dhol, tobla, ektara, dotara, khonjon, flute, etc.:
Oh my mad horse!
You ride me from place to place.
Puthi is a book of poetic traditional tales and religious stories of rural
ancient Bengal. In the past, village men gathered at a place in evening and
recited those tales,Hazar Bachhor Dhore(2005) depicts. Nonetheless at
present time the tradition has been disappeared and new recreational
activities has occupied the space.Religious and cultural occasions: Eid,
Noboborsho, Nobannooffer the villagers to celebrate and performsocial and
rejuvenating activities. Circus, boat race, puppet show, bioscope,jatra pala—
the most common ways of entertainments in village, however,are losing
theirerstwhile appeal.Bazar and tea stalls have become men’s temporary
clubs and meeting place nowadays. Women usually attend toprograms
around their homes. Occasional games in village increase the excitement
and joy.However, new age communication technologyis gradually
penetrating and occupying the life of rural youths.
Clothing: Rural men and women usually wear simple dress and ornaments
for both economic and cultural reasons. In Lalsalu (2001)which represents
the pre-liberation period social reality,Muslim menwith lower economic
background have been seenwearinglungi, fotua and barely sandal in foot.
Social elites wear rich clothes like panjabi,pajama,kurta, tupi, and jubba.
Hindu menwear dhoti. Men usually abstain from using any ornament and
cosmetic(Murshid, 2006). Wrist watch is often worn by wealthy men. Matir
Moyna(2002) delineates thepre-liberation period of Bangladeshwhen some
pious tend to use surma in their eyes to look innocent. Newly married brides
and grooms wear different dress and costumes: brides are often adorned
with heavy makeup and clothes while grooms arein traditional Muslim
garments with a maximum neat-and-clean outfit.
In rural area, both young and olderwomen wear saree as a traditional dress.
Married Hindu women use shankha and shindur.Burqa and often neqabwere
almost mandatoryand socially attributed for all ages of Muslim women in
outside-of-home due to religious restriction.However, the social construction
of dress code has been becoming more liberal so that the young women

96

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019

havealready started wearingsalwar kameezthatmakes their movement more
flexible. In villages, the common etiquette of housewives is to turn the veil
over the face in front of outsiders.Rural women have to work hard and often
more than men both inside and outside of home, therefore facial and
physical beauty do not beg an important concern for them. On the other
hand, few loving housewives wear garland, bangle, laces, tip, fairness
cream, ornaments, and cosmetics to mitigate their desire, or to entertain their
husbands.
Food and healthcare: Although rural people consume fresh food, but the
imbalance ofvitamins and other necessary food elements often cause them
to suffer from malnutrition. Rice, plough andvegetablesare the main foodsin
rural Bangladesh for years. Most of the villagesare blessed with abundance
of fish.Treatment as well as healthcare system is one of the biggest
backwardness in rural area. Enough hospitals, clinic, diagnostic centers, and
other facilities are absent there. As a result, the suffering of sick people is
extreme from time to time.Women are the deadly victim as they have to
endure a lot in their reproduction period. Lack of proper treatment often
causes fatal consequence both for mother and child. Traditional techniques
used in reproduction make the situation worse.Kabiraz, ojha, hakim, aya, dai,
etc. are thepopular local doctors and nurses. Their methods of treatment are
unreliable as well as nonscientific. In Jalaler Golpo (2014),due to infertility of
wife, Kabirazsuggests the husband a weird process of being a father:
Kabiraz

: You’ve to shave your mustache to become father.

Medicine referred by these “doctors” are usually gaachgaachra means
herbal, tabiz, koboz, pani pora, jhar fuk,8etc. They even confidently
demonstrate the effectiveness of their medicines:
Kabiraz

: My medicine must make a woman pregnant, and
if any man uses it also can be pregnant.

Rural women:In Bangladesh, men rule over the society as well as women.
Patriarchyis an integralsocial phenomenon in rural area that makeswomen
suppressed and marginalized. A womanis merely considered as for
husband’s service and recreation, sex-provider, and/or a servant of
husband’s family; therefore, a man marries a girl for doing the household
chores. Chairman suggestsHuzur to get married:
Chairman

: You need a wife. Capable men shouldn’t live
alone. Domestic works are also increasing.

Rural women are less empowered than the urban women. Almost no young
woman is allowed to go outside of home without either husband or parent’s
permission, and they are sociallyprohibited toclosely contact with other men.
They should be veiled in front of young men, should stay behind the fence,
and do not allowed in men’s discussion. Women’s opinion is mostly avoided

Rural Culture in the 21st Century Films of Bangladesh

97

in decision-making process as man is the sole authority of the family and
society. A man, in popular view of rural society, who obeys woman’s opinion
and instruction has been considered no virility at all.Imam states:
…but the problem is, if a man listen to a woman loses his manliness.
Wife and other women must be docile, thus they can be“ideal women” in
society. Husband can beat his wife if he wants to even often without any
reason. Wife has no right to criticize husband.
Wife

: You made my whole life miserable.

Husband

: You bitch! I’ll gag your mouth.

Beating of wife in little or no fault is a commonmalpractice of men in rural
society. Men from neighborhood also support the act of beating:
Neighbor

: Beat her! Beat the hell out of her!

A woman’s life was a real tragedy both in family and societydecades ago
depicted in Lalsalu(2001) andHazar Bachhor Dhore(2005). In recent time,
the situation is, to some extent,becoming liberal and favorable for woman
that has been sighted in Shrabon Megher Din(2000), Television (2012), and
Molla Barir Bou(2005) based on contemporary stories.Feeling of motherhood
seemsone of the most intense propensity among rural woman for which they
can sacrifice everything. They tend to protect her child like armor from any
hardship and risk. Mother alone fosters her child beside household activities.
Maternity is a reason that explains why women are being weakened and
oppressed in patriarchic system. They often have to bear the liability of
husband’s impotency, and being disgraced as barren women in front of the
society. An infertile woman has to struggle in husband’s family, and
sometimes, has to let him re-marry hiding tears:
Chomiron Bibi
(crying)

: May I tell you something? Why don’t you marry
again?

The directors of popular cinema often create voyeuristic scenes for
commercial purpose. In a scene ofHazar Bachhar Dhore (2005), old man
sittingin a balcony was observing a girl (Ambia) through window who was
drying her hair by shaking her head and sweeping the hair with the towel
after taking a bath. Though the male gaze is not exceptional case in rural
context, but film scenes like these are in fact a bit of exaggeration of
reality(Bhowmick, 2009).
Woman in a conservative family is restricted from doing many activities,
includingwandering without permission, reveals herself in front of outsiders,
etc.Although in present time the overall scenario has been changing
remarkably, but rural women are still remaining in the marginal social
position(Afsaruddin, 1990). In rural society, husband used to scold his wife
even in a simple matter.

98

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019
Husband

: In an open place, don’t stand brazenly like that.

In Monpura (2009), rural bride Pori has to commit suicide to get relief from
mental torture. Besides,silent revolution of womentowards socially
constructedinequality between men and women anda loud voiceagainst
patriarchic oppression has also beenportrayed in some films. Jamila in
Lalsalu (2001) and Parul in Molla Barir Bou (2005) are the two
influentialcharacters who revolt against the accustomed reality of the
backward rural society.
Relationship:In Bengali literaturelovers are depicted as coward
i.e.Rabindranath Tagore’s Hoimonty and Aporichita, and Sharatchandra’s
Porineeta(Chowdhury, 1968). Women’s emotion and demandsare
undervalued in rural context, and because of familial and social bounding,
ahusband or lover cannot easily cross the line to favor his wife or lover.Rural
people
demean
and
criticize
internal
affection
between
a
couple.Conservative society like rural Bangladesh forbidslove. As the
societal surveillance is highly rigid, a couple is forced to maintain secrecy in
their communication.Inadequate communication increases the level of
interpersonal shyness and shapes their face-to-face conversation.In
Television (2012), Farooki portrays the scenario of lovers’ gaze naively when
Solaimanhas to grab her lover Kohinoor’s hand in a secret place, she would
not let him to do so.
Solaiman

: My ear and mind want to hear your voice more
and more like 24 hours a day.

Husband-wife relationship seemsslightlydifferent. They make love, do
quarrel, andlive under the same roof sharing happiness and sorrows
throughout the life. Though difficulties happen in their lives, they stick
together for years not only and always for social bondage but also for
profound fondness to each other.Often, husbandsaredisparaged by other
elder family members if they love his wife firmly.
In village, a young male usually addressesotherelder males as Miavai(elder
brother) from respect.Concord and conflict exist side by side. In developing
rural society, obsolete ideology of ignorant elder and fresh thought of
educated young collide in various aspects. In Television (2012):
Young Monju : Do you know what the problem of old men is?
They always think youngsters are on the way
of ruin so that they make various rules and
regulations in society.
Youngsters want the backward society to transform into a modern
one.Conversely, elders try to prevent their efforts.In practice, these vindictive
orthodox people are not capable enough to adopt anything new. Theynothing
but fear the forwardness so they try to convince people that modernity is evil

Rural Culture in the 21st Century Films of Bangladesh

99

or irreligious.In movie, the village Chairman prevents televisionentering the
village addressing it as a “box of evil”which would will spoil the
villagers.However, later, the young people raise their voice against this
dictatorship.
Political culture: Legislation and adjudication system in rural area is, to
some extent, pre-modern and void. Salish, panchayat, yard-assembly etc.
are the form of local judiciary. Rural elites like Chairman,Imam,Maulana, Pir
and other educated and wealthy men constitute the judicial body. They give
their decision hearing the complaint of victim and defense of
accused.Whipping, exile, ostracize, fine, etc. are the common
punishments.In most cases, judge’s biased wish is prevailed in the
verdict.However, the previous appeal of local jurisdiction in rural area is
eroding and being ousted due to the modern law and justice.Village politics
encompass the life of rural people subtly. Grouping, meeting, planning,and
discussionare very common as well as crucialfeatures of local politics. Rural
elites control the political environment.They play game in whichordinary
villagers are merely the dice.Monpura (2009)draws the reality as the
Chairman’s son commits a murder, but the servant has to bear the liability
and banishment.
Myths, mysticism and superstitions: Social myths and spiritual belief
comprise the rural people’s basic understanding of the world.Superstitions
and mysticism about life and the worldemergefrom the lack of proper
education and knowledge.Rural people become fugitive and alienated owing
to these spiritual preconceptions(Mannan, 2003).Rural society of Bangladesh
is still conveying manifold myths for decades. Most of them originate from
religion, popular stories, and fears. Conventional religious myths and
prejudices in rural societyinclude drinking pani pora and jhar fuk from a
religious clergy during illness as medicine, “everything is God’s will”,“none
can alter his own fate”,fear of Jinn Pori, affected by water and air popularly
known as pani laga and batash laga, poverty is due to sins, etc.Prejudice
hasdevastating impact on woman’s pregnancy and reproduction as a woman
gives birth to a dead child, she is seen as ill-omened. Some people think
infertility caused from fetter, therefore, sterile woman often has to endure
frightful treatment by ojha:
Kabiraz

: You might’ve Jinn with you and that’s why you remain
infertile.

The concept of soul has beenremaining rural people surprised for centuries.
Due to proper scientific knowledge, they tend tomix up their fantasy and
spiritual perception with reality and fact. Not only elders but also curious
children misinterpret the idea with their own perceptions because of illiteracy
and scientific knowledge.

100

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019
Anu

: Where do people go when they die? What did they
become?

Rokon

: I think they turn into birds.

In Jalaler Golpo(2014), a poor and corrupted man runs his business with a
child’s foot-touched water and convinces the villagers that it would heal their
diseases. Afterwards, duringepidemic, people accuse the child for this
created situation and address him as Kufa (bad omen).
Views toward modernity:Traditional rural ideology collides with modern
ideology. Orthodox village elites deny the necessity of modern education.
Rigidpeoplelag behind because of unwillingness toadapt new ideas and
innovation frequently for their betterment as they fear of losing traditions and
previous practices(Rogers, 1983).Hence, they tend to scold modernity every
now and then. In Matir Moyna (2002),MadrasaHuzur nags at his disciple:
Huzur

: Some “westernized” schoolboys must be
corrupting you.

He also argues that the name‘Anu’ must be changed as it is not an Islamic
name rather sounds like a foreign name:
Huzur

: Are you the new boy? What’s your name?

Anu

: My name is Anu.

Huzur

:Astagfirullah! This is not an Islamic name. From now
your name will be Anwar. Muhammad Anwar.

Conflict betweenmodern and traditional thought,education,way of life
andentertainment, favoringreligious institutionsthan school, technophobia,
traditional ancestral profession as well as medicare, etc. are the primary
traits of pre-modern rural society thosehave been depicted in films creatively.
In Matir Moyna(2002), father of Anu is seen hostile to the modern medicine
and very fond of Homeopathic.
Conclusion
Contemporary rural societyhas been characterized byinadequate education,
economic backwardness,repressive socio-political settingand culture,
dominance of religion and superstitions in everyday life, and less adaptation
capacity and enthusiasm of the village dwellers with social modernity.Despite
the limitations,communication technology and information system along with
other forcesarebridging the gap between urban and rural Bangladesh.Having
various modern facilities in recent time, rurality, to a certain degree, is under
transformation.Rural family is becoming more nuclear, and collectivistic
society is breaking down.Patron-client relation is gradually declining, and
individualism is on the rise. Theeducation and use of communication
technologyareincreasing which consequentlymaking the people conscious. In

Rural Culture in the 21st Century Films of Bangladesh

101

such backdrop,some 21st Century films have beautifully portrayed the rural
ways of life:thought,clothing, food, occupation, religion, relationship, and so
on, including conflict between traditionality and modernity.Apart from the
mere representation of rural life, these films have implicit agenda for change.
Through visualizing the faces of traditional backward rural society of
Bangladesh, contemporaryfilms have deliberately been trying to sketch how
the rural society is being incessantly deprived of massattention and social
progress. In this regard, films of 21st Century, through powerful
representation, are carrying out its social responsibility.
Notes
1.

2.
3.
4.

5.
6.
7.
8.

Bangladesh Film Development Corporation (BFDC) is a government owned
and operated institution for the development of film of Bangladesh. It was
established in 1957.
Falsafa is the philosophical branch of Islam opposite to puritanical Islam.
Dua isan act of supplicating to Allah, according to Islam.
Pir, Maulana, Maulovi, Fakir, Huzur, and Imam are the Islamic clergymen
and preachers who usually perform different religious activities and have
specific distinctions and social positions.
Waaz, boyan, nosihot, khutbah, dawat are the forms of Islamic preaching.
Kinesics is thecommunication through body language.
Paralanguage is the communication through the language of expression.
Tabiz, koboz, pani pora, andjhar fuk are the traditional treatments in rural
Bangladesh.

References
Afsaruddin, M. (1990). Society and Culture in Bangladesh. Dhaka, Bangladesh: Book
House.
Ahmed, A. M. (2011). Bangladesh Culture (7th ed.). Dhaka, Bangladesh: Ahmed
Publishing House.
Baudrillard, J. (1994). Simulacra and Simulation. (S. F. Glaser, Trans.) (14thed.). Ann
Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Bhowmick, B. C. (2009). Women on Screen: Representing Women in Bangladesh
Cinema. Dhaka, Bangladesh: Bangladesh Film Archive.
Bodenstedt, A. A. (1990). Rural Culture: A new concept. Sociologia Ruralis, 30(1),
34–47. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9523.1990.tb00397.x
Chowdhury, N. C. (1968). Women in Bengali Life. Calcutta: Mitra and Ghosh
Publishers.
Cook, D. A., & Sklar, R. (2019, January 8). History of the motion picture.Britannica
Encyclopedia. Retrieved February 16, 2019, from
https://www.britannica.com/art/history-of-the-motion-picture
Giannetti, L. (2014). Understanding Movies (13thed.). New York: Pearson.
Haviland, W. A. (1999). Cultural Anthropology (9th ed.). New York: Harcourt Brace
College Publishers.
Henslin, J. M. (2014). Essentials of Sociology (11th ed.). Boston: Pearson.

102

Development Compilation, Vol. 15. Number 01. October 2019

Johansson Stenman, O., Mahmud, M., & Martinsson, P. (2009). Trust and Religion:
Experimental Evidence from Rural Bangladesh. Economica, 76(303), 462–
485. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0335.2008.00689.x
Kader, M. T. (1993). Film Industry of Bangladesh. Dhaka, Bangladesh: Bangla
Academy.
Kepley, V. (1996). The First “Perestroika”: Soviet Cinema under the First Five-Year
Plan. Cinema Journal, 35(4), 31–53. https://doi.org/10.2307/1225716
Mannan, P. M. A. (2003). Rural Society and Politics. Dhaka, Bangladesh: Oboshor
Publication.
Masud, T. (2013). Chalachchittrajatra (3rded.). Dhaka, Bangladesh: Prothoma
Prokashoni.
Murshid, G. (2006). Bengali Culture of Thousand Years. Dhaka, Bangladesh: Oboshor
Publication.
Nasreen, G., & Haq, F. (2008). The Film Industry of Bangladesh: Popular Culture in
Crisis. Dhaka, Bangladesh: Shrabon Prokashoni.
Reeves, N. (1993). The power of film propaganda—myth or reality? Historical Journal
of Film, Radio and Television, 13(2), 181–201.
https://doi.org/10.1080/01439689300260201
Rogers, E. M. (1983). Diffusion of Innovation (3rd ed.). New York: The Free Press.
Slama, K. (2004). Rural culture is a diversity issue. Minnesota Psychologist, 53(1), 9–
12.
Swain, H. (2013, November 19). Film can have a leading role in education. The
Guardian. Retrieved from https://www.theguardian.com/teachernetwork/2013/nov/19/film-education-learning-tool-inclusion
Wanger, W. (1941). The Role of Movies in Morale. American Journal of Sociology,
47(3), 378–383.

