Paper published in the Journal Poverty & Public Policy, 2019
The publication is available at: https://doi.org/10.1002/pop4.243
To cite this article: Gibrán Cruz-Martínez (2019): Older‐Age Social Pensions and
Poverty: Revisiting Assumptions on Targeting and Universalism, Poverty & Public
Policy, Volume 11, Issue 1-2, pp. 31-56. https://doi.org/10.1002/pop4.243

Older‐Age Social Pensions and Poverty: Revisiting
Assumptions on Targeting and Universalism
Gibrán Cruz-Martínez
Institute of Public Goods and Policies, CSIC
gibran.cruz@csic.es

Abstract:
Whether social protection benefits should be assigned to all (universal) or kept only for
those who meet specific criteria (targeting) remains one of the most contentious
questions in social policy research. The purpose of this article is to revisit three
assumptions on the two main social policy options for the provision of social benefits to
older persons. Each assumption is assessed through counterfactual reasoning using a
combination of literature review and statistical analysis with a global perspective. The
study finds that (i) 79 countries would be economically able to shift from targeted noncontributory pensions to basic universal non-contributory pensions with less than 1.2
percent of the respective national gross domestic products; (ii) 16 countries have meanstested/regional-tested non-contributory pensions more expensive than a hypothetical
basic universal social pension; (iii) An arbitrary threshold of “economic development” is
not a limitation for implementing social pensions. (iv) At least, 17 countries with
relatively low economic development have successfully implemented social pensions
without means-targeting. Therefore, contrary to what several international organisations
and scholars have argued, universal social pensions are politically and economically
viable and efficient strategies to alleviate income poverty.
Keywords: social protection, social policy, development, social assistance, cash transfers

INTRODUCTION
What are the possibilities for low and middle-income countries when implementing and
extending social policy programmes for the older population? There are two broad
available options on the social policy menu: social insurance and social assistance. The
former one is financed through contributions, with benefits derived from work, and
centred on redistribution throughout the life cycle of the workers (Bismarckian
approach); or financed through taxes, with flat-rate benefits, and centred on poverty
reduction (Beveridgean approach). On the other hand, social assistance programmes are
generally non-contributory programmes using benefits to level up individuals living
below a minimum societal standard. In reality, countries use a mix of policy options and
the approaches may vary between welfare areas (e.g. health, pensions, and education).
The expansion of social insurance in the less developed world remains a challenge due to
low participation rates in the formal economy and the under-institutionalised regressive
taxation system, among others (Bastagli, 2013; Cruz-Martinez, 2015). Following the
World Bank (1994) recommendations, social assistance pensions should be considered as
a “first pillar” of social protection. Social assistance programs can be used as a tool to
promote social development1 in all countries, reducing social exclusion, poverty2 and
inequality.
Social protection started to be recognised recently as a social development
practice/strategy, involving communities, the third sector, individuals and alternative
welfare providers in the development process. The objective of social development is
moving beyond the narrow view of social assistance/insurance as income-maintenance
programmes, towards a vision of the social protection system as an incubator of socioeconomic development,3 economic stability and capabilities formation (Midgley, 2014,
pp. 174-178).
According to Mulligan and Sala-i-Martin (1999) the theory of the public pension systems
is based on the idea that markets fail to provide a minimum standard of living for the
older population; thus the government have to intervene to create guarantees through
pensions. Income poverty alleviation is not necessarily the primary function of
contributory pensions in high-income countries. On the contrary, its primary purpose is
on consumption smoothing4 and redistribution between high and low-income individuals,
Social development is defined by Midgley (2014, p. 13) as “a process of planned social change
designed to promote the well-being of the population as a whole within the context of a dynamic,
multifaceted development process".
2
The World Development Report showcased social protection as a critical ingredient in poverty
alleviation (World Bank, 2001).
3
The fact of having an institutionalized social protection system is one of the reasons for highincome countries socio-economic development (Freeland, 2013, pp. 2-3).
4
Consumption smoothing refers to "a process which enables a person to transfer consumption
from her productive middle years to her retired years, allowing her to choose her preferred time
path of consumption overworking and retired life" Barr and Diamond (2006, p. 16). See Barr
(2012) for more details on the rationale behind consumption smoothing.
1

2

men and women, as well as between individuals in urban and rural areas. Whether social
protection benefits should be assigned to all (universal) or kept only for those who meet
specific criteria (targeting) remains one of the most contentious questions in social policy
research.
The purpose of this paper is to revisit three assumptions on the two main social policy
options for the provision of social benefits to older persons.
•
•
•

Assumption 1: ‘Poor’ countries should wait to cross the threshold of ‘economic
development’ before implementing universal pensions.
Assumption 2: Means-tested targeting is more efficient than universal social
provision allocating resources in a time of budget constraints and globalisation.5
Assumption 3: With an under-developed taxation system there is no alternative
than to target the income poor to alleviate monetary deprivations.

Each assumption is assessed through counterfactual reasoning using a combination of
literature review and statistical analysis with a global perspective. The paper is organised
as follows. Section 2 provides the conceptual background, featuring a discussion on
universalism and targeting as social policy options, life-cycle risks and the
conceptualisation of poverty. The historical context of universalism versus targeting as
regards poverty alleviation is addressed in Section 3. Section 4 re-examines the three
assumptions and elaborates on the issues addressed. Section 5 provides conclusions and
points for further research.
CONCEPTUAL BACKGROUND
What are the two main social policy options for the provision of social benefits to those in
the later periods of their lives?
Universalism and targeting (selectivity) have been the two core principles underlying
social provision. Under universalism, all are entitled to benefit from social policy
programs. Thus, following Marshall (1950), under universalism, every individual
experience social provision as a social-citizen right. Universalism is also the foundation
of the social democratic model of welfare system (i.e., universalistic / Nordic variety).
High-income countries that follow this model have developed a generous social security
system embedded within the public sector with high-quality social insurance programs
(pensions, unemployment, healthcare). Also, social policy plays an instrumental role in
ensuring minimum living standards guaranteed to all individuals under the overall
objective of achieving greater social equality.
On the other hand, under targeting, only individuals who meet specific criteria are
eligible to receive benefits. Targeted programs provide social assistance to selected
individuals only after confirming eligibility and accepting an individual as a ‘truedeserver'. Means-tested targeting is the foundation of the liberal or residual welfare state
5

Efficiency is understood as the best performance possible with the least waste of resources.

3

model.6 Rather than creating a basic universal social protection floor, residual welfare
models guarantee a targeted social protection floor for those considered as ‘incapable’ to
satisfy their social risks by their own means through the market (Cruz-Martinez, 2015;
Sánchez de Dios, 1993). High-income countries that follow the residual model have
developed social security programs where the limits of social protection equal the
marginal propensity to opt for the social assistance programs instead of working (poverty
trap) (Deacon & Bradshaw, 1983; Esping-Andersen, 1990). Coverage is determined
mainly by the purchasing power of the population, i.e. individuals with more economic
deprivations are the primary recipients of the scarce and limited benefits (Mishra, 1977).
In contrast to universalism, targeting implies a range of techniques to identify those
considered as the neediest and ‘deserving poor’. Gilbert (2000, pp. 9-11) identified three
‘pure’ types of targeting: targeting by category, targeting by means and targeting by
needs. In reality, targeted social protection programs may function with a combination of
any of these. Targeting by category use ‘categories’ as proxies to identify a group of the
population with needs. Categories include a range of criteria such as age, employment
status, family type, disability status, marital status, family size, and geographical location.
Beneficiaries of programs using targeting by categories receive a universal flat-rate
benefit (e.g. universal pensions for the aged, disabled, single-parent families) unless other
types of targeting are used in conjunction (e.g. targeting by means).
As the name suggests, targeting by means involves means testing. Generally, individuals
are tested for incomes, assets or employment to determine their eligibility for social
assistance. Food assistance, public housing and income support are among the diverse
types of means-tested benefits, commonly known as social assistance programs.
Beneficiaries of programs using targeting by means may receive a flat-rate benefit or
service (e.g. public health-care) although generally, they receive an incremental benefit
depending on the degree of need.
The third type of targeting is similar to targeting by means in that individuals need to be
tested before becoming beneficiaries. Targeting by needs requires an additional level of
process, assessing the particular circumstances of claimants beyond their income (e.g.
housing costs, health status). This targeting approach is generally used in combination
with means testing to configure the level of benefits that particular individuals would
receive according to their level of need. As such, one may consider this as targeting the
targeted.
Universal targeting approach and life-cycle risks
Since the centenary work of Rowntree (1901), scholars have confirmed –and
reconfirmed- that poverty is mainly concentrated at two stages of the life cycle:
6

See Esping-Andersen (1990) for a thorough exposition of the welfare state models. In brief, a
liberal or residual model guarantees the minimum of welfare required for the correct functioning
of the market; a corporatist model provides welfare via social security in search of social justice;
and the universalist or social democratic model combines a fuller set of social protection and
labour policies in search of equity (See Del Pino & Rubio Lara, 2016).

4

childhood and older-age. Poor children and older persons suffer from multiple
deprivations originated by multiple causes. Older-age poverty could be considered as the
accumulation of non-random disadvantages while early childhood poverty could be
attributed to random disadvantages. A child is randomly born into a family with certain
amounts of deprivations, while an older person accumulates disadvantages across her/his
life. Therefore, in order to alleviate specific disadvantages and deprivations, these
differences should be taken into consideration.
Life-cycle social risks for the children and older persons have been generally allocated to
the family and the community. Because of the limited scope of the state and the limited
proportion of the population with access to private welfare programs in low and middle
income countries, the family have been, historically, at the forefront of satisfying social
risks and providing welfare through intergenerational care7 (Esping-Andersen, 1999).
The institutionalisation of the "welfare state" in OECD countries led to the reassessing of
the structural social risks and the welfare relations between the state and society through
a new social contract. Social policy was one of the ways in which the state started to
ensure the wellbeing of the population by satisfying their social risks.
Outside OECD states, one finds regions with emerging welfare states (e.g. Latin America
and East Asia);8 however, large segments of the populations living in low and middleincome countries remain without access to social protection as an entitled citizen right.
According to the ILO, more than 70% of the world’s population is inadequately covered
by social protection. In other words, “only 27% of the global population enjoys access to
comprehensive social security”(ILO, 2014b). This begs the question of why we should
heed these figures, which in turn poses the question: why is social protection so
important? There is a simple answer, even if the process is less so agreed upon: “Social
protection is a key policy tool to reduce poverty and inequality while stimulating
inclusive growth by boosting the health and capacity of vulnerable segments of society,
increasing their productivity, supporting domestic demand and facilitating the structural
transformation of national economies” (ILO, 2014a).
In addition to looking at the coverage of beneficiaries, it is vital to examine the coverage
of the transfer. A. Fiszbein, Kanbur, and Yemtsov (2013) show the variation across
regions concerning the transfer coverage, measured as the percentage of the
income/consumption provided by the social protection programs. Social protection
programs in Eastern Europe and Central Asia provide transfers around 53% of
income/consumption of beneficiaries, while for countries in Latin America is halved to
27% of the income/consumption of beneficiaries. "The lowest level of transfers (less than
10%) regionally is found in South Asia and the Middle East and Northern Africa" (Ariel
Fiszbein, Kanbur, & Yemtsov, 2014, p. 168).

Refers to the provision of welfare and satisfaction of social risks by family members – mainly
women – of so-called dependent population. Reciprocity is the core value behind
intergenerational care, which is imbricated in South-European welfare states.
8
See Cruz-Martinez (2017, 2016); Goodman, White, and Kwon (1998); Huber and Niedzwiecki
(2015); Kwon, Mkandawire, and Palme (2009) among others.
7

5

While means-tested programs are claimed to have lower costs than universal approaches,
they typically deliver sub-optimal benefits (Sen, 1995). Implementing ‘universal
targeting’ programs is one way to solve the sub-optimal benefit limitation. In other
words, targeting by category (children, older population) with universal benefits. For
example, providing universal child-care and preschool programs,9 universal pre- and
post-natal care,10 universal school meals11; all three social provisions target children with
universal flat-rate benefits/services.
Universal non-contributory pension programs (also known as social pensions) are a
viable option to alleviate life-cycle social risks of older-age persons. This is another
example of universal targeting, targeting by category (older-age) with universal benefits.
Universal pensions are available unconditionally to all citizens who meet the age
eligibility (and typically some form of residency) criteria; for beneficiaries, this
represents an essential source of income. Several countries across all continents have
already implemented universal non-contributory pensions for citizens residing in the
country, including, but not limited to:12
•
•
•
•
•
•

Americas: Antigua, Bolivia, Guyana, and Suriname
Africa: Botswana, Mauritius, Namibia, and Seychelles
Oceania: Cook Islands, Kiribati, Samoa, New Zealand and Timor-Leste
Asia: Brunei Darussalam and Nepal
Caucuses: Georgia
Europe: Kosovo and Netherlands

HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF THE UNIVERSALISM VERSUS TARGETING
DEBATE ON INCOME-POVERTY ALLEVIATION
Over the last decades, there has been an intense debate between scholars and
policymakers regarding the best approach to alleviating income poverty via social
protection: universalism or targeting. According to Mkandawire (2005), universalistic
policies were the preferred choice during the 1960s and 1970s. This endured into the
1980s when the social policy discourse shifted away from universalism to targeting as a
more efficient option to reduce poverty. The neoliberal social policy began to flourish
9

See Barnett, Brown, and Shore (2004) for a case study on this proposal in the United States of
America.
10
This social provision aim to tackle infant mortality rates and promote further capability
development. According to Heckman (2012), social investment in the early stages of childhood
has more significant effects on the formation of capabilities that similar efforts in subsequent
stages of life.
11
The universal provision of school meals may help to reduce malnutrition and stunting. This
policy would be considered as universal targeting, if and only, universal access to school is
guaranteed to every child. According to Ariel Fiszbein et al. (2014, p. 168), “school feeding
programs, recently reviewed by the World Food Program and the World Bank, exist in 78
developing countries in the world and cover 270 million children”.
12
(HelpAge International, 2015a; Shen & Williamson, 2006)

6

portraying targeting as a better performer in poverty reduction than universalism and with
the least investment of economic resources. Following the path-dependence theory13
based on historical (neo) institutionalism (Pierson, 2000; Thelen, 1999), the 1980s could
be seen as a ‘critical juncture' which established a tendency in global social policy for
selectivity. This critical juncture set a trajectory that is difficult to reverse and which is
reinforced over time. While this may be a well-known issue amongst academics and
policy experts, it is less likely to be taken into consideration by the cadre of government
officials, let alone the population which these policies affect (Cruz-Martinez, 2019).
Mkandawire (2005, pp. 1-8) proposes six driving forces behind the shift from
universalism toward targeting (selectivity), exposing the logic followed by leading
international financial institutions which promoted targeting as the best alternative for
social provision.
• Ideological shifts: The rise of conservative governments amongst western powers
prioritised individual responsibility for social risks. In times of budget constraints
and globalisation, efficiency became the primary concern over equity and social
justice. Equity could be considered as the situation in which every individual is
treated equally and fair. Market failures, the unequal distribution of wealth and
income, and the inequality of opportunities in modern societies make necessary
the intervention of the state, communities and NGOs to correct these systemic
deficiencies and promote equality.
• The fiscal constraint and the quest for efficiency: Following the 1970's oil crisis
and the generalised tax reductions on the wealthiest14, budgetary constraint was
supported by the idea that there was no other alternative. Following the trickledown theory, higher income taxes were cut down with the purpose of generating
incentives for the wealthy to invest in the economy, and thus create jobs and
income for everyone. On the other hand, social assistance and subsidies were
reduced, and minimum wages were frozen with the purpose of "incentivising" the
population to work harder. Chang (2014, p. 91) consider this a “curious logic” and
asks himself, “why do we need to make the rich richer to make them work harder
but make the poor poorer for the same purpose?” The next sentence could explain
the logic followed by supporters of targeting in line with the search for efficiency:
"in face of limited fiscal resources, it is better to target the resources to the
deserving poor" (Mkandawire, 2005, p. 2).
• Shifts in aid: Low and middle-income countries –specifically the aid-dependentwere conditioned by social policy preferences from donor countries and
international financial institutions. Consequently, the shift in the ideological
foundations of social and economic policies in donor countries/institutions shaped
social policy in aid-recipient countries. Funds began to be directed to targeted
programs with the aim of creating a safety-net for the most vulnerable as the best
way to reach the poor. A safety net is a set of social policies to guarantees a
minimum level of welfare in a society. van Oorschot (2002, p. 172) argues that
13

, It refers to the causal significance of the preceding stages in a time sequence. Sewell (1996)
explains it simply by suggesting that what happens initially in time may affect the possible
outcomes of a sequence of events occurring in a subsequent point in time.
14
Supported by trickle-down economics.

7

•

•

•

the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) tended “to link to
their financial loans recommendations and even conditions concerning restricted
welfare policies and free-market based economic policies”.
Crisis of universalism: Criticisms began to emerge in reaction to ‘artificial’
universalism which failed to reach the population on a universal basis. In practice,
countries which proclaimed universal provision usually presented, in fact, a
‘stratified universalism’. This protected specific social groups (e.g. public
servants, military) while a large sector of the population, mainly working in the
agriculture and the informal sector became increasingly marginalised. This
marginalised sector of income-poor workers lacerated the political support for
universalism, and since the 1980s (i.e. neoliberal era) became one of the primary
beneficiary groups of means-tested social programmes.
Exit redistribution: Means-tested targeting was portrayed as a more redistributive
option than universal provision, mainly because of the acclaimed higher
‘redistributive effect’ of targeted transfers to the income poor. However, as
Rothstein (1998, 2001) among others has confirmed, while targeted programmes
may have higher redistributive impacts on income poverty “per unit of money”,
other factors15 make universal programmes more redistributive (Korpi & Palme,
1998). This is one reason why countries with universal welfare systems (e.g.
Nordic countries) exhibit notably less inequality than those who favour meanstested social policy.
The marginal role of social policy: Social policy was increasingly depicted as a
‘last resource’ instrument to correct negative outcomes of structural adjustments
economic policies, such as poverty. In Latin America, for example, these policies
began to be used as a way to reduce the 'undesired' macroeconomic imbalances
which occurred in the eighties, the so-called lost decade (Sojo, 2009). Targeting
social provision by means, a reflection of the residual welfare regime model
became the way forward in poverty alleviation through social policy.

The driving forces discussed in this section started to be used as arguments to steer
national and international actors towards selectivity. In the last three decades, scholars
and international financial institutions have manufactured assumptions in support of the
residual approach to social policy provision. Neoliberal ideology guided policymakers
and international funders in the construction of targeted and conditional social policy for
the neoliberal era. Next section takes some of the driving forces mentioned in this section
to analyse and re-examine three assumptions of targeting social protection.

‘Other factors’ refer mainly to the coalition formation between the working class and the
middle class in support for continued welfare state policies benefiting all (Korpi & Palme, 1998).
On the other hand, targeted policies on residual welfare regimes create coalitions between the
better-off workers and the middle class against the most deprived sectors of the working
population. Therefore, political support for redistribution is more favourable on a universalistic
regime.
15

8

RE-EXAMINING SOME OF THE ASSUMPTIONS OF TARGETING SOCIAL
PROVISION
Assumption 1: ‘Poor’ countries should wait to cross the threshold of ‘economic
development’ before implementing universal pensions
Based on the logic of industrialism and Wagner’s Law, a selection of social policy
scholarship has forwarded the idea that a certain degree of economic development is
requisite in order to develop an institutionalised social protection system. This literature
states that surpluses generated by the process of industrialisation facilitates the economic
viability of the development of social security programmes, while the destruction of preindustrial modes of social reproduction facilitates its political support by the workforce
(Esping-Andersen, 1990; Scarbrough, 2000). There is evidence showing that economic
growth is essential for the economic viability of social protection schemes (Barr &
Diamond, 2006; Clark, Munnell, & Orszag, 2006), however progressive16 fiscal reforms
and the incorporation (i.e., formalisation) of the population working in the ‘informal
sector'17– specifically in the case of low and middle-income countries – may reduce this
economic growth requisite.
The incorporation of progressive tax systems and the formalisation of the working
population would be effective reforms for increasing public revenues and to facilitate
comprehensive social policy reforms (Cruz-Martinez, 2018). The question, which
naturally emerges, is whether it is decidedly necessary for ‘less-developed’ countries to
wait until they surpass an arbitrary economic performance threshold in order to have the
economic capacity for implementing universal welfare programmes (e.g. noncontributory pensions)?
In order to test this assumption, this section explores the historical experience of Nordic
countries which are argued to stand out as the models of universal welfare policies.
Between the late 1940s and 1960s, Nordic countries abolished means-tested targeting in
their ‘basic security' pensions. These basic security pensions are basic social pensions,
equal for all individuals. Sweden led the Nordic countries, creating the ‘People’s
Pension’ in 1946, a universal pension benefiting all individuals above the retirement age
(Elmer, 1960). Similar basic security pension programs were created in Finland (1956),
Norway (1957) and Denmark (1960) (US Social Security Administration, 2015).
According to Carroll and Palme (2006, p. 19), the basic universal pensions had the effect
of “creating the broadest possible political base for combating poverty among the
elderly”, as all individuals above the retirement-age became beneficiaries while the

According to Gugushvili and Hirsch (2014, p.2) progressivity refers to “the extent to which a
tax and benefit system redistributes from upper to lower income groups. Unlike the size of the
redistributive budget, this takes account of which groups are its net beneficiaries”. The opposite is
a regressive system.
17
Refers to the population with a salaried job whose accrued wages are not reported to the
national tax agency, therefore does not follow the formally recognise labour laws in a country.
16

9

working-age started to acknowledge the eventuality of their own future status of
beneficiaries.
By using the average ‘economic performance’ of four Nordic countries by the time they
implemented the first universal basic security pensions as a threshold (8.636,69 USD
PPP)18, it is possible to test how many countries, in the present, would be in economically
viable positions to implement universal social pension programmes. Output-side real
gross domestic product (GDP) per capita at chained purchasing power parity (PPP) (in
2005 USD) is used as a proxy to operationalise the ‘economic performance' variable.
Output-side real GDP per capita allows the comparison of relative productive capacity
across countries and over time. Data come from the Penn World Table 8.1 (Feenstra,
Inklaar, & Timmer, 2015).
Using GDP per capita as a proxy of living standards is subjected to many criticisms.
First, improvements in GDP per capita might not reflect gains experienced by a
significant part of the society, due to unequal distribution of resources and consumption
of outputs. Bauman (2014) is just one of the scholars who criticise the use of GDP as an
indicator of economic development, economic growth or happiness, mainly because it
does not take into account income inequality. Therefore, in this paper GDP per capita is
used as a proxy of economic performance.19 If the argument that states must first reach an
arbitrary threshold of economic development is to be taken seriously, states with higher
GDP per capita than the benchmark set by the Nordic average should (hypothetically)
have the room to explore this option for their citizens.
Figure 1 illustrates the number of countries with an actual higher level of economic
performance than Nordic countries had by the time they implemented their first basic
universal pensions. Out of 162 countries with available data, 81 (50%) had a higher GDP
per capita in 2011 than the Nordic threshold. Table 1 disaggregates the 81 countries by
region: 31 countries are in Europe (38%), 18 are located in the Americas20 (22%), 14 in
Asia (17%), nine located in the Middle East (11%), 7 in Africa (9%) and finally 2 in
Oceania (3%). Besides, there are four countries less than 200 USD shy from the Nordic
average: Colombia, Costa Rica, Ukraine and Saint Lucia. If the median GDP per capita is
used as the Nordic threshold, then an additional country (Colombia) joins the previous 81
cases referenced above.

18

The data used to calculate the Nordic average is comprised of Sweden (1950), Finland (1956),
Norway (1957), and Denmark (1960). Sweden is the only country where data does not correspond
to the year of implementation of the basic pension.
19
Because of data limitations, neither median household income nor median individual income
could be used to operationalise the variable. The limitation refers to the data of the Nordic
countries in the 1940s-1950s.
20
According to Stephens (2002) since 1980's, and 1990's Latin American countries reached the
per capita income level of European countries by the time they first implemented flat-rate
pensions.

10

Figure 1: Countries with a GDP per capita higher than the Nordic average by the time they
implemented the first universal basic security pensions (PPP, in 2005 USD).

Notes: The map shows 81 countries with a GDP per capita (PPP) higher than Sweden, Norway, Denmark and Finland by the time they
implemented the first universal basic security pensions (dark grey). Eighty-one additional countries with a GDP per capita below the
Nordic countries average are in light grey. Countries with no data available are in white. Data is for 2011.
Author’s calculations; Source: (Feenstra et al., 2015)

Countries listed in Table 1 are categorised as high and middle-income countries
according to the World Bank. We could argue social provision is most needed in lowincome countries, mainly because the one billion most impoverished individuals, on a
multidimensional scale (i.e., the bottom billion), live in the 28 poorest countries,
according to the country-level MPI. However, Alkire, Roche, Seth, and Sumner (2014)
argue that by counting the poor living in the poorest sub-national regions, the picture
morphs into one which the poorest are located in 307 regions across 45 countries. If we
zoom in even further, and rank individuals according to their poverty profile, the bottom
billion (those with the highest intensity of poverty) are then distributed across 104
countries. This problem is commonly cited as a facet of the Modified Areal Unit Problem
(MAUP), wherein statistical bias occurs on account of arbitrary geographic delimitations.
As Alkire and Robles Aguilar (2015) suggests, “zooming in on poverty at a sub-national
or even the individual level is vital to shine a light on the different levels and
characteristics of poverty within countries and help to design high-impact policy
responses”. Therefore, in order to be able to include a vast majority of individuals in
poverty (including the older population) the implementation of universal pensions
throughout the world could counter exclusions resulting from these and other issues in
high, middle and low-income countries. If we consider assumption 1 to be true, then the
81 countries presented in Figure 1 have the economic viability to develop and implement

11

a universal non-contributory pension program, taking as an example the threshold used
by the Nordic, universal welfare states.
Table 1: List of countries with a gross domestic product per capita (PPP) higher than the Nordic
average by the time they implemented the first universal basic security pensions.
Norway

Europe
Greece

Americas
United States

Luxembourg

Czech Republic

Canada

Switzerland
Ireland

Malta
Portugal

Netherlands
Denmark
Austria

Slovakia
Estonia
Poland

Bermuda
Trinidad and
Tobago
Bahamas
Barbados
Chile

Germany
Sweden
Finland
Belgium
Iceland
United
Kingdom
France
Italy

Hungary
Croatia
Lithuania
Belarus
Latvia
Romania

Spain
Cyprus
Slovenia

Montenegro
Bulgaria
Serbia
FYR
Macedonia

Argentina
Panama
Mexico
Uruguay
Venezuela
Antigua and
Barbuda
Dominica
Saint Kitts and
Nevis
Brazil
Dominican
Republic
Peru

Asia
Brunei
Darussalam
Singapore

Middle East
Qatar

Hong Kong
Taiwan

Oman
Saudi
Arabia
Bahrain
Israel
Lebanon

Japan
Republic of Korea
Russian
Federation
Maldives
Malaysia
Kazakhstan
Turkmenistan
Azerbaijan
Thailand

Kuwait

Africa
Equatorial
Guinea
Gabon

Oceania
Australia
New
Zealand

Botswana
Zimbabwe
Mauritius
South Africa
Tunisia

Turkey
Iran

China

Notes: This list consists of 81 countries and the 4 Nordic countries considered (Norway, Sweden, Finland and Denmark).
Latest data available at the Penn World Table 8.1 was used. The variable used is output-side real GDP per capita attained PPPs (in mil.
2005 US$) for the year 2011.
Author’s calculations; Source: (Feenstra et al., 2015)

If a country must indeed overcome a specific economic performance barrier before it can
implement a universal basic security pension, then approximately 51% of the world
population21 lives in countries with enough economic resources. The question is then why
less than 10% of countries in the world have introduced a basic universal noncontributory pension? Should academics and policymakers be talking about political will
and ideology instead of using the alleged lack of economic capacity of countries as a
constraint to implement universal non-contributory pensions? Political will refers to the
determination of politicians to make the necessary reforms to implement universal noncontributory social pensions, at least in countries that meet the assumed requirement of
economic development as a prerequisite for economic viability. The ideology and driving
forces from Mkandawire are discussed above.
Nonetheless, at least 17 countries with a relatively low level of economic performance –
ranked 100 or below in terms of GDP per capita (PPP I$) – have implemented universal
21

The PWT data is available for 166 countries, with a total population of 6.718 billion people.
The 81 countries with a GDP per capita higher than the Nordic average plus the 4 Nordic
countries have a total population of 3.446 billion.

12

non-contributory pensions without means targeting for citizens and residents. Kiribati,
Samoa, Timor-Leste, Bolivia, Guyana and Namibia, have all implemented universal
social pensions for citizens and residents. Uganda, Nepal, Papua New Guinea, Tajikistan,
Moldova, Vietnam, Uzbekistan, Armenia, Swaziland, and most recently Tanzania have
implemented non-contributory pensions with additional targeting besides age (e.g.
regional, pensions-tested, or in combination) for citizens and residents.
Bolivia, Georgia, Namibia and Suriname have already developed extensive and inclusive
non-contributory pensions for citizens and residents without having overcome the historic
Nordic GDP per capita ‘barrier’. According to the Pension Watch country fact sheet,
Bolivia’s ‘Renta Dignidad’ or ‘Renta Universal de Vejez’ (‘Dignity pension’ and
‘Universal Old-Age Pension’ respectively) were introduced in 1997, Georgia’s Old-Age
Pension started in 2006, Namibia’s Old-Age Pension was introduced in 199222, and
Suriname’s ‘Algemene Oudedags Voorzieningsfonds’ (‘State Old-Age Pension’) started
back in 1973. Table 2 provides a detailed description of benefits, age of eligibility,
targeting and population covered across these four universal non-contributory pension
schemes for citizens and residents. These countries illustrate the need to appropriately
consider the assumed binding relationship between economic performance and universal
social protection in older age.
Table 2: Universal non-contributory older-age pensions for citizens and residents in Bolivia, Georgia,
Namibia and Suriname
Benefit level
Monthly
pension in
local
currency
250
bolivianos

Beneficiaries
Monthly
pension
in $US
PPP

%
$1.25
poverty
line

%
Population
60+
covered

%
Population
over
eligibility
covered

Number
Name of
Age of
of
Country
scheme
Year
eligibility
recipients
Renta
Bolivia
Dignidad
1997
60
80
211%
902749
91%
91%
Old age
65 men;
Georgia
pension
2006
60women 100 tlari
101
264%
662000
79%
106%
Old Age
Namibia
Pension
1992
60
1000 N$
159
417%
152272
114%
114%
Algemene
Oudedags
500
VoorzieningsSurinamese
Suriname
fonds
1973
60
Dollar
253
665%
42818
92%
92%
Notes: All PPP$ conversion rates are from the IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO) and the year refers to the year from which the
transfer data is from. All PPP$ data is from the 2015 WEO. % $1.25 refers to the benefit level as a percentage of the income poverty
line.
Source: (HelpAge International, 2015a)

Assumption 2: Means-tested targeting is more efficient than a universal social provision
for allocating resources in a time of budget constraints and globalisation
The premise underlying this assumption is that because of limited resources, the best
approach to identify the poor and provide social assistance is through means-tested
targeting. Under this assumption, means targeting is considered to be more efficient than
universalism (i.e. means-testing performs better to select the ‘deserving poor' than
22

It was introduced for whites in 1949 and on a universal basis in 1992 (HelpAge International,
2015b).

13

universalism, and it does so with the least amount of resources). Means testing is
considered to be more cost-efficient than universalism, allowing redistribution of income
to where it is most needed.
The dominating ideology and preference of International Finance Institutions have
influenced the structure of social protection programmes in the Global South via social
policy diffusion by promoting targeting and conditionalities in social policy. (See Heimo,
2019; Brooks, 2015; Osorio Gonnet, 2018). Kidd (2018) argues, “social protection
comprises a significant share of World Bank loans, reaching almost 10 per cent of
lending to low-income countries in 2017, while around 10 per cent of IMF loans include
conditionality linked to social protection”. The Bank´s ideology and preferences
regarding social protection have had an impact shaping and consolidating the assumption
that targeting and conditionalities are more efficient than universalism in selecting the
‘deserving poor’ with the least amount of resources.
Targeting implies a range of techniques to identify those considered as the “most needy”
and “deserving poor”. Is means-tested targeting truly efficient in identifying those
considered as “poor”? According to Danson, McAlpine, Spicker, and Sullivan (2012, p.
1), “the selective element of pension entitlement is more than 50 times more inefficient
than the universal element measured in terms of fraud and error alone and without even
taking into account the cost of administration" [emphasis added]. The World Bank (2007)
confirms that complex eligibility requirements make social protection programs more
prone to error, fraud and corruption. The costs of administration of social provision
targeted by means are higher than in universal strategies owing to the intrinsic need to
verify any and all eligibility criteria (Bowles, Gintis, & Wright, 1998, p. 240). This extra
level of administration creates a somewhat arduous negative side effect of moving away
from universalism – inclusion and exclusion errors (van Oorschot, 2002, p. 175).23 By
targeting social provision, governments must identify who is poor and who is not, and in
this process, these errors are inevitable (Sen, 1995).
What about the socio-economic effects of means-tested targeting? Selectivity increases
social and economic inequality (Danson et al., 2012, pp. 1-2). The process of proving the
status of deprivation is typically humiliating for any individual, often taken as a mark of
shame (Gubrium, Pellissery, & Lødemel, 2014) and stigmatisation (Gilens, 1999;
Titmuss, 1976). Means-tested benefits may create disincentives for individuals to save
and participate in societal consumption smoothing by knowing beforehand they will be
able to apply to means-tested pensions in the future (Feldstein & Liebman, 2002).
Besides, means testing conflicts with the broader aims of social policy: ending poverty
and dependency, social integration and social justice (van Oorschot, 2002, p. 175).
According to Kidd (2015), universal social protection programmes generate higher
budgets and allocate higher transfers – to those considered as poor – than means-tested
23

Inclusion errors (type-I errors) refer to the act of including individuals as beneficiaries of a
social program –due to inaccurate targeting- who do not meet the eligibility criteria. Exclusion
errors (type-II errors) refer to the act of excluding individuals as beneficiaries of a social program
–due to inaccurate targeting- although having the eligibility criteria to be a beneficiary.

14

schemes because they have more political support. Moreover, universalism creates
"flatter income distributions" than means-testing (Danson et al., 2012, p. 2). Anttonen,
Häikiö, and Stefánsson (2012, p. 193) argues that “unlike residual benefits, universal flatrate cash benefits do not create ‘income traps’ that impede participation in the labour
force”; furthermore, the administrative efficiency of universal programmes is, they argue,
“marvellous compared to selective programmes”.
A recent review of targeting social transfers in developing countries published by
Devereux et al. (2015) found 85 sources of evidence, covering around 30 social
protection programmes in 41 countries. In particular24:
•
•
•
•

•

No single target mechanism works best in all contexts.
Exclusion and inclusion errors are inevitable, “perfect targeting is possible in
theory but effectively impossible in reality”.
Administrative costs are higher in means testing than in regional and
universal approaches.
There are numerous costs associated with targeting that should be considered
in addition to administrative costs: private costs to applicants (e.g. transport,
documentation), social costs (e.g. the creation of divisions in the communities
between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries), psycho-social costs (e.g.
stigmatisation), political costs (due to universal programmes generate broader
political support), incentive costs (caused by the eligibility criteria, may
promote specific behavioural changes such as fertility, job-search).
Means-testing is not only expensive but inaccurate.

With the goal of efficiency in mind, countries around the world have, over the last
decades, curiously favoured means-tested social policies to identify and alleviate the
income poor. Because of the scarcity of reliable data, combined with the large informal
economies in "less-developed" countries, it is difficult to assess individual/household
incomes. Instead of putting questionable social protection systems into place, many have
instead moved forward with highly advanced statistical methods with seemingly little
attention paid to the ramifications of the limitation of their option – i.e. proxy-means
testing. The proxy-means tested (PMT) methodology was designed to tackle the dearth of
information required for accurate means testing by using household proxies to estimate
household welfare.
According to Kidd and Wylde (2011, p. 1), the logic behind this methodology is the
application of (linear) regressions between welfare and household characteristics (e.g.
demographic, human capital, housing infrastructure, durable goods, productive assets) to
identify a list of proxies that best explain household expenditures. By assigning weights
to these proxies (relative to the correlation degree), a score is calculated for each
household which is then used to assign a threshold as the eligibility criteria to receive
targeted benefits.

24

Devereux et al. (2015: 45-48).

15

Studies often “portray the PMT as a scientific and technocratic solution to poverty
targeting” Kidd and Wylde (2011, p. 2). While the PMT may be considered scientific and
even technocratic, it remains questionable whether one ought rightly to consider this
mode a solution to poverty targeting. After analysing the accuracy of the PMT
methodology in Bangladesh, Indonesia, Rwanda and Sri Lanka, Kidd and Wilde reveal
significant inclusion and exclusion errors. Considering 10 per cent and 20 per cent of the
population as beneficiary of the PMT program (coverage level), they find that “eligible
households have no better than one-in-two chance of being selected, and in some cases
even view proxy means testing as a lottery” Kidd and Wylde (2011, p. 31).
Ahmed & Bouis (2002) presents with satisfaction the PMT model used to predict and
select the “needy” and “non-needy” households in Egypt for food subsidies. The research
highlights one of the alleged benefits of this complex statistical technique, which is
expected to save economic resources for the government by lowering the budgetary costs
of rationed food subsidies. Klasen & Lange (2015) consider PMT as a useful solution to
the absence of reliable income data in large part of the Global South. However, based on
a ROC-analysis the researchers confirmed the poor performance of the PMT to identify
the income poor in Bolivia. Using a sample of nine African countries, Brown, Ravallion
& van de Walle (2018) recently confirmed that the popular PMT excludes a large amount
of income-poor individuals, thus negatively impacting the poverty reduction effect of
PMT. In the researchers' own words, PMT and”the prevailing methods are particularly
deficient in reaching the poorest” (2018, p. 109).
Emerging research in developing contexts, where the PMT is put forward, supports the
concern surrounding this mode of targeting. In the Philippines, recent work illustrates the
innate concerns of exaggerating the benefits of PMT, primarily as concerns older-age
poverty (Knox-Vydmanov, Horn, & Sevilla, 2016). Firstly, it must be remembered that
pensions target individuals, not households. The PMT eligibility criterion, however, is
based on household poverty, failing to capture intra-household poverty differences. Using
Southern Africa survey data, Bhorat (1999, p. 157) shows that poverty measures at the
individual level and the household level "transmit differential rankings of indigence".
Vijaya, Lahoti, and Swaminathan (2014, p. 70), using the Karnataka Household Asset
Survey (India), show that "individual-level measures can identify substantial gender
differences in poverty that are masked when using household measures. Thus, genderdisaggregated data and analysis can provide a useful complement to household level
poverty measures". If household poverty does not present the actual deprivations of the
individuals in the household, then, by definition, PMT is incapable of accurately
identifying the levels of deprivations suffered by individuals in poverty.
Second, poor older persons may not be asset-poor. PMT assumes that the assets a
household has strongly reflect the income of a household. However, as the Philippines
evidence points out, "the correlation between assets and income is often quite weak"
(Knox-Vydmanov et al., 2016, p. 46). This again involves the unavoidable risk of
inclusion and exclusion errors. Finally, many poor older persons live in smaller
households. The PMT methodology used in the Philippines, for instance, benefits

16

households with many members in the selection process, undermining many older
individuals living alone or in small households who are income poor.25
If there were no targeting errors and zero targeting costs, then there would be no reason
to doubt that targeting is the most efficient approach in times of budget constraints and
globalisation. The social pension in Nepal exhibits an exclusion error (measured by age
eligibility) of 23 per cent, while in Brunei the figure is 13 per cent (Willmore, 2007). In
Azerbaijan, the exclusion error (measured by poverty status) is 95.2 per cent, and the
inclusion error is around 86.1 per cent (Habibov & Fan, 2006). As these cases
demonstrate, targeting is not as efficient as international financial institutions have
claimed. Therefore the population identified as the "most needy" is not benefiting from
the alleged powers of targeting on identifying the income poor.
Assumption 3: With an under-developed taxation system there is no alternative than to
target the income poor to alleviate monetary deprivations
The main logic behind this assumption is the economic constraint faced by countries with
a non-institutionalized or inadequate tax system. Consequently, most of the arguments
used in the previous section apply here too. Taxation is one of the primary funding
sources for governments; therefore, underdeveloped capacity marks a severe limitation
on the ability of governments to mobilise and direct resources for public purposes. A
limited tax burden and a regressive tax system limit the financing capacity of low and
middle-income countries to develop a comprehensive welfare system. According to
Barrientos (2007, p. 11), “financing is a key constraint on the development of social
protection”.
Tax revenues are considerably lower in the developing world than in, say, the European
region. According to the 2015 Index of Economic Freedom, the tax burden as a
percentage of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) is around 33.2 per cent in Europe, 20.3 per
cent in Latin America and the Caribbean, 16.8 per cent in Sub-Saharan Africa and just
10.3 per cent in the Middle East and North Africa.26 This is indeed a significant
limitation, which must be addressed and urgently taken into account. The need to
implement, restructure and develop a progressive taxation system is a generally accepted
issue. Does this entail, however, that low and middle-income countries are destined to
implement means-tested programs with "poor benefits" (Sen, 1995) because of this
limitation? Are older persons across the world doomed to suffer multiple deprivations
and social risks because their national governments do not yet have what could be
considered a “developed tax system”? While not addressed in this brief, these issues must
be considered with due diligence.

25

This is mainly due to a disconnect with the original intention of that country's PMT (targeting
poor households with children for the country's child-focused poverty program – i.e., the
Pantawid Pamilyang Pilipino Program) and the purpose it has come to be used for, addressing
older age poverty
26
Author’s calculation using data from The Heritage Foundation (2015).

17

According to the latest HelpAge International (2015a) database, there are 102 countries
with non-contributory pension programmes. We could argue these countries have already
acknowledged the power of non-contributory pensions to promote wellbeing and quality
of life among the older population. However, only 17 countries provide universal noncontributory pensions, with the rest implementing additional forms of targeting (e.g.
regional, means-tested, residence, or a combination of them) to identify the ‘truly
deservers' among the older population. How much do governments in these countries
need to invest in order to be able to abandon additional forms of targeting and provide
universal benefits to every older person? Is it that costly as it is argued? Why are those
countries hesitant regarding universalism; is it only about the costs?
Using age-disaggregated data from the United Nations Population Division (UNPD,
2015) we can estimate the investment needed to implement a universal non-contributory
pension in countries which have already implemented means-tested/regional-tested noncontributory pensions. To calculate the investment needed for universal pensions, we use
a modified model of Willmore’s (2007) formula previously proposed by KnoxVydmanov (2011, p. 3), where 5% of the total cost of transfers is added as an
administrative cost Knox-Vydmanov (2011, p. 3). This formula is given as:
𝑆𝑖 = 𝑟𝑝 + 𝐴𝑐
Where Si is the social investment needed – in percentage points of GDP – to implement a
basic universal non-contributory pension, r is the ratio of the flat pension to per capita
GDP (pension level), p is the proportion of the population eligible for pensions (age
eligibility), and Ac is the administrative cost of the transfer. The data used is from 2015
and allows the inclusion of 79 countries which have already implemented meanstested/regional-tested non-contributory pensions.
The age eligibility for actual pensions also varies considerably between countries. In
order to examine different scenarios, five eligibility ages are considered: 50, 60, 65, 70,
and 75. Besides, two pension levels scenarios are considered: a pension equivalent to
10% (scenario 1) and 20% (scenario 2) of GDP per capita. Countries included in this
study have diverse economic, social and political realities; therefore, these pension levels
should be considered as ‘lab tests’ – arbitrarily assigned – and do not necessarily
represent an adequate basic income for all countries.27
Figure 2 shows the investment needed to implement a universal non-contributory pension
with a benefit level of 10% GDP per capita, while Figure 3 shows the benefit level of
20% GDP per capita. With less than 1.2% of the respective national GDPs, all 79
countries would be able to shift from targeted non-contributory pensions to universal
non-contributory pensions with a benefit level of 10% of GDP per capita and with an age
of eligibility of 75. This number is increased to 2.4% of GDP if the benefit level is
Knox-Vydmanov (2011, p. 5) justified the use of 20% of GDP per capita as a “reasonable”
pension level for low and middle-income countries. By making a comparison of the benefit levels
from universal pensions in low and middle-income countries, the author showed that a large
number of pensions exhibited a benefit level between 10% and 20%.
27

18

increased to 20% of GDP per capita. We can continue doing this analysis of the two
scenarios of benefit levels while reducing the age of eligibility to 70, 65, 60 and 50 (see
Figure 2 and 3).
According to the latest data from Pension Watch, 16 countries 28 have tested (means
and/or regional), non-contributory pensions more expensive than a hypothetical universal
pension with a benefit level of 10 per cent of GDP per capita and with an age of
eligibility of 75. For example, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela would be able to
finance a universal pension with a benefit level of 10 per cent of GDP per capita and with
an age of eligibility of 65. South Africa and Australia would be able to finance a pension
with a similar level as Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela but for every individual above
60, and Lesotho for every individual above 50.
Using 75 as the eligibility age may not be ideal, especially for low and middle-income
countries where life expectancy is shorter than for high-income countries. For example,
according to the latest 2015 UNPD data, while individuals over 75 years of age represent
7.5% of the population in high-income countries, this number is a third (2.4%) in middleincome countries and more than one-seventh (1.0%) in low-income countries. To solve
this issue, Knox-Vydmanov (2011, p. 2) proposed to begin implementing social pensions
with a higher eligibility age in order to lower its initial cost, “with the intention to
gradually reduce the eligibility age as political support and financial resources grow”.
According to Freeland (2013, p. 3), the unaffordability argument of universal social
protection is (unnecessarily and overly) exaggerated, “affordability is much more closely
associated with political will than with fiscal resources”. Governments need resources to
implement a social protection program (e.g. pensions) on a universal basis, and a
progressive, developed tax system would decidedly facilitate its economic viability.
However, governments across the world have budgets and resources allocated to different
areas. What would happen if governments started to shift budget resources from nonproductive areas to social protection? How long could a universal social pension scheme
in a low or middle-income country be funded with non-productive resources spent on
high-income countries?

28

Australia, Brazil, Cape Verde, Costa Rica, Denmark, Finland, Lesotho, Maldives,
Mozambique, Nepal, Norway, Paraguay, South Africa, Swaziland, Trinidad and Tobago, and
Venezuela

19

Kenya
Nigeria
Mozambique
Swaziland
Lesotho
Tajikistan
Guatemala
Belize
Cabo Verde
Maldives
Mongolia
Philippines
Nepal
South Africa
Turkmenistan
Kyrgyzstan
Uzbekistan
Paraguay
Algeria
India
Indonesia
Mexico
Ecuador
Peru
Malaysia
Venezuela
Fiji
El Salvador
Panama
Turkey
Viet Nam
Colombia
Kazakhstan
Antigua and Barbuda
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Brazil
Jamaica
Azerbaijan
Costa Rica
Bahamas
Argentina
Israel
Trinidad and Tobago
Chile
China
Thailand
Cyprus
Ireland
Uruguay
Moldova, Republic of
Armenia
Iceland
Australia
Barbados
Korea, Republic of
Norway
United States of America
Belarus
United Kingdom
Ukraine
Hungary
Sweden
Denmark
Switzerland
Belgium
France
Spain
Hong Kong
Estonia
Malta
Slovenia
Greece
Lithuania
Latvia
Bulgaria
Finland
Portugal
Italy
Germany

% of Gross Domestic Product

Figure 2: Social investment required to implement a basic universal pension equivalent to 10% of the GDP per capita in 79 countries with means-tested
and regional tested non-contributory pensions
+75
+70
+65
+60
+50

5

4.5

4

3.5

3

2.5

2

1.5

1

0.5

0

Author’s calculations; Source: (UNPD, 2015)

20

0
Kenya
Nigeria
Mozambique
Swaziland
Lesotho
Tajikistan
Guatemala
Belize
Cabo Verde
Maldives
Mongolia
Philippines
Nepal
South Africa
Turkmenistan
Kyrgyzstan
Uzbekistan
Paraguay
Algeria
India
Indonesia
Mexico
Ecuador
Peru
Malaysia
Venezuela
Fiji
El Salvador
Panama
Turkey
Viet Nam
Colombia
Kazakhstan
Antigua and Barbuda
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Brazil
Jamaica
Azerbaijan
Costa Rica
Bahamas
Argentina
Israel
Trinidad and Tobago
Chile
China
Thailand
Cyprus
Ireland
Uruguay
Moldova, Republic of
Armenia
Iceland
Australia
Barbados
Korea, Republic of
Norway
United States of America
Belarus
United Kingdom
Ukraine
Hungary
Sweden
Denmark
Switzerland
Belgium
France
Spain
Hong Kong
Estonia
Malta
Slovenia
Greece
Lithuania
Latvia
Bulgaria
Finland
Portugal
Italy
Germany

% of Gross Domestic Product

Figure 3: Social investment required to implement a basic universal pension equivalent to 20% of the GDP per capita in 79 countries with means-tested
and regional tested non-contributory pensions
+75
+70
+65
+60
+50

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

Author’s calculations; Source: (UNPD, 2015)

21

Here it is useful to consider some spending priorities – particularly military expenditures.
For example, with the resources Algeria used in 2014 on military expenditures, it would
be able to finance a universal non-contributory pension with a benefit level of 20% GDP
per capita and an eligibility age of 50. That means that around 17.1% of the population
would benefit directly from this pension system, with around 1.8% of its GDP remaining
for military expenditures (SIPRI, 2015).29 Israel, for example, could be using its military
expenditure to subsidise a basic universal pension with the same benefit level and age of
eligibility as Algeria in the previous example. The same is true for Armenia (benefit level
of 20% GDP per capita and an age of eligibility of 60), Azerbaijan (benefit level of 20%
GDP per capita and an age of eligibility of 60), the United States (benefit level of 20%
GDP per capita and an age of eligibility of 65), India (benefit level of 20% GDP per
capita and an age of eligibility of 60), and so forth.
What about electoral spending? According to the Center for Responsive Politics (2015),
the total cost of the United States of America’s 2012 election was 6.3 billion USD.30 This
amount is equivalent to about 0.04% of 2012 US GDP, and would not be enough to
finance even a universal non-contributory pension with a benefit level of 10% and age of
eligibility 75 in this country. However, with this amount of resources national universal
non-contributory pensions could be financed in other places. For example, Kenya would
be able to finance universal non-contributory pensions for six years (benefit level of 20%
GDP per capita and an age of eligibility of 50), Mozambique a similar pension for 21
years, Swaziland would be able to finance a similar pension for 76 years, and it would
even be enough to finance a universal non-contributory pension for India (benefit level of
10% GDP per capita and an age of eligibility of 70).31
Examples abound, but it should be clear that even with ‘under-developed’ tax systems
and all the other limitations of low and middle-income countries, there are enough
resources in this world to avoid most, if not all, of the basic income deprivations which
older persons suffer.
CONCLUSION
Universal social pensions are politically and economically viable as well as efficient
strategies to alleviate poverty. This paper has illustrated that universal non-contributory
pensions could be successfully implemented in countries with low economic
performance, despite arguments to the contrary. However, for those who support the
alleged requisite of reaching a certain degree of economic development before
implementing universal social pensions, 75 countries have surpassed this economic
threshold and still have not implemented universal social pension.
29

A military expenditure of 1.8% GDP remains higher than those of Germany, Japan, Brazil,
Italy among many others.
30
This amount was constructed adding the approximately 3.7 billion spent in the congressional
races and 2.6 billion spent in the presidential race.
31
GDP data used is for 2012 and comes from the World Bank.

22

Budget constraints are indeed a limitation for implementing social welfare policies
(universal or targeted). Nonetheless, the existing scholarship is not unanimously behind
the cause of means testing and instead indicates that targeting by means in social
provision is not more efficient than a universal provision of benefits. Means-tested comes
with higher administrative costs, clientelism, inclusion and exclusion errors, and the
stigmatisation of beneficiaries. The evidence emerging from the Philippines is illustrative
of these concerns. First, PMT does not capture intra-household poverty differences, even
though pensions are targeted to individuals. Second, asset deprivation does not accurately
equate to income deprivation, though this is assumed in the process. Third, PMT
disadvantages older persons living alone or in small households, excluding individuals
with income deprivation from social pensions.
A limited tax burden and a regressive tax system bound the financing capacity of low and
middle-income countries from the development of comprehensive welfare systems.
While this limitation should be addressed with urgency, it should not be an overriding
excuse to combine multiple types of targeting over universal targeting (universal benefits
for the older population). Using five scenarios of age eligibility and two scenarios of
benefit level in 79 countries, this paper has illustrated that universal social pensions are
affordable. This economic viability needs to be accompanied with the political will to
implement social pensions based on concepts of social justice and development. The
international community needs to incentivise the capacity building of low and middleincome countries. A social welfare system needs to be institutionalised in order to be able
to maintain the social protection schemes for the future.
THE ROAD AHEAD
Universal targeting, overall, comes out on top as the social policy approach to follow, as
a first step in the development of social protection systems. Scholars in Latin America
have been arguing in favour of ‘basic universalism’ as an option to reform social policy
in the region. This social policy proposal has four pillars: universal targeting, high quality
benefits for all individuals, a central role of the State in the implementation of such
policies, and (finally) the needs to create a tailored basic universalism for each country –
meeting the needs of its population and taking into account its fiscal/political/economic
possibilities (Cecchini, Filgueira, Martínez, & Rossel, 2015; Molina, 2006).
Essentially, what basic universalism proposes for low and middle-income countries is the
need to reinvent universalism, as we know it from high-income Nordic countries. The
idea is to start by implementing basic security policies that, with time and support, will be
able to evolve into institutionalised and universal welfare systems. Such pension systems
should consist of: basic universal pensions (as a social protection floor for the older-age
population), targeting within universalism (making universalism more effective), and
earnings-related contributory pensions as complementary earnings to promote
employment in the formal sector and increase contributions to the social security
programs. The world has the resources to implement this on a global scale; the question is
if there is also the political will to undertake the necessary reforms.

23

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Previous versions of this article were written while the author was a Postdoctoral
Research Fellow at the University of Agder, and a Research Fellow in Social Protection
at HelpAge International. The author gratefully acknowledges valuable feedback and
edits from Daniel Horn. Charles Knox ‐ Vydmanov, Flavia Galvani, Aderonke
Gbadamosi, Alice Livingstone, and blind reviewers provided much ‐ appreciated
comments on earlier drafts of this article. Special thanks to my research assistant, Anni
Chen. Supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy, Industry and Competitiveness
(FJCI ‐ 2016 ‐ 29871 & GOWPER ‐ CSO2017 ‐ 85598). Shortcomings, of course,
remain my responsibility.
REFERENCES
Ahmed, A. U. and H. E. Bouis (2002). "Weighing What's practical: Proxy Means Tests
for Targeting Food Subisidies in Egypt." FCND Discussion Paper, 132, Retrieved
from: https://core.ac.uk/download/pdf/6289481.pdf.
Alkire, S., & Robles Aguilar, G. (2015). High Visibility. How disaggregated metrics help
to reduce multidimensional poverty. OPHI Brief 28, , Oxford University.
Alkire, S., Roche, J. M., Seth, S., & Sumner, A. (2014). Identifying the Poorest People
and Groups: Strategies Using the Global Multidimensional Poverty Index. OPHI
Working Paper 78, , Oxford University.
Anttonen, A., Häikiö, l., & Stefánsson, H. (2012). The future of the welfare state:
rethinking universalism. In A. Anttonen (Ed.), Welfare State, Universalism and
Diversity. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Barnett, W. S., Brown, K., & Shore, R. (2004). The universal vs. targeted debate: should
the United States have preschool for all? Preschool Policy Matters, 6, NIEER.
Barr, N. (2012). Economics of the Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barr, N., & Diamond, P. (2006). The Economics of Pensions. Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 22(1), 15-39.
Barrientos, A. (2007). Introducing basic social protection in low-income countries:
Lessons from existing programmes. Brooks World Poverty Institute Working
Paper, 6, University of Manchester.
Bastagli, F. (2013). Feasibility of social protection schemes in developing countries.
Belgium: European Union.
Bauman, Z. (2014). ¿La riqueza de unos pocos nos beneficia a todos? Barcelona:
Ediciones Paidós Ibérica, S.A.
Bhorat, H. (1999). Distinguishing between individual- and household-level poverty.
Development Southern Africa, 16(1), 157-162.
Bowles, S., Gintis, H., & Wright, E. O. (1998). Recasting Egalitarianism: New Rules for
Communities, States and Markets. New York: England.
Brooks, S. M. (2015). "Social Protection for the Poorest:The Adoption of Antipoverty
Cash Transfer Programs in the Global South." Politics & Society 43(4): 551-582.
Brown, C., Ravallion, M. & van de Walle, D. (2018). "A poor means test? Econometric
targeting in Africa." Journal of Development Economics 134: 109-124.

24

Carroll, E., & Palme, J. (2006). Inclusion of the European Nordic Model in the Debate
Concerning Social Protection Reform: The Long-term Development of Nordic
Welfare Systems (1890-2005) and Their Transferability to Latin America in the
Twenty-first Century. Santiago de Chile: ECLAC, Special Studies Unit, Sida.
Cecchini, S., Filgueira, F., Martínez, R., & Rossel, C. (2015). Instrumentos de protección
social. Caminos Latinoamericanos hacia la universalización. Santiago de Chile:
Comisión Económica para América Latina y el Caribe.
Center for Responsive Politics. (2015). The Money Behind the Elections. Retrieved from
www.opensecrets.org/bigpicture/.
Chang, H.-J. (2014). Economics: The User's Guide. London: Penguin Books.
Clark, G. L., Munnell, A. H., & Orszag, J. M. (2006). The Oxford Handbook of Pensions
and Retirement Income. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2015). Análisis Multidimensional del Estado de bienestar emergente
y la pobreza en América Latina y el Caribe: Puerto Rico como estudio de caso.
Universidad Complutense de Madrid. Retrieved from http://eprints.ucm.es/30004/
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2016). Welfare State Development, Individual Deprivations and
Income Inequality: A Cross-Country Analysis in Latin America and the
Caribbean. Social Indicators Research, 1-25. doi:10.1007/s11205-016-1465-4
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017). Is there a Common Path that could have Conditioned the
Degree of Welfare State Development in Latin America and the Caribbean?
Bulletin of Latin American Research, n/a-n/a. doi:10.1111/blar.12556
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2018). "Revenue-Generating Potential of Taxation for Older-Age
Social Pensions." Ageing International 43(4): 415-437.
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2019). Welfare and Social Protection in Contemporary Latin
America. London: Routledge.
Danson, M., McAlpine, R., Spicker, P., & Sullivan, W. (2012). The Case for
Universalism. An assessment of the evidence on the effectiveness and efficiency of
the universal welfare state. The Jimmy Reid Foundation.
Deacon, A., & Bradshaw, J. (1983). Reserved for the poor. Oxford: Basil Blackwell and
Martin Robertson.
Del Pino, Eloísa, & Maria Josefa Rubio Lara (2016). Los Estados de Bienestar en la
encrucijada: Políticas sociales en perspectiva comparada. Madrid: Tecnos.
Devereux, S., Masset, E., Sabates-Wheeler, R., Samson, M., te Lintelo, D., & Rivas, A.
(2015). Evaluating the Targeting Effectiveness of Social Transfers: A Literature
Review. Institute for Development Studies Working Paper, 460.
Elmer, A. (1960). Folkpensioneringen i Sverige. Lund: CWK, Gleerup.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of Welfare Capitalism. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). Social Foundations of Post Industrial Economies. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Feenstra, R. C., Inklaar, R., & Timmer, M. P. (2015). The Next Generation of the Penn
World Table. American Economic Review, 105(10), 3150-3182.
Feldstein, M., & Liebman, J. B. (2002). Social Security (Vol. 4). Amsterdam: NorthHolland, Elsevier.
Fiszbein, A., Kanbur, R., & Yemtsov, R. (2013). Social protection, poverty and the post2015 agenda. Policy research working paper, 6469:

25

http://econ.worldbank.org/external/default/main?pagePK=64165259&theSitePK
=469382&piPK=64165421&menuPK=64166093&entityID=000158349_201305
30132533.
Fiszbein, A., Kanbur, R., & Yemtsov, R. (2014). Social Protection and Poverty
Reduction: Global Patterns and Some Targets. World Development, 61, 167-177.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.04.010
Freeland, N. (2013). The Seven Deadly Myths of Social Protection. Pathways'
Perspectives on Social Policy in International Development, 10.
Gilbert, N. (2000). Targeting Social Benefits: International Perspectives and Trends.
New Jersey: Transaction Publishers.
Gilens, M. (1999). Why Americans hate welfare: Race, Media and the Politics of
Antipoverty Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goodman, R., White, G., & Kwon, H.-j. (1998). The east asian welfare model: welfare
orientalism and the state. London: Routledge.
Gubrium, E. K., Pellissery, S., & Lødemel, I. (2014). The Shame of It. Global
Perspectives on anti-poverty policies. Bristol: Policy Press.
Gugushvili, D., & Hirsch, D. (2014). Means-tested and universal approaches to poverty:
international evidence and how the UK compares. CRSP Working Paper, 640.
Habibov, N. N., & Fan, L. (2006). Social Assistance and the Challenges of Poverty and
Inequality in Azerbaijan, a Low-Income Country in Transition. Journal of
Sociology & Social Welfare, 33(1), 203-226.
Heckman, J. (2012). Giving Kids a Fair Chance. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Heimo, L. (2019). Domestication of Global Policy Norms: Problematisation of the
Conditional Cash Transfer Narrative. Welfare and Social Protection in
Contemporary Latin America. G. Cruz-Martinez. London, Routledge.
HelpAge International. (2015a). Pension-Watch Database. http://www.pensionwatch.net/download/55129fc5749ec.
HelpAge International. (2015b). Pension watch. Social protection in older age.
http://www.pension-watch.net/.
Huber, E., & Niedzwiecki, S. (2015). Emerging Welfare States in Latin America and East
Asia. In S. Leibfried, E. Huber, M. Lange, J. D. Levy, & J. D. Stephens (Eds.),
The Oxford Handbook of Transformations of the State. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
ILO. (2014a). More than 70 per cent of the world population lacks proper social
protection. Geneva: ILO News: http://www.ilo.org/global/about-theilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_244748/lang--en/index.htm.
ILO. (2014b). World Social Protection Report 2014-15: Building economic recovery,
inclusive development and social justice. Geneva: International Labour Office.
Kidd, S. (2015). The Political Economy of "Targeting" of Social Security Schemes.
Pathways' Perspectives on Social Policy in International Development, 19.
Kidd, S. (2018). "Pro-poor or anti-poor? The World Bank and IMF’s approach to social
protection." CADTM, 13 April, Retrieved from: http://www.cadtm.org/Pro-pooror-anti-poor-The-World.
Kidd, S., & Wylde, E. (2011). Targeting the Poorest: An assessment of the proxy means
test methodology. Canberra: Australian Government AusAID.

26

Klasen, S. & Lange, S. (2015). "Accuracy and Poverty Impacts of Proxy Means-Tested
Transfers: An Empirical Assessment for Bolivia," Courant Research Centre:
Poverty, Equity and Growth - Discussion Papers 164, Courant Research Centre
PEG.
Knox-Vydmanov, C. (2011). The price of income security in older age: Cost of a
universal pension in 50 low and middle-income countries. Pension watch briefing
series, 2, HelpAge International.
Knox-Vydmanov, C., Horn, D., & Sevilla, A. (2016). The Philippine Social Pension at
Four Years: Insights and Recommendations. Manila: Coalition of Services of the
Elderly / HelpAge International.
Korpi, W., & Palme, J. (1998). The Paradox of Redistribution and Strategies of Equality:
Welfare State Institutions, Inequality, and Poverty in the Western Countries.
American Sociological Review, 63(5), 661-687.
Kwon, H.-j., Mkandawire, T., & Palme, J. (2009). Introduction: social policy and
economic development in late industrializers. International Journal of Social
Welfare, 18, S1-S11. doi:10.1111/j.1468-2397.2009.00635.x
Marshall, T. (1950). Citizenship and social class and other Essays. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Midgley, J. (2014). Social Development: Theory & Practice. London: SAGE.
Mishra, R. (1977). Society and Social Policy: Theories and Practice of Welfare. London:
MacMillan.
Mkandawire, T. (2005). Targeting and Universalism in Poverty Reduction. Social Policy
and Development Programme 23, , United Nations Research Institute for Social
Development.
Molina, C. G. (2006). Universalismo básico: Una nueva política social para América
Latina. Washington D.C: Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo / Editorial Planeta.
Mulligan, C. B., & Sala-i-Martin, X. (1999). Social Security in Theory and Practice (II):
Efficiency Theories, Narrative Theories, and Implications for Reform. NBER
Working Paper, 7119: http://www.nber.org/papers/w7119.
Osorio Gonnet, C. (2018). "A Comparative Analysis of the Adoption of Conditional Cash
Transfers Programs in Latin America." Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis:
Research and Practice: 1-17.
Pierson, P. (2000). Increasing returns, Path-dependence and the Study of Politics. The
American Political Science Review, 94(2), 251-267.
Rothstein, B. (1998). Just Institutions Matter. The Moral and Political Logic of the
Universal Welfare State. UK: Cambridge University Press.
Rothstein, B. (2001). The universal welfare state as a social dilemma. Rationality and
Society, 13(2), 213-233.
Rowntree, S. (1901). Poverty: A Study of Town Life. London: Longman.
Sánchez de Dios, M. (1993). El modelo sueco del Estado de bienestar. Revista de
Estudios Políticos (Nueva Época), 59, 283-303.
Scarbrough, E. (2000). West European welfare states: The old politics of retrenchment.
European Journal of Political Research, 38(2), 225-259.
Sen, A. (1995). The Political Economy of Targeting. In D. Van de Walle & K. Nead
(Eds.), Public Spending and the poor: theory and evidence. Baltimore: World
Bank and The John Hopkins University.

27

Sewell, W. H. (1996). Three temporalities: toward an eventful sociology. In T. J.
McDonald (Ed.), The Historic turn in the human sciences. Michigan: University
of Michigan Press.
Shen, C., & Williamson, J. B. (2006). Does a Universal Non-Contributory Pension
Scheme Make Sense for Rural China? Journal of Comparative Social Welfare,
22(2), 143-153.
SIPRI. (2015). SIPRI Military Expenditure Database. Stockholm International Peace
Research Institute.
Sojo, C. (2009). Proceso político de la reforma social en América Latina: condiciones y
recursos en torno a un "régimen" de universalismo básico. In C. Barba Solano, G.
Ordoñez Barba, & E. Valencia Lomelí (Eds.), Más allá de la pobreza: Regímenes
de bienestar en Europa, Asia y América (pp. 371-399). Guadalajara: Universidad
de Guadalajara, El Colegio de la Frontera Norte.
Stephens, J. D. (2002). European welfare state regimes: Configuration, outcomes,
transformations. In E. Huber (Ed.), Models of capitalism: Lessons for Latin
America. University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
The Heritage Foundation. (2015). Index of Economic Freedom.
http://www.heritage.org/index/explore.
Thelen, K. (1999). Historical Institutionalism in Comparative Politics. Annual Review of
Political Science, 2, 369-404.
Titmuss, R. M. (1976). Commitment to Welfare. London: Georges Allen & Unwin.
UNPD. (2015). World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision.
http://esa.un.org/unpd/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/.
US Social Security Administration. (2015). Social Security Programs Throughout the
World. https://www.ssa.gov/policy/docs/progdesc/ssptw/.
van Oorschot, W. (2002). Targeting welfare: on the functions and dysfunctions of meanstesting in social policy. In P. Townsend & D. Gorden (Eds.), World Poverty: new
policies to defeat an old enemy (pp. 171-193). Bristol: Policy Press.
Vijaya, R. M., Lahoti, R., & Swaminathan, H. (2014). Moving from the Household to the
Individual: Multidimensional Poverty Analysis. World Development, 59, 70-81.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2014.01.029
Willmore, L. (2007). Universal pensions for developing countries. World Development,
35(1), 24-51.
World Bank. (1994). Averting the Old Age Crisis. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
World Bank. (2001). World Development Report 2000/2001: Attacking Poverty. New
York: Oxford University Press.

28

