Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.


Philosophies of the mind and body: Descartes,
Ricouer and the metaparadigm of nursing
Rudolf Cymorr Kirby P. Martinez1, Lourlyn P. Mansaguiton2, Myrna A. Mercado3, and Iril I. Panes4
Date Received:

Date Accepted:

11th of September, 2017

5th of December , 2017

ABSTRACT
This paper presents an analysis of Descartes and Ricouer’s philosophies which explores the nature and
connection of the mind and body, in terms of their tenets, similarities, differences as well as their
implication to the understanding of the metaparadigm in nursing. The first part of the paper gives a
brief background on the philosophers and their philosophies focusing on Descartes' Dualism then
comparing it to Ricouer's concept of “Selfhood”. Meanwhile, the second part of this paper deals with
how these two philosophies affect our understanding of the metaparadigm in nursing (Fawcett, 1984)
specifically, the concept of person, health, environment, and nursing.
Keywords: Descartes, metaparadigm, mind-body, philosophy, Ricouer

I.

THE PHILOSOPHIES

escartes’ Mind-Body Dualism. Rene Descartes,
born in the French province of Touraine, is a
French philosopher, mathematician and scientist known
to be the father of modern philosophy. Early in his life,
he was influenced by the work of Beeckman, who
engaged in a project that explained phenomena
mechanistically in terms of matter in motion. Later on,
Descartes developed a unified system of knowledge
explaining the existence of a fixed law by which natural
phenomenon abide (Papineau, 2009). However, during
the time when Galileo was condemned in Rome for
maintaining that the earth was in motion, Descartes
completely changed his plans and instead shifted his
focus on discovering the ideas of the mind, matter and
God.
Descartes’ shift in focal interest allowed him to
develop his philosophy on mind-body dualism best
exemplified by his philosophical statement “Cogito ergo
sum” (I think, therefore I exist) (Murray & Chamberlain,
1999). Further, his philosophy tries to establish

D

absolute certainty on the understanding of things.
Descartes’ Discourse on the Method, published in 1637,
proposes to set a fundamental principle to consider any
false belief even with the slightest doubt which would
deprive anyone in seeking for the truth (Skirry, 2005).
To do that, he employed a method known as
methodological skepticism, a stance that reject
doubtful ideas. This implies three things: (a) that in
order to seek for the truth, it is necessary to doubt as
far as possible; (b) presume that something is not true
until proven that it is true; and (c) systematic but
tentative doubt is a prelude to genuine knowledge.
Doubting of sensible things is one of the general
approaches to the truth. This takes us into the element
of Descartes’ thinking on rationalism. Descartes
believes that only through reason can one arrive at the
truth and the perception of the senses is doubtful. His
doubt on use of the senses to understand the truth can
be understood through the “argument of the wax”.
Descartes argue that the senses are the means of
knowing a piece of wax, its properties, characteristics
and physical attributes. However, when fire melted the

1. ORCID Number: 0000-0002-5323-5108, R.C.K.P. Martinez is with the College of Nursing, San Beda College, Mendiola Manila, 1005, Philippines; the
Florentino Cayco Memorial School Graduate School of Nursing, Arellano University, Legarda Manila, 1008, Philippines (e-mail: rmartinez@sanbeda.edu.ph).
2. ORCID Number: 0000-0001-5394-5911, L. P. Mansaguiton, is with the College of Nursing, Mountain View College, Valencia City Bukidnon, 8709, Philippines
(e-mail: lourlynpagonzaga@gmail.com).
3. ORCID Number: 0000-0003-4288-2358, M. A. Mercado is with the College of Nursing, Mountain View College, Valencia City Bukidnon, 8709, Philippines (email: myrnamercado67@yahoo.com).
4. ORCID Number: 0000-0001-6687-3734, I.I. Panes is with the College of Nursing, Sultan Kudarat State University, Tacurong City, 9800, Philippines (e-mail:
myrnamercado67@yahoo.com)

University of the Visayas

Journal of Research

32

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.

wax, its attributing properties changes. Though our
sense does not see the wax in its original form, we still
know that it is wax. Our understanding of the piece of
wax then proves that the thing we believe and
understood before through our senses is not reliable.
Our senses are extensions of our body that would only
see measurable things just like that of wax but we did
not understand what wax is because we did not
scrutinize it using our reasons (McBean & Wijck, 2013).
The primacy of reason to understand the truth was
further exemplified when Garrett (2014) points out that
for Descartes, each one must plead to reasons as the
only source of knowledge. Moreover, Descartes also
post it that the use of reason can develop the natural
science and lay the ground that philosophy is a thinking
system that embodies all knowledge. He was the first
person in modern times who built a philosophy that
stands head on in self-confidence generated by rational
knowledge which concluded that the basic philosophy
comes from reason, not feeling, not faith, not verse,
nor other sources (Bennett, 1994).
Additionally, Descartes philosophy places great
emphasis on the process of reduction to understand a
concept. McBean and Wijck (2013) pointed out that
Descartes reduces the complexity of a phenomenon via
the process of reductionism, by breaking it down to
more rudimentary pieces of constructs. Applying this
process, he proposes that a person is healthy when the
body is in good working order but he does not fully
accept the idea that humans are just machinery so he
postulated another entity: the mind. For Descartes, the
mind was everything, an immaterial thinking substance,
un-extended and not subject to mechanical laws while
the body is a material, non-thinking substance,
extended and subject to mechanical laws and
measurements (Hutchin, 1952). As McBean and Wijck
(2013) would summarize it “By postulating the two
mutually exclusive entities, of body and mind Cartesian
dualism was introduced” (p.4).
Thus, by taking
Descartes’ view, the foregoing presentation expresses
the existence of the mind and the body as different
entities, which exist in two different planes. The body is
tangential while the mind is essential.
Ricouer’s Philosophy of Selfhood. Jean Paul
Gustave Ricoeur (1913–2005) was a continental
philosopher, a creative writer, whose works expound on
the meaning of life. His writing runs through the major
theme of philosophical anthropology, a philosophical
discipline that enquires into the essence of human
nature and the human condition (New World
Encyclopedia, 2015).
Moreover, philosophical anthropology seeks to

understand the nature of human beings through its
consideration of these two questions as a
methodological approach: “Who am I?” and “What is a
human being?” For Ricouer, understanding the nature
of selfhood ̶ the state of having an individual identity,
is a prelude to understanding the nature of self. For
Ricouer, to be a true master of the self, humans should
fully understand themselves, their selfhood. Opposed
to Descartes’ idea of mind-body dualism, Ricoeur
rejected the idea of a metaphysical self and focus on
selfhood instead of the concept of an entity (Atkins,
2016). Ricouer’s concept of selfhood is a dialectic of
activity and passivity since human are beings
characterized by his/her "double nature" or “double
allegiance”— the material world of cause and effect
and the immaterial world of the will (Atkins, 2016).
Though Ricouer rejects the idea of an entity, his notion
of selfhood is parallel to Descartes’s notion of dualistic
world of the material body and the immaterial mind.
Moreover, Ricouers’ concept of selfhood, like that of
Descartes, entails that human beings need to possess
both the mind and body in order to exist and to
interact with the outside world. Both argues that the
body is essential since it serves as a vessel for the mind
to exist. What sets Ricouer’s idea apart from the
mechanistic duality of Descartes is the belief that the
mind and body are always in constant interaction with
each other since there is always a tension between the
involuntary constraint of humans, being a subject of
the world and the voluntariness necessary to the idea
of the self as agents of actions. Despite this polarity,
Ricouer asserts in the existence of a complementarity in
the two dimensions of human existence (Pellauer &
Daunenhauer, 2016), but not totally harmonious.
Additionally, in answering the question “What is a
human being?”, Ricouer asserts that they are “capable”
human beings (Pellauer & Daunenhauer, 2016), that is
by nature they have the capacity to become vulnerable,
fallible and culpable because he is not a perfect being,
and these imperfections make them completely human
(Garcia, 2011) since perfection can only be attributed
to God. For Ricouer, what makes human beings unique
among God’s creation is that they are intellectual
beings and have the capacity to reason. This is again
analogous to Descartes appreciation of the mind as a
distinctive possession of human being, the agent by
which human beings “know” of things. If Descartes
believes in the fundamental notion of doubting as a
means of knowing, Ricouer proposes the use of
textuality as a basis for analysis of meaning (Siringan,
2011). For Ricouer, all knowledge, as well as man’s
knowledge of his own existence, not merely composed

UVJOR2017 Volume 11 Issue 1

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.
of accurate facts but a combination of various areas of
discussion about all aspects of human life, is not
immediately transparent and needs to be understood
through the interpretation of the expression of the self
through one’s actions, symbols, myths, metaphors and
texts. It must be noted however, that for Ricouer, all
knowledge is of value in an effort to understand
oneself, including the knowledge perceived by the
senses. The inclusion of knowledge known thru the
senses is a notion that Descartes vehemently frowned
upon since he asserts that only the knowledge
appreciated by the mind is of value. Perception then is
embraced by Ricouer and rejected by Descartes.
The foregoing discussion then asserts that in
Ricouer’s understanding, the constant interaction and
struggle of the mind and body to resolve this inherent
tension gives human beings their distinctive individual
identities as opposed to Descartes’ belief of the
primacy of the mind as the sole determinant of an
individual’s personhood.
Essentially, Ricouer’s knowing can be seen as
inclusive, pragmatic and polysemic while Descartes’ is
exclusive, skeptical and singular.
II.

MIND-BODY PHILOSOPHIES AND
METAPARADIGMS IN NURSING

Metaparadigm serves as a way to understand
disciplinary concepts, i.e. domain, of a profession as it
provides a perspective of a discipline (Masters, 2009).
Eckberg and Hill (1979) said that it “acts as an
encapsulating unit or framework, within which the
more restricted structures develop” (p.927). The
metaparadigm for nursing describes concepts that
define the discipline of nursing, namely ̶ human being,
environment, health, and nursing. Specifically, these
four concepts are about: “The person receiving the
nursing, the environment within which the person
exists, the health-illness continuum within which the
person falls at the time of the interaction with the
nurse, and finally, the nursing actions themselves”
(Flaskerud & Holloran, as cited by Fawcett, 1994, p.5).
These four (4) essential elements of nursing
paradigm as proposed by Fawcett (1981) and its
interconnectedness to the principles of Cartesian
Dualism and Ricouer’s Selfhood is described in the
succeeding paragraph.
Person. The metaparadigm of persons in nursing
focuses on human being as the recipient of care. It
encompasses the nature of persons and how it relates
to the practice of the discipline of nursing.
Both the tenets of Cartesian Dualism and Ricouer’s
Selfhood argues that human being is composed of two

University of the Visayas

33

standalone but interacting components; the mind and
the body. The immaterial mind controls and gives
“substance” to the material body to act and that the
senses are the extensions of the body, the same way as
reason is the workings of the mind. This is parallel to
the position of Rummelsburg (2015) when he asserts
that the person is a physical and material being which
interacts to the world through his senses. Dualism
posits that the “two components” of a person is
distinguishable from each other. Thus, one can focus on
understanding each part as it is. Since the mind and the
body are separate from each other, they can exist, in
theory, even without the presence of the other, such as
death. This paved the way to “demythologized” the
body and opened society’s view on the ethics of
conducting autopsies (McBean & Wijck, 2013) which
further improved our knowledge of the human body
and its workings. Moreover, this appreciation of the
body provides a clearer understanding on the objective,
factual and knowable aspects of the body and its
disorders. Maville and Huerta (2012) further assert that
this separation of mind and body from the teachings of
Descartes has allowed investigation and treatment to
focus on the illness of the body having only a few
diseases coming from the mind. This resulted to the
development of mechanistic models of the body that
started the use of biomedical and technological
interventions to treat diseases (White, 2006).
Additionally, it could also be argued that dualism also
steered further the understanding of the workings of
the mind since they are co-equal separate entities.
Furthermore, Hooft (2006) posits that dualism has
contributed to the understanding of the individuality of
a person “allowing health care workers to define their
task as being centered on the body alone” (p.24). Had
it not been for dualism, focusing on the client’s body
alone will not be possible.
On the other hand, more than just being an
intellectual mind in a mortal body, Ricouer’s sense of
selfhood elevated the discourse from the question
“what is a human being” to “who am I” and in the
process brought back humanity to the understanding of
a person. For Ricouer, human beings are “capable”
human beings. They have the fundamental capabilities
(strengths) as well as vulnerabilities (weaknesses).
These strengths and weaknesses is what makes human
beings human since they are capable of mastering
themselves through self- knowledge. But then, selfknowledge, according to Ricouer, is not immediately
transparent or known to man. That is why Ricoeur
always poses the question “What is the meaning of
being human?” in all his scope of study. This is for man

Journal of Research

34

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.

to continue seek self-understanding and his essence of
being in the world. It can be assumed therefore that
Ricouer’s focus shifted from the Descartes’
epistemological question of human being to a more
ontological perspective.
It is also among the tenets of Ricouer’s selfhood
that
he emphasized that a human being is a social creature
that the self is contingent to the collective social
memory. We are not just alone, we are contingent and
constructed by what is going on before which is part of
our collective social memory and experiences in the
past.
Lastly, Ricoeur considers that human subjectivity is
primarily through language and symbols. He also
underscores the significance of learning and
understanding the transition in the experience of
people’s lives through narratives. Ricoeur considers
“Self as a construct”. In his book the “Rule of the
metaphor” he said that, human beings construct
themselves in a narrative that they wish to create our
life’s story (Siringan, 2011). Human beings create
narratives of self in the frame of time in the past,
present and future. They create stories of themselves
that reflects who they are in the past and present what
they would like to be in the future (Flaming, 2005). This
is parallel to Benner’s definition of a human person as a
living person embodied in the world who is a “selfinterpreting being, that is, the person does not come
into the world pre-defined but gets defined in the
course of living a life “ (Benner & Wrubel, 1989, as cited
by Masters, 2009 p. 55). The human person therefore is
a continuously evolving conscious and rational being
creating, destroying and recreating himself as he/she
integrate new experiences into his/her individual
personhood and not merely a mind trapped in a mortal
body, as was proposed by dualism.
Human beings – or persons are the recipients of
care. Both Descartes and Ricouers’ precept on human
beings, although with some opposing ideas is that both
advocates care. Descartes’ Dualism makes possible for
health care workers to attend to physical problems, and
Ricouers’ Selfhood enables health practitioners to care
for persons beyond the physical aspect but holistically.
The focus of the discipline of nursing, health will be
discussed in the succeeding section.
Health. The metaparadigm of health provides an
overview on how the nature and appreciation of the
concept of health. Further, it explores how meanings
attached to health affect the nature of nursing as a
discipline.

The Cartesian dualism provides a grounding of the
mechanistic model of the body. For Descartes, a person
is healthy as long as the body is in good working order
(McBean & Wijck, 2013). But for the body to exist and
function, the mind needs to be efficient as well. This
was reiterated by Descartes when he said that how a
person feels, thinks and interprets their disease affects
their treatment such as in cases of pain and its
management (McBean & Wijck, 2013). This is parallel to
Beerman, Snyder and Frandsen (2016) definition of
health as the degree of wellness and well-being that a
person experiences. The senses, as the extension of the
body, perceived the external and internal cues that the
body is in “good working order” and it is the mind that
ultimately interprets and appreciates these cues. This is
congruent to the appreciation of health by Dorothea
Orem as the “soundness or wholeness of developed
human structures and of bodily and mental
functioning” (Orem, 1995, p. 101)
On the other hand, it can be deduced from the
tenets of Ricouer’s selfhood that health is the
attainment of the full capacity of a human being. Since
he proposes that humans are capable creatures, being
created with the capacity to reason out, judge and
comprehend, exercising their capacity in search for
humanity enables them to attain their highest
potential. It goes beyond the mere absence of disease
or infirmity but full health can only be appreciated if
human being have attained their full potential, that is,
they are well aware of who they are as a person. But
Ricoeur also stressed that humans as their nature
requires, have intrinsic vulnerabilities and fallibilities
which might lead to their shortcomings. Inability to
adjust to life stressors is one of a human’s vulnerability.
Being able to adjust and learn from this vulnerability
can then lead humans to attain a healthy character,
and eventually, a healthy life. As Beerman, Snyder, and
Frandsen (2016) claimed, a person is healthy when he is
able to adapt to the environment and with the
interaction in the environment. This is parallel to
Imogene King’s health definition - a dynamic human
experience characterized by the optimal use of one’s
resources and capabilities in order to continuously
adjust to stressors in the environment, both external
and internal; which eventually results in the attainment
of the individual’s maximum potential (Masters, 2009).
For Ricouer then, being healthy is but a conscious
choice. Flaming (2005) summed this up when he said
“In a philosophical way, Ricoeur promotes the idea that
a healthy self-identity happens when someone
constructs a self-based on a foundation that does not
change so much that all former identity is lost, all the

UVJOR2017 Volume 11 Issue 1

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.
while being aware that a self does change somewhat so
that all experiences can be incorporated into a
coherent self” (p.98).
Both philosophers agreed on the view that health is
beyond the physiological aspect, with Descartes
focusing on the efficiency of the mind and body while
Ricouer pointed out that there should be complete
balance of the person’s physical, emotional, cognitive
and spiritual self. Both views still sums up into one
common understanding – that health is holistic, and
each component identified by these two philosophers
need to be integrated and should function to its highest
capacity to achieve optimal well-being. The important
relationship of health and the environment is presented
in the next metaparadigm.
Environment.
The
metaparadigm
of
the
environment focuses on the internal and external
milieu that, directly or indirectly affects the person.
As Cartesian dualism presupposed that the mind and
body are separate entities, the environment can then
refer to external or internal context that affects the
client. The body, as Sullivan (2001) argues, is affected
by the external material context (Nath, 2013) such as
temperature among other things. He further posited
that the body, together with the external environment,
contribute to the constitution of each other and are
not capable of flourishing apart. While it is true that
bodies and the external environment are coconstituted, they remain separate and cannot be
collapsed into one thing. Being co-equal in importance
with the body, the mind is also affected by its own
“environment” (internal contexts). Though Descartes
argues that the mind is immaterial, the functioning of
the mind can be influenced by immaterial things as
well. Words, emotions, beliefs and worldviews are by
themselves immaterial things that do not affect the
body but ultimately affects the workings of the mind.
Hergenhahn (2009) claimed that because the mind is
free it can modify whatever reflexive behavior as a
result of exposure to the “environment”. Much like in
Cartesian dualism and Ricouer’s selfhood, the
environment can be viewed as a duality: an external
material environment that is perceived by the senses as
an extension of the body and an internal immaterial
environment created and appreciated by the mind. This
is parallel to Imogene King’s appreciation of the
environment as both being internal and external
contexts (Masters, 2009)
Additionally, Ricouer, much like Benner (as cited by
Masters, 2009), emphasized the social construct as part
of environment by which human beings learn to
understand themselves. Our body allows us to

University of the Visayas

35

commune with the social realities that could be useful
for understanding the ‘environmental identity’, as
Drenthen (2015) posits.
This way, environments
provide us with a context with which to understand
ourselves. This “social” environment is the collective
context of human social experiences of everyday life
that varies in space, time and quality. Societal dogmas,
values, traditions, customs, and expectations are also
part of this social milieu and needs to be constantly
defined and understood through environmental
hermeneutics. Specifically, this is a stance of
philosophical hermeneutics. It starts with the
recognition that the interpretations of the places in
which we live provide an on-going and ever changing
narrative context from which we can understand
ourselves. This is the main concept of Ricoeur’s
philosophy – understanding human self.
The discussion presents the importance of the
environment in the provision of care to the person.
The environment was shown to be internal and
external, congruent to Descartes’ philosophy on
dualism of mind and body. Moreover, how the person
adjusts to the environment around him also impacts his
health recovery, consistent with Ricouers’ view on a
person’s capacity to modify to his social environment to
strengthen and cope with his vulnerability. The
interplay in both the internal and the external
environment plays a key role in the well-being and
recovery of the person.
Having fully explained the relationship of the
metaparadigm of person, health and environment to
the discipline of nursing, the succeeding metaparadigm
explores in detail how the philosophies of Descartes
and Ricouer relate to the concept of nursing.
Nursing. Nursing is a profession grounded in the art
and science of holistic health care. Considered as an
emerging academic discipline, it is directed by the
principles of human freedom, choice, and responsibility.
In philosophy, nursing ontology examines the nature of
nursing, personhood, environment and health (Bruce,
Rietze, & Lim, 2014). Further, Beerman, Snyder, and
Frandsen (2016) define nursing as “the attributes,
characteristics, and actions of the nurse (p. 64)” as
nurses provide care with the client. Applying the
philosophy of Cartesian dualism, nursing can be then
seen as the attribute, characteristics and actions of a
nurse as she cares for the client’s mind and body.
Though the Cartesian dualism emphasizes that the
mind and body are of different entities, they need to
exist in unison for the individual to live. Nursing then
should never be only focused on caring for the mind or
the body alone but ultimately, caring for the person

Journal of Research

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.

36

who has a body and a mind.
Additionally, Ricouer’s philosophical stance focused
on understanding human and human experiences thru
the context of communication. In his work “Asserting
Personal Capacities and Pleading for Mutual
Recognition” (2004), he asserts that a human has the
capacity to speak, to act and to feel responsible (Garcia,
2011). He further believes that, human beings by
nature understands and interprets meaning through
the use of language, which possess varied meanings
thus interpretation is essential (Dowling, 2011).
Interpretation can occur if the nurse and the patient
are both co-participants in the context of a nursing
situation. This process of meaning making from
Ricouer’s philosophy when combined with the skeptical
stance of Descartes enables nurses to completely
understand the context of the patient and, in the
process, allows them to create a narrative that
facilitates not only self-awareness but knowing their
patient as well. Furthermore, this narrative becomes a
basis for nurses in making wise decisions regarding
patient care; and at the same time opening expanded
areas of opportunities for the patient. This is
comparable to Hildegard Peplau’s definition of nursing
– an interpersonal process of therapeutic interaction
between the nurse and the patient (Masters, 2009).
Through Ricouer’s philosophy, nurses are given the
possibility of re-evaluating the assumptions contained
in their discipline by reconsidering the ethico-moral
principles assumed in their unique role within the
contemporary health care system. .
III.

INSIGHTS

Person, as the object of nursing and health as its
primary focus was exemplified in the philosophies of
Descartes and Ricouer. The duality of the mind and
body proposed by Descartes and the oneness of selfput forward by Ricouer both asserts the existence of
mortal human beings capable of discovering meaning
and making sense of their environment. The role of the
nurse then should transcend from the mere act of
healing the body of persons to caring for the totality
their personhood.
Originality Index:
Similarity Index:
Paper ID:
Grammar:

99%
1%
90658817
Checked

REFERENCES
Atkins, K. (2016). Paul Ricoeur, 1913-2005. In The Internet
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy.
Retrieved
from
http://www.iep.utm.edu/ricoeur/

Beerman, A., Snyder, S., & Frandsen, G. (2016). Kozier & Erb’s
Fundamentals of nursing concepts, process, and practice (10th
ed.). New Jersey, USA: Pearson Prentice Hall..
Bennett, J. (1994). Descartes’s theory of modality, The Philosophical
Review, 103(4), 639-667.
Bruce, A., Rietze, L., Lim, A. (2014). Understanding philosophy in a
nurse’s world: What, Where and Why?. Nursing and Health, 2(3),
65-71.
Drenthen, M. (2015). Environmental hermeneutics and the meaning of
nature. Oxford Handbook on Environmental Ethics. Retrieved from
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/276418022_Environmenta
l_hermeneutics_and_the_meaning_of_nature
Dowling, W. (2011). Ricouer on time and narrative an introduction to
temps et récit. Notre Dame, Indiana: University of Notre Dame
Press.
Eckberg, D.L. & Hill, L. (1979). The paradigm concept and sociology:
A critical review. American Sociological Review, 44(6), 925-937.
Ernesto, E. Jr, Fabro, E. J., Faustino, F., Funcion, C., Guevarra, M., &
Mamengo, C. (2015). Key concepts of self-transcendence theory.
Retrieved
from
http://n207pamelareedselftranscendence.blogspot.com/2015/09/key-concepts-of-selftranscendence.html
Flaming, D. (2005). Becoming a nurse: It’s just who I am. Medical
Humanities, 31(2), 95-100. doi: 10.1136/jmh.2005.000202
Fawcett, J. (1994). Analysis and evaluation of conceptual models of
nursing. Philadelphia, PA: F. A. Davis.
Fawcett, J. (1984). The metaparadigm of nursing: present status and
future refinements. Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship,
16(3), 84–87. doi:10.1111/j.1547-5069.1984.tb01393.x
Hutchins, R.M., (Ed) (1952). Great book of the western world. New
York: Encyclopaedia Britanica.
Garcia, E. R. S. (2011). The capable human being according to Paul
Ricoeur. A. B. Philosophy Thesis, University of Santo Tomas,
2011). Retrieved from https://www.scribd.com/doc/97599001/TheCapable-Human-Being-According-to-Paul-Ricoeur
Garrett, B. ( 2014). Science and modern thought in nursing:
Pragmatism and praxis for evidence-based practice. United
Kingdom: Northern Lights Media.
Hergenhahn, B. R. (2009). An introduction to the history of
psychology. U.S. A.: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
Hooft, S. V. (2006). Caring about health. England: Ashgate Publishing
Limited.
International Council of Nurses (n.d.). Definition of Nursing. Retrieved
from http://www.icn.ch/who-we-are/icn-definition-of-nursing/.
Kearney, R. (1988). Paul Ricoeur & the hermeneutic imagination.
Philosophy & Social Criticism, 30(7), 115-145.
Locsin, R. C. (2017). The co-existence of technology and caring in the
theory of technological competency as caring in nursing. The
Journal of Medical Investigation, 64(1.2), 160-165.
Masters, K. (2009). Role development in professional nursing practice
4th ed. Massachusetts: Jones and Bartlett Learning, LLC.
Mason, T., & Whitehead, E. (2003). Thinking nursing. United
Kingdom: McGraw Hill Education.
Maville, J., & Huerta, C. (2012). Health promotion in nursing. U.S.A.:
Delmar Cengage Learning.
McBean, D., & Wijck, F.V. (2013). Applied neuroscience for the
allied health professions: An Introduction to Neuroscience. China:
Churchill Livingstone Elsevier.
McCurry, M. K., Revell S. M. H, & Roy. C. (2010). Knowledge for the
good of the individual and society: Linking philosophy, disciplinary
goals, theory, and practice. Nursing Philosophy, 11 (1), 42-52.
Murray, M. & Chamberlain, K. (1999). Qualitative health psychology:
Theories and methods. London: SAGE Publications.
Nath, S. ( 2013). Ryle as a critique of Descartes’ Mind-Body Dualism.
International Journal of Scientific and Research Publications, 3
(7), 1-5.
New World Encyclopedia. (2015). Philosophical anthropology.
Retrieved
from
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Philosophical_anthrop
ology
Orem, D. (1995). Nursing: concept of practice (5th ed). St. Louis, MO:
Mosby.

UVJOR2017 Volume 11 Issue 1

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.
Papineau, D. (2009). Philosophy. London: Duncan Baird Publishers
Ltd.
Parvan, A. (2016). Monistic dualism and the body electric: An ontology
of disease, patient and clinician for person-centered healthcare.
Journal of Evaluationin Clinical Practice, 22(4), 530-538.
Pellauer, D. & Daunenhauer, B. (2016). Paul Ricoeur, The Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy.
Retrieved
from
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/ricoeur/
Polkinghorne, D. E. (1988).Narrative knowing & the human sciences.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
Rummelsburg, S. (2015). Three perspective on the human person. The
imaginative
conservative.
Retrieved
from
http://www.theimaginativeconservative.org/2015/05/threeperspectives-on-the- human-person.html.

University of the Visayas

37

Skirry, J. (2005). Descartes and the metaphysics of human nature.
London: Theommes.
Siringan, H. (2011). Philosophy of the human person. Quezon City. C
& E Publishing, Inc.
Sullivan, S. (2001). Living across and through skins: Transactional
bodies, pragmatism and feminism. Bloomington, U.S.A: Indiana
University Press.
White, K. (2006). The SAGE dictionary of health and society.
London: SAGE Publication Ltd.

Journal of Research

38

Martinez,, R. C. K. P., Mansaguiton, L.P., Mercado, M.A., and Panes, I. I.

AUTHORS
Rudolf Cymorr Kirby P. Martinez, PhD finished his BS in Nursing from University of Santo Tomas College of
Nursing, MA in Nursing from Trinity University of Asia and his PhD in Applied Cosmic Anthropology from Asian
Social Institute. At the moment, he is currently finishing up his second PhD in Nursing Science from St. Paul
University of the Philippines, Tuguegarao City.
He is currently a full time Assistant-Professor at College of Nursing, San Beda College, Mendiola Manila and a
part-time Professorial-Lecturer at Arellano University, Florentino Cayco Memorial School Graduate School of
Nursing. His research interests include the nature, realities and phenomenon of caring; issues on death, dying ;
palliative care and medical anthropology
Dr. Martinez is the current and founding President of the Philippine Nursing Research Society-San Beda Cell, the
Director for Research of the Beta Nu Delta Society of Nursing and a Fellow of the Royal Institute of Nurses
Lourlyn Pagonzaga Mansaguiton, MA has been working as a Clinical Instructor at Mountain View College
School of Nursing since 2004 up to the present. She obtained her degree in Bachelor of Science in Nursing from
Mountain View College and later earned her degree in Master of Science in Nursing from the Adventist University of
the Philippines. Currently, she pursues her degree in Ph.D. in Nursing Science at St. Paul University Philippines,
Tuguegarao.
Her work experience and passion in Community Health Nursing for almost ten years (from August 2005 to June
2004) motivated her to conduct research related to public health as a requirement in completion of her master’s
degree, to get actively involved in community extension services, and to devote her time teaching and mentoring
student to learn valuable concepts in Community Health Nursing.

Myrna Anilao-Mercado, MA is currently working as a Clinical Instructor at Mountain View College School of
Nursing since 2003. She obtained her Bachelor of Science in Nursing degree from Mountain View College; Master’s
in management major in Human Resources from Iligan Medical Center College and also earned her degree in Master
of Science in Nursing from the Adventist University of the Philippines. Currently She is taking up Ph.D. in Nursing
Science at St. Paul University Philippines, Tuguegarao.
Mrs. Mercado’s current and her previous work experiences as a Staff Nurse, a General Clinical Supervisor,
Infection Control and Quality Assurance Coordinator and Nursing Education and Training Coordinator paved the
way to conduct research related to management and orthopedics.

Iril I. Panes, MA finished BS in Nursing from Davao Doctors College, Davao City and MA in Nursing from
Philippine Christian University, Manila. She is currently taking up PhD in Nursing Science from St. Paul University
of the Philippines, Tuguegarao City.
Ms. Panes is presently employed as a Clinical Instructor of Sultan Kudarat State University – College of Nursing
in Tacurong City, Sultan Kudarat. Being trained in Geriatric and Psychiatric care, her research interests includes
issues on mental health and mental illness, and care of the elderly.

UVJOR2017 Volume 11 Issue 1

