The British University in Egypt
Faculty of Business Administration, Economics and
Political Science

Tarrying with the Leviathan: body and temporality in modern Egypt

A Dissertation Submitted In Part Fulfilment of The Requirements For
the Award of B.Sc. In Political Science 2018/2019

By: Mario Mikhail

Honours Level - Class of 2018/2019

Supervisor: Associate Professor. Maha Ghalwash

Page 1 of 93

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my supervisor Associate Professor. Maha Ghalwash for
her support. I’m extremely grateful for her constant support and valuable
contributions throughout the writing process.

Page 2 of 93

Abstract
This dissertation will answer what is the impact of modern state
institutions (medicine, factory and communication technology) on the
construction of the Egyptian body and time and how did the Egyptians react to
these efforts?
This dissertation argues that the Egyptian state aimed to produce
docile subjectivities for the sake of efficiency through three institutions: the
first is medicine which produced a healthy desexualised Egyptian body, made
reproduction its main purpose and controlled the Egyptians’ intimate time; the
second is the factory which controlled the behaviour of body and disciplined
the Egyptians’ time (initiated by Muhammad Ali and continued later by
Egyptian capitalism with the support of the state); the third is modern
transportation (e.g. railroads) which standardised the time of the Egyptians
and regulated their movement in space. But, by using everyday acts of quiet
assertiveness, Egyptians tried to regain control over their own bodies and
tarried the monotonous time.

Page 3 of 93

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments....................................................................................................................2
Abstract....................................................................................................................................3
Introduction..............................................................................................................................5
Body and time in modern times: a theoretical investigation..................................................15
Medicalising and moralising the Egyptian body: sexuality, marriage and perversions...........26
The techno politics of body and time: between the factory and transportation....................38
The leviathan’s morality: body and temporality under the contemporary Egyptian state.....46
Embracing the perversions: sexuality and messianism in everyday life..................................54
Conclusion..............................................................................................................................64
References and bibliography..................................................................................................67

Page 4 of 93

Introduction: the bodily, the temporal and the state
“There is no document of civilization which is not
at the same time a document of barbarism. And
just as such a document is not free of barbarism,
barbarism taints also the manner in which it was
transmitted from one owner to another. A historical
materialist therefore dissociates himself from it as
far as possible. He regards it as his task to brush
history against the grain.” (Walter Benjamin, 2007,
p. 257)
“Ideology

and

advertising

have

exalted

the

permanent mobilisation of the productive and
nervous energies of humankind towards profit and
war. We want to exalt tenderness, sleep and
ecstasy, the frugality of needs and the pleasure of
the senses.” (Franco Berardi, 2011, p. 129)
The orthodox understating on state-society relations in Egypt regards
the macro institutions and structures as the most vital. The politicians, the
officials, the experts and grand institutions are the centre of the Egyptian
history. However, this dissertation goes against the grain. This is a tale about
the marginalised, the perverted, the degenerates, the unproductive and the
idlers. The people who are not worthy to be mentioned. The lowest of the low,
are the heart of this study.

Page 5 of 93

This dissertation will examine the intersection of the medical institution,
factory, and modern transportation technology on the creation of the modern
Egyptian subjectivity. The trajectory of the chosen institutions will be traced
back to Muhammad Ali, his successors, and the colonial state. Furthermore,
the reproduction of the practices and notions of these institutions will be
examined in the contemporary Egyptian state-society relations. This
dissertation will answer what is the impact of modern state institutions
(medicine, factory and communication technology) on the construction of the
Egyptian body and time and how did the Egyptians react to these efforts?
This dissertation argues that the Egyptian state aimed to produce
docile subjectivities for the sake of efficiency through three institutions: the
first is medicine which produced a healthy desexualised Egyptian body, made
reproduction its main purpose, and controlled the Egyptians’ intimate time; the
second is the factory which controlled the behaviour of body and disciplined
the Egyptians’ time (initiated by Muhammad Ali and continued later by
Egyptian capitalism with the support of the state); the third is modern
transportation (e.g. railroads) which standardised the time of the Egyptians
and regulated their movement in space. But, by using everyday acts of quiet
assertiveness, Egyptians tried to regain control over their own bodies and
tarried the monotonous time.
Reviewing the literature on the Egyptian state-society relations: from
nationalism to micro-politics
One of the most prevailing narratives about the state-society relations
in Egypt is the nationalist narrative. It sees that since Muhammad Ali, Egypt

Page 6 of 93

started to have its own national identity and to become autonomous from the
Ottomans (Brand, 2014; James, 2012; Sayyid-Marsot, 1985; Dodwell, 1967).
Since then it is a story about leaders e.g. Urabi, Saad Zaghlol, Mustafa Kamel
who affirm the Egyptian identity (Brand, 2014). This narrative assumes that
society is in a natural unity with the state (Brand, 2014). Thus, it takes society
for granted and neglects that the selfish motives of those individuals (Fahmy,
2002; James, 2012). Also, it disregards the unequal power relations between
the elite and ordinary Egyptians (Fahmy, 2002). Thus, it fails to see history
from below.
This

narrative

became

closely

associated

with

modernisation.

Modernisation for the nationalists became a nationalist tool (James, 2012).
Modern knowledge and technologies will strengthen the Egyptian nation and
prepare it for independence (El-Nagar & Krugly-Smolska, 2011; Hourani,
2007). This view disregards the negative aspects of modernisation and how it
negatively affected the Egyptians.
Another interpretation of the state-society relations is the liberal
understanding. It regards that there is a historical mistrust between the society
and the state. It can take the form of antagonism between peasants and the
state in 19th and 20th century (Brown, 1990; Goldberg, 1992; Baer, 2016). This
analysis contains many limitations because it neglects that there was a sense
of trust and interdependence between the peasants and the state whether in
the era of Muhmmad Ali and his family or the colonial state (Ghalwash, 2016;
Fahmy, 1999; Chalcraft, 2005; Anderson, 2017). The peasants in the 19 th
century indeed understood the laws of the state and believed that it will
provide justice for them (Ghalwash, 2016). Even if this form of justice is
Page 7 of 93

different from the notion of equality; the state became the source of justice
even against state officials (Fahmy, 1999).
This interpretation continued to understand the state society relations
until the 21st century. It understood the state as an authoritarian construct
(Fahmy, 2011; Lynch, 2011; Bellin, 2004). The state represses civil society
actors whether NGOs or professional syndicates and the civil society is trying
to counter this repression towards democratisation (Yom, 2005; Lynch, 2011;
Ismail, 1995; Bellin, 2004; Clark, 2000). This claim disregards the fact that
states to maintain their power they need to use a mixture of violence and
consent to legitimise their existence (Gramsci, 2010). Also, a main limitation
with this claim is that it perceives power as oppressive. Power is not
oppressive power is a productive force that produces desires and needs
(Foucault, 2008). Thus, it is important to go beyond the simplistic
authoritarianism democracy dichotomy.
Another interpretation is the classical Marxist one. Some classical
Marxist scholars perceive the Egyptian history in terms of class economically
exploiting the other classes. Peasants and labour force were being exploited
by the state elite in the pre-colonial era (Hakim, 2012; Beinin, 1981). Later the
capitalist class exploited the Egyptian workers with the support of the state
and the working class struggled against them (Beinin, 1981; Beinin &
Lockman, 1998; Lockman, 1988). This argument despite being critical and
looks at history from below. However, it focuses on class and economic
relations without considering other aspects of Egyptians lives that were
influenced by those institutions. It disregards the everyday life of people.

Page 8 of 93

Some employed the concept of oriental despotism. It sees that the
orient (including Egypt) has a distinct mode of governance based on a highly
centralised state to manage and control the people, agriculture and other
activities (Wittfogel, 1981). Some claimed that this structure of governance
continued until Muhammad Ali (Hakim, 2012). Others claimed that the
pharaonic tradition of oriental despotism continued in Egypt until the 21 st
century (Hassan, 2010). This model is simplistic because it assumes that
power is oppressive and as mentioned before it is more complicated. It also
disregards that Egypt since the era of Muhammad Ali Egypt was governed by
modes of European governance and technologies (Mitchell, 1988). Thus, the
oriental structure in modern times is a myth
There is also the social contract approach. It argues that there is a
social contract between the Egyptians and the state which rests on the
premises that Egyptians will give up their political freedoms and in return they
will gain economic benefits from the state (El-Meehy, 2010; Bassam, 2018;
Desai & Olofsgard, 2011; Kamel, 2001). Although, it acknowledges that the
state is not just an oppressive structure. However, it is heavily dependent on
economics and disregards the role of discourse and knowledge.
Recent scholarship on Egypt state society relations started to
incorporate Gramsci. This trend analyses the Egyptian state efforts as an
exercise of hegemonic leadership to legitimise its existence through discourse
e.g. democracy (Roccu, 2012; Ranko, 2015). However, a counter-hegemony
by NGO’s and Islamic social movements is resisting this discourse (Ranko,
2015; Pratt, 2004; Kandil, 2011; Smet, 2016). Although this provides a more
complex understanding on how state functions through not only force but also
Page 9 of 93

by consent; however, it is still a macro approach that focuses on grand
political institutions and social movements. Instead of understanding the role
of the pseudo-apolitical institutions and the everyday lives of the people.
Thus, a micro-political approach is needed in the Egyptian histography.
Issues related to body, sexuality and work had been always regarded as
something grounded in culture or religion (Mens, 2015). However, a more
critical approach argues otherwise. The trend of the micro-political approach
started by Timothy Mitchell. He studied architecture, blueprints and scientific
writing to examine the penetration of disciplinary Western technologies of
governance in Egypt in the 19 th century e.g. surveillance in villages, modern
schooling, modern army conscription (Mitchell, 1988).

Later he also

examined the expert knowledge and its impact on the Egyptians in the late
20th century (Mitchell, 2005). Khaled Fahmy critically examined the institutions
of modern army, forensic medicine, policing to see their impact in creating
modern docile subjectivities (Fahmy, 2002a; Fahmy, 1998; Fahmy, 1999).
Mervat Hatem studied the medical institution efforts to control Women’s
reproductive capabilities by affirming the notion that motherhood is natural
and abortion is dangerous (Hatem, 1997). Amira Sonbol studied the
Westernisation of the Western knowledge in Egypt (Sonbol, 1991). Hanan
Kholoussy examined how the medical discourse restricted male sexual
behaviour to create a healthy, heterosexual, and disciplined family man
(Kholoussy, 2010a). She also examined the circulation of a discourse in the
19th century that bachelors should seek to create families (Kholoussy, 2010b).
Other scholars focused on the colonial medical knowledge and how it was
internalised by the Egyptians (Abugideiri, 2016) Kenneth Cuno tackled the
Page 10 of 93

institutionalisation by the state of a modern nuclear family structure in Egypt in
the 19th and 20th centuries (Cuno, 2015). Hanan Hammad examined the
creation of a heteronormative industrial subjectivity by the state and factory
owners in the 20th century (Hammad, 2016). Finally, On Barak examined the
impact of modern European communication technologies (imported by the
state) on the time of the Egyptian to make it subjected to the European
standardisation and precision (Barak, 2013; Barak, 2009). Also, resistance to
these notions had been examined (Fahmy, 2002a; Hammad, 2016; Barak,
2013).
This study uses this rich literature as a starting point for an in-depth
understanding on how the state society relations function in Egypt. However,
this study will avoid the limitations of the previously mentioned micro-political
research. Almost all of the literature stress on a Foucauldian framework with
the exception of Mitchell and Barak. This study will not rely on Foucault only.
In addition to Foucault, ideas from critical theory will be used to offer a fresh
understanding of the issue to reach new conclusions. The second problem in
the literature is that it is fragmented. If Hammad studied the factories impact
on Egyptians bodies, she failed to adequately address how it impacted their
time (it is only briefly mentioned and limited to the factory only). If Barak
studied how modern communication technologies influenced people’s time he
failed to see how it impacted their bodies. The current literature mostly
restricts body to sexuality and disregards other notions and gestures by the
body. The literature disregards that the same institutions worked on the two
layers of Egyptians subjectivity which are body and time. Medicine, factory
and modern communication technologies cannot be viewed separately. They
Page 11 of 93

all intersect with each other to create a disciplined productive subjectivity.
Finally, the influence of those institutions and their repercussions in the 21 st
century had been rarely examined. This study will address those gaps.
Methodology and theory: Critical theory, post-structuralism and beyond
This dissertation uses qualitative methods. It will examine the
secondary literature on the topic. Also, primary sources are used such as
medical reports, court cases, the writings of European experts in 19 th and 20th
century Egypt e.g. European doctors, orientalists, architects and technicians
to understand the European system of thought that shaped the state
institutions that shaped the Egyptian subjectivities. Furthermore, articles by
Egyptian intellectuals and scientists in these eras will be examined to
elucidate how this discourse was internalised. In the second part of the
dissertation statements and speeches by governmental officials in the 21 st
century will be examined.
Moreover, examples from popular culture will be examined. Songs are
going to analysed from the 19 th century singing to the contemporary singing.
Also, images and movies will be examined. Also, the writings of middleclass
youth on new independent media on the internet. This rich data will exemplify
the reaction of the Egyptians to the state rationality whether it is acceptance
or resistance.
To analyse the expert’s writings, Foucauldian informed discourse
analysis is used. Discourse is understood as a creator of reality by
constructing what is normal and what is deviant or perverted (Foucault, 2008;
McSherry, 2013; Zitz et al., 2014). These discourses are produced by experts
Page 12 of 93

or people with authority (Foucault, 2008; McSherry, 2013). This hegemonic
discourse produces and legitimises certain power relations, and becomes
accepted as truth (Foucault, 2008; McSherry, 2013; Zitz et al., 2014). This
method will allow an in-depth examination of the relation between power,
knowledge, practices and language.
Regarding the theoretical work, different but corresponding theoretical
perspectives are going to be synthesised. Michell Foucault ideas on discipline
and biopower to examine how the bodies are being modified by power
structures and knowledge (Foucault, 1995; Foucault, 1994; Foucault, 2008).
E.P Thompson views on the control over the time of workers in the factory
(Thompson, 1967). Karl Marx and Hannah Arendt observations on the
subjection of the body to the machine (Marx,1976; Arendt, 1959). Althusser is
also vital to understand how state apparatuses work on the unconsciousness
and the importance of the family as a state apparatus (Althusser, 2001).
Herbert Marcuse ideas on surplus repression and the performance principle to
understand the logic behind the subjection of sexuality (desexualisation or
directing sexuality towards reproduction instead of pleasure) and other
aspects of the daily life of people to serve the modern logic of efficiency and
production (Marcuse, 1966; Marcuse, 2002). Theodor Adorno and Max
Horkheimer critique of rationality and science as an instrument of domination
(Adorno & Horkheimer, 2016). Also, Horkheimer’s view on the streets and
automobiles as an instrument of control over the people (Horkheimer, 2013).
Walter Benjamin ideas on the progress of history, the empty homogeneous
time of modernity and the messianic resistance against the progress of time
by stopping it (Benjamin, 2002). Giorgio Agamben to further examine the
Page 13 of 93

dichotomy of the homogenous time i.e. the repetitive and monotonous time of
modernity and the messianic time i.e. the spontaneous revolutionary time
(Agamben, 2010; Benjamin, 2007). James Scott to understand everyday
forms of resistance and Michel de Certeau ideas to understand the everyday
subversive tactics that people use to resist the rational/scientific planning;
Assef Bayat’s quiet encroachment is going to be also discussed to elaborate
on the unintentional practices of the ordinary (Scott, 1986; Scott, 2008;
Certeau, 1984; Bayat, 2013).
This dissertation is divided into five chapters. The first chapter will
provide a theoretical understating based on the theorists mentioned above.
The second chapter will examine the medical institution. The third chapter will
tackle the factory and modern transportation. The fourth chapter will examine
the consequences of these institutions on the contemporary Egyptian state.
The fifth chapter will examine how the Egyptians reacted to the state.

Page 14 of 93

Body and time in modern times: a theoretical
investigation
This chapter intents to synthesise different theoretical approaches to
reach a sophisticated understanding on body and time as sites of power. The
following ideas will be examined: first, sexuality and its relation to power, the
issue of time and its relation to technology, the body and technology, and
finally, the reactions of ordinary people to these modern structures.
In the beginning it was the sex
To understand how sexuality functions, understanding its relation to
discourse is fundamental. Michel Foucault noticed that sexuality is not fixed;
on the contrary, it is closely intertwined with the discourses (e.g. medical) of a
particular epoch (Foucault, 2008). Sexuality constitutes a separate domain in
the human psychophysical characteristics that is linked with desire, eroticism,
intimacy, love and passion, to name a few. It is also an identity (Halperin,
1989).

Sexuality is constructed and produced through discourse or a

multiplicity of discourses (Foucault, 2008). Sexuality is essentially a form of
cultural production (Halperin, 1989). Thus, sexuality is a discursive and social
construct.
The eighteenth century is central in the history of sexuality. Although
the power and knowledge of that time did not invent new pleasures or sexual
vices, however, it did create new rules and prescriptions for their regulation
(Foucault, 2008). Medical experts and scientists created perversions e.g.
(homosexuality and polygamy) and normality e.g. heterosexuality (Foucault,
2008). The perverse became a form of life to be investigated by medical
Page 15 of 93

knowledge to correct (Foucault, 2008). This sexual regulation was for the
purpose of creating a healthy population of workers for capitalist production
(Dean, 1994). These sexual norms are presented as objective truth and are
internalised by the subjects (Taylor, 2009). Thus, sexuality is an artificial
construct.
The body and its discontents
Another idea worth examining is that of Marcuse. Following Sigmund
Freud, Herbert Marcuse argued that in modern societies there is a certain
level of repression needed to contain sexual and aggressive instincts in order
to ensure the smooth functioning of civilization (Marcuse, 1966). This is called
a necessary repression which is needed to halt humans’ violent tendencies
(Marcuse, 1966). However, on the other hand, modern capitalist/bureaucratic
societies created a new form of repression called surplus repression for the
sake of domination (Marcuse, 1966).
Every aspect of human life including sexuality must serve a
depersonalised, rational, productive and efficient purpose; this is called the
performance principal (Marcuse, 1966). It restricts the human Eros to
monogamic sexual interactions for reproduction (Marcuse, 1966). Sexual
gratification is directed towards the genitalia and desexualises the rest of the
body (Marcuse, 1966). Non-reproductive sexual acts such as oral sex, anal
sex, and homosexuality are tabooed (Kellner, 1984). Polygamy is tabooed,
and sexual libido is channelled only through monogamous families (Kellner,
1984). The excess of libidinal energy is sublimated into socially accepted

Page 16 of 93

activities particularly alienated labour 1 (Marcuse, 1966). Excess libido is
diverted into alienated labour which is the negation of the pleasure principle
and human gratification (Marcuse, 1966). Thus, here the nature of sexuality is
seen in modern bureaucratic/capitalist societies.
Foucault contra Marcuse? Friends or foes?
Using Foucault and Marcuse together may appear as tension or even a
contradiction. However, it is not. In the conventional wisdom, Foucault is an
enemy of Marcuse (Dini & Briganti, 2017): Foucault’s critique of the repressive
hypothesis (i.e. power represses sexuality) is seen as an indirect attack on
Marcuse (Dini & Briganti, 2017).
Because as mentioned for Foucault, power is productive; it produces
subjectivities and identities, and is not repressive (Foucault, 2008). However,
this approach neglects a central concept in the Marcusasian thought which is
repressive de-sublimation which has a productive side (Renaud, 2013).
Dominant institutions must provide false needs to prevent an emancipatory
alternative (Marcuse, 2002). Dominant institutions construct suitable desires
and sexual activities while prohibiting others (Renaud, 2013). As shown
earlier both theorists believe that dominant institutions create perversions and
normality.
Sexuality and time
Before discussing time discipline it is important to elucidate the
connection between sexuality and time. Free time in capitalism is not free; it is
a continuation of work (Adorno, 2001). Free time is monopolised by capitalism
1

Since labour in capitalism in alienated, work does not fulfil human desires. It serves the dominate
apparatus (Marcuse, 1966)

Page 17 of 93

to reproduce labour power, make labour more productive and increase profits
(Adorno, 2001). The free time of sex is also a part of production (Marcuse,
2002). The time is sex is made to be productive to meet the requirements of
the performance principal (Marcuse, 2002). Thus, managing sexuality is not
just about managing body, but also people’s alleged free time to make it
productive.
Time in modern times: the factory and beyond
Time is another aspect of the modern subjectivity that is under the grip
of power. During the early stages of industrialisation, a new type of discipline
appeared: time-disciple (Thompson, 1967). The worker must observe certain
working hours (Thompson, 1967). Time keeping, and clocks became an
essential part of the labour process (Thompson, 1967). The worker’s time
became disciplined and under the control of supervisors and timekeepers
(Thompson, 1967).
The disciplining of time also was mentioned by Foucault. Factories,
hospitals and schools are governed by strict time-tables to construct a docile
body and obedient subjectivity (Foucault, 1995). The worker has a time of
arrival, departure and a set of tasks to complete (Foucault, 1995). The time
must be spent by the worker in the most efficient way possible (Foucault,
1995). A fundamental technology which standardised time across large
spaces was the railroads (Zerubavel, 1982; Bartky, 1989; McCrossen, 2016).
Because of its regular time of arrival and departure, the everyday time of the
individuals was regulated (Zerubavel, 1982; Bartky, 1989; McCrossen, 2016).

Page 18 of 93

Time became independent of the will of the individual almost everywhere,
inside the factory and outside it.
The Chronos
There are serious implications regarding this notion. Walter Benjamin
brilliantly noticed that modern history is progressing in an empty homogenous
time (Benjamin, 2007). The homogenous time is comprised of measurable
units manifested in clocks (Firth & Robinson, 2013). It has no significant or
meaningful moments (Firth & Robinson, 2013). It is a time that passes (Firth &
Robinson, 2013). It is repetitive, and its immediate effect is boredom (Firth &
Robinson, 2013; Benjamin, 2003). Giorgio Agamben calls it the Chronos
(Agamben, 2010). It is a quantitative, linear, chronological and measurable
time (Kidwell, 2016; Prozorov, 2014; Agamben, 2012; Agamben, 2010). This
modern time is fundamentality monotonous and leads to boredom. Everyday
involves repeating the same tasks at the same time. The excess of repetitions
makes life boring and dull.
Going back to the body
In the first section, the sexual aspect of the body was discussed.
However, the body is not limited to sex. The bodies of the population must be
monitored (e.g. medical records) to maintain healthy and productive
subjectivities (Foucault, 2008). This is a biopolitical control over life (Foucault,
2008). Foucault discusses also the process in which docile bodies are
created, or disciplinary power. The correct use of the body is essential to a
correct use of time (Foucault, 1995). The body is disciplined through repetitive
acts and gestures (Foucault, 1995). Certain movements of the body are
Page 19 of 93

routinised every day in a panopticon-like structure e.g. factory (Foucault,
1995). There is constant hierarchal surveillance and supervision (Foucault,
1995). The subjectivities who conform to the rules get rewarded, while those
who refuse are punished; thus, creating docile bodies (Foucault, 1995). Karl
Marx realised that the machine subjects the worker’s movement to its use;
making the worker a mere appendage to the machine (Marx, 1976). Hannah
Arendt noticed that the body of the worker must conform to the rhythm of the
machine; not vice-versa (Arendt, 1959). The natural rhythm of the body must
be mechanised to meet the requirements of the machine (Arendt, 1959).
Here, the body is controlled inside a closed factory.
The body’s movement can also be regulated in open spaces. The body
of the traveller is immobile inside the train as Michel de-Certeau noticed
(Certeau, 1998). The train is moving forwards while the human body is
overwhelmed by the movement of the train: the body cannot move; it moves
with the train; the traveller can only watch immobile things outside passing by
(Certeau, 1998). According to Max Horkheimer the technology of automobiles
is central in abolishing spontaneity (Horkheimer, 2013). The driver must
observe certain lanes, turns and speed limits (Horkheimer, 2013). Thus,
unlike the horse, for example, as a mode of transportation, automobiles
impose more regulations on movement (Horkheimer, 2013). Hence, the body
is being subjected daily to technologies of transportation that regulate its
movement in space; thus, further restricting the free movement of the body.
A note on the state

Page 20 of 93

It is important to understand that the impact of the state is not on the
conscious mind.

As Louis Althusser argued, when the state apparatus

functions, it targets the unconscious mind (Althusser, 2001). It is also vital to
note that the family is one of these apparatuses (Althusser, 2001). These vital
points are fundamental to this study.
From resistance to quiet encroachment
Despite the overwhelming network of power, knowledge and regulatory
regimes, the people are not passive. James C. Scott argued that the relatively
powerless groups have their own ways of resistance, which he describes as
‘everyday forms of resistance’ e.g. foot dragging, desertion and false
compliance are all ways that the weak use against the state or powerful elites
(Scott, 1986). This perspective highlights the hidden forms of resistance, and
challenges the traditional wisdom which restricts resistance to outright
rebellions and revolutions. However, everyday resistance can take other
forms.
Certeau elaborates on this. Certeau makes a distinction between
strategies and tactics (Certeau, 1984; Mitchell, 2007). Strategies refer to the
actions of the powerful which construct a system of panopticism (Certeau,
1984; Mitchell, 2007). This is found in the scientific management of armies,
cities, and scientific institutions (Certeau, 1984; Mitchell, 2007).
On the other hand, like Scott, tactics are the weapons of the weak to
evade discipline (Certeau, 1984; Mitchell, 2007). They are spontaneous; not
the result of a grand design (Certeau, 1984; Mitchell, 2007). Strategies are
related to space, while tactics are about the smart use of time (Frow, 1991).
Page 21 of 93

The pedestrian transforms the spatial environment (Certeau, 1984). He/she
takes shortcuts, detours, and refuses to walk in an obligatory road (Certeau,
1984). It is a spatial metamorphosis from manged spaces to liberated places
by opening new special meanings and directions through the individual’s
subjective experience with the space (Certeau, 1984). The tactics can also
include subversive language such as obscene gestures and eroticised
language in public that flout public decency and morality (Certeau et al.,
1998). People do not just consume things, they erotise their environment and
everyday things (Certeau et al., 1998). By relying on everyday tactics ordinary
people shape the scientifically planned city to meet their genuine needs
through their subjective experience with the city.
To go a step further, Asef Bayat’s ideas on resistance should be
examined. Bayat argued that the notion of everyday resistance fails to
demarcate between the people’s awareness about their condition and the act
of resistance (Bayat, 2013). Although many people are aware of their
marginal position, that does not mean necessarily that they are resisting
(Bayat, 2013). These acts are not always intentional (Bayat, 2013). The quiet
encroachment, on the other hand, entails an informal, prolonged and
persuasive process that marginalised groups engage in to cope with the
present situation, gain better opportunities, and to achieve autonomy from the
disciplinary power of the state and other institutions (Bayat, 2013). In this
context, these everyday unconscious acts can be properly understood.
The return of the messiah in the time of Kairos

Page 22 of 93

To further demarcate between the notion of refusal that this
dissertation uses and the conventional notions of resistance, the work of
Benjamin and Agamben will be re-examined. Walter Benjamin famously said
that revolutions are not the locomotive of history as Marx said; on the
contrary, they aim to pull the emergency break of history (Ross, 2017). History
is progressing in a path that does not favour the marginalised classes; it
serves the powerful (Benjamin, 2007). The angel of history is forcefully
pushed forward by wind while it is looking back (Benjamin, 2007). The wind of
progress serves the ruling classes (Benjamin, 2007). The weak messianic
power that every generation has should halt progress, not push it forward
(Benjamin, 2007). It is in that sense that the practices of the ordinary are
understood: not as an engine that pushes history; but, as modest acts to stop
the train of history from moving.
Time is fundamental here. Instead of the empty homogenous time,
there is the messianic time (Benjamin, 2007). According to Agamben, the
messianic time is unexpected while the ordinary time is chronological and
leaves the people powerless and weak (Boer, 2013). The Kairos, i.e. the
messianic time, is a seized Chronos (Agamben, 2010). Messianic time is
qualitative, cannot be quantified or measured (Harink, 2010; Kidwell, 2016).
Thus, the messianic time is revolutionary, spontaneous, and radically different
from the homogenous time.
Concluding notes on body, time, and the state
This chapter elucidated that the body and time of the modern
subjectivities is constantly manipulated and modified by power. Sexuality, the

Page 23 of 93

body movement and the time that passes are all sites of power. However, the
ordinary people are not passive consumers. They have their own ways to
cope and defy those regimes of discipline unintentionally.
This dissertation develops a skeptic view on reason and technology.
Foucault’s post-structuralist approach exemplifies this position. Also, Theodor
Adorno and Horkheimer specify that modern science, reason and technology
are tools of domination over nature and man (Adorno & Horkheimer, 2016).
Reason became an instrument of domination by the powerful instead of being
a force of critical inquiry (Adorno & Horkheimer, 2016). Althusser regarded the
state apparatuses as ideological and oppressive (Althusser, 2001). However,
this study will go beyond these ideas.
The power of the state is not just ideological, it targets bodies and the
time that passes. Factories, railroads, medical knowledge they can all be tools
of the state. Many of the theorists mentioned above, their discussion was in
the context of capitalism. This study regards them as relevant in discussing
the behaviour of the state in modifying bodies and time as the engine of
modernity in Egypt. Even though capitalism is going to be discussed in later
chapters. However, the state was the initiator of these technologies. The state
takes control over the bodies and time of the individuals to ensure complete
productivity.
However, ordinary people react to these modern inventions through
unintentional everyday acts, they quietly assert their need for autonomy.
Through these practices, people are halting progress that makes them
heteronomous to dominate institutions. Thus, regaining their bodies and

Page 24 of 93

constructing their messianic time. These acts are going to be termed as quiet
assertiveness throughout this study.

Page 25 of 93

Medicalising and moralising the Egyptian body:
sexuality, marriage and perversions
In the process of modernising Egypt, the Egyptian body came under
the influence of modern discourse of medicine. This chapter will examine how
medical knowledge shaped the sexuality of men and women to make a
productive and heathy population.
Entering modernity through medicine
The story of modern medicine in Egypt starts with Clot Bey. Clot bey is
a French physician who was hired by Muhammad Ali as the Surgeon-in-Chief
to keep the army healthy (Burrow, 1975). However, Clot Bey had a different
vision and convinced Muhammad Ali that the whole population must be
healthy to keep the army heathy (Burrow, 1975). He established Qasr Al-Aini
medical school and hospital which was equipped with the modern medical
knowledge of the time (Dib, 2015). He introduced modern medicine to Egypt
(Burrow, 1975). In this moment Egypt entered the realm of modern European
knowledge.
First the female bodies were captured
The control over sexuality started with constructing women’s bodies.
For

Clot-Bey

replacing

village

indigenous

medicine

by

professional

practitioners was essential (Hatem, 1997). He trained female doctors and
recruited local midwives to collaborate with the doctors (Kozma, 2011; Hatem,
1997). This way, the state aimed to limit abortions, which was commonly
practiced in Egypt, and aimed to limit the spread of sexually transmitted
diseases in women, because the state medical agents can examine women
Page 26 of 93

freely (Hatem, 1997). It is important to note that Clot Bey described Egyptian
women as sexually voracious, which is a reason in spreading syphilis
(ElSayed, 2011). The trained professionals and recruited midwives’ role
involved recording deaths and births (Hatem, 1997). Also, reducing infant
mortality rates that had been triggered by the spread of smallpox (Fahmy,
1998a). They were to monitor whether abortions were performed (Hatem,
1997). These women became the agents of the state (Hatem, 1997). Local
women did not see abortion as a crime or sin; although, Clot Bey regarded
them as such (Hatem, 1997). For Clot Bey women who did not want to be
mothers (i.e. committing abortion) were defying the natural order of their
bodies to reproduce (Hatem, 1997). In the programme of the medical school
women’s natural cycle in life involves getting pregnant (Hatem, 1997). Clot
Bey saw that women’s bodies are in a natural process of menstruation,
pregnancy, and childbirth (ElSayed, 2011). The female’s reproductive organs
are meant to receive (ElSayed, 2011). Women’s natural role, according to
their bodies, is to raise children in the family (ElSayed, 2011). When he
discussed female circumcision, he did not advocate it, but he tolerated it as a
social custom because it did not affect reproduction (Hatem, 1997). He said it
is used “to lessen the desire of Egyptian women” and “it is likely to continue
across generations” (Clot-Bey, 2011, P. 317). According to this medical
discourse, women are naturally mothers. This medical discourse constructed
the Egyptian feminine body as bodies for reproduction and childbirth, while
pleasure is disregarded and trivialised. This is exemplified in the comparison
between abortion and circumcision in Clot-Bey’s writings.

Page 27 of 93

Qasr Al-Aini continued to function throughout the nineteenth century.
One of the graduates of the school (Ahmad Hassan al-Rashidi) stressed that
when women engage in excessive sexual intercourses it will result in extreme
heath deterioration (ElSayed, 2011). Hence, women should be observed
(ElSayed, 2011). The curriculum under the British colonisation, still informed
by Victorian science, regarded domesticity and motherhood as ingrained in
the nature of women (Abugideiri, 2016). Egyptian doctors embraced this
discourse which led to the creation of republican motherhood by nationalist
Egyptian doctors (Abugideiri, 2016; El-Shakry, 2007). Women’s role is to
deliver and rear healthy babies for the sake of the nation (Abugideiri, 2016).
Again, only the reproductive role of sex is prioritised while sexual pleasure is
marginalised. This medical discourse became internalised by Egyptians.
Medicine became a central tool for surveillance. In 1878 a man brought
his daughter to the police station because he believed that his daughter had
been deflowered while she denied this (Kozma, 2011). His female neighbour
assured to him that his daughter is virgin (Kozma, 2011). However, at the
police station a medical practitioner examined her and concluded that she had
been indeed deflowered (Kozma, 2011). The investigations concluded that the
girl was involved in prostitution (Kozma, 2011). This case is one from many
(Kozma, 2011). This elucidates to what extent Egyptians trusted and
internalised the medical institution’s authority. The man did not believe his
daughter nor his neighbour, but he believed the medical authority.
Then the male bodies were captured

Page 28 of 93

Egyptian men were also under the influence of modern medicine,
although some literature only focused on women and neglected men as if they
were not regulated (Abugideiri, 2016; Hatem, 1997). For Clot Bey the male
reproductive organs are meant to give (ElSayed, 2011). Sperm is vital in the
process of reproduction (ElSayed, 2011). Men are naturally aggressive and
sexual; but, men should direct their sexual desires in marriage only (ElSayed,
2011). It is advised that men have sex twice only per-week with their wives
(ElSayed, 2011). Furthermore, men should avoid polygyny (ElSayed, 2011).
Polygyny will make men’s sperm weak because of overindulgence in sexual
intercourse (ElSayed, 2011). He states monogamy does not contradict Islamic
Sharia (ElSayed, 2011). Moderation in sex creates healthy sperm; thus,
healthy offspring (ElSayed, 2011). Here, the male bodies are also prioritised
for their reproductive capabilities not pleasure.
Increasing productivity was the goal. Since men were fundamental as a
part of labour force and the military during Muhammad Ali’s era, their sexual
lives must be monitored to ensure a healthy body (Kholoussy, 2010a). From
the 19th century onwards male bodies were constantly checked in the military
and they were not allowed to have sexual intercourse while serving
(Kholoussy, 2010a). Regulating prostitution (this is going to be discussed
later) aimed to regulate the sexual behaviour of men so that they do not get
infected (Kholoussy, 2010a; Fahmy, 2002a). Regulating prostitution aimed to
regulate male sexuality (Kholoussy, 2010a). The Islamic thinker, Muhammad
Abduh blamed the Egyptian bachelors for spreading venereal diseases due to
their sexual interactions with prostitutes (Kholoussy, 2010a). Here, men’s

Page 29 of 93

bodies must be kept healthy in order to become productive in various social
and economic activities.
Stop the prostitutes! Diseasing the female body
Prostitution was a major issue. Clot Bey and the medical institution
located prostitution as the main reason behind the syphilis epidemic in the
military because they are not medically checked (Fahmy, 1998a). He says
since their profession has no shame, they will not mind getting checked by
doctors (Fahmy, 1998a). He stressed that prostitutes do not only infect men
but also free women (Fahmy, 2002b). In 1834 Muhammad Ali decided to ban
prostitution then he banished prostitutes to upper Egypt (Hammad & Biancani,
2017). It was common since then that the people who engage in prostitution
get arrested or flogged (Kozma, 2012). Cot bey did not only condemn
prostitution for health reasons only as historian Khaled Fahmy argued. Clot
Bey writes prostitution is banned in all religions and it was rarely found in the
Ottoman provinces; however, Egypt was unlike the rest of the east especially
in the “disintegration of morals”, prostitutes were taxed however the
government decided to “ban it to remove the stigma of their existence and the
shame of its recognition” (Clot Bey, 2011, P. 327). Prostitution was practiced
it public, after the ban it became practiced in secret (Clot Bey, 2011). Thus, he
also presents a moral argument against prostitution not just a medical one.
But definitely prostitutes as a risk for public heath was the most vital. As it will
be discussed later, morality and efficiency are intertwined.
During the British occupation prostitution was still an important issue.
The British were worried about the health of their troops from the diseased

Page 30 of 93

prostitutes (Kholoussy, 2010a). Thus, the British regulated prostitution by
licensing prostitutes and medically inspecting prostitutes weekly for diseases
(Hammad, 2014; Biancani, 2012). Here the British administration controlled
the sexuality of Egyptian prostitutes.
This shows the change in the attitude towards prostitution. According to
Clot Bey, prostitution was something public and normal (Clot Bey, 2011). By
the late 19th century Egyptians were petitioning against the existence of
brothels in their neighbourhoods calling them evil places (Fahmy, 2002b).
During the British occupation, Egyptian nationalists called for the abolition of
prostitution which they condemned as immoral, a source for diseases, and a
waste of reproductive and economic capabilities of the youth of the Egyptian
nation (Kholoussy, 2010a; Hammad, 2014; Biancani, 2012; Hammad, 2011).
This change in the Egyptians tolerance towards prostitution indicates that the
discourse of the state medical institution was internalised by the people. For
the Muhammad Ali’s state and the British administration prostitution was
dangerous. Egyptians internalised this. This was novel to the Egyptians who
did not see any threat in prostitution or a need to regulate it or abolish it. This
changed after the introduction of the medical discourse on the danger of
prostitution.
Stop the Khawal! Medicalising homoeroticism
Another central issue was homosexuality. In 19 th century Egypt there
were male belly dancers who were called Khawals (Boone, 2015). The
dancers dressed in women’s clothes and mimicked their behaviour (Boone,
2015). European orientalists were shocked by them (Boone, 2015; Fraser,

Page 31 of 93

2015). They were assumed to desire men and engage in prostitution with men
(Boone, 2015). For Clot Bey and later the graduates of Qasr Al-Aini
homosexuality is unnatural and a product of mental or physical problems
(ElSayed, 2011). Qasr Al-Aini graduate Ahmad Al-Rashidi saw that women
become lesbians as a result of hysteria or enlarged clitoris (ElSayed, 2011).
Clot Bey writes, the prohibition of prostitution led to “a vice more shameful
than prostitution which is sodomy” (Clot Bey, 2011, P. 327). When he
discusses the Khawal performance he specifies that “the one who watches
cannot feel but disgust” and it “defiled Egypt” (Clot Bey, 2011, P. 403). Then
he called on the state to intervene (Clot Bey, 2011). However, European
accounts shows that those dancers were admired by many and had immense
popularity in Egypt (Fraser, 2015). Here, the medical experts declare
homosexuality as abnormal, a result of physical irregularity, and unnatural.
Any expressions of homosexuality cannot be tolerated.
Medicine became a central mean in monitoring homosexuality. In the
start of 20th century police were arresting homosexuals for violating public
decency even if they were outside the public’s eye (Hammad, 2016). Medical
experts were examining the bodies of the accused to deny or prove the
allegations (Hammad, 2016). In one of the cases, the medical experts
concluded that one of the accused had an anal itch which made him involved
in homosexuality and he needs to be treated (Hammad, 2016). This shows
that according the medical discourse, homosexuality is a result of physical
irregularity e.g. anal-itch not sexual attraction. Medicine continued to be a tool
for checking homosexual bodies.
Stop the perversions! A brief history of non-productive sex
Page 32 of 93

Part of the regulation of sexuality was dictating what sexual acts should
be performed. In Clot Bey’s discussion of sexual intercourse, he only
mentions the female and male genitalia (ElSayed, 2011). He does not
mention any other forms of sexual interactions. In medical journals in the late
19th and early 20th century, masturbation was doomed to be a major cause of
dangerous illnesses and a reason behind the decline of nations (Kozma,
2013). In a court case in the early 20 th century, a woman complained to the
judge that her husband had anal sex with her (Hammad, 2016). After the
medical experts supported her claim after examination, the judge sentenced
the man to jail with heavy labour (Hammad, 2016). Here, the judge did not
regard anal sex as a proper reproductive sexual act (Hammad, 2016). The
woman saw this as not private but something dangerous that needed to be
reported to the state. These examples illustrate how the medical institution
and the state concentrated sexuality on reproductive sex while tabooing nonreproductive sex e.g. masturbation and anal sex.
Public morality and marriage
The issue of public morality must be tackled. Edward William Lane in
the 19th century, armed with his Victorian morality, wrote that Egyptian women
were obscene, they curse in public and watch lustful dances (ElSayed, 2011).
It was Muhammad Ali who banned public dancing as a part of combating
prostitution (Roushdy, 2008). In Khedival Egypt the state was making sure
that public order is maintained by purifying respectable neighbourhoods from
prostitutes (Kozma, 2012). Then the colonial administration was keen on
keeping public morality (Fonder, 2013). During the early 20 th century the state
insisted on preserving public morality (Hammad, 2016). Egyptian elite
Page 33 of 93

internalised this and urged the state to have an active role in preserving
morality (Lopez, 2004). Immorality was usually associated with crimes and
chaos (Fahmy, 2002b; Lopez, 2004). The preservation of public decency was
essential for the state. As illustrated above the various immoralities are
unproductive and can pose health hazards. Thus, the state during different
eras had to regulate or abolish these immoralities.
Another central issue was monogamous marriage. Edward William
Lane wrote “polygyny, which is also attended with very injurious effects upon
the morals of husbands and wives” (Lane, 1908, P. 188). On divorce he writes
it “has depraving effects upon both sexes” (Lane, 1908, P. 188). He is
shocked about Egyptian men and women who married a large number of
partners in their lives whether due to polygyny and divorce in the case of men
or divorce in the case of women (Lane, 1908). Colt Bey echoes the same
sentiments. As noted above he was a fierce critic of polygyny due to its
alleged negative impact on health (ElSayed, 2011). Regarding divorce, he
regards it as the main cause behind prostitution in Egypt (Clot Bey, 2011). He
writes about prostitution “is enforced by the freedom that husbands have to
divorce their wives, more than the special attitude that motivates Egyptian
women to fulfil their sexual lust in an excessive manner” (Clot Bey, 2011, P.
328). For Colt Bey divorce is more dangerous to public health (because it
increases prostitution) more than the lustful nature of Egyptian women to
which he attributed (as discussed before) to the spread of syphilis. Lane
upholds this Victorian dogma. Excessive divorce and polygyny show a lack of
sexual constraints and moral disintegration. Hence, monogamous European
marriage was the answer to regulate the Egyptian sexuality.
Page 34 of 93

Monogamy became instituted. The khedival elite started to adopt
monogamous modern marriages instead of polygyny (Cuno, 2015).
Modernising marriage served as a mean to show the Europeans that they
were civilised (Cuno, 2015). Monogamy was central to the British occupation
in Egypt, Lord Cromer stressed that monogamy is a condition for a healthy
family life, while polygyny that Egyptians practice, destroys it (Pollard, 2005).
Egyptian intellectuals (e.g. Rifaa Tahtawy, Muhammad Abduh, Qasim Amin)
in the late 19th and early 20th centuries propagated the ideology of
monogamous families until it became common in the wider society (Cuno,
2015). Those intellectuals fought polygyny and divorce (Cuno, 2015). The
discourse of monogamous modern marriages became disseminated in the
public press (Kholoussy, 2010b). The family is the central unit of the nation
and the Egyptian men’s national duty is to abandon bachelorhood
(bachelorhood was related to the large number of prostitution) to form stable
families (Kholoussy, 2010b). The nation needs heathy bodies (Kholoussy,
2010a). In the 1890s the police arrested girls who were suspected of having
pre-marital sex (Kozma, 2012). In the early 20 th century, the courts were
prosecuting men and women charged with adultery (Hammad, 2016). By its
preservation of public morality, the state was enforcing heteronormative
sexuality in the context of marriage (Hammad, 2016). The press urged the
state to end the epidemic of divorce (Kholoussy, 2010b). Marriage was legally
codified in 1920 (Cuno, 2015). In law 25 of 1920, marriage was medicalised,
which meant that female-initiated divorce was permitted if the husband had a
venereal disease (Kholoussy, 2010a). Hence, divorce was only encouraged if

Page 35 of 93

the family was a health risk. Here, Egyptians embraced the ideology of
monogamous families
In many of the writings this is exemplified. Abduh discouraged polygyny
and saw that monogamy is the Islamic ideal (Amir et al., 2012). Marriage for
him is the institution which will discipline men, make them productive, and
ensure a diseases-less population (Kholoussy, 2010a). he says that people
abused Islam’s permission of polygyny and “found it a way for only seeking
lust and pleasure” (Abduh, 2012, P. 118). Qasim Amin talks about the
importance of educating women to raise healthy children, since the children in
early age “do not know idols but their mothers” (Amin, 2008, P.512). When he
talks about physical attraction he says, “it withers away gradually” (Amin,
2008, P. 245). He attacks polygyny and prostitution as degrading to women
and morally wrong respectively (Amin, 2008). The writings of these modern
intellectuals show a complete internalisation of the Western discourse. Sexual
gratification is only allowed through monogamous marriage and pleasure is
not important.
Thus, the discourse on restricting sexual intercourse to monogamous
families for productivity and health which was instituted in the 19 th century by
the medical institution, law in 20 th century, and supported by European values
was internalised by the Egyptians as the ideal.
Conclusion: medicalising and de-sexualising the body
The medical institution in Egypt regulated sexuality in many ways to
ensure that the Egyptians are productive and healthy to perform various tasks
for the state. Sexual gratification became restricted to the purpose of
Page 36 of 93

reproduction and producing children. Sex for the state’s medical institution is a
pleasure-less task. Sex is only directed to the sexual organs. Thus, many
sexual practices were tabooed and diseased such as homosexuality,
polygyny, divorce, prostitution and non-reproductive sex. The state through
different eras ensured through law or campaigns of public morality that this is
ingrained in the Egyptians. Medicine became a tool of monitoring Egyptian
bodies. This has also implications on time not just the body, the most intimate
time of the Egyptians became under the influence of the state, the supposedly
intimate free time is controlled by the state to serve a productive purpose.
Sexuality became only allowed through monogamous families. Egyptians
indeed internalised this discourse.

Page 37 of 93

The techno politics of body and time: between the
factory and transportation
The Egyptian subjectivities were not just under the influence of
medicine. This chapter is going to tackle the new technologies of factory and
railroads imported by the state, thereby aiming to increase the productivity of
the Egyptians by taking control over their bodies and time.
Producing modernity through the factory
The factory structure played a vital role in disciplining the Egyptian
body. The European-style factory was initiated by Muhammad Ali (Beinin,
1981). Khedive Ismail continued the process of industrialisation by building
different factories for several industries (Beinin, 1981). Furthermore, he
encouraged foreign investment which increased rapidly after 1882 with the
support of the British administration (Beinin, 1981). In the early 20th century,
the new Egyptian capitalist class began to own factories with the legal support
of the state to bring about the Egyptianisation of industries by law (Clawson,
1981). Thus, the state introduced a new form of modernity, the factory.
Producing modern bodies and time
Muhammad Ali’s state-led industrialisation introduced the European
system of machinery that determined the speed and regularity of the worker
(Kozma, 2010). The state forced peasants to work in factories and stamped
the factory name on their bodies; these peasants were supervised by
mangers (Fahmy, 1998b). The factory discipline was harsh, which included
frequent floggings and long working hours (Tucker, 1985). Yet Muhammad
Ali’s project failed to transform peasants into disciplined workers (Beinin,
Page 38 of 93

1981; Fahmy, 1998b). However, in this moment the technology of the factory
was imported which subjected the Egyptian body to the machine and enforced
daily disciplined time system.
The technology became more advanced and effective. Khedive Ismail
revived the process of industrialisation that was initiated by Muhammad Ali by
building factories especially in the sugar industries (Owen, 2011). French
engineering companies provided sophisticated novel machinery and factory
architecture (Bodenstein, 2014). The process of sugar-production was entirely
mechanised (Bodenstein, 2014). A photograph of a French factory similar to
the Egyptian one, shows workers standing by their machine on a higher
ground in front of them a short metal rail fence (Bodenstein, 2014). Here, the
machinery ensures that the worker’s body is moving according to fully
mechanised process. Furthermore, the architecture allows the visibility of the
worker by being in a high open place for facilitating surveillance. Modern
factory also means a strict timetable of working hours.
The technology of the factory became more advanced by time.
Nationalist capitalists continued the task of disciplining peasants into industrial
workers (Hammad, 2009). The structure of the factory can be exemplified in
Hammad’s study of al-Mahalla al-Kubra textile factory. Strict hierarchal roles
were established for supervising the workers (Hammad, 2009). The mangers
disseminated a feeling of fear among the workers (Hammad, 2009). The
punishments for not being obedient can range from physical beating to firing
(Hammad, 2009). The machine had to be constantly operated by the worker
(Hammad, 2009). Physical violence was systematically used by guards and
mangers to discipline workers and guaranteeing docility (Hammad, 2016;
Page 39 of 93

Hammad, 2009). To evade work, Egyptian workers started spending time in
bathrooms; when the supervisors realised this, they hired a guard to stand by
the bathroom doors and a permit became required for the worker to go to the
bathroom (Hammad, 2009). Court cases show that the owners and managers
of factories were aiding the state efforts in the preservation of public morality
by reporting to the police if there are any homosexual activities between the
workers (Hammad, 2016). Also, before joining the factory, the worker must
pass by a medical check to examine his/her health (Hammad, 2009). This
manifests the control over the body of the worker.
Here, the factory became a location of monitoring the Egyptian body
and disciplining it. The body of the worker had to perform repetitive tasks to
keep the machine operating. The Egyptian workers’ body movements must be
as regular as the machine; thus, mechanising his/her body. The constant
supervision and punishments ensured that the repetitive movements will not
stop. Even the call of nature was under the control of the supervisor. The
sexuality of the worker was also monitored and disciplined by the mangers by
reporting homosexuality to courts.
The factory did not only regulate the body. Time keeping was a vital
issue for the Egyptian elite as a part of modern industry (Hammad, 2009). The
working day had a punctual starting hour and an end (Hammad, 2009). The
workers were constantly looking at the clock, waiting for the time of departure
(Hammad, 2009). The factory gates close at a certain time and no one can
enter after it; thus, workers come running (Hammad, 2016). Every worker
owned a clock to watch the time (Hammad, 2016). The disciplinary impact on
time is clear.
Page 40 of 93

Thus, the time of the workers became manged by a rigid schedule. The
worker’s time is not under his/her control. The worker must abide to factory
hours. The Egyptian subject followed the rhythm of the clock in the factory.
There was a strong coordination with the state. Although the factories
were privately owned, the state was supporting national capitalism (Clawson,
1981). The state provided criminal records to the company to ensure that the
worker was not engaged in criminal activities (Hammad, 2009). The police
were always present around the factory to capture any criminals or to repress
strikes (Hammad, 2009). Furthermore, there were police stations built nearby
places (Hammad, 2009). National capitalists and the state had the common
goal of creating modern productive subjects (Hammad, 2016). This shows
that although the factories in 20th century Egypt were privately owned, their
interests coincided with the will of the state.
Navigating modernity through the railroad and the road
Another fundamental technology was the railway. Railway was first
brought by the British by the acceptance of Abbas (Lutsky, 1969). However,
the state expanded in constructing its own railways during Ismail’s era to
reach 1,590 kilometres of railways, exceeding many of the advanced capitalist
countries of that time (Lutsky, 1969). In the late-19 th century trains became
more punctual, and accurate train schedules were introduced (Barak, 2013).
Later in the late 19 th century the tramway was introduced by the Empain group
with the logistical support of the state (Barak, 2013). Setting fixed timetables
for the trains was regarded as a mean to save time and money (Barak, 2013).
This technology, administered by European experts, introduced the European

Page 41 of 93

precise, linear, and accurate time to Egypt (Barak, 2013). The railway
stressed on speed and the compression of space/time (Barak, 2013). Factory
owners in early 20th century succeeded in convincing the railway company to
adjust its schedule according to the shifts of the factory because the workers
travelled by trains (Hammad, 2009).
Thus, the precise rhythm of the railroad forced the time of the Egyptian
to be as precise. They had to adjust their time to meet the regularity of the
train timetable. The fixed times of departure and arrival are punctual. After
they get out of the train, their time is captured again when they enter the
factory.
The railroad was not the only mechanism used. During Ismail’s era a
massive project of urbanism on the European model was created (Raymond,
2007; Chaichian, 1988). Later, the British in Egypt perpetuated the process of
urbanisation (including the expansion in railways) to serve their interests
(Raymond, 2007; Chaichian, 1988). Parallel to this was the expansion in
building roads with the invention of the automobile (Hopkins & Saad, 2005).
The automobile is another vehicle that manifested speediness and
acceleration (Barak, 2013). The automobile like the trains accelerated the
time of the Egyptians to make it more productive and efficient.
The body and its temporal discontents: the death of the donkey
The trains and automobiles did not only impact time. The body was at
the centre.

Traditionally the Egyptian peasant used donkeys or mules to

travel (Clo Bey, 2011). This is qualitatively different from the experience of the
train. The European passengers of the train who were travelling and passing
Page 42 of 93

through Egypt record the dreamy experience of the Egyptian landscape that
they view from the train window (Barak, 2013). These two images are
fundamentally different. On the one hand, the Egyptian peasant riding his
animal is not confined in a closed vehicle or a specific line. He/she can stop at
any time and interact with the environment. On the other hand, the train
passenger is confined within a closed space. The passenger is a spectator
watching helplessly from the window things going by, cannot stop or change
the lane. Thus, the replacement of the animal with the railroad restricted the
movement of the Egyptian body to be dictated by the train movement.
The road and the automobile served a similar function in regulating the
body’s movement. The legal speed limit for automobiles was 15 kph (Barak,
2013). The law also stressed that the car must slowdown in narrow or
crowded spaces for safety (Barak, 2009). Although the car allows more
freedom than the train, still, it is not free as the donkey. Its speed was
regulated by law. The body inside the car cannot move. It must observe the
speed limits, regulations, and the road paved for the car.
Stop the laziness! The temporal perversion
The politics of time is also tied with productivity. Clot Bey wrote that “if
Egyptians left alone, they resort to unemployment and laziness” (Clot Bey,
2011, P.289). He criticises the Egyptians for being lazy and only working
when they are starving (Clot Bey, 2011). The Egyptians need a strong force to
push them, without it they will spend their time endlessly in laziness (Clot Bey,
2011). One of the characteristics that Cromer attributed to the Egyptians are
laziness and time-wasting (ElSayed, 2011). Qasim Amin internalised this

Page 43 of 93

discourse and criticised the lazy Egyptian (Mazid, 2002). In practical terms the
state in 1880 issued a law that allows the policing of people who wander as
they please without work or home (Kozma, 2012). If they are men, they are
regarded as a threat to public order, if they are women they are believed to
have engaged in premarital sex or potential prostitutes (Kozma, 2012). The
Western value system stresses that time is money (Barak, 2013). For the
European mindset that shaped the Egyptian state laziness, is unproductive
time, and time is money. Time must be task oriented. Thus, the state indeed
translated this into law by arresting the unproductive people in public who just
wander. They are time wasters.
The Egyptians traditionally did not know punctual timings, they
organised their time according to vague conceptions of time related to the
sun’s movement and prayers (Hammad, 2009; Hammad, 2016). However, the
modern state needed to discipline the time of the Egyptians to make it precise
and productive (Hammad, 2016; Barak, 2013; Mitchell, 1988). Thus, after the
introduction of the technologies discussed, people started to own watches to
watch the time of work; before that owning a clock was rather rare and the few
who owned it was for displaying social status (Hammad, 2009; Hammad,
2016). The vague undisciplined time of the Egyptian became disciplined and
precise by the technologies of the factory and the train.
Conclusion: the regulation of bodies in the empty homogeneous time
The technologies of the factory, railroads, automobiles, and roads had
a major impact on Egyptians. The state initiated these constructions and later
supported its dissemination. The goal was to regulate the time of the

Page 44 of 93

Egyptians to make it productive according to the European rationality. The
timetables of the trains and factories divided the everyday lives of the
Egyptians into fixed slots. In an eternal recurrence, Egyptians ran from their
home to the train then to the factory then to the train in precise timings while
watching the clock. Modern transportation accelerated the time of the
Egyptians to make it more efficient.

Because of these technologies, the

Egyptians were trapped in the empty homogenous time. The Chronos took
over their time. their time became repetitive, fixed and lost any spontaneity.
The body was another victim. The machinery of the factory made its
movement mechanised and the surveillance ensured that the body performed
repetitive movements endlessly. Furthermore, even the natural impulses of
their bodies were manged. The railroads, roads, and automobiles restricted
the movement of the Egyptian body and forced it to follow a linear preplanned lane.

Page 45 of 93

The leviathan’s morality: body and temporality
under the contemporary Egyptian state
The control over the time and body of the Egyptians did not end in the
early 20th century. On the contrary, it became instrumental to the functioning
of the contemporary Egyptian state in the 21 st century to increase the
productivity of the Egyptian subjectivities.
The legality
Law allows the state to intervene people’s private lives. Prostitution is
illegal (Zuhur, 2008). Adultery is also a crime by law (Sonbol, 2003). Thus, the
state has the legal framework to institute monogamous marriages and restrict
extramarital sex.
The virginity tests and the blue bra
The connection between sexuality and politics became apparent after
the 25th of January revolution. On March 2011, seven women protestors were
arrested by military forces and were forced to undergo state supervised
virginity tests (Abdelmonem, 2015). Samira Ibrahim recollects that married
and virgin women were separated and she was forced to undress to be
examined by the doctors (Hafez, 2014a). An officer declared that they will
check if they are prostitutes (Shenker, 2016). One of the generals gave a
rationale for this examination. He said that they were not like “our daughters”,
they camped with men in tents; thus, they had to be examined to prove that
they were not virgins in the first place, instead of the military being accused of
violating them (Amin, 2011). Thus, they were not expected to be virgins
(Abdelmonem, 2015). The rationale behind the tests illustrates that the state
Page 46 of 93

agents assumed that since they are politically subversive, they had to be
perverse also in their private lives. Conforming to the state politics entails
conforming to the state ideals regarding sex. For the state these women are
not respectable daughters, they are prostitutes in the most derogatory sense
of the word. Hence, a danger to public order as political protestors; thus,
potential prostitutes.
This is also illustrated in another case. In 2011 the military was
violently repressing a protest. An image of a woman being dragged in the
street by a soldier which lifted her abaya to reveal a blue bra haunted the
people (Hafez, 2014a; Hafez, 2014b). The state sponsored media propagated
that this girl is not respectable because she was only wearing a bra under her
abaya (Hafez, 2014b). Again, the rationale of private virtue and political
protest is employed.
These two famous cases exemplified the continuation of a state
tradition goes back to the 19 th century that was discussed before. By using
medicine to monitor virginity, policing potential un-virgins and evoking public
morality and family values. It is not a surprise that protestors were compared
to prostitutes. Prostitutes being a major danger in the 19 th century. These
protestors constituted a new danger, the state officials connected it to the old
danger of prostitution.
Stop the indecency! The guardians of public morality
The contemporary state is preoccupied with public morality. In the early
21st century the state was monitoring the internet and arrested people who
disseminated obscene poems, and homosexuals (Bahgat, 2004). In 2016 the
Page 47 of 93

novelist Ahmad Naji was arrested for violating public decency for his novel’s
sexual content (Flood, 2016). When the Egyptian singer Ruby appeared her
music videos were banned in national TV for being too provocative (Comer,
2015). Recently the state became more violent in dealing with dancers. From
2015 to 2018, several Egyptian belly-dancers and pop-singers were arrested
and sentenced for inciting debauchery due to the sexual content of their music
videos (Richards, 2015; O'Connor, 2017; O'Connor, 2018). In 2018, the
Russian belly-dancer Johara was arrested, and in 2019 she was sentenced to
jail for inciting debauchery and dancing in immodest clothes (Bishop &
McDougall, 2018; Russian belly, 2019). Any sign of indecency was confronted
by the state.
As mentioned, SCAF members after the revolution were constantly
invoking morality and family values to discredit the protestors e.g. the girls in
tahrir are not good daughters, they are different from “our girls” (Hafez, 2014b,
Amin, 2011). Former Interior Minister Habib al-Adly said in his trial defending
surveillance, “I was ingraining the moral values” he said that he advised his
men when they “find something related to morals and behaviours, leave it;
but, bring our friend and tell him/her this is wrong” (ELMANSOURA TODAY,
2014). What al-Adly describing is not just a justification for surveillance. It is a
genuine belief in the state’s role in safeguarding morality.
This reflects perpetuating state traditions discussed in earlier chapters.
Public morality is a central concern for the state because it is linked to public
order and productivity. Even, prosecuting dancers also goes back to
Muhammad Ali when he banned dancing due to its linkage with prostitution.

Page 48 of 93

Stop the unproductive sex! Homosexuality, polygamy and pornography
There are many cases that illustrates the state obsession with
preserving heteronormative monogamous morality. There are several cases
where couples were arrested for organising swingers i.e. spouse-swapping
activities from 2008 to 2018. They were charged with prostitution although
there was no cash involved (Onians, 2008; Man and wife, 2009; Egyptian
police, 2012; Egyptian couple, 2012; Married couples, 2016; Nabbout, 2018a).
In a similar case a woman was arrested for marrying two men at the same
time (Nabbout, 2018b). A voice recording was leaked of a woman discussing
her sexual experiences with different men, the police tracked the recording to
arrest her for debauchery (Youssef & Abdalaziz, 2018). Here, polygamy is
being prosecuted to promote monogamy and any sexual explorations not in
the context of monogamous marriage is prosecuted.
The state also has a problem of homosexuality. In 2001 several
homosexual men were arrested after a police raid on disco known as an
informal place for gay men in the case known as queen boat; the charge was
debauchery (Pratt, 2007). From 2000 to 2013 there were 189 reported
arrests, the number rose from 2013 to 2017 to reach 232 individuals (AbdelHamid, 2017). In 2017 there was a massive crackdown on LGBT people after
a group of people raised the LGBT flag in Mashrou’ Leila’s band party
(Michaelson, 2017; Abdel-Hamid, 2017). The media launched an attack on
homosexuality,

the

supreme

Council

for

Media

Regulation

called

homosexuality a shameful disease and the Coptic church organised a
conference to “cure” homosexuality (Michaelson, 2017). The police arrests
people based on complaint or through a strategy of luring gay people through
Page 49 of 93

dating sites by going undercover (Bahgat, 2004; Abdel-Hamid, 2017). The
medical examiners use techniques that go back to 19 th century French
medicine to examine if an anal penetration occurred (Abdel-Hamid, 2017).
The danger of AIDS/HIV is constantly evoked as a pretext for the arrests
(Abdel-Hamid, 2017). Hence, homosexuality is another perversion that the
state strives to eliminate. This reflects the cotemporary use of 19 th century
medical knowledge and linking homosexuality with the old fear of diseases.
There are other significant cases related to pornography. A court
ordered the government in 2015 to censor pornography (Egypt’s court, 2015).
An Egyptian actress had to face trial because she encouraged youth to watch
pornography for sexual education (Mortimer, 2015).
The previous cases manifest the state’s attitude regarding sexuality.
The state preserves heteronormative sexuality and morality (Pratt, 2007;
Bahgat, 2004; Abdel-Hamid, 2017) polygamy and homosexuality are
prosecuted and deemed as perversions. The logic of diseases is used in the
homosexuality cases. Even watching pornography is not acceptable because
it is another unproductive act. The state here is ensuring that only
reproductive monogamous sexual acts in the context of marriage are allowed
while other sexual acts are halted. Also, non-heteronormative acts can
potentially lead to diseases. They are a danger to public order.
Stop the Shisha! The empty homogenous imperative
Another central aspect is time. There is a right-wing discourse by the
economic and political elite blaming the people for the economic problems
e.g. the people are sitting at cafes and not working (Adly, 2016). The Minister
Page 50 of 93

of Immigration attributed unemployment to the Egyptians’ laziness (Ragheb,
2017). The Minister of Manpower said that there are jobs available, but the
youth are sitting at coffeeshops (Ibrahim, 2016). The media is constantly
echoing this discourse (Assem, 2018; Adly, 2016). This rhetoric stresses that
the Egyptians are lazy and wasting their time in unproductive manners.
The coffeeshop is particularly alarming. Thus, the state arranged
massive raids on coffeeshops in Downtown Cairo, Heliopolis and Zamalek
(Rios, 2015; Zamalek concerned, 2016; Coffee shops, 2017). Even before
that the government had stopped issuing licences for shisha (Rios, 2015). The
police were arresting political activists at the coffeeshops they frequented
(Dozens of Egyptian, 2016). A famous coffeeshop closed by the government
was propagated to be place for activists, atheists, gays and prostitutes (Rios,
2015). As indicated above the coffeeshop holds a special place in this rightwing discourse. For them this is a place of time-wasting. It is unproductive
time spent in smoking shisha, talking and drinking tea. For the officials, the
Egyptians should be inside a factory being productive and their actions and
time being regulated, instead of sitting freely. Also, being unproductive
according to the official narrative can lead to perversions e.g. political
protests, homosexuality, and prostitution. The coffeeshop is considered a
place for such dissenters.
Stop the tuk-tuk!
The obsession with time and the body does not end there. President
Abdel Fattah al-Sisi said in a speech urging youth to lose weight “Tuk-tuk has
created a huge problem” “people now move 100 meters inside their

Page 51 of 93

neighbourhoods with tuk-tuk”, transportation should be only used in a distance
over kilometre” (SadaElbalad, 2018). The Minister of Education stated that
people should use the metro for eight station and walk two (Zeidan, 2018). It
is also important to mention that tuk-tuk had been banned in main streets and
the government has recently banned its import (Tuk-tuks banned, 2019).
This can make sense within the logic regulating the time and body’s
movement. The president indicated a precise plan on how the Egyptian body
should move. In order for the body to be healthy, the body should walk;
however, when the distance is great transportation should be used. Here the
minister elaborated and stressed the metro as the main transportation. The
president and the government practices indicate a hostility towards the
unregulated tuk-tuk (the reasons will be discussed later). The metro is the
most precise public transportation technology in its regularity (the equivalent
of the railroad). Thus, the minister stressed on the metro.
Conclusion: the unholy tradition
The contemporary Egyptian state is reproducing practices and
discourses developed in the 19 th and early 20th century discussed in previous
chapters.
The state is the protector of monogamy, marriage, and public morality.
Using medicine to monitor the bodies of girls and homosexuals, and the fear
of diseases, homosexuality and prostitution are perpetuated. The desexualisation of the Egyptian body and focusing on reproductive sexuality is
asserted.

Page 52 of 93

The discourse of lazy Egyptians and the efficient use of time is
employed. The state dictates how time should be spent and how the body
should move in the urban spaces in specific vehicles. The disciplined empty
homogenous time is asserted by the state to ensure productivity.

Page 53 of 93

Embracing the perversions: sexuality and
messianism in everyday life
Ordinary Egyptians are not passive recipients. In their everyday lives,
they assert their autonomy quietly. These practices can take different forms,
which counters the state’s practices and discourse.
The last temptation of the Egyptians
In terms of sexuality, as discussed before, although prostitution was
banned by Muhammad Ali; however, it was sill practiced. Not only that but the
khawals started to appear in public spaces.
Also, as discussed, in the early 20 th century there were many cases of
homosexuality, adultery, and non-reproductive sexual practices e.g. the anal
sex case prosecuted in courts. There are many court cases where men claim
that their wives committed adultery or women complained that their husbands
desired sexual practices that they considered immoral (Shaham, 1997).
Although these cases reflect of the internalisation of the state discourse by
one of the partners; however, it sheds-light on what happens in people’s
bedrooms. It means that these sexual practices are indeed practiced.
In contemporary Egyptian society it seems that there is an explosion of
sexuality. The queen boat case and other arrests exemplifies that there are
gay activities practiced. The couples arrested for organising spouse-swapping
networks, show that many Egyptians are defying the sexual monogamous
norms. Young girls practice premarital sex despite the restrictions; they
manipulate virginity through hymenoplasty in order to get married later (Wynn,
2016). Furthermore, empirical studies proved that a considerable number of
Page 54 of 93

Egyptians are practicing premarital sex through non-penetrative sex (Bahgat
& Afifi, 2004). New media outlets manged by youth explicitly discuss sexuality.
Many Egyptians reported saying that they are using online dating sites as an
escape from the conservative social norms (Sheils, 2014). Also, growing
number of Egyptians are organise swingers and fetish parties (Sheils, 2014).
In another article in Cairoscene website titled “7 things bad Egyptian boys do
on the first day of Eid” specifies masturbation and going to the pharmacy to
buy condoms in Eid (Cairoscene Team, 2015). In another article the author
gives advice to people on how to get a “one-night stand” for men, women and
homosexuals (Daoud, 2015). Hence, this constitutes encouragement and
openness towards pre-marital sex for pure pleasure. The Egyptians are
practicing unreproductive, premarital, and non-monogamous sex daily despite
the state control.
The Egyptian pervert’s guide to cinema
Egyptian cinema can reveal many things about Egyptian sexuality. In
the movie al-naama wa al-tawoos, the two protagonists are married couple
who are sexually unsatisfied with each other (Abou-Seif, 2002). The husband
resorts to prostitutes while the wife resorts to fantasies (Abou-Seif, 2002).
Finally, they decide to go to a psychologist to solve their issues and they do
(Abou-Seif, 2002). At the end of the movie they call the doctor while trying to
have sex. The camera cuts and shows the doctor with her husband sleeping
while she is looking in despair. The couple fight in the bedroom and go to the
kitchen, they get intimate and the camera cuts to the boiling milk as a sign of
climax (Abou-Seif, 2002). This is a critique of monogamous marriages.
Marriage leads to boredom and dissatisfaction. In the last scene, the director
Page 55 of 93

is implying the medical expert cannot be relied on, she is also connected to
frustration. When the couple leave their marital traditional place of intercourse
(i.e. the bedroom) and go to the kitchen they reach a climax.
Another movie that discusses sexual frustration is Film Thaqafi. A
group of men who are not able to marry are seeking to watch a pornographic
film; thus, they are trying to find a film, place, and television. At the end they
fail to see it, because as one of the characters says about the system of the
television and DVD “the fault is in the system” (Fadel & Amin, 2000). This is
important to reveal that the culture of pornography was prevalent even before
the internet. Also, it is a critique of the constraints that face Egyptian youth to
satisfy their desires which is only accessible in marriage. Thus, the fault is in
the system.
Another important movie is Before the Summer Crowds. It is centred
around two men from different classes, one is married and the other is single
who desire a certain woman (Hefzy & Khan, 2016). It illustrates that desire
transcends social class and marital states in Egyptian society. The director
even engages the viewer (through camera shots) in the scenes of voyeurism.
Homosexuality plays a vital role in movies. Youssef Chahine's movies
feature many queer characters (Khouri, 2010). In Alexandria Why, the
protagonist falls in love with a British soldier (Khouri, 2010). In Alexandria
Again and Forever, Chahine depicts a relation between the director and a
young actor (Khouri, 2010). Youssry Nasrallah in Mercedes also depicts a
relation between a middle-class man who came from Europe to fall in love
with working class man in Egypt (Khouri, 2010). These movies were

Page 56 of 93

sympathetic to homosexuality and critiqued the stereotypical image of
homosexuality (Khouri, 2010). These movies do not only illustrate the
prevalence of homosexuality in society but also a possibility of tolerance.
Another vital movie is Dail al-samakah. It tells the story of a poet who
works as an electricity inspector who loves his neighbour and tries to fit in his
new job (Hamid & Seif, 2003). In one of the scenes, a couple were having
sex, the protagonist kept ringing the bell to inspect the electricity, the couple
were trying to ignore him, the woman finally opened the door in frustration
(Hamid & Seif, 2003). As if this scene is symbolising the relation between the
state and sex. The couple were seeking pleasure however, it is constantly
interrupted by the state agent.
However, the protagonist is not just a state agent. He is a loving
sensitive poet who loves his neighbour and flirts with a maid in one of the
apartments (Hamid & Seif, 2003). In one of his visits, he meets a homosexual
man who tries to seduce the protagonist. The protagonist refuses. The man
states in a dramatic moment that he was born this way. The protagonist says
that he accepts and tolerates him, but he is not willing to have sex with him
(Hamid & Seif, 2003). Again, this represents a possibility of toleration towards
homosexuality. Thus, the protagonist has dual character as a sensitive poet
and state agent i.e. inspector. His duty makes him interrupts pleasure (first
scene) while his personality, loves, flirts, and accepts sexual difference.
The Egyptian pervert’s guide to music
Another medium that expresses sexuality is music. The music of
‘awalem i.e. female singers in the early 20 th century discussed sexuality in
Page 57 of 93

obscene language (Lagrange, 2009). Bahya Al-Mahallawieh in a song starts
by asking for weed and alcohol, then she describes the size of the penis of ‘m
Abduh using direct obscene colloquial terms; she ends with seductive laughs
(Rqs, n.d). In another recording that documents the peasants weeding songs
she describes the bride’s intimate parts and encourages the husband to lay
with her (Zfh, 1905). In another recording she is seducing her lover and tells
him what they will do together (Hlyk, 1907). In another song she tells her lover
that she will only give her body to him, if he got her valuable gifts (Yā nẖltyn,
1907a). Mounira Al-Mahdya was another famous singer. In one of her songs
she fantasises about her lover and asks him to come and “play” (Al-Qady,
1925a). In another obscene song she describes her sexual encounter with Ali
and how he touched her and gave her pleasure; then she ends by sexual
noises (Yā wād, n.d). Naima al-Masrya seduces her lover to come with
alcohol to “play” (Al-Qady, 1927). Aziza al-Masrya tells her lover when to meet
her without her father knowing (Al-Qady & Kamel, 1927b).
The obscenity in music was not limited to women; but even more
subversive in men. Abd al-Hay Helmy is singing as a woman telling her lover
to come to her home while listing the reasons why he should not worry about
her mother, father, brother and husband (Qmrh, 1907). Like Al-Mahallawieh,
he sings as a woman the same song about a girl asking for gifts from her
lover in exchange for sex (Yā nẖltyn, 1907b). However, he is even more
obscene because when she/he did not get the gifts he started cursing the
lover by his mother (Yā nẖltyn, 1907b). Abdel-Latif Al-Banna sings as a
woman who tries to seduce her lover (eyh, 1930). He sings as a woman
fantasising about her love and calling him to “play” (Al-Qady, 1925b) Amin
Page 58 of 93

Hassanin also sings as a woman trying to secure a date with her lover behind
her father’s back (Al-Qady & Kamel, 1927b).
This obscenity perpetuated in the 21st century. News-reports are
lamenting the semi-naked dancers in weddings and the prevalence of
obscene and sexual language by the singers (Gohary, 2014; Hadidy, 2017).
The conservative overtone of these reports fails to see that it is a continuation
of an Egyptian tradition.
In media similar cases appear. Ruby with her seductive belly-dancing
and moves (Sherifsheko, 2014). Ruby resembled the average Egyptian girl
with her skin colour and body, she became a symbol for seduction (Hadad,
2016). As discussed in the previous chapter, several dancers and singers got
arrested for developing songs with suggestive lyrics and gestures. One of
them called her song “Bos Omak” which rhythms with an obscene Egyptian
word meaning “mother’s vagina” (O'Connor, 2018). This shows that Egyptians
are still being obscene and sexual until today.
In all of these cases Egyptians were constantly sexualising their
language and being obscene. In the early 20 th century women were
expressing their sexual desires and men were subverting gender norms by
singing as lustful women which implies a sense of homoeroticism. This
tradition perpetuated until today in local weddings and popular media. Thus,
the Egyptians are being obscene to express themselves despite the state’s
moral values.
Dancing

Page 59 of 93

Belly-dancing is an important part of Egyptian culture. The heart of
Egyptian belly dancing is improvisation (Frost & Yarrow, 2016). Thus, it is the
manifestation of spontaneous movement of the body. Thus, dancing is
dangerous to the state because not only it entails expression of sexuality, but
also an unregulated body movement. Egyptians, nonetheless keep dancing
despite the state.
The Kairos in Cairo or the politics of ‘lwqya
This discussion is not complete without time. In contemporary Egyptian
society the Egyptian time is vague and imprecise (Barak, 2013). Five minutes
could mean an hour and Egyptians use vague expression such as later
(Barak, 2013). This is a counter-temporality that emerged as a reaction and
stood in opposition to the de-humanising effects of the precise European
linear time (Barak, 2013). It is a rejection of the European punctuality (Barak,
2013). Hence, Egyptian time is about tarrying and delaying, against the state’s
punctuality.
Egyptians are known for procrastination. In an article in Scoop-Empire
magazine it features Facebook posts where Egyptians are proudly expressing
their procrastinating habits e.g. going late to work (Scoop team, 2015). They
use the word “‘lwqya” (Scoop team, 2015). This is an obscene word for
procrastination. Thus, Egyptians are embracing laziness to assert their own
spontaneous time.
What the Egyptians are doing is slowing progress. They are asserting
their own autonomous messianic time. It is about tarrying and delays. it is

Page 60 of 93

spontaneous

and

unpredictable

against

the

state’s

precise

empty

homogenous time.
Egyptians love spending time in coffeeshops. Going to the coffeeshop
daily is a central part of Egyptians’ lives where they smoke shisha, drink tea
and play dominos (Dean, 2015). The coffeeshop is a place for wasting time. It
is a free place where people are not governed by schedules and timetables.
That is why it is an enemy of the state.
Producing laziness
Egyptians have their ways in evading factory discipline. During
Muhammad Ali’s era there were several cases of desertion and resistance to
discipline (Beinin, 1981; Fahmy, 1998b). As illustrated in chapter three,
workers would go to the bathroom to escape discipline; when the permits
were introduced the workers started urinating on the floor which caused a bad
smell the mangers did not know its source (Hammad, 2009). Contemporary
Egyptian works use different tactics to waste time and evade discipline e.g.
slacking, sneaking out for fresh air away from machines and mangers, talking
and smoking in bathrooms, slowing the work process, and unintentional
sabotage (Shehata, 2010). Thus, since the institution of factory discipline until
today, Egyptian workers are evading it in various ways.
The urban experience: the new donkey
The introduction of the railway, tram and automobile was not as
expected. These vehicles were a source of accidents and chaos in Egypt, not
just regularity (Barak, 2013).

Page 61 of 93

In the contemporary Egyptian society Egyptians found alternatives to
the punctual public transportations. The tuk-tuk with its small size can go into
narrow alleys (Russell, 2013). There is also the microbus which is known for
violating traffic rules (El-Din, 2016). Unlike the metro or public bus. These
unofficial popular modes of transportation do not have to follow specific roads
or abide to a regular time.
Several news articles criticise Egyptians’ behaviour in the streets. An
article that criticise the Egyptians’ laziness mentions passing on the train track
instead of a pedestrian bridge or driving in the opposite direction of the street
(El-Warth, 2016). Another article warns against the Egyptian popular practice
of jaywalking (Eltigani, 2017). Thus, here the Egyptians refuse to walk
according the pre-planned rules and streets. Their bodies interact freely with
the urban-space through walking.
Chahine and the train
Chahine in his movie Cairo station presents a story of Egyptians.
Kinawai a sexually repressed individual who lives in the train station descends
into madness due to his desire for Hanomma (Talhami & Chahine, 1958). The
movie climaxes with his attempt of kidnaping her and killing her. When he is
tricked to leave to wear the “wedding attire” he wears the straight jacket and
cries for help (Talhami & Chahine, 1958). The station represents modernity
and the last scene is not about happy ending or relief (Gordon, 2012). As if
Chahine was telling a story of an Egyptian who due to sexual frustration and
boredom led him to a state of neuroses. The location of the film is the trainstation the symbol of regularity and modernity.

Page 62 of 93

The last sacrifice of the Egyptian messiah
Suicide in the metro is another major theme. Several cases reported of
Egyptians committed suicide by jumping in front of the metro (Teen commits,
2018; Egyptian man, 2018). The metro spokesman commented that these
actions by the disturbed delay citizens (Tawfeek, 2018).
What if this was the goal. Jumping in front of the metro could be the
ultimate sacrifice to stop the acceleration and precision of the metro by the
Egyptian body. The Egyptian body is throwing itself in despair to stop the train
of progress. The ultimate symbol of modern punctuality. It is the last hope for
delaying the train.
Conclusion: embracing the perversions
Egyptians are not passive. They quietly assert their autonomy against
the state discipline. They engage in non-reproductive sexual acts and erotise
language against the state’s morality. They tarry the state’s empty time to
assert their own unpredictable spontaneous messianic temporality. They tarry
progress. They stress on the free body and time. They have taken over the
rationally planned urban-space to their advantage.

Page 63 of 93

Conclusion: the second coming of the perverse
messiah
The

state

using

the

institutions

of

medicine,

transportation

technologies, and factory was able to discipline and regulate the Egyptians’
bodies and time to make it productive, efficient and docile. The discourse and
practices of these institutions and experts created perversions and
normalities. The ideal body image of the state is a mechanised reproductive
entity. The state’s ideal time is boring, monotonous, linear and predictable.
This study challenged the conventional wisdom by not focusing on
macro-institutions and major figures. Real state power in Egypt existed in the
so called “apolitical institutions”.
The medical institution reduced the Egyptian body to reproductive
entities and tabooed various sexual practices. Sexuality and Egyptians’
intimate time became a mean for reproduction only. It also ensured that the
Egyptian body is healthy and efficient. Also, the ideologies of monogamous
marriage and public morality were emphasised.
The factory which was introduced by the state then later manged by
capitalists with the state support mechanised the Egyptian body and made it
docile. The factory also captured people’s time to ensure precision and
productivity. The time and the body of the worker became disciplined under
strict surveillance.
The modern transportation technologies controlled how the body
should move in urban spaces and controlled the time of Egyptians to make it

Page 64 of 93

linear, accelerated, standardised, and punctual. In order to make the time of
the Egyptians productive and efficient.
The Egyptians were subjected to the modern forces of discipline,
productivity, efficiency, the machinery, keeping a healthy body, desexualisation for reproduction, and the empty homogenous time of the clock
or the time of the Chronos.
The implication and discourses of these institutions perpetuated in the
21st century Egyptian state. The contemporary Egyptian state stressed the
same values, discourses, and practices instituted in the 19 th and 20th centuries
in regard to how the body should act, and how time should be spent to meet a
productivity ideal. The goal is to maintain productive and efficient
subjectivities.
This study also challenged the traditional notions of resistance and
revolt. Signs of refusal can consist of subtle forms that the Egyptians
practiced daily without the intention of a direct clash with the state.
In the conventional wisdom, laziness and sexual deviances are seen
as bad habits and apolitical. However, these judgments are artificially
constructed. They served the interests of the modern state. Yet these
judgments were internalised by many Egyptians. However, several Egyptians
continued to practice these subversive acts to assert their autonomy and halt
the wind of progress that is infringing on their freedom. Egyptians indeed
reacted to the state’s knowledge and technologies. This quiet assertiveness
was practiced through obscenity in music and everyday language, reflecting
critiques in films, practicing non-reproductive sex, practicing sex for the sake
Page 65 of 93

of pleasure, belly dancing, being lazy, tarrying time, inventing alternative free
modes of transportations instead of public transportation and walking without
observing the rules.
Walter Benjamin was right; every generation has a weak messianic
power to stop progress (Benjamin, 2007). The last chapter ended by the
Egyptian sacrificing him/herself for the sake of the people. But the messiah
does not die forever, the messiah is resurrected in the next generation.
Different Egyptian generations exercised their weak messianic power through
quiet assertiveness to establish their autonomy and undermine the state
discipline. They stressed obscenity against morality, pleasure against
reproduction, spontaneous-saturated time against dullness, free body
movement against discipline.
This study opens different horizons for future research. This is not just
a critique of the Egyptian state. It is a critique of colonial knowledge, the
modern

state,

urbanisation,

modern

transportation,

medicine,

work,

capitalism, modernity and progress. It revitalises the role of everyday
practices that the ordinary make. It attacks the myth of the apolitical and
reveals hidden places of power. Every aspect of life is political from medicine
to streets.

Page 66 of 93

References and bibliography
Abdel-Hamid, D. (2017). The trap: punishing sexual difference in Egypt. Cairo:
Egyptian Initiative for Personal Rights (EIPR). Retrieved from
https://eipr.org/en/publications/trap-punishing-sexual-difference-egypt
Abdelmonem, A. (2015). Reconceptualizing sexual harassment in Egypt: a
longitudinal assessment of el-taharrush el-ginsy in Arabic online forums
and anti-sexual harassment activism. Kohl: A Journal for Body and
Gender

Research, 1(1),

23-41.

Retrieved

from

http://harassmap.s3.amazonaws.com/media/uploaded-files/reconceptu
alizing-sexual-harassment-in-egypt-1.pdf
Abduh, M. (2012). Hkm ālšryʿh fy tʿdd ālzwǧāt [The opinion of Islamic law on
polygyny]. In M. Reda (Ed.), Tāryẖ āl-āstāz āl-imām ālšyẖ Muhammad
Abduh 2 [The history of āl-āstāz āl-imām ālšyẖ Muhammad Abduh 2].
Cairo: Al-Hayya Al-Masria Al-Amma Lilkitab
Abou-Seif, M. (Producer/director). (2002). Al-naama wa al-tawoos [The
Ostridge and the Peacock] [Motion Picture]. Egypt: Abou-Seif
Productions.
Abugideiri, H. (2016). Gender and the making of modern medicine in colonial
Egypt. London: Taylor and Francis.
Adly, A. (2016, April 13). Youth unemployment and the 'Egyptian right wing’.
Mada

Masr.

Retrieved

https://madamasr.com/en/2016/04/13/opinion/economy/youthunemployment-and-the-egyptian-right-wing/
Page 67 of 93

from

Adorno, T. (2001). Culture industry: selected essays on mass culture. New
York: Routledge.
Adorno, T. W., & Horkheimer, M. (2016). Dialectic of enlightenment. London:
Verso Books.
Agamben, G. (2010). The time that remains: a commentary on the letter to the
Romans (P. Dailey, Trans.). Stanford: University Press.
Agamben, G. (2012). The Church and the kingdom (L. D. Durantaye, Trans.).
London: Seagull Books.
Al-Qady, M. & Kamel, A. (1927a). Awʿā tklmny bābā ǧāy wrāyā [Do not talk to
me; my father is behind me] [Recorded by A. Hassanin]. [Vinyl]. Cairo:
Polyphone Records.
Al-Qady, M. & Kamel, A. (1927b). Awʿā tklmny bābā ǧāy wrāyā [Do not talk to
me; my father is behind me] [Recorded by A. Al-Masrya]. [Vinyl]. Cairo:
Polyphone Records.
Al-Qady, M. (1925a). mātẖfš ʿlyā [Do not worry about me] [Recorded by M. AlMahdya]. [Vinyl]. Cairo: Baidaphon Records.
Al-Qady, M. (1925b). Mātẖfš ʿlyā [Do not worry about me] [Recorded by A. AlBanna]. [Vinyl]. Cairo: Baidaphon Records.
Al-Qady, M. (1927). tʿālā yā šāṭr nrwḥ āl-qnāṭr [Come let’s go to ālqnāṭr]
[Recorded by N. Al-Masrya]. [Vinyl]. Cairo: Polyphone Records.
Al-Sherbini, R. (2017, February 19). Egypt cafe owners fume over raids. Gulf
News. Retrieved from https://gulfnews.com/world/mena/egypt-cafeowners-fume-over-raids-1.1979567
Page 68 of 93

Althusser, L. (2001). Lenin and philosophy, and other essays. New York:
Monthly Review Press.
Amin, Q. (2008). Trāṯ Qasim Amin [The heritage of Qasim Amin]. Cairo: Dar
al-Kutub wa-al-Wathaʾiq al-Qawmiyya.
Amin, S. (2011, May 31). Egyptian general admits 'virginity checks' conducted
on

protesters.

CNN.

Retrieved

from

http://edition.cnn.com/2011/WORLD/meast/05/30/egypt.virginity.tests/
index.html
Amir, A. N., Shuriye, A. O., & Ismail, A. F. (2012). Muhammad Abduh’s
contributions to modernity. Asian Journal of Management Sciences and
Education, 1(1), 163-175. Retrieved from http://www.ajmse.leenaluna.co.jp/AJMSEPDFs/Vol.1(1)/AJMSE2012(1.1-07).pdf
Anderson, K. J. (2017). The Egyptian labour corps: workers, peasants, and
the state in world war I. International Journal of Middle East
Studies, 49(01), 5-24. doi:10.1017/s0020743816001112
Arendt, H. (1959). The human condition: A study of the central dilemmas
facing modern man. New York: Doubleday Anchor Books.
Assem, M (2018, December 24). Amr Adib: mšrwʿ āl‫ آ‬4 ‫ـ‬lāf mṣnʿ šryān lḍẖ
ālāmwāl wtšġyl ālšbāb [Amr Adib: the project of 4 thousand factory is a
vein to pump money and employing the youth]. Ahram. Retrieved from
http://gate.ahram.org.eg/News/2069700.aspx
Baer, G. (2016). Fellah and townsman in the Middle East: Studies in social
history. London: Routledge.
Page 69 of 93

Bahgat, H. (2004). Egypt's virtual protection of morality. Middle East
Report, (230), 22-25. doi:10.2307/1559291
Bahgat, H., & Afifi, W. (2004). Sexuality politics in Egypt. In R. Parker, R.
Petchesky, & R. Sember (Eds.), Sex politics: reports from the front
lines. Washington, DC: Sexuality Policy Watch.
Barak, O. (2009). Scraping the surface: the techno-politics of modern streets
in

turn-of-twentieth-century

Alexandria. Mediterranean

Historical

Review, 24(2), 187-205. doi:10.1080/09518960903488048
Barak, O. (2013). On time: technology and temporality in modern Egypt.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bartky, I. R. (1989). The adoption of standard Time. Technology and
Culture, 30(1), 25. doi:10.2307/3105430
Bassam, R. (2018). The nature of the social contract in Egypt: perceptions
and attitudes in the aftermath of the forced evictions on al-Warraq
Island (Master’s thesis). Retrieved from https://lup.lub.lu.se/studentpapers/search/publication/8954724
Bayat, A. (2013). Life as politics: How ordinary people change the Middle
East. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
Beinin, J. (1981). Formation of the Egyptian working class. MERIP
Reports, (94), 14. doi:10.2307/3012255
Beinin, J., & Lockman, Z. (1998). Workers on the Nile: nationalism,
communism, Islam, and the Egyptian working class, 1882-1954. Cairo,
Egypt: American University in Cairo Press.
Page 70 of 93

Bellin, E. (2004). The robustness of authoritarianism in the Middle East:
exceptionalism

in

comparative

perspective. Comparative

Politics, 36(2), 139. doi:10.2307/4150140
Benjamin, W. (2003). The arcades project (H. Eiland, Trans.). Cambridge,
MA: The Belknap Press.
Benjamin, W. (2007). Illuminations. New York: Schocken.
Berardi, F. (2011). After the future (G. Genosko & N. Thoburn, Trans.).
Edinburgh: AK Press.
Biancani, F. (2012). " Let down the curtains around us" sex work in colonial
Cairo

1882-1952 (Doctoral

dissertation).

Retrieved

from

http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/486/
Bishop, R & McDougall, Z. (2018, February 12). "The worst days of my life":
Belly dancer arrested after 'performing with NO KNICKERS' describes
Egypt

ordeal

hell.

Mirror.

Retrieved

from

https://www.mirror.co.uk/news/weird-news/the-worst-days-life-belly12011611
Bodenstein, R. (2014). Sugar and Iron: Khedive Ismails sugar factories in
Egypt and the role of French engineering companies (1867-1875). ABE
Journal, (5). doi:10.4000/abe.2498
Boer, R. (2013). Lenin, religion, and theology. Basingstoke: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Boone, J. A. (2015). The homoerotics of orientalism. New York: Columbia
University Press.
Page 71 of 93

Brand, L. A. (2014). Official stories: Politics and national narratives in Egypt
and Algeria. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Brown, N. J. (1990). Peasant politics in modern Egypt: The struggle against
the state. New Haven: Conn.
Burrow, G. N. (1975). Clot-Bey: founder of western medical practice in
Egypt. The Yale journal of biology and medicine, 48(3), 251. Retrieved
from https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2595236/
Cairoscene Team (2015, July 17). 7 things bad Egyptian boys do on the first
day of Eid. Cairo Scene. Retrieved from https://cairoscene.co/Buzz/7Things-Bad-Egyptian-Boys-Do-on-the-First-Day-of-Eid
Certeau, M. D. (1984). The practice of everyday life. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Certeau, M. D., Mayol, P., & Giard, L. (1998). The practice of everyday life.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Chaichian, M. A. (1988). The effects of world capitalist economy on
urbanization in Egypt, 1800–1970. International Journal of Middle East
Studies, 20(01), 23-43. doi:10.1017/s0020743800057494
Chalcraft, J. (2005). Engaging the state: peasants and petitions in Egypt on
the eve of colonial rule. International Journal of Middle East
Studies, 37(3), 303-325. doi:10.1017/s0020743805052098
Clark, J. A. (2000). The economic and political impact of economic
restructuring on NGO-state relations in Egypt. Economic Liberalization,

Page 72 of 93

Democratization and Civil Society in the Developing World, 157-179.
doi:10.1007/978-1-349-62818-6_8
Clawson, P. (1981). The development of capitalism in Egypt. London:
Khamsin, 9,

77-116.

Retrieved

from

https://libcom.org/library/development-capitalism-egypt-patrick-clawson
Clot Bey. (2011). Lamha 'amma ila Misr [General overview on Egypt]. Cairo:
Dar al-Kutub wa-al-Wathaʾiq al-Qawmiyya.
Coffee shops in Heliopolis wrecked, randomly demolished (2017, February
14).

Egypt

Independent.

Retrieved

from

https://ww.egyptindependent.com/coffee-shops-heliopolis-wreckedrandomly-demolished/
Comer, B. (2005). Ruby: The making of a star. In W. Armbrust (Ed.), Culture
wars: the Arabic music video controversy. Cairo: American University
in Cairo Press.
Cuno, K. M. (2015). Modernizing marriage: family, ideology, and law in
nineteenth and early twentieth century Egypt. Syracuse: Syracuse
University Press.
Daoud, M. (2015, October 1). How to score an instant one-night stand: the art
of

seduction.

Cairo

Scene.

Retrieved

from

https://cairoscene.co/LifeStyle/how-to-score-an-instant-one-night-stand
Dean, C. J. (1994). The productive hypothesis: Foucault, gender, and the
history

of

sexuality. History

doi:10.2307/2505475
Page 73 of 93

and

Theory, 33(3),

271.

Dean, L (2015, January 19). Inside Cairo's coffee houses, where Egyptian
men go to meet their 'second wives'. Public Radio International.
Retrieved

from

https://www.pri.org/stories/2015-01-19/inside-cairos-

coffee-houses-where-egyptian-men-go-meet-their-second-wives
Desai, R. M., Olofsgard, A., & Yousef, T. (2011). Is the Arab Authoritarian
Bargain Collapsing? The Brookings Institution, 9, 2011. Retrieved from
https://www.brookings.edu/opinions/is-the-arab-authoritarian-bargaincollapsing/
Dib, N. E. (2015). Kasr Al Ainy, the story of a palace that became a medical
school. Kasr Al Ainy Medical Journal, 21(1), 1. doi:10.4103/16874625.155653
Dini, R., & Briganti, C. (2017). History of sexuality. Milton: Macat Library.
Dodwell, H. (1967). The Founder of modern Egypt: a study of Muhammad Ali.
London: Cambridge University Press.
Dozens of Egyptian activists arrested in coffee shop raids (2016, April 22). AlAraby.

Retrieved

from

https://www.alaraby.co.uk/english/news/2016/4/22/dozens-of-egyptianactivists-arrested-in-coffee-shop-raids
Egypt’s court orders ban on porn websites (2015, May 20). Ahram Online.
Retrieved from http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/130768/
Egypt/Politics-/Egypt%E2%80%99s-court-orders-ban-on-pornwebsites.aspx

Page 74 of 93

Egyptian couple arrested for setting up wife-swapping Facebook page (2012,
March 25). Dailymail. Retrieved from https://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/
article-2120144/Egyptian-couple-arrested-setting-wife-swappingFacebook-page.html
Egyptian man commits suicide leaping in front of Metro train in Cairo. (2018,
October 7). Ahram Online. Retrieved from http://english.ahram.org.eg/
NewsContent/1/64/312917/Egypt/Politics-/Egyptian-man-commitssuicide-leaping-in-front-of-M.aspx
Egyptian police nab 'bored' sex swingers (2012, March 26). Ahram Online.
Retrieved

from

http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/37756/Egypt/Politics-/
Egyptian-police-nab-bored-sex-swingers.aspx
El-Din, M. (2016, March 13). From taxis to tuk-tuks: Cairo's most popular
modes

of

transportation.

Ahram

Online.

Retrieved

from

http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/0/190561/Egypt/0/Fromtaxis-to-tuktuks-Cairos-most-popular-modes-of.aspx
ELMANSOURATODAY (2014). Hābib al-Adly lamā knt btṣnt ālā wāḥdh wāktšf
ān slwkhā mš kwys knt bqwlhā ʿyb [Habib al-Adly when I was
eavesdropping and heard someone with bad behaviour I told her that is
wrong] [Video file]. Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=7bSGmV_9KJ8
El-Meehy, A. (2010). Rewriting the social contract: The social fund and
Egypt's politics of retrenchment (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from

Page 75 of 93

https://tspace.library.utoronto.ca/bitstream/1807/32026/1/ElMeehy_Asya_201003_PhD_thesis.pdf
El-Nagar, A. M., & Krugly-Smolska, E. (2011). Modernization of education in
Egypt: the liberal movement towards Dewey’s ideas. Comparative and
International Education/Éducation Comparée et Internationale, 40(1),
57-75. Retrieved from https://ir.lib.uwo.ca/cie-eci/vol40/iss1/5/
ElSayed, S. (2011). Dangerous sexualities: the construction of sexual
knowledge in Egypt, 1800-1928 (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
https://ore.exeter.ac.uk/repository/handle/10036/4034
El-Shakry, O. (2007). The great social laboratory: Subjects of knowledge in
colonial and postcolonial Egypt. Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
Eltigani, N. (2017, Augest 31). A guide to pedestrian safety. Egypt Today.
Retrieved from https://www.egypttoday.com/Article/15/20308/A-guideto-pedestrian-safety
El-Warth, M. (2016, October 12). 10 slwkyāt tʿks ksl ālmṣryyn [10 behaviours
that reflect the laziness of Egyptians]. Almasry Alyoum. Retrieved from
https://lite.almasryalyoum.com/lists/115498/
eyh rāyk fy ẖfāfty [Do you like my attitude] [Recorded by A. Al-Banna]. (1930).
[Vinyl]. Cairo: Baidaphon Records.
Fadel, H. (Producer), & Amin, M (Director). (2000). Film Thaqafi [Cultural film]
[Motion Picture]. Egypt: Al-Adl Group.

Page 76 of 93

Fahmy, K. (1998a). Women, medicine, and power in nineteenth-century
Egypt. In L. Abu-Lughod (Ed.), Remaking Women: Feminism and
Modernity in the Middle East. Princeton: Princeton University Press
Fahmy, K. (1998b). The era of Mehmed Ali Pasha, 1805-1848. In M. Daly
(Ed.), The Cambridge history of Egypt (volume 2). Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Fahmy, K. (1999). The anatomy of justice: forensic medicine and criminal law
in nineteenth-century Egypt. Islamic Law and Society, 6(2), 224-271.
doi:10.1163/1568519991208682
Fahmy, K. (2002a). All the pasha's men: Mehmed Ali, his army, and the
making of modern Egypt. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
Fahmy, K. (2002b). Prostitution in nineteenth-century Egypt. In E. Rogan
(Ed.), Outside in on the margins of the modern Middle East. London:
I.B. Tauris.
Fahmy, N. S. (2011). The politics of Egypt: State-society relationship. London:
Routledge.
Firth, R., & Robinson, A. (2013). For the past yet to come: utopian
conceptions of time and becoming. Time & Society, 23(3), 380-401.
doi:10.1177/0961463x13482881
Flood, A. (2016, August 30). Egyptian writer Ahmed Naji's jail term upheld
over

sexually

explicit

book.

The

Guardian.

Retrieved

https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/30/egypt-upholdsahmed-naji-jail-term-over-sexually-explicit-book-the-use-of-life
Page 77 of 93

from

Fonder, N. L. (2013). Pleasure, Leisure, or Vice? Public Morality in Imperial
Cairo,

1882-1949 (Doctoral

dissertation).

https://dash.harvard.edu/handle/1/11151531
Foucault, M. (1994). Birth of the clinic: an archaeology of medical perception.
Vintage.
Foucault, M. (1995). Discipline and punish: the birth of the prison. New York:
Vintage Books.
Foucault, M. (2008). Society must be defended: lectures at the Collége de
France, 1975-76 (F. Ewald, Trans.). London: Penguin.
Foucault, M. (2008). The history of sexuality: the will to knowledge: Vol. 1.
Camberwell, Vic.: Penguin.
Fraser, K. W. (2015). Before they were belly dancers: European accounts of
female entertainers in Egypt, 1760-1870. Jefferson: McFarland and
Company.
Frost, A., & Yarrow, R. (2016). Improvisation in drama, theatre and
performance: History, practice, theory. London: Palgrave.
Frow, J. (1991). Michel de Certeau and the practice of representation. Cultural
Studies, 5(1), 52-60. doi:10.1080/09502389100490041
Ghalwash, M. A. (2016). On justice: peasants, petitions and the state in midnineteenth-century

Egypt. British

Journal

of

Middle

Studies, 43(4), 523-540. doi:10.1080/13530194.2015.1134308

Page 78 of 93

Eastern

Gohary, M. (2014, October 23). "ālafrāḥ ālšʿbyā".. āwkār llǧns wālmẖdrāt
[Local weddings, places for sex and drugs]. Albawabh News. Retrieved
from https://www.albawabhnews.com/856036
Goldberg, E. (1992). Peasants in revolt - Egypt 1919. International Journal of
Middle

East

Studies, 24(2),

261-280.

Retrieved

from

http://www.jstor.org/stable/164298
Gordon, J. (2012). Broken heart of the city: Youssef Chahine’s Bab al-Hadid
(Cairo Station). Journal for Cultural Research, 16(2-3), 217-237.
doi:10.1080/14797585.2012.647670
Gramsci, A. (2010). Selections from the Prison notebooks of Antonio
Gramsci (Q. Hoare & G. N. Smith, Eds.; Q. Hoare & G. N. Smith,
Trans.). New York, NY: International.
Hadad, L. (2016, November 2). Ruby ālmzh ālmṣryh ālāẖyrh [The last
Egyptian

pretty

girl].

Ma3azef.

Retrieved

from

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOBWEHDEURs
Hadidy, E. (2017, November 21). Kwārṯ fy ālafrāḥ ālšʿbyh [The disasters of
local

weddings].

Veto

Gate.

Retrieved

from

https://www.vetogate.com/2959006
Hafez, S. (2014a). The revolution shall not pass through women’s bodies:
Egypt, uprising and gender politics. The Journal of North African
Studies, 19(2), 172-185. doi:10.1080/13629387.2013.879710

Page 79 of 93

Hafez, S. (2014b). Bodies that protest: the girl in the blue bra, sexuality, and
state violence in revolutionary Egypt. Signs: Journal of Women in
Culture and Society, 40(1), 20-28. doi:10.1086/676977
Hakim, T. A. (2012). Al-šẖṣyh āl-wṭnyh āl-mṣryh [The Egyptian nationalist
character]. Cairo: Al-Hayya Al-Masria Al-Amma Lilkitab.
Halperin, D. M. (1989). Is there a history of sexuality? History and
Theory, 28(3), 257. doi:10.2307/2505179
Hamid, W. (Producer), & Seif, S. (Director). (2003). Dail al-samakah [The
fish's tail] [Motion Picture]. Egypt: Wahid Hamed Films.
Hammad,

H.

(2009).

Mechanizing

people,

localizing

modernity

industrialization and social transformation in modern Egypt: al-Mahalla
al-Kubra,

1910-1958

(Doctoral

dissertation).

Retrieved

from

https://repositories.lib.utexas.edu/handle/2152/19839
Hammad, H. (2011). Between Egyptian "national purity" and "local flexibility":
prostitution in Al-Mahalla Al-Kubra in the first half of the 20th
century. Journal

of

Social

History, 44(3),

751-783.

doi:10.1353/jsh.2011.0015
Hammad, H. (2014). Regulating sexuality: the colonial–national struggle over
prostitution after the British invasion of Egypt. In M. Booth & A. Gorman
(Eds.), The long 1890s in Egypt: colonial quiescence, subterranean
resistance. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Hammad, H. (2016). Industrial sexuality: Gender, urbanization, and social
transformation in Egypt. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Page 80 of 93

Hammad, H., & Biancani, F. (2017). Prostitution in Cairo. In M. Garcia, L.
Voss, & N. Van (Eds.), Selling sex in the city: A global history of
prostitution, 1600s-2000s. Leiden: Brill.
Harink, D. K. (2010). Paul, philosophy, and the theopolitical vision: Critical
engagements with Agamben, Badiou, Žižek, and others. Eugene, Or.:
Cascade Books.
Hassan, H. A. (2010). State versus society in Egypt: consolidating democracy
or upgrading autocracy. African Journal of Political Science and
International

Relations, 4(9),

319-329.

Retrieved

from

https://academicjournals.org/journal/AJPSIR/article-abstract/6C7B7084
0831
Hatem, M. (1997). The professionalization of health and the control of
women's bodies as modern governmentalities in nineteenth-century
Egypt. In M. Zilfi (Eds.), Women in the Ottoman empire: Middle Eastern
women in the early modern era. New York: Brill.
Hefzy, M. (Producer) & Khan, M. (Director). (2016). Qabl zahmet al-saif
[Before the summer crowds] [Motion Picture]. Egypt: Middle West
Films, Film-Clinic, The Producers, WIKA Production and distribution,
MAD Solutions.
Hlyk ʿlā ʿwmy [Follow my lead] [Recorded by B. Al-Mahallawieh]. (1907).
[Vinyl]. Cairo: Odeon Records.
Hopkins, N., & Saad, R. (2005). The region of upper Egypt: Identity and
change. In N. Hopkins & R. Saad (Eds.), Upper Egypt: Identity and
change. Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
Page 81 of 93

Horkheimer, M. (2013). Eclipse of reason. London: Bloomsbury.
Hourani, A. H. (2007). Arabic thought in the liberal age, 1789 - 1939.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ibrahim, I (2016, august 26). Wzyr ālqwā ālʿāmlh: «wẓāʾf b alaf ǧnyh wālšbāb
qāʿd ʿlā ālqhāwy» [the minister of manpower: «6 thousand pounds jobs
and the youth are sitting at cofeeshops»]. Veto Gate. Retrieved from
https://www.vetogate.com/2338234
Ismail, S. (1995). State-society relations in Egypt: restructuring the
political. Arab

Studies

Quarterly,17(3),

37-52.

Retrieved

from

http://www.jstor.org/stable/41858128
James, K. L. (2012). Creating a nation in adversity: advent of Egyptian
nationalism in British occupation (Master’s thesis). Retrieved from
https://digitalscholarship.unlv.edu/thesesdissertations/1580/
Kamel, M. S. (2001). Redrawing state-society boundaries: Egypt's dynamic
social

contract (Doctoral

dissertation).

Retrieved

from

http://etheses.dur.ac.uk/3955/
Kandil, H. (2011). Islamizing Egypt? Testing the limits of Gramscian
counterhegemonic

strategies. Theory

and

Society, 40(1),

37-62.

doi:10.1007/s11186-010-9135-z
Kellner, D. (1984). Herbert Marcuse and the crisis of Marxism. Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.

Page 82 of 93

Kholoussy, H. (2010a). Monitoring and medicalising male sexuality in semicolonial Egypt. Gender & History, 22(3), 677-691. doi:10.1111/j.14680424.2010.01607.x
Kholoussy, H. (2010b). For better, for worse the marriage crisis that made
modern Egypt. Cairo: The American University in Cairo Press.
Khouri, M. (2010). The Arab national project in Youssef Chahine's Cinema.
Cairo: American University in Cairo Press.
Kidwell, J. (2016). Time for business: business ethics, sustainability, and
Giorgio Agamben’s ‘messianic time’. De Ethica. A Journal of
Philosophical, Theological and Applied Ethics, 2(3), 39-51.
Kozma, L. (2010). Girls, labour, and sex in precolonial Egypt. In J. Helgren &
C. Vasconcellos (Eds.), Girlhood: a global history. New Brunswick:
Rutgers University Press.
Kozma, L. (2011). Policing Egyptian women: Sex, law, and medicine in
Khedival Egypt. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Kozma, L. (2012). Wandering about as she pleases: prostitutes, adolescent
girls,

and

female

slaves

in

Cairo’s

public

space,

1850-

1882. Hawwa, 10(1), 18-36. doi:10.1163/156920812x627722
Kozma, L. (2013). “We, the sexologists …”: Arabic medical writing on
sexuality, 1879-1943. Journal of the History of Sexuality, 22(3), 426445. doi:10.7560/jhs22303

Page 83 of 93

Lagrange,

F.

(2009). Women

songs. History

in

the

Compass, 7(1),

singing

business,

226-250.

women

in

doi:10.1111/j.1478-

0542.2008.00574.x
Lane, E. W. (1908). The manners & customs of the modern Egyptians.
London: Dent & Sons.
Lockman, Z. (1988). The social roots of nationalism: Workers and the national
movement in Egypt, 1908–19. Middle Eastern Studies, 24(4), 445-459.
doi:10.1080/00263208808700756
Lopez, S. T. (2004). The dangers of dancing: the media and morality in 1930s
Egypt. Comparative Studies of South Asia, Africa and the Middle
East, 24(1), 99-108. doi:10.1215/1089201x-24-1-99
Lutsky, V. B. (1969). Modern history of the Arab countries. Moscow: Progress.
Lynch, M. (2011). After Egypt: the limits and promise of online challenges to
the authoritarian Arab state. Perspectives on Politics, 9(02), 301-310.
doi:10.1017/s1537592711000910
Man and wife jailed for forming swingers club in Egypt (2009, April 5). Daily
Telegraph.

Retrieved

from

https://www.dailytelegraph.com.au/news/weird/jailed-over-swingersclub/news-story/64962c1f149fcd98f4ae4ef453e8b361?
sv=331bdc4aaff10caf46ab42be6cc14c
Marcuse, H. (1966). Eros and civilization: A philosophical inquiry into Freud.
Boston, MA: Beacon.
Marcuse, H. (2002). One-dimensional man. London: Routledge.
Page 84 of 93

Married couples detained over alleged wife-swapping Facebook page. (2016,
October

27).

Egypt

Independent.

Retrieved

from

https://ww.egyptindependent.com/married-couples-detained-overalleged-wife-swapping-facebook-page/
Marx, K. (1976). Capital: a critique of political economy. Harmondsworth:
Penguin.
Mazid, N. (2002). Western mimicry or cultural hybridity: deconstructing Qasim
Amin's"

colonized

voice". American

Sciences, 19(4),

Journal

42-67.

of

Islamic

Social

Retrieved

from

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267698907_Western_Mimicry
_or_Cultural_Hybridity_Deconstructing_Qasim_Amin's_Colonized_Voic
e
McCrossen, A. (2016). Marking modern times: a history of clocks, watches,
and other timekeepers in American life. Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
McSherry, E. (2013). A Foucauldian discourse analysis of intellectual disability
in

Irish

education

(Master's

thesis).

Retrieved

from

https://dspace.mic.ul.ie/handle/10395/1958
Mens, S. (2015). Egypt. between state and Islam (Master’s thesis). Retrieved
from https://dspace.library.uu.nl/handle/1874/315803
Michaelson, R. (2017, October 8). LGBT people in Egypt targeted in wave of
arrests

and

violence.

The

Guardian.

Retrieved

https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/oct/08/lgbt-people-egypttargeted-wave-arrests-violence
Page 85 of 93

from

Mitchell, J. P. (2007). A fourth critic of the enlightenment: Michel de Certeau
and the ethnography of subjectivity*. Social Anthropology, 15(1), 89106. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8676.2007.00001.x
Mitchell, T. (1988). Colonizing Egypt. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Mitchell, T. (2005). Rule of experts: Egypt, techno-politics, modernity.
Berkeley, CA: Univ. of California Press.
Mortimer, C. (2015, October 15). Egyptian actress Entissar to go on trial for
encouraging boys to watch porn. Independent. Retrieved from
https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/africa/egyptian-actressentissar-to-go-on-trial-for-encouraging-boys-to-watch-porna6695371.html
Nabbout, M. (2018a, December 18). Egyptian police arrest couple involved in
'wife

swapping'

network.

Step

Feed.

Retrieved

from

https://stepfeed.com/egyptian-police-arrest-couple-involved-in-wifeswapping-network-6227
Nabbout, M. (2018b, December 18). Egyptian police arrest woman for being
married

to

two

men

at

once.

Step

Feed.

Retrieved

from

https://stepfeed.com/egyptian-police-arrest-woman-for-being-marriedto-two-men-at-once-3060
O'Connor, R. (2017, December 13). Egyptian pop singer sent to prison for two
years over video that 'incited debauchery'. Independent. Retrieved from
https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/news/shyma-

Page 86 of 93

music-video-egypt-prison-sentence-fine-watch-debauchery-directorappeal-latest-a8107046.html
O'Connor, R. (2018, January 4). Leila Amer: Egyptian singer arrested over
video branded a 'moral disaster' by conservative lawyer. Independent.
Retrieved

from

https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/music/news/leilaamer-arrested-music-video-pop-star-egypt-boss-oumek-debaucherysentence-latest-a8141221.html
Onians, C. (2008, October 28). Egypt police slammed over wife-swap
scandal.

The

Sydney

Morning

Herald.

Retrieved

from

https://www.smh.com.au/world/egypt-police-slammed-over-wifeswapscandal-20081028-59yl.html
Owen, R. (2011). The Middle East in the world economy, 1800-1914. London:
I.B. Tauris.
Pollard, L. (2005). Nurturing the nation, the family politics of modernizing,
colonizing and liberating Egypt (1805/1923). Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Pratt, N. (2004). Understanding political transformation in Egypt: advocacy
NGOs,

civil

Studies, 14(1),

society

and

the

state. Journal

237-262.

of

Retrieved

Mediterranean
from

https://muse.jhu.edu/article/670367/summary
Pratt, N. (2007). The Queen Boat case in Egypt: sexuality, national security
and state sovereignty. Review of International Studies, 33(1), 129-144.
doi:10.1017/s0260210507007346
Page 87 of 93

Prozorov, S. (2014). Agamben and politics: a critical introduction. Edinburgh
University Press.
Qmrh ya qmrh ya qmwrh [Hey beautiful] [Recorded by A. Helmy]. (1907).
[Vinyl]. Cairo: Odeon Records.
Ragheb, M. (2017, September 28). Wzyrt ālhǧrh: mʿndnāš bṭālh ʿndnā ksl..
wālmšrwʿāt ktyr wklh ʿāwz ybqā mdyr [The minister of immigration: we
do not have unemployment, we have laziness, there are many projects,
and everyone wants to be a manger]. Youm7. Retrieved from
http://www.youm7.com/3433522
Ranko, A. (2015). The Muslim Brotherhood and its quest for hegemony in
Egypt: state-discourse and Islamist counter-discourse. Hamburg:
Springer.
Raymond, A. (2007). Cairo: city of history (W. Wood, Trans.). Cairo: American
University in Cairo Press.
Renaud, J. (2013). Rethinking the repressive hypothesis. Symposium, 17(2),
76-93. doi:10.5840/symposium201317221
Richards, V. (2015, May 27). Reda el-Fouly: Egyptian woman arrested for
'inciting debauchery' with spoof raunchy music video. Independent.
Retrieved from https://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/
reda-el-fouly-egyptian-woman-arrested-for-inciting-debauchery-withspoof-raunchy-music-video-10279069.html

Page 88 of 93

Rios, L. (2015, May 27). The irreparable loss of Cairo's street café district.
Vice. Retrieved from https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/ypxkkw/theirreparable-loss-of-cairos-street-cafe-district
Roccu, R. (2012). Gramsci in Cairo: neoliberal authoritarianism, passive
revolution and failed hegemony in Egypt under Mubarak, 1991-2010
(Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from http://etheses.lse.ac.uk/369/
Ross, A. (2017). Walter Benjamin’s idea of revolution: the fulfilled wish in
historical

perspective. Cogent

Arts

&

Humanities, 4(1).

doi:10.1080/23311983.2017.1390919
Roushdy, N. (2008). Baladi as performance: gender and dance in modern
Egypt.

Surfacing,

71.

Retrieved

from

http://schools.aucegypt.edu/GAPP/IGWS/GradCent/Documents/Roush
dy.Baladi%20as%20Performance.(4)%20final.pdf
Rqs Shafyqa [The dancing of Shafyqa] [Recorded by B. Al-Mahallawieh].
(n.d). [Vinyl]. Cairo: Odeon Records.
Russell, M. L. (2013). Egypt. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Russian belly dancer Johara sentenced year in prison (2019, April 10). Egypt
Independent.

Retrieved

from

https://ww.egyptindependent.com/russian-belly-dancer-joharasentenced-year-in-prison/
SadaElbalad. (2018). Sada Elbalad - ālrʾys ālsisi yṭālb ṭlāb ālǧāmʿāt ālāhtmām
bāllyāq ālbdnyh: «nṣf ālwzn ʿāyz ytšāl» [SadaElbalad – pesendent alSisi urges university students to watch physical fitness «half of the
Page 89 of 93

weigh

should

be

eliminated»]

[Video

file].

Retrieved

from

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7EyLeGtsIiM
Sayyid-Marsot, A. L. (1985). A short history of modern Egypt. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Scoop team (2015, November 26). 13 signs you put the ‘pro’ In
procrastination

in

Egypt.

Scoop

Empire.

Retrieved

from

https://scoopempire.com/13-signs-youre-the-master-of-procrastinationin-egypt/
Scott, J. (1986). Everyday forms of peasant resistance. Journal of Peasant
Studies, 13(2), 5-35. doi:10.1080/03066158608438289
Scott, J. C. (2008). Weapons of the weak: everyday forms of peasant
Resistance. Yale University Press.
Shaham, R. (1997). Family and the courts in modern Egypt: A study based on
decisions by the sharī`a courts, 1900-1955. Leiden: Brill.
Shehata, S. S. (2010). Shop floor culture and politics in Egypt. Albany, NY:
SUNY Press.
Sheils, C. (2014, February 21). Egyptians logging on to get off. Cairo Scene.
Retrieved from https://cairoscene.co/LifeStyle/Egyptians-logging-on-toget-off
Shenker, J. (2016). The Egyptians: a radical story. UK: Penguin Books.
Sherifsheko. (2004). Ruby lyh bydāry kdh [why he is hiding] [Video file].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oOBWEHDEURs

Page 90 of 93

Smet, B. D. (2016). Gramsci on Tahrir revolution and counter-revolution in
Egypt. London: Pluto Press.
Sonbol, A. E. (1991). The creation of a medical profession in Egypt: 18001922. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
Sonbol, A. E. (2003). Women of Jordan: Islam, labour, and the law. Syracuse
(N.Y.): Syracuse University Press.
Talhami, G. (Producer) & Chahine, Y. (Director). (1958). Bab al-hadid [Cairo
station] [Motion picture]. Egypt: Gabriel Talhami Productions.
Tawfeek, F. (2018, September 4). ‘We are not a suicide destination’: Egypt
Metro

company.

Egypt

Independent.

Retrieved

from

https://ww.egyptindependent.com/we-are-not-a-suicide-destinationegypt-metro-company/
Taylor, D. (2009). Normativity and normalization. Foucault Studies, (7), 45.
doi:10.22439/fs.v0i7.2636
Teen commits suicide by leaping in front of metro train in Cairo (2018, July
22).

Ahram

Online.

Retrieved

from

http://english.ahram.org.eg/NewsContent/1/64/308365/Egypt/Politics-/
Teen-commits-suicide-by-leaping-in-front-of-metro-.aspx
Thompson,

E.

(1967).

Time,

work-discipline,

and

industrial

capitalism. Class, 27-40. doi:10.1002/9781119395485.ch3
Tucker, J. E. (1985). Women in nineteenth-century Egypt. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Page 91 of 93

Tuk-tuks banned on main streets, vans licensed as taxis (2019, April 13).
Egypt

Independent.

Retrieved

from

https://ww.egyptindependent.com/tuk-tuks-banned-on-main-streetsvans-licensed-as-taxis/
Wittfogel, K. A. (1981). Oriental despotism: a comparative study of total
power. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Wynn, L. L. (2016). ‘Like a virgin’: hymenoplasty and secret marriage in
Egypt. Medical

Anthropology, 35(6),

547-559.

doi:10.1080/01459740.2016.1143822
Yā nẖltyn fy ālʿlāly [Two high palm trees] [Recorded by A. Helmy]. (1907b).
[Vinyl]. Cairo: Odeon Records.
Yā nẖltyn fy ālʿlāly [Two high palm trees] [Recorded by B. Al-Mahallawieh].
(1907a). [Vinyl]. Cairo: Odeon Records.
Yā wād yā Ali yā btāʿ ālzyt [Ali the oil guy] [Recorded by M. Al-Mahdya]. (n.d).
[Vinyl]. Cairo: Baidaphon Records.
Yom, S. (2005). Civil society and democratization in the Arab world. Middle
East, 9(4),

15-32.

Retrieved

from

http://www.eden.rutgers.edu/~spath/351/Readings/Yom%20-%20Civil
%20Society%20and%20Democratization%20in%20Arab%20World.pdf
Youssef A. & Abdalaziz, G. (2019, January 11). Mṣdr āmny ykšf ālāthāmāt
ālty twāǧh ftāh "tsǧyl māzn wḥsām" [A security source reveals the
charges against the girl of “Mazen and Hussam” recording]. Elwatan

Page 92 of 93

News.

Retrieved

from

https://www.elwatannews.com/news/details/3920982
Zamalek concerned as officials announce ‘war’ on waterfront cafes (2016,
March

29).

Egypt

Independent.

Retrieved

from

https://ww.egyptindependent.com/zamalek-concerned-officialsannounce-war-waterfront-cafes/
Zeidan, M. (2018, December 16). Wzyr āltʿlym: «bdl 10 mḥṭāt mtrw.. nrkb 8
wnmšy 2» [The minister of education: instead of 10 metro stations, we
ride

8

and

walk

2].

Shorouk

News.

Retrieved

from

https://www.shorouknews.com/news/view.aspx?
cdate=16122018&id=3a8c6a41-a0a7-4650-bf0e-7cee63628443
Zerubavel, E. (1982). The standardization of time: a sociohistorical
perspective. American

Journal

of

Sociology, 88(1),

1-23.

doi:10.1086/227631
Zfh al-‘rwsh [The wedding night] [Recorded by B. Al-Mahallawieh]. (1905).
[Vinyl]. Cairo: Odeon Records.
Zitz, C., Burns, J., & Tacconelli, E. (2014). Trans men and friendships: a
Foucauldian discourse analysis. Feminism & Psychology, 24(2), 216237. doi:10.1177/0959353514526224
Zuhur, S. (2008). Criminal law, women and sexuality in the Middle East. In P.
Ilkkaracan

(Ed.), Deconstructing

sexuality

challenges and discourses. England: Ashgate.

Page 93 of 93

in

the

Middle

East

