Chapter published in Welfare and Social Protection in Contemporary Latin America, 2019
The publication is available at: https://www.routledge.com/Welfare-and-Social-Protection-inContemporary-Latin-America-1st-Edition/Cruz-Martinez/p/book/9781138600119

To cite this article: Cruz-Martinez G. (2019) Comparative Social Policy in Contemporary Latin
America: Concepts, Theories and a Research Agenda. In: Cruz-Martinez, G. (ed) Welfare and
Social Protection in Contemporary Latin America. London: Routledge, pp. 3-28, DOI:
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780429471087

Comparative social policy in contemporary Latin
America: Concepts, theories and a research agenda
Gibrán Cruz-Martínez
Institute of Public Goods and Policies, CSIC
gibran.cruz@csic.es
ORCID: https://orcid.org/0000-0002-4583-2914

Abstract:
This is the introductory chapter of the book Welfare and Social Protection in Contemporary Latin America.
The purpose of the book is threefold: (i) to present a historical and theoretical analysis of social protection
systems and welfare regimes in contemporary Latin America; (ii) to discuss the politics of contemporary
social protection and how national/global actors and institutions shape social policy in the region; and (iii)
to examine several debates on social protection and welfare systems in contemporary Latin America. The
chapter presents state-of-the-art research in the areas of social policy and welfare that is examined in each
of the three parts of the book. What do we know about welfare regimes in Latin America? What do we
know about the role of (f)actors shaping social protection development and inclusion? What do we know
about recent debates regarding social protection and welfare in Latin America? Particular attention is paid
to the contribution made by chapters in this edited volume to the social policy literature. The chapter
finishes with a description of the content and results of each chapter in this edited volume.
Keywords: social protection, welfare state, Caribbean, Latin America, comparative politics

1

Introduction
Pioneer countries in Latin America created their first welfare programmes in the early twentieth century
(Mesa-Lago, 1978). The consolidation of welfare programmes and institutions took place during the stateled industrialisation era following an import-substitution–industrialisation strategy engineered by
structuralists at the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (Graziano and Jessoula,
2018). Social insurance programmes spread in the consolidation period to the vast majority of Latin
American countries following the corporatist–statist welfare regime model, in which mainly unionised
urban formal workers and the military benefited. Rather than reducing poverty and income inequality, this
strategy exacerbated the differences between the economic/political elites and the majority of the
population working in the informal and rural sector.
Following Heclo’s (1981) stages of welfare state development, we can argue the Latin American region is
in the process of social policy expansion, or what Garay (2016) calls the ‘inclusive turn’. Since the
beginning of the century, a large part of the region has been governed by centre-left or left-wing parties –
although the ‘progressive cycle’ appears to have ended – (Muñoz, 2016). The commodity boom and the
exponential hike in primary commodities prices created the conditions for exceptional economic growth in
the region (Aravena et al., 2015). Moreover, the implementation of social assistance policies to the already
established social insurance programmes created an inclusionary path for outsiders – population in the rural
areas, working in the informal sector and the unemployed – into the social protection systems (Cecchini et
al., 2015). The twenty-first century saw an increase in social expenditure, an extension of the generosity
and coverage of welfare programmes, and improvements in the movements towards equitable
universalisation of social policies (Cruz-Martinez, 2015; Martinez-Franzoni and Sanchez-Ancochea, 2016).
However, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (CEPAL) recently confirmed
that the improvements of social and labour inclusion during the first 15 years of the new millennium have
been insufficient (e.g., only 28.6 per cent of households in the region have reached a minimum level of
double inclusion – social and labour inclusion) (CEPAL, 2017).i Social protection systems in Latin
America are fragmented and inequitable, and the commodification and privatisation of the health and
pension systems, guided by profit, have negatively impacted inequality and social welfare (Sojo, 2017).ii
Therefore, even though the improvements in the welfare state development are unquestionable, there is still
a long road ahead to secure a decent quality of life with real equal opportunities for all residents in Latin
America.
We can measure the degree of welfare state development in the region by taking into account multiple
dimensions of the welfare state. The Multidimensional Welfare Index (MWI) combines indicators from
three different dimensions (i.e., social spending, coverage of welfare programmes and outcomes of welfare
institutions) to operationalise the welfare state development in 17 Latin American countries during the
1940s–1970s (Cruz-Martinez, 2014) and 2000–2010 (Cruz-Martinez, 2017c).iii Countries are grouped into
three clusters based on the 2010 MWI results. Argentina, Uruguay, Brazil and Chile exhibit MWI scores in
the first tertile – top 33 per cent – and are labelled as countries with a relatively high degree of welfare state
development. Costa Rica, Venezuela, Panama, Colombia, Mexico, Peru and El Salvador obtained MWI
scores in the bottom 33 per cent and are considered to have an intermediate welfare state development.
Ecuador, Dominican Republic, Paraguay, Nicaragua, Bolivia, Honduras and Guatemala had the lowest
MWI scores and therefore are considered to be countries with a relatively low degree of welfare state
development.iv
Welfare state development in the twenty-first century seems to be an effective way of tackling individual
income and capabilities deprivations in Latin America and the Caribbean. However, welfare state
development does not appear to be effective for reducing income inequality in the region (Cruz-Martinez,

2

2017c). This does not mean that inequality has not been reduced; several studies confirm the reduction of
inequality in the still most unequal region in the world (Lustig and McLeod, 2011; Soares et al., 2007;
Tsounta and Osueke, 2014). However, what Cruz-Martinez (2017c) finds is that changes in the levels of
social expenditure, coverage and outcomes of the welfare state do not explain the reductions in income
inequality. One explanation for this result might be the existence of a dual social protection system. A
minority of the population continues to benefit from developments in the welfare state programmes –
mainly through improvements in the social insurance programmes for workers in the formal sector – while
the majority of Latin American residents benefit from targeted, conditional and stigmatised social
assistance programmes.
If not welfare state development, then, what explains the reduction in income inequality? Nora Lustig and
her research team conclude that one of the leading causes of income inequality reduction in the region is
the wage structure effect. For example, Brazil has seen an increase in the minimum salary (favouring lowskilled workers) and Mexico has seen an increase of skilled workers with higher salaries (Lustig et al.,
2016). Income inequality reduction in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Peru occurred thanks to “a decrease in
the earnings gap between skilled and low-skilled workers and an increase in government transfers to the
poor” (López-Calva and Lustig, 2010, p. 5).
This book brings together a group of renowned experts and early-career scholars in the broad field of social
policy and welfare studies. The purpose of the book is threefold: (i) to present a historical and theoretical
analysis of social protection systems and welfare regimes in contemporary Latin America; (ii) to discuss
the politics of contemporary social protection and how national/global actors and institutions shape social
policy in the region; and (iii) to examine several debates on social protection and welfare systems in
contemporary Latin America.
Political scientists, sociologists and economists examine from a multidisciplinary perspective the following
aspects of social protection and welfare regimes:
•

The shift in the welfare regime: from a social assistance state to a universalistic state

•

The explanatory factors in the emerging dualism of social protection institutions (i.e., social
assistance for outsiders and social insurance for insiders)

•

Construction of social citizenship rights as a consequence of changing social policy architecture

•

Nature of welfare regime reforms in the most advanced emerging welfare states of the region
(Costa Rica, Chile, Brazil, Argentina and Uruguay)

•

Theoretical foundations of conditional cash transfer programmes and the domestication of global
policy norms

•

Social protection in trade agreements (transnational social policy)

•

Neoliberalism and trade union inclusionary strategies

•

State-led versus market-led welfare provision according to the desire of rural ‘outsiders’ in the
areas of education and pensions

•

Discriminatory targeting mechanisms of citizenship and identity for welfare entitlements

•

Cash transfer programmes as a means for women’s empowerment or the reproduction of gender
roles in the patriarchal society

3

•

The future of social protection in the face of accelerated technological, labour and climate
challenges and changes

The previously mentioned topics give structure to the book. The book is divided into three parts, each
devoted to exploring one of the three main goals. The first part examines the welfare regimes in Latin
America. It tracks the expansion of social assistance and social insurance through the state-led development
era, the neoliberal or Washington Consensus era and the pink-tide. The part asks: what has been the impact
of social policy reforms on the architecture of welfare regimes in contemporary Latin America? Can we
generalise a welfare regime model for the whole region, or do we need to disaggregate it with intra-regional
typologies? Have the expansion of social assistance and the inclusion of ‘outsiders’ created dual social
protection institutions? If so, what are some of the explanatory factors for this dualism? What has been the
impact of welfare regimes’ reforms in the universalisation of social citizenship rights?
The second part explores the role played by national and international actors shaping social policy in the
region. Regarding national actors, the part examines the role played by national identification registries
determining who is a citizen entitled to social citizens’ rights (i.e., critically addressing the role played by
national institutions in the social inclusion and exclusion of individuals). Trade unions are the second
national actor considered in this part. What has been the role of trade unions in the process of policy change
from a Bismarckian to a hybrid welfare regime? Do trade unions support the inclusion of ‘outsiders’ in the
‘inclusive turn’?
The second part also considers the role of international financial institutions and international trade
agreements in the politics of social protection. What influence do international finance institutions have in
the creation and implementation of national social protection schemes? Does the official narrative of the
creation of conditional cash transfer programmes omit or include the exogenous influence played by
international finance institutions? In regards to the international trade agreements, the part asks: what are
the main implications of incorporating labour rights provisions in an international trade agreement between
the European Union and a Latin American country? These research questions contribute to the literature on
global social policy.
The third and final part addresses a variety of debates around social protection and welfare in the region.
First, it adds to the debate on the role of conditional cash transfer programmes (CCTs) to empower women.
Do CCTs empower the recipient of the cash transfers? Alternatively, as feminist research argues, do
conditionalities and co-responsibilities promote a gendered vision of care in a traditional family structure?
The second debate deals with the dilemma of state- or market-led welfare provision. Do social welfare
programmes in place correspond with the visions and desires of the beneficiaries? Do beneficiaries in the
rural Andean region prefer social security and education financed and provided by the state or by private
actors? Finally, the book ends with an analysis of the actual and future challenges that need to be addressed
to maintain social protection coverage and keep institutions afloat (e.g., ageing, automation, economic
crises).
This introductory chapter is organised as follows. The next section presents the state-of-the-art research in
the areas of social policy and welfare examined in each of the three parts of the book. Particular attention is
paid to the contribution made by chapters in this edited volume to the social policy literature. The chapter
concludes with a description of the content and results of each chapter.
Conceptual framework and state of the art in contemporary Latin American social policy studies
First, let’s start by defining the two concepts linking the chapters in this edited volume. Social protection is
a key social policy tool used by emerging or consolidated welfare states for a multiplicity of reasons

4

beyond income poverty reduction.v For example, social protection is used to promote human development
and the capabilities of individuals; to promote inclusive growth; to empower marginalised sectors of the
population; to improve livelihoods; and to reduce inequalities by redistributing income and providing
public services (e.g., public education and health care) (Barrientos and Hulme, 2009; ILO, 2018). Midgley
(2014) considers social protection a social development practice because it raises the income of the
population while developing the human capital of beneficiaries. Therefore, social protection involves the
transference of cash benefits to individuals and the provision of benefits in kind (e.g., public education,
health care, housing).
Social policy could be defined as the “collective interventions directly affecting transformation in social
welfare, social institutions and social relations” (Mkandawire, 2001, p. 1). Figure 1.1 shows the social
policy menu and the variety of social protection programmes available. Cash transfer programmes are
organised either in social insurance or social assistance schemes. One of the main traits of social insurance
is the conditionality of a direct contribution to a general fund as an eligibility requirement to become a
beneficiary of such programmes. On the contrary, social assistance does not require direct contributions as
an eligibility requirement, and cash benefits can be either universal (i.e., everyone is eligible) or targeted
(i.e., only those meeting a categorical or means-based eligibility criteria are eligible). Social insurance
programmes follow a consumption-smoothing logic (i.e., income redistribution through the life cycle of an
individual), while social assistance programmes are implemented to level individuals up to a societal
minimum (i.e., social protection floor).
Figure 1.1 The social policy menu

Source: Elaborated by the author
This book does not use the United States usage of the welfare concept as an income-tested benefit. Welfare
is considered to be a human right for human agency and well-being as fundamental as civil and political
rights. Following Griffin (2008), we must be careful with this normative consideration because, at the
moment, welfare rights are at best civil rights (i.e., ethical rights we have as citizens). However, the actual
limitation of citizenship targeting and the linkage of welfare rights to members of an “imagined
community” (Anderson, 2006) do not imply that an ethical, normative analysis must necessarily consider
that a right to welfare is a human right. Nonetheless, for welfare to be considered a human right, truly
universal welfare programmes must be implemented throughout the world. According to Barr (2012),
individual welfare comes from at least four sources: (i) labour market via wages; (ii) private provision via
private insurance and individual saving; (iii) voluntary welfare via care provided by the family, community

5

and NGOs; and (iv) the state via cash benefits, benefits in kind and tax concessions. Therefore, social
protection is a tool for welfare promotion and provision.
What do we know about welfare regimes in Latin America?vi
Following Esping-Andersen (1999, pp. 34–35), a welfare regime refers to the interdependent way in which
the state, market and family (i.e., welfare actors or welfare providers) combine to allocate risks and produce
well-being. Basically, the welfare regime informs us about how the state, market, family, NGOs,
communities and other alternative actors combine to produce welfare. We can identify three groups of
researchers who have identified welfare regimes for the Latin American region. First, researchers have
grouped all Latin American countries in a joint regional welfare regime. Second, a larger group of scholars
has identified intra-regional welfare regimes in Latin America. Third, more recently, another group
proposed intra-national welfare regimes. This subsection briefly describes these three groups and highlights
the added-value of the chapters of the first part to the welfare regimes literature.
Gough (2013, p. 205) “reconceptualise[s] the welfare regime paradigm developed within Northern social
policy studies to understand the nature and diversity of social policies in the South”. Based on previous
research with Geoff Wood, he proposes an informal (in)security regime for the global south as an analogue
ideal-type welfare state regime model (Gough and Wood, 2004; Wood and Gough, 2006). Barrientos
(2004) follows a similar logic to Gough (2013), expanding Esping-Andersen’s approach to include Latin
America. His main argument is that “there is enough commonality in welfare provision across Latin
American countries to argue that they share a common welfare regime” (2004, p. 122). In Chapter 2 of this
edited volume, Barrientos expands his previous research findings to explore variables that might help us
understand why the Latin American welfare regime shifted from a conservative–informal model to a
liberal–informal model. Changes in economic and social institutions after the Washington Consensus
brought an increased reliance on the market for welfare provision as well as a greater burden on the
individual. Barrientos argues that the lack of a basic safety net (i.e., social protection floor) contributes to
the ‘informal’ characterisation of Latin American welfare regimes.
Critiques of a joint Latin American welfare regime argue that grouping Latin American welfare systems
into one model does not show justice to the intra-regional disparities. During the last two decades, students
of Latin American social policy have concentrated their efforts in examining the national picture of welfare
regimes. Filgueira (1999), Barba Solano (2009), Huber and Stephens (2005), Pribble (2011), Martínez
Franzoni (2008), and Marcel and Rivera (2008) have proposed welfare regime typologies showcasing the
intra-regional variety of welfare-mixes. Filgueira’s typology results in three regimes. The main difference
between the three is the degree of the population excluded from the welfare programmes – around half of
the population in the dual regimes, the vast majority in the exclusionary regimes and relatively low levels
of exclusion in the stratified universalism regimes – although with differentiated quality and access to
welfare benefits across class.
Barba Solano (2009) portrays the Latin American regime during the state-led industrialisation era (i.e.,
1940s–1970s) very closely to the European corporatist regimes. During this period of consolidation of the
welfare state in the region, benefits of social security programmes were linked to class and status in the
labour market, and the family played a primordial role in the welfare-mix. Following Marshall (1950), we
can argue that the emerging welfare states of Latin America during this period guaranteed welfare
regarding exclusive social rights for a few rather than social citizen rights for all. High informality rates, the
underdevelopment of fiscal institutions for revenue-collection, and regressive tax systems were – and still
are – reasons to understand the developmental trait of Latin American welfare systems. Like Filgueira,
Barba Solano (2003) proposes three welfare regimes under the umbrella of the social security paradigm: the
universalist, the dualist and the exclusionary. Universalist regimes are similar to the corporatist regimes in

6

Europe, with active states in social welfare aspects who developed a social protection system following a
Bismarckian gradual expansion with particular benefits linked to class, trade union membership and status
in the formal market (i.e., Chile, Argentina, Uruguay and Costa Rica). The dual regimes in Brazil, Mexico,
Colombia and Venezuela are similar to the universalist, but with a higher share of the population left
without social security coverage. The exclusionary regimes in Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Paraguay, Honduras,
Nicaragua, Guatemala and El Salvador have an even weaker degree of participation of the state in welfare
provision – with a regressive trait – and with a high degree of familialisation (i.e., welfare is highly
dependent on the family). The differences between the welfare regimes are mainly in the degree of
coverage and quality of welfare benefits, rather than in the nature of the welfare programmes. Barba Solano
describes with more details the criteria to group countries in these regimes in the second chapter of this
edited volume.
Huber and Stephens (2005) identify five clusters of social policy regimes in Latin America and the
Caribbean. They examined the coverage, magnitude, rules for entitlements and modes of financing of social
welfare programmes providing cash transfers and benefits in kind. In line with Barba Solano and Filgueira,
the main difference between clusters is the degree of coverage and effort. However, they highlighted a fifth
regime in which English-speaking Caribbean countries and Costa Rica exhibited a difference in nature with
the first four clusters (i.e., stronger importance on health and education expenditure relative to social
security).
More recently, Pribble (2011) identified four social policy regimes in the region: the ‘mobilising
incorporation–industrialist’, the ‘corporatist incorporation–industrialist’, the ‘interrupted incorporation–
agrarian’ and the ‘exclusionary–agrarian’. Pribble grouped countries using proxy measures along two
dimensions of the coverage of social protection policies (i.e., risk prevention [social investment in
education and health care] and risk coping [pension coverage of workers in the formal and informal
sector]). Even though Filgueira, Barba Solano, Pribble, Huber and Stephens identified different welfare
regimes in the region, in reality these portray differences in the degree of coverage, expenditure and
welfare outcomes and not necessarily differences in nature. Therefore, previous researchers have all
considered Latin American welfare regimes under the Bismarckian welfare tradition. This broad picture
helps us understand the generalisations in the welfare provision by the multiple actors in the welfare-mix.
However, it does not do justice in presenting the different worlds of welfare across/inside countries.
Martinez-Franzoni (2008) goes beyond distinguishing countries based on the different degrees of coverage,
social expenditure and welfare outcomes to prove empirically qualitatively different roles played by actors
in the welfare-mix. Her welfare regimes examined the interaction and allocation of resources between
public policy, the labour market and family/unpaid work. Following Rudra (2007), Martinez-Franzoni takes
into account the role played by public policy in welfare production by promoting access to the market or
protecting people from the market. She also considers Orloff’s (1996) arguments on the role of the family
in unpaid care-taking provision. Martinez-Franzoni distinguishes three welfare regimes: the state–
productivist, where public policy emphasises productivity in the labour market (i.e., emphasis on the
commodification of labour work with state-targeted provisions); the state–protectionist, where public
policy provides welfare mainly via social protection linked to formal employment (i.e., emphasis on the decommodification of welfare with state-stratified provisions); and the non-state–familialist, where the role of
public policies to provide welfare is weak or non-existent and thus there is a high level of dependence on
the family (i.e., emphasis in the de-familialisation of welfare with targeted, conditional and basic social
assistance programmes).
Martinez-Franzoni overcomes the state-centric limitation by incorporating the role of the family in the
unpaid work of care-taking. However, a top-down approach persists in her cutting-edge work. A large part

7

of the literature on welfare regimes in Latin America – and the world – rely on what the state claims to do
(i.e., state-centric approach) via social expenditure, coverage and outcomes; what the market and family
claims to do; and to what individuals are entitled. However, this does not inform what the population
reports as actually having access to, and more importantly, it does not describe how each actor provides
welfare to individuals. A second limitation in the previously mentioned literature is its nation–state-centric
perspective.
The third group of welfare regime literature proposes the need to go beyond the national level to explore
potential intra-national welfare regimes and show territorial dynamics of social policy. Welfare regimes in
countries with robust welfare states, such as those examined by Esping-Andersen (1990), report significant
variations across social policy sectors. Gough (2013, p. 207) made this evident when highlighting that the
so-called “liberal Britain still retains a universal National Health Service”. Ratigan (2017) recently showed
a systematic subnational variation with distinct worlds of welfare across Chinese provinces. UbasartGonzález and Minteguiaga (2017) ratify the relevance of considering the community as an alternative
welfare provider, especially in Latin America, where indigenous and grassroots organisations actively
participate in the welfare-mix. Cruz-Martinez (2017b, 2018) recently confirmed the existence of intranational welfare regimes in a Latin American country. Following Marcel and Rivera’s (2008) alternative
welfare regime, Cruz-Martinez (2018) classified the welfare regimes in Puerto Rico following a bottom-up
approach, relying on the basis of the importance of traditional and alternative welfare providers to satisfy
social risks and promote well-being in the following eight policy areas: housing, nourishment, health,
education, maternity/paternity, disability, work-unemployment and older age.
The bottom-up characterisation of Puerto Rico’s welfare regime shows different types of welfare-mixes coexisting inside the national level. Residents from marginalised communities evidence five configurations of
intra-national welfare-mixes across the eight policy sectors mentioned above. Results show intra-national
variations of welfare regimes across policy areas. The market and the family played a central role in the
distribution of social risks associated with the housing area (i.e., evidencing a liberal welfare regime). The
market played a central role in the nourishment and health area. However, the state intervenes in a residual
role using targeted social assistance programmes. This is why the initial classification of a liberal welfare
regime for the nourishment and health area is rectified as liberal–residual. The family played a central role
in the maternity/paternity welfare area, with a care-taking role (i.e., showing a conservative–familialist
welfare regime).
The state had a dominant role in the remaining four areas: education, disability, work-unemployment and
older age. In the education area, the provision was universal and free in elementary, intermediate and high
school. Meanwhile, in the other three areas, the corporatist role of the state was evident, as only those
working in the formal sector and meeting the eligibility requirements related to contributions were able to
become beneficiaries of disability, pension and unemployment programmes.
Besides describing the welfare regime for the case of Puerto Rico, this research highlights the relevance of
examining Latin American welfare regimes (i) using a bottom-up approach to enable a comprehensive
analysis of welfare production based on recipients’ perceptions; (ii) incorporating alternative actors in the
welfare-mix to present a more real picture of the allocation of social risks by the multiplicity of traditional
and alternative actors involved; and (iii) considering the possibility of having different welfare-mixes
across policy areas, thus needing to examine the intra-national variation of welfare regimes.
The second and fourth chapter in the edited volume contribute to the intra-regional welfare regime
literature by deepening our knowledge of national variations of welfare regimes. The third chapter adds
value to the regional welfare regime literature by proposing a research agenda of potential explanatory
factors that could help us understand the transformations of the Latin American welfare regime.

8

What do we know about the role of (f)actors shaping social protection development and inclusion?
Local and external actors and factors play an essential role in the politics of social protection systems by
shaping, promoting or inhibiting the development of the emerging welfare state.vii Traditionally, social
protection literature in Latin America has focused on examining the role of political and economic local
(f)actors (Castiglioni, 2005; Garay, 2016; Niedzwiecki, 2018; Pribble, 2013). Global social policy literature
adds important explanatory factors to understand the role played by international and supranational actors
in the development, diffusion and consolidation of social policy in the region (Bianculli, 2018; Mahon,
2015; Munck, 2006). Chapters in the second part consider the role of both local and external players in the
politics of social protection.
Students of Latin American social policy have highlighted several variables and theories that help us
comprehend the different degrees of welfare state development across the region, as well as the factors
behind the emergence, consolidation and expansion of the welfare systems. The policy legacies of welfare
institutions matter, as there is a strong positive relationship between the historical experience of social
security systems and the development of the welfare state in the region (Mesa-Lago, 1978; Sanchez de
Dios, 2015). Democracy is a necessary although not sufficient condition for welfare state development
(Cruz-Martinez, 2017a; Graziano and Jessoula, 2018). Research has shown how democracy enabled the
‘left’ to implement redistributive policies after the Washington Consensus (Huber and Stephens, 2012),
created the space for electoral and interest group competition (Haggard and Kaufman, 2004) and facilitated
the inclusion of ‘outsiders’ into social protection systems (Garay, 2016). Social and labour mobilisations
combined with “the electoral competition for the vote of outsiders” are the main drivers behind the social
policy expansion in the inclusive twenty-first century (Garay, 2016, p. 25). Garay finds that when centreright parties are strong, and the expansion is negotiated in Congress, it results in a restrictive inclusion of a
small number of outsiders and low generosity. However, when social movements take an active part in the
negotiation of the expansion, it produces an inclusive expansion of a large number of outsiders with
relatively generous benefit levels.
Following power resources theory, research shows the importance of labour movements’ strength and the
power of the left. Niedzwiecki (2015) confirmed in a regional cross-country analysis the importance of
trade union strength to explain social expenditure in South America. Pribble and Huber (2013) highlight the
role played by left-wing governments in welfare state reforms with a social democratic character. Even
though right-wing parties are less likely to pursue policies that promote the welfare state (Amable et al.,
2006), Niedzwiecki and Pribble (2017) recently showed that right-wing governments in Argentina and
Chile have not engaged in deep social spending cuts due to the recent transformation of the Latin American
scenario by the consolidation of democracy and the experience of left party rule. In sum, there are still
disagreements in the Latin American social policy literature on the role of the left shaping social policy
adoption and expansion. While Pribble (2013) confirmed the positive role of the left, Fairfield and Garay
(2017) found little evidence of the effects of left-wing parties.
The fifth chapter incorporates state-institutions as important actors in the politics of social policy. Hayes de
Kalaf (2017 argues that the state can promote social inclusion or exclusion based on the criteria of labelling
someone as a deserving individual of social citizenship rights. Therefore, the ability to recognise someone
in the binary categories of national or with a foreign ancestry plays an exclusionary/inclusionary role in the
social policy expansion. The sixth chapter contributes to the literature of the role of trade unions by arguing
that even though the inclusion of outsiders did not directly benefit union members, trade unions in
Argentina and Uruguay supported the inclusionary measures. In other words, trade unions appear to have
an important role in regional social policy expansion.

9

What about the role of external actors shaping social policy in the region? In the interconnected and
globalised world of the twenty-first century, domestic social policy-making is modelled by foreign
influences (e.g., ideas, actors) (Weyland, 2005). According to Kaasch (2018), transnational actors and
factors have significantly gained importance in comparative studies of the welfare state. The literature has
signalled the role played by actors such as international financial institutions (e.g., World Bank, InterAmerican Development Bank, International Monetary Fund), cross-national networks, trade partnerships,
economic ties with other countries and international organisations (e.g., UNASUR).
Following the social policy diffusion framework, research shows that if a country has economic ties with
another country, there is a higher chance of replicating social policy dynamics (Schmitt, 2013). Therefore,
economic interdependencies appear to be more important than a similar cultural background or
geographical proximity to explain social policy dynamics. Social policy diffusion – the wavelike spread of
social policy ideas, programmes and institutions from one country to the other – is generally distinguished
in the literature using four mechanisms: learning from pioneers, economic competition among proximate
countries, emulation and coercion (Shipan and Volden, 2008).
Cross-national networks, especially solidarity and counter-hegemonic networks (e.g., Bolivarian Alliance
for the Americas – ALBA), have shaped social policy in third countries. Artaraz (2011) examines the
development of social policy programmes in Bolivia via a south–south policy transfer among countries in
the ALBA network, illustrating principles of solidarity and non-market-driven policy delivery. Artaraz
confirmed that the collaboration and support of ALBA and Cuban experts facilitated the development of
Bolivia’s National Development Plan, especially in the policy areas of health and education.
Sugiyama (2011) explores the domestic and external pressures behind the rapid expansion of conditional
cash transfer programmes in Latin America. In a decade’s time, the emulation process was almost total.
Only two countries had CCTs in 1998 (Mexico and Brazil), and in 2018 all countries have implemented
one except Cuba and Venezuela. Sugiyama (2011, p. 261) finds that “domestic political constraints bear no
statistically significant effect on the adoption of CCTs in the Americas”. In contrast, the only external
variable considered in the paper – neighbouring effect – appears to be significant. Several additional
external pressures are also considered – although not empirically tested – as relevant in the transnational
diffusion of CCTs: learning through technocratic exchanges and shared norms and coercion through
international financial institutions. The IADB and the World Bank have been active supporters of CCTs by
providing loans and technical assistance for the implementation of such anti-poverty programmes (Hall,
2008; Teichman, 2007). A variety of scholars have shown the role of international organisations in the
diffusion of CCTs throughout Latin America (Brooks, 2015; Martínez-Franzoni and Voorend, 2011; Osorio
Gonnet, 2018).
International organisations have also influenced the social policy agenda in the region. In contrast to the
US-dominated model of cooperation with the Organisation of American States or the neoliberal open
regionalism of MERCOSUR, the “UNASUR comes as part of the new cycle of politicisation in regional
politics (Dabene, 2012) or as Riggirozzi and Tussie (2012) posit, as part of a struggle for post hegemonic
regionalism” (Herrero and Tussie, 2015, p. 262). In this process, UNASUR’s Health Council contributed to
a broader regional understanding of health diplomacy and to what Herrero (2014) calls the ‘unasurization’
of health policies (i.e., the process of building a new health framework in South America).
Abrahamson (2007) questions if signing free trade agreements might have spillover effects in social
citizens rights of the underdeveloped side of the treaty. The author examines the Central American Free
Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) and argues that “there are tangible effects on social citizenship, in
particular, relating to labour rights that can be credited to the signing of the agreement” (2007, p. 339).

10

Yeates and Deacon (2006) also agree that the transnational pressures of signing free trade agreements
elsewhere are expected to increase the importance of developing a labour and social policy agenda.
The seventh chapter of this edited volume examines the role of the World Bank in creating a CCT social
policy model. Therefore, rather than an autochthonous national development of Mexico and Brazil, this
chapter highlights the role of international financial institutions in the social policy creation and diffusion
of CCTs, specifically by highlighting the coercion to implement policies developed and praised by
technocrats and social policy experts in international financial institutions. The eighth chapter contributes
to the bilateral expression of transnational social policy by questioning the positive role of free trade
agreements in spreading social policy developments. After examining the free trade agreement between the
European Union and Colombia, the chapter concludes there is no substantial evidence of positive
externalities deriving from the free trade agreement and leading to an improvement of the Colombian social
and labour protection provisions.
What do we know about recent debates regarding social protection and welfare in Latin America?
This section deals with three debates around social protection and welfare in the region: (i) private or public
provision of welfare in the process of social policy expansion; (ii) bottom-up or top-down approach of
social protection entitlements; and (iii) the link between social assistance and the empowerment of women.
The debate around private versus public provision of welfare is an ideological one. Through contemporary
history, we find different dominant ideologies in regards to the role of the state in the economy. Following
Sottoli (2000) and the Latin American welfare regimes by Barrientos (2004), we can identify the critical
junctures in the twentieth century regarding the dominant social policy and the dominant welfare regime.
Before the emergence of social protection systems in the 1920s and 1930s, the dominant social policy was
charity due to the absence of state-sponsored social welfare provisions (Dixon and Scheurell, 1990). The
1930s could then be considered as a critical juncture in which the state gained the responsibility of
providing social insurance to the population in the formal market, the military and unionised urban workers
(i.e., traditional Bismarckian social policy). Therefore, the idea of social citizenship with entitled social
protection as a citizen right was in its embryonic form. The 1980s–1990s economic and debt crises could
be considered another critical juncture, as they brought about a new dominant social policy with the arrival
of the Washington Consensus and the neoliberal era. The new social policy increased the role of the market
forces and the individual responsibility in the provision of welfare, although it incorporated as well the vast
majority of the population that were not previously benefiting from social protection systems. The new
social policy incorporated outsiders into social assistance programmes (e.g., CCTs, social pensions, family
allowances). However, the majority still lacked the relatively higher-quality and generous social insurance
programmes that were reserved for specific workers in the formal sector.
Therefore, we can argue that Latin America has shifted from an informal welfare regime to a corporatist–
informal welfare regime as a consequence of the emergence of social protection programmes in the early
twentieth century, and to a liberal–informal regime from the Washington Consensus period (Powell and
Barrientos, 2004; Wood and Gough, 2006). The debate in Chapter 9 incorporates this debate on public
versus private welfare provision with bottom-up versus top-down welfare provision – previously discussed
above. The chapter highlights the role of a private actor providing education and health programmes to
outsiders in the rural sector, and how beneficiaries claim that what they desire is a state-led welfare
provision. Therefore, outsiders are benefiting from the new market-led social policy, although what they
desire is access to traditional state-led social policy, which is understood as a social citizen entitlement.
The second debate deals with the empowerment or lack of empowerment of women thanks to the cash
transfers of the CCTs. United Nations organisations have been working with different approaches to

11

promoting equality between women and men. The gender and development approach (1980s–1990s)
started to focus more on gender rather than just women, to critically examine the social construction of
women in relation to men and the reproduction of gender roles (Moser, 1993). However, even though
women’s empowerment and the gender perspective were considered in every development programme,
once the neoliberal era arrived, these approaches did not survive (Summerfield, 2007). PROGRESA, the
first CCT programme in Mexico, had among its original goals the empowerment of women and the
improvement of gender equality. However, this initial goal disappeared from future CCT programmes in
Mexico and the rest of the region. Clearly, “gender empowerment was not a priority” (Jenson and Nagels,
2018, p. 329).
In an influential and highly cited article, Molyneux (2006, p. 425–426) argues that:
gender bias and masculine prerogative have prevailed in social policy as in social life more broadly, with
entitlements resting on culturally sanctioned and deeply rooted notions of gender difference and patriarchal
authority. These have generally accorded with idealized assumptions about the asymmetric social positions
occupied by the sexes, with male breadwinners and female mother-dependants receiving benefits according
to these normative social roles.
Following the social investment perspective, Nagels (2016) has shown that the investment in girls is more
effective than investing in women. CCT promoters have an instrumentalist view of gender awareness, as
mothers are portrayed as better spenders than men and thus are the traditional recipients of cash transfers
(Holmes et al., 2010). However, CCT promoters “remain cautious about whether relations and ‘bargaining
power’ have been altered by transfers to mothers” (Fiszbein and Schady, 2009, p. xii; in Jenson and Nagels,
2018, p. 329). Molyneux (2006, p. 440) highlights the successes and failures of the Oportunidades CCT
flagship programme in Latin America: coverage expansion, detachment of poverty relief from political
patronage and enabling risk-coping of low-income household with school children. However, Molyneux
doubts the reach of the CCTs in empowering women because the success of the programme relies heavily
on “fortifying and normalizing the responsibilities of motherhood [. . .] with fathers marginal to childcare
and [. . .] the state [playing] an active role in re-traditionalizing gender roles and identities” (Molyneux,
2006, p. 440). Therefore, Chant (2008) argues that CCTs are feminising the responsibility and obligation
for managing poverty in Latin America. The tenth chapter contributes a case study to this literature and
confirms that the Mexican CCT empowers women in one of the three dimensions considered, although it
reproduces the gender roles of the patriarchal society.
Structure of the book and the contribution of each chapter
Part I is titled “Social policy and welfare regimes in contemporary Latin America”. This part is composed
of three chapters by Carlos Barba Solano, Armando Barrientos and Manuel Sanchez de Dios.
Barba Solano presents his welfare regimes typology based on the regional experience during the state-led
industrialisation period in Chapter 2. Using his typology as a framework, Barba Solano evaluates the scope
of the welfare reforms in the last three decades. The second section of the chapter deals with the reforms
carried out during the 1980s/1990s, driven by a new constellation of global and local actors, who, in
parallel to the processes of structural adjustment, set in motion a liberal social reform agenda. Barba Solano
argues that the axes of this liberal agenda were the creation of targeted programmes to reduce income
poverty and the decentralisation and commodification of social services. The third section of the chapter
analyses the gradual deployment of a new wave of reforms, which began in the mid-1990s. According to
Barba Solano, these have pursued universalist goals, such as the inclusion of the majority of incomedeprived sectors of the population in the framework of social protection, the universalisation of access to
health coverage and the development of political and social institutions responsible of the provision of care.

12

This third set of reforms has materialised in the construction of non-contributory pillars, which in varying
degrees have sought to de-commodify social welfare but have had an unequal reach and repercussions at
the regional level. Barba Solano concludes the chapter by analysing the achievements, limitations, pending
tasks and the potential of social policy reforms, in the current context of an economic and political crisis.
In the third chapter, Armando Barrientos highlights the need to examine the causal process that led to
growing dualism in the Latin American social protection system. Social insurance has traditionally
protected workers in the formal sector (insiders), and the emergence of social assistance is supporting lowincome individuals and workers in the informal sector (outsiders). Armando presents an interesting analysis
of the social policy expansion in the region, moving from a truncated to a dual system. The main addedvalue of this chapter is the exploratory analysis of the potential explanatory factors behind the breakdown
of the Bismarckian model and the emergence and expansion of social assistance in the 1990s as a separate
component from the traditional model. Political coalitions, development strategies and (de)industrialisation
are some of the factors considered by Armando in regards to the emergence and decline of the social
insurance model. On the other hand, explaining the 1990s critical juncture in the Latin American social
protection system is more complicated. Here Armando sheds light first by clearly differentiating the
different types of redistribution involved in social insurance (i.e., horizontal) and social assistance (i.e.,
vertical). Second, he differentiates the different supporting forces for each type of redistribution – selfinterest and risk pooling in the former, and solidarity in the latter. The chapter concludes that in order to
understand the growth and institutionalisation of the social assistance model in the region, researchers must
explore the renewal of social contracts rather than the myopic view of electoral gains and losses. Armando
extends an invitation to look for positive explanations and not just normative proposals.
Manuel Sanchez de Dios closes the first section with an exploration of recent reforms in the Argentinian,
Brazilian, Chilean, Costa Rican and Uruguayan welfare regimes. Following a comparative analysis method,
Manuel shows how targeted programmes to fight poverty have been modified in the twenty-first century
following an institutional, universalistic and redistributive nature. The chapter takes into consideration
theories about institutional reform – mainly historical institutionalism and rational institutionalism – to
understand the changes, ruptures and evolution of Latin American emerging welfare states from a social
assistance state to an institutionalist–redistributive state. The chapter distinguishes between exogenous or
endogenous shocks, which enable institutional change by paying attention to the power distribution and
rent seekers’ behaviour. In the empirical and analytical section of the chapter, Manuel performs a pathdependence analysis of institutional welfare reform in contemporary Latin America. He focuses on the
processes of positive feedbacks created by welfare institutions and identifies ‘branching points’ and
‘critical junctures’ responsible for modifying the path of welfare institutions through a process of
incremental institutional change. Manuel highlights the push factors and the resulting equilibrium in the
historical trajectories of the welfare reforms of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay by
focusing on the evolution of a set of social spending indicators, rates of informal work and relative income
poverty.
Part II is titled “Politics of social protection in Latin America: stakeholders and institutions”. The first two
chapters of this part, by Eve Hayes de Kalaf and Angelica Puricelli, deal with national actors, while the last
two chapters, by Lauri Heimo and Joan Tejedor, examine the role of external actors in the politics of social
protection.
Eve Hayes de Kalaf starts the second part with a ground-breaking and interdisciplinary Chapter 5. Eve links
both citizenship and welfare state studies to show how social policy can be a tool for both social inclusion
and exclusion. When entitlements of the welfare state are linked to citizenship status, the entity in charge of
deciding who is a citizen (i.e., the state) can exclude individuals from benefits and public services.

13

Therefore, the state has the power to decide who is a ‘deserving’ individual. This chapter invites us to
revisit and critically assess normalised labels in social policy scholarship. For example, does a ‘universal’
social protection programme need to provide welfare to all individuals, or just those considered deserving?
Can citizenship act as a stratifying mechanism, targeting the already-targeted population? Using the case of
the Dominican Republic, Eve shows how foreign-descended populations have been stripped of their
citizenship – and all entitlements linked to it – because their national origin, or skin tone, does not fit
comfortably within the state-centred ‘imagined community’. Native-born populations – largely of Haitian
ancestry – are the subject of social exclusion in the modernisation of Dominican public administration. The
chapter also shows how international institutions (e.g., the World Bank) play a role in the exclusionary
process of denying social citizenship rights to Dominicans of foreign ancestry. The World Bank has argued
for the need to include the most vulnerable Dominicans in the social protection programmes; however, as
an interviewed former employee in the Dominican Republic states: “The ones that were the most
vulnerable . . . were the ones with no legal existence. So, the World Bank pushed for that to happen”. The
chapter points to an existing gap in the social policy literature that overlooks how legal identification can
arbitrarily exclude native-born populations from social rights linked to state membership.
In the sixth chapter, Angelica Puricelli examines the role of trade unions in the inclusion of outsiders into
the pension systems. Using the cases of Argentina and Uruguay, the insiders/outsiders theory elaborated by
Rueda (2007) is tested in the context of pension systems reforms. Her conclusion contradicts previous
literature that argues the two trade unions in Argentina and Uruguay were important stakeholders in the
policy change (from a Bismarckian social protection scheme to a hybrid model), even if their members did
not benefit directly from the reform due to not being their core constituencies. By applying a “process
tracing” method, the chapter demonstrates that trade unions in both South American countries supported
pro-outsider policies. Indeed, in Argentina, the corporatist relationship with the government seems to be
crucial for the support of pro‐outsider measures, while in Uruguay class‐identity matters more. However, in
both cases, the effects of neoliberalism on labour market segmentation have influenced trade unions’
strategies. Neoliberal policies blurred the boundaries between insiders and outsiders and pushed workers’
organisations to support inclusive measures. The CGT trade union in Argentina and the PIT–CNT in
Uruguay supported the governments’ strategy based on relaxing requirements to access pension systems,
thus reducing the barriers to pension coverage.
Who came up with the conditional cash transfer policy model? In Chapter 7, Lauri Heimo critically
assesses the prevailing narrative of one of the most – if not the most – popular anti-poverty social
assistance programme in the region: conditional cash transfers (CCT). The official narrative of the Mexican
social assistance scheme PROGRESA portrays the programme as a novel, endogenous and innovative
policy model to fight poverty while promoting social capital development. Lauri presents a counternarrative where exogenous actors (e.g., international financial institutions) ‘domesticated’ global policy
norms and prescriptions alongside social policymakers, politicians and researchers, which is then shown to
be a national and innovative social policy framework. Besides the influence of the Inter-American
Development Bank and the World Bank, the official narrative omits previous experiences at the municipal
level in Brazil. Lauri provides strong evidence linking thematic convergence between PROGRESA and the
World Bank’s policy recommendations before the implementation of the Mexican program. This chapter
reminds us that local actors are not the only ones shaping social policy creation, implementation and
reform. We must extend our analysis out of the nation–state borders and consider global actors and
institutions if we genuinely want to understand the big picture of social policy dynamics.
Joan Miguel Tejedor-Estupiñán examines the labour provisions in the Free Trade Agreement between
Colombia and the European Union in the eighth chapter to confirm if explicit clauses on social protection
and labour rights are promotional or conditional. Following the ILO conceptualisation, labour provisions

14

are conditional if labour standards obligations are linked to economic sanctions or incentives. If there are
no sanctions or incentives, and the labour obligations rely on cooperation and dialogue, then the labour
provisions in the Free Trade Agreement are considered promotional. Joan argues there is a lack of
empirical evidence on the effects of integrating social protection provisions in trade agreements signed
between countries or regions with evident economic and social asymmetries. Based on a literature review
and following a comparative analysis, Joan points out the main features of the EU–Colombia trade
agreement and discusses the implications of including labour requirements on the social protection systems
and clauses regarding the reduction of unemployment, poverty and income inequality. His main conclusion
is that promotional labour provisions in the trade agreement have not produced positive externalities to the
Colombian labour legislation and much less on labour rights. Joan claims this contradicts the European
Union principles, which adversely affects the less developed party in the trade agreement, in this case
Colombia.
Part III is titled “Contemporary debates in Latin American social policy”. The third part is composed of
three chapters by Alison L. Haworth-Walsh , Pastor Badillo, and Fabio Betranou, Pablo Casalí and Juan
Jacobo Velasco.
In the ninth chapter, Alison L. Haworth-Walsh focuses on how social protection interacts with the demands
of beneficiaries; the debate around the public versus private provision of welfare; and the (in)visibility of
entitled individuals. Alison argues that the debate over public versus private provision of welfare reemerged during the Left Turn and brought with it a second debate on who is recognised as a citizen entitled
to welfare programmes. The chapter focuses on an initiative in the Bolivian coffee sector, which aims to
dignify rural labour by extending social protection benefits to small coffee producers. Alison argues that
this scheme shares similarities with the Bismarckian model because benefits are linked to class and status
and the scheme segments, even more than the dual social protection systems at the national level. However,
it shows an alternative path of social policy expansion where a private initiative led by an international
NGO incorporates ‘outsiders’ in rural Bolivia. Café Correcto – the private initiative – provides education
and private pension schemes to coffee producers that have been traditionally invisible to the state. This
social welfare provision, based on market forces, clashes with the nationalist and redistributive discourse of
MAS and Evo Morales. In her fieldwork, Alison discovered that coffee producers are not willing to give up
their demands for a state-sponsored social welfare provision based on collective risk-sharing because they
consider themselves to be citizens deserving of social welfare entitlements. This chapter contributes to the
welfare regime and social policy literature by highlighting the need to go beyond financial and
redistributive aspects when creating and implementing social protection schemes and to consider the
demands and desires of the population in order to be able to develop successful social protection
programmes for development.
Following a three-dimensional framework by Rowlands (1998), Pastor Badillo examines in Chapter 10 if
the Oportunidades CCT empowers women in the personal, collective and close relationships dimensions or
if it reproduces gender roles of the patriarchal society. Based on qualitative research in Tulancingo de
Bravo (Mexico) with 40 semi-structured interviews and field notes, Pastor confirms that the arguments are
not exclusionary. His fieldwork demonstrates the Oportunidades programme empowers women in one of
the three dimensions. However, while conditional cash transfers promote the decision-making power and
confidence of women, they do not change the strongly rooted traditional societal structure, which assigns
caring and social reproduction roles to women. Interviewees considered that by being the cash benefit
holders, they are also responsible for observing and fulfilling the programmes’ conditionalities. The process
of making sure conditionalities are met (i.e., visits to the health care clinics, taking children to school,
attending programme meetings) reduces opportunities of labour commodification and overloads women
with activities and stress. Oportunidades does not seem to be promoting collective empowerment.

15

However, the mandatory programme meetings allow women to interact and exchange valuable information
and experiences. In addition, CCTs increase the intra-household decision-making power of women, but this
does not translate to close relationship empowerment of women. The majority of beneficiaries do not
perceive the cash transfer as a self-contribution to household income. Moreover, the gendered division of
labour is embedded in the beneficiaries’ discourse, which makes them feel responsible for caring and social
reproduction even though they have salaried employment. This creates a double shift for salaried working
women. Pastor argues that even though Oportunidades has the potential to become a key policy tool to
empower Mexican women, at the present time the programme design ties them to the dominant traditional
social structure (i.e., the male breadwinner model). Moreover, he argues that Oportunidades needs to adopt
a gender perspective in the evaluation phase of public policy to uncover failures in the design of the CCT
program.
Chapter 11, by Fabio Betranou, Pablo Casalí and Juan Jacobo Velasco, concludes the edited volume with
an analytical reflection on the future of social protection systems in Latin America. The authors map out
the challenges of social protection in the region by conducting a diagnosis and a normative analysis of the
following challenges: macroeconomic volatility; new technologies and automation of the labour market;
ageing of the population; changes in life expectancy of Latin Americans; social security governance
deficits; the incorporation of women into the labour market with the unequal distribution of unpaid work
and lack of family-friendly care policies; and, finally, the pressures of climate change on general well-being
and resilient recovery after natural disasters. Their analysis raises the need to reformulate the responses to
economic, climate and demographic crises with countercyclical active labour market policies and social
protection benefits. A three-dimensional reform must be carried out with the formalisation of the labour
market, fiscal space expansion and the consolidation of social protection floors. Authors put substantial
emphasis on governance by considering that good governance and appropriate administration are the
factors that ultimately determine whether a social protection system works or not. Regarding the responses
of social protection to climate change, the authors argue that social protection must adapt to create green
jobs and provide risk coverage to secure a transition to a green economy framed in the principles of decent
work.
References
Abrahamson, P. (2007). Free trade and social citizenship: Prospects and possibilities of the Central
American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR). Global Social Policy, 7(3), pp. 339–357.
doi:10.1177/1468018107082238
Amable, B., Gatti, D. and Schumacher, J. (2006). Welfare-state retrenchment: The partisan effect revisited.
Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 22(3), pp. 426–444. doi:10.1093/oxrep/grj025
Anderson, B. (2006). Imagined communities: Reflections on the origin and spread of nationalism. Rev. ed.
London: Verso.
Aravena, C., Escobar, L.E. and Hofman, A. (2015). Fuentes del crecimiento económico y la productividad
en América Latina y el Caribe, 1990–2013. In: Serie Macroeconomía del Desarrollo, vol. 164. Naciones
Unidas: CEPAL, pp. 1–36.
Artaraz, K. (2011). New Latin American networks of solidarity? ALBA’s contribution to Bolivia’s national
development plan (2006–10). Global Social Policy, 11(1), pp. 88–105. doi:10.1177/1468018110392194

16

Barba Solano, C. (2003). El nuevo paradigma de bienestar residual y deslocalizado. Reforma de los
regímenes de bienestar en la OCDE, América Latina y México (PhD Social Science), Universidad de
Guadalajara, México.
Barba Solano, C. (2009). Los regímenes de bienestar latinoamericanos y la reforma social. In: C. Barba
Solano, G. Ordoñez Barba and E. Valencia Lomelí, eds., Más allá de la pobreza: Regímenes de bienestar en
Europa, Asia y América. Guadalajara: Universidad de Guadalajara, El Colegio de la Frontera Norte,
pp. 327–370.
Barr, N. (2012). Economics of the welfare state. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barrientos, A. (2004). Latin America: Towards a liberal–informal welfare regime. In: I. Gough and G.
Wood, eds., Insecurity and welfare regimes in Asia, Africa and Latin America: Social policy in
development contexts. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 121–168.
Barrientos, A. and Hulme, D. (2009). Social protection for the poor and poorest in developing countries:
Reflections on a quiet revolution. Oxford Development Studies, 37(4), pp. 439–456.
doi:10.1080/13600810903305257
Bianculli, A.C. (2018). From free market to social policies? Mapping regulatory cooperation in education
and health in MERCOSUR. Global Social Policy, 3(18), pp. 249-266. doi:10.1177/1468018118780085
Brooks, S.M. (2015). Social protection for the poorest: The adoption of antipoverty cash transfer programs
in the global South*. Politics & Society, 43(4), pp. 551–582. doi:10.1177/0032329215602894
Castiglioni, R. (2005). The politics of social policy change in Chile and Uruguay. Retrenchment versus
maintenance, 1973–1998. New York: Routledge.
Cecchini, S., Filgueira, F., Martínez, R. and Rossel, C. (2015). Towards universal social protection: Latin
American pathways and policy tools. Santiago de Chile: ECLAC, United Nations.
CEPAL. (2017). Linkages between the social and production spheres: Gaps, pillars and challenges.
Santiago de Chile: United Nations.
Chant, S. (2008). The ‘Feminisation of Poverty’ and the ‘Feminisation’ of anti-poverty programmes: Room
for revision? The Journal of Development Studies, 44(2), pp. 165–197. doi:10.1080/00220380701789810
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2014). Welfare state development in Latin America and the Caribbean (1970s–2000s):
Multidimensional welfare index, its methodology and results. Social Indicators Research, 119(3), pp. 1295–
1317. doi:10.1007/s11205-013-0549-7
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2015). Esfuerzo de bienestar y Pobreza desde el enfoque monetarista y de capacidades:
Análisis trasnacional en América Latina y el Caribe (1990–2010). Política y Sociedad, 52(3), pp. 631–659.
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017a). Is there a common path that could have conditioned the degree of welfare state
development in Latin America and the Caribbean? Bulletin of Latin American Research, 36(4), pp. 459–
476. doi:10.1111/blar.12556
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017b). Produciendo Bienestar. Una mirada desde las Comunidades Marginadas en
Puerto Rico. Madrid: Dykinson.

17

Cruz-Martinez, G. (2017c). Welfare state development, individual deprivations and income inequality: A
cross-country analysis in Latin America and the Caribbean. Social Indicators Research, 134(3), pp. 955–
979. doi:10.1007/s11205-016-1465-4
Cruz-Martinez, G. (2018). A bottom-up picture of intra-national welfare regimes: The case of marginalised
communities in Puerto Rico. Journal of International and Comparative Social Policy.
https://doi.org/10.1080/21699763.2018.1526696
Dabene, O. (2012). Consistency and resilience through cycles of repoliticization. In: P. Riggirozzi and D.
Tussie, eds., The rise of post-hegemonic regionalism. London: Springer, pp. 41–64.
Dixon, J. and Scheurell, R.P. (1990). Social welfare in Latin America. New York: Routledge.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1990). The three worlds of welfare capitalism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Esping-Andersen, G. (1999). Social foundations of post industrial economies. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Fairfield, T. and Garay, C. (2017). Redistribution under the right in Latin America: Electoral competition
and organized actors in policymaking. Comparative Political Studies, 50(14), pp. 1871–1906.
doi:10.1177/0010414017695331
Filgueira, F. (1999). Tipos de Welfare y reformas sociales en América Latina: Eficiencia, residualismo y
ciudadanía estratificada. In: M. Melo (Ed.), Reforma do Estado e Mudanca Institucional no Brasil. Recife:
Fundacao Joaquim Nabuco.
Fiszbein, A. and Schady, N. (2009). Conditional cash transfers: Reducing present and future poverty.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Garay, C. (2016). Social policy expansion in Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gough, I. (2013). Social policy regimes in the developing world. In: P. Kennett (Ed.), A handbook of
comparative social policy. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar Publishing Ltd, pp. 205–224.
Gough, I. and Wood, G. (2004). Insecurity and welfare regimes in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Graziano, P. and Jessoula, M. (2018). Explaining welfare state developments: Towards a comparative
research agenda. Sciences Po LIEPP Working Paper, 76, pp. 1–25.
Griffin, J. (2008). On human rights. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haggard, S. and Kaufman, R. (2004). Revising social contracts: Social spending in Latin America, East
Asia, and the former socialist countries, 1980–2000. Revista de ciencia política (Santiago), 24, pp. 3–37.
Hall, A. (2008). Brazil’s Bolsa Família: A double-edged sword? Development and Change, 39(5), pp. 799–
822. doi:10.1111/j.1467-7660.2008.00506.x
Hayes de Kalaf, E. (2017). Making foreign: Social policy, legal identity and citizenship in the
contemporary Dominican Republic. Paper presented at the 2017 Society for Latin American Studies
Annual Conference, University of Glasgow.

18

Heclo, H. (1981). Toward a new welfare state? In: P. Flora and A. Heidenheimer, eds., The development of
welfare states in Europe and America. New Jersey: Transaction Books.
Herrero, M.B. (2014). El surgimiento de una nueva diplomacia regional en salud en tiempos posteriores al
neoliberalismo: el caso de UNASUR Salud. Comentario Internacional. Revista del Centro Andino de
Estudios Internacionales, 14, pp. 223–252.
Herrero, M.B. and Tussie, D. (2015). UNASUR health: A quiet revolution in health diplomacy in South
America. Global Social Policy, 15(3), pp. 261–277. doi:10.1177/1468018115599818
Holmes, R., Jones, N., Vargas, R. and Veras, F. (2010). Cash transfers and gendered risks and
vulnerabilities: Lessons from Latin America. London: Overseas Development Institute.
Huber, E. and Stephens, J.D. (7–8 October 2005). Successful social policy regimes? Political economy,
politics, and the structure of social policy in Argentina, Chile, Uruguay, and Costa Rica. Paper prepared for
the Conference on Democratic Governability Kellogg Institute, University of Notre Dame.
Huber, E. and Stephens, J.D. (2012). Democracy and the left: Social policy and inequality in Latin
America. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
ILO. (31 May 2018). Financing social protection for the future of work: Fiscal aspects and policy options.
Prepared by Staff of the ILO for the G20 Framework Working Group. Available at:
www.ilo.org/wcmsp5/groups/public/–dgreports/–inst/documents/publication/wcms_646048.pdf
Jenson, J. and Nagels, N. (2018). Social policy instruments in motion: Conditional cash transfers from
Mexico to Peru. Social Policy & Administration, 52(1), pp. 323–342. doi:10.1111/spol.12275
Kaasch, A. (2018). Global social policy through the compounded eye. Paper presented at the International
Conference on Global Dynamics of Social Policy, University of Bremen.
López-Calva, L.F. and Lustig, N. (2010). Declining inequality in Latin America: A decade of progress?
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Lustig, N., Lopez-Calva, L.F., Ortiz-Juarez, E. and Monga, C. (2016). Deconstructing the decline in
inequality in Latin America. In: K. Basu and J.E. Stiglitz, eds., Inequality and growth: Patterns and policy:
Volume II: Regions and regularities. London: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 212–247.
Lustig, N. and McLeod, D. (2011). Inequality and poverty under Latin America’s new left regimes. Tulane
University Economics Working Paper Series, 1117.
Mahon, R. (2015). Integrating the social into CEPAL’s neo-structuralist discourse. Global Social Policy,
15(1), pp. 3–22. doi:10.1177/1468018114536644
Marcel, M. and Rivera, E. (2008). Regímenes de bienestar en América Latina. In: E. Tironi, ed., Redes,
Estado y Mercado. Soportes de la Cohesión Social Latinoamericana. Santiago de Chile: Uqbar editores.
Marshall, T. (1950). Citizenship and social class and other essays. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martín-Mayoral, F. and Sastre, J.F. (2017). Determinants of social spending in Latin America during and
after the Washington consensus: A dynamic panel error-correction model analysis. Latin American
Economic Review, 26(1), p. 10. doi:10.1007/s40503-017-0053-6

19

Martínez Franzoni, J. (2008). Welfare regimes in Latin America: Capturing constellations of markets,
families, and policies. Latin American Politics and Society, 50(2), pp. 67–100.
Martinez-Franzoni, J. and Sanchez-Ancochea, D. (2016). The quest for universal social policy in the South:
Actors, ideas and architectures. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Martínez-Franzoni, J. and Voorend, K. (2011). Actors and ideas behind CCTs in Chile, Costa Rica and El
Salvador. Global Social Policy, 11(2–3), pp. 279–298. doi:10.1177/1468018111421296
Mesa-Lago, C. (1978). Social security in Latin America. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.
Midgley, J. (2014). Social development: Theory & practice. London: Sage Publications.
Mkandawire, T. (2001). Social policy in a development context, vol. 25. Geneva: United Nations Research
Institute for Social Development.
Molyneux, M. (2006). Mothers at the service of the new poverty agenda: Progresa/Oportunidades,
Mexico’s conditional transfer programme. Social Policy & Administration, 40(4), pp. 425–449.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9515.2006.00497.x
Moser, C. (1993). Gender planning and development. London: Routledge.
Munck, R. (2006). Globalization of/in Latin America. Global Social Policy, 6(3), pp. 358–365.
doi:10.1177/1468018106069207
Muñoz, G. (2016). Dossier: The end of the progressive cycle. Alternautas, 3(1), pp. 83–179.
www.alternautas.net/publications-171/2016/2019/2011/2016-vol-2013-issue-2011
Nagels, N. (2016). The social investment perspective, conditional cash transfer programmes and the
welfare mix: Peru and Bolivia. Social Policy and Society, 15(3), pp. 479–493.
doi:10.1017/S1474746416000105
Niedzwiecki, S. (2015). Social Policy Commitment in South America: The Effect of Organized Labor on
Social Spending from 1980 to 2010. Journal of Politics in Latin America, 7(2), pp. 3-42.
Niedzwiecki, S. (2018). Uneven social policies: The politics of subnational variation in Latin America.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Niedzwiecki, S. and Pribble, J. (2017). Social policies and center-right governments in Argentina and
Chile. Latin American Politics and Society, 59(3), pp. 72–97. doi:10.1111/laps.12027
Orloff, A. (1996). Gender in the welfare state. Annual Review of Sociology, 22, pp. 51–78.
Ortiz, I., Durán-Valverde, F., Urban, S. and Wodsak, V. (2018). Reversing pension privatizations.
Rebuilding public pension systems in Eastern Europe and Latin America. Geneva: ILO.
Osorio Gonnet, C. (2018). A comparative analysis of the adoption of conditional cash transfers programs in
Latin America. Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis: Research and Practice, pp. 1–17.
doi:10.1080/13876988.2018.1491671
Powell, M. and Barrientos, A. (2004). Welfare regimes and the welfare-mix. European Journal of Political
Research, 43(1), pp. 83–105.

20

Pribble, J. (2011). Worlds apart: Social policy regimes in Latin America. Studies in Comparative
International Development, 46(2), pp. 191–216. doi:10.1007/s12116-010-9076-6
Pribble, J. (2013). Welfare and party politics in Latin America. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Pribble, J. and Huber, E. (2013). Social policy and redistribution: Chile and Uruguay. In: S. Levitsky and
K.M. Roberts, eds., In the Resurgence of the Latin American Left. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press, pp. 117–138.
Ratigan, K. (2017). Disaggregating the developing welfare state: Provincial social policy regimes in China.
World Development, 98, pp. 467–484. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2017.05.010
Riggirozzi, P. and Tussie, D. (2012). The rise of post-hegemonic regionalism. The case of Latin America.
In: Series on regionalism, vol. 4. New York: United Nations University, p. 17.
Rowlands, J. (1998). Empoderamiento y mujeres rurales en Honduras: un modelo para el desarrollo. In: M.
León, ed., Poder y empoderamiento de las mujeres. Bogotá: Tercer Mundo, Fondo de Documentación
Mujer y Género, Facultad de Ciencias Humanas, Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Rudra, N. (2007). Welfare states in developing countries: Unique or universal? The Journal of Politics,
69(2), pp. 378–396.
Rueda, D. (2007). Social democracy inside out: Partisanship and labor market policy in advanced
industrialized democracies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sanchez de Dios, M. (2015). La reforma de los regímenes de bienestar en Costa Rica, Chile, Argentina,
Brasil y Uruguay. Política y Sociedad, 52(3), pp. 661–690.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5209/rev_POSO.2015.v52.n3.45377
Schmitt, C. (2013). Culture, closeness, or commerce? Policy diffusion and social spending dynamics. Swiss
Political Science Review, 19(2), pp. 123–138. doi:10.1111/spsr.12035
Shipan, C.R. and Volden, C. (2008). The mechanisms of policy diffusion. American Journal of Political
Science, 52(4), pp. 840–857.
Soares, S., Osorio, R., Soares, F., Sousa, M. and Zepeda, E. (2007). Conditional cash transfers in Brazil,
Chile and México: Impacts upon inequality. Working Paper, 35, International Poverty Center, Brasilia.
Sojo, A. (2017). Protección social en América Latina: la desigualdad en el banquillo. Santiago de Chile:
CEPAL, Naciones Unidas.
Sottoli, S. (2000). La política social en América Latina bajo el signo de la economía de Mercado y la
democracia. Instituto de Investigaciones Sociales. Revista Mexicana de Sociología, 62(4), pp. 43–65.
Sugiyama, N.B. (2011). The diffusion of conditional cash transfer programs in the Americas. Global Social
Policy, 11(2–3), pp. 250–278. doi:10.1177/1468018111421295
Summerfield, G. (2007). Transnational migration, gender and human security. Development, 50(4), pp. 13–
18.
Teichman, J. (2007). Multilateral lending institutions and transnational policy networks in Mexico and
Chile. Global Governance, 13(4), pp. 557–573.

21

Tsounta, E. and Osueke, A.I. (2014). What is behind Latin America’s declining income inequality? IMF
Working Paper, 14(124), pp. 1–34. www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2014/wp14124.pdf
Ubasart-González, G. and Minteguiaga, A. (2017). Esping-Andersen en América Latina: El estudio de los
regímenes de bienestar. Política y gobierno, 24(1), pp. 213–236.
Weyland, K. (2005). Theories of policy diffusion: Lessons from Latin American pension reform. World
Politics, 57(2), pp. 262–295.
Wood, G. and Gough, I. (2006). A comparative welfare regimes approach to global social policy. World
Development, 34(10), pp. 1696–1712.
Yeates, N. and Deacon, B. (June 2006). Globalism, regionalism and social policy: Framing the debate.
UNU-CRIS working paper.

Notes

i CEPAL defines the double inclusion – social and labour – as the access to education, health, social
protection and housing with minimum living standards combined with access to salaried jobs with a
remuneration commensurate to the task being performed, in decent conditions and with access to social
protection.
ii “From 1981 to 2014, 30 countries privatized fully or partially their public mandatory pensions; as of
2018, 18 countries have reversed the privatization” due to underperformance and high costs (Ortiz et al.,
2018).
iii The following three indicators make up the social spending dimension: social spending as a percentage
of gross domestic product (GDP); social spending as a percentage of public spending; and social spending
per capita. The following three indicators form the coverage dimension: percentage of population over 65
years who receive a retirement pension; percentage of employees with retirement coverage; and the number
of hospital beds for every 10,000 inhabitants. Finally, the proportion of adults in the age group of 25–65
years with more than 13 years of formal education and the improbability of children under 5 years suffering
infant mortality represent the outcome dimension in the multidimensional welfare index (Cruz-Martinez,
2017c, p. 958).
iv See Cruz-Martinez (2014, 2017c) for data, methodology and more details on the results. The MWI was
constructed using principal component analysis and arithmetic means.
v The literature has labelled welfare systems in Latin America as emerging welfare states (Huber and
Stephens, 2012) and welfare states in development (Cruz-Martinez, 2017a, 2017c), among others, to refer
to the underdevelopment of Latin American welfare programmes and institutions in contrast to
consolidated welfare states in Europe.
vi This subsection is based primarily on Cruz-Martinez (2018).
vii See Martín-Mayoral and Sastre (2017) for an overview and recent results of the economic determinants
of welfare effort expansion.

22

