What Should Historical Sociologists Do All Day? Starving the Beast, the Reagan Tax Cuts, and Modes of
Historical Explanation
Elizabeth Popp Berman 1
University of Michigan
epberman@umich.edu
[Uncorrected preprint – forthcoming in Contemporary Sociology]
Starving the Beast: Ronald Reagan and the Tax Cut Revolution, by Monica Prasad. New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 2018. 338 pp. $35.00 paper. ISBN: 9780871546920.
Monica Prasad, along with collaborators like Isaac Martin and Ajay Mehrotra (e.g. Martin, Mehrotra and
Prasad 2009), has made fiscal sociology—the sociology of taxation—a thriving part of the discipline. Her
first book showed how different national patterns of taxation help explain the variable strength of
neoliberalism across nations (Prasad 2006). Her second identified progressive taxation as key to
producing both democratized credit and a weak welfare state in the U.S. (Prasad 2012). More generally,
her work has been critical for helping us understand how political institutions shape societal outcomes
in lasting, often counterintuitive, ways.
Prasad’s latest book, Starving the Beast: Ronald Reagan and the Tax Cut Revolution, bears many of the
hallmarks of her best work: sweeping purview, ambitious comparisons, systematic testing of competing
explanations. It displays an impressive depth of research (opening your book by talking about your sixyear wait for FOIA’ed documents is definitely a power move) and breadth of scope (few people can talk
so knowledgeably about tax systems across so many countries). It provides a definitive historical
account of the Reagan tax cut revolution, and the new archival evidence it draws on gives us rich detail
that has been missing from prior narratives.
Yet some parts of Starving the Beast are more convincing than others. While one of the book’s two main
arguments is fully compelling, the other is less completely documented, and to some extent even
contradicts the first. The competing explanations that are set up—even around the first, generally
persuasive argument—have a bit of a straw man feel, and the arguments used to dismiss them
sometimes miss the mark. Given that I was convinced by the core empirical account, it took some
puzzling to figure out why I was not more fully satisfied with the complete package. Revisiting a widelycirculated working paper by Damon Mayrl and Nick Wilson, “What Do Historical Sociologists Do All Day?
Methodological Architectures in Historical Sociology” (Mayrl and Wilson 2018) helped diagnose the
issue: a mismatch between a mode of historical explanation Prasad deploys with aplomb in other work,
and turns to in this book as well, and the mode of historical explanation suggested by the body of
evidence that appears to have inspired the book.
Starving the Beast first and foremost tackles the question of why Republicans—formerly the party of
fiscal responsibility—became the party of tax cuts. Drawing on newly released documents from the
Reagan archives, it tells an important, complex, and historically nuanced story. In Prasad’s account,
several factors set the stage for this turn. For decades, Republicans had been searching for a solution to
their problem of being a seemingly permanent minority party. While Democrats had achieved success
Thanks to Dan Hirschman, Jeremy Levine, and Isaac Martin for comments on previous versions of this essay, and
to Damon Mayrl and Nick Wilson both for comments and for sharing multiple drafts of their paper, “What Do
Historical Sociologists Do All Day? Methodological Architectures in Historical Sociology.”

1

through welfare state clientelism, promising programs for every constituency, Republicans’ eat-yourvegetables identity of balanced budgets had proven less appealing to voters. When the inflation of the
1970s intersected with the structure of the U.S. tax system—which, for historical reasons explored
elsewhere by Prasad, relied on income rather than sales tax, and had high corporate and capital gains
tax rates—a political opportunity opened up.
Since the U.S.’s progressive tax brackets were not indexed to inflation, Americans found their tax rates
increasing even if their real income was not, producing growing dissatisfaction. Business, feeling
increasing pressure from international competition, also began pushing for more favorable tax
treatment. First Jack Kemp and then Ronald Reagan chose to break with the Republican tradition of
balanced budgets and effectively seized on tax cuts as a central plank in their platform, leading to the
1981 Economic Recovery Tax Act (ERTA), which gave massive tax cuts to both individuals and businesses.
Though Republicans promised that ERTA would not reduce revenues, in actuality it produced recordbreaking deficits. But the lesson Republicans learned from ERTA—a lasting one—was that voters didn’t
really care about deficits. And while perpetuating large deficits would not have been a viable long-term
strategy had the rest of the world not been happy to purchase as much debt as Americans wanted to
produce, it turned out that the rest of the world was. Given this reality, tax cuts became a hugely
successful platform for Republicans, and one that returned them to political dominance for the next
several decades.
Prasad tells this story in the first two-thirds of her book, but the final third draws on her comparative
work to make a second argument: that ultimately, the Republican turn toward tax cuts took place
because European governments were more business-friendly. Europe’s strong welfare states rested on
an environment of low corporate taxes and relaxed regulatory policy, while the U.S. was surprisingly
punishing to business. Though U.S. business interests pushed for lower taxes, in doing so they were
“running to stay in place”—trying to secure the more favorable tax environment their European
competitors already enjoyed. From this, she draws several lessons: that we should not overestimate the
political power of business in the U.S., that tax cuts reflect democratic wishes rather than indicating a
lack of democracy, and—an ongoing theme in her work—that successful welfare states rest on businessfriendly policies.
Prasad’s real strength as a sociologist is in setting up sweeping, counterintuitive macro-causal
explanations of unexpected historical outcomes, using comparison (across both nations and policy
domains) as a means of building her arguments, and systematically setting up (and knocking down)
competing explanations. Her first two books, Politics of Free Markets and The Land of Too Much, both
feature this sort of puzzle—why did the U.S. and the U.K. end up with more neoliberal policies than
France and Germany? why does the U.S. have an unusually weak welfare state?—and this form of
argument, with great success. And part of what makes them not only provocative but useful books is
that you don’t have to be fully convinced by the grand argument to find specific components both
compelling and generative. Regardless of whether one agrees that the U.S. and U.K. turned to
neoliberalism because of politics in those countries was more adversarial to business, Prasad’s
identification of different patterns of taxation as key to producing to particular kinds of politics is critical.
And regardless of whether one is convinced that nineteenth-century agrarian populism played the key
role in producing the distinctive U.S. welfare state, her reframing of American politics as unexpectedly
hostile to business interests is crucial.

But Starving the Beast is different. It has a similar puzzle to be explained—why did the party of fiscal
responsibility become the party of tax cuts? But Prasad appears to have been motivated to write the
book, at least in my read of the introduction, by a treasure trove of newly available archival documents.
The book uses them to provide an account that is sharply articulated and fully supported, but that is not
as surprising or counterintuitive as her earlier books. Nor can that account be boiled down to a single
line: that the U.S. and U.K. were unexpectedly adversarial to business, or that early U.S. progressivism
unexpectedly produced a weak welfare state. Starving the Beast tells a complex, multicausal story, ripe
with contingency, individual agency, political skill, and plain old luck. While political institutions and the
structural position of the U.S. in the global economy play a role, it is, more than anything, a historical
explanation.
This type of explanation maps well onto a particular category in the four-part typology developed by
Mayrl and Wilson in “What Do Historical Sociologists Do All Day?” In this creative and thought-provoking
paper, Mayrl and Wilson empirically examine all the citations in 37 award-winning books and articles in
comparative-historical sociology. Grouping publications by patterns in what kinds of sources they use
(primary versus secondary) and in how they use them (critically versus constructively, and in service of
their theoretical versus empirical argument), the paper identifies four “methodological architectures”
for making sociological claims about the past: the “theoretical frontier”, the “sociologist as historian”,
“macro-causal analysis”, and “data driven theorizing.”
Prasad’s general approach to historical sociology seems to fit the “macro-causal analysis” category, and
indeed, Mayrl and Wilson use The Land of Too Much as an archetype: the book “pos[es] and answer[s] a
large, sociological question with an equally sweeping argument” and “makes [its] case through periodic
comparisons -- in this case, with Europe and Canada.” It “repeatedly delves into marvelous detail, the
chapters peppered with illuminating quotes and apposite illustrations of crucial theoretical points, each
lavishly sourced to empirical material.” Like other work in this cluster, The Land of Too Much “is devoted
to building an airtight empirical case for an alternative theory,” a technique Prasad excels at.
But both the type of evidence Prasad relies upon and the story that Starving the Beast tells are better
suited to another of Mayrl and Wilson’s architectures: the “sociologist as historian”. This approach, they
suggest, “is fundamentally distinguished by its source material, drawing heavily on original archival and
other primary research.” While these works “tend to feature comparisons,” “a richly detailed narrative
sourced to primary documents dominates the ultimate presentation.” With its new archival evidence
and its contingent, multi-causal narrative, Prasad’s latest book would seem an excellent example of
work that reflects “the third-wave call for more extensive engagement with primary sources in ways
that blur the boundary between history and sociology.” The problem is that Prasad remains committed
to the first approach, even when the data might point to the second. This disjuncture leads to some
choices in Starving the Beast that work less well. 2
For example, although Prasad’s account emphasizes historical complexity, much of Starving the Beast is
spent knocking down competing explanations for why Republicans turned to tax cuts: 1) the power of
big business to advocate for them, 2) the power of ideas (either the Laffer curve argument that tax cuts
Interestingly, in Mayrl and Wilson’s paper, The Politics of Free Markets falls into the “sociologist as historian”
bucket, rather than the “macro-causal analysis” bucket. While the citation patterns of The Politics of Free Markets
may reflect the heavy reliance on primary sources characteristic of the former architecture, its pattern of
argumentation and the scope of its central question (why did neoliberalism proceed further in the U.S. and U.K.
than in Germany and France) appear to me more macro-causal, and it seems like a potential boundary case.
2

could increase revenues or, alternatively, that tax cuts would force government to reduce spending),
and 3) the racialization of welfare policy undermining support for government. But there are problems
here. First, while trying to evaluate the relative importance of different causes is worthwhile, supporting
the historical argument of Starving the Beast does not really require disproving that other factors played
a role. Second, because the story is not quite as counterintuitive as that of The Politics of Free Markets
or The Land of Too Much, this approach forces Prasad to create straw men of these competing
arguments, making their demolition relatively unsurprising. And finally, because the evidence
encourages a focus on the passage of ERTA specifically, the book overlooks ways these factors may have
changed the broader environment in which tax politics took place even if they were not immediate,
direct motivators for ERTA.
Prasad’s argument that business interests did not put tax cuts on the Republican agenda, for instance,
focuses too narrowly on the moment Reagan chose to champion tax cuts and in doing so misses other
forms of business influence. ERTA has long been understood as the result of an uneasy partnership
between a movement focused on large cuts in individual tax rates, of which the business community
was skeptical; and business advocacy of corporate tax cuts, and in particular accelerated depreciation
(e.g. Stockman 1986). Reagan did not take up the mantle of tax cuts at the behest of business, but this
does not mean that the rising influence of organized business interests, and their public case for greater
government support in the face of increasing global competition, did not produce an environment
favorable to such an alliance (Mizruchi 2013; Waterhouse 2013).
Similarly, Starving the Beast discusses at length whether racism caused ERTA, but assumes that ERTA
supporters must have been more racist than non-supporters, or that white and black voters must have
had different preferences for tax cuts, in order for race to have mattered. But you don’t need to think
that tax cut supporters were especially racist to believe that the 1970s racialization of the welfare state
broadly increased skepticism about the value of government in ways that produced a tax-cut-friendly
environment. Given that this type of sociologist-as-historian account does not rest on disproving all
other competing explanations in order to be convincing, addressing such explanations in a way that did
not try (with less than complete success) to dismiss them entirely might have been the better choice.
The macro-causal approach also leads Prasad to draw on her comparative work to argue in the final
third of the book that ultimately, the Republican turn toward tax cuts took place because Europe was
more business-friendly. Europe’s strong welfare states, she contends, rested on a base of low corporate
taxes and relaxed regulatory policy, while the U.S. was surprisingly punishing to business in ways that
ultimately led it to challenge this treatment in order to remain competitive in a global market. Yet this
part of the argument seems to conflict with the earlier story, in which business is relatively weak, is not
an important driver of the Reagan tax cuts, and suffers a significant loss in that it opposes the large
individual tax cuts that make up half of ERTA. And because the bulk of the evidence is concentrated in
the first two-thirds of the book, the reader does not really have enough to fully evaluate how convincing
the case is. Again, there is a mismatch between the detailed archival evidence that motivates the first
two-thirds of the book and the convincing sociologist-as-historian account that accompanies it, and the
macro-causal argument that the book continues to turn to.
As a methodological pluralist, I am a fan of both the grand macro-causal comparisons that Prasad’s
books have been exemplars of, as well as more historical-sociological accounts that emphasize
complexity and contingency but retain an eye on social structure. Yet not every historical narrative, nor
every sociological puzzle, nor every trove of evidence is equally suited to both types of explanation.
There is no single right approach to historical sociology—a single thing that historical sociologists should

do all day. But whatever it is they choose to do, they will do it best when their empirical material and
their style of argument align closely with one another. While Starving the Beast can be faulted for
putting too much macro-causal argument atop an otherwise strong historical narrative, the book will
nevertheless be essential reading. Prasad has produced a compelling, definitive account of why
Republicans became the party of tax cuts, and Starving the Beast will doubtless generate future
dissertations on the nature of business-state relations in the U.S. and Europe as well.
Bibliography
Martin, Isaac William, Ajay K. Mehrotra, and Monica Prasad (Eds.). 2009. The New Fiscal Sociology:
Taxation in Comparative and Historical Perspective. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Mayrl, Damon, and Nicholas Hoover Wilson. 2018. "What Do Historical Sociologists Do All Day?
Methodological Architectures in Historical Sociology." Unpublished paper.
Mizruchi, Mark. 2013. The Fracturing of the American Corporate Elite. Cambridge: Harvard University
Press.
Prasad, Monica. 2006. The Politics of Free Markets: The Rise of Neoliberal Economic Policies in Britain,
France, Germany, and the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
—. 2012. The Land of Too Much: American Abundance and the Paradox of Poverty. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Stockman, David. 1986. The Triumph of Politics: How the Reagan Revolution Failed. New York: Harper &
Row, Publishers.
Waterhouse, Benjamin C. 2013. Lobbying America: The Politics of Business from Nixon to NAFTA.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.

