Divorced and Unemployed:
the Declining Association
between Two Critical
Lifecourse States in the UK,
1984-2017
DIAL Working Paper Series 16/2019

Lewis R. Anderson, Christiaan W.S. Monden,
Erzsebet Bukodi

0

dynamicsofinequality.org

Divorced and Unemployed: the Declining
Association between Two Critical
Lifecourse States in the UK, 1984-2017
Lewis R. Anderson1, Christiaan W.S. Monden2, and
Erzsebet Bukodi3

Abstract
Individuals exposed to both job loss and marital dissolution are likely to
be highly disadvantaged, having experienced stresses and losses in the
two primary domains of life. Moreover, recent literature finds that
exposure to one event tends to increase risk of the other. However, next
to nothing is known about the size or composition – or changes therein –
of the divorced/separated and unemployed (DSU) subpopulation. Using
large, nationally representative, repeated cross-sectional datasets
extending back to 1984, we aim to fill this gap for the UK. We give a
descriptive account of the prevalence and social distribution of DSU,
and of the cross-sectional association between its two component states:
among which groups, by education and gender, does being either
divorced/separated or unemployed most strongly imply a heightened
risk of also being the other, and how has this changed over time? We
find stable and strong educational inequality in DSU, while the gender
gap has narrowed and recently closed. The association between the two
states is stronger among men; has weakened strikingly over the time
period we consider, for both men and, especially, women; and is
educationally stratified among men but not women. Contrary to
expectations, higher-educated men in one of the two states are most
likely to also be in the other. Possible explanations and further questions
are discussed. In particular, we highlight the possibility that over this
time period the divorced/separated have become more like the general
population, rather than a negatively selected subgroup among whom
unemployment is a particular risk.
Keywords: divorced, marital dissolution, unemployed, job loss,
repartnering, cumulative disadvantage

1. Corresponding author. Nuffield College and Department of Sociology, University
of Oxford, lewis.anderson@sociology.ox.ac.uk.
2. Nuffield College and Department of Sociology, University of Oxford.
3. Nuffield College and Department of Social Policy and Intervention, University of
Oxford.

1

Acknowledgments
Research reported in this manuscript is part of the project
CRITEVENTS, which is part of the joint NORFACE research program
“Dynamics of Inequality Across the Life-course” (DIAL). DIAL is
funded by the European Commission via an ERA-NET Cofund grant
(grant number 724363).
We are grateful for the comments and suggestions from those present at
the CRITEVENTS project meeting at the European University Institute,
Florence, June 2018. We also thank Pepita Barlow, Patrick Präg, Paula
Sheppard, Zachary Van Winkle, and Florianne Verkroost for their
comments and suggestions.

Online supplemental material
Supplemental material for this paper can be accessed at:

2

1. Introduction and background

Most studies which attend to both divorce and job loss ask whether exposure to one event is
associated with an increased risk of the other. Prompted, among other considerations, by the
many positive answers that have been found to both questions (Blekesaune 2008; Covizzi
2008; Hansen 2005; Jalovaara 2003; Kalmijn 2005; Killewald 2016; Lampard 1994), the aim
of this paper is to explore the co-prevalence of being divorced or separated and being
unemployed. Since marital dissolution and unemployment occur in the two primary domains
of life – home and work – the two events together may have implications for just about every
aspect of an individual’s wellbeing. Whatever outcomes job loss may leave untouched – for
instance, a fulfilling relationship with one’s partner – marital dissolution probably will not
(Brand 2015; Leopold 2018). In other words, individuals exposed to both job loss and marital
dissolution are likely to be distinctly disadvantaged. Surprisingly little is known about this
potentially precarious state, its distribution in the population, and changes over time.
The co-prevalence of the two states refers to a frequency or proportion which may be
viewed as having two parts: the portion expected to arise from chance alone – given that there
are a certain number of divorced/separated individuals and a certain number of unemployed
individuals, and the two are not mutually exclusive – and the portion beyond this. This
second part reflects the cross-sectional association between being divorced/separated and
being unemployed at a given point in time. The strength of this cross-sectional association,
and its distribution between sociodemographic groups and over time, is the focus of this
paper: among which groups does being either divorced/separated or unemployed most
strongly imply a heightened risk of also being the other?
The groups to which we pay particular attention are those formed by men and women
with differing levels of education. Education is robustly associated with the risk of
3

unemployment (Brand 2015), although its association with divorce is far more complicated,
and may vary by gender (Kalmijn, de Graaf, and Poortman 2004). With regard to both men’s
and women’s education, different countries variously show positive (Blossfeld et al. 1995),
null (Bracher et al. 1993), and negative (Lyngstad 2004) gradients in divorce. Looking across
marriage cohorts from the 1960s to 1990s, Härkönen and Dronkers (2006) find that in all of
the nine (out of seventeen) Western countries where the educational gradient in divorce has
changed over time, it has become more negative.
We investigate the co-prevalence between being divorced/separated and being
unemployed in the context of the UK. The proportion divorced/separated is likely to be
relatively high in the UK, given its somewhat high crude divorce rate over the last halfcentury in comparison with most European nations (Eurostat 2018a). The divorce rate rose
rapidly from the mid-1960s and remained high until a fall in the last decade or so (ONS
2017), making it rather widespread and unremarkable. Indeed, cultural and economic barriers
to divorce are low. There are few Catholics, or members of any other religion with a strong
prohibition against divorce. Female labour market participation and educational enrolment
are high, lowering the relative economic costs of divorce for many women. In these respects
the UK resembles much of northern and western Europe (Wagner and Weiß 2006). Though
UK data were not available to Härkönen and Dronkers (2006), other evidence indicates that
in the UK the gradient has also become more negative, and in fact switched from positive to
negative (Chan and Halpin 2008), a result also found for Sweden (Hoem 1997).
The UK unemployment rate was high in the early 1980s, and the country experienced
another recession in the early 1990s, again elevating unemployment. Since then however, and
particularly in terms of its recovery from the late-2000s financial crisis, the UK has seen
relatively low unemployment compared to its European neighbours (Eurostat 2018b). It may
then be that the unemployed are increasingly negatively selected, especially in terms of

4

education. This, coupled with the negative educational gradient in divorce, may have led to
an increase in the co-prevalence of being divorced/separated and being unemployed, among
the less educated in particular.
We focus on the states of being divorced/separated and being unemployed rather than
the events which represent entry into (or exit from) them. The distribution of marital
dissolution following job loss (and vice versa) may differ from the distribution of persistence
in, and exit from, the state of being divorced/separated and unemployed (hereafter, DSU). It
could be, for instance, that men experience more spells of DSU than women on average, but
the duration of these spells is much longer among women. The co-prevalence we track maps
out an understudied and disadvantaged subpopulation, capturing the outcome of the interplay
between the various factors which predispose individuals to unemployment and/or
divorce/separation, which affect the likelihood of divorce or separation leading to
unemployment (or the reverse), and which affect the likelihood of re-employment or
repartnering. Rather than describe which groups are at risk of entry into or exit from DSU, we
identify the groups most likely to be living under exposure to DSU at a given moment, which,
as we argue below, is likely to be an especially vulnerable state. In this way our paper builds
upon and brings together the existing literatures linking job loss and marital dissolution, and
those exploring repartnering and transitions out of unemployment.
We therefore address the following research questions: (a) What proportion of the
adult UK population are DSU? (b) To what extent is the risk of being DSU different for men
and women and stratified by education? (c) How strong is the cross-sectional association
between the two component states, and how does this vary by gender and education? In each
case we also explore how our findings vary over time, using annual data from 1984-2017.
This paper is exploratory and descriptive: we follow Merton’s (1987) injunction, situated by

5

Goldthorpe as ‘the first aim of a population science’ (Goldthorpe 2016: 14), to robustly
establish the phenomena.
In the next sections we add further motivation for this paper and draw on previous
research to articulate our expectations. We then describe the data, measures and methods.
This is followed by results, and finally a discussion in which potential explanations for the
observed results are discussed, and further questions identified.

1.1 DSU as an outcome of interest

Theoretically, the state of being DSU is one of extreme disadvantage. Each of the two states
considered separately is associated with low wellbeing and implies previous exposure to a
stressful loss event (Dolan, Peasgood, and White 2008; Kalmijn 2005), but there are reasons
to view the co-prevalence of the two as especially detrimental.
First, the two are likely to have interactive impacts on several key outcomes,
constituting a form of cumulative disadvantage (DiPrete and Eirich 2006). Income is one
example. Particularly in more liberal welfare regimes such as the UK, partner’s income is an
important buffer following job loss (Ehlert 2012). Without a partner to provide this
compensation, one’s vulnerability to the effect of job loss on income is greater. Health is
another: among US men, a large study found that work stressors (including being fired or laid
off, or problems getting a new job) were associated with increased risk of all-cause mortality
among the divorced but not among the married (Matthews and Gump 2002).
Second, the losses of both employment and marriage deprive individuals of two
relatively independent sources of coping resources. Marital dissolution implies the loss of the
partner’s socioemotional support, social network, and contribution to household income and
domestic labour. Job loss implies not only a substantial reduction in own income and

6

economic security, but also the loss of important psychosocial bases of wellbeing such as
skill use, social networks, status, time structure, and sense of control (Brand 2015;
Powdthavee 2012; Price, Choi, and Vinokur 2002). A consistent finding of the stress
literature is that the impacts of stressors can be moderated by a sense of control over life, high
self-esteem, and social support (Thoits 2010). Employment and marriage contribute to each
of these independently, but the loss of both may leave one highly vulnerable to other
stressors.
Third, insofar as being in both states makes exit from either more difficult, DSU may
constitute something of a wellbeing trap, extending the duration of an already undesirable
life-course state. Unemployment is likely to be a major disadvantage among those seeking to
repartner. Being divorced/separated in the labour market may be viewed as a signal of
negative characteristics by potential employers. In addition, the human capital of spouses
influences labour market success (Bernasco, de Graaf, and Ultee 1998); lacking this, and
lacking the wider network provided by a partner, may prolong the job search process. Indeed,
in the UK, married men are 33 percent more likely to make the transition from unemployed
to employed than unmarried men, with other characteristics including age controlled for
(Long 2009).

1.2 Expectations and previous research

A multiplicity of processes together generate DSU, the cross-sectional association between
the two states, stratification in these outcomes, and change over time. We are necessarily
agnostic about the diverse range of underlying processes, but seek to give an account of what
they produce overall. For this reason, we do not hold strong expectations, but here reflect on

7

what are likely to be some of the important mechanisms involved, in the UK context in
particular, and the patterns they would imply.
First, the two events giving rise to these states share several individual-level risk
factors. As noted above, education has a well-established association with unemployment.
Higher levels of education both signal desirable qualities to employers, and reflect the
accumulation of human capital. Societies with a positive educational gradient in divorce tend
to be those where the cultural and economic barriers are higher; those who get divorced are
those with the resources to cope with challenges such as legal barriers, stigma, and a
reduction in living standards. However, in countries such as the UK where divorce is a
realistic option for far more individuals, its relationship to education reflects other
considerations. Among these are that the more educated may possess skills which improve
the stability of relationships, and are less likely to suffer financial strain and its destabilising
effects; additionally individuals have more to lose financially from divorcing highly-educated
partners (Härkönen and Dronkers 2006). As stated above, we expect that DSU will be
especially prevalent among the less educated.
Other individual level factors are also relevant. Two of the big five personality traits –
low conscientiousness and high neuroticism – have been related both to divorce (Boertien
and Mortelmans 2017; Solomon and Jackson 2014) and to unemployment (Egan et al. 2017;
Uysal and Pohlmeier 2011). Parental divorce is a consistent predictor of marital dissolution
(de Graaf and Kalmijn 2006), and the often-accompanying family conflict and singleparenthood increase children’s risk of unemployment in adulthood (Caspi et al. 1998). Amato
(1996) finds that the intergenerational transmission of divorce is largely mediated through
interpersonal behaviour problems; it is plausible that they also mediate a link from parental
divorce to unemployment. These factors may each correlate with low education, further
reinforcing our expectation that DSU will be educationally stratified.

8

Second, there is growing evidence that the unemployed are at increased risk of
divorce (Blekesaune 2008; Hansen 2005; Jalovaara 2003; Killewald 2016), and that divorce
increases the risk of unemployment (Covizzi 2008; Kalmijn 2005). These effects may be
especially strong in the context of the UK’s low barriers to divorce and flexible labour
market. Evidence points to a gendered pattern in the association of unemployment with
subsequent divorce, and in particular to the persistence of the norm of the male breadwinner,
rather than to an effect mediated by financial strain or dependence (Killewald 2016; Sayer et
al. 2011). This suggests that the association between the two states will be stronger among
men than women.
Third, repartnering dynamics will influence the patterns of co-prevalence (de Graaf
and Kalmijn 2003), with the unemployed likely to find repartnering more difficult. This again
may vary with education, with less educated men having lower odds of repartnering (Shafer
and James 2013). Intuitively, even conditional on being unemployed, more-educated
individuals might prove more attractive to potential new partners on the basis of their
earnings potential. This would imply a stronger cross-sectional association among the less
educated.
Men repartner at a higher rate (Wu and Schimmele 2005), which would act to
decrease the strength of the association between the two states among men relative to women.
While it has been argued that remarriage functions as an especially important strategy for
women to overcome the financial consequences of divorce, one test of this hypothesis found
support only among women with a low income before divorce (Dewilde and Uunk 2008). To
the extent that low education proxies low income, a higher rate of repartnering among less
educated unemployed women might partially offset the expected stronger cross-sectional
association among less educated women.

9

Fourth, the distribution of re-employment matters. Stratification here likely parallels
that for unemployment, with the less educated likely to spend longer without a job. An
additional consideration is the steep decline in income among women post-divorce (Andreß
et al. 2006). This may incentivise a swift return to employment. Indeed, ‘there is a consensus
that women increase their labour supply substantially after divorce’ (Özcan and Breen 2012:
474); among women with better education and higher earnings potential, this strategy might
substitute for remarriage ‘for the money’ and explain the only partial support for that
approach found by Dewilde and Uunk (2008). If women are faster to find employment
following divorce, this will reduce the cross-sectional association among women relative to
men.
Interestingly, there is evidence to suggest that policy reforms – in particular the
Working Families Tax Credit – instituted in the UK in 1998 and aimed at ‘making work pay’
had a pronounced effect on women’s post-separation employment. Jenkins (2008) compares
BHPS results from 1991-1997 and 1998-2003, and finds a clear increase in the proportion of
separated women taking up in-work benefits after separation, and a clear decrease in the
proportion taking up unemployment benefits after separation. This implies that the crosssectional association may weaken among women around this point in our time series.
In sum, a wide and complex range of mechanisms generate the outcomes we are
interested in. Some of these are expected to act in opposite directions. We have no strong
expectations about gender differences, but expect both that DSU will be more prevalent
among the less educated, and that the two states will be most strongly associated among the
less educated.
Direct evidence on these questions is extremely sparse. Some sequence analysis work
on the US and UK has quantified the size of groups with life-course patterns such as
‘unstable work, no family’ (McMunn et al. 2015). However, since a greater number of

10

categories increases the complexity of sequence analysis exponentially, this literature mostly
ignores distinctions between unemployment and economic inactivity, and between
divorced/separated and never married (Jackson and Berkowitz 2005; McDonough et al. 2015;
Worts et al. 2013).
Our current lack of information about the group is also likely attributable in part to
sample size constraints – the two component states are each relatively rare. Their coprevalence applies to a group too small to subject to further disaggregation and examination
in a detailed cohort or panel survey. We overcome this by turning to the UK Labour Force
Survey series, which consistently attains over 100,000 respondents and extends back over
several decades. Compared to standard socioeconomic datasets, we trade off longitudinal
information and a broad range of measures for the ability to focus on a neglected
subpopulation.

2. Data, measures and methods

We apply nationally-representative repeated cross-sectional surveys to answer each of our
questions for the UK population aged 25-64. We code an annual time series dataset extending
from 1984 to 2017 by combining two incarnations of the Labour Force Survey (LFS): the
annual LFS, and the Quarterly Labour Force Survey (QLFS). The size of these surveys
enables the analysis of gradients in risk for DSU status in spite of this being a small
subpopulation.
Our time series begins in 1984, with the introduction of a consistent series of
questions aimed at measuring economic status according to the International Labour
Organisation (ILO) definitions. The definition of unemployment we use is more inclusive

11

than the ILO version, but it is derived from questions designed to measure ILO
unemployment.
From 1984-1991 the LFS was conducted annually. In 1992 the survey became the
QLFS. The annual LFS data were collected in March-May, so we use the April-June QLFS in
each year from 1992-2017. Minor changes to the surveys between years necessitate
harmonisation of some of the measures, which we discuss below.

2.1 Economic status

Economic status refers to the mutually exclusive categories employed, unemployed, and out
of the labour force (OLF). Under the ILO definition, one is unemployed who a) is not
employed (i.e. has not worked at least one hour for pay or profit in the previous week), b)
would like a paid job, c) is available to start a paid job within two weeks, and d) has
undertaken some kind of job-seeking activity within the past four weeks. Someone who has
secured a job and is waiting to start is also regarded as unemployed. We use an identical
definition of unemployment except that we relax the job-seeking condition d). This means
that we include those referred to by Brandolini et al. as the ‘potential labour force’ (2006:
175) and by others as ‘discouraged workers’ – those who would like a job and are available
to start, but either have not started looking, or last undertook job-seeking activity more than
four weeks before the interview. Evidence from 14 European countries, including the UK,
indicates that in terms of transition probabilities into employment, this group is clearly
distinct from the rest of the OLF population, and generally closer to the ILO unemployed
(Brandolini et al. 2006). Despite changes to the survey, by limiting our time series to 1984
onwards we are able to utilise a highly consistent measure of unemployment. As a robustness
check, we also report results using the ILO definition of unemployment or, extending back to

12

1979, its close approximation (based on a one-week rather than four-week job-seeking
activity requirement).

2.2 Marital status

Changes to the survey questions on marital status and cohabitation necessarily introduce a
small discontinuity into the time series. The result is that for 1988 and earlier,
‘divorced/separated’ (that is, simply, either of the two self-report marital status categories
‘divorced’ or ‘separated’) refers to those who are divorced or separated from their spouse,
including those who are currently in a cohabiting relationship (but not remarried). From
1989 onwards, ‘divorced/separated’ excludes this group and refers only to those who are not
currently in a cohabiting relationship, which is to say those who have not repartnered. The
exclusion of this divorced/separated-but-currently-cohabiting group is reflected in an 18%
(5%) decline among men (women) from 1988 to 1989, amidst a rising trend, in the proportion
classified as divorced/separated. This slight discontinuity is visible in Figure 1, panels (a) and
(b). We assume that these 18% and 5% figures (plus a small addition to account for the rising
trend line) represent an upper bound for the measurement discontinuity of divorced/separated,
insofar as there are no good reasons to believe that proportionately more of the
divorced/separated were living in cohabiting relationships in any of the years 1984-1987 than
in 1988. This discontinuity does not appear to affect our substantive conclusions. From 1995
onwards, we are able to separately identify, among the divorced/separated, those who are and
those who are not currently living in a cohabiting relationship. We compare results for these
groups in our supplemental analyses.

13

2.3 Divorced/separated and unemployed (DSU)

DSU simply refers to individuals who are both divorced/separated and unemployed, as
defined above. We here reiterate that we measure states rather than events, and cannot
ascertain from these data whether individuals suffered marriage dissolution or job loss first.

2.4 Education

We use a relative measure of educational attainment based on individuals’ highest reported
qualification. For men and women separately, within each five-year birth cohort, the sample
is ultimately divided into a top quarter, middle half, and bottom quarter (as closely as
possible given the categorical nature of the data, see Figures A1 and A2). Our approach is
explicated at length in the supplemental material.
This sex- and cohort-relativisation of education reflects our conceptualisation of
education primarily as a positional good in this context – namely labour and marriage
markets in which, for the most part, one competes with others of the same sex and similar
age. This follows the intuition that, for example, holding A-level qualifications is a far
stronger signal of qualities attractive in those markets for someone born in 1930 (a cohort in
which around 15% of men hold greater or equal qualifications) than it is for someone born in
1980 (where the equivalent figure is around 50%). Accordingly, the former would be in the
top approximate quarter by education, while the latter would fall in the middle approximate
half of the distribution (see Figure A1). Common understandings of what it means to hold a
given highest qualification, such as A-levels, have changed over the longer period across
which all individuals in our sample acquired their qualifications. We argue that there is more
conceptual consistency in using an artificial top quarter, middle half, and bottom quarter, thus

14

taking the shifting distribution of education into account, than there is in using, for instance,
degree, any other qualifications, and no qualifications.

2.5 Methods

We first plot proportions over time of the three states divorced/separated, unemployed, and
DSU. These are presented separately for men and women, and further disaggregated by
education. This allows simple visual inspection of the trends in the two critical life-course
states and their co-prevalence, as well as their educational stratification over time. To give a
clearer picture of this stratification, we then plot time series of age-adjusted risk ratios for
DSU by education.
We next turn to the question of how strongly the two component states of DSU are
cross-sectionally associated with one another. In other terms, this is the question of how
predictive being in one of the two states is of being (also) in the other state (and therefore
DSU). To explore this, we plot the odds ratio for the association of the two states, controlling
for age, and again disaggregate by sex and educational status. (The odds ratio is preferred to
the risk ratio in this context because its property of symmetry allows the more succinct
presentation of a single parameter. The two risk ratios for the association of each state with
the other are, because of their relatively low prevalence, both extremely similar to one
another, and to the odds ratio.) To better understand the trend in this association, we finally
plot the proportions unemployed conditional on being divorced/separated, and vice versa.
Throughout, weights provided by the LFS are used, which weight data to sub-regional
population estimates and then adjust for the estimated age and sex composition by region.

15

We also include a robustness check (using the ILO definition of unemployment, as
discussed above) and some supplemental analyses. These are both reported in the text, while
the accompanying figures can be found in the supplemental material.
3. Results

Figure 1 Proportion divorced/separated, by sex and education
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

16

Figure 2 Proportion unemployed, by sex and education
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

17

Figure 3 Proportion divorced/separated and unemployed (DSU), by sex and education
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

Figure 1 shows the proportion of those aged 25-64 who are divorced/separated. This is shown
separately for men and women in panels (a) and (b), and broken down by education, again for
men and women separately, in panels (c) and (d). A clear rising trend in this proportion is
evident from 1984 to around 1996, at which point there is a plateau, followed by a more
recent decline. This plateau and decline occurs somewhat earlier for the more educated,
especially among women. Accordingly, for both men and women there is an increase in the
difference in risk between the most educated and the middle half, who had been
divorced/separated in similar proportions in the early part of the period. While there is a clear
negative educational gradient throughout, it thus becomes stronger through time. The clear
overall gender difference reflects a higher frequency and speed of repartnering among men,

18

and possibly a higher frequency among women of the preference not to repartner (Kreidl and
Hubatková 2017).
Figure 2 shows the proportions unemployed. The early-1980s, early-1990s, and late2000s UK recessions are clearly reflected in three peaks for men, while the middle of these
appears to have had a far smaller effect on the female unemployment rate. Since the time
series begins in the aftermath of recession, the overall appearance is of a generally steady
decline in unemployment, ending at around 4% for both men and women in 2017. For both
men and women, the most educated have moved somewhat closer to the middle half in terms
of their risk of unemployment. For men, the least educated appear to have been especially at
risk in the early part of the period, with the inequality narrowing later.
Figure 3 plots the proportions in the state of being DSU. The trends are far more
closely correlated with being unemployed than divorced/separated. This is due to spells of
unemployment presumably being of shorter duration than the state of being divorced or
separated (from 1992-2017, when the measure is available for the ILO-defined unemployed,
44% reported that they had been unemployed for less than six months). The proportions
mirror the declines evident for being unemployed, but moderated by the countervailing rising
prevalence of being divorced/separated. The highest co-prevalence among any of the sexeducation groups is 2.4% among the less-educated women in 1987. Throughout, women, and
in particular those with less education, are the group most at risk of DSU. Despite the high
prevalence of being divorced/separated, DSU is at its lowest point in the most recent year,
around 0.4% for both men and women. This equates to an estimated 150,000 DSU
individuals. Educational stratification appears stable throughout the period, except that lowereducated men in the 1980s diverge especially from the mid-educated, in line with the result
for unemployment alone.

19

Figure 4 Age-adjusted risk ratios for being divorced/separated and unemployed (DSU), by
education, men
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

20

Figure 5 Age-adjusted risk ratios for being divorced/separated and unemployed (DSU), by
education, women
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

Figures 4 and 5 give clearer visualisations of the educational stratification of DSU
over time. These figures plot risk ratios by education (taking the middle half as the reference
group), adjusted for (mean-centred) age. The smoothed lines produced by locally-weighted
regressions show a narrowing of educational stratification for men (Figure 4) in the period to
2000, driven by both upper and lower quarters coming closer to the middle group in their risk
of being DSU. In the 1980s, men in the lowest quarter by education are around five times as
likely as those in the highest to be DSU, but this falls to around three or four for the rest of
the period. For women (Figure 5), the risk ratio for the bottom versus the top educational
quarter is stable at around three or four, but there is some change in the trends of each relative
to the middle half. The higher-educated women diverge slightly from the middle group in the

21

middle part of the period, but converge later on, with the confidence intervals for both top
and bottom quarters for 2017 including a risk ratio of 1. The overall picture is of quite stable
and strong educational stratification in DSU.

Figure 6 Association between being unemployed and being divorced/separated (age-adjusted
odds ratio), men
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

22

Figure 7 Association between being unemployed and being divorced/separated (age-adjusted
odds ratio), women
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

Next we turn to the cross-sectional association between the two states, expressed as an
odds ratio. Compared to someone who is not unemployed (alternatively, divorced/separated),
how likely is someone who is unemployed (divorced/separated) to be divorced/separated
(unemployed)? Figures 6 and 7 reveal two important findings. First, the cross-sectional
association between the two states is consistently stronger among men than among women.
Second, it has declined substantially between 1984 and 2017, and particularly for women.
Individuals who are unemployed are decreasingly likely to also be divorced/separated. For
someone who is unemployed, the odds of (also) being divorced/separated (and thus DSU) are
76% greater for men and 37% greater for women in 2017, compared with someone who is
not unemployed. The same is true if one considers the contrast between an individual who is

23

divorced/separated and one who is not, in terms of their odds of (also) being unemployed. In
1984, these figures were 148% for men and 103% for women. For men the decline appears
fairly constant through the period, though perhaps slight from 1984 to around 1996. For
women, there is more clearly a turning point: prior to 1998, there is no sign of a decrease in
the association, but from 1998 onwards it is clear and steep.

Figure 8 Association between being unemployed and being divorced/separated (age-adjusted
odds ratio), men, by education
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

24

Figure 9 Association between being unemployed and being divorced/separated (age-adjusted
odds ratio), women, by education
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

In Figures 8 and 9, disaggregating the cross-sectional association by education, we
group the data into pairs of years (1984-85, 1986-87 etc.) to make the visualisation clearer.
Across the period as a whole, the weakening of the association is evident among each of the
sex-education groups, although the group of higher-educated women show only a faint trend
of decline, and a relatively low association throughout. The timing and intensity of the
decline varies between groups, however. Among men, there is stability or even an increase in
the first half of the period among middle- and high-educated men. For these groups, the
decline comes later, and is especially steep among the high-educated. Among the lesseducated, the pattern is the reverse: there is a steep decline until around 2004 and then a
levelling-off. The pattern is rather similar for women: stability or increase among the middle-

25

and high-educated in the first half, with the decline coming later, though more for the middleeducated; and a steep decline among the less-educated, which unlike for men, continues
through the whole period.
Though there is volatility between years, generally there is a clear educational
gradient among men. For most of the period, the two component states are more closely
associated among the higher-educated men, and clearly less closely associated among the
lower-educated. With regard to the most educated, this pattern is however absent at the
beginning and end of the period. Recall that the proportion DSU is lowest among the most
educated men, which may account for the volatility of the estimates between years for that
group. The gap between the lower-educated and middle-educated is substantial and present
through the whole period, suggesting an educational gradient is present. Among women, by
contrast, the three educational groups are relatively equal throughout, except that the two
states may be more strongly linked among less educated women in the beginning of the
period.

26

Figure 10 Proportion divorced/separated and proportion unemployed, unconditional and
conditional on being in the other state
Source: UK Labour Force Survey.

What might be driving this loosening of the association between the two states?
Figure 10 shows the proportion who are divorced/separated, conditional on being
unemployed, and vice versa. For men, the proportion divorced/separated is steadily greater
among the unemployed than among the general population (panel (a)). In each of panels (b)(d), however, we see a convergence of the lines indicating a loosening of the dependence
between the two states. This is most pronounced with regard to the proportions who are
unemployed (panels (c) and (d)). The proportion unemployed among adults in general, and
the proportion unemployed among those who are divorced/separated have almost fully
converged. This suggests that the association between the two states is primarily being driven
down by an increase in the number of divorced/separated individuals for reasons unrelated to

27

changes in the proportion unemployed; that is, the divorced/separated are becoming more like
the general population, rather than a selected subgroup among whom unemployment is a
particular risk. However, the unemployed, particularly unemployed men, steadily remain a
group whose risk of being divorced/separated is clearly higher than the general population.
These patterns are the same for each of the groups disaggregated by sex and education
(Figures A3 and A4).

3.1 Robustness check

Our definition of unemployment diverges from the ILO version used by official statistics
agencies. Figures A5-A14 in the supplemental material replicate Figures 1-10, extending the
time series back to 1979 and using the ILO definition of unemployment (and, from 19791984, its close equivalent except that the job-seeking activity requirement is with reference to
the previous week rather than previous four weeks). In comparing the sets of figures it is
important to bear in mind the slight extension of the time period. Beyond the obviously
slightly lower levels of unemployment under the more restrictive ILO definition, the main
difference between the two measures is seen among women in the 1980s, with lower levels
relative to men than in the main analysis, and a surprising lack of inequality between the
middle and bottom by education (Figure A6). Given the high unemployment rate in this
period, we suspect that the ILO measure misses a substantial number of women, especially
those lacking any qualifications, who would have welcomed work but in that climate made
the judgement that actively seeking a job would be unlikely to result in success. These
findings do not alter our substantive conclusions.

28

3.2 Supplemental analyses

Some further noteworthy results are briefly presented here. First, Figure A15 shows, for
1995-2017, the cross-sectional association (as in Figures 6-9), comparing results for two
subsets of the divorced/separated – those not currently cohabiting, and those who are
currently cohabiting. The difference is stark: there is no association between being
divorced/separated and being unemployed amongst those who now live together with
someone as a couple. This highlights the importance of the actual presence or absence of a
partner versus legal marital status. A number of interpretations are possible, but none can be
given with confidence due to our lack of information about the ordering of events. For
instance, this may be confounded by time since marital dissolution, may reflect unobserved
characteristics, or may be due to a positive impact of repartnering on re-entry into
employment. This result has another important implication. Our data for 1984-1988 include
both of these two groups as divorced/separated (see above). It is therefore likely that our
estimation of the cross-sectional association in this early part of the period is biased
downward by the inclusion of the now-cohabiting, amongst whom Figure A15 suggests there
is no cross-sectional association. The decline across the whole period is thus likely to be
somewhat steeper than Figures 6-9 suggest.
Figures A16 and A17 explore the age distribution among the DSU and those in the
two component states. The median age of the DSU has risen substantially among men in
particular, from 43 to 55. Among women it has risen from 41 to 48. This mirrors an upward
shift in the age distribution of the divorced/separated. The age distribution of the
unemployed, which shows a greater dispersion, has remained stable, with the median
fluctuating around 40-45 among men and around 40 for women. The divergence in the age
distributions of those in the two component states of DSU may be a mechanism driving the

29

decline in the cross-sectional association. The reasons behind this are a topic for future
research, but we speculate that as individuals increasingly delay entry into marriage and are
subsequently older when at risk of divorce, they increasingly distance themselves from the
age range around which unemployment risk is greatest.
4. Discussion

The aim of this paper was to answer basic descriptive questions about the co-prevalence of
being divorced/separated and unemployed, a joint state theoretically expected to be extremely
disadvantageous as well as difficult to exit, but about which we know almost nothing. We
leverage the large sample size and long temporal coverage of the LFS series to examine
trends in and stratification of DSU and the cross-sectional association between its two
component states.
Our first research question concerned the proportion of the adult population which is
DSU, and how this has changed over time. With the proportion divorced/separated rising
through the period to a peak around 2010, and unemployment showing a clear decline
punctuated by economic crises, the trend in DSU is by no means a priori clear. In fact, there
has been a decline, following the trend of unemployment, but tempered by the rising
proportion of individuals divorced/separated. Over the period from 1984-2017, the proportion
DSU peaked at 1.2% among men in 1994, and at 1.6% among women in 1987. In 2017 it
stood at around 0.4% among both men and women, amounting to around 150,000
individuals.
Our second question concerned stratification in the risk of DSU according to gender
and relative educational attainment. We expected that DSU would be concentrated among the
less educated, but held no prior expectations about gender differences. As expected, those in
the bottom quarter of the educational distribution relative to those of the same sex and similar
30

age were most at risk of DSU. This inequality was especially wide among men in the 1980s
during a period of very high unemployment among less educated men in particular. For most
of the period, women were more likely to be DSU than men, across the educational
distribution. However this gender difference has decreased and even disappeared.
Our third question concerned the cross-sectional association between the states of
being divorced/separated and being unemployed. This refers to how predictive being in one
state is of (also) being in the other (and thus DSU). We expected that this relationship might
be strongest among the less educated. The cross-sectional association can be influenced by
factors affecting the likelihood of job loss conditional on being divorced/separated, of marital
dissolution conditional on being unemployed, of gaining a job conditional on being
divorced/separated, or of repartnering conditional on being unemployed. We speculated that
the less educated might be at a particular disadvantage when looking for a new partner whilst
unemployed, and might also be more likely to experience marital dissolution whilst
unemployed, given that the unemployed with more education on average have better earnings
prospects which might be attractive to a new or existing partner. We again had no clear
expectations about gender differences, with plausible mechanisms operating in opposite
directions.
With regard to this third question, our main findings are that the association is
stronger among men, educationally stratified among men (weakest among the least educated
men) but not among women, and has weakened substantially between 1984 and 2017. Indeed
the point estimate for the cross-sectional association in 2016-17, among the least educated
approximate quarter of women, is an odds ratio of 1.01, down from 2.14 in 1984-85:
remarkably, among this group, the most recent results indicate that being divorced/separated
and being unemployed are uncorrelated states.

31

The finding that the association is consistently stronger amongst men likely reflects a
persistence of the norm that husbands should be breadwinners (Forret, Sullivan, and Mainiero
2010; Sayer et al. 2011). Kalmijn (2005) has documented negative labour market
consequences of divorce for men, and Covizzi (2008) finds a stronger impact of union
dissolution on risk of unemployment for men than for women. It is likely too that
unemployment is a particular obstacle to repartnering for men, both because of the
breadwinner norm and because the workplace is one of the main contexts within which men
meet potential partners in the remarriage market (de Graaf and Kalmijn 2003). Although men
may be especially vulnerable to unemployment following a divorce, a consistent finding has
been that women suffer a greater loss of income (Andreß et al. 2006; Leopold 2018). Another
explanation for the gender inequality may then be that women have stronger incentives to
either repartner or enter employment if they are in the state of being DSU (Jansen,
Mortelmans, and Snoeckx 2009). Women across all social strata usually take on childcare
responsibilities post-divorce. Sole responsibility for childcare may increase the urgency of
repartnering or employment, or lead to a transition out of the labour force.
Educational stratification in the association between the two states is not clearly
evident among women, except in the early part of the period when being divorced/separated
and unemployed were more closely linked among less educated women. For men there is a
clearer gradient, with the association strongest amongst those with higher educational
attainment. One possible explanation for this is that the group of high educated men who are
in one of the two states are relatively more negatively selected on unobserved characteristics,
such as poor health or certain personality traits, which might make being (and remaining)
both unemployed and divorced/separated more likely. Among less educated men,
unemployment may be less of a signal of such characteristics, being both a more prevalent
state and one which is more likely than among higher educated men to owe (more) to the

32

employer than the employee. Indeed Doiron & Mendolia find that the effect of male job loss
on divorce varies on this dimension, with redundancies, interpreted as more likely to be
exogenous, having ‘small, positive, often insignificant and short-lived effects’ on divorce
(2012: 367), while more person-specific types of job loss such as dismissals have larger
impacts. The authors’ interpretation is that this is because person-specific types of job loss
convey new information about the (poor) quality of a match. It is also possible that for more
educated men, unemployment results in a greater decline in earnings capacity and career
prospects, leading in turn to a greater risk of marital dissolution compared with the less
educated.
Using data from 2002-2017, we are able to test the hypothesis that higher educated
DSU men are more negatively selected on health grounds. This does not appear to be the
case. At least by our measure – having a health problem lasting more than 12 months – the
most educated are no more likely than the other groups to be unhealthy. We cannot rule out
negative selection on other characteristics.
An alternative explanation for the educational pattern is that higher educated men are
more tolerant of DSU, in a range of possible ways. First, they may have the resources and
preference to tolerate a longer job search period while they try to re-enter employment in a
relatively high status occupation. Their repartnering behaviour may be analogous. Less
educated men, with fewer resources, may seek immediate exit from DSU status on both
fronts, and be more likely to seek and find the type of employment that is immediately
available. In addition, less educated men, with fewer coping resources, may be more likely to
exit DSU not by entering employment but by leaving the labour force, if the stress of divorce
causes or exacerbates health problems. Some report that the process of separation and divorce
is more stressful for men than women (Amato 2000).

33

Most notably, there has been a clear decline in the association between the two states
across both sexes and all educational strata within them, except among the most educated
quarter of women, among whom the association has consistently been relatively weak. The
proportion unemployed among the divorced/separated has declined relative to the proportion
unemployed in general, while the proportion divorced/separated among the unemployed has
remained more stable relative to the general population (Figure 10). The association is
primarily being driven down by the divorced/separated increasingly resembling the rest of the
population in terms of their risk of being unemployed. This overall decline in the association
between the two states is therefore consistent with a rise in divorce and separation for reasons
unrelated to unemployment and its determinants. We speculate that this declining association
may therefore be due in large part to a general weakening of the social norm against divorce
and separation in the UK. Related research on attitudes towards marriage suggests a strong,
steady decline in traditional attitudes in this area (NatCen 2016). In 1989, 70% agreed that
‘people who want children ought to get married’ and under 20% disagreed. By 2014, these
figures were 37% and 35% respectively. Acceptance of childbearing outside of wedlock is
likely to closely correlate with acceptance of divorce, which regularly occurs between
couples with children.
A second factor loosening the association between the two states may be policy. As
discussed above, 1998 saw the introduction of New Labour reforms aimed at ‘making work
pay’, and which had the effect of keeping a substantial proportion of separated women in
employment. This coincides with beginning of the steep decline in the association among
women, shown in Figure 7. A third possible factor is that the increasing delay of entry into
marriage may be leading to divergent age distributions among those most at risk of being
divorced/separated and those most at risk of being unemployed, as suggested by our

34

supplemental analysis. A fuller explanation of this decline would be a useful target for future
research.
There are clear limitations to this study: inter alia, our analysis is restricted
exclusively to the UK. Many of the processes underlying the generation of DSU are likely to
be context dependent, reflecting macroeconomic conditions, labour market policy, barriers
and incentives to divorce, and social norms governing the interpretation of the signals
constituted by being divorced/separated in the labour market, and by being unemployed in the
search for a new partner. Our data do not contain good quality, consistent measures of the
outcomes DSU might be theorised to relate to. They also do not contain any longitudinal
information. We are not able to ask any questions of the particular sequences or mechanisms
by which individuals become, remain, and cease to be DSU, and nor do we know individuals’
DSU duration.
It might be argued that with the rise of cohabitation, and lower rates of marriage, the
phenomenon of marital dissolution in particular is of declining interest, and we should attend
also to the dissolution of cohabiting unions. We are constrained to explore marital dissolution
exclusively because the data do not record the state of being separated from a cohabiting
relationship. However, we also believe that marital dissolution is a loss event distinct from
the dissolution of a cohabiting relationship. The latter is more likely to be viewed more as a
failed experiment, an iteration in the matching process. Marriage, by contrast, is obviously
intended at the outset to be a long-term commitment, the culmination of the matching
process. Given that, increasingly, a couple might merely cohabit, marriage represents a
particularly strong commitment, and its dissolution a particularly pronounced negative event,
in most cases.
This paper provides an impetus for further work on the processes of DSU entry and
exit, and how they vary among groups. The existing literature is relatively uninformative

35

about gender and, in particular, educational stratification in the processes that generate the
cross-sectional association between being divorced/separated and unemployed, and thus their
co-prevalence. Among the unemployed seeking to save their marriage or find a new partner,
and among the divorced/separated seeking to hold on to their job or find a new one, how does
education matter? A substantial number of individuals remain in the ‘wellbeing trap’ of DSU;
future research might usefully explore how they can escape.

36

References
Amato, Paul R. 1996. ‘Explaining the Intergenerational Transmission of Divorce’. Journal of
Marriage and Family 58(3):628–40.
Amato, Paul R. 2000. ‘The Consequences of Divorce for Adults and Children’. Journal of
Marriage and Family 62(4):1269–87.
Andreß, Hans-Jürgen, Barbara Borgloh, Miriam Bröckel, Marco Giesselmann, and Dina
Hummelsheim. 2006. ‘The Economic Consequences of Partnership Dissolution—A
Comparative Analysis of Panel Studies from Belgium, Germany, Great Britain, Italy,
and Sweden’. European Sociological Review 22(5):533–60.
Bernasco, Wim, Paul M. de Graaf, and Wout C. Ultee. 1998. ‘Coupled Careers: Effects of
Spouse’s Resources on Occupational Attainment in the Netherlands’. European
Sociological Review 14(1):15–31.
Blekesaune, Morten. 2008. Unemployment and Partnership Dissolution. Working Paper.
2008–21. ISER Working Paper Series.
Blossfeld, H., A. de Rose, J. M. Hoem, and G. Rohwer. 1995. ‘Education, Modernization,
and the Risk of Marriage Disruption in Sweden, West Germany, and Italy’. Pp. 200–
222 in Gender and Family Change in Industrialized Societies, edited by K. O. Mason
and A. Jensen. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Boertien, Diederik and Dimitri Mortelmans. 2017. ‘Does the Relationship between
Personality and Divorce Change over Time? A Cross-Country Comparison of
Marriage Cohorts’. Acta Sociologica 0001699317709048.

37

Bracher, Michael, Gigi Santow, S. Philip Morgan, and James Trussell. 1993. ‘Marriage
Dissolution in Australia: Models and Explanations’. Population Studies 47(3):403–25.
Brand, Jennie E. 2015. ‘The Far-Reaching Impact of Job Loss and Unemployment’. Annual
Review of Sociology 41(1):359–75.
Brandolini, Andrea, Piero Cipollone, and Eliana Viviano. 2006. ‘Does the ILO Definition
Capture All Unemployment?’ Journal of the European Economic Association
4(1):153–79.
Caspi, Avshalom, Bradley R. Entner Wright, Terrie E. Moffitt, and Phil A. Silva. 1998.
‘Early Failure in the Labor Market: Childhood and Adolescent Predictors of
Unemployment in the Transition to Adulthood’. American Sociological Review
63(3):424–51.
Chan, T. W. and B. Halpin. 2008. The Instability of Divorce Risk Factors in the UK. Working
Paper. Oxford: Department of Sociology, University of Oxford.
Covizzi, Ilaria. 2008. ‘Does Union Dissolution Lead to Unemployment? A Longitudinal
Study of Health and Risk of Unemployment for Women and Men Undergoing
Separation’. European Sociological Review 24(3):347–61.
Dewilde, Caroline and Wilfred Uunk. 2008. ‘Remarriage as a Way to Overcome the
Financial Consequences of Divorce—A Test of the Economic Need Hypothesis for
European Women’. European Sociological Review 24(3):393–407.
DiPrete, Thomas A. and Gregory M. Eirich. 2006. ‘Cumulative Advantage as a Mechanism
for Inequality: A Review of Theoretical and Empirical Developments’. Annual
Review of Sociology 32(1):271–297.

38

Doiron, Denise and Silvia Mendolia. 2012. ‘The Impact of Job Loss on Family Dissolution’.
Journal of Population Economics 25(1):367–98.
Dolan, Paul, Tessa Peasgood, and Mathew White. 2008. ‘Do We Really Know What Makes
Us Happy? A Review of the Economic Literature on the Factors Associated with
Subjective Well-Being’. Journal of Economic Psychology 29(1):94–122.
Egan, Mark, Michael Daly, Liam Delaney, Christopher J. Boyce, and Alex M. Wood. 2017.
‘Adolescent Conscientiousness Predicts Lower Lifetime Unemployment’. The
Journal of Applied Psychology 102(4):700–709.
Ehlert, Martin. 2012. ‘Buffering Income Loss Due to Unemployment: Family and Welfare
State Influences on Income after Job Loss in the United States and Western
Germany’. Social Science Research 41(4):843–60.
Eurostat. 2018a. ‘Crude Divorce Rate, Selected Years, 1960-2016’. Eurostat - Statistics
Explained.

Retrieved

17

July

2018

(http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-

explained/index.php?title=File:Crude_divorce_rate,_selected_years,_19602016_(per_1_000_persons).png).
Eurostat. 2018b. ‘Unemployment Rate - Annual Data’. Eurostat - Tables, Graphs and Maps
Interface

(TGM).

Retrieved

15

July

2018

(http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/tgm/graph.do?tab=graph&plugin=1&pcode=tipsun20&la
nguage=en&toolbox=sort).
Forret, Monica L., Sherry E. Sullivan, and Lisa A. Mainiero. 2010. ‘Gender Role Differences
in Reactions to Unemployment: Exploring Psychological Mobility and Boundaryless
Careers’. Journal of Organizational Behavior 31(5):647–66.

39

Goldthorpe, John H. 2016. Sociology as a Population Science. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
de Graaf, Paul M. and Matthijs Kalmijn. 2003. ‘Alternative Routes in the Remarriage
Market: Competing-Risk Analyses of Union Formation after Divorce’. Social Forces
81(4):1459–98.
de Graaf, Paul M. and Matthijs Kalmijn. 2006. ‘Change and Stability in the Social
Determinants of Divorce: A Comparison of Marriage Cohorts in the Netherlands’.
European Sociological Review 22(5):561–572.
Hansen, Hans-Tore. 2005. ‘Unemployment and Marital Dissolution - A Panel Data Study of
Norway’. European Sociological Review 21(2):135–48.
Härkönen, Juho and Jaap Dronkers. 2006. ‘Stability and Change in the Educational Gradient
of Divorce. A Comparison of Seventeen Countries’. European Sociological Review
22(5):501–17.
Hoem, Jan M. 1997. ‘Educational Gradients in Divorce Risks in Sweden in Recent Decades’.
Population Studies 51(1):19–27.
Jackson, Pamela Braboy and Alexandra Berkowitz. 2005. ‘The Structure of the Life Course:
Gender and Racioethnic Variation in the Occurrence and Sequencing of Role
Transitions’. Advances in Life Course Research 9:55–90.
Jalovaara, Marika. 2003. ‘The Joint Effects of Marriage Partners’ Socioeconomic Positions
on the Risk of Divorce’. Demography 40(1):67–81.

40

Jansen, Mieke, Dimitri Mortelmans, and Laurent Snoeckx. 2009. ‘Repartnering and
(Re)Employment: Strategies to Cope With the Economic Consequences of
Partnership Dissolution’. Journal of Marriage and Family 71(5):1271–93.
Jenkins, Stephen P. 2008. Marital Splits and Income Changes over the Longer Term. ISER
Working Paper Series 2008-07. Institute for Social and Economic Research,
University of Essex.
Kalmijn, Matthijs. 2005. ‘The Effects of Divorce on Men’s Employment and Social Security
Histories’. European Journal of Population / Revue Européenne de Démographie
21(4):347–66.
Kalmijn, Matthijs, Paul M. de Graaf, and Anne-Rigt Poortman. 2004. ‘Interactions Between
Cultural and Economic Determinants of Divorce in The Netherlands’. Journal of
Marriage and Family 66(1):75–89.
Killewald, Alexandra. 2016. ‘Money, Work, and Marital Stability: Assessing Change in the
Gendered Determinants of Divorce’. American Sociological Review 81(4):696–719.
Kreidl, Martin and Barbora Hubatková. 2017. ‘Rising Rates of Cohabitation and the Odds of
Repartnering: Does the Gap Between Men and Women Disappear?’ Journal of
Divorce & Remarriage 58(7):487–506.
Lampard, Richard. 1994. ‘An Examination of the Relationship between Marital Dissolution
and Unemployment’. Pp. 264–98 in Social Change and the Experience of
Unemployment, edited by D. Gallie, C. Marsh, and C. Vogler. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

41

Leopold, Thomas. 2018. ‘Gender Differences in the Consequences of Divorce: A Study of
Multiple Outcomes’. Demography 55(3):769–97.
Long, Katy. 2009. ‘Unemployment Durations: Evidence from the British Household Panel
Survey’. Economic & Labour Market Review 3(10):48–54.
Lyngstad, Torkild. 2004. ‘The Impact of Parent’s and Spouses’ Education on Divorce Rates
in Norway’. Demographic Research 10(5):121–42.
Matthews, Karen A. and Brooks B. Gump. 2002. ‘Chronic Work Stress and Marital
Dissolution Increase Risk of Posttrial Mortality in Men from the Multiple Risk Factor
Intervention Trial’. Archives of Internal Medicine 162(3):309–15.
McDonough, Peggy, Diana Worts, Cara Booker, Anne McMunn, and Amanda Sacker. 2015.
‘Cumulative Disadvantage, Employment–Marriage, and Health Inequalities among
American and British Mothers’. Advances in Life Course Research 25:49–66.
McMunn, Anne et al. 2015. ‘De-Standardization and Gender Convergence in Work–Family
Life Courses in Great Britain: A Multi-Channel Sequence Analysis’. Advances in Life
Course Research 26:60–75.
Merton, Robert K. 1987. ‘Three Fragments From a Sociologist’s Notebooks: Establishing the
Phenomenon, Specified Ignorance, and Strategic Research Materials’. Annual Review
of Sociology 13(1):1–29.
NatCen. 2016. ‘Is Britain Getting a Divorce from Marriage?’ NatCen Social Research.
Retrieved

16

July

2018

(http://www.natcen.ac.uk/news-media/press-

releases/2016/may/attitudes-to-marriage/).

42

ONS. 2017. ‘Statistical Bulletin: Divorces in England and Wales: 2016’. Office for National
Statistics.

Retrieved

15

July

2018

(https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/d
ivorce/bulletins/divorcesinenglandandwales/2016).
Özcan, Berkay and Richard Breen. 2012. ‘Marital Instability and Female Labor Supply’.
Annual Review of Sociology 38(1):463–81.
Powdthavee, Nattavudh. 2012. ‘Jobless, Friendless and Broke: What Happens to Different
Areas of Life Before and After Unemployment?’ Economica 79(315):557–75.
Price, Richard H., Jin Nam Choi, and Amiram D. Vinokur. 2002. ‘Links in the Chain of
Adversity Following Job Loss: How Financial Strain and Loss of Personal Control
Lead to Depression, Impaired Functioning, and Poor Health’. Journal of
Occupational Health Psychology 7(4):302–12.
Sayer, Liana C., Paula England, Paul D. Allison, and Nicole Kangas. 2011. ‘She Left, He
Left: How Employment and Satisfaction Affect Women’s and Men’s Decisions to
Leave Marriages’. American Journal of Sociology 116(6):1982–2018.
Shafer, Kevin and Spencer L. James. 2013. ‘Gender and Socioeconomic Status Differences in
First and Second Marriage Formation’. Journal of Marriage and Family 75(3):544–
64.
Solomon, Brittany C. and Joshua J. Jackson. 2014. ‘Why Do Personality Traits Predict
Divorce? Multiple Pathways through Satisfaction’. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 106(6):978–96.

43

Thoits, Peggy A. 2010. ‘Stress and Health: Major Findings and Policy Implications’. Journal
of Health and Social Behavior 51(1_suppl):S41–53.
Uysal, Selver Derya and Winfried Pohlmeier. 2011. ‘Unemployment Duration and
Personality’. Journal of Economic Psychology 32(6):980–92.
Wagner, Michael and Bernd Weiß. 2006. ‘On the Variation of Divorce Risks in Europe:
Findings from a Meta-Analysis of European Longitudinal Studies’. European
Sociological Review 22(5):483–500.
Worts, Diana, Amanda Sacker, Anne McMunn, and Peggy McDonough. 2013.
‘Individualization, Opportunity and Jeopardy in American Women’s Work and
Family Lives: A Multi-State Sequence Analysis’. Advances in Life Course Research
18(4):296–318.
Wu, Zheng and Christoph M. Schimmele. 2005. ‘Repartnering after First Union Disruption’.
Journal of Marriage and Family 67(1):27–36.

44

