Design features of health information visualization for the purpose
of efficacy perception about weight control among young adults: A
mixed methods study
Xing Huang
Keywords. Information visualization, self-generated health information, self-efficacy

Introduction
We are information receivers and, at the same time, data producers. There is a profound change
of how we acquire data and how we make use of them. On one hand, driven by the exponential
growth of medical data (i.e., self-generated health information1, medical records, lab reports,
etc.), we are able to access health-related data much easier these days than we used to. However,
do these high-yield data really proffer legible information? Or are people just overwhelmed with
poorly presented information to make sense of and take action to change their health behavior
accordingly? As the quantity, accessibility, and complexity of medical data, improving
understanding and motivation of health behavior change is not only a medical problem but also
an information problem.
On the other hand, health promotion has undergone changes which shifted from scaring,
rewarding, to motivating people to change and manage their health habits (Bandura, 1998,
p.623). There is a need of usable and useful medical information visualization that can promote

1

Self-generated health information refers to health-related data which is created, recorded, gathered or inferred by
individuals themselves, which includes data from an observation, a device tracking, or a test result. It is defined
based on the definition of patient-generated health-information (PCHI). (Deering, Mary Jo. (2013). Issue Brief:
Patient-Generated Health Data and Health IT. The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology. Retrieved from https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/pghd_brief_final122013.pdf)

1

health behavior change. In addition to just educating people, Thomas Goetz in a TED Talk
mentioned that there is a need of giving them a sense of efficacy to health behavior change. The
term “self-efficacy” originally from Albert Bandura’s words refers to “beliefs in one’s
capabilities to organize and execute the courses of action required to manage prospective
situation” (A. Bandura, 1982). In the medical context of this study, it relates to giving people
information about their health and enable them to aware of a path towards better health so that
they have the belief that they can manage health habits which associated with possible health
outcomes.
This study focuses on weight control since a considerable amount of the reported deaths in the
United States are among lifestyle diseases, which can be manageable by changing lifestyle and
controlling weight (Amber Howard, 2011, p1). Although, there are many fitness management
programs have been carried out, the trends of technology, visual communication, and health care
call into a question: What are the design features of health information visualization that impact
on young adults’2 self-efficacy perception about weight control? In this study, the term of “health
information visualization” is not data visualization in the field of statistic which deals with data
analyses and visual representation tools. Instead, information visualization is a functional and
aesthetic way of revealing knowledge and telling a story behind data in a way that can reinforce
human cognition and be useful in our lives.
Methods
This study intends to find out the design features of health information visualization that can
positively influence young adults’ perception of self-efficacy about weight control. An
exploratory mixed methods design has been used by firstly collecting qualitative data in order to
2

Young adults refer to people in the age range of 20-39. (Retrieved from
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Young_adult_(psychology))

2

develop an information visualization intervention, which then followed with a quantitative phase
to assess the design features. The overall procedure is shown in figure 1.
Figure 1. Exploratory sequential mixed methods

In the first phase, qualitative data was collected from open-ended interviews and surveys. Eleven
providers from two health centers involved in this study as convenient samples. The purpose was
to explore the factors on gaining weight and the strategies of weight control, which informed the
content of the health information. Data was also collected from graduate students (n=24)
(participants age range from 20 to36, who can represent young adults) for the same intention.
The qualitative results from phase one informed design features of health information
visualization which was then assessed in the quantitative phase by using A/B test survey.
Twenty-one students involved in the survey and each of them has been shown 3 groups of
visualized calories information. In the first group, group 1-a showed the amount of intake
calories and calorie consumption by time; group 1-b added a comparison between the amount of
intake and consumed calories among the original diagram. In the second group, group 2-a
showed the the same diagram as in the group1-a; while in the group 2-b, there was a prediction
of weight by a short-term (3 days) and a long-term (a month). In the last group, group 3-a
showed the same diagram as in the group 1-a; group 3-b showed a path toward an ideal weight
3

besides the original visualization. Participants are required to rate their certainty from 0 to 100 by
using the general self-efficacy scale (GSE). The means of the differences between the A/B
groups were calculated which estimated the function of the three design features on self-efficacy
perception.
Results
Three design features were generated from the analysis of qualitative data in the phase 1: 1.
Visualizing the comparison of intake and consumed calories; 2. Showing both the short-term and
long-term predictions of weight; 3. Showing an ideal path of weight control. In the phase 2, the
means of A/B test results among the three groups are: 𝜇# = 5.26, 𝜇% = 9.48, 𝜇& = 7.01. The
results indicate all of the three design features have a positive influence on self-efficacy
perception among young adults about weight control.
Discussion
The differences between the A/B results may be caused by other reasons besides changes of
perceived self-efficacy. They could be influenced by the amount of represented information,
legibility, participants’ cognitive load, etc. For these reasons, future work may apply EEG for a
double check. Besides, health providers from two countries may involve cultural difference
which could be a limitation of this study.
Conclusion
All of the three design features which generated from this study consist with the theory in
Bandura’s articles which pointed out that visualizing one’s success, finding a role-model, and
reviewing past successes can help build high self-efficacy. If we could take the advantage of
theses design features, and visualized health information in an appropriate way, young adults
may take a better responsibility of taking care of his/her own health.

4

Acknowledgements
Much appreciation to all the participants.
Reference list
1. Amber Kristine Howard. 2011. Feedforward: A Mobile Design Strategy that Supports
Emotive Learning for Preventive Health Practices and Enduring Lifestyle Change. North
Carolina State University.
2. Albert Bandura. 2006. “Guide for Constructing Self-Efficacy Scales,” in Self-Efficacy
Beliefs of Adolescents, 307-337. Information Age Publishing, 2006.
3. Albert Bandura. 1977. Self-efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change.
Psychological Review, 84(2), 191-215. doi:10.1037/0033-295X.84.2.191.
4. Albert Bandura & D. H. Schunk. 1981. Cultivating competence, self-efficacy, and
intrinsic interest through proximal self-motivation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 41(3), 586-598. doi:10.1037/0022-3514.41.3.586.
5. Albert Bandura. 1982. Self-Efficacy Mechanism in Human Agency. American
Psychological Association. Vol. 37, No.2, 122-147.
6. Albert Bandura. 1989. Regulation of cognitive processes through perceived self-efficacy.
Developmental Psychology, 25(5), 729-735. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.25.5.729.
7. Albert Bandura. 1998. Health promotion from the perspective of social cognitive theory.
Psychology and Health, 13, 623-649.
8. Albert Bandura. 2001. Social Cognitive Theory of Mass Communication. Media
Psychology. 3(3), 265-299.

5

