Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.15

Pp. 181-195

Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific Purposes
College Students' in Developing Vocabulary

Edhah Numan Khazaal
Department of International Economic Relations
College of Political Sciences
University of Al-Nahrain, Baghdad, Iraq

Abstract
The study aims to find out the impact of intensive reading strategy on English for specific purposes
college students' in developing vocabulary. To achieve the aim of the study, 40 ESP College
students were randomly chosen from the college of political sciences at A-Nahrain University in
Iraq, the participants were in the second grade during the academic year 2017-2018. Two groups
were enrolled in this experiment, 20 ESP students in the experimental group and the same number
in the control group. To determine if the intensive reading strategy had an impact on ESP student's
in developing vocabulary, a pre-posttest was administered for both groups. The control group was
treated by the traditional way of teaching vocabulary through translating the words in Arabic
language and memorizing them with the help of the teacher, while the experimental group was
treated by using intensive reading strategy for about ten weeks. The chosen texts were taken from
(New Head way Pre-intermediate student's book). Fill in the blank exercises had been chosen in
the pre-posttest which consist of 50 items for each, the test was administered by the researcher.
Based on the findings of this research, it was found that the new strategy has a positive impact on
ESP College students' in mastering vocabulary that was proven from the improvement of students’
mean score from pretest to posttest. Based on the results gained; it is recommended that intensive
reading strategy can play a great role in mastering vocabulary.
Keywords: English for specific purposes, intensive reading, vocabulary
Cite as: Khazaal, E. N. (2019). Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific
Purposes College Students' in Developing Vocabulary. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2) 181195. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.15

181

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

1. Introduction
English is considered as an international language, which is having its impact on every field
of our daily life. The English language is mainly composed of grammar and vocabulary, though
grammar is a basic element in English language, yet vocabulary is more important, because
without mastering a large of vocabulary , students can't express themselves and communicate
easily with others whether inside or outside the class room. Wilkins (1972, p 97) states that: 'There
is not much value in being able to produce grammatical sentences if one has not got the vocabulary
that is needed to convey what one wishes to say … While without grammar very little can be
conveyed, without vocabulary nothing can be conveyed’’.
Vocabulary is the repository and the main engine of the communication process. A reader
cannot understand a text without knowing what most of the words mean. "The more actively and
deeply students process words, the better they learn them". (Blachowicz & Fisher, 2000 ; Stahl &
Fairbanks, 1986, pp. 503-524). To teach vocabulary effectively teachers must learn the necessary
skills to apply the suitable methods and strategies, students on the other hand need a wide range
of independent word-learning strategies. Intensive reading is one of these strategies that are useful
in learning and teaching vocabulary, it helps learners to grasp the meaning of the words.
2. Problem of the Study
Many English language learners found that learning new vocabulary and words is one of
the most challenging parts in mastering English. Learners have many difficulties in acquiring
words, even for quite proficient learners, the extent of their knowledge of vocabulary is only a
fraction of what it is for native speakers of English, and the failure to understand even a few words
of a text can have negative effects on comprehension because every words has its form, meaning,
and usage.
(Beglar, 2009) states that in learning many vocabularies is not an easy matter for learners
that occurs progressively over many years for foreign language learners and even for native
speakers. Arab countries students in general and Iraqi students in particular face a lot of problems
in acquiring English vocabulary. This is due to the educational system and the methods of teaching.
(Saeed & Jafar, 2016). Most of our English teachers in Iraqis schools and colleges usually follow
the traditional ways in teaching vocabulary, that the teacher often presents a word in English and
their meaning in Arabic language and ask the learners to memorized these words. (Alqahtani,
2015; Alakeeli, 2013).
Some students acquire new vocabulary through new words in their textbooks and memorize
these words in their mind and then they can use it correctly in their speech or a written text, but
mastering a word is not only to know its meaning, but to know other seven aspects .All these
properties are called word knowledge. (Schmitt , 2000). Insufficient of vocabulary knowledge is a
serious problem for ESL and EFL learners. To learn new words is not an easy job, so teachers have
a hard task to find effective strategies. (Heggins, 2015)
There are many methods of teaching vocabulary but most of these methods don't help the
students in acquiring the vocabulary and how to realize the meaning of words, their correct
pronunciation and usage. According to (Diamond, & Gutlohn, 2006) vocabulary knowledge is not
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

182

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

something that can ever be fully mastered; it is something that expands and deepens throughout a
life time.
3. Significance of the Study
Vocabulary is considered as one of the language elements which need to be mastered well.
If students master vocabulary; they can easily improve language skills such as listening, speaking,
reading and writing (Cahyono &Widiati, 2008,p.1). Vocabulary is a significant predictor of overall
reading comprehension and student performance. (Stahl & Fairbanks, 1986;, & Baumann,
Kame'enui Ash, 2003).
Teaching vocabulary is a vital part of any English language course. Many teachers are
concerned about how to teach vocabulary. New words have to be introduced in such a way as to
capture the students’ attention and place the words in their memories. In order to develop an ability
to learn new vocabulary, for both general English and technical vocabulary in learning ESP, the
students should become aware of the importance of language learning strategies and be trained to
use them appropriately.
The teachers put a lot of effort toward helping them to learn vocabulary related to their field
of study. Vocabulary instruction should aim to engage students in actively thinking about word
meanings, the relationships among words, and how we can use words in different situations. This
type of rich, deep instruction is most likely to influence comprehension (Graves, 2006; McKeown
& Beck, 2004).
In recent years, the world witnessed many changes in the methods and techniques that are
used in teaching different subjects, as there is a great interest in the use of intensive reading strategy
in learning and teaching a foreign language. There are various studies emphasizing the fact that
intensive reading was the best way to solve student's problem in learning vocabulary, because its
focus is on the language rather than the text. As for (Abid, 2017) Intensive reading is a method in
which learners read texts with a high degree of comprehension. By contrast, extensive reading is
a method in which learners focus on an amount of reading rather than comprehension.
4. Aim of the study
The study aims to find out the impact of intensive reading strategy on ESP College students’ in
developing vocabulary.
5. The Hypothesizes
The hypothesis of this research is as follows:
1. There is a significant difference in students' achievement in acquiring vocabulary through
intensive reading strategy.
2. There is no significant difference in students' achievement in acquiring vocabulary through
intensive reading strategy.
6. Limits of the study
The present study is limited to the second year ESP college students in the college of political
sciences at Al-Nahrain University, Iraq during the academic year 2017- 2018.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

183

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

2. Literature Review
2.1. Vocabulary in English
Vocabulary is a word that is used in a language. In other words, vocabulary is a set of words
within the language. It is an effective communication tool that allows a person to interact with
others. The vocabulary was used at the first time in the 1530s which clarify that it is a list of words
with explanations; the noun vocabulary came to refer to the “range of language of a person or
group. It is "a range of words in the language of a person or group" (On line Etymology Dictionary,
2006).
For many scholars the word vocabulary is related to the number of words that a
person knows. It is a collection of words known by an individual or by a large group of
people. (Merriam Webster Dictionary, 2018). It is also defined as the knowledge of words and
their meanings in both oral and written language. (Osborn & Hieber, 2004).
2.1.1. The Importance of Vocabulary
One of the main elements that shows the student' success in schools and colleges is
vocabulary. Vocabulary is used in many fields of our daily life.(Marzano & Pickering,
2005).Generally vocabulary is considered as the main key for the students to use the English
language in speaking and writing perfectly and effectively. It is “a core component of the language
proficiency and provides much of the basis for how well learners speak, listen and write” (Richards
& Renandya, 2002, p. 255).
Vocabulary expand the learner's knowledge .The more the learner knows words, the more
he can communicate with others when he needs to speak or write certain thinks. (Graves, 2000).A
student with rich vocabulary can improve his ability to contact and communicate with others
through the four English skills. (Allen, 1999) .Knowing many and different vocabularies can be
useful for students in school, at work, and socially. It will enable him to understand and
communicate others' ideas better and develop reading ability. (O'Connor, 2018)
2.1.2. Types of Vocabulary
In the English language, there are four types of vocabulary as stated by (.Montgomery, 2007).
They are as follow:
1- Listening Vocabulary: It is all the words, which we can hear and understand when we are
listening to oral speech or communication.
2-Speaking Vocabulary: It is all the words that are used while some one is speaking or
communicating. It refers to all the words that we speak.
3-Reading Vocabulary: It is all the words, which we determine while; we read books, newspapers
or journals. It refers to the words we recognize when we read any text.
4-Writing Vocabulary: It is all the words that are used in various forms of writing such as writing
essays, composition-mails or letter writing. It refers to those words which we regain while
writing to express ourselves.
2.1.3. Parts of Vocabulary
Vocabulary is broadly divided into two types as follows:
1- Receptive knowledge also known as receives. It is the control of the words that you understand
when you hear them or read them.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

184

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

2- Productive knowledge is also known as achieves. It is the control of the words that you use to
express yourself, in speech or writing. (Laufer , 1998)
2.2. What is Intensive Reading?
Intensive reading refers to the way of reading through every word of a text from beginning
to end very thoroughly and deeply. It is the way of reading short texts thoroughly and with clear
goals. (Koay, 2015). It is an activity that requires great mental effort and focuses. Because of this,
the learner who engages in intensive reading must be careful to follow specific guidelines, or else
risk boredom and burnout. (Lampariello, 2017)
Intensive reading is a classroom activity carried out under the supervision of a teacher who
is primarily concerned with texts, which contain new words and idioms .This type of reading is
considered as the backbone of language education programs. It involves focusing on question-andanswer teaching methods and uses the explanation of presentations and representation to
communicate meanings of words, it also describes the vocabulary and rules to be taught and the
order in which it should be submitted .it aims to develop the students' ability on how to understand
the detailed information.
2.2.1. Goals of Intensive Reading
Intensive reading has many goals as follows:
1. It concentrates on having a new language such as vocabulary and grammar.
2. It helps students to create a great number of new vocabularies and language composition that
helps the student to use the useful expression.
3. It helps the student to learn new skills such as making inferences and identifying main ideas
4. It helps the student to have a good transition from one word to another and from sentence to
sentence and from paragraph to paragraph.
5. It helps the student to understand the meaning of the lesson and keep its thoughts alive in mind.
6. Students will develop other reading skills, such as skimming, scanning, and identifying the main
ideas of texts and paragraphs. (Macalister, 2011)
2.2.2. The Characteristics of Intensive Reading
The intensive reading strategy is characterized by the followings:
1. It is characterized by slow and deliberate Student read the text line by line, and using his
dictionary.
2. Intensive reading usually classroom based.
3. It helps to develop reading skills.
4. The aim is to build more knowledge in language and not to depend on practicing the skill of
reading.
5. It is used when reading the article requires concentration and attention. (Palmer, 1921)
2.2.3. The Materials of Intensive Reading
1-Learners read the text in detail with specific learning aims and tasks.
2-The used text should be short.
3-The chosen texts are done by the teacher. (MacLeod, 2013)
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

185

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

2.2.4. The advantages and disadvantages of Intensive reading
a) Advantages
1- Intensive reading is usually done with difficult texts with many unknown words that require the
learner to use a dictionary.
2- Intensive reading enhances cooperation among students.
3- Intensive reading is the fastest way to acquire and learn vocabulary.
4- Intensive reading is the most typically taught method of teaching reading and reading
comprehension,
5- It improves the power of expression.
6- It helps the student in making inferences.
7- It helps the student by understanding sentence structure. (Scrivener, 1994)
b) Disadvantages
1-Learners have on enough time to practice of reading because of the small amount of text.
2-Learners often are unable to read the text at their level in the class, because everyone in the class
is reading the same material.
3-The texts mostly are chosen by the teacher; therefore the text may not be interest to the reader.
(Scrivener, 1994)
3. Methodology
3.1. The Design of the Study
The Pre-Posttest two groups design was used in this study that compares the change that occurs
within two groups and to measure the degree of change occurring as a result of treatments.
3.2 Population of the study
The population of the current research was the second grade ESP college students in the
college of political sciences at Al-Nahrain University in Iraq, which consist of 95 students.
3.3 Sample of the study
The sample used for this study was 40- second grade ESP college students in the second
semester during the academic year 2017-2018. The ages range between nineteen and twenty.
3.4. Validity of the test
Validity is defined as 'the extent to which a concept is accurately measured in a quantitative
study". (Heale & Twycross, 2015, p.66) It is the degree to which the scale measures what it is
expected to measure. To ensure the validity of the research instrument, it was given to a jury
professor in the field of EFL to evaluate the items of the test. Jury's comments were taken into
consideration and the researcher modified all the required comments accordingly.
3.4. The Material
The researcher used both materials in the research .They are:
(a) Using an intensive reading as a strategy in learning vocabulary
(b) Text book of New Head way Pre-Intermediate student's book.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

186

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

3.5. The Study Instruments
In order to fulfill the aims of the study, the researcher used the following instruments:
1- Pre-posttest was designed for both groups to develop ESP college students' vocabulary through
using intensive reading strategy.
2- The instructional program based on Intensive reading strategy.
3- Questionnaire was categorized into ten questions to know the student’s idea about using
intensive reading strategy to develop their vocabulary. (See Appendix A)
3.6. The Administration of the Vocabulary Test
The test was prepared by the researcher by using intensive strategy to develop ESP college
students' ability in mastering vocabulary. The program lasted ten weeks during which the
participants were supposed to read (3-6) texts in each new lesson .These texts were chosen from
the New Head way Pre-Intermediate Student's Book. The class met once a week for two hours in
each session for 50 minutes per week. The study was carried out during the students’ second
semester of the college.
3.7. The Pre-test
The pre-test was administered at the beginning of the experiment as a regulatory means to
control prior differences among participants followed by the treatment and the post-test towards
the end of the experiment to measure the development of ESP students in using vocabulary through
the new strategy. The participants of both experimental and control groups received a pretest of
vocabulary. It administered before the treatment.
Fill in the blanks exercises was chosen in the test which consists of 50 items. The sample of
the exercise was made by the researcher himself. The purpose of such a test was homogenization
of participants and also the need for pretest and posttest mean comparison. Students answered each
questions by choosing the correct choice of their answers on the answer sheet which was provided
to them. The students would get one mark for the correct answer and zero (0) for the wrong answer
or no answer. Time location of the test was 50 minutes. The pre-test was conducted on, February
19th 2018. (See Appendix B)
3.8. The Pilot Study
The pilot study was carried out to facilitate the achievement of the study aim by testing and
modifying the research instruments. The test was piloted by a group of 20 students who did not
participate in the main study. Based on the results of the pilot study, some items were excluded
and some items were modified. The final version of the test which was used for the main study
had 1o questions items. A pilot study was conducted to check the validity of the instruments as
well as to decide on the time needed for participants to finish each test.
3. 9. The Instruction
The researcher (the teacher) himself tried to introduced the instructional planning for all
sessions, by preparing all the necessary procedures for the test, starting from choosing the material,
arrange the classroom situation and prepared the lesson plan for the experimental group while the
control group continued by learning vocabulary through the traditional method that depends on
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

187

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

giving the meaning of the new word and its meaning in the Arabic language by the teacher himself
and the students had nothing to do only to memorize these words.
The researcher in his experiment prepared in each new lesson (3-6) texts which were taken
from New Headway pre-Intermediate student's book. He explained to his students the meaning of
the new strategy and the main roles of teacher and students in using this strategy.
Students in an intensive reading treatment read passages in their textbooks in details and line
by line, using their dictionaries under the guidance of the teacher, and the teachers attend to issues
of grammar, vocabulary, text organization and meaning that arise from the readings. The teacher
should encourage and motivated the students to read the text in general without knowing every
word in the passage, they should think about the meaning of what was written, and engage with
the text and then answer questions about the text, order sentences, or find specific words.
3. 10. The Post Test
This test was used to find the differences before and after they get treatment and if there is any
development for students in using vocabulary after treatment was given,
The test was constructed in the same way as done in the pre-test by forming fill in the blanks test
which consisted of 50 items. The sample of the exercise was made by the researcher himself.
Students answered each question by choosing the correct answer, they got I mark for the correct
answer and zero for wrong and no answer. Time location of the test was 50 minutes. The post-test
was conducted on, May 7th 2018. (See Appendix C)
3.12. The Reliability
Reliability refers to the consistency of a research study or measuring test. It is a way of
assessing the quality of the measurement procedure used to collect certain data.
It's the extent to which assessments are consistent. Cronbach’s alpha was used to administer the
reliability of the test for the study. By data analysis, the results showed that the measured reliability
by 'Cronbach Alpha' formula was 0.81.
4. Results and Discussions
4.1. Data analysis
In accordance with the requirement of the study, two-groups pre-test, posttest
experimental research design was used .The pre-test was administered at the beginning of the
experiment as a regulatory means to control prior differences among participants followed by the
treatment and the post-test towards the end of the experiment to measure the development of ESP
college students in acquiring vocabulary through intensive reading strategy.
Table 1
Results of Pre -Test of Control and Experimental Groups
Groups Test N
Mean Std. D

T-V

Control

Pre

20

6.85

1.80 0.485

Experimental

Pre

20

6.14

2.42

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

df
94

Sig.
0.001

188

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

The results of the above table show that there are no statistical differences between the two
groups, as the mean score of the control group was 6.85, while in the experimental group was
which refers that there are not any differences between both groups.‫و‬6.14
Table 2
T-Test of Pre Control-and Experimental groups in Post-Tests
Groups N
Mean Std. D
T-V
Control
20
13.8
3.7
3.86
Experimental 20

16.68

df
87

Sig.
0.001

3.1

The result of the two groups in posttest shows that the mean of the posttest scores in the
experimental group was 16.68, whereas the mean score in pre-test was 13. 81,
The result indicates that the post-test score is higher than the mean of the pre-test.
The above result confirms that the new strategy has been the effective impact on developing
learners' vocabulary.
Finally, the post-test performance of both the control and experimental group were compared
and the obtained results revealed that there is a significant difference between the two groups in
their post-test scores at .01 level of significance.
Table 3
Paired Sample T-Test of Pre-and Post-Tests of Experimental Group
Experimental
N
Mean Std. D
T-V
Group
Pre-test
20
6.136
1.8
17.8

df

Sig.
0.001

68
Post-Test

20

16.68

3.1

As shown, the results of the vocabulary pre-posttest scores of the experimental group, which
indicated that the mean of the posttest was 16.68 , while the pre-test was 6.136 ,which refers that
the post-test score was slightly greater than the mean of the pre-test.
4.2 Discussion
Due to the results of the statistical analysis of this study, it was found that there was a
significant development in ESP learners' scores in using vocabulary through intensive reading
strategy. It was found that the students’ mean scores in the pre-test of the experimental group was
17.72, while the students’ mean scores in the post-test was 22.63, which indicates that the mean
scores of the post-test were higher than the mean scores of the pre-test, which revealed that there
is an improvement in the students' scores before and after the treatment.
Therefore, these results indicated that intensive reading could enhance a positive impact on
students' attitudes in using vocabulary.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

189

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

This study is compatible with (Rashidi & Piran, 2011) in their study how can the extensive
and intensive reading strategy can effect on Iranian EFL learners' vocabulary size and depth
which demonstrated that reading both intensively and extensively can lead to vocabulary
development in a way that the number of vocabulary which each learner knows in terms of each
word's synonym, antonym and collocation will be improved significantly.
Moreover, (Sari & Huzairin, 2012) in their study how to improve students' vocabulary
through intensive reading, the final analysis of the results showed that there was a significant
improvement in students’ vocabulary achievement after they were taught by using intensive
reading, which emphasize that intensive reading can improve students’ vocabulary achievement.In
addition (Morales, 2017) in his study proves that intensive reading has a positive effect on scaffold
reading.

Figure 1 Shows Vocabulary Improvement
5. Conclusions and Suggestions
5. 1. Conclusions
The purpose of this study was to find out the impact of intensive reading on ESP students in
developing their vocabularies. To achieve the goal of the study a pre-test was given before the
treatment and a post-test was given after the treatment. The results and analysis of the data that
gained from the test proved that intensive reading strategy could develop ESP college students'
ability in acquiring vocabulary and use words correctly.
5.2. Recommendations
Based on the findings and the conclusions drawn from the study, many recommendations
could be followed as:1-More studies could be recommended to examine the effect of intensive reading on other English
activities such as, writing and speaking skills.
2- Up dating curriculums in universities and colleges with new trends in teaching and learning
English vocabularies.
3- Teachers should stimulate students' motivation by using different technologies.
5-Students should be given enough chance to develop their vocabulary by using effective and
different strategies.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

190

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

5.3. Suggestions
According to the result of the study, the researcher puts some suggestions .as:1-New innovative methods of English teaching should be introduced in the curriculum.
2-It is necessary for an educational process in teaching EFL, ESL or ESP to apply another
vocabulary training techniques such as extensive reading, skimming and scanning strategy.
3-In order to improve the process of teaching and learning teachers should be more creative in
using intensive reading strategy.
About the Author:
Dr. Edhah Numan Khazaal is an Assistant Professor of Applied Linguistics at the Department
of International Economic Relations, College of Political Sciences, University of Al-Nahrain
.Baghdad – Iraqi. I received my PhD in Applied Linguistics from College of Education for Human
Sciences / Baghdad University. I have been teaching English as a foreign language and English
for Specific Purposes (ESP) since 2000. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3707-5164
References
Abid, R.A.S. (2017). A Study of Vocabulary Learning Strategies and Vocabulary Size of Iraqi
EFL Learners. Journal of Basra researches for Human Sciences: Basra University. ISSN:
18172695 .Volume: 42 Issue: 4 (356-371)
Al-Akeeli, F.S.S.F. (2013). Examining Lexical and Grammatical Difficulties Encountered by
Iraqi Students in Learning English as a Foreign Language. A Thesis Submitted to the
Council of St Clements University Mat. No. AB0309
Al-Qahtani, M. (2015). The importance of vocabulary in language learning and how to be taught.
International Journal of Teaching and Education, III (3), 21 - 34 .
DOI: 10.20472/TE.2015.3.3.002
Allen, J. (1999).Words, Words, Words: Teaching Vocabulary in Grades 4-12.York, Maine: Sten
house Publications.
Baumann, J. F., & Kame’enui, E. J., & Ash, G. E. (2003). Research on vocabulary instruction:
Voltaire Redux. In J. Flood, D. Lapp, & J. R. Squire, J. M. Jenson (Eds.), Handbook of
Research on Teaching the English Language Arts (2nd ed., pp. 752-785). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Beglar, D. (2009). A Rasch-based validation of the vocabulary size test. Language Testing,
26(4), 1- 22. [Electronic version]. Language Testing 27; 101 16, 2009. DOI:
10.1177/0265532209340194 Birch (2002:130 )
Blachowicz, C. L. Z., & Fisher, P. (2000).Vocabulary Instruction. In M. L. Kamil, P. B.
Mosenthal, P. D.Pearson, & R. Barr (Eds.), Handbook of Reading Research, Volume III
(503–523). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Cahyono,B.Y., &Widiati, U.(2008 ). The Teaching of EFL Vocabulary in the Indonesian Context:
The State of the Art. TEFLIN Journal, 19 1), 1-17
Diamond,L.& Gutlohn ,I.(2006) Teaching Vocabulary. Retrieved from
(http://www.readingrockets.org/article/9943,diakses19Juni2014
Fraenkel, J. R. &amp; Wallen, N. E.(2003).&quot; How to design and evaluate research in
education &quot;. Fifth ed. New York: McGraw –Hill
Heale, R. & Twycross ,A. (2015) .Validity and Reliability in Quantitative Studies. Published
Online. http://ebn.bmj.com/Downloaded from http://ebn.bmj.com
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

191

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

Heggins,M..(2015). Vocabulary Acquisition in English Language Learns. Running Head: ELL
Vocabulary Northwest Missouri State University Missouri. 61-683 Research Paper.
Koay,J.(2015). What is Intensive Reading? Independent Researcher and A Research &
Development Consultant at EduMaxi. Victoria University of Wellington, School of
Linguistics and Applied Language,
Laufer, B. & Par ibakht, T. S. (1998). The Relationship between passive and active vocabularies:
Effects of language learning context. A journal of research in Language studies. Language
Learning 48:3, September, pp. 365-391
Lampariello L (2017).Extensive vs. Intensive Reading .On line article. Retrieved from:
https://www.lucalampariello.com/intensive-vs-extensive-reading
Macalister, J. (2011). Today’s teaching, tomorrow’s text: Exploring the teaching of reading. ELT
Journal, 65(2), 161-169. DOI: 10.1093/elt/ccq023
MacLeod, Maija. (2013). Types of Reading Article (Online). (http://fis.ucalgary.ca/ Brian/
611/reading type. html# what itis intensive, accessed on 6th February 2014)
Marzano, R. J., & Pickering, D. J. (2005). Building academic vocabulary: Teacher's manual.
Alexandria, Va.: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development.
McKeown, M. G. & Beck, I. L. (2004). In J. F. Baumann & E. J. Kame’enui (Eds.) Vocabulary
Instruction: Research to practice (pp. 13-27). New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
Merriam Webster Dictionary: (2018) .Definition of Vocabulary. Retrieved from
https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/vocabulary.
Montgomery, J. K. (2017). The Bridge of Vocabulary: Evidence Based Activities for Academic
Success (NCS Pearson Inc.)
Morales , H.S.(2017). Effects of Scaffolded Intensive Reading on Students’ Reading
Comprehension Performance. Revista Electrónica “Actualidades Investigativas, en
Educación” Volumen 17, Número 1 -Enero- Abril. 1-29
http://dx.doi.org/10.15517/aie.v17i1.27204
Osborn, L. F. &amp; Hiebert , J.E H..(2004) Research-Based Practices in Early Reading Series: A
Focus on Vocabulary. Pacific Resources for Education and Learning PREL Honolulu,
Hawaii. Retrieved January from http://www.prel.org/products/re_/ES0419.htm
O'Connor, J. (2018). Effective Ways to Build Your Vocabulary. Research Foundation. Retrieved
from https://www.jocrf.org/resources/effective-ways-build-your-vocabulary
Online Etymology Dictionary. (2006). Word Origin and History for Vocabulary.
https://www.dictionary.com/browse/vocabulary
Palmer, H.E. (1921). Principles of Language Study. New York: World Book Company.
Rashidi,N. & Piran.,M.(2011). The Effect of Extensive and Intensive Reading on Iranian EFL
Learners’Vocabulary Size and Depth. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, Vol. 2,
No. 2, pp. 471-482, doi:10.4304/jltr.2.2.471-482
Richards, J. C., & Renandya, W. A. (2002). Methodology in language teaching: An anthology of
current practice. New York: Cambridge University Press.
R. Mackay & A. J. Mountford.( 1978 ) English for Specific Purposes : a case study approach.
London: Longman, bookmark: https://trove.nla.gov.au/version/39701788
Saeed,N.R & Jafar ,F.A.A..(2016). Problems of Teaching English in Iraqi Public Schools in Mosul
for the Intermediate Stage from the Teachers’ Point of View. Online Published in
International Journal of Humanities and Social Science journal, 6, (1)
Schmitt, N. (2000). Vocabulary in Language Teaching. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

192

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

Scrivener, J. (1994). Learning Teaching. Oxford: Heinemann Publishers (Oxford) Ltd
Stahl, S. A., & Fairbanks, M. M. (1986). The Effects of Vocabulary Instruction: A model-based
meta-analysis. Review of Educational Research, 56 (1), 72–110.First Published March 1,
1986 Research Article https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543056001072
Steve Kaufmann .(2017). How to Learn Vocabulary Fast When Learning A Language. The
Linguistic Institute, Inc. platform www.LingQ.com
Wilkins, D. (1972). Linguistics in Language Teaching. London.
Appendices
Appendix A
Questionnaire for Students
Dear Students,
You are kindly requested to answer the following questions. Please. Answer (None, A little, Some, and A lot) in the
right place. Add any commitments when necessary.
Student Name-----------------Time: 50 minutes
No
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10

Description

None

A little

Some

A lot

Do you think that learning vocabulary through intensive reading
helped you to learn words quickly?
Do you think that intensive reading strategy enhance your
vocabulary acquisition?
Do you think that learning words which you learn by intensive
reading can stick in your mind for a long time?
Do you think that Intensive reading strategy can
help you to understand the details of texts that you have read.
Do you think that Intensive reading strategy make vocabulary
learning meaningful?
Do Intensive reading help you understand the meanings and to
remember all words?
Do you want to learn vocabulary through intensive reading
strategy again?
Do you think that intensive reading strategy play a great role in
developing your reading skill?
Do you think that intensive reading strategy help you to
understand to and remember the meanings of the English
vocabularies easier?
Do you think that intensive reading strategy makes you enjoy
the teaching learning process?
Thank you for your collaboration

Appendix B
Sample of Pre-Test for 25 items
Name: __________________________
Read these sentences carefully and fill in the blanks with the correct answer.
1-Ahmed's father was killed in a car ________ last month.
a- incident
b- accident
c-president
d- student
2 – Snakes in Australian are ---------------- species.
a-Dangerously b- dangerous c- dangers
d- danger
3-Arthur writes English -----------------

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

Time: 30 min.

193

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

a-Beautiful
b-beautifully
c- beautiful
d- beauties
5-can I --------a lunch with you.?
a-Has
b- have
c- do
d- make
6- I’m ___________ to meeting you at the Symposium.
a-Looks forward b-Look forward
c- looking forward
d-look
7- A defect can be caused .............. negligence by one of the embers of a team.
a- by
b- to
c- at
d- in
8-He tries his best to get a better ______to develop his life.
a- employ
b- job
c- work
d- employment
9-Punishing children may cause a bad---------on their behavior.
a- affect
b- pressure
c-. influence
d- effect
10-He is --------- to go to India this summer.
a- planning
b- intended
c- decided
d- ought
11- Students shouldn’t -------------their teacher in the classroom .
a- interrupt
b- interfere
c-communicate
d- ask
12-She was late to join the conference, because she was held up in traffic -------------a- crush
b- jam
c- order
d- blocks
13- It was the longest story I’ve ever read; it……..six hours.
a- lasted
b- finished
c- taken
d- ended
14- She decided to travel to France for a month in order to------------ the French language..
a- learn
b- speak
c- join
d- know
15- Life without rules, people would live in--------a-hardly
b- peacefully
c-harmony
d- jungle
16- The Boss ………………… the workers for arriving late.
a-punish
b- rewarded
c- dismissed
d- helped
17- Please be------------- when you pass this street..
a- Careless
b-carefree
c-careful
d-caring
18- The teacher taught the children always to say the..........
a-truth
b-facts
c-true
d-news
19- Old people should be ------------. when you cross this road.
a-careless
b- cares
c- careful
d-caring
20-Cancer is considered as one of the most ......... diseases.
a-problems
b-attempts
c- serious
d- dangerous
21-The doctor submitted to the hospital several results to .......... his point of view.
a-Support b- explain c-deny d- explore
22- On Monday, I'll tell you ......... how many people will be attending the party.
a-probably
b-mostly
c-exactly
d-definitely
23-Water is ---------Hydrogen and Oxygen.
a-Made of
b- contain of c- consist of
d- depend on
24-You must attended the final exam of English; it was
a-important
b- interesting
c-dull
d-stimulating
25- The student doesn’t feel good. He must be _____ a cold.
a- taking b- having
c- getting d- coughing
Appendix C
Sample of Post-Test for 25 items
Name: _________________________
Time: 30 min.
Read the sentences and fill in the blanks with the best answer.
1-Hearing a daily broadcast of the weather will make you ------ of what is going to happen.
a- aware
b- alike
c- understand
d- knowledgeable
2- It was the longest story I’ve ever read; it……..six hours.
a- lasted
b- finished
c- taken
d- ended
3- We haven’t had .............. problems with him.
a- some
b- any
c- no
d- none

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

194

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
Impact of Intensive Reading Strategy on English for Specific

Khazaal

4- Many experts are eager to test --------------- new experiment.
a- in
b- up
c-on
d-out
5- All items of the required delivery will be -------from 17 May.
a-suitable
b-portable
c-available
d-accessible
6- You .............. travel to Syria – there isn’t an airport.
a- may
b- can
c- may not
d- cannot
6- Her treatment with patient gives a good --------------that she is a good nurse.
a-view
b-reaction
c-impression
d-knowledge
7- Please, let me know if you are -----------------------to attend the meeting.
a –concerned
b –informed
c-invited
d-interested
8-You must -------your suggestions by the end of the day.
a-submit
b-subject
c-subscribe
d-decide
9-They always work ------------their manager orders.
a-share
b- against
c- with
d-agree
10-It is __________ for me to meet you today.
a- possible
b-not possible
c- necessary
d-hard
11-The teacher has to ____________ the students' papers test.
a-re- arrange
b-put together
c-fix
d-collect
12-I will have a n invitation with my -------- group of my friends.
a-nearest
b- large
c- close
d- old
13- I like to ---------------- songs, when I'm taking my breakfast.
a-Record
b- listen
c-sing
d-have
14- She insists to -------------------- her speech, though no body listen to her..
a-complete
b-neglect
c-continued
d-finished
15- Workers should be careful to _____ fires in the store.
a. conduct
b. prevent
c. produce conduct
d. cause
16-This insect is very invisible-------------.
a-cannot be touched
b-. Cannot be seen c- can be heard
d- cannot be moved
17-Helen works as secretary. She --------- is late for work.
a- always
b- seldom
c- almost
d- frequently
18- Sura failed the French test four times, but she studied hard and _____ she passed.
a- finally
b- because
c- automatically
d- until
19- What is the main --------- for the crisis?
a- reason
b- effort
c- effect
d- result
20- Everyone needs _____ some sports for our good health.
a- practicing
b- sufficient
c- excessive
d- having
21- The child doesn’t seem well. He must be _____ a cold.
a- sharing
b- taking
c- getting
d- causing
22- All the travellers in the boat were killed .Only one little girl _____ the accident.
a- saved
b- survived
c- stayed
d- lived
23- All kinds of vegetables _____ energy for the body.
a- assist
b- increase
c- reduce
d- provide
24- Many experts are eager to test --------------- new experiment.
a- on
b- up
c-in
d-out
25-Peter cant --------- the drawn people, because he isn’t a good swimmer.
a- Keep
b- save
c-see
d-prevent

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

195

