Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.19

Pp.242-256

The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English Language
Teachers in Arab Context
Saleh Ahmed Saif Abdulmughni
Department of English And Literature, College of Arts and Science
Wadi-Ad- Dawasir, Prince Sattam bin Abdul-Aziz University
Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

Abstract
There is a significant psychological aversion to English as a foreign language in Saudi Arabia.
General weakness among learners opting for English majors and undergraduate learners of the
English language is noted. Different learners are unaware of learning styles most suited to them.
This research discussed the necessity for sensitizing university teachers towards the contributing
factors in the success or failure of teaching and learning the English Language in Saudi Arabia.
Teaching-learning processes would be fruitful if the syllabus designers, teachers, and learners
become aware of important factors like teacher’s characteristics, learners’ characteristics, teaching
materials, and educational institutions. This study aimed to emphasize the role of the English
language teacher in facilitating learning processes, through conducting active research of English
language learners at Wadi Ad-Dawasir in Saudi Arabia. This research enhances the prospects of
pedagogical studies of different language learning and teaching.
Keywords: English language teachers, language learners, pedagogical empiricism, sensitizing
university, Saudi Arabia
Cite as: Abdulmughni, S.A.S. (2019) The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for
Sensitizing University English Language Teachers in Arab Context. Arab World English
Journal, 10 (2) 242-256. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.19

242

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

Introduction
The sole foreign language used in Saudi Arabia is English (Alrashidi & Phan 2015). The use of
this language is employed throughout the various sectors in Saudi Arabia (Al-Seghayer 2014). For
this reason, a great number of Saudi citizens learn English as a way of enhancing their prospects
(Moskovsky & Alrabai 2009). Furthermore, English is utilized as a mode of communication in
Saudi Arabia’s education sector (Liton 2013). Therefore, it is clear that the acquisition of the
English language is significant for Saudi citizens.
However, a significant psychological aversion is noted to English as a language strictly in
the context of Wadi Ad-Dawasir and similar locale in Saudi Arabia, based on the first-hand
experience. Additionally, there is a general weakness among Saudi English learners about reading
and writing this language with ease, as evidenced by recent literature (Liton 2013). Therefore,
there is an urgent need to sensitize teachers in Saudi Arabia towards the factors that contribute to
the success or failure of teaching or learning the English language. Here, ‘sensitizing’ refers to
drawing the teachers’ attention towards effective communication and teaching and is efficiently
based on various models of classroom action research (Zepke 2015).
Thus, this study proposed and investigated the role of a teacher in making radical changes
in the current environment of English learning and teaching. Specifically, the characteristics of
such a teacher have been discussed through relying on scientific and empirical evidence based on
effective teaching practices, various learning cultures and a review of fabricated pedagogical
cultures. Therefore, the empirically proved contributing factors of success and failure in the Saudi
context would be implemented, utilized and recommended for suitable teaching and learning
processes according to the learning situation, learners' characteristics, the opted level of learners,
the allotted time for teaching, available facilities and aims of teaching syllabus. The influencing
elements of the learning process are conveniently classified into learners, teachers, teaching
materials, and administrative factors. Accordingly, the teachers will be sensitized to the
appropriate acts of teaching and cautioned towards the inappropriate ones.
Theoretical Grounds for Research
The center of the Empiricism states that one’s knowledge of the world is based on one’s sensory
experiences. According to empiricists such as Alston (1989), Barnes & Henry (1996) and Longino
(2002), learning is based on individual observation and perception. Experiential learning indicates
the process of acquiring, implementing knowledge, skills and feels in the immediate appropriate
context by learners. It is more pragmatic and encompassing of learner difficulties as compared to
merely theorizing about the phenomena. This type of learning is institutionalized and
professionalized for training programs. Experiential learning was first devised by Kolb (1984),
who was interested in individual and social change, career development and executive and
professional education. The repetitive model devised by Kolb & Fry (1975) is comprised of four
cyclically arranged elements, as follows: (1) concrete experience (2) observation and experience
(3) forming abstract concepts, and (4) testing in new situations. The model contends that
successful learning requires the following capabilities: (1) concrete experience abilities (2)
reflective observation abilities (3) abstract conceptualization abilities, and (4) active
experimentation abilities. Kolb and Fry (1975) assert that the learning cycle could start and
continue as a spiral process at any one of these points. Accordingly, they developed a learning
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

243

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

style inventory. Smith (2001, 2010) presents the following table for teaching activities that support
different aspects of the learning cycle.
Table 1. Experiential Learning Cycle
Concrete
Reflective
experience
observation
Readings
Logs
Examples
Journals
Fieldwork
Discussion
Laboratories
Brainstorming
Problem sets
Thought questions
Trigger films
Rhetorical questions
Observations
Observations
Simulations/games
text Reading

Abstract
conceptualization
Lecture
Papers
Projects
Analogies
Model building

Active experimentation
Project
Fieldwork
Homework
Laboratory
Case study
Simulation

Importance of English in KSA
The English language holds great importance in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (KSA), due to the
emergence of this nation as an economical, religious and political global leader. The use of this
language is required for diplomatic, political and commercial engagements with non-Arab
countries. Given the turbulence in and around the Middle East, KSA has a decisive role to play in
geopolitical prospects. Moreover, this region is the site for umrah and annual Hajj pilgrimages,
performed by Muslims hailing from different parts of the world and speaking different languages.
Additionally, Saudi Arabia is host to a migrant population of seven million. A majority of Saudi
scientific research centers and many annual scientific, political, religious, economic conferences
are conducted in English or are translated to English. Therefore, learning the English language is
necessary for Saudi researchers, so that they may keep abreast of new scientific theories,
technological development and pursue higher education.
Furthermore, English is taught in all levels of education within Saudi Arabia. Therefore,
Saudi people need to acquire a good understanding of this language to be able to communicate
their ideologies, culture, and perceptions with the rest of the world. KSA dispatches a large number
of students to renowned colleges and universities all over the world. These students need to have
an adequate understanding of English to understand and discuss highly technical topics about their
courses. This necessitates qualified English teachers, excellent teaching materials, a precise aim,
and competent administrative staff. However, only a few English learners enjoy these necessary
characteristics. It is of urgency that the quality of teaching and learning be improved while
disregarding interfering factors such as learners’ quality and the environment. Therefore, the focus
here is on the teacher's quality, experience, efforts, enthusiasm and awareness about the
appropriate theories.
Teaching university-level English to local students in a growing city like Wadi is a
satisfying, yet demanding job. A combination of specific skills, knowledge, and experiences are
required to excel in the profession. Before deciding to embark on this career path in the Arab
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

244

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

context in general and Wadi Ad-Dawasir and similar locale in particular, self-assessment should
be done to determine one’s ability to tackle learner-specific difficulties.
Teachers’ Skills and Knowledge
Teachers need excellent communication skills to be able to explain the material in the curriculum
in a variety of ways to students with diverse learning styles, limited vocabulary and the habit of
relying on their mother tongue for comprehension. They also require superior interpersonal skills
such as patience and the ability to remain calm in stressful situations. Collaborative skills enable
them to work productively with their colleagues. Group and team learning have always been more
constructive than individual efforts whether on the part of teachers or learners (Barkley et al.,
2014). Additionally, creativity and presentation skills are essential for capturing the attention of
students. Basic technological skills are needed for audio-visual presentations and reporting and
taking attendance electronically. English teachers additionally need to demonstrate competent
leadership to maintain order and monitor disruptive student behavior. As seen in Wadi AdDawasir, learners were used to a free atmosphere at different education levels as there was strong
classroom management by the teacher. After establishing classroom discipline, the teacher shifted
to slide-based teaching through rote memorizations and repetitive actions. This is an interim
process which was followed by more advanced processes characterized by critical thinking and
problem-solving.
Teachers need to have a firm grasp of the subject they are teaching in addition to relevant
skills. University-level English teachers must have a sound basic knowledge of language teaching
skills, linguistics, literature, and English language teaching, in addition to a thorough knowledge
of the area of specialty. University teachers, who usually specialize in only one or two subject
areas, must have a thorough understanding of their area of specialty and elementary knowledge in
all the relevant specialization fields. Teachers should also be acquainted with different methods of
learning used by different learners and the expectations in development for children of different
ages. They also need to know a variety of teaching strategies and disciplinary techniques and be
able to learn, understand, select and use teaching strategies appropriate to the level, ability, and
interests of the students in the class. They should remain updated with current trends in educational
research through reading, experimenting and modifying existing ideas.
Teachers’ Personal and Professional Experiences
Most teachers are initially drawn to the profession due to positive learning experiences faced early
in their lives. They might have had a favorite teacher who was instrumental in helping them fulfill
their potential or any opportunity they had to teach someone, such as a younger sibling or a friend.
These experiences help potential teachers understand the dynamic of transmitting information
from teacher to learner. Other experiences, such as being a camp counselor, scout leader or sports
coach also contribute to increased awareness of how to interact with learners and inspire them.
Within the purview of professional experiences, teachers must possess sufficient sensory
functions to develop and maintain awareness of all students in the classroom and sufficient motor
function to move about the classroom, manage, supplies and demonstration materials and
supervise classroom activities. An essential component of teachers’ college programs is practice
teaching, which should occur early in the teachers’ program. Only by preparing lectures and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

245

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

delivering them, teachers can determine which methods they are most comfortable with and which
ones are more likely to ensure student success. The teaching method should be chosen per learners’
characteristics, the surrounding, learner level, allotted time and aims of the teaching and learning
program, rather than with which the teacher is most comfortable. A teacher might use different
methods. These include: the direct method given ample time; the grammar-translation method to
give the meaning of abstract word; the audio-lingual method to teach the pronunciation of a word
or linguistic structure; Silent Way if learners are to be encouraged to produce language as much
as possible, or; the cognitive code approach if grammar rules are to be taught. All these methods
can be used in one setting. An experienced teacher will be able to choose suitable methods for
learners according to their ways of learning.
Learning Approaches
To understand different ways that people learn best, scientists and psychologists have developed
many different models. One popular theory is the VARK model, in which Fleming and Mills
(1992) suggest four modalities that reflect the experiences of the students and teachers
(Prithishkumar & Michael, 2014). VARK stands for visual, aural, read/write and kinesthetic
sensory modalities that are used for learning information about the identification of four primary
types of learners. This perceptual mode describes four learning methods, with each learning
method responding best to a different method of teaching. For instance, auditory/aural learners
will remember information best after hearing it from the speaker. This learner category learns best
from pair or group discussions, lectures, television/radio, mobile phones, speaking, web-chatting,
talking and non-formal language or setting. Learners of this category favor oral classification and
organization accordingly. Visual learner’s best respond to concrete depicted matters such as flow
charts, labeled diagrams, maps, spider diagrams, tree diagrams, charts, graphs arrows, circles,
hierarchies, and other demonstration devices. Whereas, read/write learners learn best from written
material. This mode is favored by many learners. They rely on reading and writing and written
texts such as manuals, reports, essays, and assignments. People who prefer this modality are often
addicted to PowerPoint, the Internet, lists, diaries, dictionaries, thesauri, quotations and words.
Note that most PowerPoint presentations and the Internet, Google and Wikipedia are primarily
suited to those with this preference as there is seldom an auditory channel or a presentation that
uses visual symbols. Additionally, kinesthetic learners prefer hands-on experience and practice,
whether simulated or real.
Hence, a teacher has to be understood by all these varieties of addressees, through varying
his/her presentations according to the four learning styles. There are two types of learners; these
are active learners who are willing to be involved in the discussions and the passive learners who
remain undesirably detached. An excellent teacher can evoke a high level of interest, involvement
and desired learner-response through employing the carrot and stick policy; the students are to be
reminded of the repercussions of not learning regularly. The teacher should ensure the student's
level of lecture preparation, class participation, and assignment completion, in addition to
ascertaining learner attentiveness. This can be guaranteed by a teacher through different
approaches. Although it is the responsibility of students to be receptive to instruction and study
regularly, a teacher must confirm that learners understand the instruction through active
communication.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

246

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

A teacher has to befriend learners, care for them and extend help at every step to ensure
ease of learning. The ethical values of care include compassion, gratitude, acceptance, forgiveness,
interest, and insight for developing students’ potential. Teachers express their commitment to
students’ well-being and learning by offering positive influence, professional judgment, and
empathy in practice. Teachers must, therefore, possess the cognitive, communicative,
sensory/motor, and emotional/ social/ interactional abilities necessary for these complex
classroom activities. They must discharge their duties promptly, conduct tests, student
assessments, and referrals formulate written plans for teaching, provide student worksheets and
assignments reports on student progress and facilitate communications with parents. A responsible
teacher should act with self-discipline, be aware of the consequences of his actions and be
consistent. He must display emotional, social and interactional abilities that are necessary for full
exploitation of intellectual abilities and develop a rapport with his learners and society to promote
public trust and confidence in the teaching profession. He should act with integrity, honesty, keep
his promises with consistency and demonstrate loyalty to those not present.
Generally, students treat teachers as role models and wish to follow into their footsteps.
Therefore, the teacher should monitor and act the role model appropriately. A competent teacher
has a flair and passion for the subject that drives students to learn for themselves actively. Great
teaching seems to have less to do with knowledge and skills and more to do with attitudes toward
our students and the subject. Mutual respect between teachers and students provides a supportive
and collaborative learning environment.
The clarity in the presentation of ideas is mandatory for a successful teacher. He should
present the same ideas in different patterns of language. A teacher should be aware of professional
demands and adopt appropriate ethical codes; this is necessary to inspire learners who consider
this as the emblem of a teachers' portrait. Ethical values for the teaching profession signify a vision
of the professional practice. At the heart of a strong and effective teaching profession is a
commitment to students and their learning. The aims and objectives of the ethical values for the
teaching profession are to inspire members to replicate and maintain the honor and dignity of the
teaching profession and to identify the ethical accountabilities and commitments in the teaching
process.
Specific need learners
The Wadi-Ad-Dawasir learners are first-generation learners with specific qualities, cultures and
learning mannerisms. Therefore, they demand a specific kind of learning from their firstgeneration teacher. The characteristics of a first-generation English teacher include many traits,
values, and features. He has to be a good model holding himself to the same expectations and
standards as he holds his students. His actions should not contradict his teaching; for instance, it
is impossible for a teacher to have double standards. Therefore, it is clear that accountability is the
first characteristic of any successful teacher.
It is believed that a successful and learner-friendly teacher is the one who provides
entertainment and maintains joyful relationship with the learners but not at the cost of the
necessary hard work from the English first generation learner, both inside and outside the class. A
first-generation teacher has to work hard to evolve and improve himself and his learners
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

247

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

continuously. The author observed that a majority of mediocre teachers do the bare minimum
while preparing lectures; they restrict their reading to the course book and do not have any passion
for teaching. Teaching needs drive, passion, compassion, warmth, enthusiasm, love for learning,
cooperation with learners and administration that helps students with their issues both inside and
outside the class. A good teacher should give due importance and respect to the learners, create a
sense of community and homogony among learners and himself and be easily adaptable to
different situations. A first-generation English teacher has to be creative, dedicated, engaging,
dynamic and determined to overcome all difficulties to achieve the objective. He should be able
to create a vivid picture in the minds of his learners about the different elements of the discussed
topics to change students’ conceptual values into permanent behavioral practices.
A capable teacher and syllabus designer must contextualize his presentation taking into his
cognizance the needs of his learners which will enable them to perform their duty competently,
effectively and skillfully. He should help his learners to develop strategies to take care of specific
needs learners and engage his learners in critical thinking, to facilitate problem-solving.
Brookfield (2017) suggested that facilitating learners to be critical thinkers was strongly
contingent upon respecting the learners, supporting and paying attention to them, encouraging
them to participate in the classroom setting actively and challenging preconceived notions. Most
importantly, Brookfield suggested that it was important for teachers to build trust with their
learners by encouraging them to point out their flaws and then making respective changes in their
behavior. It was argued that one of the most significant cognitive skill sets to be mastered by a
critically thinking teacher was to evaluate assumptions and preconceived notions in the light of
alternatives, and to impart this knowledge to learners (Hamby 2015). An additional study by
Abrami et al., (2015) suggest exposing learners to simulated problems and utilizing role-playing
techniques as a way to stimulate critical thinking. Therefore, a teacher with good critical thinking
skills should vary his presentation methods and individualize his strategies, through the use of
role-playing lectures that incorporate activities of translation and interpretation, paragraph-writing
and discussions. He should use different channels to impart knowledge, such as lectures, handouts,
videos, case studies, personal experiences, and discussion. He should use different intelligences
to reach his objectives; for example, logical and linguistic intelligences are used in traditional
academic settings considerably. This was responsible for high scores in academic achievement
tests.
Since the environment for English is limited in the context of Wadi-Ad-Dawasir and the
overall Arab World, and Arabic is the preferred language for all these learners’ activities;
consequently, a first-generation teacher should emphasize the use of language in all written and
spoken forms for different functions as well as in personal interactions. Learning styles play an
essential role in the number of learning processes. Learning styles are only different approaches
or ways of learning. Through appropriate learning styles, first-generation learners could learn a
more significant amount of information in a shorter time and retain it in a better way. Therefore,
a teacher should know the different learning styles approached by his learners and expose them to
appropriate and alternative learning styles. For instance, a teacher must ensure an appropriate
learning style for poor learners struggling in the learning process.
Therefore, a teacher must evoke interests in his learners and improve his communicative
skills according to the needs and benefit of the learners. However, while interacting with their
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

248

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

students in Wadi Ad-Dawasir, the author discovered that a majority of learners are reluctant to
think critically and work collaboratively. The kind of instruction imparted by elementary,
preparatory and secondary teachers inculcated in them a type of learning which is based on rote
memorization and negates the use of analytical thinking and reasoning. Consequently, they found
it very difficult to be taught and examined using non-familiar approaches. Therefore, it is
imperative for undergraduate teachers to compensate for this lacuna and develop the necessary
skills needed for analyses, synthesis, and reasoning in their learners.
While learning styles are unique and have distinctive characteristics, it is important for
them to be coherently blended to offer advantages. Still, a valid argument might be that the
capacity and style of learning vary radically from one learner to the other and so it is practically
impossible to cater to the conflicting and varying styles of learning. However, a teacher can sense
the accepted styles used by a majority of learners and treat the exceptions separately. A qualified
teacher has to make equilibrium among different interfering factors. An experienced teacher will
be capable of acting, interacting and involving in an “ongoing process of diagnosis, with self and
with learners, including observation, questioning, obtaining evaluative feedback, and critical
reflection” (Nuckles 2000, p. 6). This was collaborated by Heimlich & Norland (2002), who states
that “each teacher is unique and can use his or her style to be as effective an educator as possible."
(p.23)
Motivation is another important factor that a teacher can depend on to improve his quality
of teaching and extract a higher degree of response from students. It is the power that derives,
selects, orients and continues behavior towards a goal. A teacher has to employ an eclectic
approach to effectively motivate learners to integrate the use of intrinsic and extrinsic strategies
as per choice; dealing with motivational principles and strategies depends on many issues such as
syllabus, learners’ characteristics, and others. It can be done in many different ways depending on
the motivated learner. However, common ones are the type of teaching material, a task which
should be socially comprehensive and fine-tuned, beginning by queries to arouse the curiosity of
learners and encouraging students to perform at their best capacities. The highest nature of
performance still leaves space for improvement. Concretizing abstract ideas, that is, exemplifying
the abstract by concrete means such as the use of morphemes and allomorphs in teaching
morphology, is concretized by the man with different realizations.
First-generation learners with specific needs and limitations should be given clear and
specific objectives for their step-to-step performance. In other words, teachers have to utilize the
strategy of Sheltered Instruction Observation Protocol (SIOP) to facilitate subject matter concepts
for this type of learners. This strategy is assumed and widely believed to be effective in the quoted
context of learning. Learners will face frustration if there are no clear and unambiguous steps for
learning since most of their learning depends on memorization. Accordingly, both content and
language objectives have to be specified and achieved by learners under the direct practical
supervision of a teacher. A teacher should ensure that learners are working to meet objectives
because a majority of learners are not mature enough to carry on the instructions unless they are
forced to work. It is mandatory for a teacher to think about objectives content and language
objective.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

249

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

The former covers what the learner should know in a lecture to be able to perform a
particular task and the latter is to develop the linguistic skills necessary to communicate the
acquired knowledge. For example, at the end of the lecture in content objectives, the learners will
be able to identify, solve, investigate, distinguish, hypothesize, create, select and draw conclusions
about sensitizing university teachers, whereas, language objectives encompass the patterns of
language used to express this idea. They include objectives such as ‘Listen for,' ‘Retell,' ‘Define,'
‘Find the main idea,' ‘Compare,' ‘Summarize,' ‘Rehearse,' ‘Persuade' and ‘Write.'
Verbs for Writing Content and Language Objectives based on Bloom’s Taxonomy and the
4 Domains of Language
Experimental teaching that assumes critical or reflective thinking and learning is one of the best
means of successful teaching. This type of teaching proved to be effective in the Wadi Ad-Dawasir
learning scenario. Through prompting learners' reflective thinking, a teacher would be able to
accelerate thinking, learning, and metacognitive strategies of the learning process intellectually
and emotionally. This shapes their thought processes, identifies their learned information and
modifies it accordingly. Therefore, a teacher has to create an appropriate learning environment in
which learners are encouraged to reflect on their learning. This can be done through the direct
involvement and participation of learners in the analytical process of a problem and his gradual
solving. This view was stated by Brookfield (2017), who commented upon the power of selfmonitoring and reflection in a student’s learning process. Reflective or critical thinking helps
students develop higher-order thinking skills. Learners are aware of and control their learning by
actively participating in reflective thinking – assessing what they know, what they need to know,
and how they bridge that gap – during learning situations.
Another important dimension of the teaching and learning process facet is related to the
pre-teaching and post-teaching evaluating strategies and plans. A teacher should set his reasons or
a logical basis for a course of action or a particular belief on which basis he/she is going to proceed
in his teaching in a classroom and evaluating his learners. This includes outlining a clear plan for
teaching, identifying ways for measuring learner’s progress and fairness of evaluation. His tests
and exams should be reliable, dependable, and valid. This is one of the most important post
teaching steps, which enlighten him about the success or failure of the teaching-learning process.
Verbs for Content Objectives
With respect to knowledge, the verbs include options such as ‘list’, ‘identify’, ‘locate’,
‘memorize’, ‘review’, ‘label’, ‘describe’, ‘define’, ‘name’ and ‘match’. For comprehension, the
verbs are inclusive of ‘recall’, ‘reproduce’, ‘summarize’, ‘explain’, ‘demonstrate’, ‘translate’ and
‘rephrase’. Regarding application, the verbs include options such as ‘predict’, ‘compare’,
‘contrast’, ‘solve’, ‘classify’, ‘categorize’, ‘show’, ‘apply’, ‘make’ and ‘build a replica. With
respect to synthesis, verbs such as ‘build a model’, ‘combine’, ‘compile’, ‘compose’, ‘construct’,
‘create’, ‘design’, ‘elaborate’, ‘test’, ‘infer’, ‘predict’, ‘hypothesize’, ‘invent’ and ‘design’ are
used. Finally, for evaluation, the verbs include ‘choose’, ‘decide’, ‘recommend’, ‘select’, ‘justify’,
‘defend’ and ‘support’.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

250

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

Verbs for Language Objectives
With respect to listening, the verbs include ‘tell’, ‘role play’, ‘identify’, ‘review’, ‘label’,
‘describe’, ‘define’, ‘name’, ‘match’, ‘listen’, ‘recognize’, ‘pint’, ‘show’ and ‘follow’. For
comprehension, the verbs are ‘recall’, ‘reproduce’, ‘summarize’, ‘directions’ ‘explain’,
‘demonstrate’, ‘translate’ and ‘rephrase’. Regarding speaking, verbs such as ‘name’, ‘discuss’ and
‘rephrase’ are used. With respect to application, verbs include ‘predict’, ‘compare’, ‘contrast’,
‘ask’, ‘answer’, ‘predict’, ‘say’ ‘steps in a solve’, ‘classify’, ‘categorize’, ‘show’, ‘apply’,
‘process’, ‘pronounce’, ‘repeat’, ‘respond’, ‘make’, ‘build a replica state’, ‘summarize’, ‘explain’,
‘tell’ and ‘use’. Similarly, for synthesis, the verbs include ‘build a model’, ‘combine’ and
‘compile’. Regarding reading, the verbs are ‘preview’, ‘read aloud’, ‘find’, ‘compose’, ‘construct’,
‘create’, ‘design’, ‘elaborate’, ‘specific information’, ‘identify’, ‘skim’, ‘test’, ‘infer’, ‘predict’,
‘hypothesize’, ‘invent’, ‘design’ and ‘explore’. Coming to evaluation, this includes verbs such as
‘choose’, ‘decide’, ‘recommend’ and ‘select’. For writing, verbs such as ‘list’, ‘summarize’, ‘ask
and justify’, ‘defend’, ‘support answer questions’, ‘create sentences’, ‘state and justify opinions’,
‘write’, ‘contrast’, ‘classify’ and ‘record’ are used. Lastly, the verbs for vocabulary development
include ‘define isolated words’, ‘define words in context’ and ‘find words and construct meaning’.
Practical Approach to Teaching
It is believed that teaching experience in different contexts, institutions, and different learners'
characteristics would empower a teacher with the necessary skills to make appropriate decisions
at appropriate times with different learners. His local and international experience will help
learners to benefit from his way of instructions and the material selected. Teachers’ roles in
simplifying the language complex structures and solving their enigmas contribute greatly in
facilitating learning and processing information. However, one should not forget that teachers play
a major role in internalizing the abstract knowledge into learners’ minds, through the actual
experienced behavior, especially where the learners depend entirely on their teachers and teaching
materials as the main source of their language input. Teachers’ encouragement of their learners is
a very determinative and affective factor in the learning process. Their extrinsic motivation, such
as high grades or praise, might contribute to the learning process. This kind of supportive learning
process from teachers could enthuse and energize the learning faculty in the learners and create a
conducive learning environment which is also one of the affective factors of learning.
A teacher could have a major role in altering the learners’ attitude towards target language.
For instance, students with anxiety would greatly benefit from teachers that understand and
accommodate them. Since anxiety affects the mental processing of language (Azher et al., 2010),
it is highly important for a good teacher to consider this factor when teaching. A teacher should
play the role of an advisor, a teacher, and a friend and represent good values for his learners to
gain the trust of his learners. Learners should feel that they are not alone to do the task; this
especially includes first-generation learners such as in Wadi Ad-Dawasir, who receive no
assistance from their families. A teacher should make his learners believe that he is accessible for
them in terms of aid, assistance, and guidance. This may eradicate the apprehension created as a
result of anxiety. Consequently, their fear will be changed into a positive force; that is, their
anxiety will lead to action. Learners should be assured of the ease in learning languages and that
it simply depends on perseverance, practice, and involvement. A teacher, of course, may not be
able to play with or change internal factors that a learner is attributed with, such as age experience,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

251

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

cognition, and native language, but he/she could positively influence external factors such as
teaching materials, clear and coherent instruction, culture and status, extrinsic motivation and
access to native speakers. These factors play a heavily significant role in the teaching and learning
process and are entirely under the control of an experienced and competent teacher. Teaching
materials should be sequentially presented according to the principles of cause and effect and
logic. A teacher should take care of the language of the text of teaching materials from the words,
phrases, clauses, and sentences. He/she should juxtapose the problematic words and phrases with
synonymous words and phrases, and anomalous structures and patterns with simple and easily
understood ones between practices. In this way, a learner will be able to understand the ideas, be
exposed to intricate patterns and enrich his vocabulary. The teacher should train his learners to
simplify the structures of complex sentences because a learner cannot understand very long
sentences. One of the ways of helping the learner understand a very long sentence is to show him
how to identify the three fundamental pillars of the sentence. Namely, the subject, verb and the
object should be identified, and the rest of the elements should then be added to their respective
modified heads of the phrases. For example, the following sentence is very long: “Tall regal and
intelligent, Benazir Bhutto, prime minister of Pakistan and “Daughter of the East,” as she titled
her autobiography, will land in Washington next week to begin an official visit to the United
States.” This statement can be simplified as follows.
Firstly, the author made the learners identify the subject, verb, and complement of the main
clause. For instance, ‘Benazir Bhutto’ is the Subject, ‘land’ is a Verb and ‘in Washington’ is an
adverb phrase/complement. This was done because many sentences could contain many clauses,
which sometimes confused the learners and made them take the elements of subordinate clauses
for the main clause, thereby distorting the meaning.
After identifying the important elements, a learner should add the premodifier of the nouns.
Concerning this statement, the premodifiers are ‘tall,' ‘regal' and ‘intelligent.' The post modifiers
of the noun should also be added; these are ‘prime minister of Pakistan’ and ‘Daughter of the
East’, as she titled her autobiography. Of course, this sentence is easier than sentences containing
more subordinate clauses. For example, many learners take ‘she used to be present with her
mother’ as the main clause in the following sentence: “In a highly attended civilian court, the size
of the faculty of art and science, where she used to be present with her mother, she displayed an
outrageous pimpled check towards the jury, who were enraged by her behavior.”
In this sentence, the main elements are ‘she displayed face.' If a learner identifies them and
following this, adds the related elements in their appropriate place and sequence, then, he would
be able to comprehend the sentence easily and correctly.
Culturally speaking, the English speaker or writer will delay the most important message
to the end of the sentence, whereas the Arabic speaker initiates the sentence with the most
important information or the main clause. For example, the Arabic speaker will sequence the
information in the above sentence as follows: “She displayed an outrageous pimpled check
towards the jury, who were enraged by her behavior…” One may ask why a teacher does not
simplify the text to his learner instead of juxtaposing the authentic words, phrases, and patterns
with the simplified ones. The answer is that the learner has to be exposed to authentic texts because
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

252

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

simplification is an intermediate temporary dependent stage in being transferred to a more
independent stage simultaneously. Access to native speakers’ natural language is a critical input
of second language acquisition, which is of the determinative affective factors.
Teachers should be aware of the significance of the input in enhancing second language
acquisition because learners rely on the input provided to them by their teachers for their learning
process. They should expose their learners to different comprehensive texts which are rich in
vocabulary. This was corroborated by Krashen (1985, 1989), who opined that input is highly
important for second language acquisition. In the opinion of the author of the present research,
this proved to be completely true. Throughout the process of learning and thirty years of teaching
English as a foreign language, it was found that the various and comprehensive inputs that are well
prepared by teachers would create an encouraging learning process. Here, the word input is not
limited to language learning only, but to all the courses that are learned by learners, whether they
were language courses, linguistics courses, literature courses, English Language Teaching (ELT)
courses or any courses that are taught in BA English.
Student interaction is vital for language acquisition and comprehension of information. For
example, the interaction was used by the researcher for teaching a course titled ‘Language
Acquisition.' It was found that learners comprehend information far better when discussing the
subject with each other, as compared to when simply listening to teacher explanation alone. This
was affirmed by Genesee (2014), who emphasized the role of student interactions in facilitating
second language acquisition. For example, a language acquisition teacher who is cognizant of his
contribution to students' English language development would create scenarios demanding student
interactions.
Second language teachers should not restrict themselves to the role of facilitating the
information of a particular course only, but they should facilitate the language as well. They should
try to create an English environment in the classroom to integrate the information of the courses
they teach in addition to the language skills. This can be achieved by the cooperative learning and
interaction of learners themselves alongside the supervision, guidance, and assistance of the
teacher. For example, in any course taught by the researcher, learners are instructed to follow this
instruction.
It is mandatory for learners to acquaint themselves with the teaching materials that will be
delivered in the next lecture, interact with the instructor and classmates during the delivery and
make post teaching study. In this way, learners contribute to the teaching-learning process and
gain mutual benefit. This process enables learners to build confidence in themselves, enhances
their expressivity and consolidates their linguistic and subject knowledge. This is very important
for language acquisition and learners studying any courses in a non-native language. In this way,
learners interact with the input, deeply negotiate meaning, imprint language structures and
improve their retention ability, memorability and vividness of concepts; this is necessary because
foreign language learners need comprehensible input as well as repetitive reinforcement. This
corrects and increases the internal representation of learners, which reflexes external linguistic
realities. All these highlights the importance of the interaction for the production.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

253

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

It is clear that learners will be able to avoid native language interference, second language
over-generalization and the temptation of simplification, given more exposure and repetitive
reading of the same patterns and structure. Therefore, a teacher should emphasize preparation,
learner interaction, repetitive reading of teaching materials, clarify ambiguity and simplify any
complex or unusual structures. A majority of learners are ready to work hard, but they are unsure
of how to accomplish their aims. Consequently, they are frustrated when they unable to perform
as required. A teacher should make it clear that foreign language acquisition is not difficult, given
adequate time and effort. The type of learners the author dealt with over the past ten years were
unaware of their interests in the subject and had lackadaisical attitudes, due to which they needed
pursuance, and repetitive follow up. It was proved that many learners do very well if coerced to
work. In order to avoid seasonal studies of students, it is necessary to introduce six mid-term
examinations; consequently, learners were forced to read continuously to be able to take the
exams.
A well-known fact is that the practice of English language teaching is unseparated from
the use of appropriate learning materials and methods of facilitation. Syllabus designers and
teachers should devise new methods and tasks, and increase awareness about existing ones, to
facilitate learning. One of the most conspicuous technologies that can expedite language teaching
and learning is the use of all the types of potential tasks such as text completion, guessing meaning
from contexts, matching related meaning and information, ability of identifying, collocating
words, illustrating ideas, enumerating points and filling the blanks from available or missing ones.
In this context, the verbs for writing content and language objectives based on Bloom’s taxonomy
and the four domains of language are of great help in this respect. In other words, foreign language
teachers should be creative, flexible, knowledgeable, assiduous, and patient, offer without limits
and take great care of teaching materials; these are necessary to ensure comprehensible output.
Teaching materials bridge the gap between what the learner wants to say and what he says. The
experience says that learner’s expressivity is hindered by the lack of expressions and enriched by
comprehensive teaching materials.
One of the major roles of language teachers is neutralizing and marginalizing the negative
affective factors involved in the process of language learning. For example, the connection of a
learner to the second language community may contribute negatively or positively to the learning
process. Therefore, the role of a good teacher is to try and eradicate erroneous concepts in the
mind of his learners as far as possible. For instance, political and religious leanings play a great
role in influencing learner attitudes towards the target language. However, teachers can easily
neutralize these learners’ attitudes, especially if they command the respect and confidence of their
learners.
Conclusion
This article highlighted the purpose of sensitizing concepts for facilitating the teaching success of
English Language teachers in Saudi Arabia. A teacher has to use every relevant approach to
facilitate optimal learning effectively. He should be acquainted with different types of learners,
different styles, knowledge, and type of learning and the method, approaches, and techniques for
teaching every type of learner. A qualified teacher is well-endowed with critical thinking that
enables him to manage and organize knowledge and make it accessible in a variety of forms. Good
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

254

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

classroom management and teaching skills, in addition to subject knowledge are very important
for a qualified teacher. Similarly, the use of an engaging personality and teaching style, clear
objectives for both teachers and learners and effective disciplinary skills, could contribute to the
advancement of teaching and learning process. Preparation of comprehensive teaching materials,
formal academic training, course planning and coherently organizing the teaching elements are
basic characteristics of a qualified teacher that would be capable of creating a change in the
targeted category of learners. Developing a tolerance for disruptive learners, handling them with
equity, establishing trusting relationships with them, respecting them and accepting them as they
are, creates a sense of community and belonging in the classroom. The teacher should be warm,
accessible, enthusiastic, caring and flexible. He should explore new technologies for facilitating
the teaching-learning process according to the needs of the situation. He should maintain
professionalism in all areas of his presence. Furthermore, continuous collaboration with peers is
mandatory for a good teacher and institution.
It was additionally seen that learning styles play an important role in the learning process.
The majority of first-generation learners do not know of appropriate learning styles that are suited
to them. Therefore, the first-generation teacher should train his learners by acquainting them with
the appropriate methods of learning according to predispositions. Active learners who are willing
to be involved in classroom discussions should be encouraged further by teachers to achieve
excellence. Passive learners with a withdrawal syndrome and undesirable reticence should be
guided by the teacher so that they may come out of their shells.
University teachers should develop analytical, synthetic and organizational faculties in
their learners to prepare them for any potential difficulties. Teaching and learning styles are
different, and their correspondence would enhance the teaching and learning process.
Accordingly, a teacher should harmonize his teaching style with different learning entities. An
excellent teacher should use different kinds of motivation to trigger the desired response from
learners. A teacher has to articulate the objective of his lecture. He should not assume that his
learners will be able to identify the objective of their own since they are university learners,
especially in the context of Wadi Ad-Dawasir. Summarily, the teacher should be an emblem of
ethical values and maintain the dignity of the teaching profession. The present research advocates
for the benefit of the consanguinity between learning styles and teaching styles for developing
conducive learning and teaching conditions; however, the research acknowledges that this
consanguinity would not guarantee a successful learning achievement
About the author:
Dr. Saleh Ahmed Saif Abdulmughni, associate professor of English, is currently working
with PSAU, KSA has worked with a variety of academic institutions in different places
and capacities. At times a referee for the evaluation of research papers with different
Universities and conferences, expert, presided sessions at international platforms and wrote
extensively on issues ranging from language to literature. https://orcid.org/0000-00020571-5086

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

255

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
The Importance of Pedagogical Empiricism for Sensitizing University English

Abdulmughni

References
Abrami, P. C., Bernard, R. M., Borokhovski, E., Waddington, D. I., Wade, C. A., & Persson, T.
(2015). Strategies for teaching students to think critically: A meta-analysis. Review of
Educational Research 85, (2) : 275-314.
Alrashidi, O., & Huy Phan, H. (2015). Education context and English teaching and learning in
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: An overview. English Language Teaching 8, (5):33.
Al-Seghayer, K. S. (2015). The actuality, inefficiency, and needs of EFL teacher-preparation
programs in Saudi Arabia. International Journal of Applied Linguistics and English
Literature 3, (1): 143-151.
Alston, W. P. (1989). Epistemic justification: Essays in the theory of knowledge. Cornell
University Press.
Azher, M., Anwar, M. N., & Naz, A. (2010). An investigation of foreign language classroom
anxiety and its relationship with students′ achievement. Journal of College Teaching and
learning 7, (11): 33.
Barkley, E. F., Cross, K. P., & Major, C. H. (2014). Collaborative learning techniques: A
handbook for college faculty. John Wiley & Sons.
Barnes, B., Bloor, D., & Henry, J. (1996). Scientific knowledge: A sociological analysis.
University of Chicago Press.
Genesee, F. (2014). Second language learning in school settings: Lessons from immersion. In
Bilingualism, multiculturalism, and second language learning (pp. 203-222). Psychology
Press.
Brookfield, S. D. (2017). Becoming a critically reflective teacher. John Wiley & Sons.
Hamby, B. (2015). Review of Stephen Brookfield‘s Teaching for Critical Thinking. Inquiry:
Critical Thinking Across the Disciplines 30, (2): 63-68.
Heimlich, J. E., & Norland, E. (2002). Teaching style: where are we now? New directions for adult
and continuing education in 2002, (93): 17-26.
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning Prentice Hall. Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
Kolb, D. (1975). Towards an applied theory of experiential learning. Theories of Group Process.
33-56.
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. Addison-Wesley Longman
Ltd.
Krashen, S. (1989). We acquire vocabulary and spelling by reading: Additional evidence for the
input hypothesis. The modern language journal 73, (4): 440-464.
Liton, H. A. (2013). EFL Teachers' Perceptions, Evaluations and Expectations about English
Language Courses as EFL in Saudi Universities. Online Submission 6, (2): 19-34.
Longino, H. E. (2002). The fate of knowledge. Princeton University Press.
Moskovsky, C., & Alrabai, F. (2009). Intrinsic motivation in Saudi learners of English as a foreign
language. The Open Applied Linguistics Journal 2, (1).
Nuckles, C. R. (2000). Student-centered teaching: Making it work. Adult learning 11, (4): 5.
Prithishkumar, I. J., & Michael, S. A. (2014). Understanding your student: using the VARK model.
Journal of postgraduate medicine 60, (2): 183.
Zepke, N. (2015). Student engagement research: Thinking beyond the mainstream. Higher
Education Research & Development 34, (6): 1311-1323.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

256

