Modern Democracy-Welfare

State and Public Goods. A current

consequence for Greece.
EmmanouilMavrozacharakis, PhD Candidate, Department of Political
Science, University of Crete, Researcher of the Centre for Human Rights (KEADIK)

Abstract

People expect the state to create jobs and provide them with a social security
net. Whatever its defects, whatever the virtues of the private sector, no structure other
than the state can today provide citizens with the basic public goods. Under the
present right-wing government of Nea Dimokratia in Greece, which is not particularly
at odds with neoliberalism, a very active role of the state is not expected. Also is nor
expected the introduction of a serious program of public investment and demandboosting to stimulate the national economy and enter into a virtuous circle of
recovery. Greece, which has undergone the economic crisis with drastic cuts in its
traditionally deficient social state, has to respond directly to the marked
underinvestment in public goods (in key areas such as education, health, natural
disasters, dealing with decent living conditions).The most important tool for inputting
resources is the tax system.

[1]

The prevalence of the ideas of enlightenment and of the rational spirit
undoubtedly complies with the perception that economic, social and political crises
are not created by nature or god but by collective human choices and decisions
(Shruti:2017,1-2).The same goes for overtaking them. We can therefore only regard
the current right-wing governance in Greece as a result of a collective choice. At first
sight, this choice was indeed rational in the sense that in the electorate invests in the
hope of an orderly state through the balancing of social development, the promotion
of an intact economy. In this sense, the people felt that the right-wing could relieve
the business of unnecessary state interference or bureaucracy, without the state
abandoning its guaranty and regulatory role. From the above to a certain extent, the
new right-wing government in Greece has taken up recently his legitimation of power.
In the past, this legitimation has been broken because the right-wing rule was not
accompanied by the constitution of an orderly state, as the right-wing party had been
evangelized. Claus Offe (1997,81): underlines that «all societies, in order to reproduce
themselves in a manner compatible with the notion of ‘‘social order’’, must solve two
reciprocal core problems in institutionalized ways. First, they must allocate (adult)
human labor power to valued (‘‘productive’’) functions, thereby situating ‘‘people’’
into ‘‘places’’.
The set of allocation rules through which this task is performed includes
selective exemptions from the expectation to perform economically valued activities
that apply, in our society, to the young, the old, the sick, and the independently
wealthy. Putting people in places is a process that results in patterns of (however
unequal) inclusion, participation, recognition, self-respect, and discipline, as well as
an overall pattern of division of labor. It provides people with relatively stable
expectations as to where they belong and what conduct is appropriate in work and in
life. Second, societies must provide people, in equally patterned and routinized ways,
with the means of livelihood in return for the valued functions they perform (or have
performed at earlier points) and as a precondition of the continued performance of
these functions. These means include income (or the claim to means of the
consumption of ‘‘goods’’) and protection (or the, at least partial, compensation of
risks, or the incidence of ‘‘bads’’).
These two problems – the problem of production and the problem of
distribution – can be institutionally solved in a myriad of ways». With other words,
[2]

the mission of the state governed by the rule of law "is not limited only to the care and
planning of adequate infrastructure in the road and transport network, but also to the
education of all young people, to the health of citizens, to the employment of all those
who seek work, the quality of the environment and culture (Johnston:2002, 1).
Moreover, this is in line with the idea of citizenship established after the World War II
by TH Marschall and J M Keynes and linked to the welfare state and the pursuit of
political, economic and social equality and cultural autonomy (van Sternbergen:1994,
1-10).
As Dahrendorf (1994, 13) states «Marshall defines citizenship as the body of
rights and duties - the status - which goes with full membership of a society. This
status is by definition removed from the vagaries of the market. Citizenship is a noneconomic concept. It defines people's standing Independent of t e relative value
attached to their contribution to the economic process. The elements of citizenship are
thus unconditional. This is as true for obligations as it is for rights. The right to vote,
for example, is not dependent on paying taxes, although paying taxes is an obligation
associated with the status of citizenship». The idea of democracy was therefore linked
to the demand for more social justice and the creation of public services related to
education, health, housing, urban regeneration, public transport, subsidized culture,
and the arts.
Habermas (1994, 25) notes that « today, however, the expression
'Staatsburgerschaft' or 'citizenship' is not only used to denote membership of a state,
but also for a status defined by civil rights ….. The status of citizen is constituted
above all by those democratic rights which the individual can reflexively lay claim to
in order to alter his or her material legal status». The rights therefore in a modern
democracy far outweigh the sphere of the free economy or political participation and
include social participation and distributive justice Lamont:2017).
Together with the individual rights of freedom and the rights to freedom of
expression and ideas, social rights form a framework that aims to live the life of a
civilized being as opposed to state patronage and discrimination ( Beetham:1998, 2129). In other words, only through the revival of the democratic ideal and the
establishment of the rule of law of modern times, public social space was established
which guaranteed wider production of public goods and services, the mediation and
harmonization of interests, the regulation and exercise of individual and social rights.(
Dewey: 1937, 457-67). Through democracy in the end, the individual becomes a
[3]

citizen and a person. However, investment in the citizen, namely in quality public
goods and social services such as education, health - care, social cohesion is what is
needed to sustain a society the pressures of international competition and to respond
to international challenges.
The welfare state and its functions are not only concessions to the citizens, but
necessary conditions for the survival of a capitalist society. " (Midgley: 1997, 105106). The issue of Democracy is therefore directly linked to the issue of social
cohesion (Cuellar:2009), which many governments, being a victim of the syndrome of
international competitiveness and neoliberal ideology, often overlook (Fougner:
2006).
As Krugman (2004, 44) )among others points out, governments should not fall
victim to an Obsession of "competitiveness" because it is dangerous and can lead to
mistaken choices. The idea that a country's economic progress is solely dependent on
its success on the global market is an unreliable case based on empirical analysis.
Krugman (2004,42) notes that «Most of those who have preached the doctrine of
competitiveness have not heen old-fashioned protectionists. They want their countries
to win the global trade game, not drop out. But what if, despite its best efforts, a
country does not seem to he winning, or lacks confidence that it can? Then the
competitive diagnosis inevitably suggests that to close the borders is better than to
risk having foreigners take away high-wage jobs and high-value sectors. At the very
least, the focus on the supposedly competitive nature of international economic
relations greases the rails for those who want confrontational if not frankly
protectionist policies».
Moreover, the legitimacy of the state does not depend on whether it can
manage globalization, but on how effective it is to deliver public goods to its own
nationals, at least with other entities, in a context naturally shaped by globalization. In
a further sense «The promotion of a higher quality of life and the protection of human
dignity should be regarded as a crucial element in any effort to globalize.
Accordingly, globalization cannot mean the abandonment of all things to market
forces. In other words, "the economic sphere cannot be separated from the more
complex fabric of social and political life and sent shooting off on its own trajectory.
To survive and thrive, a global economy must have a more solid foundation in shared
values and institutional practice. It must advance broader and more inclusive social
purposes.Basic needs must be satisfied as an end in itself, but also as a means to allow
[4]

people to be able to seize to a greater extent the benefits of globalization…… Public
sector capacity-building in terms of institutions, human resources, mobilization, and
management of resources, as well as innovation and information technology, is
crucial in ensuring that countries are able to seize the opportunities of globalization.
There is a growing need to strengthen national capacity to design and implement
people-centered programs and policies; to strengthen national capacity to ensure that
countries benefit from globalization, while minimizing its costs; to enhance citizen
participation at all levels of governance and to foster partnerships between the State,
civil society and the private sector for development» (Bertucci-Alberti:2001, 25-26).
People expect the state to create jobs and provide them with a social security net.
Whatever its defects, whatever the virtues of the private sector, no structure other than
the state can today provide citizens with the basic public goods.
Sen notes that : "what people can positively achieve is influenced by economic
opportunities, political liberties, social powers, and the enabling conditions of good
health, basic education, and the encouragement and cultivation of initiatives» (Sen:
1999,. 5)The State has a very important role to play in this respect. Under the present
right-wing government of Nea Dimokratia in Greece, which is not particularly at odds
with neoliberalism, a very active role of the state is not expected. Also is nor expected
the introduction of a serious program of public investment and demand-boosting to
stimulate the national economy and enter into a virtuous circle of recovery. It is clear
that the right-wing in Greece remains locked up in the anachronistic undertaking of
neoliberalism and does not follow the example of a modern European center-right like
German CDU that turned to the values of social justice, putting forward policies that
combined economic growth, social cohesion, orderliness.
As a result, there was a clear political stigma, the widening of social alliances
and finally systematic sweeping victories of the European center-right. This explains
why in countries like Germany, the first socio-economic effects of the crisis
(redundancies, unemployment eruptions, falling purchasing power) are not
particularly acute and did not lead to a more radical electoral behavior and instead
created the paradox that the neoliberal right-wing factions which launched with their
antisocial policies the attack on social acquisitions were strengthened as well as the
far-right regimes that played elaborately with the issue of security and immigration.
While one would expect, due to the crisis, the strengthening of anti-capitalist
tendencies and ideas, it was at least apparently the opposite. The modern center-right,
[5]

in many cases, adopted the Keynesian logic of strengthening demand through public
spending and government interventions.
However, in order for a public spending strategy to be successful, it must be
designed on the basis of the social entity (social benefit) and the costs involved (social
costs). Public goods resulting from the corresponding public expenditure are usually
produced by public bodies (eg national defense, internal security). Similarly, in
Greece, most of the public goods, for which there is a need for intervention by public
bodies for their provision, are produced by their own public bodies and are provided
free of charge to the people of the community. Their cost is covered by income
taxation. According to economic theory, Public goods, have the special feature that
the user who enjoys them can not prevent other users from enjoying them at the same
time, according to the principles of indivisibility and publicness (Rawls:2003,235).
Clean air is a public good that is not guaranteed only for half the inhabitants of a
region (taxpayers or those who do not pollute). Air quality is common to all. Public
order and the protection of the life and property of citizens was the predominantly
public goods ( Janda/ Berry/, Goldman: 2009, 9). It is common ground that this is an
area in which private initiative alone is not enough. We would say that security, more
than education and health, is the main reason why people have, and still Tolerate,
states (Groc:2016, 10-12).
A relatively balanced policy within a modern state aims primarily to ensure:
1. The optimal distribution of available productive factors (labor, capital,
buildings, land and so on) between different users to ensure sufficient production of
goods and services that will meet the needs of the population over time
2. Excellent distribution of national income (total country production in one
year, measurable in value, ie in euros) according to the prevailing perceptions of
social justice in order to prevent social unrest. With Marxist terminology, one would
say that the mitigation of class contradictions through the closing of the income gap is
a precondition for social peace. The distribution is through tax deduction of income
from them with and through pensions or benefits that add income to non-residents. A
critical dimension is the ability to pursue a social policy that in some cases serves (the
social democratic model) to lift inequality, but in other cases (liberal model) the
maximum requirement is to provide a safety net to alleviate extreme poverty. In the
[6]

countries of mainland Europe where social protection is almost identical to social
security (as in Greece), the main objective is to promote social cohesion - a goal
incompatible with a rapid deterioration of inequality, but not necessarily with the
keeping it at a stable and perhaps relatively high level
3. Steady, balanced and long - term growth combined with pursuing full
employment and the achievement of price stability. Combined policies attempt to
achieve the economic well-being of the people and their dignified survival, but at least
to meet their basic needs above the poverty line. It is obvious and understandable that,
depending on the political and ideological nature of each government, its priorities, its
capabilities and the culture of every people, the center of gravity will be placed in one
of the three basic objectives of every modern state.
A state with strong feelings of law and social equality will mainly seek to
ensure excellent distribution of national income and stabilization of prices. A state
that holds liberal views (in the good sense ...) will seek to make the most of the factors
of production and promote growth, without generating major failures in social
cohesion. A neo-liberal government, on the other hand, will turn its interest in a
democracy that is synonymous with the free market, while issues of equality, social
justice will be of secondary importance and used to reduce those who are subjected to
social exclusion and punishment by the system itself (eg charities).
Despite the logical consistency of these differences, some analysts point to the
objection that "Governments across the globe, from liberal to socio-democratic, are
pushing policies that transfer wealth from many to few and shape the conditions for
the birth of ruined societies are squeezed out of poverty, unemployment, social
hardship and dissatisfaction, crime and the brutality of the police. For many years,
reports of super-governmental institutions such as Social Watch, UNICEF and the
United Nations Development Program have attempted to draw attention to the
worsening socio-economic conditions around the world. Internationally recognized
personalities from the economy, such as Joseph Stiglitz and Paul Krugman, denounce
the anti-democratic and immoral agenda of the neoliberal elite. " With the economic
crisis of 2007, however, the dividing lines between right and left again became
distinct. Modernizing social democracy, following the Third Way model, has in many
cases implemented extreme neoliberalist prescriptions, and has abandoned the social
[7]

state as its basic ideological prowess, instead of stifling social inequalities. It then lost
the traditional social strata that historically supported it, eventually falling into a deep
identity crisis. It followed in many cases the election shrinking. It is obvious that due
to the international economic crisis, the post-industrial social-democrat recipes have
recurred their timeliness and charm.
The fundamental distinction between right and left is, therefore, re-emerging
as a dilemma between the market and society. However, it follows from can only keep
pace with social equality when there is democratic control only when there is a
democracy. This is a qualitative differentiation in relation to the political philosophy
of modernizing social democracy which has been of prime importance in
development. Of course, we must look at solutions that are both visionary and
workable. "At the level of implementation, the most effective answer was the
Keynesian Revolution in the 1950s and 1960s, which confirmed the full compatibility
between a market economy and social cohesion, provided that the state faces the
really big flaw of the former: the structural the trend towards insufficient demand.
The undisputable substantial success of Keynesian macroeconomic policies
supporting public demand depended, however, on two fundamental conditions: the
economic sovereignty of the nation-state within its boundaries, and the explicit or
silent agreement between entrepreneurs and workers to redistribute the profits
resulting from the increase productive income (so-called income policy) '. Of course,
the state today has greater difficulty in defining economic policy autonomously than
in 20 or 30 years ago. The proliferation of financial instruments has created what
some call "shadow worlds" - shadowy in the sense that they escape the control of the
bodies assigned to them to manage economic policy. There is, therefore, a very level
issue of democracy.
The new government of Nea Dimokratia which is now an irreversible event,
should carefully and cautiously manage the actors of the traditional form of interest
mediation (strong interests, economic and political oligarchies, guilds, unions, clerks,
etc.) who often offer specialized integration of their interests into the system, in order
to gain access to the core of the political system. Greece, which has undergone the
economic crisis with drastic cuts in its traditionally deficient social state, has to
respond directly to the marked underinvestment in public goods (in key areas such as
education, health, natural disasters, dealing with decent living conditions ). The most
important tool for inputting resources for the policy is the tax system.
[8]

References:
Beetham, D (1998): Democracy: Key Principles, Institutions and Problems . In:
Inter-Parliamentary Union (Ed) Democracy: Its Principles and Achievement. InterParliamentary Union, Geneva
Bertucci, G/ Alberti, A (2001) :Globalization and the Role of the State: Challenges
and Perspectives United Nations Online Network in Public Administration and
Finance
http://unpan1.un.org/intradoc/groups/public/documents/un/unpan006225.pdf
Cuellar, R (2009) : Social Cohesion and Democracy. International Institute for
Democracy and Electoral Assistance , Stockholm
Dahrendorf; R (1994) : The changing Quality of Citizenship . In: In Van Sternbergen,
B (Ed): The Condition of Citizenship. London , Thousand Oaks , New Delhi :Sage
Puplikations , pp. 10-20
Dewey, J (1937):

"Democracy and Educational Administration," School and

Society 45 (April 3) ; 457-67.
Fougner, T (2006): The state, international competitiveness and neoliberal
globalisation: is there a future beyond ‘the competition state’? Review of International
Studies , 32, 165–185
Groc, F (2016) :The Principle of Security . Polis Publishing. :Athens (in Greek)
Habermas, J (1994): Citizenship and national Identity . : In Van Sternbergen, B
(Ed): The Condition of Citizenship. London , Thousand Oaks , New Delhi :Sage
Puplikations, pp .20-35
Janda,K / Berry,J/ Goldman, J (2009):The Challenge of Democracy: American
Government in a Global World, Texas Edition, Wadsworth, Boston
Johnston, M (2002): Good governance: rule of law, transparency, and accountability
Available

at:

https://www.researchgate.net/publication/267974525_Good_Governance_Rule_of_La
w_Transparency_and_Accountability
[9]

Krugman, P (2004): Competitiveness: A Dangerous Obsession. In: Foreign Affairs
Volume 73 , Nr. 2, pp. 28-44

Lamont, J (2017): Distributive Justice
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/justice-distributive/
Midgley, J (1997): Social Welfare in Global Context. Sage
Thousand Oaks , London , New Delhi
Offe, C (1997): Towards a new Equilibrium of citizens rights and economic resources ?. In:
OECD (Ed.) Societal Cohesion and the Globalising economy . What does the Future hold?
Paris. pp. 81 -108
Rawls, J (2003): A Theory of Justice. Cambridge, Belknap Press of Harvard University Press
Sen, A (1999): Development as Freedom, A.A. Knopf, New York
Shruti S (2017): The Rise of Citizenship and Rights Post the Advent of Enlightenment. J Pol Sci
Pub Aff 5: 283. doi: 10.4172/2332-0761.1000283
Van Sternbergen, B (1994) : The Condition of Citizenship: an Introduction . In Van
Sternbergen, B (Ed): The Condition of Citizenship. London , Thousand Oaks , New Delhi :Sage
Puplications , pp. 1-10

[10]

