"x"
"1" "Castañeda ,  Ernesto .   A Place to Call Home: Immigrant Exclusion and Urban Belonging in New York, Paris, and Barcelona . Stanford University Press ,  2018 . pp.  208 , $25.00 paper, ( 9781503605763) ."
"2" "I n  A Place to Call Home: Immigrant Exclusion and Urban Belonging in New York, Paris, and Barcelona,  Ernesto   Castañeda  explore s   how  immigrant incorporation and sense of belonging are  shaped by  social processes in different cities.   The  author   explores   city-level  differences by   d rawing on  original  data  including  et hnography, interviews,  and  surveys , which  he  collect ed  through years of research in sending  and  receiving countries.   A   compar ative   study  of  New York, Paris,  and  Barcelona and two groups ,   Latin American s   and North African s ,   i t contributes to   the  grow ing literature that compares  how policies and contexts of migration affect  immigrants’ and their descendants’ long-term settlement experiences  on both side s  of the Atlantic."
"3" "Castañeda   starts, in  c hapter  1 , with a  concise argument for  considering both  immigrants’  subjective feeling s  of inclusion  and   objective measures of  their  incorporation.  The  study  compare s  immigrant groups with similar backgrounds and socio-economic status . They  are  Latin Americans (mainly Mexicans) in New York, North Africans in Paris, and Latin Americans and North Africans in Barcelona , who  make up the largest immigrant groups in their respective cities.  He  examines  i ntegration  outcomes in various domains (labor market,  politics,  housing, and intermarriage) .   Given the comparative nature of the book, he  outlines  the  main  grand  narrative s at the national and city level s  that help explain integration outcomes and immigrant  well-being :  models of integration,  minority rights,  and  religious tolerance .   Furthermore,  he examines the conditions and immigrants’  understanding  of their conditions  before migration ,  which  influence  immigrant  long-term settlement experiences and  their  well-being."
"4" "The  next three chapters  focus  on  how  the  immigrant group s   fare  in  each city   and  their   experience s of  urban belonging .   E ach chapter   examines how the context of reception shapes immigrant  integration  and  how   immigrants   feel  about the city’s inclusiveness.  Castañeda   asks   how closely   subjective feelings  align   with  objective integration outcomes."
"5" "Chapter  2   examines  the  urban belonging   and  varied  integration  outcomes  for  Mexican immigrants in New York .  It  situates  New York as an immigrant destination in the long history of  American immigration policies  and  nation-building .  Mexican immigrants feel  they belong and   are  socially   integrate d  because New York City leaves incorporation to the immigrants.  Since the  US has a de facto multicultural liberal system , it is open to  immigrants  wh o  maintain   their  cultural  practices  and   organize  along   ethnic, cultural ,   or   racial lines .   Castañeda  finds  that  Mexicans in New York are integrated  well   because of the availability of  jobs , even though many  before immigrating to the city  overestimate d   what  they w ould  earn.   Although   many Mexican immigrants  lack  legal  papers   and a  safety net, and  despite  the high cost of living , they  still  insert themselves in New York ’s  social fabric through religious and political activities   ( 46 ) ."
"6" "In c hapter 3 ,   Castañeda   argues that   Arab  N orth African  immigrants   and their descendants  feel marginalized and excluded from  Parisian   society. They lack political voice and urban belonging.   In the cultural realm,  the  strong preference Parisians have for their own culture burden s  immigrants and their children , which leads to  social exclusion .  Due to   France’s  strong welfare state, most   i mmigrants have direct relationship s  with state  bureaucrac ies ;  thus,  they are administratively incorporated  in to the French welfare system. However, this   can  erode group solidarity ,  weaken  social capital ,   and impede  their ability to act collectively.  Furthermore, they are also residentially segregated from the native population  by living  in the  banlieue s ,  low-income housing in the suburbs .  D espite citizenship and a social safety net, many children of North Africans are not socially integrated ."
"7" "C hapter  4   shows that  Latin  American  and North African  immigrants  feel welcome  in Barcelona , yet   their normative expectations about integration get reversed.  Latinos report that they feel less welcome than  they  expected before migration , while North African s  feel more welcome .  One  reason  is  Barcelona ’s  locat ion  in Catal onia , a n autonomous region in Spain ,  with  a strong  nationalist movement  and its own  local language (Catalan).   Spain   has a top-down multicultural model of immigrant integration   (similar to Canada’s) ;  thus,  w ithin Catal onia   i mmigrants  enjoy   cultural rights ,  an extension of  minority rights for local residents .   Surprisingly, l anguage  became  a  barrier  of incorporation  to  Latin American s .   The l ocal s speak  Catalan ,  while Latin Americans speak Spanish , which  Catalans see as  a proxy  for   Madrid ’s control .   They feel unwelcome because they  a re identified as non-Catalan .  In contrast, North African immigrants expected that  Spain’s  anti-Muslim history  would  work against  their  incorporation ;   yet,  t hey feel less personal and institutional discrimination in  the city  than expected.   They  can  practice their cultural traditions, and many   North African men   date  local women .  T he author argues  that   immigrants’  positive perceptions of Barcelona  are  influenced by  municipal  i nterventions, economic integration, and social contact with other Barcelona residents  even though they may have experienced  residual racism ."
"8" "C hapter 5  moves   on   to  different avenues of religious expression in  the three cities.   Castañeda   focuses on how  immigrants express their worth through their religious affiliation:  Catholicism in New York and Paris and Islam in  Paris and Barcelona .   He  argues that although  the  three countries have freedom of religion, and separation between church and state, they are actualized differently in each location.  T hese differences shape  the  forms of inclusion or exclusion,  and how immigrant s  are incorporated  (125).   Whereas,  i n  New York , Mexican  i mmigrants  expressed   their religious and ethnic identity  by  celebrating the Virgin of Gua d alupe ;   in   Paris ,   collective  religious  identity  is  not  expressed   among  Mexican immigrant   professionals , who  follow the French model of immigrant incorporation.   In Barcelona, Catholic identity has shown limited efficacy in encouraging bonds between newcomers and natives.  Catalonian  ethnic and regional identities trum p religious commonalities.   Islam   is a contentious topic  in France ;   i mmigrants adapt  by   downplaying  public  displays   of Islam .  They often  feel that  their religion and cultural traditions are  not  respected  and stigmatized .   French Muslims are  isolated from one another   as they  are not encouraged to display their  religious affiliation in public .   In contrast  in  Barcelona ,  Arab  North African  immigrants   can  identify with each other on the basis of  a  common religion  as they have spaces to  do so .   The author  offers  an insight that religion can be both dividing and unifying force in shaping immigrant integration and well-being."
"9" "In chapter  6 ,   the author bring s  the  book ’s themes  together,  and discusses   the  structural, institutional ,  and  individual   factors that  affect how inclusive each city is toward immigrants .  He highlights the contextual factors that shape immigrant incorporation and belonging  such as  institutional integration  channels , access to  legal  residence, economic  and  political integration.   I mmigrants in  New York and Barcelona  are more structural ly  integrated into the social life of the cities and  have  a greater  sense of belonging than their counterparts in Paris. In the first two cities, immigrants  perceive more opportunities,  even though   Paris has  more generous  social welfare and economic benefits (145).  In other words,  an  objective measure such as welfare benefit s  might not predict immigrants’ well-being.  In contrast, d espite  long  work hours and being undocumented,   immigrants   feel   relatively better  off  in New York."
"10" "Although   Castañeda   has  presented   a n impressive  array   of data through interviews and surveys, immigrant voice s  get lost when the  author  writes about structural and  institutional  differences between cities.   W hile   I  would   have  like d  more  interview  data , th e  book  makes  valuable contribution s  to the fields of immigration and urban studies.  The author   demonstrates   that  contexts of reception  matter  to immigrant  well-being and  incorporation."
"11" "Nga Than"
"12" "City University of New York – The Graduate Center"
"13" "Nga Than  is  a doctoral student at City University of New York Graduate Center.  Her research interests include   immigration ,  entrepreneurship,  sociology of work ,   and  consumption."
"14" "Email :  nthan@gradcenter.cuny.edu"
