Bringing the polls to the people: How electoral access encourages
turnout but shapes political inequality
Daniel de Kadt∗
May 16, 2019

Abstract
Attempts to increase electoral access are generally seen as unambiguously desirable in new democracies. While these policies can increase the size of the electorate, they may also carry costs through
changing electorate composition, by differentially enfranchising those who are highly sensitive to costs.
Using new administrative data from South Africa and a difference-in-differences design, I show that a 15
year, large scale, expansion of access to voting stations increased national turnout by between 2.3 and
4.7 percentage points. In the context of a natural quasi-experiment, I then use 39,000 survey respondents
geo-referenced to their nearest voting station to document that those of high socioeconomic status, and
those who are older, are much more sensitive to electoral access than others. This may affect electorate
composition in favor of those already economically or politically powerful, who also happen to be more
opposed to redistributive public policies and have particular partisan preferences.

∗ University

of California Merced, ddekadt@ucmerced.edu.

1

1. Introduction
Electoral democracy depends on voter participation, but new or fragile democracies often suffer from low
levels of formal political engagement. Policies designed to increase electoral access in these countries are
thus generally seen as unambiguously desirable. In South Africa, an archetypal new democracy where the
number of voting stations has increased 51% in just 15 years, I show that expanded access to the vote has
had powerful consequences for the size of the electorate. Yet increasing access affects the composition of the
electorate by differentially enfranchising those who are highly sensitive to voting costs. Lowering voting costs
increases turnout in general, but does so more for older and wealthier voters, those who are more opposed to
redistributive public policy and have particular partisan preferences. In states where elections are not highly
competitive, where voting is new, or where trust in institutions is fragile, increasing political inequality may
countervail the benefits of increasing turnout.
Because the probability of influencing an election is vanishingly small for individuals, many people are
highly sensitive to the cost of voting (Downs, 1957; Niemi, 1976; Sanders, 1980; Kousser and Mullin, 2007;
Brady and McNulty, 2011; Goodman and Stokes, 2018). Elites may pursue partisan agendas by systematically varying these costs, essentially disenfranchising targeted groups of people (Dunne et al., 1997). Recent
debates in the United States about election administration reflect this very real fear (Barreto et al., 2009;
Brady and McNulty, 2011; Stewart III, 2012; Burden et al., 2014; Hajnal et al., 2017; Grimmer et al., 2017;
Joslyn et al., 2018; Pettigrew, 2017). Yet even non-partisan attempts to lower voting costs across the board
may have unintended consequences for socioeconomic or partisan inequality in the electorate (Enos et al.,
2013). In the United States, voting by mail increases turnout but also differentially activates older, more
educated, more interested non-voters (Berinsky et al., 2001; Berinsky, 2005; Arceneaux and Nickerson, 2009).
In fledgling democracies similar consequences may occur – with or without elite influence – in the natural
course of incrementally expanding access to the vote. A nascent body of work now shows that interventions
to facilitate direct access to elected officials can have compositional consequences, empowering only certain
types of people (Grossman et al., 2014, 2016, 2017).
Post-apartheid South Africa provides a compelling political setting for studying the consequences of
such incremental electoral inclusion. In the wake of the emancipatory election of 1994, South Africa’s
then newly established non-partisan Independent Electoral Commission (IEC) “electronically, randomly and
statistically” determined the delimitations of voting districts, and consequently the exact locations of their
associated voting stations (IEC, 1999). Since then, the IEC has dramatically increased the number of voting

2

stations in an open, predictable, and non-partisan fashion. At the same time, turnout has slowly declined
from 86% of the voting age population (VAP) in 1994 to 57% in 2014 (Schulz-Herzenberg, 2009, 2014). The
rich spatial and temporal variation in voting station access and turnout, combined with the initial quasirandom situating of stations, provides an opportunity to make credible causal inferences about the effects of
expanding access to the vote.
With new data on the locations of South African voting stations for approximately 4,000 geographic units
over 7 election cycles, I use a difference-in-differences design to show the IEC’s large scale expansion of access
to voting stations increased national turnout by between 2.3 and 4.7 percentage points. I then use 39,000
geo-referenced survey respondents from the South African Social Attitudes Survey (HSRC, 2011), linked to
their nearest voting station to show that, in the context of a natural quasi-experiment, greater distances to
voting stations decrease the probability of voting. Crucially, as found in other contexts, those voters who are
wealthier, have higher incomes, or are gainfully employed are more sensitive to high voting costs than those
of lower socioeconomic status. Indeed, I also find that at the aggregate level, socioeconomically advantaged
parts of South Africa are typically more responsive to increases in electoral access. Likewise, middle-aged
and older citizens are very sensitive to voting costs, while the youth, who face unemployment levels of over
55%, are almost entirely invariant to them. These twin results accord with recent findings about turnout
patterns in South Africa. A dramatic and increasing age-based political participation gap exists: roughly
75% of those 30 and over vote in national elections, compared to only 37% of those under 30 (Mattes, 2012;
Scott et al., 2015). Likewise, a rising socioeconomic political participation gap has emerged: in the 2014
election, the top income decile turned out at rates 10 percentage points higher than the lowest income decile
(Everatt, 2016). South Africa is one of the world’s most unequal societies (Leibbrandt et al., 2010), and
socioeconomically advantaged and older people dominate elite political and economic spaces, have systematic
partisan leanings, and have economic preferences generally opposed to redistributive public policies.
Understanding the growth and consolidation of democracy depends on answers to key questions about
political participation: who votes, who does not, and why. I theorize that in new democracies, voting costs
inhibit participation, and increasing access is an effective tool for increasing turnout. Yet straightforward
attempts to lower voting costs for all may have unintended consequences. In an ideal democracy, the
electorate should be largely representative of society – a state of political equality in participation. This study
shows that this ideal may be threatened not only when costs are differentially imposed, but because different
types of people are differentially sensitive to those costs. While these arguments emerge from research
conducted in established democracies, they take on different shapes in poor and highly unequal democracies

3

like South Africa. Furthermore, very little is known about the applicability of even our most basic theories
of turnout in developing democracies. By leveraging both unique data and a natural policy-based quasiexperiment, this study presents some of the first empirical evidence from outside of wealthy established
democracies that voting costs are extremely important in citizens’ turnout calculus, and that these costs
may matter differently for different types of potential voters. Policy makers should heed these findings,
and ensure that attempts to increase turnout use targeted non-partisan voter education and mobilization to
complement reductions in costs.

2. Theory and context
Electoral democracy is a process constructed over time through sustained voter participation in regular, free,
and fair elections (Lindberg, 2004, 2006). As such, behavioral models have been applied to broader debates
about transitions and regime consolidation, focusing on opinion formation and vote choice. Detailed studies
of the citizens of new democracies have characterized how people come to trust and support particular
institutional arrangements (Bratton and Mattes, 2001; Mattes, 2002; Denemark et al., 2016; de Kadt, 2017).
In South Africa and elsewhere, others consider how vote choice is shaped by clientelism (Wantchekon, 2003;
Stokes, 2005), elite cue taking (Eifert et al., 2010; Baldwin, 2013; Nathan, 2016a; de Kadt and Larreguy,
2018), ethnic or national identification (Posner, 2004; Robinson, 2014), economic incentives (Mattes and
Piombo, 2001), or complex conditional mixtures of motivations (Ferree, 2006, 2010; Ichino and Nathan,
2013; Nathan, 2016b; de Kadt and Lieberman, 2017; Sands and de Kadt, ming).
Far less studied in emerging democratic contexts, and in particular Sub-Saharan Africa, is turnout: who
votes, who does not, and why (Kuenzi and Lambright, 2011). The answers to these questions provide crucial
insights into how electorates may grow or shrink, change or stay the same, and, crucially, are affected by
decisions made by election officials (Hidalgo and Nichter, 2015). The importance of studying the size and
composition of the electorate, and how access to the vote shapes it, is obvious even in established democracies
such as the U.S. where policies have been designed to differentially raise the cost of voting for certain types
of voters (US Court of Appeals For the Fourth Cicruit, 2016), and where even non-partisan attempts to
lower voting costs have had compositional effects (Berinsky, 2005). In new democracies, where institutional
arrangements are different, levels of political knowledge are vastly lower, and political experience is often
lacking, these consequences merit closer examination.

4

2.1. Models of turnout behavior
Models of turnout propose that potential voters face a utility maximizing problem. The benefits of voting rely
on the probability of pivotality (influence), the returns received from the chosen candidate or party winning,
other participatory rewards unrelated to policy outcomes, and costs (Downs, 1957; Riker and Ordeshook,
1968; Niemi, 1976; Sanders, 1980; Aldrich, 1993). Whenever the combination of influence, policy returns,
and general participatory rewards is more utility-generating than the costs, turnout is “rational.”
Though influence is typically close to zero for any individual, voting still occurs. Marginal voting decisions are thus thought to hinge on the weighing of participatory rewards, rather than policy returns, and
costs (Gimpel and Schuknecht, 2003; Gimpel et al., 2006; Brady and McNulty, 2011). Numerous studies
have explored different dimensions of participatory rewards, from intrinsic self-motivation and duty to group
mobilization and turnout buying (Feddersen and Pesendorfer, 1996; Feddersen, 2004; Feddersen and Sandroni, 2006; Nichter, 2008; Battaglini et al., 2010; Larreguy et al., 2016). In Africa’s various democracies,
researchers have found evidence that particular institutional arrangements, election timing, and elite mobilization correlate with aggregate and individual turnout (Kuenzi and Lambright, 2007, 2011). More recent
work has also demonstrated that ethnically-targeted mobilization efforts play an important role in political
campaigns (Horowitz, 2016), and that turnout buying may be present in African elections Kramon (2016).
Multiple costs faced by voters constrain their participation (Blais, 2000). Voters face direct costs related
to travel (Dyck and Gimpel, 2005; McNulty et al., 2009; Bhatti, 2012), opportunity costs in what is forgone
by voting (Stein and Vonnahme, 2008), and psychic or cognitive costs relating to search (Brady and McNulty,
2011), processing information and making decisions. Reducing any of these costs increases utility, thereby
increasing the probability of voting. Yet all individuals may not be similarly sensitive. For example, research
on compulsory voting shows that while turnout increases in aggregate, the composition of the electorate can
also be affected. Levying fines against those who do not vote appears to differentially turn out those with
higher levels of educational attainment in Brazil, increasing political inequality (Cepaluni and Hidalgo,
2016), though the opposite appears true in the Australian case (Fowler, 2013). Whatever the effects in a
given context, the possibility that either lowering voting costs or increasing penalties for not voting may
have “perverse” consequences for political inequality has been widely documented (Berinsky, 2005). The
South African political context merits a focus on two groups of citizens that may be differentially activated
by increasing electoral access, which has implications for political inequality and, potentially, representation.
First, given South Africa’s extreme economic inequality, I test whether socioeconomic status divides

5

sensitivity to voting costs. Those in higher socioeconomic strata are likely to perceive that they have little
to gain, either directly or indirectly, from participating in electoral politics. Nathan (2016a) argues that in
Ghana, wealthier voters have little to gain directly from patronage politics. This same dynamic is highly
plausible in South Africa, and may be compounded by those of lower socioeconomic status being heavily
reliant on government grants. With lower perceived benefits those of higher socioeconomic status may
be more marginal voters than those of lower socioeconomic status, and thus more sensitive to direct voting
costs. Those who are more economically engaged likely also face greater opportunity costs – they hold higher
valuations of their time. Electoral participation in the early 2000s was typically declining in income in South
Africa (Everatt, 2016), and the same relationship has been found in 9 other African democracies (Kuenzi and
Lambright, 2011) and across many other parts of the developing world (Kasara and Suryanarayan, 2015).
Second, I investigate whether sensitivity to voting costs varies by age. Older voters, for a broad range
of reasons including, but not limited to, health, transportation, and opportunity costs, are also likely to
be more sensitive to direct costs than younger voters, a dynamic that has been documented in the U.S.
(Berinsky et al., 2001; Brady and McNulty, 2011). Age is particularly important in South African where
older voters currently participate at almost twice the rate of those under 30 years of age (Mattes, 2012; Scott
et al., 2015), and elite politics is dominated by an older generation from the anti-apartheid era.
To summarize, I consider four questions in the context of South Africa’s young electoral democracy. First,
do citizens respond to changes in the costs of voting by increasing turnout when costs decline? Second, are
those of higher socioeconomic status more sensitive to voting costs than those of lower socioeconomic status?
Third, are older people, even conditional on socioeconomic status, more sensitive to costs than the youth?
Finally, are there implications for political inequality with regard to public policy and partisan preferences?

2.2. Elections in Democratic South Africa
In 1994, South Africans voted in the country’s first democratic election, with Nelson Mandela’s African
National Congress (ANC) gaining a strong majority. Turnout was staggeringly high, in part due to the
emancipatory nature of the occasion, and in part due to the absence of required registration. Since 1994,
turnout has declined, likely due to regression to the mean, generational replacement of those who participated
in the 1994 election, and the failure of the opposition to mobilize new voters (Mattes, 2012; Scott et al.,
2015).1
1

I do not include the 1995/6 election as this was not run by the IEC and the requisite data is not available.

6

South African elections occur at two levels, off cycle. National and Provincial Elections (NPEs), in which
national and provincial parliamentary composition is decided by proportional representation, were held in
1999, 2004, 2009, and 2014. Off cycle Local Government Elections (LGEs), which determine who controls the
roughly 230 municipal councils across the country, were held in 2000, 2006, 2011, and most recently 2016.2
The LGEs use a mixed-member system, in which some seats are allocated by proportional representation,
and others are allocated by ward level single-member winner-takes-all contests. Though there is a small
degree of split-ticket voting across election types, South African elections are typically party-centric rather
than individual-centric (Piper, 2012). LGEs are also typically perceived by the media and the elite as midterm referenda on the government. Despite its setbacks in the 2016 elections, the ANC remains dominant at
both levels: they control over 60% of the seats in parliament, and around two-thirds of municipal councils .
All elections are administered by the IEC. Established just prior to the 1999 NPE, the IEC created the
first demarcation of South Africa’s voting districts and corresponding voting stations. The country was
“electronically, randomly and statistically” divided into 14,650 voting districts at the municipal level (IEC,
1999). This process, while somewhat opaque, involved each municipality being randomly divided into a
target number of voting district polygons, such that the total estimated VAP in the municipality could be
accommodated on election day as follows: approximately 3,000 voters per urban voting district and 1,200
per rural voting district.3 With municipalities randomly divided into roughly equal-sized spatial units by the
computer, each of these newly delimited voting district was allocated a single voting station such that it was
as best as possible, “in the centre of the voting district and would be equally accessible to all voters” (IEC,
1999). Given the large number of potential voting district randomizations, the exact locations of voting
stations within municipalities were quasi-randomly assigned. That is, for every unique set of randomized
polygons (voting districts), the exact location of the voting station (roughly at the centre of the polygon)
is different. While an imperfect approximation of an experiment, this provides a useful inferential lever for
isolating the effect of access on self-reported turnout at the individual level.
Since 1999, the IEC has sought to increase potential voters’ access to the polls, typically by reducing
2

The data used in the paper does not include 2016.

3

The IEC states that the process for voting district delimitation was approved by party liaisons, and that
the process was closely monitored to prevent gerrymandering.

7

travel and wait times.4 A central tool for improving electoral access is expanding the number of voting
stations, which have increased by 51% from 14,650 in 1999 to 22,263 in 2014, as shown in the left panel of
Figure 1.5 In the 2000 election report, the IEC notes that re-drawing or splitting of voting districts after the
1999 elections focused on places where, “physical features such as hills and rivers had prevented reasonable
access to voting stations by voters” (IEC, 2000). Likewise, most election reports clearly state that the steady
increase in voting stations is to ensure that voters have, “reasonable access to voting stations in terms of
distance” and “do not wait at their voting station for unreasonable periods of time to vote” (IEC, 2014).
South Africa is not alone in growing access through increasing voting station numbers. Ghana, Tanzania,
Zambia, and Kenya have all embarked on similar – and sometimes even more ambitious – expansions of
voting infrastructure in recent years (GBN, 2012; Kazoka, 2014; Mbaka, 2015; DN, 2015).
The right panel of Figure 1 shows the distribution of ward-level net changes from 1999 to 2014. Holding
the geography of political wards constant, 64.63% have experienced a net increase in voting station numbers
over the period (blue), 21.54% have retained the same number (grey), and 13.83% have seen an overall
decrease in their number of voting stations (red).6 The average net change over the study period (from 1999
to 2014) is an increase of 1.2 voting stations, and there exists rich temporal and spatial variation.
The IEC provides information in annual reports about how new voting stations are allocated. Consistent
across multiple reports is the idea that increases in voting station numbers follow, “changes in human
settlement patterns that had occurred since the [previous] elections. Human settlement changes included the
growth of informal settlements, the intra-urban movement of voters, and urbanisation” (IEC, 2011). This
typically means relying on registration levels from the prior election as a proxy for human settlement.7 These
4

There are also a small number of changes to the voting station network and infrastructure that are
made each year due to electoral re-demarcations. Further, the IEC has piloted and implemented a range
of new technologies like the Zip-zip machine and various queueing systems, but these are implemented
nationally with no spatial variation.

5

In the 2016 LGEs, held on August 3, 2016 there were 22,663 voting stations, which is a modest increase
of 400 from 2014. I do not analyze data for 2016.

6

Decreases are typically the result of correcting initial mis-allocations of resources. Therefore, the majority
of decreases occurred from 1999-2000 and 2000-2004. A small number of decreases result from moving
pre-existing voting stations to new venues that did not previously exist.

7

This interpretation is based on the author’s correspondence with employees at Statistics South Africa.

8

Figure 1: Changes in Voting Stations 1999-2014
1000

25000

20000
Number of Wards

Total Number of Polling Places

750

500

15000

250

10000

14

−10
0
10
Net Change in Ward Level Voting Stations (1999 − 2014)

20

20
11

09
20

06
20

04
20

19
9
20 9
00

0

Election Year

Note: The left panel shows the total number of voting stations in South Africa per the IEC’s official election reports from 1999
through 2014. The right panel shows a histogram of ward-level changes from 1999 to 2014. The modal change over the entire
period 1999 to 2014 is an increase of 1, and the average change is an increase of 1.2 voting stations. 64.63% of wards have
experienced a net increase in voting station numbers over the past 15 years (blue), 21.54% have retained the same number
(grey), and 13.83% have seen an overall decrease in their number of voting stations (red). Together, both panels demonstrate
that not only has the number of voting stations increased dramatically, but that the average change in each ward has been net
positive over time.

9

public reports, as well as conversations with opposition politicians, suggest that the decision to allocate new
voting stations is largely a-political. The fact that the allocation of voting stations follows human settlement
is also reassuring with regard to a study of political turnout, as there is little reason to believe that such
areas are somehow predisposed to show high levels of turnout. As a check, I offer a variety of empirical
tests of these assumptions in later sections. Once a new voting district has been delimited a new voting
station assigned, the IEC chooses a site. Two-thirds of voting stations are located at schools, and one-third
are located in a mixture of community centers, religious buildings, public facilities, and in some of the rural
parts of South Africa, traditional courts or even Chief’s kraals (cattle enclosures).

3. Data
I bring together data from various administrative sources to construct a unique time-varying panel dataset
of the number of voting stations and electoral returns. The first decision to be made is the spatial unit of
analysis. I choose the 2011 ward, the smallest discrete unit of political geography in the country, for a total
of 4,277 cross-sectional units observed over 7 elections.8

3.1. Voting station locations and counts
Shapefiles of voting stations for the 1999, 2000, 2004, 2006, 2009, 2011, and 2014, elections were provided by
the IEC in Centurion, Gauteng. Using QGIS and the 2011 ward demarcations, I calculate V otingStationsit ,
8

Given that we might fear some endogenous feature of the aerial unit (e.g. redistricting that took place
after 2000, the first major demarcation), I replicate the results using alternative units of aggregation.
The main effect estimates replicate using the 2000 ward demarcations (n = 3, 786). While the point
estimates are marginally lower, this is due to the 2000 wards being larger polygons, meaning baseline
counts and changes are higher. The net effect is essentially unchanged. The placebo tests also replicate.
These results are available in full detail in the additional appendix materials. Throughout the study, I
use the 2011 boundaries in the main analysis because they are the most recent demarcation as of writing,
are higher in number which increases statistical power, and allow for clean merging of census data which
is used to calculate VAP and other covariates.

10

11

Note: The upper panels show the spatial distribution of voting stations in 1999 and 2014 for Bloemfontein, the largest city in the central province of the Free State,
nested within the Mangaung municipality. Each cross or X represents a single voting station. This is the raw spatial data. The lower panels show the spatial distribution
of voting station counts aggregated to the ward level for the same area. This is the processed data used in the analysis. The left set of panels show the data for 1999,
and the right set of panels show data for 2014. Contrasting the two shows the expansion of access to voting stations in Mangaung.

Figure 2: Voting Stations in Bloemfontein, 1999 and 2014: Raw Data and Aggregated Data

the total number of voting stations available to the local population for each ward in each election year.9
Figure 2 visualizes this data for one major city and its surrounding areas for the years 1999 and 2014.
This shows both the expansion of access in the area – contrasting the left panels to the right panels – and the
process of aggregation from raw data to ward data – contrasting the top panels to the bottom panels.10 This
aggregation process is repeated for the entire country for each election year. Maps of year-to-year changes
are available in the additional appendix materials, and demonstrate spatial and temporal variation in voting
station counts.

3.2. Election returns and census data
Using the geo-referenced voting stations for each election and publicly available election returns, I construct
various ward level election measures. For the NPEs, I use national ballot returns to build these variables;
for the LGEs, proportional representation ballot returns are used. The key dependent variable is turnout in
a given ward, which is calculated in two ways:

T urnoutRegit =

V otesit
Registeredit

T urnoutV APit =

V otesit
V APit

T urnoutReg measures the fraction of those eligible to vote on election day who turned up at the polls.
This quantity is precise because the measures of both the votes cast and the registered population come from
9

This measure is agnostic as to the distribution of voting stations within the ward. It could be that a
large number of voting stations poorly distributed with respect to population centers provides less access
than fewer well distributed stations. Though this is plausible, it is unlikely to be a major concern, given
that the IEC’s explicit desire when increasing voting stations is increasing access. Further, exploring the
data visually suggests that the distribution of voting stations has typically become more comprehensive
over time.

10

Figure 2 also suggests a second change over time – a change in the distribution of existing stock of
polling stations so as to better serve the population. While such changes may be important, the primary
focus of this paper is changes in the volume and distribution of stock, rather than changes in only the
distribution.

12

the same source, the IEC’s official voting station returns. There is no concern that the underlying data or
geographies are different, which would ultimately introduce measurement error into this calculation. This
variable also maps perfectly to the key performance indicators for the IEC’s official turnout measures, which
makes it interpretable for policy-makers. Yet it also has drawbacks, the most notable of which is that any
effect on the ratio of votes cast to the registered population may reflect movement in either the denominator,
the numerator, or both. A positive estimated effect of increasing voting stations on T urnoutReg might
measure not an increase in actual votes cast, but a decrease in the registered population. Given that
registration takes place at voting stations in the run up to the elections, it seems highly unlikely that this
would be the case, and empirically, it does not appear to be true. If anything, this variable may understate
changes in turnout by increasing the denominator and numerator simultaneously, attenuating estimates.
T urnoutReg is my preferred measure of turnout, likely providing conservative estimates of any effect.
By contrast, T urnoutV AP takes as the denominator the interpolated voting age population (VAP) for
a given election year. The VAP is reliably measured in the censuses of 2001 and 2011 by Statistics South
Africa, the national census bureau. I use these anchoring values for the VAP in 2000 and 2011, and linearly
interpolate and extrapolate VAP for the missing election years.11 T urnoutV AP measures the fraction of
those who are eligible to vote at all who turned up at the polls. This is a useful quantity because the
denominator, VAP, cannot be affected by the number of voting stations, so any effect is attributable to
changes in the numerator and not the denominator. Yet this measure is also imperfect: because the measure
of VAP comes from the census and not the IEC, it fails to account for subtle changes in electoral geography
that go with the creation of new voting stations. Thus, it is likely that the denominator is too small in those
places allocated new voting stations and too big in those places that are not, upwardly biasing the effect
estimates. As discussed later, some of the placebo test that probe the validity of the research design are less
persuasive when using this measure rather than T urnoutReg, though the deviations found are typically tiny
relative to the effect estimates.
Both dependent variables range from 0 to 1, with the mean of T urnoutReg equal to 0.66 (0.77 for NPEs,
0.52 for LGEs) and the mean of T urnoutV AP equal to 0.48 (0.55 for NPEs, 0.39 for LGEs). While the main
11

Of course, the linearity assumption may affect the inferences made – growth in population may be nonlinear, and this may be correlated with both increases in voting stations and increases in turnout. I
believe this is unlikely, but it is an important caveat. Further, interpolation seems reasonable given that
the two data points I observe essentially bookend the study period.

13

effect estimates are consistent in sign and statistical significance across both measures, the coefficients are
typically twice as large when using T urnoutV AP rather than T urnoutReg. The truth likely lies somewhere
in between, and these quantities should be see as providing lower and upper estimates of the effects.

4. Ward-level research design and results
The difference-in-differences design between elections should ideally isolate the effect of changes in the number
of voting stations in a given area on turnout. I estimate this effect with OLS using a panel of ≈ 4, 000 units,
each measured in 7 election periods:

Yit = αi + βV otingStationsit + γV otingStationsit−1 + δt + i

Where i is the ward, t is the election year, Yit is either dependent variable, V otingStationsit is the count
of voting stations in ward i for election year t, αi are ward fixed effects, δt are election year fixed effects,
and i are ward-clustered standard errors. The key causal quantity of interest is the coefficient on the log of
(V otingStations + 1), which is transformed due to right skewness in the variable and likely non-linearity in
marginal effects.12 I include V otingStationsit−1 , a one-time-period lag of the log of (V otingStations + 1),
to accounts for path-dependence in the count of voting stations over time, given that the IEC considers
current resource allocations when allocating new voting stations. In further specifications, I include province(n = 9), municipal- (n = 234), or unit-level linear time trends, typically seen as a conservative restriction
in a difference-in-differences design.13 These account for the possibility that at certain geographic levels –
certain provinces, municipalities, or units – turnout and voting station counts are simultaneously increasing
over time, resulting in spurious causal estimates.
12

Estimating models with V otingStations and the square of V otingStations provides non-linear estimates,
in which turnout is increasing in V otingStations but at a declining rate, extremely similar in both
substance and form to the results with the log transformed variable. The results are available in the
additional appendix materials.

13

Note that the results presented throughout the paper are generally robust – in fact, the point estimates
are typically further from zero and similarly statistically significant (p < 0.01) – to the inclusion of
linear and quadratic province-, municipal- or unit-level time trends. I elide these results due to space
constraints.

14

4.1. Validity of the research design
Difference-in-differences is a valid research design for causal inference when there are no “time-varying confounders,” implying what is sometimes called the “parallel trends” assumption. Time-varying confounders
are omitted variables that simultaneously predict both the causal variable, V otingStationsit , and the outcome, T urnoutRegit or T urnoutV APit . In the absence of such confounders we may assume parallel trends:
over time, had those places that did receive new voting stations hypothetically not receive them, turnout
would have followed the same trend as turnout in those places that really did not receive new voting stations.
How might this assumption be violated? Perhaps the types of places that are targeted for new voting
stations are those where turnout is already on the rise. The IEC may target places where there is an uptick in turnout in the previous election, or where there is an expressed demand for more election resources.
Or, despite being non-partisan, the IEC may be politically pressured into providing greater access to those
parts of the country that are likely to favor the incumbent, ANC, which could correlate with higher turnout
through, for instance, machine politics.
Five pieces of evidence help to assuage these concerns. The first is qualitative. As outlined earlier, the
IEC has an explicit focus on expanding access and tracking changes in human settlement patterns when
allocating new voting stations. There appears to be little room for political agendas in the allocation of
voting stations, and very minimal consultation with local politicians. Of course, trusting official reports may
be unwise, so I interviewed politicians in the main opposition party, the Democratic Alliance (DA), who
interact with the IEC. Opposition politicians are themselves likely to be biased against my assumptions, yet
nothing raised in any of the interviews questioned the IEC’s integrity or their agenda when allocating voting
stations, even when asked directly.
Second, this qualitative evidence is supported by results from a regression discontinuity design using close
races in the 2000, 2006, and 2011 ward level single-member district elections. I estimate whether an ANC
councillor winning a local race has an effect on the number of voting stations allocated to that ward for
the next election. The estimates, presented in the appendix, are generally close to zero and not statistically
significant, suggesting very little evidence of strategic allocation on the basis of ANC control.
Third, I estimate placebo regressions where the dependent variable is lagged by one time period. This tests
the parallel trends assumption as directly as possible: the causal variable in time t should not be associated
with the observed outcome in the previous time period, t − 1. The presence of a strong association would
suggest that, had the number of voting stations not increased, turnout would not have trended parallel to

15

other wards that did not receive more voting stations. Reassuringly, results presented in the appendix show
that the number of voting stations in a given ward in time t generally do not predict turnout in time t − 1. I
also present results from a similar test using one- and two-time-period lead variables to test for anticipation
effects. Where there is statistically significant predictive power, the coefficients are substantively tiny.14
Fourth, the main results are robust to including current and/or lagged registration levels, and current
and/or lagged VAP levels on the right hand side as covariates. These estimates, available in the appendix,
show that the point estimates typically increase slightly they account for changes in the denominator of the
outcome variable as described above. Likewise, also included in the appendix, the main results are also robust
to including interpolated time-varying census covariates – logged mean household income, employment rates,
and average age in the ward. The inclusion of these covariates captures one major threat, that in-migration
by certain types of high-propensity voters may drive both the allocation of voting stations and turnout. Yet
controlling for these time-varying covariates yields effect estimates that are essentially indistinguishable from
the main results presented here. These two sets of robustness checks suggest that demographic trends do
not confound the estimates in any meaningful way.
Finally, highly dynamic confounders or compound treatments that track with the placement of new voting
stations may be a concern. Examples could be political party presence, voter education platforms, or rapidly
changing socioeconomic conditions. While these confounders are unlikely to explain effects of the magnitude
14

For T urnoutReg as the dependent variable, these placebo tests provide very little evidence, in terms of
either substantive or statistical significance, that the parallel trends assumption does not hold. However,
in some of the tests using T urnoutV AP , the results are statistically significant, but the placebo point estimates are generally 6-8 times smaller than the corresponding causal effect estimates. As T urnoutV AP
is likely upwardly biased, one could regard the estimated placebo effects as this bias and subtract this
bias from the main estimates. Even after this adjustment, the main effect estimates remain similarly
sized and substantively unchanged. In general, this placebo regression exercise provides support for
validity the difference-in-differences design. Further, to show that this exercise is, in fact, a suitable test
of parallel trends, I falsified it using the the count of registered voters as the dependent variable. The
raw count of registered voters in t − 1 should be associated with the voting station count in t, because
the IEC uses, among other non-varying ward characteristics, information about changes in population
to determine where more voting stations should be located. As expected, the placebo test fails when
using lagged registration levels as the outcome.

16

I find, I offer an empirical test by replicating the main analysis for an election-day outcome that should not be
affected by the number of voting stations, but could correlate with these types of confounders: the proportion
of votes that are “spoilt” (failed or ineligible votes). This variable generally correlates negatively with ward
level measures of socioeconomic status, and with various party vote shares, suggesting it may capture voters’
electoral competency and political party presence. In the appendix, I show a precisely estimated and highly
stable null relationship between changes in the voting station count and changes in the percent of spoilt
votes, providing further evidence in favor of parallel trends.

4.2. Results
I present results for both turnout variables in Table 1. The top panel (Panel A) presents estimates with
T urnoutReg, the preferred measure, as the dependent variable, and the bottom panel (Panel B) presents
the same estimates with the exception of using T urnoutV AP as the dependent variable. Each of the four
columns in Table 1 represents a different specification. Column (1) includes only the ward (unit) and year
fixed effects. Column (2) adds a linear provincial time trend for each of the nine provinces of the country.
Column (3) presents a more restrictive version of this, with the inclusion of linear municipality time trends
for each of the 234 municipalities in the country (as of 2011). Finally, column (4) reports the most restrictive
conditioning, which includes a linear trend for each ward in addition to ward (unit) and year fixed effects.
Across both dependent variables and all four specifications, the results are consistent in both sign and
statistical significance. The estimated coefficient on the log of V otingStations is roughly .05 for T urnoutReg,
and roughly .1 for T urnoutV AP . All eight estimated coefficients are statistically significant at p < 0.001.
To interpret these results substantively, consider Panel A, Column (1), for T urnoutReg. This result, the
lower estimate, suggests that a 25% increase in the number of voting stations would result in a 1.27 (0.0568
× log(1.25)) percentage point (pp) increase in turnout among registered voters. This means that moving
from four to five voting stations in an area increases turnout among the registered by 1.27 percentage points,
but this marginal effect declines as the baseline number of voting stations increases. Similarly, column (1),
Panel B, of Table 1, shows that a 25% increase in the number of voting stations would result in as much
as a 2.57 (0.115 × log(1.25)) percentage point increase in turnout among the VAP. It should be noted that
this non-linearity in effect sizes is the result of the use of a logged regressor; that is, the non-linearity is
itself assumed in the model. For robustness, in the additional appendix materials I also present models
using V otingStations and the square of V otingStations. These specifications show turnout is increasing
in V otingStations but at a declining rate, effects that are similar to the results with the log transformed

17

Table 1: Is Ward Level Turnout Affected by (Log) Voting Station Counts?
Panel A DV: TurnoutReg
(2)
(3)

(1)

(4)

Log VotingStations

0.0568∗∗∗
(0.00461)

0.0526∗∗∗
(0.00451)

0.0571∗∗∗
(0.00440)

0.0646∗∗∗
(0.00576)

Log VotingStations Lag1

-0.0211∗∗∗
(0.00373)

-0.00352
(0.00353)

0.00406
(0.00351)

0.0208∗∗∗
(0.00498)

Ward Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Linear Prov Time Trends
Linear Muni Time Trends
Linear Unit Time Trends
Observations
R2

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
23518
0.763

23518
0.787

23518
0.804

Panel B DV: TurnoutVAP
(2)
(3)

(1)

X
23518
0.844
(4)

Log VotingStations

0.115∗∗∗
(0.00636)

0.124∗∗∗
(0.00632)

0.131∗∗∗
(0.00640)

0.161∗∗∗
(0.00852)

Log VotingStations Lag1

0.0209∗∗∗
(0.00500)

0.0292∗∗∗
(0.00483)

0.0318∗∗∗
(0.00474)

0.0484∗∗∗
(0.00579)

Ward Fixed Effects
Year Fixed Effects
Linear Prov Time Trends
Linear Muni Time Trends
Linear Unit Time Trends
Observations
R2

X
X

X
X
X

X
X

X
X

X
23518
0.605

Standard errors clustered by ward in parentheses
+ p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

18

23518
0.637

23518
0.656

X
23518
0.773

variable.
Using the data for 1999 and 2014 to calculate the ward level period percent change in voting stations,
I estimate the aggregate effect of the IEC increasing access to the vote in this period. For each ward, I
multiply the period percent change by the coefficients in Column (1) of Table 1 for both T urnoutReg and
T urnoutV AP , calculating predicted effects for each ward. Averaging over these predicted effects gives an
estimated effect of the IEC increasing access to the vote over the period of the study. A 51% increase in the
number of voting stations likely accounts for a net period increase in turnout of between 2.3 (T urnoutReg)
and 4.7 (T urnoutV AP ) percentage points. This accounts for as much as 5% of the electorate.
While turnout both as a fraction of registered voters and VAP has declined substantially from 1999,
it began to stabilize in NPEs in the mid-70s (registered) and mid-50s (VAP). Further declines have been
staved off by the IEC’s concerted effort to expand physical access to the vote. The magnitude of these
aggregate point estimates is roughly in line with individual level estimates from some of the less intensive
get out the vote campaigns conducted in the U.S. Given the fact that generally increasing electoral access
does not involve targeted interactions with potential voters at all, these effects remain quite impressive.
Without detailed cost data from the IEC, it is impossible to conduct a per vote cost-benefit analysis; how
best to balance resources between increasing access, direct voter education, and mobilization is a question
practitioners should explore in light of these and other findings.

5. Individual sensitivity to voting costs
The aggregate results provide strong evidence that increasing access to voting stations increases turnout,
likely due to a mix of decreases in travel times and wait times for voters. But ecological problems may
render these aggregate inferences problematic. The question then is: do these findings reflect individual level
behaviors in relation to voting costs? Unfortunately, South Africa, like most countries, does not release its
voter roll or individual turnout data to the public, so analyses like those conducted by researchers in the U.S.
are impossible. I use the best alternative: a large geo-referenced dataset of survey respondents (n ≈ 39, 000).
Data comes from the South African Social Attitudes Survey (SASAS) for 2004-2011, which was conducted
by the Human Sciences Research Council (HSRC), South Africa’s statutory research agency for the social
sciences and humanities (HSRC, 2011). SASAS, a member of the International Social Survey Programme
(ISSP), is an annual nationally representative cross-section of South Africans’ views on political, social, and
economic topics. Because the surveys are administered late in the calendar year while elections occur early in
the year, the date range of 2004-2011 includes retrospective voting measures for the 2004 and 2009 national

19

elections and the 2006 and 2011 local elections. Using QGIS, I measure the distance in meters of each
respondent’s enumeration area (a tiny geographic unit used in the census) to the relevant voting station in
the prior election, as the crow flies.

5.1. Does distance to voting stations reduce voting?
To test for sensitivity to voting costs, I consider whether longer travel distances to voting stations reduces
voting. Recall that the first voting district delimitations were created randomly at the municipality level. The
IEC randomly delimited each municipality into multiple voting district polygons, each with a corresponding
voting station positioned as close to the polygon’s center as possible. As a consequence, the first locations
of voting stations were quasi-randomly assigned within each municipality (IEC, 1999). Though there has
been endogenous change in some of these locations over time as the number of voting stations has increased,
the potential for natural quasi-experimental variation remains. I use spatial-temporal fixed effects at the
municipality-survey-year level to isolate that exogenous variation in voting station distance.15 This leverages
the natural quasi-experiment created by the first delimitation by comparing only those individuals living in
the same area surveyed at the same time, but who have to travel different distances to vote.
As noted previously, this natural quasi-experiment is an imperfect approximation of a true experiment.
For the estimates to be interpreted as causal requires that the distance to voting stations be as-if randomly
assigned within municipalities for each survey year. Beyond the IEC’s initial randomization at the municipal
level, three pieces of evidence suggest this condition is met. First, results in the appendix show no systematic
15

Note that the municipalities I use in my analysis (demarcated in 2011) are not the exact municipalities
used in the randomization process (demarcated in 1996). The 1996 municipalities were inherited from the
prior regime, and were typically smaller. The 2011 municipalities subsume these smaller municipalities,
but the outer boundaries are highly “sticky” over time. I use the 2011 municipalities in all analyses
presented in the paper for three reasons. First, the “stickiness” likely means the research design remains
valid, and various placebo and robustness tests accord with this. Second, the smaller size of the 1996
municipalities means that there are far more spatial-temporal fixed effects and thus fewer units within
each area, squeezing out variation that may in fact be valuable. Third, replicating the analysis with the
1996 municipalities reveals substantively similar results, though there are some implications for statistical
significance. These results are presented in the additional appendix materials, along with results from
specifications in which I use 2011 municipality-election-year fixed effects with the appropriate clustering.

20

or stable correlation between distance to voting stations and partisanship. Given the strong spatial and
demographic nature of South African partisanship, this is particularly compelling evidence that the exact
locations of voting stations were not manipulated. Second, a sensitivity analysis presented in the appendix
reveals that for an unobserved confounder to attenuate the effect estimates to zero, it would have to be as
predictive of both the causal variable and the outcome as the most predictive covariates (e.g. race group or
wealth). Given South Africa’s history, this seems unlikely. Third, as shown in Table 2, the point estimates
are stable when conditioning on a number of predictive economic and demographic covariates including race,
income, employment, wealth, sex, and age. As such, I am cautiously optimistic that, within municipalities
for each survey year, the design provides a plausible causal estimate of the effect of distance on voting.
I estimate this effect on a voting station on binary self-reported turnout in the most recent election. While
self-reported turnout is likely overstated, and this over-statement may correlate with certain demographic
factors (Silver et al., 1986), there is little reason to believe that this measurement error correlates with the
causal variable of interest – distance. If anything, overstatements of turnout probably drive results toward
zero, as ceiling effects constrain the magnitude of the point estimate. It is also worth noting that the quantity
of interest is subtly different from that targeted in the aggregate level analyses. Here, I estimate how the level
of individual turnout is related to the level of access, while the aggregate regressions estimate how changes
in access to voting stations affect turnout. I implement variations of the following specification using OLS:

Yit = α + βDistanceit + γ + δmt + mt

Where i is the individual respondent, t is the survey year (or election year, in some specifications),
Distanceit is the individual’s distance (scaled in meters) to their nearest voting station in year t, γ denotes
race fixed effects (four dummy variables), δmt represents municipality-survey year fixed effects, and mt
are the municipality-survey-year clustered standard errors. The coefficient of interest is that on the log of
Distance (so transformed due to right-skewness and likely non-linearity in effects). This captures the effect
of distance (in meters) to a voting station on the probability of voting. If voters are invariant to voting costs
the coefficient should be close to zero. If voters are sensitive to voting costs then the coefficient should be
non-zero; a negative sign indicates that higher costs dissuade voters.
The results presented in Table 2 come from three specifications. Column (1) includes only the causal
variable and the design-based municipality-survey-year fixed effects as dummies. Column (2) adds racial
category dummies for the four primary race groups in South Africa, which I include in all subsequent

21

individual-level analyses. Column (3) adds the continuous covariates age, age squared, wealth, income,
employment status, and gender. It is worth noting that from the original dataset of 39,000 observations,
the spatial matching drops roughly 5,000 observations, and the inclusion of demographic controls further
decreases the number of observations quite substantially, due to missingness in the data. Across all three
specifications, the results are consistent in sign, magnitude, and statistical significance: longer distances
and higher voting costs lower the probability that a respondent voted. The point estimates move only very
slightly toward zero with the inclusion of race dummies and economic covariates.
Table 2: Individual Self-Reported Turnout and (Log) Meters to Voting Station
DV: Turnout in Past Election
(1)
(2)
(3)
Log Distance (Meters)

-0.012∗∗
(0.004)

-0.010∗∗
(0.004)

-0.010∗
(0.005)

Muni-Survey Year FE
Race Dummies
Covariates
Observations
R2

X

X
X

34121
0.079

34120
0.094

X
X
X
17513
0.224

Standard errors clustered by municipality-survey-year in parentheses.
+ p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Substantively, suppose that the mean distance to a voting station in the survey data is 1345 meters
(1.3km, just under a mile). If the distance required to travel to a voting station was 100% higher (2.6km
at the mean rather than 1.3km), the probability of voting would be between .7 and .83 percentage points
lower. Alternatively, if the distance a person had to travel was halved (650m instead of 1.3km, for example),
the probability of voting would be between .7 and .83 percentage points higher.16 From 1999 to 2014, the
median distance observed in the survey dropped from 780m to 625m, which would have an estimated effect
of between 0.18 and 0.21 percentage points on the probability of voting, though changes may have more (or
less) dramatic effects on turnout than predicted here. While these effect estimates may seem substantively
small, they comport extremely well with prior findings in established democracy. Two examples that allow
for easy comparisons illustrate this. In the United States, Dyck and Gimpel (2005) report a headline result
of increasing distance to a polling station from the mean by 3km leads to a 2.3 percentage point decrease
in turnout – the corresponding calculation using my results gives an estimate of a 1.73 percentage point
16

Calculations: −0.010 × log(2) × 100 = 0.7 and −0.012 × log(2) × 100 = 0.83

22

decrease. In Denmark, Bhatti (2012) reports a headline result that living 5km away from a polling station,
as opposed to right next door, decreases turnout by 9.8 percentage points – the corresponding result here is
a 10.2 percentage point decrease. These comparative results also appear to be quite similar to those reported
in Haspel and Knotts (2005), McNulty et al. (2009), and Brady and McNulty (2011).

5.2. Who is sensitive to voting costs?
South African voters are sensitive to voting costs, as can be seen at both the aggregate level and at the
individual level. While turnout effects are important, a crucial question for political inequality is whether
there are systematic patterns in who is sensitive to voting costs. Empirically, I test this by replicating the
analysis on theoretically motivated subsets of the data. I focus on differential sensitivity by socioeconomic
status and age. I present results from interacted specifications using these variables (and in the case of age,
a continuous version of the variable) in the appendix, which show point estimates of the appropriate sign in
all cases, as well as statistically significant interactions for income, wealth, and age.
To explore effect heterogeneity by socioeconomic status, I consider three variables: income, wealth, and
employment.17 Table 3 presents the results of these analyses in three panels, each of which has four columns.
There are two specifications for each subset. The first includes only the municipal-survey-year fixed effects
and race dummies, while the second specification includes economic and demographic covariates as well.
Panel A divides the sample by income, focusing on those in the highest household income bracket reported
in the survey data, where household income per month is greater than R5,000 (approximately $300 per
month, R60,000 per year). This represents the upper part of South Africa’s income distribution, where
approximately 55% of the population live below the 2014 upper bound poverty line of R9,036 per person per
year. Panel B divides the sample by wealth, with the wealthiest being those who own three valuable assets:
a microwave, a television, and an electric washing machine. The less wealthy are those who do not own at
least one of these. This division represents roughly the upper third of the wealth distribution in the data.
Panel C divides the sample by employment status, with those coded as employed only if they are employed
full-time. This is the official South African definition of broad unemployment, including those who are not
actively seeking work as unemployed. Consequently roughly 40% of the sample are coded “unemployed,”
close to the national broad unemployment rate of 35%. The quantity of interest is again the coefficient on
the log of Distance – the effect of the distance to a voting station on voting. Those who are invariant to
17

I also considered heterogeneity by education levels and found no notable divergences.

23

Table 3: Who is Sensitive to Voting Costs? Heterogeneous Effects on Turnout By Economic Status
Panel A: Income
Highest Incomes
Log Distance (Meters)

Sub-Group Mean Y
Sub-Group Mean Dist
Muni-Survey-Year FE
Race Dummies
Covariates
Observations
R2

-0.019+
(0.010)

-0.016
(0.014)

Lower Incomes
-0.011∗
(0.005)

0.745
897m
X
X

0.805
1598m
X
X
X
4200
0.284

6539
0.171

-0.007
(0.005)

X
X
21108
0.110

X
X
X
13313
0.245

Panel B: Wealth
Wealthiest
Log Distance (Metres)

Sub-Group Mean Y
Sub-Group Mean Dist
Muni-Survey-Year FE
Race Dummies
Covariates
Observations
R2

-0.021∗∗
(0.007)

-0.026∗
(0.012)

Less Wealthy
-0.002
(0.005)

0.717
943m
X
X

0.800
1590m
X
X
X
4965
0.265

10908
0.120

-0.002
(0.005)

X
X
20388
0.112

X
X
X
12548
0.253

Panel C: Employment
Employed
Log Distance (Metres)

Sub-Group Mean Y
Sub-Group Mean Dist
Muni-Survey-Year FE
Race Dummies
Covariates
Observations
R2

-0.015∗∗
(0.005)

-0.012∗
(0.006)

Unemployed
-0.008
(0.007)

0.805
1681m
X
X
13192
0.155

X
X
X
9909
0.221

-0.003
(0.007)

0.765
1153m
X
X
10090
0.171

X
X
X
7604
0.309

Note: Results from interacted models can be found in the appendix.
Standard errors clustered by municipality-year in parentheses.
+ p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

24

voting costs should have a coefficient close zero, and those who are sensitive should have negative coefficients.
The results presented in all three panels of Table 3 suggest that those who are socioeconomically well
off (higher incomes, wealthier, and employed) are typically much more sensitive to voting costs than those
who are less socioeconomically privileged. As speculated earlier, this likely relates to voters’ valuations
of the benefits of voting, or of their valuations of time. While Table 3 suggests that in the survey data,
socioeconomically advantaged voters are not uniformly more engaged in the political process than those who
are less well off, two points should be made. First, in an analysis of electoral and census data, Everatt (2016)
demonstrates that, from 2004 to 2014, turnout has diverged for the top two income deciles compared to the
bottom two income deciles in South Africa. Turnout among the registered was slightly higher among the lower
income deciles in 2004, but by 2014, a 10 percentage point gap had emerged, with higher turnout in the higher
income deciles. Second, turnout disparities aside, those who are socioeconomically advantaged are typically
those who occupy positions of economic and social power. The South African context is one of critical
income and wealth inequality, an embattled and failing education system, chronic structural unemployment,
and substantial “informal” politics. Those most sensitive to improved access to voting stations are the very
people who already command substantial political, social, and economic authority and influence.
Table 4: Who is Sensitive to Voting Costs? Heterogeneous Effects on Turnout By Age
Age < 31
Log Distance (Metres)

Sub-Group Mean Y
Sub-Group Mean Dist
Muni-Survey-Year FE
Race Dummies
Covariates
Observations
R2

-0.001
(0.008)

0.001
(0.011)

30 < Age < 41
-0.012+
(0.007)

0.589
1307m
X
X
11557
0.196

X
X
X
5912
0.353

-0.000
(0.009)

40 < Age < 51
-0.021∗∗
(0.008)

0.851
1390m
X
X
7637
0.217

X
X
X
4957
0.253

-0.024∗
(0.010)

50 < Age
-0.013∗
(0.006)

0.853
1454m
X
X
6188
0.224

X
X
X
3830
0.267

-0.020∗
(0.010)

0.879
1275m
X
X
8738
0.189

X
X
X
2814
0.313

Note: Results from interacted models can be found in the appendix.
Standard errors clustered by municipality-year in parentheses.
+ p < 0.10, ∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗ p < 0.01, ∗∗∗ p < 0.001

Next, I consider heterogeneous effects by age, dividing the sample into four age bands which correspond
to the age bands used by the IEC in its public reports. Table 4 presents the results for subset analyses using
the bands Age < 31, 30 < Age < 41, 40 < Age < 51, and 50 < Age. As before, I present two specifications
for each subset, one which uses only the municipal-survey-year fixed effects and race dummies, and one which
includes economic and demographic covariates.
25

The results suggest that voters’ sensitivity to cost is highly heterogeneous across age bands. Those
who are over 40 years of age (either in the band from 41-50 or 50 and over) are highly sensitive, while
those under the age of 40, especially those in the youngest age band of 18-30, are invariant to costs. Any
sensitivity for those in the 31-40 age band appears to be absorbed by the inclusion of economic covariates. In
terms of age, those who are already highly politically active are also far more sensitive to voting costs. Are
the implications of these individual level findings visible at the aggregate level? While ecological inference
problems necessitate caution, I provide two analyses to show that sensitivity to voting costs appears to be
present even at the aggregate level. First, I analyze the two off-cycle election types – National and Provincial
Elections (NPEs) and Local Government Elections (LGEs) – separately. While the results, available in the
additional appendix materials, show noticeable turnout effects for both election types, the estimates for
T urnountReg are substantially stronger — roughly twice the magnitude – in the NPEs. This is consistent
with the hypothesis that the types of people who vote in the LGEs are less sensitive to marginal changes in
voting costs.
Second, I subset the ward level data into ten equal quantiles based on time-invariant covariates of interest,
and re-estimate the main panel regression analysis for each quantile. I consider heterogeneity by mean
log income and by mean employment rates at the ward level.18 Figure 3 presents point estimates and
95% confidence intervals from fixed effects panel regressions (akin to the causal coefficient estimate from
Column (1) in the main effects table) on T urnoutReg for 10 quantiles of time-invariant covariates. The left
panel shows effects for 10 quantiles of log income. The right panel shows effects for 10 quantiles of broad
employment. The effect increases as income and employment rise until around the middle of the distribution,
consistent with the notion that those of higher socio-economic status are differentially activated by increasing
electoral access. This is particularly important because across all quantiles of all three covariates, turnout in
the early years of South African democracy was not particularly divergent. Importantly, regressions pooling
across all 10 quantiles return statistically significant (p < .05) positive interaction terms for both income and
employment on the log of voting stations – the effect of turnout is increasing in income and employment.
18

This exercise is particularly instructive with respect to the economic covariates because South Africa’s
political history has rendered the country highly segregated in socioeconomic terms – wealthier places
tend to be uniformly wealthier. As such, mean log income and mean employment at the ward level are
instructive about most voters in that ward. The analysis is not instructive with regard to age as there
is no “age” segregation, but results are available on request.

26

0.1

●

●

●

●

Effect on Turnout Reg (Quantile N = 2,767)

Effect on Turnout Reg (Quantile N = 2,767)

Figure 3: Heterogeneous Aggregate Effects on T urnoutReg by Ward Characteristics

●

●
●

●

●

●
0.0

Min = 4.2

Mean = 6.7

Max = 10

10 Quantiles of Average Log Income in Ward

0.1

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

0.0

Min = 1.4%

Mean = 32%

Max = 96%

10 Quantiles of Average Broad Employment

Note: This figure presents point estimates and 95% confidence intervals from fixed effects panel regressions (akin to Column
(1) in the main effects table) on T urnoutReg for 10 quantiles of time-invariant covariates. The left panel shows effects for 10
quantiles of log income. The right panel shows effects for 10 quantiles of broad employment. Across all three covariates, turnout
in 1999 was roughly equal. Note that regressions pooling across all 10 quantiles return statistically significant (p < .05) positive
interaction terms for both income and employment on the log of voting stations, corroborating the finding that the effect of
turnout is increasing in income and employment. For transparency, a similar exercise for age is also presented, and shows an
interaction term slightly negative but essentially zero; though see footnote 18.

Why does this occur? As argued earlier, one explanation is that voters are sorted into blocks based on
their propensity to vote. Some are very high probability voters, and some very low probability voters, but
very few are in the middle, movable, category. If younger voters and poorer, unemployed voters are not
movable, then small changes to the cost of voting have little influence on the final decision. This sorting
may be driven by opportunity costs and access to resources, but it may also be the result of South Africa’s
political context. In a country in which one party that already does a reasonable job of representing the
poor is electorally secure, those voters may perceive little benefit in participating. Of course, the ANC’s
record of defending the interests of the youth is shaky, so this explanation may have only limited power.

5.3. Consequences for political inequality in partisanship and preferences
Whatever the mechanisms driving it, heterogeneity in the sensitivity of citizens to the costs of voting is
important. In South Africa, improving access to the electorate may have the consequence of accentuating
political inequality. These results are consistent with findings from the United States in relation to lowering
voting costs (Berinsky, 2005) and from Brazil in relation to increasing the penalties of not voting (Cepaluni
and Hidalgo, 2016), which suggest generality beyond the current case. In both cases, growing the electorate
may have the perverse consequence of worsening political inequality – the equality of participation in the

27

electorate. In the South African case, the findings reported here may help to explain the changing composition
of the South African electorate, where political inequality across socio-economic status has risen over time
(Everatt, 2016). This may have political implications, as these groups have divergent policy preferences.
Using the SASAS survey data, I regress three measures of preferences toward economic redistribution, and
a factor of these three variables, on the key moderating covariates. I focus on economic redistribution as this
is a central policy issue in South Africa, where economic growth has been slow, unemployment is high, and
economic inequality the worst in the world. One question asks respondents to agree or disagree that reducing
inequality is the government’s responsibility. A second asks whether increasing the standard of living is the
government’s responsibility. A third question asks whether the government should raise spending on the
poor. The results of these analyses, available in the additional appendix materials, suggest those of higher
socioeconomic status – income, wealth, and employment – are typically much more likely to disapprove of
economic redistribution than the less wealthy. Preferences for redistribution vary with age non-linearly. To
visualize these relationships, I plot predicted support for the redistribution factor as a function of the key
covariates in Figure 4, which shows that poorer people and younger people are systematically more likely to
be in favor of economic redistribution.
Figure 4: Preferences for Redistribution and Key Moderating Covariates
0.15

0.10

Predicted Support for Government Redistribution

Predicted Support for Government Redistribution

0.15

Variable
Employment
Income

0.05

Wealth

0.00

−0.05

−0.10

−0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

−0.05

−0.10

−0.15
Low SES

High SES

Age < 31

30 < Age < 41

40 < Age < 51

50 < Age

Note: These figures show support for redistribution as a function of the key moderating covariates: wealth, income, employment,
and age. Predicted values on the y-axis come from the regression analyses reported in the additional appendix materials.

Furthermore, both older voters and those of higher socioeconomic status are distinctive in terms of
partisanship. I estimate a multinomial logit specification among those who report having voted in the
previous election to assess whether the categories above predict meaningful differences in partisanship. The
28

Figure 5: Political Partisanship and Key Moderating Covariates
1.00

Predicted Probability of Voting for the Democratic Alliance

Predicted Probability of Voting for the Democratic Alliance

1.00

Variable
Employment

0.75

Income
Wealth

0.50

0.25

0.00

0.75

0.50

0.25

0.00
Low SES

High SES

Age < 31

30 < Age < 41

40 < Age < 51

50 < Age

Note: These figures show support for the Democratic Alliance (DA) as a function of the key moderating covariates: wealth,
income, employment, and age, the levels of which are on the x-axis. Predicted probabilities on the y-axis come from the
regression analyses reported in the additional appendix materials.

dependent variable is categorical – vote ANC, vote DA, vote IFP, or vote other – with vote ANC as the
omitted category. While the full results are available in the additional appendix materials, I focus here
simply on support for the Democratic Alliance (DA), the right-of-center white party. Figure 5 shows that
all four of the conditioning variables predict higher levels of support for the DA.

6. Conclusion
Prior research suggests that people are highly sensitive to voting costs in established democracies. In this
study, I demonstrate that voters in a new democracy are similarly sensitive. Using a difference-in-differences
design, I estimate that in the South African case, a 51% increase in the number of voting stations over the
period 1999 to 2014 likely led to an increase in turnout of between 2.3 and 4.7 percentage points. In general,
increasing access to voting stations has a powerful impact on individuals’ likelihood of voting. This result is
echoed in 39,000 individual level observations, geo-referenced to measure the distance they would have had
to travel to vote in the previous election, studied in the context of a natural quasi-experiment.
Yet my findings also show that straightforward attempts to lower voting costs – even absent partisan
intentions, as is the case in South Africa – may have important unintended consequences for the composition
of the electorate. Segments of society that are socioeconomically privileged appear to be those that are
most sensitive to voting costs, thus differentially activated by attempts to increase access for all. Older

29

voters, disproportionately represented in the electorate to begin with, are more sensitive to changes in
voting costs. These twin findings are particularly resonant in South Africa, which faces rising political
inequality in socioeconomic terms (Everatt, 2016) and a turnout crisis in relation to young voters (Mattes,
2012; Resnick and Casale, 2014). Indeed, low youth turnout is an issue that has received extensive public
coverage in South Africa, and is seen as a potential crisis in the making as young voters choose to exit formal
political systems. This study suggest that increasing physical electoral access is at best unlikely to reduce
the age-based participation gap – in fact it may worsen it.
In the context of a new – and somewhat fragile – democracy, these findings are of particular importance.
In many nascent democracies, political institutions remain besieged, either by the machinations of elites,
single dominant parties, or the problems of extreme low turnout and political efficacy among the populous.
The study of emerging democracies has thus often focused on elites and the various tools they employ to
preserve and legitimate their power (Schedler, 2002; Van de Walle, 2001; Geddes, 2005; Magaloni, 2006;
Gandhi and Przeworski, 2007). While these elite level processes are important, the results of this study
suggest that researchers should pay attention to mass electoral behavior. Voting is a fundamental feature of
representative democracies, and the size and composition of the electorate may have profound consequences
for the success of the institution. Simply failing to grow the size of the electorate – effectively enfranchising
voters – may lead to declines in belief and trust in the institutions of democracy. Likewise, compositional
effects may limit competitive elections if the electorate self-selects to suit incumbent parties.
In general, the finding that voters are sensitive to distance (and thus travel time) is in line with findings
from more established democracies. Gimpel and Schuknecht (2003) find evidence that less accessible voting
precincts in the U.S. tend to have lower turnout. Likewise, Brady and McNulty (2011) find that, in California,
increasing travel times on election day has the effect of shifting voters from turning out to vote on election day
to submitting absentee ballots. South Africa, however, has minimal support for absentee voting (“special”
voting in the IEC’s parlance), which requires an early application and is only afforded to those who are
physically infirm, disabled, or pregnant, or will be unable to vote on election day.
This study also reinforces how vital politically independent electoral commissions and administrations
are to democracy. If partisan interests are allowed to shape the decisions and agendas of actors within
electoral institutions, there is the distinct possibility that they may strategically shape access to the vote,
and thus, the composition of the active electorate. Safeguarding against such manipulation should help to
grow the electorate without having it come to represent the interests of those already in elected office, or
in positions of socio-economic power. For policy makers, increasing physical access is certainly an effective,

30

though expensive, tool for increasing turnout, but reducing political inequality may not be aided by focusing
on cost, and may instead require carefully targeted mobilization, motivational, or educational interventions.

31

References
Aldrich, J. H. (1993). Rational choice and turnout. American Journal of Political Science, 246–278.
Arceneaux, K. and D. W. Nickerson (2009). Who is mobilized to vote? a re-analysis of 11 field experiments.
American Journal of Political Science 53 (1), 1–16.
Baldwin, K. (2013). Why vote with the chief? Political connections and public goods provision in Zambia.
American Journal of Political Science 57 (4), 794–809.
Barreto, M. A., S. A. Nuno, and G. R. Sanchez (2009). The disproportionate impact of voter-id requirements
on the electorate – new evidence from Indiana. PS: Political Science & Politics 42 (01), 111–116.
Battaglini, M., R. B. Morton, and T. R. Palfrey (2010). The swing voter’s curse in the laboratory. Review
of Economic Studies 77 (1).
Berinsky, A. J. (2005). The perverse consequences of electoral reform in the United States. American Politics
Research 33 (4), 471–491.
Berinsky, A. J., N. Burns, and M. W. Traugott (2001). Who votes by mail?: A dynamic model of the
individual-level consequences of voting-by-mail systems. Public Opinion Quarterly 65 (2), 178–197.
Bhatti, Y. (2012). Distance and voting: Evidence from danish municipalities. Scandinavian Political Studies 35 (2), 141–158.
Blais, A. (2000). To vote or not to vote?: The merits and limits of rational choice theory. University of
Pittsburgh Press.
Brady, H. E. and J. E. McNulty (2011). Turning out to vote: The costs of finding and getting to the polling
place. American Political Science Review 105 (01), 115–134.
Bratton, M. and R. Mattes (2001). Support for democracy in Africa: intrinsic or instrumental? British
Journal of Political Science 31 (03), 447–474.
Burden, B. C., D. T. Canon, K. R. Mayer, and D. P. Moynihan (2014). Election laws, mobilization, and
turnout: The unanticipated consequences of election reform. American Journal of Political Science 58 (1),
95–109.
Cepaluni, G. and F. D. Hidalgo (2016). Compulsory voting can increase political inequality: Evidence from
brazil. Political Analysis.
de Kadt, D. (2017). Voting then, voting now: The long-term consequences of participation in south africa’s
first democratic election. The Journal of Politics 79 (2), 670–687.
de Kadt, D. and H. A. Larreguy (2018). Agents of the regime? traditional leaders and electoral politics in
south africa. The Journal of Politics 80 (2), 382–399.
de Kadt, D. and E. S. Lieberman (2017). Nuanced accountability: Voter responses to service delivery in
southern africa. British Journal of Political Science, 1–31.
de Kadt, D. and M. L. Sands (forthcoming). Segregation drives racial voting: New evidence from South
Africa. Political Behavior.
Denemark, D., R. Mattes, and R. G. Niemi (2016). Growing Up Democratic: Does It Make a Difference?
Lynne Rienner Publishers.
DN (2015). ECZ targets 1.7 million more voters. http://bit.ly/2b7waWS.

32

Downs, A. (1957). An economic theory of political action in a democracy. The Journal of Political Economy 65 (2), 135–150.
Dunne, S., W. R. Reed, and J. Wilbanks (1997). Endogenizing the median voter: Public choice goes to
school. Public Choice 93 (1-2), 99–118.
Dyck, J. J. and J. G. Gimpel (2005). Distance, turnout, and the convenience of voting. Social Science
Quarterly 86 (3), 531–548.
Eifert, B., E. Miguel, and D. N. Posner (2010). Political competition and ethnic identification in Africa.
American Journal of Political Science 54 (2), 494–510.
Enos, R. D., A. Fowler, and L. Vavreck (2013). Increasing inequality: The effect of gotv mobilization on the
composition of the electorate. The Journal of Politics 76 (1), 273–288.
Everatt, D. (2016). The era of ineluctability? Post-Apartheid South Africa after 20 years of democratic
elections. Journal of Southern African Studies 42 (1), 49–64.
Feddersen, T. and A. Sandroni (2006). A theory of participation in elections. The American Economic
Review 96 (4), 1271–1282.
Feddersen, T. J. (2004). Rational choice theory and the paradox of not voting. The Journal of Economic
Perspectives 18 (1), 99–112.
Feddersen, T. J. and W. Pesendorfer (1996). The swing voter’s curse. The American Economic Review,
408–424.
Ferree, K. E. (2006). Explaining South Africa’s racial census. Journal of Politics 68 (4), 803–815.
Ferree, K. E. (2010). Framing the race in South Africa: The political origins of racial census elections.
Cambridge University Press.
Fowler, A. (2013). Electoral and policy consequences of voter turnout: Evidence from compulsory voting in
australia. Quarterly Journal of Political Science 8 (2), 159–182.
Gandhi, J. and A. Przeworski (2007). Authoritarian institutions and the survival of autocrats. Comparative
Political Studies 40 (11), 1279–1301.
GBN (2012). EC increases number of polling stations. http://bit.ly/2b8S4qo.
Geddes, B. (2005). Why parties and elections in authoritarian regimes? In Annual meeting of the American
Political Science Association, Washington DC. http://bit.ly/1Mcsoor.
Gimpel, J. G., J. J. Dyck, and D. R. Shaw (2006). Location, knowledge and time pressures in the spatial
structure of convenience voting. Electoral Studies 25 (1), 35–58.
Gimpel, J. G. and J. E. Schuknecht (2003). Political participation and the accessibility of the ballot box.
Political Geography 22 (5), 471–488.
Goodman, N. and L. C. Stokes (2018). Reducing the cost of voting: An evaluation of internet voting’s effect
on turnout. British Journal of Political Science, 1–13.
Grimmer, J., E. Hersh, M. Meredith, J. Mummolo, and C. Nall (2017). Comment on ‘voter identification
laws and the suppression of minority votes’. Journal of Politics.
Grossman, G., M. Humphreys, and G. Sacramone-Lutz (2014). “I wld like u WMP to extend electricity 2 our
village”: On Information Technology and Interest Articulation. American Political Science Review 108 (3),
688–705.
33

Grossman, G., M. Humphreys, and G. Sacramone-Lutz (2016). Information technology and political engagement: Mixed evidence from uganda. In European Political Science Association Annual Conference,
at Brussels, Belgium. http://bit.ly/2CJyAGX.
Grossman, G., K. Michelitch, and M. Santamaria (2017). Texting complaints to politicians: Name personalization and politicians’ encouragement in citizen mobilization. Comparative Political Studies 50 (10),
1325–1357.
Hajnal, Z., N. Lajevardi, and L. Nielson (2017). Voter identification laws and the suppression of minority
votes. The Journal of Politics 79 (2), 363–379.
Haspel, M. and H. G. Knotts (2005). Location, location, location: Precinct placement and the costs of
voting. Journal of Politics 67 (2), 560–573.
Hidalgo, F. D. and S. Nichter (2015). Voter buying: Shaping the electorate through clientelism. American
Journal of Political Science.
Horowitz, J. (2016). The ethnic logic of campaign strategy in diverse societies: Theory and evidence from
kenya. Comparative Political Studies 49 (3), 324–356.
HSRC (2004-2011).
South african social attitudes survey (sasas) rounds 2-9,
Technical report, Pretoria South Africa:
Human Sciences Research Council
http://www.hsrc.ac.za/en/departments/sasas.

2003-2011.
[producer].

Ichino, N. and N. L. Nathan (2013). Crossing the line: Local ethnic geography and voting in Ghana.
American Political Science Review 107 (02), 344–361.
IEC (1999). Report: National and Provincial Elections, 2 June 1999. Technical report, Independent Electoral
Commission of the Republic of South Africa. http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Electionreports/.
IEC (2000). Report: Municipal Elections, 5 December 2000. Technical report, Independent Electoral
Commission of the Republic of South Africa. http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Electionreports/.
IEC (2011). Annual Report, 2014. Technical report, Independent Electoral Commission of the Republic of
South Africa. http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Election-reports/.
IEC (2014). National and Provincial Election Report, 2014. Technical report, Independent Electoral Commission of the Republic of South Africa. http://www.elections.org.za/content/Elections/Election-reports/.
Joslyn, N., A. Bilbo, J. Arndt, H. Berger, and M. Joslyn (2018). Distance traveled to polling locations: Are
travel costs imposed equally on party members? The Social Science Journal.
Kasara, K. and P. Suryanarayan (2015). When do the rich vote less than the poor and why? Explaining
turnout inequality across the world. American Journal of Political Science 59 (3), 613–627.
Kazoka, L. (2014). Tanzania: More polling stations planned. http://bit.ly/2mjcyo8.
Kousser, T. and M. Mullin (2007). Does voting by mail increase participation? using matching to analyze a
natural experiment. Political Analysis 15 (4), 428–445.
Kramon, E. (2016). Electoral handouts as information: Explaining unmonitored vote buying. World Politics 68 (3), 454–498.
Kuenzi, M. and G. M. Lambright (2007). Voter turnout in Africa’s multiparty regimes. Comparative Political
Studies 40 (6), 665–690.

34

Kuenzi, M. and G. M. Lambright (2011). Who votes in africa? an examination of electoral participation in
10 african countries. Party Politics (6), 767–799.
Larreguy, H., J. Marshall, and P. Querebin (2016). Parties, brokers and voter mobilization: How turnout
buying depends upon the party’s capacity to monitor brokers. American Political Science Review 110 (1),
160–179.
Leibbrandt, M., I. Woolard, A. Finn, and J. Argent (2010). Trends in South African income distribution
and poverty since the fall of apartheid.
Lindberg, S. I. (2004). The democratic qualities of competitive elections: Participation, competition and
legitimacy in africa. Commonwealth & Comparative Politics 42 (1), 61–105.
Lindberg, S. I. (2006). Democracy and elections in Africa. JHU Press.
Magaloni, B. (2006). Voting for autocracy: Hegemonic party survival and its demise in Mexico. Cambridge
University Press Cambridge.
Mattes, R. (2012). The “born frees”: The prospects for generational change in post-apartheid south africa.
Australian Journal of Political Science 47 (1), 133–153.
Mattes, R. and J. Piombo (2001). Opposition parties and the voters in South Africa’s general election of
1999. Democratization 8 (3), 101–128.
Mattes, R. B. (2002). South Africa: Democracy without the people? Journal of Democracy 13 (1), 22–36.
Mbaka, J. (2015). IEBC increasing polling stations to 45000 by 2017. http://bit.ly/2aM1End.
McNulty, J. E., C. M. Dowling, and M. H. Ariotti (2009). Driving saints to sin: How increasing the difficulty
of voting dissuades even the most motivated voters. Political Analysis 17 (4), 435–455.
Nathan, N. L. (2016a). Does participation reinforce patronage? Policy preferences, turnout, and class in
urban Ghana. British Journal of Political Science.
Nathan, N. L. (2016b). Local ethnic geography, expectations of favoritism, and voting in urban Ghana.
Comparative Political Studies.
Nichter, S. (2008). Vote buying or turnout buying? Machine politics and the secret ballot. American Political
Science Review 102 (01), 19–31.
Niemi, R. G. (1976). Costs of voting and nonvoting. Public Choice 27 (1), 115–119.
Pettigrew, S. (2017). The race gap in precinct wait times: Why minority precincts are underserved by local
election officials. Political Science Quarterly.
Piper, L. (2012). Further from the people – bipartisan “nationalisation” thwarting the electoral system.
Local Elections in South Africa: Parties, People, Politics, 31–44.
Posner, D. N. (2004). The political salience of cultural difference: Why Chewas and Tumbukas are allies in
Zambia and adversaries in Malawi. American Political Science Review 98 (04), 529–545.
Resnick, D. and D. Casale (2014). Young populations in young democracies: Generational voting behaviour
in sub-saharan africa. Democratization 21 (6), 1172–1194.
Riker, W. H. and P. C. Ordeshook (1968). A theory of the calculus of voting. American Political Science
Review 62 (01), 25–42.
Robinson, A. L. (2014). National versus ethnic identification in Africa: Modernization, colonial legacy, and
the origins of territorial nationalism. World Politics 66 (04), 709–746.
35

Sanders, E. (1980). On the costs, utilities and simple joys of voting. The Journal of Politics 42 (03), 854–863.
Schedler, A. (2002). The menu of manipulation. Journal of Democracy 13 (2), 36–50.
Schulz-Herzenberg, C. (2009). Trends in party support and voter behaviour, 1994-2009. In R. Southall and
J. Daniel (Eds.), Zunami!: the South African elections of 2009. Jacana Media.
Schulz-Herzenberg, C. (2014). Voter participation in the south african elections of 2014. Institute for Security
Studies.
Scott, D., M. Vawda, S. Swartz, and A. Bhana (2015). Punching below their weight: Young South Africans’
recent voting patterns. 19 (3), 19–21. http://repository.hsrc.ac.za/handle/20.500.11910/3234.
Silver, B. D., B. A. Anderson, and P. R. Abramson (1986). Who overreports voting? American Political
Science Review 80 (2), 613–624.
Stein, R. M. and G. Vonnahme (2008). Engaging the unengaged voter: Vote centers and voter turnout. The
Journal of Politics 70 (2), 487–497.
Stewart III, C. (2012). Waiting to vote in 2012. Journal of Law and Politics 28, 439.
Stokes, S. C. (2005). Perverse accountability: A formal model of machine politics with evidence from
Argentina. American Political Science Review 99 (03), 315–325.
US Court of Appeals For the Fourth Cicruit (2016).
NAACP v. McCrory and others.
http://www.ca4.uscourts.gov/Opinions/Published/161468.P.pdf.
Van de Walle, N. (2001). African economies and the politics of permanent crisis, 1979-1999. Cambridge
University Press.
Wantchekon, L. (2003). Clientelism and voting behavior: Evidence from a field experiment in Benin. World
Politics 55 (03), 399–422.

36

