AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies, Volume3, Number3. August 2019

Pp.20-36

DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.2

Mahmoud Darwish and Joy Harjo: Cosmic Consciousness

Adil M. Jamil
Department of English, Faculty of Arts and Sciences
Amman Arab University. Amman, Jordan

Abstract:
This study examines the phases of human consciousness revealed in the poetry of indigenous
people in the light of some prominent psychologists and philosophers mainly Bucke,
Schleiermacher, William James, Hegel, and Moores. Bucke and Schleiermacher cited three forms
of consciousness: Animal or Brutish Self-awareness, Sensual or Self-Consciousness, and Cosmic
Consciousness. While examining the poetry of indigenous people, Palestinians and Native
Americans, we find out that the majority moves within the confines of the Sensual or SelfConsciousness in their reaction to the brutish consciousness of the oppressors who deny their
unalienable rights for life, liberty, and pursuit of happiness. Unlike others, Mahmoud Darwish, the
Palestinian, and Joy Harjo, the Native American, attempt to transcend the sensual consciousness
and adopt a broader universal vision or cosmic consciousness; however, their peaceful vision is
often shattered by bitter realities and frustrated by the inhuman conduct of their oppressors. In their
verses, the particular or the sensual is not completely overlooked or concealed. It is always there,
yet alleviated by a universal vision held by the two poets
Keywords: Animal or Brutish Consciousness, Cosmic consciousness, Darwish, Harjo,
Native Americans, Palestinians, Sensual or Self-Consciousness
Cites as: Jamil, A. M. (2019). Mahmoud Darwish and Joy Harjo: Cosmic Consciousness. Arab
World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies, 3 (3) 20-36.
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awejtls/vol3no3.2

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 |www.awej-tls.org

20

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Introduction
Before examining the poetry of indigenous people, one may feel inclined yo shed some light upon
the phases of human consciousness as noted by Bucke and Schleiermacher. In their studies of the
evolution of human mind, they infer that human consciousness develops into three phases:
Brutish Self-awareness, or Simple Consciousness, possessed by both animals and ancient people;
Sensual or Self-Consciousness, possessed by common man, encompassing thought, reason, and
imagination; and Higher Self-Consciousness, or Cosmic Consciousness, the highest form, or the
pinnacle of human consciousness (Bucke, 2009 p.1-30). For certain the highest is the rarest and
often seen in the words and action of godlike figures who possess the capability of transcending
animal instincts and Sensual Consciousness, attaining a point of contact with God or the absolute,
and seeing the cosmos as entirely immaterial, spiritual, and alive. To those rare individuals all the
creatures of God become one. Every living creature has eternal life and belongs to the same cosmic
web.
1. Cosmic Consciousness and Song of Myself
Cosmic Consciousness as a term was first coined by Richard Maurice Bucke, in his book
Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the human Mind, in which he relies
heavily on Schleiermacher’s earlier manifestations. Bucke explores concept as part of his
investigation of the development of man's mystic relation to the infinite as revealed in the most
acclaimed poem Song of Myself of Whitman, whom Bucke considers the climax of religious
evolution and the harbinger of humanity's future (Robertson, 2010, p.135; Parini,2011). In
Song of Myself, Whitman lays grounds for a peculiar vision and offers substantial outline for
Bucke’s import. In Whitman’s verses, the particular entirely retreats giving room for a more
universal vision or at best mingled together (Cook, 1950). Whitman sees himself in everyone,
and everyone in himself regardless of race, religion, or gender: "For every atom belonging to
me as good belongs to you" (Section 1); and "In all people I see myself, none more and not one
a barleycorn less/and the good or bad I say of myself I say of them"(Section 20). In (Section
47), he sees himself as an agent of all common men: "It is you talking just as much as myself...
I act as the tongue of you". Whitman transcends the confines of sensual consciousness, and
becomes a union of opposites, a melting pot, where all universal contraries reside and mingle
(Section 52). Furthermore, all the contraries are essential and belong to the same web, and
every individual is equal and an expression of the whole. To Whitman, as it is to Hegel's Geist,
God is not a being separate from the universe, instead God is part of His own creation and can
be seen everywhere and in everything. His presence in men and nature made them divine; and
thus humanity is godlike, neither innately wicked nor worth lamenting (Huysteen, 2003). As
well, Whitman, like William James, internalizes that all religions have a common core
regardless of any various institutional accession and ritual; and that mystical illumination is
the foundation of all spiritual experiences. In mystic states, all individuals become one with
the Absolute and become aware of universal oneness, as William James often advocates (James
1892). Equally important, Moores believes that the experience of cosmic consciousness is
incomplete without the element of love (Moores 2006 pp. 33-34). In addition, the universe is
orderly designed, no ultimate death nor chaos in the universe. When dying, man is going to
give his body back to nature and continue his immortal journey. By large, Whitman’s Cosmic
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

21

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Consciousness can be understood as an idealistic vision that transcends customary human
concerns, vices, pains, miseries, and sees the cosmos as one regardless of gender, race, or
religion. Whitman calls for a mystic unison of the whole world where love, mutual respect
and tolerance prevail. Such a vision is hardly seen in the verses of indigenous people with very
rare exceptions, however.
2. Afflictions of Both Palestinians and Native Americans
Historical records speak bluntly about the resemblance in affliction of both Native Americans
and Palestinians. Both nations were exploited and abused. Many were forced to relocate or leave
their homeland behind, and sought asylums worldwide. The ones who held up to their ground
suffered various forms of persecution, indignation, and segregation. In the 19th Century, Native
Americans were forcedly rooted out of their homeland and driven like herds to other designated
lands, later called the Reservations. Palestinians have suffered the same fate. After long centuries
of peaceful co-existence with other inhabitants, in the 20th Century Palestinians were forced to
leave their homeland and to be squeezed into refugee camps in the neighboring countries,
especially Jordan, Syria, Lebanon, and Egypt. Ironically, in both regions, unverified religious
prophecies are used to legitimize aggression and exploitation of others. The so-called American
prophecy of Manifest Destiny and the so-called Israeli prophecy of Promised Land are used
excessively to achieve political ends. In reaction to the plight of both nations, poets reveal various
forms of consciousness: seldom brutish consciousness, often sensual or self-consciousness, and
rarely cosmic consciousness.
3. Poetry of Palestinians
In examining the poetry of Palestinians, one may infer that most inclinations fall within the
confines of Sensual Consciousness. The particular plight takes the center stage, whereas the
universal, or the mystical, is mostly missing. Many popular poems were collected by Kanafani and
classified as poems of resistance (as cited in Hijjawi, Ed.& Trans. 2009). These representative
poems are pregnant with feelings of defiance, indignation, and a need for defending and reserving
their national identity against attempts of cultural appropriation. One of the most popular lyrics is
spoken by a Palestinian rebel addressing Night before his scheduled execution at dawn: O Night,
stay a little longer until the captive finishes his song. At dawn his wing will flutter, and the victim
will swing in the wind, leaving his fledglings hungry at home and a widow who offered her only
bracelet to rebels when her country cried for arms (Hijjawi, 2009, p.5). Such lines reveal utter
defiance and readiness to sacrifice soul and gold to win homeland back. Other sensual verses as
such are quite popular in Palestine, memorized and recited by most people, young and old. Among
those are Mahmood Abdul-Raheem’s two lines: I will carry my soul in my palm, and fling it in
the road of doom/ Either a life pleasing the friend/ or a death agonizing the foe. Nothing is left for
Palestinians but freedom or honorable death, as the poet states. Defiance of enemy is also strongly
felt in Tawfiq Zayyad’ popular poem The Impossible (as cited in Hijjawi, 2009, p.9). Zayyad
defies that it could be easier for the oppressor to perform all the impossible tasks, but he cannot
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

22

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

destroy the shimmering glow of a belief/, a march, or our cause one single step. As Zayyad
emphasizes, attachment to homeland is deeply rooted and cannot be erased.
Fadwa Tuqan’s poem To Christ on his Birthday, (as cited in Hijjawi, 2009, p.18) speaks about
the particular experience of her nation and sounds defiant and hopeful despite the ongoing
destruction: out of deep sorrows/out of the freshness of our spilled blood/ out of the quivering of
life and death/ life will be reborn in you again. In her poem, Tuqan lays deep sorrow before Christ
for all the joys of Jerusalem are crucified/ all the bells are silent/ the domes…in mourning/ …
Jerusalem is whipped/ under the cross/ bleeding/ at the hands of the executioner. Salem Jubran,
another displaced poet, wails his forced desertion of his hometown Safad in his poem The Exile
(as cited in Hijjawi, 2009, pp. 12-13): Between your sky and my eyes/ A stretch of border walls/
blackens my view! In another poem named after his hometown Safad, Salem Jubran expresses
nostalgic sentiments to Safad, where he is now merely an unwelcomed stranger among the current
dwellers of erected houses: A funeral of mourning sits on my lips/ and in my eyes/ there sits a lion’s
humiliation/ Farewell/ farewell Safad. Sameeh Al Qassim, another prominent poet, often
expresses sensual consciousness too as evident in the following verses (as cited in Samih AlQassim Poems). In his poem A Letter of a Bankrupt, he defies his enemy and vows revenge for
robbing his land, ditching young fellows in prison holes. Despite the nightmare of terror imposed
on his village, he defies, I shall not compromise/ And to the end/ I shall fight. At the same rate, AlQassim in The Wall Clock expresses utter dejection as he sees everything being collapsed, his
neighborhood, the street, the square, home, and the wall. Time goes on and nothing has changed.
In his poem, The Ashes, the same feelings of utter dejection engulf his tormented soul: love is now
only words… no more yearning, no urgency, no real joy in our hearts/ no wonder in our eyes.
Utter dejection also overflows his Confession in the Midday Sun, Out of agony, he turned the
trunk of his planted tree into firewood, though spares some to make a flute, yet even the flute
doesn’t lift his dejected soul; he thus broke the flute, and lost the fruit and the tune, and mourned
the tree. In his poem The Bats, the dream of freedom and struggle to win back his homeland never
die, though suffocated by the watchful eyes of oppressor’s police who trail him everywhere, to
watch his pauses and moves. Still, he strongly believes that bats are on the verge of suicide, and
he keeps digging a road to daylight. In Travel Tickets, his tone mellows somewhat showing feeble
hope in the conscience of his killer and in the world body of justice. Before he dies, he would leave
three travel tickets in his pocket, one to peace, one to the field and rain, and one to the conscience
of humankind, and begs his killer to take them, use them, and … travel (as cited in Samih AlQassim Poems).
In the aforementioned verses, the particular extends over the universal. In philosophical terms,
the majority of poets have not gained yet the capability of transcending what the sensual
consciousness dictates. Most react sensually due to the distressing circumstances, the continuity
of world neglect, and above all the brutish consciousness of oppressor. Such bitter realities left no
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
23
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

room for distressed souls to transcend the sensual consciousness, and thus remain resisting within
the confines of the particular. Their poetry can be described as merely a particular protest against
a particular injustice, battered spirits against a well-armed hostile executioner. Darwish in his wellknown poem A Lover From Palestine describes Palestinian struggle by the metaphor of the grass
and rock: a more aggressive and hostile oppressor like the rock, against a more willful yet
powerless oppressed people like the grass that defies the solidness of the concrete and keeps
growing: Like grass growing among the joints of a rock/ We existed as strangers one day (as cited
in Joudah, 2007). No poet seems able to transcend the confines of sensual consciousness and treat
bitter realities differently, and the reason is not hard to discern. Only people, one might say,
endowed with heavenly stamina can transcend the particular with its unendurable pain and aspire
to attain a divine stature.
4. Mahmood Darwish
In comparison to fellow poets, Darwish grows more universal in his vision especially in the
final phases of his poetic career. In his final phases, Darwish strives to transcend the particular and
embrace a cosmic vision. In his early verses, the sensual consciousness is dominant, though
broader human touches can be felt even in his poetry of resistance. Human touches can be dated
back to his early days at school. In a poem he wrote once to a Jewish classmate, he innocently
wonders, why his fellow student has a house, yet he doesn’t; why he and the Jewish boy are not
allowed to play together. Decades later, Darwish recalls being summoned to see the military
governor, who threatened him: "If you go on writing such poetry, I'll stop your father working in
the quarry (Clark, 2008). As a young man, he joined the Israeli Communist Party (ICP), a party
whom he thought it might be a key to counter with its nonsectarian ideology the Jewish Zionist
sectarian ideology. Afterwards, he joined the new Arab party, Jabhat Al Ard (The Land Front),
which evolved from the Israeli Communist Party (Jaggi, 2002). In additions, what deepened further
his nonsectarian feelings in his early age was a notable love affair with a Jewish young lady
(Ferber, 2014). Later, his consciousness grew broader as he mingled with international folks of
different background and faith. After he left Palestine in 1971, Darwish closely communicated and
integrated then with French, English, Latinos, beside Arabs and Jews. It could be that his intimate
communication and integration with people of different walks and cultures inspired him with a
new vision of the world, and stood behind the trends of non-exclusive love and peaceful coexistence inhabited his late poetry.
In the early phase of Darwish’s poetry, the sensual consciousness is more dominant. His
emotional reaction is expected of a young man whose land is confiscated and banished out of
ancestral homeland; his house and entire village, al-Birwa, had been razed by the Israeli army and
built upon a new settlement for strangers (Mattar, 2005; Taha, 2002). His popular poem Identity
Card, as many of his early poems, recounts a desperate cry of an oppressed spirit in the face of
oppressor. After establishing his own identity as a native to the land, he vows to avenge indignation
and denial of identity: Write down, I am an Arab…I do not supplicate charity at your doors/ Nor
I belittle myself at the footsteps of your chamber. In his outrage, he expresses pride in ancestral
heritage and bluntly warns his oppressor of imminent consequences: You have stolen the orchard
of my ancestors/ And the land I cultivated/… And you left nothing for us. For such atrocities, he
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

24

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

boldly lays out an emotional warning: Write down… I do not hate people/ Nor do I encroach/ But
if I become hungry/ The Usurper's flesh will be my food/ Beware… of my hunger/ And my anger!
(Joudah, Trans., 2007) In Defiance, Darwish registers another bold protest against a series of
imprisonment and house arrest. He vows defiance no matter the place or the pain he endures: I
will say it/ In the detention room/ In the bathroom / In the barn / Under the whip/ Under the
handcuff/ In the violence of chains/ A million birds on my heart branches /Make the fighting tune.
Beside Identity Card and Defiance, many poems roam within the confines of sensual
consciousness, even the poem dedicated to his Jewish sweetheart, Between Rita and my Eyes, a
Rifle. The images encountered, however, are suggestive of a broad heart open to encompass others,
mindless of culture or background. The divinity in those honey-colored eyes/, the moments of utter
love, the loveliest of braids are all indicators of genuine feelings to a Jewish beloved. Yet his
dream is frustrated by the prejudice of the rifle possessor. Their love, flowing as a stream and
flying freely as a million sparrows, was Fired at by a rifle.
In the second phase of his career, Darwish continues reacting emotionally to the atrocities of
a brutish enemy, yet a more mature tone is notably taking over. His tone seems more disputatious,
and less threatening or blustering, as if the sensual consciousness, persistent before, has taken a
new form. Still the particular is the leading drive. In O, You Who Pass Among Fleeting Words,
(as cited in Joudah, 2007), Darwish beseeches peacefully the usurper to Be gone out of homeland
after the latter snatches the blueness of the sky and the sand of memory. The usurper, in fact, is
alien and has no connection to a land of peaceful agrarians equipped with nothing but stones, bare
flesh and rain confronting a stranger armed to the teeth with steel and fire, tanks and gas bombs.
He describes the conflict as a clash of existential proportion between a force of nature and a force
of anti-nature: the rain, the motherland, the sky, and the sea verses a factitious entity made up of
fleeting words, gas bombs, tanks and usurpation. As he says, from you the steel and the fire and
from us our flesh. From you another tank and from us a stone/ From you another gas bomb and
from us the rain. Nevertheless, he amicably asks the usurper to take your fill of our blood, be gone
and enjoy your victory upon helpless people elsewhere, and leave us guarding the blossoms of
martyrs or the grave grass at our overfilled graveyards. Such a peaceful call is given a deaf ear by
the usurper, though the latter’s claim to existence in Palestine is fraudulent and fictitious; it has no
moral content whatsoever, but an unverified religious fancies, that ought to be piled in a deserted
hole and be gone, … the skeleton of your bird, …and the holy calf. As the poem advances, the
particular concern soon drifts into a broader image of mankind as a whole. A call for peace is
insinuated as the poet resents witnessing the creatures of God on both sides who breathe the same
air and live under the same sky engaging into a bloody campaign. By large, this poem in specific
disappointed some of his Jew leftist friends who mistakenly interpreted his import as a call for the
destruction of their state, an accusation Darwish played down and pressed his faith in peaceful
coexistence with the other (Hadid, 2008).
In his poem On a Canaanite Rock at the Dead Sea, the tone is also disputatious, and less
threatening or blustering, in addition the oeuvre of some lines renders universal relevance. He
reminds once again that the usurper’s claims to connection with his motherland is fictitious,
fraudulent and lacking in moral or factual basis. In his argument, he surveys the history of Palestine
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

25

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

and its inhabitants throughout the epochs of time. Palestine used to be a place of all monotheistic
religions, and all people living in the green plains were Canaanites, closely connected to the salt
of sea, birds, sky, and plains where Jericho [still] sleeps under her ancient tree, like baby Jesus
Christ, yet with no one to rock her cradle. The religious controversy is reshuffled as he maintains,
All the prophets are my family/ Yet heaven is still far from its land, and no divine intervention
came along to redress man’s wrong doing. The prophets have deserted his homeland, leaving
behind fictitious and fraudulent testaments that incite bloody conflicts between followers. Since
then, no white flags, is lifted to exchange declaration of peace. Despite history and its long
controversies, his consciousness expands to contain both the natives and immigrants. Unlike his
previous call for the stranger to Be gone, he extends his hand for peaceful co-existence:
Stranger, hang your weapons
Above our palm tree, so I may plant my wheat
in the sacred soil of Canaan,
Take wine from my jar. Take a page from my Gods' book.
Take a portion of my meal and gazelle from the traps of our shepherd's song…
Lay a single brick and build up a tower for doves, to be one of us
… be a neighbor to our wheat… leave Jericho under her palm tree
But do not steal my dream. (as cited in Jaudah, 2007)
He urges his opponent to realize the familiarity bond between the two nations, and coexist.
Ironically, his genuine call is frustrated by the brutish consciousness of opponent, that seems
unwilling to admit any human bond and unwilling to discard the past religious fancies and erase
the old steam, leaving Darwish wavering between the dictates of the sensual and the trends of
cosmic consciousness. Though dismayed, his trends of peaceful co-existence never wane. He
repeatedly reminds his opponents: All the prophets are my family, to reassure the mystical unison
of all people in Palestine and the cosmic idea that everybody is an essential part of the whole web
regardless of various faiths. In practice, the followers of each faith reshape and mold heavenly
revelations, and use religion as a motivation for conflict instead.
In Jerusalem, Darwish re-thrusts the idea of mystic unison of the three monotheistic
religions’ followers. To convey a sense of spiritual oneness, he uses references and language from
Christianity, Islam and Judaism, treating the ancient traditions embodied in the city with almost
impeccable equity (Horesh 2015). All religions are given their fair share of attention as though
reiterating once again All the prophets are my family. The Christian Evangel, the Jewish Prophet
Isaiah, Prophet Muhammad, the messenger of Islam, are all mentioned briefly: Words sprout like
grass from Isaiah’s messenger mouth: If you don’t believe you won’t be safe. As well, he
introduces himself as another crucified Christ: And my wound a white biblical rose/ And my hands
like two doves on the cross/ hovering and carrying the earth. Prophet Muhammad is also present
in Jerusalem: But I think to myself: Alone, Prophet Muhammad spoke classical Arabic. The dream
of spiritual unison, or cosmic vision, is soon shattered by bitter realities. Amidst his dream, A
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
26
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

woman soldier shouted: Is that you again? / Didn’t I kill you? / I said: You killed me ... and I
forgot, like you, to die. The same rifle, that ruins his dream to cross the barriers of hate with his
Jewish beloved Rita, ruins once again his dream of spiritual oneness in Jerusalem. The dreamer
is soon brought back to reality with the shout of a soldier at the end of the piece. In other words,
his cosmic consciousness that renders non-exclusive love and mutual respect is frustrated by the
incivility, hostility animosity, and intolerance of his brutish opponent.
During the last period of his career, Darwish searched for analogies or
illuminating parallels with the Palestinian experience in the chronological records of
losers: The Moors of Andalusia, the Natives Americans, the pagan cultures of the
ancient Near East. Darwish used these chronicles of loss to amplify his sense of
Palestinians’ predicament (Creswell 2009). It could be said that his consciousness grew
more cosmic, and the particular cause of his nation became part of a long struggle of
the oppressed. In his poem The Last Speech of the Red Indian Chief, translated also by
Joudah (2007), Darwish puts on an Indian garb to relate both the Palestinians’ afflictions
in the guise of Native Americans’ afflictions. Despair, frustration, and a sense of loss are
all manifested in this relatively long poem. Still a cosmic vision, that renders reconciliatory
tone, cannot be missed in his verses. The Chief expresses first a strong faith in the divine
spirit that animates their life, their pastures; as well as the grass that possesses a soul in us
that could shelter the soul of earth. Their spirituality is further manifested as the Chief
entreats his enemy, Don’t kill the grass anymore/; sister tree has a spirit too and being
tortured the way they ‘ve tortured me. Yet the idea of spirituality falls way beyond the
understanding of his opponents. Columbus, the emblem of brutishness, can’t recognize the
spirits roaming free between the sky and trees; thus he mocks their beliefs and calls their
ghosts names of his liking, denying that all men are born equal. And worse, Columbus is
bent on carrying out his deadly war, even after he took his fill from the flesh of our living
and our dead. Despite Columbus’ brutish consciousness, the Chief extends another hand
for peace insomuch as does the persona in On a Canaanite Rock reminding Columbus
Isn’t about time, stranger, for us to meet …., and share the sky, the air, and water; let us
share the light, and take your fill of the night, but leave us a few stars to bury our celestial
dead. The trends for peace are further pressed as the Chief reminds Columbus of freedom
of faith: You have your god and we have ours. You have religion and we have ours. In
contrast, Columbus has no real faith, only using God as a courtier in the palace of the king,
and unwilling to tame the horses of madness, or to keep his wicked will in check. The
brutish consciousness of Columbus, as opposed to the mystical consciousness of the Chief,
is brilliantly hatched further in the Chief’s emotional appeal: But if you must kill, white
man, don’t slay the creatures that befriended us. A deer will never approach grass that’s
been stained with our blood. To the Chief, the universe is entirely spiritual and entirely
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

27

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

alive, and abound by the element of love, whereas to the invader it is only a game of gain,
and a place of ruthless competition. In fact, Columbus and followers do not spare even the
buffalos, the main life stock of the Natives: Buffalos are our brothers and sisters, as well
as everything that grows, the turtle, the trees, the orchards, the blooms, and the river. Such
heart-felt words do not appeal to the narrow consciousness of Columbus who arrogantly
boasts,
We are the masters of time
Come to inherit the land of yours.
We want God all to ourselves
Because the best Indians are the dead Indians in the eyes of our Lord.
The Lord is white and the sky is white.
The process of destruction never ceases. It continues with the English guns, and sword, French
wine and influenza; and Columbus establishes his kingdom in the hallow of a wounded space.
Once again the trends for cosmic consciousness are stifled by the dictates of brutishness of the
invader. In reaction, the Chief remains defiant, unwilling to sell a bit span of wheat farm and sign
a peace treaty with the killers of his nation and nature. He would rather go back to his mother
nature and leave his oppressor build his statue of fake liberty above his corpse. Death would bring
no fright to the Indian Chief for it is only a unification with nature and resurrection of his immortal
soul: We'll emerge from the flower of the grave. We'll lean out of the poplar's leaves/ of all that
besieges you.
In brief, Darwish, like the Indian Chief, strives to abide by the dictates of cosmic or mystical
consciousness, especially in the last phase of his poetic career, yet his inclinations are always
suffocated by the brutish consciousness of his opponents. Though fully convinced that the Israelis’
claims to connection with the land are fictitious, and lacking in moral or factual basis; however,
he is willing to put the past behind, and keeps dreaming of a peaceful coexistence based on
tolerance and mutual respect.
5. Native Americans’ Vision and Cosmic Consciousness
Basically Native Americans’ vision and culture bear resemblance to Bucke’s cosmic
consciousness, or Walt Whitman’s vision. Like Whitman, they strongly believe in the immortality
of the soul as their well-known sayings and doctrines reveal. They hold after a man dies, his spirit
is somewhere on earth or in the sky,... we are sure that his spirit still lives… so it is with
Wakantanka (Indian God)… he is everywhere, yet he is to us as the spirits of our friends, whose
voices we cannot hear (American Indians Poems and Quotes). They also believe in the spiritual
unison of the world as it is evident in Chief Seattle’s words: all things share the same breath- the
beast, the tree/ the man; the air shares its spirit with all the life it supports. The mystical oneness
of the world appears also in some Indian doctrines: Humankind has not woven the web of life. We
are but one thread within it…. All things are bound together. All things connect. To the Indians
the universe is orderly designed: everything on the earth has a purpose, every disease an herb to
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
28
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

cure it, and every person a mission (American Indians Poems and Quotes). Concurrently, they
even feed their young children with ideas of the spirituality of the world and peaceful trends at
schools as is the case in the Red Cloud Indian School. In a song, they beseech their Holy Spirit to
give them strength not to be greater than my brother/, but to fight my greatest enemy-myself…so
when life fades, my spirit may come to you without shame (American Indians Poems and Quotes).
Other mystical ideas can be detected in Chief Crazy Horse’s words: A very great vision (intuition)
is needed and the man who has it must follow it as the eagle seeks the deepest blue of the sky. In
additions, they believe in the goodness of man at the instant of birth. To them, the intimation of
immortality is associated with children: Grown men can learn from very little children/ for the
hearts of the little children are pure. Therefore, the Great Spirit may show to them/ many things
which older people miss. Mutual respect and tolerance are also among the basic values of the
Natives. Chief Tecumseh counsels: Trouble no more about their religion: respect others in their
view and demand, they respect yours. In summary, one may feel inclined to suggest that the
doctrines of Native Indians bear close resemblance to Whitman’s cosmic consciousness.
6. Sensual Poetry of the Natives
Though the basic doctrines of Indians render to a great extent cosmic consciousness, bitter
realities pushed most Indian poets to hover within the confines of the sensual or self-consciousness.
The notable discrepancy, cited here, is not hard to discern. It could be said that the scar is too deep
to put behind, or it could be said that the struggle of the living Indians have not come yet to a
comforting conclusion, as is the struggle of Palestinians. Hence a great deal of Indian verses still
recounts the past and present injustices and the atrocities they have endured for centuries. To many
sensual poets, the infamous Wounded Knee Massacre of 1890 has ever since become an emblem
of despicable cruelty, and a weeping wall for the Indian poets (Parsons, R. 2011). The phrase Bury
My Heart at Wounded Knee is used poetically to encapsulate a broader sense of loss, grief, and
outrage over the historic mistreatment and the continuing abuse of the Natives by government and
big corporations. In paging the Indian Foundation of Poetry, one may encounter numerous
examples of verses that fall within the confines of Sensual Consciousness. For instance, Colin Ian
Jeffery recalls with sorrow the past bluffing of white soldiers who indiscriminately slaughtered
young and old men, women, children, and even livestock, and left a few survivors to bury the
victims at Wounded Knee Creek:
Parents of Crazy Horse came to the fort
Took the body of warrior
Secretly burying majestic heart
At a place called Wounded Knee Creek
Rebecca Miles, another Indian poet, blends the grave events of the Massacre with the on-going
atrocities: Bury me at Wounded knee/ for we won’t do as we’re told/ The women die from lack of
food/ and our children are sold, all sold. Jude Kyrie follows suit in her irony of the bloody campaign
against Indians: History of settlement marked in blood/… in all the time the land defiled/ with spilled
blood of Indian child. Despite such despicable atrocities, in Washington the politicians sleep/ but I
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

29

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

know why the willow tree weep. In the same manner, Smilling Stocks is also ironic of biased
politicians, now and then. In his poem Bury my Heart at Wounded Knee, Stocks blends two scenes,
one from the present where a Sioux Indian is taken to death chamber and a nurse, in charge of the
cyanide hole… keeps the cards that read “Have Mercy on His Soul”. This current scene recalls the
infamous Massacre at wounded knee, and a linkage is brought home via the names of past and present
politicians, Mr. Abraham Lincoln, Adolf Nixon, George Bush, Mr. 7th Cavalry Jones. All politicians
raised no eyebrow for the killing of innocent people, and worse they commissioned the killing
meanwhile ask God to “Have Mercy” on their souls. In 1990, the same old phrase surfaced too in
Buffy Sainte-Marie’s song titled Bury my Heart at Wounded Knee, one of the greatest protest songs
ever written. It is meant to draw the attention of world body of justice to the continuing abuse of the
Natives’ natural rights by government and big corporations. Esther Belin in Blues-ing focuses on the
particular trauma of relocation that left Indian feeling lost and out of existence: And Coyote blues-ing
on the urban brown funk vibe/ wanders in and out of existence/ tasting the brown rusty at times/ worn
out bitter from relocation.
Despite the on-going atrocities, still most Native poets embrace peaceful means to redress the evil
deeds. Joseph Ward-Langman, unexpectedly asks his fellow Indians, Do not kill, but do not yield;
Bury my heart at the sacred land. Even in the famous Indians’ protest in March 1972, the past carnage
was present too. In his Black Hills, Ted Glick registers love to nature of snow-drops, honeyed-rain/
fall from the glistening green needles of upper reaches over Rapid City. In contrast, the sacred lands
commercialized, organized/ centralized/ scandalized by the white man. Tanya Winder speaks also
about the particular humiliation of Indians: 1 in 3 Native women will be raped in her lifetime/ … Native
women are 2.5 times more likely to be sexually assaulted … while the rest of the world keeps on
eating. Winder surveys other forms of indignation: stealing our spirits each day… taking us away…to
industrial schools to forced assimilation… genocide. The current atrocities, she demonstrates, are only
a continuation of what had happened before, our bodies are targets marked for violence. …our
mothers swallowed these bullets long ago. Being extremely frightened, for Colonization’s bullets sits
cocked, waiting behind a finger on trigger. Despite the imminent danger, her nation is still alive and
breathing. Like Tanya Winder, Mark Turcotte in his poem, Flies Buzzing, displays the Indians’ love
for life regardless of the pain and injustices around. His people keep dancing in the greasy light of
kerosene lamps and recalling the inspiring spirits of ancestors, and singing, we shall live again. Sara
Littlecrow- Russell in her Ghost Dance holds on to the same faith no matter the pain. Unlike what
history books say... The ghost dance died with the ancestor…, she challenges, Each time it rains / I go
to the sidewalk/ where the trees roots/ have broken the concrete/ listening to the water’s whispering:
“It is coming soon.” In fact, the ghost dancers were murdered dreaming of freedom and unison with
the holy spirit, but the survivors still embrace the same old dream. They believe their nation will rise
again like trees roots that break the concrete to preserve and restore the Native American’s land and
way of life.
Sherman Alexie, like others, engages mostly the particular rather than the universal. He
illuminates despair, poverty, alcoholism, and other forms of self-abuse that often shape the life of
Native Americans living on reservations. In his poem Grief Calls Us to the Things of This
World, the persona feels fooled not only by white men but also by the angels who burden and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

30

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

unbalance us/… Those angels, forever falling, snare us/ And haul us, prey and praying, into dust.
In his poem, How to Write the Great American Indian Novel, Alexie resents the particular
hyphenation and stereotyping of his own nation, as well the racial pressure imposed even on their
arts. An Indian novel cannot see the light, unless it suits the racial expectations of Anglo audience.
All Indians characters must have tragic features: tragic noses, eyes, and arms. Racial
specifications must be strictly observed too in the portrayals of Indian heroes and heroines. The
hero must be a half-breed, half white and half Indian. The Indian heroine must be beautiful,
slender/ and in love with a white man, or a half-breed Indian man. All Indian men, should be
depicted as storms, and destroyer of the lives of any white women who choose to love them. As
well, the Indian community ought to be inhabited by murderers, hopeless men, rapists and
alcoholics.
Alexie’s attachment to heritage and fear over cultural appropriation are illuminated in his poem
My mother was a dictionary. His mother was a reservoir of Indian traditions, culture and
language. With her death, the Indian heritage was entombed, or at best stored in a deteriorated
cassette tape, a dictionary, a thesaurus, or an encyclopedia. The Powwow at the End of the
World, is another typical Indian poem in which the particular prevails at the expense of the
universal, hence signifying sensual consciousness. The poem speaks about a powwow, a
conference of North American Indians; a ceremony characterized by feasting, dancing, and rites
performed (Ellis. 2003). The ceremony is meant to preserve and restore the Native American land
and way of life. It may refer also to the past Ghost or Prophet Dance, a religious ceremony of
resurrection of the dead, forbidden by the government in the nineteenth century, and participants
often crushed by American troops (Brown, Dee. 2007). Apparently, the battered persona shows
how unlikely he will forgive the ones who ruined their life and enslaved nature with man-made
dams. He will forgive only when all wrongs put right again, after the first drop of floodwater is
swallowed by that salmon waiting in the Pacific. In a Spokane myth, the salmon, the immortal
agent of the holy spirit, was blocked from its own original stream by the dam. Given the idea that
the salmon took human form in the ocean but transformed themselves into fish to be eaten. Neither
forgiveness nor reconciliation would come till they have gathered around the fire with that salmon.
Basically, once their tradition returns, forgiveness might be attained. At the end of the poem, he
imaginatively topples the man-made dam and unleashes the waters, anticipating that human
arrogance would inevitably come to an end, and the salmon would finally swim upstream past the
flooded cities, broken dams and abandoned reactors of Hanford. By large, the poem illuminates
the Indian’s trauma; yet as other cited verses, it falls within the confines of Sensual Consciousness.
Compared to the particularity extant in the aforementioned poems, Alexie’s Hymn
entangles more universal issues. In other words, it transcends the confines of the particular and
encompasses a non-exclusive vision. In more specific terms, the sensual level dominant before has
given way to a rather cosmic vision in which the particular plight of Indians becomes part of the
universal struggle. Alexie surveys the evolution of human mind from the lowest brutish selfawareness, to the sensual consciousness, and then to a higher self-consciousness, as though tracing
the forms of consciousness illuminated by both Bucke and Schleiermacher. The begins with the
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

31

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

brutish self-awareness in which men act like beasts, love their progeny, as any lion can be devoted
to its cubs, as well Any insect, be it prey/ Or predator, worships its own DNA. This kind of love
draws mockery not admiration: It ain't that hard/ To love somebody who resembles you… with the
same chin/ And skin and religion and accent and eyes. This form of love suits a caveman who is
closer to brutes in his sentiments and afraid of the things outside the cave. Incivility, volcanic
hostility, lists of enemies, and moral apocalypse— are all features of brutes not real humans. In
Schleiermacher's theology, a man remains brutish in consciousness unless he transcends animal
instincts and attain a point of contact with the absolute, with no doubt entails non-exclusive love
(Bunge 2001). The brutish awareness is mocked further as the fans worship beneath the tarnished
steeple and admire the lack of compassion of their abhorrent dictator. And worse, they are
convinced that their deadly sins (Envy, wrath, greed) have transformed into wins, misusing
religious fiction to justify aversions against others of different race, religion or culture. To make
amends, the divisive brutish consciousness is to be encountered by a new vision of non-exclusive
love: I know I will still feel my rage and rage / But I won’t act like I’m the only person on stage…
I will resist hate… I will stand and sing my love…and sing to welcome strangers; as though The
Powwow dictated by Alexie’s sensual consciousness has evolved into a cosmic one that
encompasses people of different walks. In other words, Alexie transcends the particular in this
specific poem and realizes the idea of non-exclusive love as the essence of creation; as well he
deems everyone part of the human fabric; and everyone shares in the truly essential things in life.
7. Joy Harjo
Among the rest of the Native American poets, Joy Harjo often shows serious inclinations to
transcend the particular and adopt a rather Whitmanian cosmic vision, cemented by Creek values,
myths, and beliefs. Harjo chants a unity of the whole universe and a mystical unison among
humans, animals, plants, the sky, and earth. In additions, she believes that we become most human
when we understand the connection among all living things (Romero, 2012). She also embraces
the spirituality of world, the idea of non-exclusive love and the beauty of the whole web. However,
like Darwish, her inclinations are often frustrated by distressing realities- the brutish consciousness
of her opponents. Harjo grew up in slums and shacks of poor Indians in Tulsa, Oklahoma, a
background that deeply informs her work. As growing up, Harjo learned how to maintain and
integrate with others without losing or denying her own identity. Like Darwish, she has nurtured
herself to adopt and display a cosmic consciousness of her own liking, perhaps for the purpose of
containing the reminiscence of past injuries. To some degree, the particular in her verses often
surrenders its place to a more universal vision. As she comments once, the concerns are particular,
yet often universal (Poetry Foundation/ Joy Harjo). Following the footsteps of Walt Whitman, her
incantations excludes nothing; it inhabits all American landscapes and revolves around the need
for remembrance in order not to deny or lose her own identity, and transcendence in order to rise
above the atrocities of brutish consciousness of opponents. In a published interview, she states that
she feels strongly obliged to all past and future ancestors, to home country, to all places… to all
voices, all women, all of [her] tribe, all people, all earth, and beyond that to all beginnings and
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

32

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

endings (Poetry Foundation/ Joy Harjo). She often touches upon land rights for Native Americans,
meanwhile she strives to bring realization of the wrongs of the past, not only for Native American
communities but also for oppressed communities worldwide (Valenzuela-Mendoza, 2014).
In her poem the Eagle, (as cited in Poetry Foundation) the Indian heritage and Whitman’s
vision of higher consciousness inform her verses. Like Whitman, she celebrates not only herself,
but all humanity, and indicates that spiritual moments can lead to peace, joy, and knowledge. While
praying, her soul transcends the particular and unfolds to encompass the whole world.: To pray
you open your whole self/ To sky, to earth, to sun, to moon/ To one whole voice that is you/ And
know there is more. Genuine prayer, as she states, would sweep our hearts clean. And in moments
of mystical illumination, we learn That we must take the utmost care/ And kindness in all things,
for every creature is part of the same fabric, and shares in the truly essential things in life. As well,
birth and death are part of life journey, yet all should be done in beauty, without hyphenation or
segregation. The same vision of spiritual oneness and non-exclusive love, she reiterates in her
poem This Morning I Pray for My Enemy. To her, a human heart should be a conduit through
which all man’s thoughts and moves should pass: the door to the mind should only open from the
heart. A human heart should be open and admit even the foe who dares to be a friend: An enemy
who gets in, risks the danger of becoming a friend, as she concludes her poem.
In her Reconciliation- A Prayer, Harjo channels also Walt Whitman particularly in his wellknown poem Reconciliation, the concluding poem in Drum Taps, written as the American Civil
War came to a close. Like Whitman, Harjo based her discourse on the spirituality of the world and
the idea of non-exclusive love. Her lines showcase the divine spirit living at the root of molecular
structure in all life as a dynamic force, all-pervading and all-loving; it reveals itself at all levels,
humans, animals, plants, minerals, as well as in the essence of the sun (Robertson, 2010). Unlike
Alexie’s one color gathering in The Powwow at the End of the World, Harjo’s powwow
encompasses not only the Natives, but all God’s creatures. She invites all people to take part in her
prayer, embracing the idea that the foundation of all religious experiences is mystical illumination
that all need (James, 1892; Moores 2006). In her poem, the mystical unison of the whole world is
attained through a precise balance among the symbols of Christianity, and Indians’ faith. The
Indian symbols of love and spirituality merge with the Christian sacrament of the Last Supper:
This god who grew to love us became our lover, sharing/ tables of food enough for everyone in
this whole world. This traditional image of Christ accompanies the image of her Indian Gods: Oh
sun, moon, stars, our other relatives peering at us/ from the inside of god’s house. Keep us from
giving up in the land of nightmares and miracles. Despite differences in rituals, acts of kindness
must be the lights for all decent worshipers. With no illusion of domination nor undertaking, people
should move forward together tolerating the shape and faith of one another with compassion. She
further prays that all the strands broken from the web of life/ shiver with love and sing for the
welfare of the whole universe.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

33

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

In Remember, also the particular gives its place to a universal vision in which all the factions
in conflict should be abound in love. Like Whitman who chants always the oneness of the universe,
Harjo encompasses in her broader image the whole universe, the sky, the sun, the moon, the
sunrise, the sunset, the mother, the father, the earth. plants, trees, animals, as essential parts of the
whole web of life. Nothing is excluded. All are abounding in love, she adds. Only with nonexclusive love, people of different faith, color, or gender can retain and embrace the oneness of
the whole world.
In the Equinox, Harjo seems wavering between the dictates of the sensual consciousness and
the mandate of a cosmic vision: either to keep fighting, or to extend her arm to meet others at the
middle of the road. The sensual that tempts her to carry a war club as the grief staggering toward
the sun is eventually kept in check. Instead, she resorts to a comforting idea of the eternal, for
eternity encompasses the whole; and her addiction to war and desire have been broken. She
consciously decides to have the dead buried and to make songs of the blood, the marrow.
Reconciliatory tone is to prevail despite the spilled blood and racial grudge. However, cosmic
consciousness, which renders love, is nearly shaken by bitter realities, and evaded by the
aggressor’s insistence on his bloody game. Her plan of transcendence is soon dodged by the
reservoir of remembrance. An alarming thought from the past encroaches on her: How they would
forget our friendship, would return to kill me and the babies. Her fear is temporarily overcome by
inclinations to love the whole world while whirling joyfully on the dance floor. Still, even the joy
she finds in dancing is frustrated and evaporated by the staccato of the bullets, and the artillery
she sees in the hands of dictators.
With a slight difference, her poem An American Sunrise reiterates the same peaceful trends,
meanwhile those trends are suppressed by the prejudice and the brutish consciousness of
oppressors. While revisiting the land of ancestors with its reminiscent of pain and grief, she strives
to keep the sensual in check: surfacing the edge of our ancestors’ fights, and ready to strike. With
alcohol and dancing, she tends to remember to forget the atrocities of others and rises above
worldly pains: We drummed a fire-lit pathway up to those starry stars, and integrate and rather
assimilate, yet the other is still in the habit of using religious fiction to stigmatize the Natives as
heathens or anti-Christ: Sin was invented by the Christians, as was the Devil, we sang/. We were
the heathens, and there is only a thin chance to be saved from them. Against all odds, justice has
not been done for Native Indians yet: forty years later and we still want justice, she concludes.
In brief, Harjo’s verses flicker between the sensual consciousness that entails remembrance of
all the past indignation, massacres, and on-going injustices; and an earnest impulse to transcend
the past with all its injuries and adopt a cosmic vision that sees the whole universe as one, abound
by the idea of non-exclusive love and justice for all regardless of race, gender, or faith. Her cosmic
inclinations, however, are often frustrated by the brutish consciousness of the other. Still, she
believes that time has come for humanity to turn a new page, and she anticipates that the
consciousness of all people will eventually develop into the highest form of human consciousness.

Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

34

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Conclusion
The majority of indigenous people’s verses hover within the confines of the sensual
consciousness. In contrast, Darwish and Harjo cherish a universal vision that considers all
creatures on earth as one, and dream of a historic reconciliation based on justice for all, tolerance
of the other, and above all the idea of non-exclusive love that encompasses foes and friends among
the factions in conflict. In the examined verses of both poets, the particular goes side by side with
the universal, or the sensual with the cosmic. Both expose the injustices befall their nations, and
concurrently strive to transcend the particular and the mandates of the brutish consciousness and
attain a point of contact with the absolute. This is not to argue that Darwish and Harjo adopt
completely cosmic consciousness; they showcase earnest trends for such a vision, yet their
inclinations are always frustrated by harsh realities- the brutish consciousness of their oppressors.
Hope, though a feeble one, is still there, as Darwish once relates: I do not despair. I am patient
and waiting for a profound revolution in the consciousness of the Israelis…. All it has to do is to
open the gates of its fortress and make peace (as cited in Hadid, 2008).
About the Author:
Dr. Adil M. Jamil, specialized in American Poetry with a Master’s degree from Marshall
University, USA, and a Doctoral Degree from MTSU, USA., is now a chairman of the
Department of English at Amman Arab University, having growing interest in the life and Arts
of Indigenous people, beside Creative Writing. ORCID ID https://orcid.org/0000-0001-59162782
References
American Indian Poems and Quotes. Retrieved from https://www.beccascorner.tripod.com/id22.html.
Bucke, M. (2009). Cosmic Consciousness: A Study in the Evolution of the Human Mind.
Mineola, New York: Dover Publications.
Brown, D. (2007). Bury my heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian history of the American
West. New York: Macmillan.
Bunge, M. J. (2000). The Child in Christian Thought. Grand Rapids, Michigan: Wm. B.
Eerdmans Publishing
Clark, P. (2008, August 11). Mahmood Darwish. The Guardian. Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/11/poetry.israelandthepalestinians
Cook, A. L. (1950). "A Note on Whitman’s Symbolism in 'Song of Myself'". Modern Language
Notes 65.4: 228-32. JSTOR. Web. 17 October 2011
Creswell, R. (February 2009). "Unbeliever in the Impossible: Poetry of Mahmoud
Darwish". Harper’s 318 (1905): 69–74
Darwish, M. (2007). The Butterfly’s Burden. Trans by Fadi Joudah. Port. Townsend,
Washington: Copper Canyon Press.
Ellis, C. (2003). A Dancing People: Powwow Culture on the Southern Plains.
Lawrence, Kansas: University Press of Kansas.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

35

AWEJ for Translation & Literary Studies Volume, 3 Number 3. August 2019

Ferber, A. (2014. June 4). When the Palestinian National Poet Fell in Love with a Jew: The
Love Letters Between Mahmood Darwish and ‘Rita’. HAARETZ. Retrieved from
https://www.haaretz.com/jewish/.premium-palestinian-poet-in-love-with-a-jew1.5250557. April 18, 2019.
Hadid, D. (9. August, 2008). Palestinian Poet Mahmoud Darwish Dead at 67. Seattle Times.
Retrieved from https://wikivisually.com/wiki/Mahmoud_Darwish
Hijjawi, S. Ed. &Trans (2009). Poetry of Resistance in Occupied Palestine by Ghassan
Kanafani. Baghdad: Ministry of Culture Press, 1968.
Horesh, U. (2015). In Jerusalem by Mahmoud Darwish. Transference: 3 (1)
Huyssteen, W. V. (2003). Encyclopedia of Science and Religion, Volume 2. New York,
Macmillan Press
Jaggi, M. (June 8, 2002) Profile: Mahmoud Darwish – Poet of the Arab world, The Guardian,
Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2002/jun/08/featuresreviews.guardianreview19
Mattar, P. ed. (2005). Encyclopedia of the Palestinians. New York, NY: Facts on File.
Moores, D.J. (2006). Mystical Discourse in Wordsworth and Whitman: A Transatlantic Bridge.
Leuven, Belgium: Peters Publisher.
Nassar, H. K. & Rahman. N. (eds.), (2007). Mahmoud Darwish, Exile's Poet: Critical Essays.
Northampton, MA: Interlink Books,
Parini, J. (March 11, 2011). The 10 Best American Poems. The Guardian. Retrieved from
https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2011/mar/11/best-american-poems.
Parsons, R. (2011). The Wounded Knee Massacre, December 1890. Retrieved from
https//www.lastoftheindependents.com.
Poem Hunter, Samih Al-Qassim Poems, https://www.poemhunter.com/samih-al-qasim/
Poetry Foundation, Poets. https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poets. All the verses of Native
American are cited in this website.
Reynolds, D.( 1995.) Walt Whitman’s America: A Cultural Biography. New York: Alfred A.
Knopf,
Redding, P. (2011) Whitman Unbound: Democracy and Poetic Form. New Literary
Theory 41.(3)(669-90.
Richardson, H. (2010). Wounded Knee: Party Politics and Road to An American Massacre.
New York: Basic Books
Robertson, M. (2010) Worshipping Wall: The Whitman Disciples. Princeton University Press
Romero, C. (2012). Activism and the American Novel: Religion and Resistance in Fiction by
Women of Color. Virginia: University of Virginia Press.
Shatz, A. (2001, December 22). A Poet’s Palestine as a Metaphor. The New York Times,
Retrieved from https://www.nytimes.com/2001/12/22/books/a-poet-s-palestine-as-ametaphor.html
Taha, I. (2002). The Palestinian Novel: a communication study. London: Routledge.
Valenzuela-Mendoza, E. (2014). Tending to the past: The Historical Poetics of Joy Harjo and
Natasha Trethewey". Iowa Research Online. 1 (7).
Whitman, Walt. (2016) Song of Myself. Iowa City: Iowa University Press.
Arab World English Journal for Translation & Literary Studies
ISSN: 2550-1542 | www.awej-tls.org

36

