Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018

Pp.136 -145

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.9

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Phothongsunan Sureepong
School of Arts, Assumption University
Bangkok, Thailand

Abstract
The main aim of the study is to explore 15 high achieving English language learners’ accounts of
their undertakings in learning English in a Thai upper secondary school. The researcher adopts the
view of social learning, particularly in reaching better understandings of the learners’ experiences
in learning English. As there exists a tendency to gauge learners’ success in English based on
examinations, this study asserts that language learning involves more than a cognitive process,
thus values the social aspects of experiential English learning. The focus lies on investigating the
perceptions of these high achieving English language learners of their success in learning English
as well as the influences contributing to it. Two methods are used to collect data: focus groups and
interviews. The findings indicate the participants’ perceptions of their own success in learning
English in three main aspects: English language ability, examination performance and skills in
teaching others. In particular, the ability to speak English fluently and correctly appears to be of
utmost importance for a successful English as a Foreign Language (EFL) learner. It is also found
that most learners identify their own performance in class, the teacher, including teacher rapport,
and school culture as contributing to their English learning achievement. In focusing on the
learners’ perceptions and their actual experiences, insights into how the learners actually undergo
the learning opportunities provided by the education system can be obtained. To understand the
extent to which innovations in English language teaching and learning have been successful, the
everyday realities of the language classroom and school have to be accentuated.
Keywords: EFL learners, English learning, learning context, learning experiences

Cite as: Sureepong, P. (2018). EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context.
Arab World English Journal, 9 (4), 136 -145.

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.9

136

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

Introduction
Intending to understand the learners’ experiences of learning in view of their English achievement
as measured through a formal assessment, the researcher wanted to find out why some high
achieving Thai English language learners have been more successful in learning English. By
acknowledging the learners as whole persons and social beings, some historical and cultural
background on the learners’ experiences with English would be explored. This provides a basis
for understanding the identity of these learners, how they see their progress in English, how they
see themselves as learners of English and their responses to English teaching and learning
situations. Their reasons for learning English, their constructions of themselves as learners of
English and their perceptions of learning English as a subject in school would also be examined.
The researcher was interested in the experiences of learners who had been successful in
terms of examinations. What other people thought these learners had accomplished in English
based on formal learning indicates that examination results had been simplistically regarded as an
indicator of success.
There is a strong inclination in Thailand to measure learners’ progress in English solely in
connection with examinations, reflecting a mainstream second language acquisition view that
language learning is a cognitive process, and that it involves a process-product approach where
attainment in the latter is simply measurable. The researcher started this study with an assumption
that these learners, based on their excellent results in the English examinations, were successful
English language learners. However, the researcher also took the stance that language learning
involved more than a cognitive undertaking, thus deciding to explore the social aspects of the
learners’ experiences of learning English which could account for their success in English as well.
Two main research questions in the studyare:
1. What are the perceptions of high achieving English language learners of their own success
in learning English?
2. What are the influences that the learners identify as contributing to their success as EFL
learners?
Literature Review
With the view of social learning, language learning is a relationship between social and cognitive
processes, which involve a social and collaborative endeavor and transformation of learners’
identities and participation in the context of learning where language has its own distinctive role
in the learning of a language (Breen, 2001).
Language learning also depends on linguistic input. This is because theorists such as
Krashen (1982) believes linguistic input is the main source for language learning. According to
Krashen’s input hypothesis, to acquire language one needs to be exposed to comprehensible
linguistic input. If the input contains forms and structures just beyond the learner’s current level
of competence both comprehension and acquisition of the language can occur (Lightbown , 2000).
Interactionist theorists similarly agree that input is the key source of language learning.
This suggests that as the learner tries to manage his or her interactions with second language input
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

137

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

and then organizes his or her second language output internally and invisibly (Lightbown, 2000),
based on Swain’s (1985) output hypothesis, language learning can advance.
The implication of such a position is that the language classroom is seen as of value as a
linguistic data provider to shape learners for efficient mental processing of the language (Breen,
2001). This seems to reflect the common belief in Thailand that the classroom is the most important
context for learning English.
From the viewpoint of theorists and researchers working within the information-processing
model of human learning and performance (McLaughlin, 1987; Johnson, 1996) language learning
is perceived as the accumulation of knowledge systems such as grammatical structures through
‘practice’ and integration of the learning task that results in a fluent performance.
From this assumption it is through practice that learners will be able to store various aspects
of the language learned, and that when the learner wants to perform an action, the stored knowledge
can be retrieved from memory (Johnson, 2001). This implies the notion of transmission learning
which involves the one-way flow of information from the teacher to the learners. More crucially,
the idea that the learners have accumulated knowledge of the language from the teacher is
something readily explored. This probably explains the reason why in Thailand learners’ progress
in English is mainly evaluated through examinations.
However, as stated earlier language learning can be perceived as social and collaborative
phenomena embedded in social activities in which people engage in various everyday situations
and settings. In the second language learning situation, the teacher becomes a co-participant, a
source of constant affirmation, to develop learners’ sensitivity to learning through direct exposure
to stimuli and to develop in the learners’ cognitive prerequisites for such direct learning (Kozulin,
1998).
This collaborative social interaction is viewed to be most productive within the zone of
proximal development (ZPD). ZPD is understood as the distance between the learner’s actual
development and the learner’s potential growth (Wertsch, 1984). In second language learning, this
zone can be interpreted as the distance between learners’ basic knowledge in the language and the
extent to which the learner can advance to a higher level of proficiency in the language. It is
believed that within this ZPD that effective learning takes place with the help of or in collaboration
with the others who serve as mediators.
Within this zone, a teacher can also develop strategies to assist learners. The support
provided by the teacher is known as scaffolding (van Lier, 2001). In the initial stages of learning,
learners are supported more directly in their learning, for example, through explicit instruction.
However, as learners show a sign of being capable of dealing with the learning task on their own,
the scaffold must be gradually dismantled.
From this perspective, in the formal teaching and learning situation, the learners’
development and learning seem to be shaped by their relationship with the teacher. Based on this
view, it is therefore important to recognize that learners’ achievement or success in formal second
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

138

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

language learning, is partly under their own control, and partly under the control of their teachers
(Mercer, 2001). The language learners, therefore, arguably are not solely responsible for their own
achievement.
By developing the notion of learning as a social and collaborative activity, it is important
to note that within the social framework, language is considered the most important tool for such
activity. We need language both first language (L1) and second language (L2) to mediate and
regulate our relationships with others, and with ourselves as in organizing our thoughts for
reasoning, planning and reviewing, and hence change the nature of the relationship (Candlin &
Mercer, 2001). In other words, this means that we do not use language just for communication
where communication among other things involves sharing our culture but also we use it for
thinking and in turn, understanding (Williams & Burden, 1997).
Mercer (2000) asserts that language, in fact, helps people to think together, and thus,
introduces the notion of interthinking. According to Mercer, when people interact through
language, they are in actual fact combining their mental resources. Through observation, imitation
and taking part in joint physical activity by means of language, people can jointly create new ideas
and evaluate the quality of their achievement.
Methodology
This study adopts a case study approach. It fits the needs to explore the situation under study
where data are from people’s experiences and perceptions and so are considered realistic and rich.
Case studies are a data source from which further investigation can be made which can lead to
further research. It is therefore important to realize specific cases and ensure a more holistic
approach to research (Cohen et al., 2000).
Sampling
The participants consisted of 15 Thai high school students who were studying in grades 10, 11 and
12 in a Thai school in suburban Bangkok. From the total, five students from different classes in
each of the grade levels were selected. They studied in a Thai program and English was learned
about three hours per week in a 15-week semester. Ten of them were female while the 5 others
were male. The participants were purposively chosen based on their English grades in which case
they must have received at least 85% (A grades) from English courses for as minimum the past
two semesters consecutively. None had experienced studying overseas.
Data collection
To obtain data for this study, two methods were used: focus groups and interviews, all carried out
in Thai, fully transcribed, and then translated into English. A focus group is as a group discussion
on a particular topic organized for research purposes. This discussion is guided, monitored and
recorded by a researcher (Silverman, 2000). This method was used in this study because the
researcher found that the participants once asked to take part in this study were generally eager to
express ideas and account for their experiences in learning English. Thus, it was decided that
stranger groups would be used as the participants would be able to speak freely without fear of
repercussion, and challenges to other participants could be more challenging and probing, leading
to richer data. Three focus groups for which each level represents were deployed.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

139

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

The researcher was, however, conscious that being in a group could also mean that learners
were unwilling to assert their views because of a fear of being intimidated by their peers, the
interviewer or even the situation (Powney & Watts, 1987). Similarly, being in a friendship group
could also pose some problems, as learners’ views may tend to converge in order to keep the peace.
In the light of these foreseen drawbacks, during the group discussions, the researcher tried to
encourage all the participants to talk and to monitor these individuals who could have dominated
the conversations (Creswell, 1998).
Interviews were another principal method of data collection for the reason that findings
created through the interaction of the inquirer and the phenomenon (the individuals) are often more
plausible (Guba & Lincoln, 1998). In addition, Fontana and Frey (1994) state that interviewing is
most powerful in trying to understand people. Cooper and McIntyre (1996) suggest that, in gaining
access to learners’ perspectives, what is needed is an approach that enables the participants to
express their own personal views or constructions of their experience.
A semi-structured interview technique was used in order to give the participants ‘a voice’
with a certain degree of freedom to talk about what was centrally significant to them within the
designed framework of this research study (Bell, 1993). At the same time, using a semi-structured
interview enabled the researcher to probe and ask for clarification as the participants constructed
their meaning in response to the questions raised about their experiences in order to construct an
understanding of their accounts and perceptions of learning English.
Data analysis
The data was initially transcribed. The focus group discussions were transcribed verbatim during
the first phase. These transcripts were then returned to the groups for respondent validation
(Radnor, 2002). Similarly, the individual interviews were transcribed and returned to the
participants for respondent validation.
In the first instance, adapting the analysis procedures advocated by Knodel (1993) for focus
group data, the researcher used the discussion guideline as a point of reference in coding the data.
These coded data were then transferred to an overview grid that provided a descriptive summary
of the content of the focus group discussions. This overview grid served as a guide for further
coding. The transcripts were read and re-read taking into account the group as well as the
individual responses. As emphasized by Morgan (1993), discussions in focus group depend on
both the individuals that make up the group and the dynamic of the group as a whole.
The coding process was undertaken based on emerging units of meaning (Maykut &
Morehouse, 1994). Throughout this process, the data was constantly compared across groups and
across individuals in the group. At this point, descriptive accounts were written out based on the
categories to indicate relationships and patterns. The next step was then to integrate the data to
yield an understanding of the participants’ constructions of English learning experiences.
Similar procedures were used for the individual interviews. However, the constant
comparative method was based on comparing across individuals within the same level and in
different levels based on similar units of meanings. Similar units of meaning were identified and
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

140

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

coded. These were then matched to the data from the focus group discussions to understand the
overall learners’ perceptions of their success in learning English and the influences that they
identify as contributing to their learning success.
Findings and Discussion
To answer the first research question, three major domains can be addressed: English language
ability, examination performance and teaching a skill.
In terms of English language ability, all participants believed that the ability to speak
English fluently and correctly was important to be successful English learners. They seemed to
have a powerful image that if someone was to be good at English, the person should be able to
speak English fluently, correctly and even without hesitation. Nine out of fifteen participants also
indicated that a native-like accent could clearly distinguish successful from unsuccessful EFL
learners. Interestingly, four of the participants from grade 10 pointed out that the use of English
vocabulary and the length of vocabulary made them stand out among their classmates at school.
All five respondents from grade 12 opined that ability to write well-developed essays attributed to
their success in learning English.
Regarding performance in examinations, all participants reported being able to do well
in English exams as an important criterion of becoming a successful EFL learner. This is because
for the participant's grades were seen as an achievement indicator that is tangible and acceptable
as recognized by teachers, peers, and parents. Moreover, about half of the participants (N=7)
found taking English tests with confidence significant for an efficient English learner.
Another interesting finding was on teaching a skill as many participants (N=8) pointed out.
Ability to teach other people English seemed to be necessary as they reasoned that if ones could
teach or guide others to use English well, they would be qualified and competent enough to use
English for communication, and this would be a clear sign of success. In other words, many
participants justified that to be a successful English user, one role was to have a teacher-like figure
to help other learners achieve a higher level of proficiency in English.
From the findings, the learners identified speaking as an important characteristic of a
good English language learner. English speaking was the skill they needed to be able to pursue
their present and future academic/professional as well as social endeavors. However, what most
of these learners underscored was the ability to speak English confidently and correctly because
they seemed to believe they had to speak English without grammatical mistakes. That all the
learners emphasized the ability to converse in English more than other skills as their key criteria
for having achieved in English can be pertinent to the learners’ sense of accomplishment in English
mostly related to the extent to which they felt they could speak English. This finding seemed to
concur with Tse’s (2000) finding that for the students in her study, the conversational ability was
the most important criteria that reflected their actual proficiency in English more than traditional
measures of academic competence.
Another issue that could be related to the participants’ perceived success in learning
English was their concern for correctness in the language. It can be deduced that due to the focus
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

141

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

on examinations and on covering the prescribed framework, correctness in the language was
emphasized over the message carried by the language (Lightbown, 2000; Wells, 2003).
Some learners seemed to be referring to their experience in school. Possibly influenced
by their experience with written work in their English lessons, these learners referred to the quality
written work as a standard a successful learner should have. It can also be implied that good
language learners or users seem to be judged based on formal learning. Thus, learners’ ability to
use English or specifically speak the language could be predominantly perceived from a written
perspective as well.
The participants admitted placing a high value on examinations. On the one hand, this
seemed to reflect the influence of an examination-oriented education system in Thailand. On the
other hand, this could also be due to the fact that examination performance would determine if
these learners could pursue their higher education with success. By emphasizing on preparing
students for examinations, this reflects the notion implied by Hopkins (2001) that the
organizational conditions of the school are closely related to classroom practice that directly and
indirectly impacts student learning.
Regarding the teaching skill raised by many participants as vital in becoming successful
in learning English, teaching from this perspective is the process of creating situations whereby
students are able to interact with the material to be learned in order to construct knowledge. The
feeling of accomplishment also seemed to relate to the idea that the learners had been given
empowerment in their learning, which again reflects the notion of transmission learning. Assuming
a teaching role relates to a perceived change in the learners’ identity as teachers to become coparticipants (Kozulin, 1998) in other learners’ learning of English, making all their learning
experiences more social.
The second research question deals with influences identified as contributing to their
success as EFL learners. Most of the participants (N=10) referred to their own performance in
class. They reported participating actively during all lessons, doing what was required of them as
learners, though they hardly asked questions. This relates to the notion proposed by Wright (1987)
that students may be merely acting ‘in role’ as learners based on the status they believed accorded
to them in the classroom situation.
More than half of the participants (N=8) believed that the teacher and rapport with the
English teacher helped them to succeed in learning English, without specifically indicating the
teacher’s age or native or non-native status. They on the other hand commented favorably on the
English teacher’s personality and ways of conducting lessons. Interaction with the English teacher
seemed to have provided an opportunity for real language practice through informal more than
formal conversations. Five participants from grade 10 agreed that the teacher seemed to have
provided a chance for the learners’ voices to be heard during lesson activities and within the
learning framework. The teacher is always seen as a key authority in the language classroom.
Supposedly as an English expert, the teacher is a facilitator who can help support learners’ learning
as they try to rationalize their language learning experiences (Kozulin, 1998; Williams & Burden,
1997). Simultaneously, the teacher can offer the scaffolding to enhance learners particularly in the
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

142

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

initial stages of learning. The teacher also seems to hold power concerning whether the learners
have access to speaking and using English in context (Norton, 2000). Put differently, the teacher
seems to make it possible regarding whether learners have a chance to practise different language
skills. Similarly, the teacher is the person who can provide learners with emotional backing as
they experience an adjustment in identity whenever using a second language. Obviously, what is
important is a relationship between learners and the teacher, as this appears to affect the learners’
learning and development in the language.
Three other participants mentioned school culture in particular. In their school, English is
mainly used in the classroom and tested in examinations. English learning is perceived for
examination purposes, and the school concentrates on classroom learning where the focus is on
learners’ passing the examinations. School culture includes the professional culture of educators,
standards of local organization and administrative practice (Husén & Postlethwaite, 1994). Thus,
the way schools in general perceive English learning could also account for the way English is
used by learners within the school environment. This relates to the notion presented by Spolsky
(1989) that school rationale, priorities and goals for the target language are important as they seem
to determine an extent to which learners can use English in and outside the language classroom
either to practice or to continue learning the target language or merely to focus on taking
examinations.
Conclusion
Using an interpretive inquiry focusing on learners in the attempt to understand their perspectives
of learning English in school, this study, has provided invaluable insights into how the learners
discovered themselves, which can be seen as extending the research scope in the field of EFL.
Findings from this study indicate that successful EFL learners do have clear conceptions of their
learning experiences, demonstrating that Thai learners, given the opportunity to articulate their
experiences, are able to voice their views on different issues related to their perceived success in
learning of English. Future research with different target groups and types of school are worth
considering. These can provide concerned stakeholders with different insights into learners’ social
worlds of learning English. Within the field of second language learning in EFL contexts, research
into learners’ perspectives in terms of their general experiences of school has not been conducted
extensively. Thus, further research involving learners’ perspectives on different issues of teaching
and learning of English within the social context of Thai schools can be seen as broadening an
understanding of second language learning.
About the Author:
Sureepong Phothongsunan works at the Theodore Maria School of Arts, Assumption University.
Holding a doctorate in TEFL from the University of Exeter, UK, he has published books, articles,
and research in English Language Teaching. ORCiD: https://orcid.org/0000-0001-8115-4375

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

143

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

References
Bell, J. (1993). Doing Your Research Project: a guide for first-time researchers in education and
social science. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Breen, M.P. (2001). Navigating the discourse: on what is learned in the classroom. In C. N.
Candlin and N. Mercer (Eds.), English Language Teaching in its social context, 306-323.
London: Routledge.
Candlin, N.C. and Mercer, N. (Eds.). (2001). English Language Teaching in its Social Context. A
Reader. London: Routledge.
Cohen, L., Manion, L. & Morrison, K. (2000). Research Methods in Education. London and
New York: Routledge.
Cooper, P. & McIntyre, D. (1996). Effective Teaching and Learning: Teachers’ and Students’
Perspectives. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Creswell, J.W. (1998). Qualitative Inquiry and Research Design: Choosing Among Five
Traditions. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Fontana, A. & Frey, J.H. (1998). Interviewing: The Art of Science. In H. K. Denzin and Y.S.
Lincoln (Eds.), Collecting and Interpreting Qualitative Materials, 47-78, Thousand
Oaks: Sage Publications.
Guba, E.G. & Lincoln, Y.S. (1998) Competing Paradigms in Qualitative Research. In H. K.
Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (Eds.), The Landscape of Qualitative Research, 195-220.
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Hopkins, D. (2001). Powerful Learning, Powerful Teaching and Powerful Schools. Paper given
at College of St Mark and St John, October 2001. Mimeo.
Husén, T. & Postlethwaite, T.N. (Eds.). (1994). The International Encyclopedia of Education.
Oxford, England: Pergamon.
Johnson, K. (1996). Language Teaching and Skill Learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Johnson, K. (2001). An Introduction to Foreign Language Learning and Teaching. England:
Pearson Education Limited.
Knodel, J. (1993). The Design and Analysis of Focus Group Studies: A Practical Approach. In
D.L. Morgan (Ed.), Successful Focus Groups: Advancing the State of the Art, 35-50.
Newbury Park: Sage Publications.
Kozulin, A. (1998). Psychological Tools. A Sociocultural Approach to Education. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.
Krashen, S. (1982). Principles and Practice in Second Language Acquisition. Oxford: Pergamon.
Lightbown, P.M. (2000). Anniversary Article: Classroom SLA Research and Second Language
Teaching. Applied Linguistics, 21(4): 431-462. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Maykut, P. and Morehouse, R. (1994). Beginning Qualitative Research - A Philosophical and
Practical Guide. London: The Falmer Press.
McLaughlin, B. (1987). Theories of Second-Language Learning. London: Edward Arnold.
Mercer, N. (2000). Words and Minds. London: Routledge.
Mercer, N. (2001). Language for teaching a language. In C. N. Candlin and N. Mercer (Eds.),
English Language Teaching in its Social Context, 243-257. London: Routledge.
Morgan, D.L. (Ed.). (1993). Successful Focus Groups: Advancing the State of the Art. Newbury
Park: Sage Publications.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

144

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

EFL Learners and Their Success in Learning English in the Thai Context

Sureepong

Norton, B. (2000). Identity and Language Learning: Gender, Ethnicity and Educational Change.
England: Pearson Education Limited.
Powney, J. & Watts, M. (1987). Interviewing in Educational Research. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
Radnor, H. (2002). Researching your professional practice: Doing interpretive research.
Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Silverman, D. (2000). Doing qualitative research. London: Sage Publications.
Spolsky, B. (1989). Conditions for Second Language Learning. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Swain, M. (1985). Communicative competence: Some roles of comprehensible input and
comprehensible output in its development. In S. Gass and C. Madden (Eds.), Input in
Second Language Acquisition. Rowley, Mass: Newbury House.
Tse, L. (2000). Student Perceptions of Foreign Language Study: A Qualitative Analysis of
Foreign Language Autobiographies. The Modern Language Journal, 84, (I): 69-84.
van Lier, L. (2001). Constraints and Resources in Classroom Talk: Issues of Equality and
Symmetry. In C. N. Candlin and N. Mercer (Eds.), English Language Teaching in its
Social Context, 90-107. London: Routledge.
Wells, G. (2003). Dialogic Inquiry in Education: Building on the Legacy of Vygotsky. Ontario
Institute for Studies in Education. Retrieved
http://www.oise.utoronto.ca/~gwells/NCTE.html on 18 August 2018.
Wertsch, J.V. (1984). The Zone of Proximal Development: Some Conceptual Issues. In B.
Rogoff and J.V.Wertsch (Eds.). Children’s Learning in the ‘Zone of Proximal
Development’, 7-18. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Williams, M. & Burden, R.L. (1997). Psychology for language Teachers. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Wright, T. (1987). Roles of Teachers & Learners. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

145

