Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.6

Pp.68-76

Policies and Issues in Teaching English to Arab EFL Learners: A Saudi Arabian
Perspective
Rashed Al-Tamimi
Department of English Language and Translation
College of Languages and Translation
King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia

Abstract
This paper examines the history, policies, and discussions relevant to the teaching of English as a
foreign language (EFL) in Saudi Arabia. It investigates the value of EFL within the Saudi
education system and surveys the extent to which English has been adapted to suit the needs and
customs of Saudi citizens. While focusing on major policy issues related to planning and
implementing EFL instruction, the paper examines how stakeholders have worked to preserve
Saudi culture, Arabic, and the structure of Saudi society. It seeks to determine whether EFL courses
in Saudi schools meet the needs of students, the results of which are compared with Saudi policies
on language teaching. The study then presents observations on the compatibility of teaching
practices and policies, as well as the issues involved. Saudi Arabia faces several challenges that
have greatly hindered the planning and implementation of language-teaching policies. This study
proposes strategies for strengthening these policies to fully achieve the desired objectives. It also
shows that English is gradually being naturalized in Saudi Arabia, absorbing cultural, religious,
and social values and beliefs.
Keywords: Arab EFL learners, language planning, language policy, Saudi education system,
teaching practices
Cite as: Al-Tamimi, R. (2019) Policies and Issues in Teaching English to Arab EFL Learners: A
Saudi Arabian Perspective. Arab World English Journal, 10 (2) 68-76.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol10no2.6

68

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Introduction
Although Arabic is the official language in Saudi Arabia, English is increasingly used as a lingua
franca in the private sector between Saudi citizens and the large population of foreign workers. In
public policy statements, the Saudi government has commented on the fundamental role played by
English worldwide, acknowledging that it has become the language of science and technology and
a key factor in modernization (Al-Asmari & Khan, 2014; Alrashidi & Phan, 2015; Al-Seghayer,
2005; Elyas & Picard, 2010). Furthermore, because English is the language of business and
politics, it has gained a lingua franca status globally. Saudi policies aim to prepare high-school
learners of English as a foreign language (EFL) to become global citizens who will advance and
support the Saudi community academically and economically.
After the discovery of massive oil reserves in the 1930s, Saudi Arabia became a key
strategic interest to the West, especially the United States, which developed close and long-lasting
ties with Saudi Arabia. The Saudi government realized the need to train its citizens to communicate
with the outside world, leading to the introduction of EFL in schools (Zuhur, 2011). The
importance of the language was linked with the social and economic development of the country
(Faruk, 2013). The petroleum industry provided a powerful motivation for learning EFL in the
kingdom, so much so that its dissemination and teaching have sometimes been referred to as
“petro-linguistics” (Karmani, 2005). One of the main reasons for introducing EFL instruction was
to prepare Saudi students to communicate with the expatriate community (Al-Braik, 2007).
Saudi EFL teaching policies and strategies have evolved considerably over the years. The
first policy to guide EFL instruction in school was created in 1943 when English was introduced
for intermediate public-school students all over the kingdom (Al-Ghamdi & Al-Saddat, 2002).
Students were required to study English until Grade 12. In private schools, however, EFL
instruction began in first grade (Faruk, 2013). Today, English is taught throughout all grade levels
in private schools and at every university (Al-Seghayer, 2003).
The 2003 Saudi language policy made English compulsory from the fifth grade onward
(Elyas & Picard, 2010). In 2012, a new policy recommended English be taught starting in fourth
grade but only for four hours per week. King Saud University is believed to have established the
first English Department as early as 1957 (Al-Abed Al-Haq & Smadi, 1996). The medium of
instruction in schools is officially Arabic, although in practice, the engineering, medical, science,
and technical departments at Saudi universities often use English for this purpose (Al-Seghayer,
2005).
During the 1990s, the nation’s Sixth Development Plan (1995–2000) enacted educational
policies that reflected the World Trade Organization (WTO) requirements and the demand for
English in global interactions. It became imperative for students to achieve linguistic competence
in English to enable the country to modernize as a global economy. Since then, English has played
an important role in shaping the Saudi nationalization (“Saudization”) policy, which seeks to fill
public and private industry positions with a Saudi workforce (Looney, 2004).
The importance of English teaching has expanded since 2005, as government policies have
reduced the country’s dependence on oil and made sustained, painstaking efforts to develop a
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

69

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

knowledge-based economy in line with developed countries (Alrashidi & Phan, 2015).
Universities, including King Saud University, King Saud University of Science and Technology,
and King Fahad University of Petroleum and Minerals, have invited scholars from all over the
world to inspire and educate young Saudi students and entrepreneurs. This phase marks a major
shift in the focus on English teaching. More and more new universities have been established with
expanding language centers, where English is taught to all students for at least one semester (Faruk,
2013).
The Ministry of Education’s core objective for introducing EFL instruction in high school
is to enable citizens to use English-language texts and write and speak competently in the language
(Elyas & Badawood, 2016). According to Rahman and Alhaisoni (2013), English is now the
primary medium of instruction in technical majors, such as medicine. It is no longer seen as needed
solely to pass tests but has come to be viewed as essential for higher education and commerce,
carrying practical importance and high status. Furthermore, English plays a prominent role in
Saudi private and government sectors at all levels (Al-Seghayer, 2014).
Despite this, English proficiency in public high schools is still very low and failing to meet
government targets (Alnasser, 2013; Huwari & Al-Khasawneh, 2013). The present study has
analyzed high-school language policies and planning in order to answer the following research
questions:
1. What factors affect language policies in Saudi Arabia?
2. What challenges hinder the fulfillment of government language policy goals?
3. What strategies could be used to make language policies more practical and effective,
enabling them to achieve the desired objectives?
Literature Review
According to Mahboob and Elyas (2014), English has entered public and private schools in such
a major way that Saudi Arabia has developed its own version of the language: “Saudi English.”
This Saudi form of English is being incorporated into social life and manifesting in culture,
religion, and society. However, the present study reveals that teaching and comprehension are not
always strong and that some policies have not been fully or effectively implemented. It is true,
however, that EFL teaching is coming of age and that efforts are being made to further improve
instruction.
To be successful, language curriculum must be created with clear goals in mind. Because
of this, the Saudi Higher Committee of Education is seeking to implement EFL policy reforms
(Al-Shumaimeri, 2003). Various groups have emphasized the need to design suitable English
curricula with clear goals (Rahman & Alhaisoni, 2013).
Arab EFL learners generally encounter various problems, particularly in speaking
(Rababah, 2005) and writing (Benhania, 2016), as clearly demonstrated by many researchers. For
instance, Al-Khairy (2013) confirmed that several studies conducted in the Arab world have
demonstrated that Arab college students struggled in their English learning in general and writing
in particular. Similarly, Huwari and Al-Khasawneh (2013) found that Arab learners of English,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

70

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

including Saudi learners, faced major problems in learning writing skills, and this dilemma has
been shown by a number of researchers (e.g., Al-Khairy, 2013; Al-Hazmi & Schofield, 2007).
Regarding speaking skills, Al Shumaimeri (2003) motioned that according to instructors, highschool students often graduate without being able to conduct even brief conversations. This
demonstrates that English teaching approaches applied in Saudi public schools are ineffective and
involve some problematic issues, especially in the area of planning and development
.
Khan (2011) conducted a study to explore the biggest obstacles EFL learners faced in Saudi
Arabia. One of the crucial factors influencing the EFL teaching and learning process in the Arab
world is the fact that students only learn English in schools, where English instruction is
ineffective. As Alhamdan, Honan, and Obaidul Hamid (2007) stated, “Discourses of the
universality of English and its role in individual mobility and social development abound in the
literature” (p. 1), facilitating English becoming a global language and increasing the importance
of English instruction. However, few studies have examined “how these discourses unfold in local
contexts … are reproduced or appropriated, and … are translated into teaching and learning
artifacts (e.g., policies and textbooks) and practices by teachers and students” (p. 1).
This paper has studied the value of EFL learning within the Saudi education system to
contribute to the ongoing discussion of how EFL policies are implemented in Saudi schools. It has
examined how the intersection between English, globalization, and neoliberalism has influenced
English language planning and policies in the Saudi education system. Various stakeholders have
embraced these key elements to push for their agendas, arguing that the government’s current
policy of internationalizing higher education “has created an unregulated market of Englishmedium institutes in the country” (LeHa & Barnawi, 2015, p. 547). Such issues have had negative
effects on the Saudi government’s endeavors to restructure and empower the country’s postsecondary education system, although the Center of Excellence has had positive effects on
technical and vocational training.
Despite the advantages of English and English-medium education, several barriers have
emerged due to “the government’s rather uncritical adoption of English and its over-reliance on
international training providers” (LeHa & Barnawi, 2015, p. 561). The Saudi government has been
rushing import services and products to the country to improve English education; nevertheless,
this process lacks accurate planning, transparency, quality, or effective support for all stakeholders
(LeHa & Barnawi, 2015).
Given current barriers, the English proficiency of Saudi learners is not expected to greatly
improve in the future (Al-Seghayer, 2014). Therefore, challenges related to language policy and
teaching practices should be thoroughly investigated. Teacher training programs are vital to
develop effective teaching methods and a productive school environment. According to AlSeghayer, current EFL curriculum and practices must be made to align with learning goals with
sufficient support from administrators to motivate students. This will result in higher learner
proficiency and more effective teachers.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

71

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Discussion
English has gained increasing prominence within the Saudi education system, and ordinary Saudis
have come to see English proficiency as necessary to obtain knowledge from sources within and
outside the country (Millward & Hayes, 2011). With globalization, English has been increasingly
used to achieve economic, social, and humanitarian goals. Thus, modern realities have changed
the national outlook, placing more emphasis on global interaction and participation in activities
with common humanitarian themes and international ramifications. The challenge is to understand
whether these goals are being achieved, the actual status of English teaching, and whether there is
a gap between the goals and the reality. Assessing the current situation in relation to pedagogical
input, needs-based syllabi, learner motivation, and learning barriers can help determine the source
of poor proficiency among Saudi EFL learners.
The influence of and over-reliance on Arabic can make it difficult for Saudi students to
acquire English intonation, accent, syntax, and semantics. However, many new technologies and
teaching methodologies, as well as greater effort, are helping to overcome these obstacles. These
reflections are based on observations of the fundamental transformation taking place in public
schools. Private schools in the kingdom have always been more responsive to student needs
because they are subject to competition. Even so, the difference is only marginal.
Core English skills (listening, speaking, reading, and writing) should be taught separately
and afforded sufficient attention in the classroom. Weakness in any of these skills has a farreaching impact on language acquisition, as no one skill can be learned or used in isolation. Basing
instruction on this axiom will enable appropriate thinking, planning, and decision making.
The researcher discussed this consideration informally with 10 teachers and 20 high-school
graduates selected for the study. The data were collected using direct interviews. None of the
students were fully satisfied with the English instruction they received, and most of them had an
aversion to learning English in Saudi schools. Creating a communication channel with teachers
was challenging as students seemed afraid to express their true feelings. They reported that it was
difficult to say anything in English in classes because of the distant relationship with their teachers.
In line with numerous other studies (e.g., Alharbi, 2015; Al-Nasser, 2015), this paper argues that
communication is a prerequisite for learning; the absence of open communication from Saudi EFL
classrooms thus acts as a barrier to students realizing their full potential.
Students admitted to having problems with their teacher, saying it was difficult to ask him
a question when he was teaching, they felt stressed in his class, and he did not explain the meaning
of difficult words. He was also seen as autocratic, giving tests without telling students which
chapters they would cover. Despite this situation, the students were aware English was and would
continue to be an important language for work, and they feared they would never master it.
The interviews with high-school students were enlightening. They were well informed
about the potential of information technology and thought more modern methods and electronic
devices should be used to teach English. Such techniques would help them understand the language
better, learn with minimal input from the teacher, and generate interest in English. In particular,
they felt English should be taught using online games, movies, and social communication
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

72

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

programs. The majority opinion favored changing the approach, methodology, and materials used
in teaching, and all students preferred a more open, student-centered, tech-savvy learning culture.
The main problem observed during this study were the poor learning outcomes in the form
of language proficiency. Students could graduate from high school, having attended English
classes four hours a week for six full academic years, but still be unable to produce a single errorfree utterance.
Suggestions Based on the Findings
In response to the analysis and interviews, the researcher proposes the following solutions to help
teachers and course planners develop strategies and methodologies for teaching English to students
in Saudi schools.
Introduce English during first grade. English education in Saudi schools must begin
early—not in the fourth grade, as is prevalent now. Various studies (e.g., Abdan, 1991; Alharbi,
2015; Al-Nasser, 2015) have shown that second language acquisition becomes easier when taught
from the first school year onward. The best time to learn a language is earlier in childhood.
Stress quality over quantity in course materials. Course planners and educators must
shape English curricula to match the needs and capacities of learners. Saudi curriculum designers
often create lengthy course syllabi based on course designs used in the West without addressing
the needs of Saudi learners. As a result, course materials are sometimes difficult to use, and
teachers rush to complete the material before the end of the semester. Not only does this approach
not help students learn, it can make them unlearn what they once knew. Curricula should be
reviewed to ensure the material can be taught within the time allowed.
Use assessments, not exams. Progress in language learning is not as easy to quantify as
some other subjects. Current examination systems do not test the language abilities of students
accurately. It has been observed that students’ actual language competencies are often drastically
different from their exam results. To accurately assess learner proficiency, it is necessary to do so
in naturalistic ways by talking with them and assessing their speech and understanding in various
communicative situations—rather than only through conventional tests.
Avoid crowded classrooms. It is common to see Saudi English classes that are extremely
overcrowded. Language instruction, however, requires time and concentration. In a class of 50 or
more students, it becomes impossible for the teacher to evaluate the progress of every student. An
ideal language classroom should not have more than 20–25 students for results-based, practical
instruction.
Use audio-visual aids. Normal English communication involves listening and speaking,
even when students are learning to read and write. Language is a social act in which people
exchange ideas and information, and it cannot be taught from a merely theoretical standpoint like
other subjects. Introducing audio-visual aids could thus help students learn English more
effectively. Schools should take advantage of modern technologies to establish language labs and
smartboard teaching systems to offer a more naturalistic learning environment.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

73

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Expand class time. Once out of school, students often must use resources such as language
institutes to increase their proficiency. Four hours a week of language instruction divided into 40minute classes is insufficient for teaching four language skills, assessing progress, and encouraging
regular practice. Class time devoted to English should therefore be increased.
Conclusion
This paper assessed EFL policy and practice in Saudi schools. It found key problems impeding
learners from meeting language acquisition goals. EFL curricula and instruction were observed to
depend extensively on grammar-teaching methodologies, to the detriment of learners. Major issues
were found in course planning and implementation. These issues can be addressed through better
teacher training, curricula, methodologies, teaching tools, and technology. Saudi students and
educators were keenly aware of the importance of acquiring English skills. While considerable
progress was made by introducing English in the fourth grade, more steps are needed to meet
students’ language-learning goals.
Acknowledgement:
The author expresses his appreciation to the Deanship of Scientific Research at King Saud
University, Saudi Arabia, and the Research Center at the College of Languages & Translation for
offering support for the current article.

About the Author:
Dr. Rashed Altamimi works as Assistant Professor of Linguistics in department of English
Language and Translation at College of Languages and Translation, King Saud University, Saudi
Arabia. Dr. Rashed teaches and is interested in the area of English as a Second Language, second
language pedagogy, and classroom-based language acquisition. https://orcid.org/0000-0003-19710128
References
Abdan, A. A. (1991). An exploratory study of teaching English in the Saudi elementary public
schools. System, 19(3), 253–266.
Al-Abed Al-Haq, F., & Smadi, O. (1996). The status of English in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
(KSA) from 1940–1990. In J. A. Fishman, A. W. Conrad, & A. Rubel-Lopez (Eds.), Postimperial English: Status change in former British and American colonies, 1940–1990 (pp.
457–484). Berlin, Germany: Mouton de Gruyter.
Al-Asmari, A. M., & Khan, M. (2014). World Englishes in the EFL teaching in Saudi Arabia. Arab
World English Journal, 5(1), 316–325.
Al-Braik, M. (2007). Performance of KFU English major students. Scientific Journal of King
Faisal University, 8(2), 647–677.
Al-Ghamdi, A., & Al-Saddat, I. (2002). The development of the educational system in Saudi
Arabia. Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Tarbiat Al Ghad.
Alhamdan, B., Honan, E., & Obaidul Hamid, M. (2017). The construction of the universality of
English within Saudi Arabian education contexts. Discourse: Studies in Cultural Politics
of Education, 38(5), 627–641.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

74

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Alharbi, H. A. (2015). Improving students’ English speaking proficiency in Saudi public schools.
International Journal of Instruction, 8(1), 105–116.
Al-Hazmi, S. H., & Scholfield, P. (2007). Enforced revision with checklist and peer feedback in
EFL writing: The example of Saudi university students. Scientific Journal of King Faisal
University, 8(2), 223–261.
Al-Khairy, M. A. (2013). Saudi English-major undergraduates’ academic writing problems: A Taif
University perspective. English Language Teaching, 6(6). Retrieved from
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/EJ1077051.pdf
Al-Nasser, A. S. (2015). Problems of English language acquisition in Saudi Arabia: An
exploratory-cum-remedial study. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 5(8), 1612–
1619.
Alnasser, S. (2013). A new form of peer feedback technique: An investigation into the impact of
focusing Saudi ESL learners on macro level writing features (Unpublished doctoral
dissertation). Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
Alrashidi, O., & Phan, H. (2015). Education context and English teaching and learning in the
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia: An overview. English Language Teaching, 8(5), 33–44.
Al-Seghayer, K. (2003). Technological and pedagogical consideration for a more effective
electronic
glossary.
The
Reading
Matrix,
3(1).
Retrieved
from
http://www.readingmatrix.com/articles/al-seghayer/article.pdf
Al-Seghayer, K. (2005). Teaching English in Saudi Arabia: Slowly but steadily changing. In G.
Braine (Ed.), Teaching English to the world (pp. 115–130). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates.
Al-Seghayer, K. (2014). The four most common constraints affecting English teaching in Saudi
Arabia. International Journal of English Linguistics, 4(5), 17–26.
Al-Shumaimeri, Y. A. N. (2003). A study of classroom exposure to oral pedagogic tasks in relation
to the motivation and performance of Saudi secondary learners of English in a context of
potential curriculum reform (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of Leeds,
Leeds, UK.
Benhania, A. (2016). Teaching writing to EFL/ESP Arab learners: A socio culturally based
approach. Sino-US English Teaching, 13(4), 267–276.
Elyas, T., & Badawood, O. (2016). English language educational policy in Saudi Arabia post-21st
century: Enacted curriculum, identity, and modernisation: A critical discourse analysis
approach. Forum for International Research in Education, 2(3), 21–33.
Elyas, T., & Picard, M. (2010). Saudi Arabian educational history: Impacts on English language
teaching. Education, Business and Society: Contemporary Middle Eastern Issues, 3(2),
136–145.
Faruk, S. (2013). English language teaching in Saudi Arabia: A world system perspective.
Scientific Bulletin of the Politehnica University of Timişoara Transactions on Modern
Languages, 12(1–2), 73–80.
Huwari, I. F., & Al-Khasawneh, F. M. (2013). The reasons behind the weaknesses of writing in
English among pre-year students’ at Taibah University. English for Specific Purposes
World, 38(14), 1–9.
Karmani, S. (2005). Petro-linguistics: The emerging nexus between oil, English, and Islam.
Language Identity and Education, 4(1), 87–102.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

75

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 10. Number 2. June 2019

Khan, I. (2011). Learning difficulties in English: Diagnosis and pedagogy in Saudi Arabia.
Educational Research (International Research Journal), 2(7), 1248–1257.
LeHa, P., & Barnawi, O. Z. (2015). Where English, neoliberalism, desire and internationalization
are alive and kicking: Higher education in Saudi Arabia today. Language and Education,
29(6), 545–565.
Looney, R. (2004). Saudization and sound economic reforms: Are the two compatible? Strategic
Insights, 3(2). Retrieved from https://www.hsdl.org/?view&did=444343
Mahboob, A., & Elyas, T. (2014). English in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. World Englishes,
33(1), 128–142.
Millward, C. M., & Hayes, M. (2011). A biography of the English language. Independence, KY:
Heinle & Heinle.
Rababah, G. (2005). Communication problems facing Arab learners of English. Retrieved from
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED473079.pdf
Rahman, M., & Alhaisoni, E. (2013). Teaching English in Saudi Arabia: Prospects and challenges.
Academic Research International, 4(1), 112–118.
Zuhur, S. (2011). Saudi Arabia. Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

76

