Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number 4. December 2018

Pp. 39 -55

DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.3

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian and EnglishSpeaking Communities: Ukraine and the USA

Anzhelika Solodka
Department of German Philology and Translation, Faculty of Foreign Languages
V.O. Sukhomlynsky National University of Mykolaiv
Ukraine
Luis Perea
United States Department of State
USA
Abstract
Compliments as speech acts have the reflection and expression of cultural values. Many of the
values reflected through compliments are personal appearance, new acquisitions, possessions,
talents and skills. It is especially important in linguistic interaction between people. This research
aims to analyze the speech acts of complimenting in Ukrainian and American cultures in order to
use them for teaching pragmatics second language (L2) students. Defining the ways of
complimenting in Ukrainian, Russian and American English help to avoid misunderstandings and
pragmatic failures. This study uses a method of ethnomethodology. Speach acts are studied in their
natural contexts. To carry out this research native speakers of English in the United States and
native speakers of Russian and Ukrainian from all over Ukraine were interviewed on-line. The
analysis was made on the data that included: 445 Russian, 231 Ukrainian and 245 English
compliments. Results of this study show how native speakers tend to compliment people:
syntactical structure of expressions, cultural lexicon, attributes praised and language context. It
has implications for teaching English to Ukrainians and for teaching Russian and Ukrainian to
speakers of English. Knowing how to use speech acts allows the speaker to have pragmatic
competence. Upon completion of the data analysis on the current study, further information on
deeper analysis in terms of semantics and metaphorical language can be provided.
Keywords: compliments, pragmatic competence of second language students, pragmatic failure,
speech act, structure of compliments
Cite as: Solodka, A., & Perea, L. (2018). The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the
Ukrainian, Russian and English-Speaking Communities: Ukraine and the USA. Arab World
English Journal, 9 (4), 39-55. DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/vol9no4.3

39

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

1. Introduction
At this time, learning a second language (L2) in universities has been strictly technical by
using grammar, syntax, morphology, phonetics, phonology. Many interesting methods exist to
teach a L2 and many of them try to teach a L2 in a communicative way, but unfortunately these
methods overlook a very important part of languages. Such a lacking part is the speech acts and
the appropriate pragmatic knowledge to really obtain a good communication.
Advanced second language students who only know the technical part of the L2 may not
understand a large percentage of a conversation or how speech acts work. All this implies knowing
how to communicate in social contexts appropriately. L2 students need what Canale & Swain
explain as sociolinguistic competence which is the component made up of two sets of rules:
“sociocultural rules of use and rules of discourse”, and strategic competence which is the
“component that consists of verbal and nonverbal communication strategies that may be called
into action to compensate for breakdowns in communication due to performance variables or to
insufficient competence” (1980, p. 29).
All this together forms what is called communicative competence; which enables the speaker
to produce and to understand and infinite set of sentences appropriately and accurately.
Communicative competence includes pragmatic competence. Pragmatics analyzes and studies the
conversation and the speech acts, in a general way, the functions of the linguistic sentences and
their characteristics in the communication processes are also studied (Van Dijk, 1985)
Pragmatic competence is learnt by individuals when they are learning their first language.
Pragmatic competence is defined by Thomas (1983) and Nordquist (2017), as the ability to use
language successfully in order to achieve a specific purpose and to understand language in context;
Thomas also states that pragmatic competence in these situations is very important because without
it, speakers would have pragmatic failure (1983, p.91). Pragmatic failure is when the utterance has
totally failed to achieve the speaker’s goal; it is also defined as the language learners’ inability to
understand what is meant by what is said (Thomas, 1983; Nordquist, 2017).
In addition, speech acts take an important role in communication. Austin defines speech acts
as the minimal unit of communication. Austin divides speech acts into locutionary, illocutionary
and perlocutionary acts (1975, p. 24).
One of the most interesting acts to study has been complimenting. Herbert (1990) studies
speech acts such as compliments and compliment responses because there is not an agreement or
a common pattern on what is the correct way of complimenting and responding to a compliment,
even within the same speech community. Holmes claims that a compliment is: “a speech act which
attributes credit to someone other than the speaker, usually the person addressed for some ‘good’
possession, characteristic, skill etc.” (1988, p. 446).
The aim of the article is to define the ways of complimenting in Ukrainian, Russian and
American English to avoid misunderstandings and pragmatic failure. To achieve this goal, the
following tasks were set out: to compare American, Ukrainian and English compliments in order
to know the patterns being used by the speakers, as well as to find what are the similarities and
differences in: (compliment frequency; attributes praised; role relationship between the speakers;
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

40

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

gender of the speakers; tone used and compliment form that includes: number of words, adjectives
and verbs used in the compliments).
2. Theoretical Background of the Research
2.1 Pragmatics and pragmatic competence
As it was mentioned before, second language learners besides having the grammatical
knowledge; they need the knowledge of the appropriate use of language in a context and the
sociolinguistic rules of a speech community, all this is concerned with the study of Pragmatics.
Additionally, if a second language speaker wants to understand an utterance in the target language,
he/she needs pragmatic competence that is the knowledge needed to determine what sentences
mean when they are spoken in a certain way and context (Fraser, 1990).
Pragmatics is the study of linguistic interaction between people (Wierzbicka, 1991).
Pragmatics analyzes the conversation and the speech acts (Nordquist, 2017). In a general way, it
studies the functions of the linguistic sentences and their characteristics in the communication
processes as well as the language use in a context and in particular situations. (Van Dijk,1985,
p.79-81).
Fraser & Rintell (1990) explain pragmatic competence as the knowledge to determine the
meaning of any sentence depending on when it is spoken, the way and the specific context (Fraser,
1990, p.221). Also, any time a speaker uses the language in a social context, he/she is performing
one or more speech acts such as: requesting, complimenting, declaring, apologizing, criticizing,
etc. So when they are expressing such speech acts, they are showing their pragmatic competence
(Fraser, 1990; Kasper, 2201).
According to Bialystok (1993), pragmatic competence is “the ability to use and interpret
language in contexts” (1993, p.44). Bialystok (1993) also mentions the speaker’s ability to use
language for different purposes and the listener’s ability to understand the real intention of the
speaker.
Thomas postulates that “it is the ability to use language successfully in order to achieve a
specific purpose and to understand language in context” (1983, p.92). Thomas also concerns that
pragmatic competence in these situations is very important because without this, speakers would
have pragmatic failure. Consequently, the results are misunderstanding, communication
breakdowns, frustration etc. (Beebe, Takahashi & Uliss-Weltz, 1990; Nguyen, Pham, & Pham,
2012; Farshi, & Baghbani, 2015, Loiseau, Hallal, Ballot, & Gazidedja, 2016).
Thomas states that pragmatic patterns are important to be able to use the appropriate
utterances in a context, in addition if a hearer wants to understand and interpret what the speaker
intended through his utterance, such a hearer must take into account both “contextual and linguistic
cues” (1983, p.98). According to Thomas, there are 2 kinds of pragmatic failure: pragmalinguistic
failure that occurs when speech acts are inappropriately transferred from L1 to L2 and
sociopragmatic failure which refers to the social conditions placed on language in use, it also
covers patterns such as social distance, gender and intimacy of relationship (1983, p.99).

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

41

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

All the situations which cause misunderstandings, are transferring the inappropriate form of
language from L1 to L2 (Wolfson, 1983; Solak & Bayar, 2015). That is the reason why speech
acts, speech events and pragmatic competence are important to understand the reasons which
provoke pragmatic failure (Shi, 2014). And it is helpful to conduct cross-cultural research to
investigate student’s L1 strategies (Rajabi & Farahian, 2013; Halenko & Jones, 2011; Allami &
Naeimi, 2011).
Finally, pragmatic competence plays an important role in the acquisition of a language
because speakers avoid pragmatic failure and it helps to understand the meaning and purpose of
the utterance in any context.
2.2 Compliments
The speech act of complimenting in this study was selected because Ukrainian and Russian
L2 learners of English get confused when they try to make or understand a compliment in a
different way than native speakers do. In addition, it is essential to mention the fact that sometimes
some of those expressions in both languages are part of the personal or regional way of expressing
in those places; all this leads to the slang in the USA. (Nelligan, 1996).
Aceves (1996) in her study of compliments, states that the study of the compliment speech
act contributes valuable information that concerns when and how and to whom, one may offer a
compliment as well as how to interpret implicit social and cultural meanings; and how to respond
appropriately when one receives a compliment. Compliment as a general term means giving praise,
credit, eulogy, to a person for any possession, characteristics, skill, etc.
Chung-Hye defines a compliment as “a speech act which explicitly or implicitly attributes
credit to someone other than the speaker, usually the person addressed, for ‘good’ (possession,
characteristics, skill etc.) which is positively valued by the speaker and the hearer” (1992, p.18).
Manes (1983) defines compliments as those speech acts which have the reflection and
expression of cultural values because of their nature as judgments, over expressions of approval
or admiration of another’s work, appearance or taste.
Holmes (1988) suggests three functions of compliment exchanges. (1) That compliments are
usually used as mean of expressing liking when used as positive affective speech acts. In other
words, compliments allow increase solidarity between people. Example: How nice you look today!
(2) That compliments can serve as positive politeness strategies before a face threatening act
(FTA). All this means that a compliment can be used in a very stressed situation in order to obtain
something; a compliment is used before asking what you want. Example: Doesn’t your hair look
wonderful! By the way, could I borrow your Spanish book? (3) That compliments may be face
threatening acts themselves as they indicate an intrusive desire on the speaker’s part towards the
hearer’s possessions. As a consequence, the compliment will be included in the request. Example:
can I borrow your wonderful Spanish book? (Holmes, 1988, p. 445-451).
Another author who states the importance of the compliments is Bolton (2004), and he
proposes three conditions for a compliment to be performed:
1. Hearer has certain quality Q.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

42

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

2. Speaker believes Q is admirable.
3. Speaker wants hearer to know/believe that speaker admires Q.
In addition, Manes (1983) claims that the major function of the compliments is the
establishment or reinforcement of solidarity between the speaker and the addressee as well as they
play an important role because make possible judgments, expressions of approval or admiration of
another’s work.
Finally, Wolfson (1983) concludes that compliments are also windows through which we
can view what is valued by a particular culture, for instance: In the United States, Americans
compliment each other on personal appearance, new acquisition and work, suggesting that
Americans value these attributes. In Japan, people are more apt to compliment skill and study,
suggesting that Japanese people value skill and study. However, in Mexico, people is less
expressive that Americans (Aceves, 1996), suggesting that Americans were more expressive than
Mexicans.
Wolfson and Manes (1980) note different cultural differences in complimenting and observe
that Iranians and Arabic speakers tend to use proverbs and other ritualized expressions when
complimenting. Al Rawashdeh Al Balqa (2018), investigating Arabic Jordanian compliments
(Mujamaleh) and politeness expressions versus their counterparts in American English, shears
these ideas. Holmes & Brown (1987) state than American people like to compliment in a very
frequent way.
Nelson, Al-Batal, & Echols (1996) compare Egyptian Arabic and American English
compliments by using a similar methodology used by Wolfson & Manes (1980). They find that
American compliments are shorter and less complicated than Egyptian compliments. Egyptians
use a lot of similes and metaphors and long series of adjectives in complimenting as well as their
compliments are less frequent than the American ones.
Aceves (1996) and Perea-Hernandez (2017) study on Spanish compliments using the
methodology employed in Barnlund & Araki (1985).
Nelson (1993) conducted a study of Mexican Spanish and American English compliments.
The differences are related to gender. Also, American males compliment another male on
appearance even more than Mexican males. Another factor is the fact that Mexican females are
more frequently compliment more than American females by males. American females and males
compliment acquaintances more than Mexicans. Also, intimates are complimented by Mexican
females even more than intimates being complimented by American females.
3. Methods and Materials of Research
3.1 Method of data collection
This study is based on ethnomethodology to collect data because it will research
compliments on a day to day interaction. Valdes (1981), Holmes & Brown (1987), Wolfson
(1988), Herbert (1990), Herbert & Straight (1989) and others use ethnomethodology to collect
their data about speech acts.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

43

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

Ethnography is described by Fetterman as “the art and science of describing a group or
culture” (Fetterman, 1989, p.11). The ethnographer is concerned about people’s daily lives, thus,
“the most important element of fieldwork is being there – to observe, to ask questions, and to write
down what is seen and heard” (Fetterman, 1989, p.19). The method is essentially to work with
people in their natural contexts.
The present study uses a method that was adapted owing to its necessities and circumstances
because two different cultures (Ukrainian and American) and three different languages (Ukrainian,
Russian and American English) are compared.
Also, as these techniques and instruments have their advantages and disadvantages, they are
used to collect data because they have proven effectiveness in gathering data on compliments.
However, it is often argued that speech acts should be studied in their natural contexts using
ethnomethodology, it is difficult for cross-cultural studies due to problems of comparability. For
this reason, the present study uses a method which was developed by Barnlund & Araki (1985),
also used and expanded by Nelson (1993) and to collect the compliment data.
3.2 Subjects
81 American participants (USA), 179 Ukrainian speakers of Russian (Ukraine) and 118
Ukrainian speakers (Ukraine) participated in the online survey via SurveyMonkey. The Ukrainian
participants consisted of university students, professors and people from all over Ukraine including
cities such as Mykolaiv, Kiev, Odessa, Lviv, Chernivtsi, etc. from middle class between ages 1560 years old approximately.
The American participants consisted of university students, professors and people from all
over the USA and some people living overseas. They were middle class between ages 16-70 years
old. The universities students belong were from: Portland State University, George Fox University,
University of Texas at San Antonio, University of the Incarnate Word and several cities from the
USA.A small source of data collection consisted from finding compliments in the social media
(Facebook), TV, Movies, etc.
3.3 Instrument
An interview is developed to collect the data. First of all, it is necessary to mention that the
interview designed by other researchers in collecting compliments, was taken as reference in this
study because it gave successful results. Such an interview is taken from the studies of Aceves
(1996) & Nelson (1997), and it was adapted and added more information considering the
necessities and the subjects of the present study.
A. Characteristics of the interview:
• Open questions.
• English/Russian/Ukrainian version – 26 questions
• Personal information of the participants.
• Variables or aspects studied.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

44

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

B. Questions of the interview:
1.
Interviewed person - Do not include your real name (Please use a pseudonym that
identifies your gender; e.g. Mary or John, etc.)
2.
Please select your gender
3.
Place of birth (state or region and city) and Age.
4.
To what socio economic level do you consider yourself? (Upper level class, middle
class, etc.) and where do you currently live?
5.
What is the last compliment that you have given to somebody else? What were your
exact words?
6.
About what did you comment on?
7.
What tone did you use?
8.
How long ago did you say the compliment?
9.
Which is your relationship with the person who received the compliment?
10.
The person who received the compliment was male, female or a group of people?
11.
What was the approximate age of the person who received the compliment?
12.
What is the last compliment that you have received, and what were the exact words?
13.
What kind of tone did the person who told you the compliment use?
14.
What was the point of the person who told you the compliment?
15.
When did you receive the compliment?
16.
The person who told you the compliment was male or female?
17.
What was the approximate age of the person who told you the compliment?
18.
Which is your relationship with the person who told you the compliment?
19.
What is the last compliment that you have heard someone else tell to someone else?
20.
What were the exact words?
21.
About what did those persons comment on?
22.
What tone was used?
23.
When did you last listen to the compliment?
24.
Which was the relationship between those persons?
25.
The person who received the compliment was male, female or a group of people?
26.
The person who gave the compliment was male or female?
27.
What were the approximate ages of the people who complimented each other?
Correspondence of variables to the questions of the interview was the following: compliment
form – questions 5,12,19; attributes praised – questions 6,14,20; relationship between giver and
receiver – questions 9,18,23; gender of the compliment giver and receiver – questions
10,16,22,24,25; frequency of compliments – questions 8,15,22; tone used – questions 7,13,21.
3.4 Data analysis
The compliments are coded sociolinguistically. First it is coded the data and established the
categories, which are data driven (the categories are based on the data that is gathered) and based
on the studies of Aceves (1996), Nelson (1997), Wolfson (1980), & Manes (1981). The categories
are established according to similar patterns found in their studies.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

45

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

4. Results and Discussion
The analysis was made on the data that included: 445 Russian, 231 Ukrainian and 245
English compliments. Participants consisted of native speakers of English interviewed in the
United States and native speakers of Russian and Ukrainian from all over Ukraine.
4.1 Average age of participants. Average age of Russian speaking participants was 25.7
years old, Ukrainian speaking participants – 26 years old, English speaking participants – 31 years
old.
4.2 Compliment form
Compliment form is the language used to express the compliment. The Ukrainian, Russian
and American compliments shared similarities in form, and the majority of them were short and
adjectival. The following table shows the examples of compliment forms’ similarities.
Table 1
Similarities of compliment forms.
Russian

Ukrainian

English

PRON+HAVE+ADJ+N/NP
Example: У тебя красивые
глаза (You have beautiful
eyes).

PREP+PRO + HAVE + (intensifier) ADJ
+ N/NP
Example: В тебе такі хороші парфуми
(You have very good perfume)

PRO+HAVE+ADJ+NP
Example: Wow, you
have very white teeth.

ЯКИЙ (HOW)+HAVE+ (INTENSIFIER)
ADJ+N
Example: Який у тебе гарний парфум!
(How good perfume you have)
PRO+ADV(intensifier)+ADJ
Example: Ты очень умный.
(You are very clever.)
PRO+ADJ
Example: Ты красивая. (You
are beautiful.)

PRO + (intensifier) + ADJ
Example: Він дуже влучний ( He is very
accurate)

PRO+BE+ADJ+COMP
LEMENT
Example: You will be
successful anywhere you
go

PRO+LOOK+ADV
Example: Она выглядит
изумительно. (She looks
gorgeous!)

PRO/ADV+LOOK
Example: Класно виглядаєш (You look
cool)

PRO/NP+LOOK+ADJ+
COMPLEMENT
Example: You look
beautiful today. Like a
model!

ADJ
Example: Милая. (Pretty.)

ADJ(+)
Example: Розумний (Smart)

ADJ+NP
Example: Great job!

I like/love+(intensifier)+ your
+N
Example: Мне нравится
твоя обувь. (I like your
shoes.)

I LIKE (YOUR)+N
Example: Мені дуже подобається твоя
зовнішність (I like your appearance so
much)

I+like/love+NP
Example: I really like
your neighborhood!

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

46

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian
PRO+ADV+V
Example: Ты приятно
пахнешь. (You smell good.)

PRO+ADV+V
Example: Ти гарно посміхаєшся. (You
smile beautifully)

Solodka & Perea
PRO+VERB+COMPLE
MENT
Example: I wish I had
your legs. You are all
legs!

During this study, the most frequent patterns identified were:
Ukrainian: PRO + (intensifier) + ADJ (28, 1%). Ukrainian compliments used this pattern
and PREP+PRO + HAVE + (intensifier) ADJ + N/NP (22%): Ти дуже непередбачувана (You are
very unpredictable). У тебе дуже гарні очі (You have very beautiful eyes)
Russian: PRO+HAVE+ADJ+N/NP (18.6%): У тебя красивые глаза. (You have beautiful
eyes.)
American English: PRO+BE+ADJ+COMPLEMENT (26%) and PRO/NP+LOOK+ADJ+
COMPLEMENT (26%): You're awesome. You're a 10/10, for real, you're so beautiful. You look
really professional in that outfit-I love the cardigan.
Some other patters that resulted in a minor frequency were:
Ukrainian: You are (my) +THE MOST+ADJ+N (0,4%), NP + VERB + ADJ
+COMPLEMENT (0,4%), and PREPOSITIONAL PHRASE + NP (0,4%): Ти найкраща подруга
в світі (You are the best friend in the world). Пиріг приготований просто чудово (Pie is cooked
absolutely great). На тобі дуже гарні прикраси (You have very beautiful jewelry).
Russian: N+ADV+V (1, 1%) and ADV (intensifier) + ADJ (1,5%): Очень красивая. (Very
beautiful). Платье очень хорошо скроено (The dress is cut out very well).
American English:
NP+BE+ADJ+COMPLEMENT (1%): The food was great! The pastor is a wonderful
preacher.
IMPERATIVE VERB+COMPLEMENT (1%): Look at you!!! Go Luis! Great job, keep up
the good work!
IDIOMATIC EXPRESSION (1%): Way to go. Congrats.
QUESTION+COMPLEMENT (1%): Can you try not to be so awesome? You are making
the rest of us look bad. INTERJECTION+NP (1%): Bravo, my intellectual friend!
Both types of compliments also used a limited number of syntactic patterns although the
Ukrainian compliments were more varied in their syntactic form. The Ukrainian and Russian data
set included compliment forms that did not occur in the American data, the Ukrainian and Russian
data included one-word compliments, whereas the American data did not:
Ukrainian: ADJ (3, 8%): Розумний (Smart). Мила (Cute). N (1, 7%): Красуня (Beauty).
Молодець (Well done).
Russian: ADJ (3. 3%): Красивая (Beautiful). N (2. 2%): Молодец (Good job.)

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

47

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

In addition, some other patterns of Ukrainian compliments were identified which are not
used in Russian and American English. These expressions start with particle Як, Який. Яка (How).
That accounted 3.2 %: Який (how) + HAVE + (intensifier) ADJ + N (1.2%): Яка в тебе чудова
сукня! (How beautiful dress you have). Яка (how) + ADJ + N (1,2%): Яка чудова погода (How
great weather is). Яка (how) + ADJ/PRO + N (0,8%): Яка ти красуня (How pretty you are).
4.3 Compliment length
The compliment length is the approximate number of words that each compliment showed
in this study. These results showed a very interesting aspect that is the existence of simple and
complex compliments. The simple compliments are those formed by one sentence or expression
with a single compliment that denotes the flattery impact, and all together makes the meaning.
Table 2
Compliment length.
Russian compliments
5,9 words (445 compliments
– 2025 words)

Ukrainian compliments
4,32 words (231 compliments
– 1263 words)

English compliments
5,5 words (245 compliments
– 1360 words)

Table 3
Examples of simple and complex compliments.
Simple compliments:
Simple compliments:
Ты прекрасна! (You are
Дуже гарно! (Very nice!)
so beautiful!)
Complex compliments:
Complex compliments:
Ты очень умная и
Ви дуже гарна та загадкова
красивая девушка и я хочу незнайомка, але ці квіти я купив
быть с тобой рядом саме для Вас (You are very beautiful
каждую секунду (You are a and mysterious woman, but I bought
very smart and beautiful girl these flowers for you).
and I want to be with you
В тебе дуже гарна посмішка !
every second)
Посміхайся частіше (You have
В Ваших глазах можно beautiful smile! Smile more often!).
кататься на яхте потому,
что они как два океана (In
your eyes I can sale because
they are like two oceans).

Simple compliments:
Hey
beautiful!
Excellent report!
Complex compliments:
So honored to work
with such great and
talented future English
teachers,
translators,
interpreters
and
philologists
from
Ukraine!!!
Got the privilege to
visit and listen to the
awesome
presentations
from these bright kids!! I
feel excited to work with
them and I look forward to
it!

4.4 Adjectives
It is also interesting to show the results found in this study in terms of adjectives. Most of all
the compliments found in three languages were adjectival. The adjectives found in the American
compliments were varied. 44 different types of adjectives were identified. The most usual were,
good (+the best) 19%, great 14, 9%. nice 9,2%, beautiful 9,2%, awesome 5,1%, amazing 3,6%,
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

48

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

cute 3%, wonderful 2,6%, pretty2,6% handsome 2%, smart 2%. These 11 adjectives accounted
76,3 %.
In the study 35 different adjectives in Ukrainian compliments were identified. 10 the most
frequent Ukrainian adjectives (84,9%) are: гарний(pretty) 25,2%, розумний (smart) 15, 4%,
вродливий (beautiful) 10,3 %, добрий (good, kind) 8,1%, смачний (tasty) 7,5%, щирий (sincere)
6%, турботливий (thoughtful) 3,5%, хазяйновитий (handy) 3,4 %, найкращий (best) 3%,
веселий (jolly) 2,5%.
The amount of Russian adjective is almost the same as American ones. 45 different adjectives
are identified and 11 (61, 9%) of them are the most frequent in use. Among them: красивый
(pretty) 31,5%, умный (smart) 5,1%, шикарный (elegant) 3,5%, прекрасный (beautiful) 3,5%,
вкусный (tasty) 3.2%, милый (nice) 2.8%, хороший (good) 2.8%, отличный (excellent) 2,2,
крутой / классный (cool) 2.2%, лучший (best) 1,9%, добрый(kind) 1,9%.
4.5 Verbs
In this study in the American compliments, the most usual (6 verbs from 10) were: to look
(33.3%), to like (22.2%), to have (13.3), to love (11.1%), to do (11.1%). Other verbs (9%) are
found in a minor frequency. In the Ukrainian compliments were found 6 verbs from 21 the most
frequent in use: пасувати/ личити (to suit) 10%, виглядати (to look) 26%, мати (to have) 10%,
подобатися (to like) 11, 2%, пахнути (to smell) 8%, робити (to do) 14%. In the Russian
compliments, 16 different verbs were found and the most usual were: выглядеть (to look) 31.8%,
идти/ подходит (to suit) 13.2%, нравится (to like) 9.7 %, готовить (to cook) 7.07 %, любить
(to love) 2.6 %.
4.6 Adverbs
Ukrainian and Russian compliments are characterized by using of a great number of adverbs:
18 different adverbs in 171 from 231 Ukrainian compliments, 26 different adverbs in 95 from 445
Russian compliments. In comparison, 5 different adverbs in 28 from 245 English compliments
were found.
4.7 Tone employed
During this study, it was identified and analyzed the tone used in the compliments. The kinds
of tone were classified in: positive or sincere way and negative or sarcastic way. A 98% of the
compliments were told sincerely by Americans. Females (2%) and males (2.2%) told compliments
sarcastically. In the Ukrainian compliments a 97% (Russian compliments – 98%) was sincere and
a 3% (Russian compliments – 2%) was sarcastic in general. Ukrainian speaking females said a
98,2% (Russian speaking females – 99.1%) of the compliments sincerely and a 1.8% (Russian
speaking females – 0.8%) sarcastically, whereas Ukrainian speaking males said a 95.5% of the
compliments sincerely (Russian speaking males – 96%) and a 4.5% sarcastically (Russian
speaking males – 4%).
4.8 Attributes praised
First of all, it is important to mention the categories used in this study. Such categories were
called: “appearance”, “traits/personality”, “skill/work”, “personal property”, and “other”. Also, all
these attributes were branched in order to give a clearer vision of each category as follows:
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

49

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

A. Appearance. It involves the general looks of the persons involved. It was subdivided in:
“general appearance” that is a general subdivision because it involved somebody’s whole
appearance referred to the body or clothe, not praising a specific part of the person. Another
subdivision was: “body”, that involves any part of the body where in American compliments are
praised: hair, eyes, feet, calves, and butt, whereas in Ukrainian compliments are praised: eyes,
smile, hair (haircut, hairdo, hairstyle, hair color), voice (timbre, laugh), figure, nails (manicure),
face, age. In Russian compliments to this list the following can be added: eyelashes, eyebrows and
tattoos.
Another subdivision was: “clothes” that are all the items that perform a good or bad look in
the persons, are used in the body, and they can be directly identified. Americans praised: skirts,
dresses, pants, shoes, shirts, glasses, sweaters, and bags; whereas in Ukrainian compliments are
praised more assessors, and makeup, in Russian compliments – style (new image, cool image,
fashionable, good taste).
B. Traits/personality. It involves the general personality of the persons. It also was
subdivided in: “personality” that is the way a person behaves in a negative or positive way.
Personal traits that are praised in Russian compliments: faithful, devoted, native soul, strange, cool,
kindhearted, funny, cheerful, nice, charismatic, sincere, open, positive, mystic, brave, active,
sociable, artistic, sense of humor, taking difficulties easy; in Ukrainian compliments: cool,
kindhearted, funny, cheerful, nice, charismatic, sincere, open, positive, mystic, brave, sociable,
artistic, sense of humor, vulnerable, mysterious, honest, curious, awesome, caring,
communicative; in English compliments: talented, active, friendly, hard-working, cool, funny,
cheerful, nice, sincere, positive, brave, sociable, artistic, sense of humor, taking difficulties easy.
C. Skills/work. It involves the general abilities of any person to perform any activity or job.
It was subdivided in: “job well done” that is any well-performed activity in the job and the school.
Another subdivision is: “good meal or taste” that is the capacity to cook, and “skill/effort that
denotes someone’s general skill to do something. In American, Ukrainian and Russian
compliments these 3 subdivisions were complimented.
D. Personal property. It involves items not being used by the person on his/her body, those
can be houses, cars, cats, dogs, etc., and items that are not identified or seen in the person’s body.
Americans praised an outfit, a new car, whereas praised a perfume, which was not directly seen or
identified because it was a smell, a fragrance.
E. Other. This category refers to any compliment that did not fit in the previous
classifications. It was identified in compliments in the Ukrainian/Russian data (poem, song,
decoration) and English data (photo in social network/blog post, attention/presence). In the table,
all the results are exemplified in terms of attributes praised found in this study in the Russian,
Ukrainian and English compliments.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

50

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

Table 4
Attributes praised by Russian, Ukrainian & English compliments.
Russian compliments
Appearance

Traits/
Personality

Skill/
work

Taste

Natural
Human
Traits

Other

Total

164 (36,8%)

100 (22,4%)

58 (13%)

54 (12, 1%)

58 (13%)

9 (2%)

445
(100%)

Other

Total

5 (2,1%)

231
(100%)

Ukrainian compliments
Appearance

Traits/
personality

Skill/
Work

Personal
property

Natural
Human
Traits

98 (42,4%)

28 (12%)

16 (7%)

22 (9,5%)

62 (27%)

English compliments
Appearance

Traits/
Personality

Skill/
work

Personal
property

Other

Total

50 (20, 4 %)

40 (16, 2 %)

92 (36, 45 %)

36 (14,7 %)

27
(10, 95
%)

245 (100
%)

4.9 Gender of the compliment giver and receiver. According to the data American females
complimented both males and females in appearance, but they also praised more males in
personality and in skill/work, but not in the category: property and other. Whereas American males
complimented more males in skill/work and females in appearance. They praised both females and
males only in traits/personality. Only one compliment was given to males in property but none to
females in this category.
In contrast, Ukrainian females complimented more females in appearance, and males to
traits/personality, and in property, although both females and males were complimented in
skill/work. Concerning the Ukrainian males (Russian and Ukrainian speakers), they extremely
complimented females in appearance, traits/personality, and in skill/work but not in other and
property. Males were less praised in appearance, personality, and the category other and none in
skill/work and property.
Finally, it is important to mention that Ukrainian males (Russian and Ukrainian speakers)
praised females even more than American males to females. Ukrainian females (Russian and
Ukrainian speakers) complimented females more than American females to females, but American
males praised males a lot because it is very normal in the American culture. However, it is not
common in Ukraine to see males complimenting other male so if they do it, it is performed in a
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

51

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

sarcastic way. In the relationship female to male, both cultures praised almost the same number of
males. Also, it is usual for American culture to compliment to a group of people or an even.
Table 5
Attributes praised in compliments.
Russian speaking participants
Gender

Appearance

Traits/
personality

Skill/
work

Taste

Natural Human Traits

Other

Total

164 (36,8%)

100 (22,4%)

58 (13%)

54(12
%)

58 (13%)

9 (2%)

Ukrainian speaking participants
Gender

Appearance

Traits/
personality

Skill/
work

Personal
property

Other

Total

98 (42.4%)

28 (12%)

16 (7%)

22 (9.5%)

62 (27%)

92 (36, 45 %)

36 (14,7 %)

27 (10, 95
%)

American English speaking participants
Total

50 (20, 4 %)

40 (16,2 %)

4.10 Role relationship between the compliment giver and receiver. First, it is essential to
mention the scheme used in this study to categorize the relationship between the participants. The
categories used were relatives that cover all the family members; acquaintances that cover
classmates, coworkers, teacher/student relationships, boss/employer relationship, casual
acquaintances, neighbors, and customer/worker relationships. Another category was friends that
covers friends and roommates; intimates who are boyfriends or husband/wife only; the category
strangers, who are totally unknown people, and the category other, referred to a relationship
different to these ones.
The results indicated that both Americans and Ukrainians (Russian and Ukrainian speaking
participants) praised friends, Americans with a 28.5% and Ukrainians with 36,3% (Ukrainian
speaking participants) and 35.5% (Russian speaking participants). Americans complimented then:
acquaintances, including classmates, coworkers, teacher/student, boss/employer, casual
acquaintances and customer/worker with a 22% whereas Ukrainians praised a 16.5-17.3%,
including all the subcategories mentioned above, plus neighbors. However, Americans did not
praise strangers (10.1%), as much as Ukrainians did (Ukrainian speaking participants – 9%,
Russian speaking – 6/9% participants). In addition, Americans only praised intimates, with a 7.4%,
whereas Ukrainians did it with a 14.6% (Ukrainian speaking participant) and 13.9 % (Russian
speaking participants). Ukrainians praised relatives with a 14.3% (Russian speaking participants)
and a 10.8% (Ukrainian speaking participants) although Americans did it with a 11.8%.
Consequently, Ukrainians praised more intimates, friends and acquaintances than Americans, but
both nationalities don’t praise strangers.
Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

52

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

4.11 Compliment frequency
The results show that Americans complimented an average every 58 hours (2 days and 10
hours), Russian speakers – every 134.5 hours (5 days), and Ukrainian speakers – every 37 hours
(1 day and 13 hours). According to the results in compliment frequency, Ukrainian speaker are
more expressive than English and Russian speakers and more open in communication.
5. Conclusion
In this research there were investigated the ways of complimenting in Ukrainian, Russian
and American English to avoid misunderstandings and pragmatic failure. American, Ukrainian
and English compliments were compared in order to know the patterns being used by the speakers:
compliment frequency; attributes praised; role relationship between the speakers; gender of the
speakers; tone used and compliment form that includes: number of words, adjectives and verbs
used in the compliments.
As we have observed in these preliminary results, there exist numerous implications from
this study into the teaching of pragmatics in the ESL, Russian and Ukrainian as a Second Language
classroom. We can see the importance of understanding the syntactical formulas in the three
languages as mean to teach compliments in the classroom. It will help L2 students to avoid pragmalinguistic failure. Students wishing to produce these speech acts, can better understand the structure
of the expressions and follow the aforementioned formulas. Adjectives are also important to
consider as part of the cultural lexicon used within those languages and utilize those that are the
most familiar in the second language context. Another important aspect is paying attention to the
attributes praised and see how native speakers of English (living in the USA), Russian and
Ukrainian (living in Ukraine), tend to compliment people. These results also allow students to take
a glance through a window into the cultures where these languages are used, and see what is valued
by different speakers in different situations.
Upon completion of the data analysis on the current study, further information on variables
such as role relationship of the giver and receiver of the compliment, attributes praised by gender
according to nationality, some factors of meaning toward the compliments, to avoid false
interpretations of the compliments, and even a deeper analysis in terms of semantics, metaphorical
language can be provided.
About the Authors
Anzhelika Solodka, Doctor of Science (Education), Professor of Department of German
Philology and Translation at V.O. Sukhomlynsky National University of Mykolaiv, Ukraine. Her
main areas of interest include Cross-cultural Communication, Applied Linguistics and Translation.
https://orcid.org/0000-0003-1703-7996
Luis Perea, United States Department of State, English fellow at V.O. Sukhomlynsky National
University of Mykolaiv, Ukraine. His research interests are in Cross-cultural Pragmatics,
Language Assessment, Reverse-engineering in Language Testing, and Academic Language.
https://orcid.org/0000-0002-9353-5738

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

53

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

References:
Aceves, P. (1996). A Comparative Study of the Use of “Compliments” by Native Speakers of American
English and Native Speakers of Mexican Spanish, Puebla: Universidad de las Americas.
Allami, H., & Naeimi. A. (2011). A cross-linguistic study of refusals: An analysis of pragmatic competence
development in Iranian EFL learners. Journal of Pragmatics, 43, 385-406.
Al Rawashdeh Al Balqa, B. (2018). Arabic Jordanian compliment (Mujamaleh) and politeness online
expressions versus their counterparts in American English. Journal of Education and Practice, 9
(33). Retrived from
https://iiste.org/Journals/index.php/JEP/article/viewFile/45277/46721
Austin, J.L. (1975). How to Do Things with Words, Second Edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Barnlund D. C., & Araki, S. (1985). Intercultural encounters: The management of compliments by Japanese
and Americans. Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 16 (1), 9-26.
Beebe, L. M., Takahashi, T., & Uliss-Weltz, R. (1990). Pragmatic transfer in ESL refusals. In R. C.
Scarcella, E. S. Andersen & S. D. Krashen (Eds.) Developing Communicative Competence in a
Second Language (pp. 55-73). New York: Newbury House Publishers.
Bialystok, E. (1993). Symbolic representation and attentional control in pragmatic competence. In Kasper,
G., & Blum-Kulka, S. (Eds.). Interlanguage Pragmatics (pp. 43-57). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Canale, M., & Swain, M. (1980). Theoretical bases of communicative approach to second language
teaching and testing. Applied Linguistics, 1, 1-47.
Chung-Hye, H. (1992). A comparative study of compliment responses: Korean females in Korea
interactions and in English interactions. Working Papers in Educational Linguistics, 8 (2), 17-31.
Farshi, S., & Baghbani, S. (2015). The effects of implicit and explicit focus on form on oral accuracy of
EFL learners. Theory and Practice in Language Studies, 5 (2), 292-297.
Fetterman, D.M. (1989). Ethnography Step by Step, Newbury Park, CA. Sage.
Fraser, B. (1990). Perspectives on Politeness. Journal of Pragmatics, 14, 219-236.
Halenko, N., & Jones, C. (2011). Teaching pragmatic awareness of spoken requests to Chinese EAP
learners in the UK: Is explicit instruction effective system. Technology and Applied Linguistics, 39,
240-250.
Herbert, R. (1990). Sex-based differences in compliment behavior. Language in Society, 19, 201-224.
Herbert, R., & Straight, H.S. (1989). Compliment-rejection versus compliment avoidance: listener-based
versus speaker-based pragmatic strategies. Language & Communication, 9, 35-47.
Holmes, J. (1988). Paying compliments: A sex preferential positive politeness strategy. Journal of
Pragmatics, 12 (3), 445-465.
Holmes, J., & Brown, D.F. (1987). Teachers and students learning about compliments. TESOL Quarterly,
21 (3), 523-546.
Kasper, G. (2001). Classroom research on interlanguage pragmatics. In Kasper, G., & Rose, K. (Eds.).
Pragmatics and Language Teaching, (pp.33-60). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Manes, J. (1983). Compliments: A mirror of cultural values. In N. Wolfson and E. Judd (Eds.),
Sociolinguistics and Language Acquisition (pp. 82-95). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Manes, J., & Wolfson, N. (1981). The compliment formula. In F. Coulmas (Ed.) Conversational Routine:
Explorations in Standardized Communication Situations and Prepatterned Speech (pp. 116-132).
The Hague, the Netherlands: Mouton Publishers.
Loiseau M., Hallal R., Ballot P., & Gazidedja. (2016). A. Game of Words: prototype of a digital game
focusing on oral production (and comprehension) through asynchronous interaction. Retrived from
https://files.eric.ed.gov/fulltext/ED572202.pdf
Nelligan, M. (1996). El Picaro Mexicano, Mexico, D.F.: Diana.
Nelson, G., Al-Batal, M., & Echols, E. (1996). Arabic and English Compliment responses: Potential for
Pragmatic failure. Applied Linguistics, 17 (4), 411-432.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

54

Arab World English Journal (AWEJ) Volume 9. Number4. December 2018

The Speech Act of Complimenting as Part of the Ukrainian, Russian

Solodka & Perea

Nelson, G. (1993). Egyptian and American Compliments: A cross-cultural study. International Journal of
Intercultural Relations, 17, 293-313.
Nguyen, T., Pham, T., & Pham, M. (2012). The relative effects of explicit and implicit form-focused
instruction on the development of L2 pragmatic competence. Journal of Pragmatics, 44, 416-434.
Nordquist R. (2017). Pragmatic Competence: Glossary of Grammatical and Rhetorical Terms. Retrived
from https://www.thoughtco.com/pragmatic-competence-1691653
Perea-Hernandez, J.L. (2010). Teacher Evaluation of Item Formats for an English Language Proficiency
Assessment.
Dissertations
and
Theses. Retrieved from
https://pdxscholar.library.pdx.edu/open_access_etds/436/
Perea-Hernandez, J.L. (2017). You are like steel wrapped in silk!: a comparative study of conceptual
metaphor in Peninsular & Latin American Spanish piropos and English pick up lines. In Культурнодетерміновані Фактори у Практиці Перекладу: Монографія, ed. by Solodka A. (pp.122-165).
Mykolaiv. Retrived from https://pdx.academia.edu/LuisPerea
Rajabi, S., & Farahian, M. (2013). The effects of pragmatic instruction on EFL learners' awareness of
suggestions. Modern Journal of Language Teaching Methods, 3 (3), 28-38.
Shi, X. (2014). On cross-cultural pragmatic failures in C/E interpretation. Theory and Practice in Language
Studies, 4 (5), 1033-1037.
Solak, E., & Bayar, A. (2015). Current challenges in English Language Learning in Turkish EFL context.
Participatory Educational Research, 2 (1), 106-115.
Thomas, J. (1983). Cross-cultural pragmatic failure. Applied Linguistics, 4, 91-112.
Valdés, G. (1981). Codeswitching as a Deliberate Verbal Strategy: A Microanalysis of Direct and Indirect
Requests among Bilingual Chicano Speakers. In Latino Language and Communicative Behavior, ed.
by Richard P. Durán (pp. 95-107). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Van Dijk, T. (1985). Handbook of Discourse Analysis, London: Academic Press.
Wierzbicka, A. (1991). Cross-cultural Pragmatics: The Semantics of Human Interaction. In Trends in
Linguistics: Studies and Monographs, 53.
Wolfson, N. (1983). An empirically based analysis of complimenting behavior in American English. In
N.Wlfson & E.Judd (Eds.). In Socioliguistics and Language Acquisition (pp.82-95). Rowley, MA:
Newbury House.
Wolfson, N. (1988). The bulge: a theory of speech behavior and social distance. In Fine, J. (ed) Second
Language Discourse: A Textbook of Current Research (pp. 17-34). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Wolfson, N., & Manes, J. (1980). Compliment as social strategy. International Journal of Human
Communication, 13, 391-410.

Arab World English Journal
www.awej.org
ISSN: 2229-9327

55

