Arab World English Journal (August 2019)
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.241

Theses ID 241

Pp. 1-62

A Systemic Functional Linguistic Analysis of Cohesion and The Writing Quality of Saudi Female
EFL Undergraduate Students

Khawater Fahad Alshalan
Department of English Language and Literature
College of Languages and Translation
Al Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, Saudi Arabia

Author: Khawater Fahad Alshalan
Thesis Title: A Systemic Functional Linguistic Analysis of Cohesion and The Writing Quality of Saudi
Female EFL Undergraduate Students
Subject/major: Linguistics
Institution: Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University, College of Languages and Translation,
Saudi Arabia.
Degree: MA in Linguistics
Year of Award: June 2019
Supervisor: Dr. Ibrahim H. Almaiman
Key Words: cohesion, cohesive devices, essay writing, systemic functional linguistics (SFL)
Abstract
This study aims to investigate how frequently Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) cohesive devices were used as
well as their relationship with the writing quality of 100 Saudi EFL undergraduate students in Al Imam
Muhammed Ibn Saud Islamic University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. It uses a mixed method approach, where
the students’ essays were analyzed using systemic functional linguistics (SFL) in terms of the textual
meta-function of cohesive devices. The five types of the cohesive devices are the following: lexical
cohesion, reference, conjunction, substitutions, and ellipses. Moreover, each of their subcategories were
analyzed in the students’ texts. The NVivo qualitative data analysis software and the corpus analysis
(conducted using AntConc) were used to calculate the frequencies of each cohesive device found in the
data. The IELTS writing assessment scale was also used to evaluate the students’ writing scores. The
results show that the most frequently used device was lexical cohesion, specifically repetition. Saudi EFL
undergraduate students tended to repeatedly stay focused on the central idea of the topic. Furthermore,
Pearson’s correlation coefficient found a relationship between the students’ writing scores and length of
their essays, the use of cohesive ties and the scores, and cohesive ties and the length of the students’
essays. This study recommends that EFL teachers provide Saudi EFL students several cohesive tools in
order to help them improve their writing skills and connect their ideas smoothly.
Cite as: Alshalan, K. F. (2019). A Systemic Functional Linguistic Analysis of Cohesion and The Writing
Quality of Saudi Female EFL Undergraduate Students. Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic
University, College of Languages and Translation, Saudi Arabia. (Master Thesis). Retrieved from Arab
World English Journal (ID Number: 241) August 2019,1-62.
DOI: https://dx.doi.org/10.24093/awej/th.241

Arab World English Journal
ISSN: 2229-9327

www.awej.org

1
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Ministry of Education
Al Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud Islamic University
College of Languages and Translation

A Systemic Functional Linguistic Analysis of Cohesion and The Writing Quality of Saudi
Female EFL Undergraduate Students

A Paper Submitted to The Department of English
in Partial Fulfillment of The Requirements For The Degree of Master’s in Linguistics

Submitted by
Khawater Fahad Alshalan
Supervised by
Dr. Ibrahim H. Almaiman

Shawal 1440- June 2019

I
Abstract
This study aims to investigate how frequently Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) cohesive
devices were used as well as their relationship with the writing quality of 100 Saudi EFL
undergraduate students in Al Imam Muhammed Ibn Saud Islamic University, Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. It uses a mixed method approach, where the students’ essays were analyzed using
systemic functional linguistics (SFL) in terms of the textual meta-function of cohesive
devices. The five types of the cohesive devices are the following: lexical cohesion, reference,
conjunction, substitutions, and ellipses. Moreover, each of their subcategories were analyzed
in the students’ texts. The NVivo qualitative data analysis software and the corpus analysis
(conducted using AntConc) were used to calculate the frequencies of each cohesive device
found in the data. The IELTS writing assessment scale was also used to evaluate the students’
writing scores. The results show that the most frequently used device was lexical cohesion,
specifically repetition. Saudi EFL undergraduate students tended to repeatedly stay focused
on the central idea of the topic. Furthermore, Pearson’s correlation coefficient found a
relationship between the students’ writing scores and length of their essays, the use of
cohesive ties and the scores, and cohesive ties and the length of the students’ essays. This
study recommends that EFL teachers provide Saudi EFL students several cohesive tools in
order to help them improve their writing skills and connect their ideas smoothly.

Keywords: cohesion, cohesive devices, essay writing, systemic functional linguistics (SFL)

‫ملخص الدراسة‬
‫تهدف هذه الدراسة إلى معرفة مدى تكرار استخدام أدوات التماسك اللغوي الخاصة بالعالم هاليداي (‪)1976‬‬
‫وعالقتها بجودة كتابة ‪ 100‬طالبة في جامعة اإلمام محمد بن سعود اإلسالمية في المملكة العربية السعودية بمدينة الرياض‪.‬‬
‫سيتم تحليل مقاالت الطالبات باستخدام اللغويات الوظيفية النظامية (‪ )SFL‬من حيث ربط جمل النص ببعضها لبعض‬
‫وتحليل كل فئة من فئاتها الفرعية في نصوص الطالبات‪ .‬تم استخدام برنامج تحليل البيانات ‪ AntConc‬لجمع الكلمات‬
‫المتكررة وإليجاد أكثر أداة مستخدمة في النصوص‪ .‬تم استخدام مقياس ‪ IELTS‬لتقييم درجات الطالبات في كتابة مقاالتهن‬
‫لمقارنة درجات الطالبات باستخدام تلك األدوات اللغوية‪ .‬أظهرت النتائج أن أكثر الكلمات استخدا ًما هي من النوع التماسك‬
‫المعجمي ‪ Lexical Cohesion‬وخاصة عملية تكرار الكلمات‪ .‬تميل الطالبات في المرحلة الجامعية في تخصص اللغة‬
‫اإلنجليزية إلى تكرار الكلمات عند كتابة المقال باللغة االنجليزية لعدم الخروج عن موضوع النص‪ .‬وجد معامل ارتباط‬
‫بيرسون عالقة إيجابية وقوية بين درجات كتابة الطالبات وعدد كلمات مقاالتهن وبين استخدامهن ألدوات التماسك اللغوي‬
‫ودرجاتهن وعالقتها بعدد كلمات مقاالتهن‪ .‬توصي هذه الدراسة أن توفر معلمات اللغة اإلنجليزية لطالباتهن عدة طرق‬
‫لعرض وشرح أدوات التماسك اللغوي بشكل واضح من أجل مساعدتهن على تحسين مهاراتهن في الكتابة وربط أفكارهن‬
‫بسالسة‪.‬‬

II
Dedication

To my mother who loved me unconditionally
To my father who had faith in me

III
Acknowledgements

Praise be to Allah, Almighty God, for guiding me and making me capable in
achieving this project. I would like to thank the Department of English Language and
Literature in the College of Languages and Translation at the Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud
Islamic University for giving me the opportunity to achieve one of my major goals in my life,
the Master‘s degree and for that I am extremely grateful. I would like to show my gratitude to
my supervisor, Dr. Ibrahim Almaiman for his professional guidance and sharing his pearls of
wisdom throughout the development of this research.
Words cannot express how deeply thankful I am for my parents. My remarkable
mother always inspires me to make the best out of everything. My beloved father is my hero
and the light of my life. His fruitful insights and detailed advice throughout my postgraduate
studies encouraged me to pursue my dreams.
Last but not least, a special appreciation goes to my brothers, sisters, nieces and to my
nephew for their endless love, support and understanding.

IV
Table of Contents
Abstract………………………………………………………………………………………. I
Dedication……………………………………………………………………………………. II
Acknowledgements…………………………………………………………………………. III
Table of Contents……………………………………………………………………………IV
List of Tables………………………………………………………………………………. VII
List of Figures………………………………………………………………………………VII
Chapter one: Introduction………………………………………………………………….. 9
1.1 Context of the problem……………………………………………………………… 9
1.2 Statement of the Problem…………………………………………………………… 10
1.3 Significance of the Study.…………………………………………………………… 10
1.4 Research Questions………………………………………………………………….. 11
1.5 Method and procedure………………………………………………………………. 11
1.6 Operational definition of terms……………………………………………………… 12
1.7 Summary …………………………………………………………………………….13
Chapter two: Literature review…………………………………………………………… 14
2.1 Theoretical framework of SFL……………………………………………………… 14
2.2 Textual Meta-function……………………………………………………………….. 16
2.3 Cohesion……………………………………………………………………………... 17
2.4 Previous studies……………………………………………………………………… 17
2.4.1 SFL, Cohesion and L2 writing………………………………………………… 17

V
2.4.2 EFL Arab students’ misuse of cohesive devices………………………………. 18
2.4.3 Cohesive devices and writing quality………………………………………… 19
2.5 Summary…………………………………………………………………………….. 21
Chapter three: Methodology………………………………………………………………. 22
3.1 Research design……………………………………………………………………… 22
3.2 Population and sample………………………………………………………………..22
3.3 Data Collection………………………………………………………………………. 23
3.4 Procedure …………………………………………………………………………….23
3.5 Instruments…………………………………………………………………………... 24
3.5.1 Data Analysis Tools…………………………………………………………… 24
3.5.1.1 Lexical cohesion………………………………………………………… 24
3.5.1.2 Reference………………………………………………………………… 25
3.5.1.3 Conjunctions…………………………………………………………….. 25
3.5.1.4 Substitution……………………………………………………………… 26
3.5.1.5 Ellipses……………………………………………………………………26
3.5.2 Writing assessment scale………………………………………………………. 27
3.6 Validity and Reliability of instruments……………………………………………… 27
3.6.1 Validity of instruments………………………………………………………… 27
3.6.2 Reliability of instruments……………………………………………………… 28
3.7 Summary …………………………………………………………………………….29
Chapter four: Results and data analysis…………………………………………………. 30
4.1 Answering question 1 and 2………………………………………………………… 30

VI
4.1.1 Lexical Cohesion……………………………………………………………… 31
4.1.2 Reference………………………………………………………………………. 33
4.1.3 Conjunctions…………………………………………………………………… 36
4.1.4 Substitution…………………………………………………………………….. 38
4.1.5 Ellipses………………………………………………………………………….39
4.2 Answering question 3……………………………………………………………….. 40
4.2.1 Relationship between the scores and the usage of the cohesive devices……… 42
4.2.2 Relationship between Word count and cohesive devices……………………… 43
4.3 Summary…………………………………………………………………………….. 43
Chapter five: Discussion and implications………………………………………………... 44
5.1 Discussion…………………………………………………………………………….44
5.1.1 The students' usage of cohesive devices……………………………………….44
5.1.2 The students' writing quality………………………………...............................48
5.2 Limitations……………………………………………………………………………49
5.3 Implications………………………………………………………………………….. 49
5.4 Conclusion…………………………………………………………………………… 50
References……………………………………………………………………………………51
Appendixes………………………………………………………………………………….. 57
Appendix A……………………………………………………………………………….57
Appendix B……………………………………………………………………………….58
Appendix C……………………………………………………………………………….59

VII
List of Tables

Table 4. 1 Total of cohesive devices …………………………………………………… 31
Table 4. 2 Lexical Cohesion……………………………………………………………... 32
Table 4. 3 Reference ……………………………………………………………………...34
Table 4. 4 Conjunctions………………………………………………………………… 37
Table 4. 5 Substitution …………………………………………………………………… 38
Table 4. 6 Ellipses……………………………………………………………………….. 39
Table 4. 7 Summary………………………………………………………………………. 39
Table 4. 8 Summary of students’ texts …………………………………………………… 41
Table 4. 9 Relationship between the use of cohesive devices and writing quality……… 41
Table 4. 10 Pearson correlation coefficient …………………………………………… 41

VIII
List of Figures

Figure 4. 1 Cohesive devices………………………………………………………………..31
Figure 4. 2 Lexical cohesion ………………………………………………………………. 33
Figure 4. 3 References …………………………………………………………………….. 36
Figure 4. 4 Conjunctions …………………………………………………………………...38
Figure 4. 5 Correlation between writing scores and cohesive devices …………………….. 42
Figure 4. 6 Correlation between word count and cohesive devices ………………………...43

9
Chapter one

Introduction
Chapter one introduces this study by clarifying the context of the problem, statement
of the problem, the significance of the study, the research questions, the method and
procedure briefly and the operational definition of terms.
1.1

Context of the problem
Numerous research studies illustrate that no matter where research is conducted,

researchers become more and more concerned about EFL (English as a foreign language)
students learning the writing skill in academic contexts (Crossley & McNamara, 2010).
Writing is the most fundamental productive skill for undergraduate students to master
because it is a thinking tool used for critical thinking and learning in all disciplines
(Khuwaileh & Al Shoumali, 2000). However, EFL undergraduate students face some
difficulties in employing cohesion in writing argumentative essays that cause failure of
creating a smooth flow of information (Sidighi and Heydari, 2012). Cohesive devices tie
pieces of text together, such as Reference, Substitution, Ellipsis, Conjunction and Lexical
Cohesion (Halliday and Hasan, 1976). Al-Yaari, S. A., Al Hammadi, F. S., Alyami, S. A., &
Almaflehi, N. (2013) discovered that Saudi EFL students used mainly connectives in their
writings and the rest of the cohesive devices were used incorrectly.
Paiva and Lima (2011) explained that it is crucial to have a deeper analysis of
students’ writing rather than the traditional surface-level approach. Michael Halliday’s SFL
(Systemic Functional Linguistics) approach is a linguistic model that views language as ways
of making socially-constructed meaning within a cultural context (Eggins, 2004). In
discourse, SFL creates meaning through three meta-functions; ideational, interpersonal and

10
Textual. Ideational function includes participants and what they are doing. The
interpersonal function is concerned about the relationship between the author and his
audience within a text. The textual function is related to the mode of communication, which
includes cohesion and coherence (Derewianka & Jones, 2010). This paper focuses on textual
meta-function, mainly the cohesive devices used by EFL students in writing.
Applying the SFL cohesive analysis has numerous advantages. The improvement of
cohesive devices in EFL students’ essays influences the quality of their writing (Crossly,
Kyle and McNamara, 2016). Furthermore, cohesive analysis classifies written discourse
features that help the reader comprehend text as a whole (Bastrukmen & von Randow, 2014).
Because of the crucial use of cohesive devices in argumentative writing, as mentioned, this
study will not look at the traditional aspects of writing but the paradigm of Systemic
Functional Linguistics.
1.2

Statement of the Problem
Writing is one of the toughest skill to adapt in an EFL context. EFL students face

some difficulties when they write. Most students have problems with how to generate and
organize ideas. Thus, they have no knowledge of cohesion mechanics. Most teachers
concentrate on a sentence level more than the discourse level in teaching writing. Therefore,
they never focus on cohesion though it is a crucial feature of good writing. Consideration
should be made to help EFL students shape their ideas by using suitable cohesive devices in
their writings.
1.3

Significance of the Study
This paper would calculate the frequencies of cohesive devices used in EFL students’

essays at Imam University. The study aims to show the relationship between the use of

11
cohesive devices and the quality of writing. The ability to understand students’ use of
cohesive devices would advance their writing skill.
1.4

Research Questions

This research paper seeks to answer the three following questions:
RQ1. What is the most frequently used cohesive device in Saudi female EFL undergraduate
students’ writings at Imam University?
RQ2. What are the frequencies of different types of cohesive devices in Saudi female EFL
undergraduate students’ writings at Imam University?
RQ3. What is the relationship between Saudi female EFL undergraduate students’ use of
cohesive devices and the quality of their writing at Imam University?
1.5

Method and procedure
This study was a mixed method approach. It was built on qualitative data analysis of

the cohesive devices and finding their correlation with the writing quality that delivered
quantitative data. 100 EFL Saudi undergraduate Students, who were taking a writing course,
would write an essay about a topic that is taken from the IELTS exam. The topic was “Many
people believe that social networking sites have had a huge negative impact on both
individuals and society”. In order to study the textual meta-functions, Halliday and Hasan’s
(1976) five cohesive devices were used to analyze the students’ essays; reference,
substitution, ellipses, lexical cohesion, and conjunction. Lexical cohesion contained
repetition, synonyms, hypernyms, hyponyms, meronyms, and antonyms. Reference is divided
into personal pronouns and possessive pronouns. Conjunctions can split into elaboration,
extension, and enhancement. Substitution and Ellipses could be nominal, verbal or clausal.
NVivo qualitative data analysis software and the corpus analysis AntConc were used to

12
calculate frequencies of each cohesive device found in the data. The IELTS writing
assessment scale was also operated to evaluate students’ writing scores. Moreover, pearson
correlation coefficient was used to determine the relationship between the students’ writing
scores, length and their usage of cohesive devices.
1.6

Operational definition of terms
Systemic Functional Linguistics is the study of forming meaningful discourse by

operating language choices through different functions (Eggins, 1994). One of these
functions was Textual, which ties and unifies the whole text together to help the reader
understand and recognize its purpose (Humphrey, Droga, and Feez, 2012). Cohesion includes
non-structural relations that go beyond the sentence level and is represented by cohesive
devices (Martin, 2001). This paper focuses on five main cohesive devices. First, Lexical
cohesion has an effect due to certain vocabulary selections. This can be clarified as the
repetition of content words; synonyms, co-hyponyms and antonyms (Salkie 1995). Second is
Reference that has a semantic relation in a text between one element and another by reference
while the referring thing corresponds to the semantic properties of what is being referred to
(Halliday and Hasan, 1976). Third, Conjunctions join textual elements together to produce a
complex semantic unit (Thompson 2004). It can be divided into five categories;

Additive,

Adversative, Causal, Temporal and Continuative. Forth, Substitution is when an item is
replaced by another item (Ramasawmy, 2004). Substitution can be Nominal, such as “there is
one there”; Verbal do “He does too” or Clausal, such as “the manager said so”. Usually, “do”
or “so” is used as an alternative for nouns or verbs that have already been used (Emilia,
2014). Finally, Ellipsis means the deletion of an item. It leaves an empty hole that could be
occupied by the referent (Thompson, 2004). It is also divided into three types; Nominal

13
Ellipses, Verbal ellipses, and Clausal ellipses, where they all are understood from the
context when removed.
1.7

Summary
Chapter One illustrated the purpose of this study, defined its terms and summarized

its method and procedure after stating the context of the problem. Chapter Two will review
past literature, previous studies of cohesive devices and students’ writings as well as the
theoretical framework of Systemic Functional Linguistics (SFL).

14
Chapter two

Literature review
The previous chapter presented the fundamentals of this paper; research questions,
purposes and method. Chapter two explains the theoretical background of SFL and previous
studies related to students’ uses of cohesive devices.
2.1

Theoretical framework of SFL
Systemic linguists are interested in how a person uses language to accomplish social

claims every day. The use of language is functional and its function is to create meanings.
Social and cultural contexts influence these meanings in which they are exchanged. This
process is called a semiotic process, which means making meanings by choosing (Eggins,
1994, p. 2). Systemic functional linguistics theory (SFL) views language as a system of
meaning, a “semiotic system” (Halliday, 2007, p. 2). The theory is called “systemic” because
language is powerful in having is a massive network of unified choices that are signified in
the form of system networks (Halliday, 2007). System networks display a ‘tool-box’ or
resource for making meaning through grammatical and lexical choices (Droga & Humphrey,
2003, p. 1). Therefore, to provide meaning, language choices are made.
The main aspect of SFL is not about what people use language for but how to use
language (Eggins, 2004). The theoretical framework of SFL observes language as “a
strategic, meaning-making resource” (Eggins, 2004, p. 2) and, in social contexts; it discovers
how language is used to accomplish specific goals (O’Donnell, 2011).
Language can be used to describe either spoken ideas or written and can share it to
one another. Theoretically, these are viewed as three meta-functions of language: ideational,
interpersonal, and textual (Butt, Fahey, Feez, Spinks, & Yallop, 2000). Thus, language is

15
functional. Having ideational, interpersonal, and textual meanings in user’s mind, it is able
to choose grammatical patterns and words in linguistic units to simplify and organize coding
systems as sets of choices (Eggins, 2004).
However, SFL is not only theoretical but also used in practice (Droga & Humphrey,
2003). This allows individuals to accomplish things and to achieve many social purposes in
their lives. SFL pinpoints three features; mode, field, and tenor. They have convincing and
predictable effects on language usage. In relation to practice, individuals usually make
language choices in certain contexts to do three things at the same time; talk about a
particular topic (field), communicate with someone (tenor), and create a coherent idea orally
or in writing (mode). Thus, achieving the register (Butt et al., 2000; Martin, 2009). Rose &
Martin (2012) argue that the interpersonal function has to do with the relationships of who is
involved by language, recognized as the tenor of social relations. The ideational function is
about the experiences that are interpreted by language. This is considered as the field of the
experience. The textual function is the role the language plays in the context and how it
creates connected and coherent discourse. This is called the mode of communication, such as
in speaking or writing (Rose & Martin, 2012).
These choices can be either through a single clause level or a whole text level
(Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014). While the view of traditional grammar pays attention to the
correct language use through rules, the functional view is about how language is able to
establish meaning (Butt et al., 2000; Droga & Humphrey, 2003). Language choices must be
carefully considered by the writers to convey their message effectively (Hyland, 2003). The
tenor, the interaction between the writer and the reader, language choices are employed “to
negotiate relationships and to express opinions and attitudes” (Droga & Humphrey, 2003, p.
53). Using pronouns and names in structures of clauses can make statements or questions
more or less personal. Also, the tenor of interactions depends on the use of models that show

16
low, medium or high levels of the writer’s certainty. Students can become critical readers
and selective writers if they understand the interpersonal functions of texts as well as tenor’s
linguistic resources used to induce readers (Droga & Humphrey, 2003; Martin, 2009).
According to mode, language choices make texts cohesive. It shows that the text is organized
and signals what the writer will mention next (Droga & Humphrey, 2003).
There are some key aspects concerning SFL. First, language is a resource for
meaning. It is a system of choices that users choose from to make meanings suitable to its
social context. This may control the number of choices from the linguistic system. This leads
to the second aspect that there is a systematic or symbolic relationship between texts and
contexts. Social contexts influence language choices and language itself helps in forming
these contexts. Third, SFL labels elements of texts in relation to their function in making
meanings. For example, the words participant, process, and circumstances are functional
labels (Emilia, 2010).
Derewianka and Jones (2010) note that the SFL model tolerates different entry points
for teachers and their students. Regarding the tenor within a register, students start to realize
that written texts are not only for their teacher to read. It is for a broader audience; a formal
audience, such as professionals or colleagues. Those who read the text might have more or
less knowledge of the written topic. Thus, language choices rely heavily on the audience.
Likewise, the mode of interaction, such as cohesive devices, is within the path of
communication.
2.2

Textual Meta-function
The textual meta-function of SFL is used to examine texts. It always overlaps with the

ideational and interpersonal meta-functions to make a meaningful language. Textual metafunction straightforwardly relates to the mode of communication. In this study, the mode is

17
hand-written, argumentative essays. Humphrey, Droga, and Feez (2012) describe textual
elements as “threads that tie together...a unified whole text...that an audience can comprehend
and recognize as relevant and purposeful” (p. 93). Mainly, textual elements function in two
ways. First, it organizes the stream of information at clause and sentence levels, like
coherence. Second, it joins several words or phrases in the text, such as references,
substitutions and transitions to make it cohesive.
2.3

Cohesion
Cohesion is an internal element that makes the reader while reading; relate the

meaning together within the text (Dastjerdi & Samian, 2011). Halliday and Hasan (1976)
explained that cohesion is a non-structural unit of textual meta-function that does not rely on
the structural unit, like a clause or a sentence, in the text. Cohesion is about the meaning,
which is beyond a sentence or a clause. Moreover, cohesion produces a sense of
connectedness because the explanation of one part in the text relies on one element to another
(Emilia, 2014). For one to accomplish this sense of connectedness, cohesive devices are used
to relate between elements as the text grows (Derewianka & Jones, 2012). The main focus of
this study is these cohesive devices, which were references, conjunctions, substitutions,
ellipses and lexical cohesion.
2.4

Previous studies
Scholars have given attention to EFL undergraduate students’ usage of cohesion in

their writings. Some of them came up with similar findings whereas others have been
contradictory.
2.4.1 SFL, Cohesion and L2 writing
Abusharkh (2012) investigated cohesion in argumentative essay writing of 60 College
Students in Palestine. By observing Halliday and Hasan (1976), cohesive ties were identified,

18
written their number of occurrences and described in relations to the type of cohesion.
Participants were labeled according to their levels; high, intermediate, and low. Findings have
discovered that the three groups of participants were most likely to use lexical devices but
hardly used substitution and ellipses. Furthermore, intermediate and low-level students used
reiteration as a cohesive device more than the high-level students. Additionally, intermediate
and low-level students used language transfer that hinders cohesion.
Tshotsho (2014) used SFL in exploring 20 undergraduate students’ argumentative
essay writing in South Africa. Students who were labeled ‘competent’ used more reference
markers and cohesive devices in their writings than those who were ‘not competent’. This
study revolves around the register of competent students. It suggests that when students are
advanced, they use formal academic English in their language choices. However, less
advanced students could not detect the register. Findings show that explicit instruction of
textual features is important in English academic writing.
2.4.2 EFL Arab students’ misuse of cohesive devices
Written essays that lack cohesion reduce the reader’s comprehension and his
concentration. There are some studies that reflect Arab students’ difficulties in English
writing. Khalil (1989) studied how Arab undergraduate students used cohesive devices in
their writings. The results showed that students repeated the same lexical item as a cohesive
device but underused other lexical and grammatical cohesive links. However, Arab students
in Kharma’s (1985) study show that all irregular ties and mistakes they made were because of
the negative transfer from Arabic.
Sayidina (2010) tried to clarify how first languages interfere in second language
acquisition. She compared 50 Arabic research papers with English essays written by Arab
students regarding cohesive devices and additive transition words. Results show that native

19
Arabic additive transition words were highly used in English works. Also, instead of using
grammatical cohesion, the same noun is repeated more than once.
Al-Jarf (2001) explored EFL Arab students’ struggles in managing cohesive ties; reference,
conjunction, substitution and ellipsis. Students were required to identify cohesive ties in a
certain text and write the referent or substitute of each anaphor. Then, students needed to list
all conjunctions from the text and stock the ellipted words. Findings suggested that,
according to the students, the toughest cohesive tie was substitution followed by reference
and ellipses. The easiest device was conjunction.
Also, Al-Shatarat (1990) observed 100 Jordanian intermediate students’ use of
cohesive devices in community college. They were given two tests. The first test consists of
57 multiple-choice items and students had to pick the best answer. The second examination
contained 500 words and 28 blanks. Students were required to fill these blanks by using
cohesive devices. The results have shown that almost 42% of the student's answers were
incorrect or unsuitable because of mistreatment of grammatical and lexical cohesive devices.
Furthermore, Kargozari et al. (2012) examined cohesive devices in 180 structures in
argumentative essays. The participants were Iranian EFL university students who wrote these
essays. Results implied that, in student's writing, lexical devices were greatly used followed
by conjunctions and references. Further, problems of misusing, overusing and restriction of
reference, conjunction and lexical devices were classified in participants’ structures.
2.4.3 Cohesive devices and writing quality
Wenxing and Ying (2012) observed the use of cohesive devices in Chinese EFL
students’ argumentative writing at different proficiency levels. Results indicated that Chinese
EFL students used cohesive devices incorrectly. The researchers indicated that the correct
uses of cohesive items are associated with the writing quality of students’ texts.

20
A study was conducted to shows the relationship between the use of cohesive
devices and the writing quality of students by Crossley and MacNamara (2010). The two
researchers established that the amount of cohesive devices used in a piece of writing was an
excellent source for organizing a text. However, they discovered that joining conjunctions
and sentences overlap pronouns, which is considered a negative indication of the essay
quality. They concluded that the number of times the students used cohesive devices in their
text alone is not enough to reflect good writing quality. The writing quality depends on other
factors, such as the type of cohesive devices used in the writing.
On the contrary, Alarcon & Morales (2011) disagree that the frequency and types of
cohesive devices used in students’writing with the writing quality. They investigated the use
of cohesive devices in argumentative essays written by undergraduate students. Halliday and
Hasan's (1976) classification was used as an analytical framework. Their findings show that
the most frequently used cohesive device that was around 91% out of all devices is
Reference. The second most frequent cohesive device was Conjunction that appeared ten
times less than reference. However, the researchers did not find a vital connection between
the frequent number of cohesive devices and the writing quality of the students’ essays. After
analyzing the data, qualitatively, Alarcon & Morales (2011) concluded that the number of
times students used cohesive devices in their essays couldn’t be served as good evidence in
their writing quality. However, they have recommended that writers need to be familiarized
with these cohesive devices for better writing quality.
Similarly, Chen (2008) absorbed the relationship between the total of cohesive
features and writing quality. The researcher studied 46 essays written by 23 EFL
undergraduate students. Results indicated that students mostly used lexical devices, followed
by conjunctions and reference devices. Furthermore, this research paper revealed that there is
no significant relationship between the writing quality and the number of cohesive devices.

21
Coskun's (2011) compared and analyzed EFL Turkish and Uzbek students’ English
writing and the findings reinforced the same conclusion of Alarcon & Morales's study, which
was showing no relationship between the use of cohesive devices and the quality of writing.
However, the differences lied on the preferred usage of cohesive devices by EFL Turkish and
Uzbek students. The students used more ellipsis in their writings.
As mentioned, previous studies show dissimilarity between the frequent number and
types of cohesive devices in writing. There are not enough studies that examine whether or
not Saudi EFL undergraduate students have similar or different usage of cohesive patterns
and writing quality through a systemic functional linguistic perception. Thus, this study aims
to investigate the relationship between cohesive devices and overall writing quality in
argumentative essay writing of Saudi EFL students.
2.5

Summary
Reviewed studies, focused on similar issues of the current study that covered most of

the matters theoretically and practically concerning this study's problem. The upcoming
chapter, chapter three, will show a detailed description of the method and procedure in order
to answer the research questions.

22
Chapter three

Methodology
This study examines cohesion patterns and the writing quality of female
undergraduate students in a Saudi educational context. This chapter will describe the research
design, population and sample, data collection, procedure, validity and research ethics.
3.1

Research design
As stated in chapter one, the aim of this study was to examine the most frequently

used cohesive device in students' argumentative essays as well as the relationship between
the use of cohesive devices and the quality of their writing.
This study followed a mixed method approach. The descriptive analysis of students’
writing was conducted depending on the paradigm of Halliday’s (1985) Systemic Functional
Linguistics, specifically the textual meta-function. The number of occurrences of Halliday
and Hasan’s (1976) cohesive devices, such as reference, ellipses, substitution, conjunction
and lexical cohesion were calculated by adapting Halliday and Matthiessen’s (2014) analysis
schemes.
3.2

Population and sample
The data for this study were collected from the population of EFL Saudi female

undergraduates in Al Imam Muhammed Ibn Saud Islamic University in Riyadh, Saudi
Arabia. The age range of participants was 19-25 with Arabic as their L1. All participants in
this study were female due to the existing gender separation in Saudi Arabia and for no other
intended reasons. The sample included 100 students from level 5 and level 6 who were
specialized in linguistics at the college of languages and translation. They had an English

23
writing course for Academic Purposes (EAP). The study took place in the second academic
semester of 2019. The experiment lasted for 4 weeks.
3.3

Data Collection
This study’s data involved 100 argumentative essays, written by Saudi undergraduate

students, with a total word count of 14,200. The students were required to write about the
negative impact of networking sites on a society. This particular topic was taken from an
IELTS exam.
3.4

Procedure
The objectives of this paper were carefully explained in detail to the students. The

researcher asked the students’ permission to use their essays as data sources in this study. The
students had only 40 minutes to write an argumentative essay about the given topic.
However, they did not get any external assistance that would help them in writing their
essays. The researcher attended and only observed the students during the process of writing.
After submitting their papers, the researcher typed what the students wrote into a Microsoft
word format without correcting any of the errors. However, for this study, participants’
identification markers, such as name and ID number were removed. To calculate frequencies
of each cohesive device found in the data, NVivo qualitative data analysis software and the
corpus analysis AntConc were used. Then, the IELTS writing assessment scale was operated
to evaluate students’ essays and word count. After that, the Pearson’s correlation coefficient
would find the relationship between the use of cohesive devices and the quality of the
students’ writing.

24
3.5

Instruments

3.5.1 Data Analysis Tools
For this paper, the data analysis tools were Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) five cohesive
devices, which were reference, reiteration, ellipses, lexical cohesion, and conjunction. The
reason behind choosing these particular tools was studying the textual meta-functions
following Halliday’s (1976) Systemic Functional Linguistics theory. The cohesive devices
that tend to connect the text together and make it clear. Furthermore, these cohesive devices
were selected because they can be examined from a semantic and a grammatical point of
view. Lexical cohesion and reference were inspected through lexical meaning while ellipses
and substitution are examined through grammar. As for Conjunctions, they can be explored
through both lexical meaning and grammar (Halliday & Matthiessen, 2014). Thus, the five
cohesive devices would focus on the aim of this paper by examining the semantic and
grammatical textual meta-functions of students’ texts. Moreover, this paper followed
Halliday and Matthiessen’s (2014) cohesion analysis schemes because it provided clear and
detailed explanations of numerous cohesive ties with examples.
According to Halliday and Hassan (1976), the five cohesive devices were briefly
summarized as follows.
3.5.1.1 Lexical cohesion
Lexical cohesion revolves around the writer’s selection of lexicon. Its occurrence, in a
discourse, is necessary to get readers' full attention. Lexical cohesion words are explored
through the semantic meaning of repetition, synonyms, antonyms, meronyms, hypernyms and
hyponyms. In organizing a text, various forms of lexical repetition should be used. Repetition
is when a word is repeated twice in a sentence. For example, “your mother is unique and your
father is unique”. Synonyms are words that have the same meaning used in a sentence, such

25
as “Weeping is crying because of a lost friendship”. However, antonyms are words that are
the opposite of other words used. A metonym is a word that is a small part of something but
refers to a whole thing, such as the word “faces” which refers to “people” in “there were so
many familiar faces today”. Hypernyms is a broad word that contains words with precise
meanings, for instance, the word “color” is a hypernym of “blue”. Hyponyms, however, are
specified words that are included in other words. For example, a “table” is considered a
hyponym of “furniture”.
3.5.1.2 Reference
Halliday and Hassan (1976) believe that any association between an element and its
source is called a reference. There are three kinds of reference; personal, demonstrative and
comparative. Personal reference occurs when it is being referred to a particular person by
using pronouns within a text. Personal reference could be divided into personal pronouns,
like “he”, “they”, and “them”, and possessive pronouns, such as “their”, “his”, and “her”.
Demonstrative is another type of reference, it can be either definite article “the” or “this”,
“that”, “these”, “those” or adverbs “here”, “there”, “now” and “then”. Comparative reference,
according to Halliday and Hassan, refers to similar referential devices indirectly. This
includes adjectives and adverbs, for instance, “better”, “equally” and “likewise”.
3.5.1.3 Conjunctions
Conjunctions were features that could join sentences together that create semantic
relations. As said by Halliday and Matthiessen (2014), conjunctions could split into three
broad categories; elaboration, extension, and enhancement. Elaboration contains three main
divisions. The first conjunction is clarifying that can be divided into corrective, dismissive,
distractive, resumptive, particularizing, summative, and verificative, like “actually” and “in
short” conjunctions. The second conjunction is called appositives that are expository, such as

26
“in other words, that is”. The third conjunction is exemplifying, like “for example”.
Extension involves three different divisions; additive, that are positive or negative,
adversative and varying extensions that is sub-divided into alternative, replacive and
subtractive, for example “and”, “but” and “instead”. Enhancement contains four different
aspects. First, temporal, which can be simple or complex. Second is causal-conditional, such
as “otherwise” and “soon”. The third is the manner that includes comparative and means.
Finally, matter, which can be positive or negative.
3.5.1.4 Substitution
Substitution is when an element, within a text, substitutes another. Substitution is
similar to Ellipses in the sense of lacking three different kinds; nominal, verbal or a clausal.
However, substitution substitutes the absent part while ellipses keep it empty (Halliday and
Hassan, 1976; Halliday and Matthiessen, 2014). When a noun or a noun phrase is being
replaced by another element is called Nominal substitution. For example, “All the letters
were on the table. We promptly wrote one” (“one” equals “letter”). However, when a verb or
a verb phrase is substituted by another element it is named a Verbal substitution, such as “He
remembered his long-ago memories. He remembered his childhood too”. As for clause
substitution, it occurs when a particular clause is replaced by another. For instance, speaker
A: ” it is going to snow”, speaker B:”that is right”.
3.5.1.5 Ellipses
Halliday and Hassan (1976) called Ellipses ‘empty’ substitution while no other
element takes the empty place (p.88). Ellipsis shortens the sentence due to an occurrence of a
repetition of an element in texts. An element is omitted because it was previously mentioned
in an earlier written sentence. This helps a text to become more cohesive. Ellipsis can be
classified into three different kinds as well: nominal, verbal and clausal. The noun phrases

27
ellipsis, in the following example, is between brackets. “John lived in a desert, (John) was
going to look for water, and suddenly fell into a giant hole”. Verbal ellipsis, such as “Do you
think ice cream is good or (you think is) bad?”. Another example that includes ellipsis as a
clause, “who is the principle of this school?” “One of the greatest men” (is the principle of
this school).
3.5.2 Writing assessment scale
The goal of using a writing assessment scale, in this study, was to mark the students'
performances and writing quality. This paper used the IELTS writing assessment scale,
which included 9 bands for evaluating essays. The scale involved four criteria; Task
Achievement, Coherence and Cohesion, Lexical Resource, and Grammatical Range and
Accuracy. Each criterion has a number of characteristics. For the students to score high in
writing, for example band 7, their essays needed to include the features of that band in all
four criteria (see Appendix C). For example, in achieving band 6 in writing, regarding the
Task Achievement criterion, students’ essays should have addressed all parts of the task. As
for Coherence and Cohesion, the information and ideas provided should be arranged
coherently while the progression of their essays is clear and orderly. Lexical Resource, and
Grammatical Range and Accuracy involved using a sufficient variety of vocabulary for the
task as well as using a combination of both, simple and complex sentence structures.
3.6

Validity and Reliability of instruments

3.6.1 Validity of instruments
This paper followed Mackey and Gass’s (2016) three sides of validity; face, content
and construct validity concerning the cohesive analysis tools. Face validity was verified by
the general application of the scheme, the way it appears to analyze the students’ essays for
cohesive devices. By following Halliday and Matthiessen’s (2014) cohesion scheme, content

28
validity was accomplished by classifying cohesive devices as well as offering information
in detail. Construct validity is calculating the frequency of the students’ usage of the cohesive
devices by dividing the sub-total number of every used cohesive device by the total number
of its total occurrences and multiply it by 100.
Additionally, the IELTS Test measurements were also reviewed according to; face,
content and construct validities. Face validity was realized when the test appeared, to the testtaker, to assess what it is supposed to be testing. If test-takers admitted that their results were
precise, then face validity would be accepted (Alderson, Clapham and Wall, 2005). However,
in order for a test to be content valid, the test described its items that contained various
language structures and language skills. Oller (1979) clarified that content validity helped
test-takers show their language abilities, which was what the exam tended to evaluate.
Moreover, construct validity tested the relationship between test scores and test taker’s actual
language abilities.
3.6.2 Reliability of instruments
The reliability of the IELTS writing assessment was confirmed because test results
were considered stable. Usually, test takers score similar results when they take the same
exam again in different sessions with different administrations (Brown, 1996). Furthermore,
when the researcher evaluated the student’ essays, a three-year experienced trainer who used
to give EFL Saudi females introductory courses for IELTS exam preparations reviewed the
scores.
Repeatability and reproducibility were studied in order to confirm Reliability (Allen
& Knight, 2009). Regarding repeatability, the researcher conducted the analysis by choosing
randomly one of the students’ essays and analyzed them. Then, the researcher used the same
scheme to reanalyze that essay to confirm its frequencies and percentages.

29
Concerning reproducibility, a specialized instructor, who had more than a decade of
experience in teaching EFL students in King Saud University and was very familiar with the
cohesion of texts, helped in reexamining the essays while using the same schemes.
Furthermore, the researcher reviewed all the texts again in order to ensure accuracy.
3.7

Summary
This chapter offered the methodology used in this research, involving an overview of

participants, data collection, analysis procedures, instruments and their validity and
reliability. Chapter Four will examine students’ writing using the textual meta-function to
explore students’ language patterns to produce cohesive texts.

30

Chapter four

Results and data analysis
The earlier chapter shed light on the study’s method and procedure. Chapter four will
describe the SFL quantitative data analysis to answer the research questions. The findings of
the study will be stated as well.
4.1

Answering question 1 and 2

RQ1 What is the most frequently used cohesive device in Saudi female EFL undergraduate
students’ writings at Imam University?
RQ2 What are the frequencies of different types of cohesive devices in Saudi female EFL
undergraduate students’ writings at Imam University?
In order to answer the first and the second questions of the study, this chapter will
discuss the most obvious overall trend of the cohesive devices the students used. After that,
the occurrences of every of Halliday and Hasan’s (1976) cohesive devices; reference,
ellipses, substitution, conjunction and lexical cohesion and their subcategories were each
described separately and in detail.
As shown in Table 4.1 and figure 4.1, the most frequently used cohesive device was
lexical cohesion, with the percentage of 48.3% The second most frequently used was
reference, occurring 37.4% The third is Conjunctions with the percentage of 13.9% The low
percentage of substitution was 0.4% followed by the least used cohesive device, which was
ellipses 0.05%
Table 4. 1
Total of cohesive devices

31
Cohesive Device

Frequency

Percentage

Lexical Cohesion

2966

48.3%

Reference

2298

37.4%

Conjunctions

853

13.9%

Substitution

24

0.4%

Ellipses

2

0.03%

Total

6143

100%

Figure 4. 1 Cohesive devices
4.1.1 Lexical Cohesion
The most frequently used cohesive device stated in this study’s data parallels to
lexical cohesion with the percentage of 48.3% Table 4.2 indicates that the most subcategory
used of the lexical cohesion device was repetition that was occurred 1916 times. The repeated
content words were related to the topic of the essay that was given to the students. The most
repeated word that was written in the texts 439 times was the word “Social” followed by the
word “people”, which was written 347 times. Other words, such as “Networking, Sites,
Negative, Media, Impact, Time, and Society”, each was repeated more than a hundred times.
Meronym came second, which occurred 521 times. This shows the words that were
part of a whole, for example, “Sites” is part of (>) “Social Networking” and “Social media” >

32
“Technology”. Moreover, 203 Synonym words were found in the students’ essays, such as
“Many/ a lot”, “reason/ cause” and “people/ individuals”. Also, students’ essays involved 136
Hypernyms like “Chatting apps” as a general term and “Whatsapp” as a hyponym, which is
more specific. There were also 105 of antonyms found in the students’ essays. For instance,
the word “Positive” and its opposite, “negative”, “good” and “Bad” “bright” and “dark”. The
least number of occurrences was 87 of Hyponym words, such as “Messages, Youtube,
Snapchat, Twitter and Facebook”.
Table 4. 2
Lexical Cohesion
Subcategory

Examples

Frequency

Percentage

Repetition

Social (439), People (347), Networking

1914

64.5%

521

17.6%

203

6.8%

136

4.6%

(215), Sites (167), Negative (160), Media
(146), Impact (131), Time (131), Society
(103), Network (75).
Meronym

Sites (167)> Accounts (8) >Social
Networking (198)>, Social media
(141)>Technology (7).

Synonym

Many (112)/ a lot (42), reason (21)/ cause
(10), people (347)/ individuals (55), think
(36)/ believe (39), United (1)/ gathered (1),
fear (1)/ concern (2), impact (131)/ effect
(71), harmful (10)/damaging (1), post
(3)/share (14),
False (2)/ wrong (9)

Hypernym

Network (75), Parents(11), Network

33
sites(17), Chatting apps (1),
generations(6), Web (1), Education(8),
Religion(1) Applications(13), Device(2),
Country(1).
Antonym

Positive (37)/ negative (160), good (58)/

105

3.5%

87

3%

2966

100%

Bad (68), bright (3)/dark (3), more (42)/
less (2), agree (21)/reject (1), give(8)/
take(18)/ young(4)/old(3), harmful(10),
harmless(3)/ advantages(5)/
disadvantage(5), strong(1)/weak(1)
Hyponym

Messages(1), Youtube (6) Snapchat (22),
Twitter (15), Facebook(22), Whatsapp(3),
Edmodo (1) Phones(17).
TOTAL

Figure 4. 2 Lexical Cohesion
4.1.2 Reference
The second frequently used cohesive device, by the students, was reference with the
percentage of 37.4% Personal references, demonstratives, and comparatives were all used in

34
the students’ essays. However, the most subcategory used was the personal pronoun
reference (41.5%). As shown in Table 4.3 and figure 4.3, the personal pronoun “it” occurred
324 times in the students’ texts. Other examples of personal pronouns were “He”, “She”,
“They” and “I”. The second frequently used reference was the definite demonstrative
reference (41.2%). The definite article “The” was written 499 times. As for, the comparative
reference, it occurred with the percentage of 5.3%. The least number of occurrence was the
word “Else” that was used only twice throughout students’ essays.
Table 4. 3
Reference
Subcategory

Tie Type

Examples

Frequency

Total

Percentage

Personal

Pronouns

It

324

953

41.5%

They

171

You

122

We

86

I

78

Them

73

One

34

Us

28

He

13

Her

11

Him

7

Me

5

She

1

Their

124

275

11.97%

reference

Possessives

35

Demonstrative

Definite

Reference

Comparative reference

TOTAL

Our

79

His

30

My

27

Its

13

Mine

1

Theirs

1

The

499

That

190

These

83

There

75

This

64

Here (now)

19

Those

9

Then

9

Other

51

More

42

Different

16

Same

6

Better

3

Less

2

Else

2
2298

948

41.2%

122

5.3%

100%

36

Figure 4. 3 References
4.1.3 Conjunctions
As Table 4.4 has listed Halliday & Matthiessen’s (2014) the three main kinds of
conjunctions; extension, enhancement and elaboration. It clarifies that the most frequently
used conjunction found in students’ essays was extension with the percentage of 71.2%. The
positive additive conjunction that was from the extention subcategory, “and” was written
down 454 times. The other positive additive conjunctions were two-thirds of “Also” and
“Furthermore”, which was used only twice throughout the students’ essays. As for the
Adversative conjunctions, “But” was seen 65 times and “However” occurred a dozen times.
The second frequently used conjunction was temporal, which was a subcategory of
extention with the percentage of 9.3% From sequential and the concluding conjunctions, the
highest number of occurrences was the word “Conclusion” that was written 19 times. The
lowest was the simple sequential conjunction “Then” that was used 9 times. Also, one
example of the simple causal conjunction, the word “because” that was used 59 times with
the percentage of 6.9%
The third most used was the enhancement conjunction with the percentage of 8.8%
The only example found for the positive manner enhancement conjunction was “There” that
was used 75 times.

37
The percentage of the elaboration conjunction was 3.75% The exemplifying
appositive elaboration shown by the words “for example” that occurred 22 times, and “for
instance” that was used only once throughout the students’ essays. One expository appositive
elaboration was “That is” that occurred 4 times. As, for the word “Actually”, the verification
clarification elaboration conjunction was used 5 times.
Table 4. 4
Conjunctions
Subcategory

Tie type

Sub-tie type

Examples

Frequency

Total

Percentage

Extension

Additive

Positive

And

454

608

71.2%

Also

75

Furthermore

2

But

65

However

12

Adversative

Causal

Simple

Because

59

59

6.9%

Temporal:

Sequential

Second

15

79

9.3%

First

14

Then

9

Conclusion

19

Finally

12

In the end

10

Simple

Conclusive

Enhancement

Matter

Positive

There

75

75

8.8%

Elaboration

Appositive

Exemplifying

For example

22

32

3.75%

For instance

1

38

Clarification

Expository

That is

4

Verification

Actually

5

TOTAL

853

100%

Figure 4. 4 Cojunctions
4.1.4 Substitution
The second least cohesive tie used in the data was a substitution that occurred 24
times (see Table 4.5). There was very little difference between substitution and ellipses.
According to Halliday and Hassan (1976) “Ellipses is substitution by zero” (p. 142). The
Nominal substitution was the only kind of substitution found in the data. The Nominal
substitution “One” substituted the head noun in the sentence. An example that was taken
from the data was the substitution “One” in the following sentence “The bright side is equal
to the dark one”. The word one here substitutes the noun “side”.
Table 4. 5
Substitution
Subcategory

Examples

Frequency

Percentage

Nominal

One

24

100%

24

100%

TOTAL

39
4.1.5 Ellipses
The cohesive Ellipses occurred only twice throughout the data, which was the least
frequently used. Numerative Nominal ellipsis was the only types of ellipses that was found.
For example the word “more” in “It affects people positively and also negatively. I see that
its negative side is much more”. “More” is an ellipsis of the form “more ones”.
Table 4. 6
Ellipses
Subcategory

Tie Type

Examples

Frequency

Percentage

Nominal

Numerative

More

2

100%

2

100%

TOTAL

Table 4.7 clarifies the main findings of the most frequently used cohesive device in
the data to the least. The most prominent used cohesive device was lexical cohesion,
specifically repetition then reference, conjunction, substitution and lastly ellipsis.
Table 4. 7
Summary
Cohesive

Sub-category

Frequency

Total

Percentage

Lexical

Repetition

1914

2966

48.3%

Cohesion

Meronym

521

Synonym

203

Hypernym

136

Antonym

105

Hyponym

87

Personal (Pronouns- Possessives)

1228

2298

37.4%

devices

Reference

40

Conjunction

Demonstratives (Definite)

948

Comparatives

122

Extension (Additive-Adversative-

746

853

13.9%

Causal- Temporal)
Enhancement (matter)

75

Elaboration (Appositive- Clarification)

32

Substitution

Nominal

24

24

0.4%

Ellipses

Nominal (Numerative)

2

2

0.03%

4.2

Answering question 3

RQ3 What is the relationship between Saudi female EFL undergraduate students’ use of
cohesive devices and the quality of their writing at Imam University?
In answering the third question of this paper, the students’ essays were analyzed
according to length and score. After that, five of the students’ essays were chosen to find the
correlation between word count as well as their scores and the usage of cohesive devices.
Table 4.8 shows how the students’ essays varied according to length. The longest
essay covered 290 words and the shortest had only 47 words. This means that when students
wrote their essays in a forty-minute time limit, their performances diverse completely
towards the topic of the essay. The students’ essays that contained the most number of words
were nearly five times longer than those containing the least words. After using IELTS
writing scale for evaluating students’ essays, the highest score the students achieved from
writing the argumentative essay was 5, whereas the lowest band was 1. However, the average
was 3.
Table 4. 8
Summary of students’ texts

41
Number of texts

Word counts

Maximum score

Minimum score

Average score

100

14200

5

1

3

The five essays in table 4.9 included the longest and the shortest in terms of word
count. As for the scores, five different bands were chosen for this analysis; from the lowest
score 1 to the highest score 5.
Table 4. 9
Relationship between the use of cohesive devices and writing quality
Student Number

Score

Word count

Cohesive devices

1

5

163

34

2

4

290

54

3

3

117

28

4

2

72

19

5

1

47

11

Table 4. 10
Pearson correlation coefficient

Scores

Scores
1

Ties
.781

Length
.742

Ties

.781

1

.993**

Length

.742

.993**

1

**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
Pearson’s correlation coefficients were done in order to measure the relationship
between students’ scores, word counts and their usage of cohesive ties. Findings show that
there was a strong positive relationship between the students’ scores and word counts (r =

42
.742, p<.01). It was also revealed a strong positive relationship between the use of cohesive
ties and the scores (r = .781, p<.01), and between cohesive ties and the length of the students’
essays (r = .993, p<.01).
4.2.1.1 Relationship between the scores and the usage of the cohesive devices
Figure 4.5 shows that there was a strong uphill positive linear relationship between
the students’ scores and their usage of cohesive devices. The frequency of the use of Halliday
and Hasan’s (1976) cohesive devices were significantly correlated with the students’ writing
performance. The student who scored 4 had the highest frequency usage of cohesive devices
among the rest, which was 54. The score of 5 was the second highest in the usage of cohesive
devices, 34. The students who scored the lowest had the least number of cohesive devices.

Figure 4. 5. Correlation Between Writing Scores and Cohesive Devices

43
4.2.1.2 Relationship between Word count and cohesive devices
Figure 4.6 shows the correlation between the two variables, which were word count
and cohesive devices. The findings revealed that there was a strong positive linear
relationship between the length of the students’ texts and their usage of the cohesive ties.

Figure 4. 6 Correlation Between Word Count and Cohesive Devices

4.3

Summary
The results of the frequency of cohesive devices as well as their relationship with the

student’s writing performance were described in this chapter. The upcoming chapter, chapter
five, would list conclusions and recommendations for this study.

44
Chapter five

Discussion and implications
This chapter concludes this paper by discussing the study’s findings, limitations as
well as recommendations for further research.
5.1
5.1.1

Discussion
The students’ usage of cohesive devices
The findings of this study will be discussed in relation to the research questions that

were previously specified. The most frequently used cohesive device written by EFL Saudi
students was lexical cohesion, especially repetition. Also, Kafes (2012) stressed the point that
most Turkish students, in English writing, used repetition. In a productive skill, students tend
to repeat words in their writing because they have a limited number of lexicon. EFL Saudi
undergraduate students learning English do not have a vocabulary repertoire to help them
paraphrase their ideas using other terms. Another reason is because repetition is an easy
process for students to engage in their writing (Chanyoo, 2018). Student writers who were
not considered advanced or skilled in writing try their best to show the reader that they could
manage the topic of the essay by using this strategy. As they tend to progress in their writing,
repeating words would help them to stay around the main idea of the topic.
The students need linguistic devices to be alongside them when they produce their own
essays because they find it hard to regain their own while writing. Thus, a teacher who is
teaching a writing course should assist the students to acquire several cohesive tools to let
their written ideas flow easily. Palmer (1999), whose findings also indicated that his nonnative English students used more repetition to create cohesion, recommended that teachers
should provide students with a variety of texts to read. This would assist the students to learn

45
more examples of many different cohesive devices to use in writing instead of making their
essays sound boring.
Other than repeating words, the students used words with similar meanings in order to
connect their ideas together. For instance, a student wrote “individuals” for “people”.
However, there is a particular continuum or a scale that is related to synonymy. In terms of
meaning, there are words, which are similar or close relative to the main term and words that
are more divergent. For example, the word “fear” would hardly be a synonym for the word
“harmful”. The students need to learn that the closer they get to the keyword, the more
coherent their piece would be. The teachers need to help the students find the closest meaning
to what they intend to say. In addition, teachers should provide the students with many texts
to read to help them understand that they can still handle the central topic of their essays
while writing by using many different cohesive devices other than synonyms. The students’
repetition of certain words and their usage of synonyms, antonyms, hyponyms, hypernyms,
and meronyms have enriched their essays with lexical cohesion and added more focus to their
essays.
As findings indicate, the students used a variety of references in order to help them in
referring back and forth to particular aspects in their essays. References mostly refer back to
what was written at a clausal or sentence level (Johnson, 1992). Instead of repeating words,
the Saudi students could make connections between what they previously mentioned and the
current information by a term that clarified their ideas. Moreover, the massive number of
personal pronouns used shows that the student writers are unique because usually, writers do
not use the word “I” or “we” to refer to themselves. The students used the anaphoric relation
type only because they tend to refer to aspects that were already mentioned in their essays.
Also, it was considered simpler than the cataphoric relation type where it refers to what
comes later in their essays. They did not use this type because it was too advanced for them.

46
However, when the students add references to their texts, such as anaphoric relations and
definite references, they were supporting what they wrote by offering precise information.
The students made it clear that the information they mentioned was a definite one because of
the massive occurrences of the definite article “The”. Coskun (2011) states that Uzbek and
Turkish students, who used a very small amount of references, received low writing scores.
The third most prominent used cohesive device by the Saudi students was the
conjunction device. The conjunction “and” and its huge number of occurrences in the data
demonstrate its popularity in creating cohesion. The overuse of the conjunction “and”
supports Chanyoo’s (2013) study in stating that FL students would rather use conjunctions
because they contain literal meaning. Students do not have to further explore the
conjunctions’ meaning. Halliday and Matthiessen (2014) state that “and” was considered as
an extending tie that is positive as well as additive. The conjunction “and” tends to lengthen
what was written by giving more information. It is positive since it serves as a backup detail
that never contradicts what the writer previously mentioned. The huge number of times it
occurred might be because of what McLaughlin (2006) stated that the conjunction “and” is
the first to acquire when denoting addition. This signals that the students had a low level of
proficiency in using conjunctions. Moreover, it was clear that the students were trying to add
more information about what they know about the topic. They included logical as well as
creative ideas and clarified them with examples of their own daily life. When the students use
the conjunction “and” in essay writing, it shows that the students understand how to add to
what is written. Also, students use more conjunctions to link words or clauses together and
not worry about their usage of conjunctions if it is on a word level or a clausal level.
Conjunctions could be both grammatical and lexical cohesion.
The ellipses and the substitution were among the least used cohesive ties in EFL
Saudi student’s writing. According to Halliday and Hassan (1976), the Substitution device

47
does not tend to provide more meaning, it only refers back to what was already written. It is
not like reference though because a reference is seen as meaning whereas substitution is
grammatical wording. When the students used the Nominal substitution, it shows that they
were supporting their own ideas by using something else instead of writing the same words
they already used. As for ellipses, language users tend to use these forms instead of the
original form in informal settings (Halliday and Hassan, 1976). Surprisingly though, the
ellipses tie was hardly used by the students in this study. The reason behind this is not
because they wanted to be more informative, but actually, they do not know how to use the
simple styles of language usage. Instead of using a word and assuming that the reader would
understand without saying, they tend to write what they refer to again. Apparently, Saudi
students do not know how to omit or substitute terms to make it easier for the reader to link
their ideas. They believe that in order to write in proper English, they need not delete words
but express them clearly. Although, Coskun (2011) investigated how 5th graders used
cohesive devices in writing in Uzbekistan and Turkey. The most frequently used cohesive
device was ellipsis and the least used devices were references. There might be a reason
behind this oddness. Saudi students focus on nouns in their writing. So, they tend to use
repetition to form connections in their texts to make it coherent. As for Uzbek and Turkish
students, they never make connections through inter-clausal semantic signals of repetition.
Instead, they make associations by using inter-clausal syntactic signs, like ellipses. The
difference lied on the difference in their mother tongue.
The students were familiar with different kinds of cohesive devices because they tied
to use some of them in writing their essays. Yet, it was not enough to only know that the
students used lexical cohesion, reference and conjunctions approximately 800 to 3000 times.
For instance, some of the students wrote the definite article “the” so many times, while others

48
rarely used it. This led to the importance of exploring the relationship between the
frequency of cohesive devices and the students’ writing quality.
5.1.2 The students’ writing quality
Saudi students’ writing quality, in this study, was evaluated using the IELTS writing
scale in which writing experts highly valued. Findings show that the students with the high
scores used more cohesive devices in their essays. Basically, a writer could accomplish a
high-essay-writing score when a large number of cohesive devices were employed. The
findings of the present study were similar to Chanyoo’s (2018) study on Thai undergraduate
students’ essay writing. It was discovered that there was a positive correlation between the
Thai students’ scores and the number of cohesive devices used. However, a student cannot
learn to count how many times they used cohesive devices to achieve a better grade but they
need to learn how to apply appropriate cohesion in lexical and at a clause level. On the
contrary, the researchers Liu, M. and Braine, G. (2005) stated that the correlations between
their student’ writing scores and the overall number of cohesive devices were covaried (r =
0.315).
Additionally, the findings indicate that there was a strong positive relationship
between length and cohesive devices. When students tend to use more words in their writing,
the number of cohesive devices increases. Similarly, Chanyoo (2018) discovered that the
word counts in Thai undergraduate students’ essays were positively correlated with the total
usage of cohesive devices (r = .867). Particularly, there was a positive relationship between
word count and repetitions (r = .799) as well as word count and references (r = .771). There
might be a reason behind this correlation. The longer an essay is, the more lexical items it
contains (Liu, M. and Braine, G., 2005).

49
5.2

Limitations
This study faced some difficulties in generalizing its results on all Saudi female

undergraduates for several reasons. The first reason is that the students knew that their essays
were not graded and therefore they hardly pay any effort to write at a proper level. This could
be one of the limitations of this study. The second limitation is the little number of similar
studies. This could affect how the qualities of cohesion in the essays were being judged.
When there are more studies that cover a similar issue, it would produce reliable results.
Furthermore, the previous studies mentioned in this paper did not exactly relate to what
Halliday and Hasan (1976) proposed because they were focused on vocabulary development
that could widely differ reliant on numerous reasons. However, this study mainly focused on
the textual meta-function of the students’ essays. This might also be considered as a
limitation because there are other thematic relations of cohesive devices that needed to be
studied. Other SFL tools, such as register, mood, and modality needs to be further explored to
discover the ideational, interpersonal, and textual functions of the texts.
5.3

Implications
This study recommends enrolling EFL Saudi students in a writing course where a

teacher focuses on how to make connections between sentences to produce the unity of a
written text. Saudi students need to experience the whole process of writing; drafting,
revising and proofreading in the classroom as professional writers. In writing courses, FL
teachers should improve the students’ writing competence by letting the students practice
more in writing. FL teachers need to provide many examples to help the students learn the
suitable uses of cohesive devices.
While conducting this study, the research came up with some recommendations for
further research. First, this study investigated the students’ writings at Imam University; it

50
would be compelling to conduct the same study at other universities in Saudi Arabia.
Second, This study was conducted on a small-size sample (100 students). It would be useful
to examine a larger-size sample to generalize findings.
5.4

Conclusion
This paper aimed to explore the usage of the cohesive devices in essay writing among

undergraduate students in Al-Imam Muhammad Ibn Saud Islamic University in Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. 100 texts were analyzed by using systemic functional linguistics (SFL),
particularly in terms of linguistic features that have to do with cohesion. All of Halliday and
Hasan’s (1976) five types of cohesive devices; lexical cohesion, reference, conjunction,
substitutions, and ellipses were found in the students’ essays. These devices tend to tie
aspects of texts together in order to make them sound coherent. The most frequently used
cohesive tie was lexical cohesion with its highly occurred subcategory repetition. EFL Saudi
undergraduate students tend to repeat because they lack English vocabulary repertoire.
However, the least used cohesive tie was an ellipsis. Saudi students do not omit words from
their texts because they lack the simple usage of the English language. In addition, five of the
essays were chosen to find the correlation between the length and the scores of the students’
essays and cohesive devices. There was a strong positive relationship between the usage of
cohesive devices and the students’ writing quality. Findings indicate that the students
received a high score in writing, had more cohesive devices in their essays. There was also a
correlation between the length of the students’ texts and the use of cohesive ties. The more
word counts their essays contained, the more cohesive devices were used.

51
References
Abusharkh, B. (2012). Cohesion and coherence in the essay writing of Palestinian college
students (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). Hebron University, Palestine.
Alarcon, B. J., & Morales, K. N. S. (2011). Grammatical cohesion in students’ argumentative
essay. Journal of English and Literature, 2(5), 114–127.
Al-Buainain, H. (2009). Students’ writing errors in EFL: A case study. Journal of Faculty of
Education: University of Alexandria, 19(1), 311–351.
Alderson, J., Clapham, C., & Wall, D. (2005). Item writing and moderation. Language test
construction and evaluation (pp. 40–72).
Al-Jarf, R. (2001). Processing of cohesive devices by EFL Arab college students. Foreign
Language Annals, 34 (2), 141–150.
Allen, S., & Knight, J. (2009). A method of collaboratively developing and validating a
rubric. International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 3 (2), 1–
17.
Al-Seghayer, K. (2011). English teaching in Saudi Arabia: Status, issues, and challenges.
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia: Hala Print Company.
Al-Shatarat, Y. (1990). Errors in cohesive devices made by Jordanian intermediate
community college students in the English language specialization (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). University of Jordan, Jordan.
Al-Yaari, S. A., Al Hammadi, F. S., Alyami, S. A., & Almaflehi, N. (2013). Using English
discourse markers (EDMs) by Saudi EFL learners: A descriptive approach.
International Journal of English Language, 1(2), 1–26.
Bastrukmen, H., & von Randow, J. (2014). Guiding the reader (or not) to re-create
coherence: Observations on postgraduate student writing in an academic
argumentative writing task. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 16, 14–22.

52
Brown, J. D. (1996). Testing in language programs. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall
Regents.
Butt, D., Fahey, R., Feez, S., Spinks, S., & Yallop, C. (2000). Using functional grammar: An
explorer’s guide (2nd ed.). Sydney, Australia: National Centre for English Language
Teaching and Research.
Cai, J. (1996). Shiju zudwen fa [Ten-sentence composition]. Shanghai: Fudan Daxue
Chubanshe [Fudan University Press].
Chanyoo, N. (2013). A corpus-based study of connectors and thematic progression in the
academic writing of Thai EFL students (Unpublished doctoral dissertation).
University of Pittsburgh, USA.
Chanyoo, N. (2018). Cohesive devices and academic writing quality of Thai undergraduate
students. Journal of Language Teaching and Research, 9(5), 994–1001.
http://dx.doi.org/10.17507/jltr.0905.13
Chen, Y. (2008). An investigation of EFL students’ use of cohesive devices (Unpublished
doctoral dissertation). National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan.
Coskun, E. (2011). Cohesion compositions of Turkish and immigrant students. Educational
Science: Theory and Practice, 11 (1), 892–899.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches (4th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Crossly, S. A., Kyle, K., & McNamara, D. S. (2016). The development and use of cohesive
devices in L2 writing and their relations to judgments of essay quality. Journal of
Second Language Writing, 32, 1–16.
Crossley, S. A., & McNamara, D. S. (2010). Cohesion, coherence and expert evaluation of
writing proficiency. Proceedings from the 32nd Annual Conference of Cognitive
Science Society.

53
Dastjerdi, H. V., & Samian, S. H. (2011). Quality of Iranian EFL learners’ argumentative
essays: Cohesive devices in focus. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 2 (2),
65–76.
Deraney, P. (2015). Analysis of systemic functional linguistics preparatory year writing in a
Saudi university. Teaching and learning in Saudi Arabia (pp. 49–70).
doi:10.1007/978-94-6300-205-9_3
Derewianka, B., & Jones, P. (2012). Teaching language in context. South Melbourne,
Australia: Victoria Oxford University Press.
Droga, L., & Humphrey, L. (2003). Grammar and meaning: An introduction for primary
teachers. N. S. W. Berry (Ed.). Australia: Target Texts.
Eggins, S. (2004). Introduction to systemic functional linguistics. London, England: A&C
Black.
Emilia, E. (2014). Introducing functional grammar. Bandung: Pustaka Jaya.
Feez, S. (1999). Text-based syllabus design. TESOL in Context, 9 (1). 11–14.
Halliday, M. A. K. (2007). Language and education. J. J. Webster (Ed.). New York:
Continuum.
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Edward Arnold
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman.
Halliday, M. A. K., and Matthiessen, C. (2014). An introduction to functional grammar (4th
ed.). London: Arnold.
Humphrey, S., Droga, L., & Feez, S. (2012). Grammar and meaning [Adobe Digital Edition].
Newtown, Australia: Primary English Teaching Association Australia (PETAA).
Retrieved from www.petaa.edu.au.
Hyland, K. (2007). Language, literacy, and writing instruction. Journal of Second Language
Writing, 16, 148–164.

54
Johnson, P. (1992). Cohesion and coherence in compositions in Malay and English. RELC
Journal, 23 (2), 1–17.
Kafes, H. (2012). Lexical cohesion: An issue only in the foreign language? English Language
Teaching, 5, 83–94.
Kargozari, R. et al. (2012). Cohesive devices in argumentative, descriptive, and expository
writing produced by Iranian EFL university students. Modern Journal of Language
Teaching Methods, 2 (3).
Khalil, A. (1989). A study of cohesion and coherence in Arab EFL college students’ writing.
System, 17 (3), 359–371.
Kharma, N. (1985). Problems of writing composition in EFL. Abhath Al-Yarmouk, 3 (1) 7–
29.
Khuwaileh, A. A., & Al Shoumali, A. (2000). Writing errors: A study of the writing ability of
Arab learners of academic English and Arabic at university. Language, Culture and
Curriculum, 13 (2), 174–183. doi:10.1080/07908310008666597
Liu, M., & Braine, G. (2005). Cohesive features in argumentative writing produced by
Chinese undergraduates. System, 33 (4), 623–636.
Mackey, A., & Gass, S. (2016). Second language research: Methodology and design. New
York: Routledge.
Martin, J. R., & Rose, D. (2008). Genre relations: Mapping culture. Oakville, CT: Equinox
Publishing Ltd.
McLaughlin, S. (2006). Introduction to language development. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson
Delmar Learning.
National Commission on Writing (2003). The neglected “r”: The need for a writing
revolution. Retrieved from www.collegeboard.com

55
O’Donnell, M. (2011). Introduction to systemic functional linguistics for discourse
analysis. Language, function and cognition (pp. 2011–12). Retrieved from
http://web.uam.es/departamentos/filoyletras/filoinglesa/Courses/LFC11/LFC-2011Week1.pdf
Oller, J. W. (1979). Language tests at school. London: Longman.
Paiva, K. S. F. M., & Lima, E.F. (2011). Systemic functional linguistics as a desirable
approach to L2 writing evaluation: A case study. Retrieved from
http://www.letras.ufg.br/up/25/o/VIISLE_23.pdf
Palmer, J. (1999). Coherence and cohesion in the language classroom: The use of lexical
reiteration and pronominalisation. RELC Journal, 30 (6), 61–85.
Ramasawmy, N. (2004). Conjunctive cohesion and relational coherence in students’
compositions (Unpublished doctoral dissertation). University of South Africa,
Pretoria.
Rose, D., & Martin, J. (2012). Learning to write, reading to learn: Genre, knowledge, and
pedagogy in the Sydney school. Sheffield: Equinox.
Rothery, J. (1996). Making changes: Developing an educational linguistics. In: R. Hasan &
G. Williams (Eds.), Literacy in society (pp. 86–123). New York: Addison Wesley
Longman Limited.
Sayidina, A. (2010) Transfer of L1 Cohesive Devices and Transition Words into L2
Academic Texts: The Case of Arab Students. RELC Journal, 41 (3), p253.
Shadish, W.R., T.D. Cook and D.T. Campbell (2002). Experimental and quasi- experimental
designs for generalized causal inference. Boston: Houghton Mif- flin.
Sidighi, F., & Heydari, P. (2012). Cohesion analysis of L2 writing: The case of Iranian

56
undergraduate EFL learners. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 3(2), 557572.
Thompson, G. (2004). Introducing Functional Grammar. 2nd Ed. London: Arnold.
Tshotsho, B. (2014). Assessing students’ academic writing using systemic functional
linguistics at a university in South Africa. International Journal of Education Science,
6(3), 425-433.
Wenxing, Y. & Ying, S. (2012). The Use of Cohesive Devices in Argumentative Writing by
Chinese EFL Learners at Different Proficiency Levels. Linguistics and Education,
23(1), 31-48.

57
Appendixes
Appendix A
Consent form for students
Imam Muhammed bin Saud Islamic University
College of Languages &Translation
English Department

A Consent form for your participation in a Writing Research
I am a graduate student working on my master’s thesis at Al Imam Muhammed Ibn
Saud Islamic University in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. The topic of my study is “Descriptive
Analysis of Cohesive Patterns in Saudi EFL College Students’ Writing at Imam University”.
My intention is to conduct research on female undergraduate students’ writings in order to
investigate their frequent use of cohesive devices. This is a request for your participation in
my study.
If you agree to participate, I will give you a topic to write about in 40 minutes. There
is no risk if you choose to hand me your written essays because the research analysis results
will be anonymous and confidential. Your identity (name or student ID number) will be
removed. You can withdraw any moment without negative consequences.
For participation, sign your name below:
By signing I am saying that I am willing to participate in this study. The process of this
procedure was explained clearly and I understand what is required from me.
Signature:……………………………………..

58
Appendix B
Writing task
Imam Muhammed bin Saud Islamic University
College of Languages &Translation
English Department

You should spend about 40 minutes on this task.
Write about the following topic:
Many people believe that social networking sites (such as Facebook) have had a huge
negative impact on both individuals and society.
To what extent do you agree?

Give reasons for your answer and include any relevant examples from your own knowledge
or experience.

Write at least 250 words.

59
Appendix C
IELTS Writing Scale

60

