Running head: POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

1

A Relative Commitment Approach to Understanding Power in Romantic Relationships

Christopher J. Carpenter

Christopher J. Carpenter is an Associated Professor in the Department of Communication at
Western Illinois University. Correspondence to: Christopher J. Carpenter, Western Illinois
University, Department of Communication, 1 University Circle, 318 Memorial Hall, Macomb,
IL 61455, USA. E-mail: cj-carpenter2@wiu.edu Twitter @DrCJCarpenter

This is an Accepted Manuscript of an article published by Taylor & Francis Group in
Communication Studies 2017, available online: https://doi.org/10.1080/10510974.2016.1268639

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

2
Abstract

In some romantic relationships, one partner has more power over joint decisions than the other.
This study examines relative commitment as a key predictor of which partner has more power
and developed a model based on classic interdependence theory. A survey was conducted (N =
324) using new measures of the key variables to test the model. When desire for control was
high, relative commitment predicted self-perceived power, which predicted major and minor
decision making as well as dominant conflict strategies. These results are consistent with the
proposed modification of interdependence theory concerning desire for control.

Keywords: Relative Commitment, Investment Model, Interdependence Theory, Romantic
Relationships, Power, Conflict

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

3

A Relative Commitment Approach to Understanding Power in Romantic Relationships
Over 80 years ago, Waller (1934) published his in-depth analysis of the dating scene at a
state college. The most influential of Waller’s observations concerned the relationship between
relative commitment in a given romantic relationship and power in that relationship. He noted,
“control follows the principle of least interest, i.e. that person controls who is less interested in
the continuation of the affair” (p. 733). This assertion has formed the basis of a great deal of
theorizing about power in relationships, including that of interdependence theory (Thibaut &
Kelly, 1959) and other related social exchange theories (e.g. Blau, 1964; Homans, 1961). These
theories all posit that one member of a romantic relationship will have more power over the other
if they are less interested in continuing the relationship.
Unequal balances of power have a wide variety of impacts on romantic relationships.
Several researchers (Drigotas, Rusbult, & Verette, 1999; Gray-Little & Burkes, 1983; TingToomey, 1984) have found relationships between how egalitarian a relationship is (i.e. equal
power) and how satisfied the members of that relationship are. Felmlee (1994) found that
relationships characterized by unequal power were more likely to end.
What is consistent across the variety of researchers who have examined the issue is the
causes of self-perceived power (SPP) are usually relative to one’s partner. As Waller (1934)
noted, it is not one’s absolute level of interest in remaining in a relationship that affects one’s
SPP, but one’s interest relative to what one perceives one’s partner to possess. In the current
investigation, it will be shown that perceived relative commitment will be well-suited to
predicting SPP in romantic relationships. Additionally, decision-making power as well as
dominant and submissive conflict styles will be discussed as outcomes and processes of SPP in
relationships. Another aspect missing from previous theorizing about power is inter-individual

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

4

variation in desire for control (Burger, 1992) such that being in a position of power (lower
commitment than one’s partner) may only result in SPP and other outcomes if the individual has
a preference for the control of others. Finally, Sprecher, Schmeeckle, and Felmlee (2006) argued
that if power is to be understood, stronger, multi-item measures of its predictors are required.
Therefore, this paper introduces new measures of the core constructs.
Relative Commitment and Self-Perceived Power
The core constructs will first be described before examining theoretical linkages between
them. Initially, self-perceived power (SPP) will be defined as the belief that in a particular
romantic relationship, one feels as though one is generally and consistently able to influence the
behavior of one’s partner more than one’s partner is able to influence one’s own. SPP is
described as a general ability to influence because it is not limited to particular domains in this
conceptualization. This choice reflects the theoretical stance that power is generalized rather than
specific. The definition of SPP used the term “consistently” based on the prediction that this
construct tends to be a stable aspect of a relationship over time. It could change as all things in
relationship can, but the individual who self-perceives this kind of power is assumed for the
purposes of this research to believe it to be unlikely to change in the near future.
Next, relative commitment will be described. Rusbult (1980) defined commitment as “the
probability that he/she will leave the relationship” (p. 174). Relative commitment is the extent to
which one believes that one is more or less committed to remaining in the relationship than one’s
partner. One can believe that both one and one’s partner are equally committed to remaining in
the relationship or one can believe that oneself or one’s partner is more strongly committed.
Relative commitment will be proposed as a direct antecedent to SPP within a particular
romantic relationship based on interdependence theorizing. The early social exchange theorist,

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

5

Blau (1964), proposed that, “The girl with whom a boy is in love has power over him, since his
eagerness to spend much time with her prompts him to make their time together especially
pleasant for her by acceding to her wishes” (p. 22). Blau argued that part of the impact relative
commitment has is based on the behavior of the more highly committed partner such that the
more highly committed partner is the one essentially giving power to the less committed partner.
By giving the low commitment partner power, the high commitment partner is attempting to
make the relationship more desirable and thus raise the low commitment partner’s level of
commitment.
Some researchers have attempted to capture power via a combination of social exchange
variables. Solomon and Samp (1998) argued that dependence power is the three-way interaction
between the respondent’s commitment level, the respondent’s perception of her or his partner’s
commitment level, and the partner’s access to quality relationship alternatives. The relative
commitment approach taken here instead offers several improvements on that method. First,
there is a single variable for relative commitment whose psychometric properties can be
individually assessed rather than attempting to measure the antecedent of power as a
combination of variables. Furthermore, in many cases, quality of alternatives may be redundant.
If Rusbult’s (1980) investment model is correct, then the quality of alternatives influences
relationship variables via commitment. In other words, quality of alternatives only affects SPP
because it affects commitment. If commitment is being assessed, quality of alternatives does not
theoretically add additional explanation. If an individual has high quality of alternatives, but
remains highly committed, the approach taken here suggests that such a person will not have
more SPP than someone who has low quality of alternatives and is highly committed. Either
way, the partner of such a person has no fear of that person leaving.

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

6

An interdependence theory expansion by Drigotas et al. (1999) argued that although level
of dependence is an important aspect of power, commitment is the more direct predictor of SPP.
Commitment is the expression of being dependent on someone else for the satisfaction of
relational needs. One may feel more or less dependent on one’s partner but the concrete
expression of that is ultimately the extent to which one wishes to remain in a relationship. Person
A might be somewhat dependent on her or his romantic partner, Person B. Yet, if A is more
willing to leave B than B is A, it is A who ultimately has higher SPP because the fear of
relational termination is what ultimately matters to B. Additionally, Drigotas et al. argued that
one might not be aware of dependence in a relationship but one is aware of commitment. So
despite traditional social exchange theories discussing degree of dependence as an aspect of
power (see Dunbar, 2015 for a review), this research follows Drigotas et al. and focuses on
relative commitment as the key antecedent of SPP. Therefore, the first hypothesis to be tested
proposes that relative commitment will be substantially related to SPP such that being less
committed than one’s partner will be associated with higher SPP.
Relationship Power and Decision Making
SPP is expressed in romantic relationships when one partner gets her or his way more
consistently than the other and is aware of it. Having SPP means that when decisions that affect
both partners need to be made and the partners disagree, one partner is usually more likely to
prevail over the other. When the decision only affects one member of the couple or when they
both agree, SPP is unlikely to be a factor. Decision making is often researched as an expression
of SPP in a relationship (Bentley, Galliger, & Ferguson, 2007; Drigotas et al., 1999; Falbo &
Peplau, 1980; Galliher, Rostosky, Welsh, & Kawaguchi, 1999) Consistent with this perspective,

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

7

Felmlee (1994) found that relative decision making in a relationship is a strong indicator of
power in that relationship.
This study will conceptualize two types of decision making: major and minor. Major
decisions are those that have a large impact or long-lasting impact on both members of the
relationship. Minor decisions are those that are unlikely to have an impact beyond a single day or
interaction. Some previous measures of decision making have been proposed that measured just
one type, combined the two, or left it unclear (Bently et al., 2007; Falbo & Peplau, 1980;
Grauerholz, 1987; Murstein & Adler, 1995; Oyamot, Fuglestad, & Snyder, 2010; SafiliosRothschild, 1976). As SPP is conceptualized as consistently getting one’s way, greater power
will be associated with increased likelihood of making decisions in both minor, everyday
situations and major, important situations. It is hypothesized for the current study that SPP will
be positively associated with both types of decision-making.
SPP and Conflict Strategies
Another predicted impact of SPP in romantic relationships concerns how romantic
partners communicate during conflict. Although decision making indicates who tends to win
conflicts, SPP is also likely to predict what kinds of communication strategies romantic partners
might use when their goals conflict. This investigation will examine the extent to which SPP
affects the frequency with which romantic partners use dominant and submissive conflict
strategies.
According to Zacchilli, Hendrick, and Hendrick (2009), dominance strategies are
characterized by trying to win conflicts and forcing one’s partner to agree with one’s position.
These strategies are hypothesized to be related to higher SPP as partners of a romantic
relationship who were in a low power position would be unlikely to use these strategies for fear

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

8

of pushing their partner away. Emerson’s (1962) analysis described power as the ability to
overcome resistance on the part of a target. Believing that one has the higher SPP enables one to
use the kind of dominant, direct strategies described by Zacchilli et al. (2009) that include
making demands rather than putting forth the effort to try to convince one’s partner.
The hypothesis of linear relationships between SPP and dominance may contradict
Dunbar’s (2004) prediction of a curvilinear relationship between power and dominance derived
from dyadic power theory (DPT). Despite the elegance of DPT, there are several reasons to
doubt that the DPT prediction will be valid in all cases. Dunbar argued that high power people
would not need to use dominance because their position of power means that the weaker partner
would simply do what the stronger partner wants without needing to discuss it. Yet there will be
many cases in which a new situation develops or the stronger partner’s wishes change. Given
that the weaker partner is not a mind reader (cf. Bem, Palmer, & Broughton. 2001), the stronger
partner is more likely to openly make demands of the weaker partner than vice-versa.
Additionally, previous research found that when either partner acts in a dominant way, both
partners are less able to predict what the other partner wants and what they are expected to do
(Millar, Rogers-Millar, and Courtright, 1979). DPT’s predictions rely on the assertion that the
weaker partner is better able to predict their partner’s behavior, not less. These considerations led
to the current predictions of linear relationships.
Consistent with the current prediction, Dunbar and Burgoon (2005) found evidence of a
substantial, positive relationship between self-reported power and dominant behavior in an
observational study of dating and married couples (though that linear relationship may have been
due to a range restriction problem, and follow up work by Dunbar and Johnson from 2015 found
that there is some evidence that when the variance is enhanced with random assignment some of

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

9

the expected curvilinear effects appear). Similarly, Samp and Palevitz (2014) found that the
lower dependence was associated with a greater self-reported likelihood of confronting a partner
due to a potential relational transgression. On the other hand, Worley and Samp (2016) found
that DPT did explain the likelihood of participants voicing their feelings such that the likelihood
was highest at when power was equal. That research is consistent with the Millar et al. (1979)
finding that in non-dominant relationships the partners understand each other better. Feeling
comfortable raising issues with one’s partner may be a hallmark of equal power, but acting
dominant and demanding explanations for transgressions seems to be more likely to be
associated with high power. It may be that acting dominant and voicing feelings are separate
process.
Additionally, a parallel prediction to the dominance hypothesis is hypothesized for
submission. If low SPP individuals are trying to improve their partner’s rewards by acceding to
their wishes, they would be predicted to use submissive strategies when in conflict with their
partners. Zachilli et al. (2009) described submissive strategies as giving in to one’s partner and
trying to “satisfy my partner’s needs rather than my own” (p. 1081). These strategies would be
the most likely to be used by the lower SPP partner.
Moderation by Desire for Control
Previous research and theorizing on power in romantic relationships has neglected the
extent to which one partner even wishes to exert control over the other. Although the proposed
relationships are likely to be found for many people, low desire for control individuals may be an
exception. Being less committed to a relationship does not necessarily translate into dominant
outcomes if the less committed partner has a low desire for control in general. Being less

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

10

committed to the relationship than one’s partner gives one the means, but not the motive to
possess greater power in the relationship.
Specifically, the relationships between relative commitment and the other constructs
(SPP, decision making, and conflict strategies) are predicted to be moderated by the desire for
control (DC; Burger, 1992). DC refers to “the extent to which people generally are motivated to
see themselves in control of the events in their lives” (p. 6). Burger also notes that such a trait
generally causes some people to be “highly motivated to make the decisions in a relationship” (p.
6). Someone who has a very low DC will be unlikely to translate being less committed into SPP
in the relationship because they will not want to have control.
Although Burger (1992) suggested the possibility of high DC impacting power in
romantic relationships, no study (to the author’s knowledge) has examined the issue directly.
Burgoon and Dunbar (2000) called for more research on how personality can influence
dominance by examining social skills as a predictor. This study will therefore offer an extension
of previous work on power in romantic relationships by determining the extent to which the
personality trait of DC interacts with relative commitment such that the relationship between
relative commitment and, SPP, decision making, and conflict styles are only substantial when
DC is high but not when it is low.
Overview of the Proposed Models
In addition to the proposed bivariate and moderated bivariate relationships, this study will
also test a moderated mediation causal model. Although a longitudinal design is needed to offer
strong evidence for causal ordering, assessing the fit of basic path models can offer some
evidence consistent with causal ordering. The proposed model indicates that relative
commitment is the exogenous variable at the beginning of the simple causal chain. SPP is

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

11

proposed as the next variable in the causal chain. It is likely that in order to demand that one get
one’s way via dominant strategies and to make most of the decisions, one must first feel that one
has more power in the relationship. Safilios-Rothschild (1976) suggested that being in a position
of power will only be translated into behavior if the individual is aware they have that power.
SPP is proposed as the mediator between relative commitment and the other outcomes (decision
making and conflict strategies).
As the effects of relative commitment on the other variables are expected to be moderated
by DC, a moderated mediation hypothesis will be tested such that the models will be proposed to
fit when people have a high desire for power. If relative commitment only affects power and the
outcomes of power when DC is high, the models with power as the mediator are proposed to fit
when DC is high but not low.
Method
Sample
The sample was obtained by an undergraduate research methods class such that each
member of the class solicited participation by emailing individuals and posting requests on social
media. Of the 319 who participated and reported their sex, 211 reported being female and 108
reported being male. Five did not respond. The average age was 28.91 (SD = 12. 37). In this
sample, 43% reported they were not college students. With this sample size, power analysis
indicates a greater than 95% chance of detecting correlations of .2 with a two-tailed test with
alpha set at .05 (Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, & Lang, 2009)
The sexual orientation of the sample was assessed with five response options. 281
indicated romantic and sexual interest only in the opposite sex. 17 indicated romantic interest in
the opposite sex and both sexes for sexual interest. Three chose both sexes for romantic and

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

12

sexual interest, four chose opposite and same sex for sex but only same for romantic, and 5 chose
same sex only for both romance and sex.
Procedure
The participants who chose to begin the survey by clicking on the offered link to the
online survey were first shown an informed consent form. Upon indicating their consent, the
survey was displayed. They were then thanked for participation at its conclusion.
Instrumentation
The means, standard deviations, and reliability estimates are in Table 1. First the
participants were asked if the relationship they were going to focus on to respond to the survey
was a current relationship or a previous relationship. If they were in a current relationship, they
were instructed to choose that option. If they were not, they were asked if they had been in a
romantic relationship previously. In this sample 213 were currently in a romantic relationship
and 111 were focusing on a previous romantic relationship.
Participants were then asked to complete the relative commitment measure with these
instructions:
Please consider both how you feel and how you think your partner feels about the
relationship. Consider each statement and use the scale to indicate if you or your partner
would be more likely to agree with each statement.
The scales they were given ranged from 1-9 with 1 labeled “My partner would be much more
likely to think this than me,” 5 labeled “We are both equally likely to think this,” and 9 labeled “I
would be much more likely to think this than my partner.” The subjects were then shown the
commitment items from the investment model scales (Rusbult, Martz, & Agnew, 1998). Relative
commitment was composed of averaging each participant’s scores on the relative commitment

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

13

items. Scores higher than 5 indicated the participant was more committed than their partner,
scores lower than 5 indicated the partner was more committed than the participant, and scores of
5 indicated equal commitment to the relationship. The distribution was leptokurtic
Next the new major and minor decision making scales were displayed. Both employed 7point response options ranging from 1-7 with 1 labeled “my partner always makes the decision,”
4 labeled “Neither of us is more likely than the other to make the decision,” and 7 labeled “I
always make the decision.” All new items are included in the appendix. Both scales’ distribution
were leptokurtic. Higher scores indicating greater decision making.
The new SPP scale included 7-point response scale with 1 labeled “My partner is,” 4
labeled “We both are,” and 7 labeled “I am.” The participants were asked to use the scale to
describe their relationship in response to the four items concerning who is the more powerful
member in the relationship. The distribution was also leptokurtic.
The participants then responded to the domination and submission subscales of the
romantic partner conflict scale (Zacchilli et al., 2009). These items were not relative to the
partner and only concerned the individual participant’s behavior during conflict. Both scales
used 7-point likert response options scored such that higher scores indicated more frequent use of
those conflict styles. The domination scale distribution was slightly negatively skewed.
Finally, the participants responded to the desire for control scale (Burger, 1992). There
were twenty items and 7-point likert response options ranging from 1-7 were provided such that
higher scores indicate greater dominance motives. There was a slight negative skew.
[TABLE 1 HERE]
Results

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

14

First, the measurement model for the construct validity of the new scales will be assessed.
Then the proposed bivariate relationships will be examined. Then the moderation by dominance
motive will be tested using moderated regression. Finally, the simple slopes results from the
moderated regression will be used to test the proposed moderated mediation models using path
analysis.
Measurement Model
A confirmatory factor analysis was conducted to assess the extent to which the
measurement model was consistent with the obtained inter-item relationships and the factor
loading estimates for all of these variables. A CFA was conducted using the lessR program for
the R Statistics software (Gerbing 2014). The data indicate that the model was a good fit as the
absolute mean error was .061. The proposed measurement model was maintained.
Bivariate Relationships2
It was proposed that relative commitment would be related to SPP such that being less
committed relative to the partner would be associated with higher SPP. Table 2 shows the
correlation matrix and indicates there was a small, but statistically significant relationship in the
predicted direction. SPP was proposed to be positively related to greater major and minor
decision making as well as dominant conflict styles but negatively related to submissive. The
correlation matrix indicates there was medium to large relationships in the predicted directions.
These hypotheses were confirmed.
[TABLE 2 HERE]
Moderated Regressions
The correlation matrix in Table 2 shows that relative commitment was only weakly
related to SPP and weakly related to the other variables as well. Those findings are unsurprising

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

15

because being in that position of power (less commitment) was hypothesized to only translate
into SPP and the other outcomes when the individual was higher in desire for control (DC) but
not when they were lower. The presence of low DC participants weakens the bivariate
relationships. To test these hypotheses, a series of moderated regressions with standardized
variables were conducted by regressing each outcome variable onto relative commitment, DC,
and the product of relative commitment and DC. Then, simple slopes analysis was used to
interpret the nature of the moderation (Aiken & West, 1991).
Table 3 shows the results of these regressions by displaying for each outcome, the
standardized effects and p-values for each of the three predictors. For SPP, major decisions,
minor decisions, and dominance, the results indicated that the effect of relative commitment on
these outcomes was moderated by DC, as indicated by the statistically significant product term.
None of the predictors were statistically significant for submission.
[TABLE 3 HERE]
Next, simple slopes analysis was used to assess the extent to which the nature of those
interactions were consistent with predictions. As per Aiken and West’s (1991) recommendations,
the standardized relationship between the predictor and outcome was calculated using the linear
regression formula at one standard deviation below and above the mean for the moderator. In this
case, the relationship between relative commitment and each outcome was assessed for low
levels of DC and at high levels. It was predicted that at high levels, the relationships would be
ample and negative. Table 4 shows that for SPP, major decisions, minor decisions, and
domination, the relationships were all in the predicted direction. The results suggest that being
less committed is more likely to confer more power on the participant, but only if the participant
has a strong desire for control motive. For SPP, major decisions, and domination, having low DC

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

16

produces trivial relationships between relative commitment and these variables. Surprisingly, for
minor decisions, when the participants had low DC, being more committed was associated with
making more of the minor decisions. These results are mostly consistent with hypotheses.
[TABLE 4 HERE]
Mediation Tests
Evaluating mediation has recently begun to move away from the traditional Baron and
Kenny (1986) method of relying on statistical significance tests (Hayes, 2009; Rucker, Preacher,
Tormala, & Petty, 2011). Another option is to rely on the basic path analysis algorithms that
underlie structural equation modeling (SEM). Wright (1934) established that if one predicts that
the relationship between X and Z is mediated by Y, then one’s model predicts that the correlation
between X and Z is equal to the product of the X and Y correlation and the Y and Z correlation
(rxz = rxy * ryz).
To assess model fit, such standardized estimates enable the researcher to easily estimate
the difference between the predicted and obtained relationships in a standardized format (Hunter
& Hamilton, 2002). Hu and Bentler (1999) recommend the use of standardized root mean square
residual (SRMR) to assess model fit. These residuals are values that indicate the extent to which
obtained values differ from those predicted by the model. That index standardizes the residuals
that result from model testing using covariance matrices. They present evidence that values
below about .08 indicate good fit. In the case of using standardized relationships instead of the
covariances, the root mean squared error (RMSE) is calculated directly from the residuals
because the estimates are already standardized and can therefore be interpreted similarly. Thus,
values below .08 also indicate good fit for RMSE. In the case of the simple models tested here,

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

17

the mean of the standardized residuals is not required as there is only one residual per model,
represented here by indicating the amount of error (E).
As Aiken and West’s (1991) moderated regression produces standardized estimates of the
effects of one variable on another under different levels of a moderator, those standardized
estimates can be used to assess model fit. Specifically, the correlations in the basic rxz = rxy * ryz
formula are replaced by standardized regression coefficients estimated at one standard deviation
above and below the mean of the moderator. Then the model can be tested at one standard
deviation above and below the mean of the moderator to determine if the model predictions fit at
these varying levels of the moderator (see Muller, Judd, & Yzerbyt, 2005 for an extended
discussion of using the +1 SD and -1 SD values method of estimating different coefficients in
path modeling). Based on Boster’s (2002) recommendations, all relationships were corrected for
measurement error before testing the models.
The first model tested was the extent to which SPP mediated the relationship between
relative commitment and major decision making when DC was high. The error of prediction was
higher than desirable (E = .112) due to the obtained relationship being weaker than the one
predicted by the constrained paths. The second model tested the extent to which the relationship
between relative commitment and minor decision making was mediated by SPP when DC was
high. The error of prediction was very low (E = .007), suggesting very good fit of the mediation
model. The third model tested the extent to which SPP mediated the relationship between
relative commitment and dominant conflict styles when DC was high. The error of prediction
was at the borderline (E = .088). The observed relationship was slightly larger than the
relationship predicted by the model. This model may be said to be marginally consistent with the
data. The model was not tested with submissive behaviors because the direct paths were too

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

18

small to indicate a causal relationship. The data were most strongly consistent with the proposed
mediation by SPP when minor decision making was the outcome, marginally consistent when
dominance was the outcome, and weakly consistent when major decisions was the outcome.
Additional Analysis
Some of the sample was responding to the survey items based on their current
relationship and some were recalling a previous relationship. Although not the focus of this
investigation, it was a possibility that this variable might moderate some of the proposed
relationships. That possibility was tested with a series of moderated regressions in which current
relationship responders were coded 1 and previous -1. Relationship status was not a substantial
or statistically significant moderator of the relationship between relative commitment and any of
the other variables. However, the relationships between SPP and both types of decision making
were so moderated. Simple slopes analysis was again employed. For the relationship between
SPP and major decision-making, the interaction term for type of relationship and SPP had a
small but statistically significant effect (β = -.10, p = .04) such that the effect of SPP on major
decision-making (β = .61) was somewhat smaller for current relationships (β = .51) than for
previous relationships (β = .71). A similar pattern emerged with minor decision-making such that
the interaction between relationship status and SPP was again statistically significant (β = -.15, p
= .005). Again, the effect of SPP on minor decision making (β = .50) was smaller for current
relationships (β = .35) than previous relationships (β = .65). The reason for this pattern is unclear
but future research should continue to carefully consider whether survey respondents are
considering current or former relationships.
Discussion

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

19

Relative commitment, as per social exchange theory and the related interdependence
theory (Blau, 1964; Drigotas et al., 1999) proved to offer an effective explanation of both selfperceived relationship power and the outcomes of that power (major and minor decision making
and dominant conflict strategies). These data demonstrate the value of interdependence and
social exchange theory by showing how SPP, decision-making, and dominant behavior are all
rooted in relative commitment to the relationship. The relationship focus in these theoretical
approaches was augmented by including the personality trait DC with the prediction that not
everyone uses their position of power to dominate their partner. Only people who have higher
levels of desire for control of their lives in general, are likely to translate that position of power
into actual outcomes, unlike people with low DC. By merging both the traditional relationshipfocused approach with personality theory, the current approach was able to offer a stronger
prediction of who would be making the decisions and what kinds of communication strategies
they would use.
Additionally, the models tested in this study found some evidence that when people have
a high level of DC, the effects of being less committed on being more likely to make minor
decisions may be dependent upon feeling more powerful. There is some evidence, though less
strong, for the same being true of using dominant strategies when in conflict with one’s romantic
partner. Future work should expand on the use of moderated mediation to explore how relative
commitment can affect other variables via increasing one partner’s power.
There was, however, mixed evidence that these variables were related to using
submissive strategies. The relationship between relative commitment and submissive strategies
was not substantial and not moderated by DC. On the other hand, the data were consistent with
the predicted negative relationship between SPP and submission. It is unclear why the self-

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

20

perceived power that produces submission is not rooted in relative commitment. Perhaps
submissiveness is related to some non-relationship source such as previous relationships or a
personality trait. Further work is needed to both replicate this finding and offer a new theoretical
approach to explain it.
Limitations
The cross-sectional design prevents assessing causality. Though the perspective proposed
here is that relative commitment causes SPP, other scholars argue the causality flows in the other
direction (Lennon, Stewart, & Ledermann, 2013). The current study cannot provide evidence
concerning that controversy because a model in which SPP influences both relative commitment
and the other outcomes would also be consistent with the data due to the nature of modeling with
cross-sectional data. Longitudinal designs are needed to assess the causal ordering of the key
variables. The theorizing that produced this study is merely able to suggest one possible
interpretation of that data.
Conclusion
This study sought to integrate social exchange and interdependence theory approaches to
understanding power in romantic relationships with insights from work on desire for control. The
new measure of relative commitment was proposed as an exogenous variable in understanding
the process of power in relationships. The study validated the use of that measure and of other
new measures. These measures may be of use to other researchers attempting to understand
power in romantic relationships regardless of theoretical orientation. Future work on power in
romantic relationships may help both social scientists and clinicians alike understand how to help
people maintain more satisfying relationships.

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

21
References

Aiken, L. S., & West, S. G. (1991). Multiple regression: Testing and interpreting interactions.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Baron, R. M., & Kenny, D. A. (1986). The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social
psychological research: Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 1173-1182.
Bem, D. J., Palmer, J., & Broughton, R. S. (2001). Updating the gansfeld database: A victim of
its own success? The Journal of Parapsychology, 65, 207-218.
Bentley, C. G., Galliher, R. V., & Ferguson, T. J. (2007). Associations among aspects of
interpersonal power and relationship functioning in adolescent romantic couples. Sex
Roles, 57, 483-495.
Blau, P. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New York, NY: Wiley.
Boster, F. J. (2002). On making progress in communication science. Human Communication
Research, 28, 473-490.
Burger, J. M. (1992). Desire for control: Personality, social, and clinical perspectives. New
York, NY: Plenum Press.
Burgoon, J. K., & Dunbar, N. E. (2000). An interactionist perspective on dominance-submission:
Interpersonal dominance as a dynamic, situationally contingent social skill.
Communication Monographs, 67, 96-121.
Drigotas, S. M., Rusbult, C. E., & Verette, J. (1999). Level of commitment, mutuality of
commitment, and couple well-being. Personal Relationships, 6, 389-409.
Dunbar, N. E. (2004). Theory in progress: Dyadic power theory: Constructing a communicationbased theory of relational power. Journal of Family Communication, 4, 235-248.

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

22

Dunbar, N. E. (2015). A review of theoretical approaches to interpersonal power. Review of
Communication, 15, 1-18.
Dunbar, N. E., & Burgoon, J. K. (2005). Perceptions of power and interactional dominance in
interpersonal relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 22, 207-233.
Dunbar, N. E., & Johnson, A. J. (2015). A test of dyadic power theory: Control attempts recalled
from interpersonal interactions with romantic partners, family members, and friends.
Journal of Argumentation in Context, 4, 42-62.
Emerson, R. M. (1962). Power-dependence relations. American Sociological Review, 27, 31-41.
Falbo, T., & Peplau, L. A. (1980). Power strategies in intimate relationships. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 618-628.
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A.-G. (2009). Statistical power analyses using
G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behavior Research Methods,
41, 1149-1160.
Felmlee, D. H. (1994). Who’s on top? Power in romantic relationships. Sex Roles, 31,275-295.
Furlow, C. F., & Beretvas, N. (2005). Meta-analytic methods of pooling correlation matrices for
structural equation modeling under different patterns of missing data. Psychological
Methods, 10, 227-254.
Galliher, R. V., Rostosky, S. S., Welsh, D. P. & Kawaguchi, M. C. (1999). Power and
psychological well-being in late adolescent romantic relationships. Sex Roles, 40, 689710.
Gerbing, D. W. (2014). R data analysis without programming. New York, NY: Routledge.
Grauerholz, E. (1987). Balancing the power in dating relationships. Sex Roles, 17, 563-571.
Gray-Little, B., & Burks, N. (1983). Power and satisfaction in marriage: A review and critique.

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

23

Psychological Bulletin, 93, 513-538.
Hayes, A. F. (2009). Beyond Baron and Kenny: Statistical mediation analysis in the new
millennium. Communication Monographs, 76, 408-420.
Homans, G. (1961). Social behavior: Its elementary forms. New York, NY: Harcourt Brace
Jovanovich.
Hu, L. & Bentler, P. M. (1999). Cutoff criteria for fit indexes in covariance structural analysis:
Conventional criteria versus new alternatives. Structural Equation Modeling: A
Multidisciplinary Journal, 6, 1-55.
Hunter, J. E., & Hamilton, M. A. (2002). The advantages of using standardized scores in causal
analysis. 28, 552-561.
Lennon, C. A., Stewart, A. L., & Ledermann, T. (2013). The role of power in intimate
relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 95-114.
Millar, F. E., Rogers-Millar, L. E., & Courtright, J. A. (1979). Relational control and dyadic
understanding: An exploratory predictive regression model. In D. Nimmo (Ed.),
Communication Yearbook 3 (pp. 213-224). New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Muller, D., Judd, C. M., & Yzerbyt, V. Y. (2005). When moderation is mediated and mediation
is moderated. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 852-863.
Murstein, B. I., & Adler, E. R. (1995). Gender differences in power and self-disclosure in dating
and married couples. Personal Relationships, 2, 199-209.
Oyamot, C. M., Fuglestad, P. T., & Snyder, M. (2010). Balance of power and influence in
relationships: The role of self-monitoring. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,
27, 23-46.
Rogers-Millar, L. E., & Millar, F. E. (1979). Domineeringness and dominance: A transactional

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

24

view. Human Communication Research, 5, 238-246.
Rucker, D. D., Preacher, K. J., Tormala, Z. L., & Petty, R. E. (2011). Mediation analysis in
social psychology: Current practices and new recommendations. Social and Personality
Psychology Compass, 5/6, 359-371.
Rusbult, C. E. (1980). Commitment and satisfaction romantic associations: A test of the
investment model. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 16, 172-186.
Rusbult, C. E., Martz, J. M., & Agnew, C. R. (1998). The investment model scale: Measuring
commitment level, satisfaction level, quality of alternatives, and investment size.
Personal Relationships, 5, 357-391.
Safilios-Rothschild, C. (1976). A macro- and micro-examination of family power and love: An
exchange model. Journal of Marriage and Family, 38, 355-362
Samp, J. A., Palevitz, C. E. (2014). Managing relational transgressions as revealed on Facebook:
The influence of dependence power on verbal versus nonverbal responses. Journal of
Nonverbal Behavior, 38, 477-493.
Solomon, D. H., & Samp, J. A. (1998). Power and problem appraisal: Perceptual foundations of
the chilling effect in dating relationships. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,
15, 191-209.
Sprecher, S. (1985). Sex differences in bases of power in dating relationships. Sex Roles, 12,
449-462.
Sprecher, S., Schmeeckle, M. & Felmlee, D. (2006). The principle of least interest: Inequality in
emotional involvement in romantic relationships. Journal of Family Issues, 27, 12551280.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1984). Perceived decision-making power and marital adjustment.

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

25

Communication Research Reports, 1, 15-20.
Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959). The social psychology of groups. New York, NY: Wiley
Waller, W. (1937). The rating and dating complex. American Sociological Review, 2, 727-734.
Worley, T. R., & Samp, J. A. (2016). Complaint avoidance and complaint-related appraisals in
close relationships: A dyadic power theory perspective. Communication Research, 391413.
Wright, S. (1934). The method of path coefficients. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 5,
161-215.
Zacchilli, T. L., Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (2009). The romantic partner conflict scale: A
new scale to measure relationship conflict. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,
26,1073-1096.

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

26
Appendix

Decision Making Scales Items
Major decisions:
When situations come up concerning issues that will have a large effect on both of our lives.
In situations in which we will both have to live with the decision for a long time.
When we disagree about an important decision.
If something I wanted very much conflicted with my partner getting something important to her
or him.
If we had to make a serious decision that would have an impact on our ability to stay together as
a couple.
When the decision will have an impact on both of our abilities to be happy with our lives.
Minor decisions:
Everyday kinds of choices where the impact on our lives is minimal.
Decisions that will not matter much the next day.
Choices such that we disagree but neither of us feels very strongly about the outcome.
When we disagree about an unimportant decision.
If we had to make a decision that might affect how happy we each are for just the evening but
not after that.
When we want different things but neither of us will be upset if we do not get our way.
Self-Perceived Power scale
Who is the member of the couple that has more power in the relationship?
Who is the member of the couple that your friends would probably say is more in charge?
Who is the member of the couple that is the more dominant member of the relationship?
If your relationship were a country, who would be the leader?

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

27

Table 1
Means, Standard Deviations, and Alpha Reliability for the Measured Variables
Measure
Relative Commitment

Mean
4.08

SD
1.35

Alpha
0.87

Major decision-making

4.23

0.88

0.78

Minor decision-making

4.08

0.94

0.82

SPP

4.21

1.50

0.87

Domination

4.00

1.31

0.86

Submission

4.01

1.25

0.87

DC

4.83

0.72

0.81

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

28

Table 2
Correlation Matrix

1. Relative Commitment
2. SPP
3. Major Decision-Making
4. Minor Decision-Making
5. Domination
6. Submission
7. DC

* p < .05

1

2

3

4

5

6

-0.15*
-0.06
-0.03
-0.10
0.07
-0.11

0.59*
0.47*
0.33*
-0.32*
0.20*

0.49*
0.23*
-0.19*
0.11

0.28*
-0.16*
0.09

0.06
0.14*

-0.07

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

29

Table 3
Regression Results of Moderation Tests

Power
Predictor Variables
Relative Commitment
Desire for Control
Product Term

b
-0.2
0.26
-0.25

p
0.03
0.01
0.01

Major Decisions
b
p
-0.05
0.37
0.08
0.14
-0.12
0.03

Outcome Variable
Minor Decisions
b
p
-0.004
0.94
0.09
0.17
-0.24
<.001

Domination
b
p
-0.07
0.24
0.13
0.04
-0.15
0.02

Submission
b
p
0.08
0.22
-0.07
0.31
0.06
0.35

Table 4
Simple Slopes Analysis Showing Standardized Regression Coefficients at -1 and +1 SD of Desire for Control

-1 SD
+1 SD

Power
0.04
-0.45

Major
Decisions
0.07
-0.17

Minor
Decisions
0.24
-0.24

Domination
0.08
-0.23

POWER IN RELATIONSHIPS

30

Footnotes
1

This statistic is calculated similarly to the standardized root mean residual and can be

interpreted similarly such that a lower value indicates better fit.
2

The scatterplots of the predicted relationships were examined for any evidence of non-linearity

and none was found.

