bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Liquid-liquid microphase separation leads to formation of
membraneless organelles

Srivastav Ranganathan and Eugene Shakhnovich
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University
12 Oxford Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
email: srivastav_ranganathan@fas.harvard.edu
email: shakhnovich@chemistry.harvard.edu

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Proteins and nucleic acids can spontaneously self-assemble into membraneless droplet-like
compartments, both in vitro and in vivo. A key component of these droplets are multi-valent proteins
that possess several adhesive domains with specific interaction partners (whose number determines
total valency of the protein) separated by disordered regions. Here, using multi-scale simulations we
show that such proteins self-organize into micro-phase separated droplets of various sizes as opposed to
the Flory-like macro-phase separated equilibrium state of homopolymers or equilibrium physical gels.
We show that the micro-phase separated state is a dynamic outcome of the interplay between two
competing processes: a diffusion-limited encounter between proteins, and the dynamics within small
clusters that results in exhaustion of available valencies whereby all specifically interacting domains find
their interacting partners within smaller clusters, leading to arrested phase separation. We first model
these multi-valent chains as bead-spring polymers with multiple adhesive domains separated by
semi-flexible linkers and use Langevin Dynamics (LD) to assess how key timescales depend on the
molecular properties of associating polymers. Using the time-scales from LD simulations, we develop a
coarse-grained kinetic model to study this phenomenon at longer times. Consistent with LD simulations,
the macro-phase separated state was only observed at high concentrations and large interaction
valencies. Further, in the regime where cluster sizes approach macro-phase separation, the condensed
phase becomes dynamically solid-like, suggesting that it might no longer be biologically functional.
Therefore, the micro-phase separated state could be a hallmark of functional droplets formed by
proteins with the sticker-spacer architecture.
Significance statement
Membraneless organells (MO) are ubiquitous in ‘healthy’ living cells, with an altered state in
disease. Their formation is likened to liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) between MO-forming
proteins. However most models of LLPS predict complete macrophase separation while in reality MO’s
are small droplets of various sizes, which are malleable to rapid morphological changes. Here we
present a microscopic multiscale theoretical study of thermodynamics and kinetics of formation of MO.
We show that MO’s are long-living dynamic structures formed as a result of arrested macrophase
separation. Our study provides a direct link beween the molecular properies of MO-forming proteins
and the morphology and dynamics of MO paving a path to rational design and control of MO.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Biomolecular phase transitions are widespread in living systems. Transitions that result
in irreversible, solid-like assemblies such as amyloid fibrils are a hallmark of disease while those
like cytoskeletal filaments play a functional role [1]. The third self-assembled state, in addition
to the soluble and the solid-like state, is the loosely associated droplet phase held together by
several weak, transient interactions [2]. The transient nature of these interactions makes these
self-assemblies reversible and thereby a potential strategy for temporally regulated sub-cellular
organisation. Several examples of spatiotemporally regulated, droplet-like objects within the
cell have been discovered in the past few decades, composed of different types of proteins
often co-localised with nucleic acids [3]. The importance of these membrane-less
compartments is potentially two-fold: (i) localising biochemical reactions within the cell, and (ii)
sequestering biomolecules to regulate their activity [3]. Examples of cytoplasmic
membrane-less organelles include P bodies, germ granules and stress granules (SGs).[4]
However, aberrant granule dynamics and a transition from a liquid-like to a more solid-like
state are often hallmarks of degenerative diseases.[5], [6] Solid-like RNP aggregates have been
reported as cytoplasmic inclusions [7] and as nuclear RNP aggregates [6] in degenerative
diseases. Investigating the physical principles governing the formation of these high-density
phases is vital to understand the subcellular organisation and the conditions leading to disease.
Several experimental studies have highlighted the 'multi-valent' nature of the
constituent proteins in membrane-less organelles [1], [8], [9]. In other words, these proteins
carry multiple associative or 'adhesive' domains[7], [8]. Multivalency could be achieved by
several different architectures [1], the simplest being a linear sequence of folded domains that
are connected by linker regions that are flexible and unstructured. Li et al., employed such a
linear multivalent 2-component model system (SH3 and PRM domains threaded together by
flexible regions) to show that liquid-like droplet formation can result from just two multivalent
interacting components (repeats of the same domain) [8]. Another intriguing feature of
condensate proteins is the presence of intrinsically disordered regions or low complexity
sequences that link folded domains together[10]. Therefore, a combination of these motifs and
different architectures could form a basis for different types of phase-separated structures
within the cell. Due to the heterogeneous composition of droplets and complex set of factors
dictating their growth, theoretical and computational models of varying resolutions have
previously been employed to study this problem [10]–[13]. However, much of the focus has
been on identifying the self-assembled state at equilibrium. In particular, Flory theory of phase
separation in polymer solution has been employed to describe self-assembly of membrane-less
organelles [14]. The Flory theory which is applicable to solutions of homopolymers predicts two
phases – mixed and macrophase separated. However, in reality membrane-less organelles are
droplets of finite size akin to microphase separated entities – in variance with simple Flory-type
theoretical predictions. Despite significant experimental and computational efforts, a key
question remains unanswered -- what are the physical mechanisms that govern the formation
of tunable microphase separated droplets rather than complete macrophase separation? The
multi-component nature of membrane-less organelles is an important feature that
distinguishes them from simple homopolymers that undergo phase separation. How do

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

droplet size distributions depend on the intrinsic characteristics of the biopolymers? What
are the key features inherent to the architecture of these self-assembling molecules that make
their assemblies tunable? Since the equilibrium states in such systems are either mixed or
macrophase separated, the kinetic factors must play a crucial role in the observed microphase
separation [8] outcome. However, a detailed mechanistic understanding of the process of
formation and growth of these droplets that leads to the microphase separated state has been
lacking.
In this work, we address these questions using multi-scale coarse-grained models. In the
first part of the paper, we probe the physical determinants of intracellular microphase
separation using microscopic model of multivalent polymers composed of a linear chain of
adhesive domains separated by semi-flexible linkers. The results of our Langevin dynamics (LD)
simulations for this model shed light on the early stages of droplet growth and the mechanism
of arrested phase-separation. Next, using the LD simulations as the basis to identify vital
timescales for condensate growth, we explore the phenomenon at biologically relevant
timescales using a phenomenological kinetic model. Broadly, we explore liquid-liquid
microphase separation (LLmPS) on multiple scales – from mesoscale to macroscopic. To that
end, detailed LD simulations explore microscopic mechanisms that determine key events
dictating the early stages of growth which serve as the basis for developing the
phenomenological kinetic model. Overall, using these two approaches, we provide a
mechanistic explanation for the predominance of the microphase separated state for
multi-valent heteropolymers.

Model
Despite the complexity of the intracellular space, experiments suggest that in vitro
LLmPS can be achieved even using simple two-component systems [8]. The tractability of
simpler models makes them powerful tools to investigate the role of individual factors in
modulating droplet formation and growth. Here, we perform LD simulations (see Methods for
detail) to understand the process of self-association between two types of polymer chains
composed of specific interaction sites (red and yellow beads in Fig.1). These adhesive sites are
linked together by non-specifically interacting linkers (blue beads in Fig.1). The red and yellow
beads on these chains mimic complementary domains on different chains that can participate
in a maximum of one specific interaction (between yellow and red beads).
For our simulations, we consider 400 such semi-flexible polymer chains (200 of each
type) in a cubic box with periodic boundary conditions). Each chain in the simulation box is
composed of 5 specific interaction sites that are linked together by non-specific linker regions
that are 35 beads long. (blue beads in Fig.1). This linker length was based on previous
theoretical studies of phase-separating proteins [10]. The specificity of the functional
interactions is modelled by imposing a valency of 1 between different complementary specific
bead types (red and yellow beads) via a bonding vector attached to each bead. Valency 1
means that each specific interaction site can only be involved in one such interaction. The total
valency of an individual polymer chain (λ) is the number of adhesive sites that are part of a
single chain. Bond formation (modelled using stochastically forming harmonic springs) occurs
with a probability (𝑃𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑚 ) if two complementary beads are within a defined interaction cutoff
distance ( 𝑟𝑐 ). We employ conventional Langevin dynamics simulations to study the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

self-assembly of the model biopolymers, wherein the size of the specific interaction sites
(diameter of 20 Ǻ) is roughly four times that of the linker beads which represent individual
amino acid residues (diameter of 4.2 Ǻ). This difference in sizes is to mimic a folded adhesive
domain -- SH3 domain (diameter of 20 Ǻ, PDB ID:1SHG,) that is often involved in liquid-liquid
phase-separation [15]. The folded adhesive domains are modeled at a lower resolution (one
bead per domain of 60 amino acids) than linkers which are more dynamic and hence modeled
with a 1 bead per amino acid resolution.

Figure

1: Model (A) Schematic of the polymer model for studying phase-separation by multivalent
biopolymers

Results
Self-assembly of multi-valent polymers with inter-chain interactions between
complementary domains is a simple model system for studying phase-separation by
intracellular polymers. In the current study, we employ this model to discover microscopic
factors driving phase separation. In the first part of this study, we present results of
self-assembly driven by irreversible (highly stable) functional interactions and identify two key
timescales that define cluster growth and their size distributions. In the latter part of this paper,
we build a coarse-grained kinetic model demonstrating the tunability of this phenomenon. In
the following subsections, we use the term specific interactions for the finite valency
interactions between functional domains and non-specific interactions to refer to the
inter-linker isotropic interactions.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Micro-phase separation -- the most likely outcome at low concentrations and
irreversible functional interactions
Multivalent polymers with adhesive domains separated by flexible linkers can
potentially self-assemble through two types of interactions, a) the finite number of adhesive
contacts between the functional domains (yellow and red beads in Fig.1), and b) the
non-specific, isotropic interactions between the linker regions (blue beads in Fig 1). We first
performed control simulations with specific interactions turned off, where we varied free
monomer concentration Cmono, from 10 to 200 µM for a weak non-specific interaction strength
of εns = 0.1 kcal/mol. In these control simulations, we observe no phase-separation in the whole
range of Cmono (Fig.2A, purple curve). Therefore, in this regime of εns and Cmono, at the simulation
timescale of 16 µs, the polymer assemblies do not reach large sizes. Not surprisingly, this result
suggests that the assembly driven by non-specific interactions (linker-driven) alone is achieved
only at stronger non-specific interactions and/or high free monomer concentrations.
However, intracellular microphase separation often results in the enrichment of biomolecules
within the self-assembled phase, at relatively low bulk concentrations [9]. Under such
conditions, specific interactions which are fewer in number become critical determinants of
microphase separation. In our LD simulations, we employ polymer chains comprised of 5
univalent adhesive domains and 4 linker regions totalling 145 beads bringing total valency of 5
for each polymer. For the sake of simplicity, we begin with a situation where these bonds, once
formed, do not break for the rest of the simulation. Although an idealized construct with
respect to biological polymers, these simulations can aid in our understanding of cluster size
distributions and arrest of cluster growth when the spontaneously assembled clusters are
unable to undergo further reorganization.

Figure 2: Cluster Sizes in Langevin Dynamics simulations. A) The single largest cluster as a function of
free monomer concentration (in 𝜇M). The largest cluster size is shown as a fraction of the total number
of monomers in the simulation box. The smooth curves are plotted as a guide to the eye, using the
cspline curve fitting. The vertical bars represent the standard error. B) Cluster size distributions for
increasing free monomer concentrations. The linker stiffness for the self-assembling polymer chains in
this plot is 2 kcal/mol while the strength of inter-linker interaction is 0.1 kcal/mol (per pair of interacting
beads). The mean and distributions of the single largest cluster sizes were computed using 500 different
configurations from 5 independent simulation runts of 16 µs. The simulations were performed for an
instantaneous bond formation assumption (Pform = 1).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

In Fig.2 we show the single largest cluster size, for varying free monomer
concentrations. The polymer-chains, for the data plotted in Fig.2, have flexible linkers (𝑘𝑏𝑒𝑛𝑑 =2
kcal/mol, see Model and Methods for defintion of bending rigidity) with weak inter-linker
interactions (εns = 0.1 kcal/mol). As evident from Fig.2, the polymer chains can assemble into
larger clusters in the presence of functional interactions (black curve, Fig.2A), as opposed to the
control simulations where inter-linker interactions alone drive self-assembly (purple curve,
Fig.2A). Simulations with highly stable functional interactions suggest that, for low and
intermediate concentrations (Cmono < 100 uM) these polymer chains would never achieve
aggregate sizes that approach the number of chains in the system (fraction of monomers in
largest cluster → 1 in Fig.2A) indicating a microphase separation regime. However, an increase
in concentration from 10𝜇M to 100𝜇M results in macrophase separation - a system-spanning
aggregate with cluster sizes approaching the size of the system. This is further evident from the
size-distribution of the single-largest cluster computed using 500 different configurations from
5 independent simulation runs of 16 µs (Fig.2B). The largest cluster approaches the total
number of monomers, only at large Cmono. However, the cellular concentration of
phase-separating proteins is often in the nanomolar to the low micromolar range [9]. Our LD
simulations suggest that for irreversible specific interactions macro-phase separation can only
be observed at large non-physiological concentrations.

Figure 3: Tracking cluster formation at early timescales. A) and B) show the temporal evolution of
specific contacts for a free monomer concentration of 10, and 50 uM, respectively. For a low
concentration of 10 𝜇M, there is an initial decrease in the monomer population (purple curve) which is

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

concomitant with an increase in the dimer population. A negligible fraction of the clusters is in the form
of large-mers (size > 10, orange curve) at these low concentration since the available valencies for
growth are consumed by the smaller aggregated species. An increase in concentration from 10𝜇M to
50 𝜇M results in an increase in the large-mer (orange curve, 50 𝜇M) population as the monomer
fraction decreases during the simulation. A higher free monomer concentration allows the larger
clusters to grow due to consumption of free monomers (with unsatisfied valencies) before they get
converted into smaller clusters (dimers, trimers) with satisfied valencies. C) Time evolution of available
valencies within the single largest cluster and outside the single largest cluster, for a Cmono of 50 µM, εns
of 0.1 kcal/mol and linker bending rigidity of 2 kcal/mol. D) A schematic figure showing the possible
mechanisms of cluster growth and arrest and the competing timescales that could punctuate the
process.

Exhaustion of free valencies results in kinetically arrested droplets.
The size of the largest cluster shows a dependence on concentration (Fig.2), for weak
inter-linker interactions (εns = 0.1 kcal/mol). While the macro-phase separated state could be a
potential equilibrium outcome, for stable functional interactions, such a state is not observed in
our simulations except for very high concentrations (>= 100 uM in Fig.2). Therefore, identifying
the timescales which are vital for cluster growth could reveal the cause of arrested
macro-phase separation. In Fig.3A and B, we show the time evolution of the individual species
at different monomer concentrations (10𝜇𝑀 and 50 𝜇M). As seen from Fig.3A and B, for
irreversible functional interactions, the monomer fraction continues to monotonically decrease
during the simulations with the fraction of other competing species increasing concomitantly.
However, at low concentrations (Fig.3A, 10 𝜇M), the monomer fraction curve shows a
cross-over with the dimer curve (Fig.3A, green curve) while higher order clusters do not appear
at simulation tmescales.. This result suggests that the spontaneous formation of large
assemblies held together by functional interactions is contingent upon two timescales. The first
is the diffusion-limited timescale that governs initial dimerisation and the subsequent growth of
these smaller clusters. The second, competing timescale is the one where all functional
valencies get exhausted within the smaller initial clusters. At an intermediate concentration of
50 𝜇𝑀, (Fig.3B) we observe that the fraction of large aggregates (> 10mer) increases during the
early part of the simulations before free monomers are entirely consumed within dimers. In
other words, the unsatisfied valencies within the monomers, dimers and trimers get utilized to
form larger-sized clusters before the specific valencies get exhausted within the smaller clusters
making them no longer available for further self-assembly. To further verify this observation,
we track the temporal evolution of the fraction of available valencies within and outside the
single largest cluster (Fig.3C). We observe that while there are unutilized valencies within the
single largest cluster (Fig.3C, purple curve), the cluster does not grow further due to almost
complete exhaustion of valencies within the polymer chains outside the single largest cluster
(Fig.3C, green curve). A slower rate of exhaustion of free-valencies within micro-clusters by
varying the specific bond formation probability, P form, results in larger cluster sizes for smaller
free monomer concentrations, suggesting that the dynamicity of bond formation can alter the
cluster size distributions significantly (Supplementary Fig. S1). These results suggest that the
ability to form a large, macro-cluster is limited by the exhaustion of free valencies within
smaller sized clusters, thereby arresting their growth (Fig.3D).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: The characterisation of time-scales associated with the growth of a cluster using a
dimerisation model. A) The mean first passage time for the first specific interaction between a pair of
polymer chains as a function of the polymer concentration (represented as the polymer number density,
Nmono/L3, where Nmono and L are, the number of chains the length of the box, respectively). B) The mean
first passage time for a pair of polymer chains to exhaust all the available valencies within the dimer.
The shaded region in B) shows that for flexible linkers, this timescale for the exhaustion of valencies is of
𝐿2

the order of the reptation time for an equivalent polymer, given by Trep. 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑝 = 3∗𝜋∗𝐷

𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑑

, where L and

𝐷𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑑 refer to the contour length and the diffusion coefficient of the individual monomer beads within
the polymer chain [16].

Identifying the vital timescales determining cluster growth
In the limit of irreversible functional interactions, the process of phase separation gets
arrested due to kinetically trapped clusters which do not participate in further cluster growth
due to lack of available valencies (Fig.3D). As discussed above, two critical timescales would
then dictate the growth of clusters: i) the timescale for two chains to meet and form the first
functional interaction, and ii) the time it takes for the polymer chains within an assembly to
exhaust all valencies within the cluster before new chains join in. We explore the scaling
behaviour of these two timescales using the primary unit of any self-assembly process, the
dimer. Using LD simulations, we first compute the mean first passage times for two polymer
chains to form their first functional interaction. Given the diffusion-limited nature, this
timescale scales with the concentration of free monomers in the system (Fig.4A). This diffusion
limited timescale dictates the encounter probability of the two chains. Once the first bond is
formed, resulting in an 'active dimer' (one that has unsatisfied valencies), the cluster can only
grow to larger sizes as long as the dimer remains active. Therefore, the time taken by the dimer
to exhaust all its valencies becomes a vital second timescale. In Fig.4B, we plot the mean first
passage times for a dimer to exhaust all its valencies once the first bond is formed. For flexible
linkers (𝜅 < 2 kcal/mol), this timescale (referred to as the reorganisation time, Texhaust-valency), is
roughly of the order of the reptation time of flexible polymer chains (𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑝 In Fig.4B) that are
145 beads long. The reptation time, i.e. the time taken for the polymer chain to 'scan' its entire
contour length, is given by [16],
𝐿2

𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑝 = 3∗𝜋∗𝐷

𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑑

,

(1)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

where L and 𝐷𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑑 refer to the contour length and the diffusion coefficient of the individual
𝑘𝐵 𝑇
monomer beads within the polymer chain. Also, 𝐷𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑑 = 6𝜋𝜂𝑎
. For an amino acid, 𝐷𝑏𝑒𝑎𝑑 is of
the order of 9 ∗ 10−10 𝑚2 /𝑠. For a polymer of contour length 𝐿 = 145 beads in length (each
bead representing an amino acid), this timescale is of the order of 0.5 𝜇s. As seen from the
right panel in Fig.4, the flexible polymer chains indeed exhaust their valencies at timescales
comparable to the reptation time for an equivalent flexible polymer chain. As the linker region
becomes more rigid, this timescale becomes slower, resulting in the dimer remaining `active'
for much longer. A slower reorganisation time and a faster diffusion encounter time favours the
cluster growing into larger sizes. Conversely, a faster reorganisation time that is of the order of
the meeting timescales results in a higher likelihood of the clusters getting locked at smaller
sizes. For stable functional interactions, the interplay between these two timescales would limit
the size of the largest cluster.

Figure 5: Linkers as modulators of self-assembly propensity. A) The size of the largest cluster
for flexible linker regions(𝜅 = 2 kcal/mol) with varying inter-linker interaction strength (black curve, 0.1
kcal/mol and purple curve, 0.5 kcal/mol). Sticky inter-linker interactions result in smaller cluster sizes,
also corroborated by the collapsed nature of these aggregates in B). Mean Radius of gyration for the
individual-polymer chains (RgMono) within a self-assembled cluster as a function of increased inter-linker
interactions. C) The mean reorganisation times, 𝑇𝑒𝑥ℎ𝑎𝑢𝑠𝑡−𝑣𝑎𝑙𝑒𝑛𝑐𝑦 as a function of linker-stiffness, for
different values of inter-linker interaction strengths.

Linker regions as modulators of self-assembly propensity
The spatial separation of specifically interacting domains (with finite valencies) and the
non-specific linker regions is an architecture that could be highly amenable to being tuned for
phase-separation propensities. In this context, we further extend the findings from our LD
simulations to probe how the microscopic properties of the linker region could modulate the
extent of phase-separation. In Fig.5, we demonstrate how the linker properties could be useful
modulators of cluster sizes, without any alteration of the nature of the specific functional
interactions. Further, to model an unstructured linker, we consider a scenario where the linkers
participate in inter-linker interactions alone. Strong inter-linker interactions increased occupied
valencies (Supplementary Fig.S2), for all the concentrations under study, while resulting in
much smaller equilibrium cluster sizes (Fig.5A) during the timescales accessed by our
simulations. Further, the mean radius of gyration (RgMono) for the monomers within these
clusters shows a transition with an increase in inter-linker interaction strength (εns), with a
sharp decrease in RgMono for an increase in εns from 0.3 kcal/mol to 0.5 kcal/mol indicating an
onset of linker-driven coil-globule transitions for the polymers [17].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

The assemblies that ensue at these strong values of ε ns are more compact and
condensed akin to homopolymer globules[17]. Intramolecular compaction of polymers due to
nonspecific inter-linker interactions brings specific domains closer in space leading to a higher
likelihood of the exhaustion of specific interaction valencies within small assemblies. In Fig.5C,
we show how the inter-linker interaction strength can influence the time it takes to exhaust
specific interaction valencies within a dimeric cluster (Texhaust-valency). For weaker inter-linker
attraction (εns < 0.5 kcal/mol), the initial polymer assemblies are less compact (Fig.5B) and
thereby exhaust valencies within a cluster at a much slower rate (higher Texhaust-valency for dimers
with εns < 0.5 kcal/mol in Fig.5C). An increase in inter-linker interaction propensity results in
faster re-organisation times for these polymers. The polymers with εns = 0.5 kcal/mol exhaust
their valencies almost an order of magnitude faster than their 0.1 kcal/mol counterparts
(Fig.5C). Upon exhaustion of these specific interaction valencies, these clusters can only grow
via inter-linker interactions, a phenomenon that could be less dynamic (Supplementary Fig S3)
and tunable than the functional interaction driven cluster growth. It must, however, be noted
that the observation of further coalescence of clusters formed by sticky inter-linker interactions
was limited by the timescales accessible to the LD simulations. Any alteration to the ‘stickiness’
of the linker can shift the mechanism of assembly, and thereby result in altered kinetics of
cluster growth by modulating the Texhaust-valency. Our dimerisation simulations show that a second
mechanism of slowing down the Texhaust-valency timescale is by altering the flexibility of the linker
region (increasing linker stiffness in Fig.5C). Primarily the stiffer linkers model spacer regions
that prefer more `open' configurations (because of say, a high local density charges). This is
corroborated by a shift in the cluster size distribution towards larger sizes, for the polymer
chains with less flexible linkers (Supplementary Fig.S4). The linker region can thereby serve as a
modulator of microphase-separation propensity.
Further, we probed how the linker region influences the density profiles of these
clusters. In Supplementary Fig.S4, we show the probability distributions for cluster densities
normalized by the bulk densities, as a measure of the degree of enrichment within the
self-assembled state. For weak inter-linker interactions, we find a 10-fold enrichment of
monomers within the assemblies (Supplementary Fig.S4, purple curve). On the other hand, a
‘sticky’ linker results in an almost 100-fold enrichment within the collapsed globule-like clusters
(Fig.5B and Supplementary Fig.S5). These values are consistent with experimental findings of a
~10-100 fold enrichment of biomolecules within droplets [4], [8], [9], [18], [19]. Therefore, a
variation in the intrinsic properties of the linker, with no modifications to the functional region
can be used as a handle to tune the degree of enrichment within the condensed phase. This
lends modularity and functionality to these condensates, with the linker regions controlling the
degree of enrichment within a condensate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6: Schematic description of our kinetic model. A schematic figure detailing the
different rates in our phenomenological kinetic model simulated using the Gillespie algorithm. The
particles on the lattice can diffuse freely (when there are no neighbouring particles) with a rate kdiff. In
the presence of a neighbouring particle, a non-specifically interacting monomer can diffuse away with a
rate kdiff εns. Neighbouring particles can also form specific interactions (with fixed valency λ) at a rate k bond
or break an existing interaction with a rate k break. Clusters could diffuse at a rate that is scaled by their
sizes. εns and εsp refer to the strength of non-specific and specific interactions, respectively.

Figure

7: Kinetic Monte Carlo Simulations. A.) Phase diagram highlighting the different phases

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(microphase (Micro-PS) or macrophase separated (Macro-PS), and the non-phase separated state (No
PS) ) encountered upon varying the ratio of kbond/kdiff, and the bulk density of monomers (φ) within the
box. The assembling particles have a valency (λ) of 5 in these simulations. B.) Phase diagram highlighting
the different phases encountered upon varying valency and bulk density as the phase parameters. The
macro-phase separated state is only encountered for larger valency particles at higher densities. This
phase diagram was computed for kbond/kdiff = 1 and εns of 0.35 kT. C.) The difference in the densities of
the largest cluster, for clusters that are driven by specific (solid purple curve) and non-specific (solid
black curve) interactions. The non-specific interaction driven clusters are denser than their
specific-interaction driven counterparts. The cluster sizes, however, for both these cases are comparable
(dashed curves). kbond/kdiff = 1, and φ=0.04, for this plot. εns was set to 0.35 kT. D) The fraction of
monomers in the largest cluster as a function of epsilon, for kdiff= kbond and φ=0.04. The single largest
cluster sizes in all sub-panels of this Figure was computed for a simulation timescale of 2 hrs (with the
fundamental timsecale of diffusion being set to kdiff= 1 s-1).

Phenomenological kinetic simulations predict microphase separation at
biologically relevant timescales
The LD simulations help us identify the initial events that mark phase-separation by
multi-valent polymer chains assembling via finite-valency, specific interactions. However, the
model is limited by its ability to access longer, biologically relevant timescales at which droplets
typically form and grow in living cells. Also, while the assumption of non-transient interactions
is a useful simplification to identify conditions arresting cluster growth, bio-molecular
interactions are often transient in nature. Hence, to probe whether micro or macrophase
separation becomes kinetically favored for reversible functional interactions, we employ a
coarse-grained approach wherein the whole polymer chain from the bead-spring model (with a
fixed valency) is represented as an individual particle on a 2D-lattice. In our simulations, the
lattice is populated by ‘N’ such multi-valent particles (at varying densities) that diffuse freely, at
a rate kdiff, and particle collisions per unit time is proportional to kdiff*φ. Here, φ is the bulk
number density of particles on the lattice. In our MC study, we vary the bulk density of the
lattice in a range of 0.01 to 0.1 (see Methods section for rationale). When two such particles
occupy neighbouring sites on the lattice, they interact non-specifically with an interaction
strength of εns, a parameter that is analogous to the inter-linker interactions in our LD
simulations. Additionally, two neighbouring particles with unfulfilled valencies can form a
specific bond (with finite valencies per lattice particle) with a rate of k bond. The valency per
particle (λ) here can be utilized to form bonds with one to four potential neighbors, with each
pair being part of one, or more than one specific interactions between themselves. However,
unlike the irreversible specific interactions in our LD simulations, the specific bonds in the
lattice model can break with a rate kbreak = kbond*exp(-εsp), where εsp is the strength of each
specific bond. Additionally, clusters can diffuse with a scaled diffusion rate that is inversely
proportional to the cluster size. It must be noted that the timescale for the first bond formation
in the LD simulations is an outcome of two phenomenological rates in this model, k diff and kbond.
The second timescale, Texhaust-valency, is a timescale that depends on the kbond and kbreak
parameters in this model. The details of the simulation technique and the various rate
processes can be found in the Methods section and described schematically in Fig.6.
Using kinetic Monte Carlo simulations [20], we explore the cluster formation (at times

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

reaching a physiologically relevant scale of hours) by varying parameters such as a) bulk density
of particles on the lattice (φ), (2) rate of bond formation (kbond), (c) valency per interacting
particle (λ), and (d) the strength of specific interactions (𝜖𝑠𝑝 ). With the assumption that, for low
concentrations, the rate of free diffusion k diff is the fundamental timescale limiting cluster
growth, we first explore the relationship between the rate of specific bond formation (kbond),
and kdiff (Fig.7A and Supplementary Fig.S6). It must be noted that the LD simulations employed
the assumption that bond formation, upon the two functional domains coming in contact, is an
instantaneous event. Here, we show that for values of k bond/kdiff → 0, there is no
phase-separation. As the bond formation rate approaches that of free diffusion – correponding
to instant bond formation in LD simulations --, we encountered phase-separated states in our
simulations. However, the system largely favors the micro-phase separated state (bluish-red
regions in the phase diagram) for low and intermediate densities. The macro-phase separated
state is only observed for higher densities. The macro-phase separated regime in this phase
diagram is, however, absent at low valency λ of 3 (Supplementary Fig.S6). Further, this phase
diagram (Fig.7A) also establishes that for the value of non-specific interaction strength (εns =
0.35 kT, see methods section for rationale) used here the cluster formation is driven by the
finite-valency specific interactions (absence of phase separation for kbond/kdiff → 0). For
comparison, in the Supplementary Fig.S7, we present the mean cluster sizes for assemblies that
are stabilized by non-specific interactions only (λ=0). The εns-φ phase diagram shows that
non-specific interaction-driven cluster formation occurs at only high values of ε ns
(Supplementary Fig.S7B). Therefore, microphase separation is contingent on the bonding rate
being of the same order as the free-diffusion rate (kbond → kdiff) establishing the validity of the
instantaneous bonding assumption in the LD simulations. It is the ratio of kbond/kdiff, and not the
absolute magnitudes that is a vital parameter for these simulations. Hence, in all the kinetic
Monte carlo (KMC) simulations we set the value of kdiff to 1 s-1 and vary the ratio kbond/kdiff to
tune phase separation. It must be noted that, unless mentioned otherwise, the results from the
kMC simulations presented here are for a weak non-specific interaction strength of 0.35kT. All
simulations were performed for a timescale of 2 hours (actual time). As proof of convergence of
these simulations, we compare results at the end of 2 hrs to those at longer simulation
timescale and show that there is negligible difference in cluster sizes (Supplementary Fig.S8).
Further, we systematically probed the effect of specific interaction valency on the
extent of phase separation. Fig.7B shows phase diagram with λ and φ as the phase parameters.
For smaller λ and low φ, the single largest cluster sizes do not approach the macrophase
separated limit (blue and black regions in Fig.7B). This suggests that the critical densities for
macrophase separation for lower valency particles would be extremely large, making it an
improbable scenario at low in vivo concentrations. Detailed versions of these phase diagrams
can be found in Supplementary Fig.S5. This phase-diagram is consistent with in vitro
experiments involving SH3 and PRM chains with varying valencies, with higher valency
molecules displaying a lower critical concentration for phase separation [8]. Another interesting
feature that differentiates the clusters stabilized by specific interactions are relatively lower
densities of these clusters, as opposed to their counterparts stabilized by non-specific
interactions (Fig.7C). While the assemblies formed by specific interactions (λ=5, ε ns = 0.35 kT;
purple curve in Fig.7C) are of comparable sizes to those driven by non-specific interactions,
their densities are almost 2-fold lower. This is consistent with the spatial density profiles for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

strong and weakly interacting linkers in our LD simulations (Supplementary Fig.S4). In
addition to the number of specific interactions, a vital parameter that would determine the
droplet sizes is the strength of these specific interactions (𝜀𝑠𝑝 ). As evident from Fig.7D, for
specific interactions that are extremely weak (𝜀𝑠𝑝 < 2𝑘𝑇 in Fig.7D), there is no significant
phase separation. Strikingly, this critical interaction strength (when the largest cluster >=
50% of available monomers) is lower for higher valency particles (λ = 5 curve in Fig.7D).
Interestingly, the SH3-PRM interaction strength is reported to be of the order of 2 kT [8], [10]. A
more detailed εsp-kbond phase diagram can be found in Supplementary Fig.S9. Overall, our
systematic study of cluster sizes suggests that the propensity to phase separate at biologically
relevant timescales could be tuned via different parameters offering the cell several handles to
modulate sizes and morphologies of droplets. Interestingly, a macro-phase separated state
exists only in a very narrow window of parameters in the limit of weak non-specific
interactions, unlike aggregation processes where isotropic interactions always result in
macrophase separation at longer timescales.

Tunability of exchange times in microphase-separation
In the KMC simulations so far, we discuss the manner in which different phase
parameters could shape droplet size distributions. However, the functionality of a condensate
hinges not only on the ability of biomolecules to assemble into larger clusters but also to
exchange with the surrounding medium at biologically relevant timescales. These exchange
timescales are also a measure of the material properties of the droplets themselves [2], [9],
[21]. Therefore a systematic understanding of the dependence of molecular exchange times on
intrinsic and extrinsic parameters is crucial to get a grasp of the tunability of intracellular
self-organisation driven by finite-valency specific interactions. In this context, we probed the
extent to which the exchange times could be tuned by modulating the intrinsic features of the
self-assembling units. Here, we define monomer exchange times as the mean first passage time
for a monomer to go from having four neighbours to being completely free. To compute first
passage times, we kept track of exchange events from across 300 simulation trajectories of 10
hours each. Our simulations suggest that, for a given valency, a slight increase in interaction
strength 𝜖𝑠𝑝 within a narrow window could result in a dramatic increase in phase-separation
(Fig.7D). This raises an interesting question—is there an optimal range for these phase
parameters that promotes phase separation as well as maintains the dynamicity of the
clusters? In this context, we first computed the mean first passage times for monomer
exchange upon systematic variation of εsp (Fig.8A). Interestingly, as with cluster sizes, a slight
increase in εsp results in a dramatic increase in monomer exchange times. For particles with
λ=5, a slight increase in εsp from 2 kT to 2.5 kT, there is a four-fold slowdown in exchange times
indicating dramatic malleability of dynamicity of these assemblies. This shift from the fast to
slow exchange dynamics is less abrupt in case of particles with λ=3 suggesting that an interplay
between λ and εsp could tune the droplets for desired exchange properties. We further varied
these two parameters (λ and εsp) systematically to probe their effect on cluster sizes
(Supplementary Figure.S10A) and molecular exchange times (Supplementary Figure.S10B). As
expected, for weak εsp and a low λ there is no phase separation (black region in Fig.8B). For an
intermediate regime in this phase-space, the system is predominantly in a micro-phase

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

separated state, with either slow (red region in Fig.8B) or fast (blue region in Fig.8B)
molecular-exchange times. However, macrophase separation is only observed for really large λ
and εsp, with a dramatic slowdown in exchange times (shaded yellow region in Fig.8B and
Supplementary Figure.S10B ), suggesting that these assemblies might be biologically
non-functional. Valency is, therefore, a key determinant of how frequently a molecule gets
exchanged between the droplet and the free medium. Similar observations have been made
experimentally by Xing et al. (Fig 8C and D) with regards to several condensate proteins
featuring different valencies, with low valency species showing exchange times that are orders
of magnitude faster than the higher valency ones [9]. Given that functional droplets are tuned
for liquid-like behaviour, microphase separation is, therefore, the most likely outcome for
dynamically exchanging droplets.

Figure 8: Effect of model parameters on the exchange times between monomers and the
aggregates. The parameter values used in panels A and B are φ=0.04, k bond/kdiff = 1. A) Mean
first passage time for the monomers to go from the buried state (with 4 neighbours) to the free
state (with no neighbours) in response to varying values of specific interaction strength. The
two curves show the trends for species with different interaction valencies. The dashed solid
lines refer to value of εsp beyond which the largest cluster consumes 50% or more of available
monomers. B) The state of the system, for variation in εsp and λ suggests that the system
displays remarkable malleability in dynamicity and size distributions. Weak εsp and a low λ

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

results in no phase separation (shaded black). For higher values of both these parameters, the
system can access the macrophase separated state (shaded yellow), however with a dramatic
slowdown in exchange times. For an intermediate range, the system shows microphase
separation, with either slow (shaded red) or fast-exchange (shaded blue) dynamics. C) The
experimentally determined molecular exchange times for molecules of varying interaction
valencies. [9]. D) The extent of recovery after a photobeaching experiment, for interacting
species with varying valencies. The data in panel C) and D) has been obtained from a study by
Xing et al[9]. The solid curves in C and D are added to guide the eye

Discussion
Micro-phase separation: a potential signature of multivalent heteropolymers
Membrane-less organelles are heterogeneous pools of biomolecules which localize a
high density of proteins and nucleic acids [1], [21], [22]. An interesting feature of several
complex monomers [4], [8], [10] that constitute these droplets is 'multivalency' or multiple
repeats of adhesive domains [1], [7], [8]. These adhesive domains can bind to complementary
domains on other chains, thereby facilitating phase separation. In this study, we model this
phenomenon as that of self-associative polymers that possess folded domains (represented as
idealized spheres in ) separated by flexible linker regions. Recent computational studies have
employed similar models to characterize the equilibrium state of these polymer systems,
notably the coarse-grained simulations by Harmon et al.[10] and Choi et al. [12]. These studies
employ the 'sticker and spacer' model to understand the phase behaviour of these linear
multivalent polymers [10], largely focusing on the nature of the phase-separated state at
equilibrium. Using lattice-polymer Monte carlo simulations, they establish the role of
intrinsically disordered linker regions as molecular determinants that dictate the equilibrium
state of a system of associative polymers that interact via non-covalent interactions[10].
Crucially, these works focus on the cross-linked gel-like nature of the macrophase-separated
state of these polymers. However, equilibrium lattice simulations and classical Flory-like
theories do not address the dynamics of cluster growth resulting in the observed peculiar
micro-phase separated nature [8], [21] of multiple biomolecular condensates, as opposed to a
single macro-phase separated state [14], [23]. This raises a number of interesting questions – is
microphase separation a signature of multi-valent protein assemblies? How does the physics of
associative polymers multivalent proteins differ from those of simple, homopolymer chains? In
this work, we provide a kinetic analysis of these questions using a combination of
coarse-grained LD simulations to probe the early stages of cluster growth, and a
reaction-diffusion model to probe the problem at longer timescales.
Exhaustion of specific interaction valencies -- a barrier to macro-phase separation
First, we studied self-assembly by multivalent polymers whose adhesive domains
interact via stable, `non-transient' interactions to understand the early events in the growth
process. We observed that, except for extremely high concentrations where there is a system
spanning network, the most feasible scenario at smaller concentrations is that of
micro-droplets with a concentration-dependent distribution of droplet sizes. The temporal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

evolution of aggregated species suggests that at lower concentrations, the available interaction
valencies get consumed within smaller-sized assemblies, making them inert for further cluster
growth. Our results suggest that two critical timescales decide whether a cluster continues to
grow further -- a) concentration-dependent timescale of two chains encountering each other
and forming the initial functional interaction, and, b) the exhaustion of valencies within a small
cluster, a timescale dependent on intrinsic features of the polymer (Fig.4). Crucially, these two
timescales are sensitive to subtle modifications in the self-assembling polymer chain (Fig.5).
Therefore, by tuning these two time-scales, the cell can modulate the degree of phase
separation. Modifications to the linker can also result in altered densities of the self-assembled
state, with a 10-100 fold enrichment in molecular concentrations within the droplets
(Supplementary Fig.S5), consistent with the experimentally reported degrees of enrichment
within condensates [4], [8], [18]. Overall, the simulations involving non-transient interactions,
help us establish an understanding of the essential physical mechanisms determining
microphase separation in membrane-less organelles, with the finite nature of the specific
interactions driving the peculiar phenomenon. Although these findings were for an ‘artificial’
assumption of extremely stable functional interactions, the highly cross-linked nature of the
phase-separated state [10] might result in these early micro-phase droplets not being able to
transition to the macro-phase separated state even for reversible, transient interactions.
Bridging the gap between the early and biologically relevant timescales
To reach the time scales relevant to biology we employed a coarse-grained kinetic
model where each polymer (from the LD simulations) is represented as a diffusing reacting
centre on a 2D lattice which can interact either non-specifically (mimicking inter-linker
interactions) or specifically with neighbouring centres. The difference between the two types of
interactions is that the number of specific interactions that each centre can make is limited by
its valency. In an extension of the LD model, specific interactions are stable yet reversible and
can form and break with rates dictated by detailed balance. Consistent with our LD simulations,
our kinetic Monte-Carlo simulations of the phenomenological model reveal that for timescales
relevant to biology, macro phase-separation is a phenomenon that is observed in a very narrow
regime of parameters in the kinetic phase-space (Fig.7). Further, the phenomenon of exhausted
adhesive valencies is even more prominent for species with lower valency (fewer adhesive
domains in the prototypical polymer), as evident from much smaller sizes of the largest cluster
after an hour-long (actual time) simulation run. The lattice-diffusion model, despite its minimal
nature, captures the well-known relationship between molecular valency and critical
concentration [8] for phase separation (Fig.7B). An interplay between the valency of the
generalized polymer and the strength of interactions can also alter the exchange times of
molecules with the bulk medium dramatically. Interestingly, a slight shift in either these
valencies or interaction strengths could result in a change in exchange rates by orders of
magnitude. Further, for regions of the parameter space (εsp and λ) that favor macro-phase
separation we observe a dramatic slow-down in molecular exchange times. In other words, for
parameters that result in a fast-exchanging condensed state, micro-phase separation is the
most favored outcome (Fig.8B and Supplementary Fig.S10). Such a discontinuity makes these
systems extremely sensitive to mutations that might cause a shift in dynamics and eventual loss
of function of these droplets. Also, such shifts could also make these systems extremely

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

responsive to non-equilibrium processes such as RNA-processing, side-chain modifications
(acetylation, methylation) that are often attributed to modulating condensate dynamics [24]–
[26]. The differential exchange times in response to variation of interaction parameters in our
model lends further support to the scaffold-client model [9]. The scaffolds that are slower
exchange species with higher valencies acting could, therefore, recruit faster exchange clients
with lower valencies. The valencies and strength of interactions could have thus evolved to
achieve exchange times that ensure the functionality of spatial segregation via liquid-liquid
phase separation.
A multi-domain architecture such as the sticker-spacer architecture allows for
separation of two functions with the folded domains (conserved) performing functional role
while the spacer regions being modified over time to tune the propensity to phase separate and
also the material nature of the condensate. Overall, our multi-scale study shows that the block
co-polymer like organization of these multi-valent proteins, with finite specific interactions
driving phase separation could manifest itself in the micro-phase separated droplet state. A
switch in the driving force for self-assembly, from the specific to non-specific interactions via
sticky linkers, could not only alter the kinetics of assembly but also have implications in
disorders associated with aberrant phase separation.

Methods
Langevin Dynamics simulations
Force Field. The polymer chains in the box are modelled using the following
interactions. Adjacent beads on the polymer chain are connected via harmonic springs through
the potential function,
𝐸𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 𝑘𝑠 ∑𝑀−1
⃗𝑖 − 𝑟⃗𝑖+1 | − 𝑟0 )2 ,
(2)
𝑖=1 (|𝑟
𝑡ℎ
𝑡ℎ
where 𝑟⃗𝑖 and 𝑟⃗𝑖+1 are the 𝑖
and (𝑖 + 1) bead positions, respectively; 𝑟0 is the
equilibrium bond length while 𝑘𝑠 represents the spring constant. This interaction ensures the
connectivity between the beads of a polymer chain. To model semi-flexibility of the polymer
chain, any two neighbouring bonds within the linker regions of the polymer chains interact via a
simple cosine bending potential
𝐸𝑏𝑒𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 = 𝜅 ∑𝑀−2
(3)
𝑖=1 (1 − 𝑐𝑜𝑠𝜃𝑖 ),
𝑡ℎ
𝑡ℎ
where 𝜃𝑖 describes the angle between 𝑖 and (𝑖 + 1) bond while 𝜅 is the energetic cost
for bending. The non-bonded isotropic interactions, inter-linker and linker-functional
interactions were modelled using the Lennard-Jones (LJ) potential,
12

𝜎

𝐸𝑛𝑏 = 4𝜖 ∑𝑖<𝑗 [(|𝑟⃗ −𝑟⃗ |)
𝑖

𝑗

6

𝜎

− (|𝑟⃗ −𝑟⃗ |) ],
𝑖

𝑗

(4)

for all |𝑟⃗𝑖 − 𝑟⃗𝑗 | < 𝑟𝑐 , where 𝑟𝑐 refers to the cutoff distance beyond which the non-bonded
potentials are neglected. The LJ potentials were truncated at a distance cutoff of 2.5𝜎.
The strength of the attractive component of this potential, ε, was varied to achieve varying
degrees of inter-linker interactions in our simulations. 𝜖 signifies the strength of the attractive
interaction and has units of energy. In our simulations, we vary the bending energy parameter
(𝜅) to model rigid or flexible linkers. The `stickiness' of the linker regions and their ability to
promote inter-molecular self-assembly is modulated using an effective interaction parameter

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(𝜖). Non-specific, isotropic interactions between linker beads (interaction strengths 𝜖ns ) are
also used as a model parameter that is varied systematically in our simulations. In our
simulations, the linker regions participate in inter-linker interactions only. The strength of this
inter-linker εns in our simulations was varied in the range of typical strengths of short-range
interactions in biomolecules. We vary the ε ns for pair-wise inter-linker interaction (per pair) in
the range of 0.1 kcal/mol (~0.2 kT) to 0.5 kcal/mol (~1 kT)[27]. For comparison, strong
non-covalent interactions such as the H-bonds are known to be of the order of 0.5 kcal/mol to
1.5 kcal/mol in solvated proteins. Similar values of isotropic, short-range interactions have been
used in conventional coarse-grained protein force-fields such as the MARTINI [28], [29].
LD Simulations Details.
The dynamics of these coarse-grained polymers was simulated using the LAMMPS
molecular dynamics package[30]. In these simulations, the simulator solves for the Newtons’s
equations of motion in presence of a viscous drag (modeling effect of the solvent) and a
Langevin thermostat (modeling random collisions by solvent particles)[31]. The simulations
were performed under the NVT ensemble, at a a temperature of 310 K. The mass of linker
beads was set to 110 Da while the mass of the idealized functional domains (red and yellow
beads in Fig.1) was set to 7000 Da that is approximately equal to the mass of the SH3 domain.
The size of the linker beads was set at 4.2 A (of the same order as amino acids) while that of the
functional domains was set at 20 A (~size of a folded SH3 domain [15]). The viscous drag was
implemented via the damping coefficient, ϒ = m/6πηa. Here, m is the mass of an individual
bead, ‘η’ is the dynamic viscosity of water and ‘a’ is the size of the bead. An integration time
step of 15 fs was used in our simulations, and the viscosity of the surrounding medium was set
at the viscosity of water. Similar values of these parameters have been previously employed for
coarse-grained Langevin dynamics simulations of proteins [32].

Kinetic Monte carlo simulations
To assess biologically relevant time-scales, we develop a phenomenological kinetic
model wherein the individual multi-valent polymer chains are modelled as diffusing particles
with fixed valencies. Each particle in our lattice Monte carlo simulations is a coarse-grained
representation of the bead-spring polymer chains in the LD simulations, with an effective
valency that is a simulation variable. Particles occupying adjacent sites on the lattice experience
a weak, non-specific interaction (of strength 𝜖𝑛𝑠 ) that is isotropic in nature. This isotropic
attractive force is analogous to the inter-linker interactions in the LD simulations. A functional
bond can stochastically form between any pair of neighbouring particles, provided both the
particles possess unsatisfied valencies. The rate of bond formation between a pair of particles
with unsatisfied valencies is kbond. On the other hand, an existing functional bond can break
with a rate kbreak that is equal to kbond. 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−𝜖𝑠𝑝 ) in magnitude. 𝜖𝑠𝑝 is the strength of each
functional interaction. Assuming that there are unoccupied neighbouring sites, the monomers
can diffuse on the lattice in any of the four directions (in 2D) with a rate 𝑘𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 . Additionally, the
entire cluster that any given monomer is a part of can diffuse in either of the 4 directions with a
scaled diffusion rate that is inversely proportional to the size of the cluster. A particle that is
part of a cluster can diffuse away from the cluster with a rate 𝑘𝑑𝑖𝑓𝑓 . 𝑒𝑥𝑝 − ∑(𝜖𝑠𝑝 + 𝜖𝑛𝑠 ). Here,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

∑ 𝜖𝑠𝑝 + 𝜖𝑛𝑠 is the magnitude of net interactions that any particle is involved in. These rates are
schematically described in Fig.6.
Using these set of phenomenological rates, we allow the system to evolve using the
exact stochastic simulation method or the Gillespie kinetic Monte Carlo algorithm [20]. This
algorithm has previously been used to model biological processes as diverse as gene regulation
[33] and cytoskeletal filament growth [34]. In this approach, a set of 'N' rates is initiated for any
given current configuration (set of coordinates of each particle and their valencies). In other
words, 10 potential events are initiated for each particle on the lattice. Namely, the 10 events
per particle are a) 4 diffusion events, b) 4 cluster diffusion events, c) bond formation and d)
bond breakage events. For any given configuration, all or only a subset of these events could be
possible. We then advance the state of the system by executing one reaction at a time. The
𝑗
𝑗
probability of each event is equal to its rate, 𝑟𝑖 /∑ ∑ 𝑟𝑖 . Here i and j refer to the identity of the
monomer and the event type, respectively. Given these set of propensities, we choose the
event to be executed by drawing a uniformly distributed random number 𝑧1 and by comparing
how the random number compares with the event propensities. The simulation time is
advanced using the following expression, 𝛿𝑡 =−(1/𝑟𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 )𝑙𝑛(𝑧2 ), where 𝑧2 is a uniform
random number. This 𝛿𝑡 is based on the assumption that the waiting times between any two
events are exponentially distributed. The above algorithm has to be iterated several times such
that each reaction has been fired multiple times, suggesting the system has reached
steady-state behaviour.
Rationale behind phase parameters in KMC simulations:
Two key phase parameters in our KMC simulations are the valency per interacting
particle and the bulk density of particles on the lattice. We performed simulations for valencies
ranging from 3 to 6, typical of multivalent proteins enriched in membrane-less organelles.
Unlike the non-specific which can only be one per neighbor, thereby a maximum of 4 per
particle for a 2D-lattice, there could be more than one specific interactions between a pair of
neighboring particles, as long as both the participating members have unsatisfied valencies. The
bulk density of particles is defined as, φ = Nmono/L2, where Nmono and L are the number of
particles and lattice size, respectively). In our kMC simulations, we varied φ within the range of
0.01 to 0.1, a range that is consistent with the analogous parameter for LD simulations, the
4
occupied volume fractions within the LD simulation box (φ LD= Nmono.3 𝜋Rmono3). For instance, a
free monomer concentration (C mono) of 10 uM corresponds to a φLD of 0.008 which increases to
0.17 for 200 uM. Further, the phase diagrams for KMC simulations were primarily computed for
a weak non-specific εns of 0.35 kT, chosen in order to focus on specific interaction-driven cluster
growth. In the kMC simulations, εns refers to the net non-specific interaction for a pair of
monomers as opposed to a pair of interacting linker beads in the LD simulations. It must,
however, be noted that the interaction strength for a pair of interacting chains is not merely
additive (with the length of the polymer chain). A potential explanation for this could be found
in earlier studies wherein it has been argued that smaller segments (~ length of 7-10 amino
acids) within a long, solvated polymer chain (like IDPs) could behave like independent units
referred to as blobs[35]. Since the degree of coarse-graining employed in KMC is of the order of
one particle per polymer chain, it lacks the microscopic degrees of freedom of the bead-spring
polymer chain (in LD simulations). Hence we do not employ a higher non-specific interaction

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

strength in our phase plot computations. As proof of principle, we show the mean pairwise
interaction energies for dimers from the LD simulations, for a weak inter-linker interaction
strength of 0.1 kcal/mol (Supplementary Fig.S7A) and a corresponding phase-diagram for
non-specifically driven interactions (Supplementary Fig.S7B). All the mean cluster sizes in the
MC simulations were computed over 300 independent kinetic Monte carlo trajectories. The
mean molecular exchange times were computed over 1000-independent kMC runs.
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by NIH RO1 GM068670. We are grateful
to Mark Miller (Durham University) and Ranjith Padinhateeri (Indian Institute of Technology
Bombay) for useful discussions.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[5]
[6]
[7]
[8]
[9]

[10]

[11]
[12]
[13]
[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

[18]

S. F. Banani, H. O. Lee, A. A. Hyman, and M. K. Rosen, “Biomolecular condensates:
organizers of cellular biochemistry,” Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., vol. 18, p. 285, Feb. 2017.
L. Guo and J. Shorter, “It’s Raining Liquids: RNA Tunes Viscoelasticity and Dynamics of
Membraneless Organelles,” Mol. Cell, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 189–192, 2015.
A. A. Hyman, C. A. Weber, and F. Jülicher, “Liquid-Liquid Phase Separation in Biology,”
Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 39–58, 2014.
D. M. Mitrea and R. W. Kriwacki, “Phase separation in biology; functional organization of
a higher order,” Cell Commun. Signal., vol. 14, no. 1, p. 1, 2016.
H. J. Kim et al., “Mutations in prion-like domains in hnRNPA2B1 and hnRNPA1 cause
multisystem proteinopathy and ALS,” Nature, vol. 495, p. 467, Mar. 2013.
M. Ramaswami, J. P. Taylor, and R. Parker, “Altered Ribostasis: RNA-Protein Granules in
Degenerative Disorders,” Cell, vol. 154, no. 4, pp. 727–736, 2013.
A. Patel et al., “A Liquid-to-Solid Phase Transition of the ALS Protein FUS Accelerated by
Disease Mutation,” Cell, vol. 162, no. 5, pp. 1066–1077, 2017.
P. Li et al., “Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins,” Nature,
vol. 483, no. 7389, pp. 336–340, 2012.
W. Xing, D. Muhlrad, R. Parker, and M. K. Rosen, “A quantitative inventory of yeast P
body proteins reveals principles of compositional specificity,” bioRxiv, p. 489658, Jan.
2018.
T. S. Harmon, A. S. Holehouse, M. K. Rosen, and R. V Pappu, “Intrinsically disordered
linkers determine the interplay between phase separation and gelation in multivalent
proteins,” Elife, vol. 6, p. e30294, 2017.
S. Auer, C. M. Dobson, and M. Vendruscolo, “Characterization of the nucleation barriers
for protein aggregation and amyloid formation,” HFSP J., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 137–146, 2007.
J.-M. Choi, F. Dar, and R. V Pappu, “LASSI: A lattice model for simulating phase transitions
of multivalent proteins,” PLOS Comput. Biol., vol. 15, no. 10, p. e1007028, Oct. 2019.
S. R. Ren and I. W. Hamley, “Cell Dynamics Simulations of Microphase Separation in Block
Copolymers,” Macromolecules, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 116–126, Jan. 2001.
C. P. Brangwynne, P. Tompa, and R. V. Pappu, “Polymer physics of intracellular phase
transitions,” Nat. Phys., vol. 11, no. 11, pp. 899–904, 2015.
A. Musacchio, M. Noble, R. Pauptit, R. Wierenga, and M. Saraste, “Crystal structure of a
Src-homology 3 (SH3) domain,” Nature, vol. 359, no. 6398, pp. 851–855, 1992.
D. Feldman, “The theory of polymer dynamics, by M. Doi and S. F. Edwards, the
Clarendon Press, Oxford University Press, New York, 1986, 391 pp. Price: $78.50.,” J.
Polym. Sci. Part C Polym. Lett., vol. 27, no. 7, pp. 239–240, Jun. 1989.
I. M. Lifshitz, A. Y. Grosberg, and A. R. Khokhlov, “Some problems of the statistical
physics of polymer chains with volume interaction,” Rev. Mod. Phys., vol. 50, no. 3, pp.
683–713, Jul. 1978.
T. J. Nott et al., “Phase Transition of a Disordered Nuage Protein Generates
Environmentally Responsive Membraneless Organelles,” Mol. Cell, vol. 57, no. 5, pp.
936–947, Mar. 2015.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881565; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

[19]

[20]
[21]
[22]

[23]
[24]

[25]
[26]
[27]
[28]

[29]

[30]
[31]

[32]
[33]

[34]
[35]

K. A. Burke, A. M. Janke, C. L. Rhine, and N. L. Fawzi, “Residue-by-Residue View of
In&#xa0;Vitro FUS Granules that Bind the C-Terminal Domain of RNA Polymerase II,”
Mol. Cell, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 231–241, Oct. 2015.
D. T. Gillespie, “Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions,” J. Phys.
Chem., vol. 81, no. 25, pp. 2340–2361, 1977.
M. Feric et al., “Coexisting Liquid Phases Underlie Nucleolar Subcompartments,” Cell, vol.
165, no. 7, pp. 1686–1697, 2016.
S. Boeynaems et al., “Spontaneous driving forces give rise to protein−RNA condensates
with coexisting phases and complex material properties,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 116,
no. 16, pp. 7889 LP-- 7898, Apr. 2019.
P. J. Flory, “Thermodynamics of High Polymer Solutions,” J. Chem. Phys., vol. 10, no. 1,
pp. 51–61, Jan. 1942.
M. Hofweber and D. Dormann, “Friend or foe—Post-translational modifications as
regulators of phase separation and RNP granule dynamics,” J. Biol. Chem., vol. 294, no.
18, pp. 7137–7150, May 2019.
J. T. Wang et al., “Regulation of RNA granule dynamics by phosphorylation of serine-rich,
intrinsically disordered proteins in C. elegans,” Elife, vol. 3, p. e04591, 2014.
J. Wang et al., “A Molecular Grammar Governing the Driving Forces for Phase Separation
of Prion-like RNA Binding Proteins,” Cell, vol. 174, no. 3, pp. 688--699.e16, Jul. 2018.
S.-Y. Sheu, D.-Y. Yang, H. L. Selzle, and E. W. Schlag, “Energetics of hydrogen bonds in
peptides,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 100, no. 22, pp. 12683 LP – 12687, Oct. 2003.
S. J. Marrink, H. J. Risselada, S. Yefimov, D. P. Tieleman, and A. H. De Vries, “The MARTINI
Force Field : Coarse Grained Model for Biomolecular Simulations The MARTINI Force
Field : Coarse Grained Model for Biomolecular Simulations,” vol. 111, no. June, pp. 7812–
7824, 2007.
L. Monticelli, S. K. Kandasamy, X. Periole, R. G. Larson, D. P. Tieleman, and S.-J. Marrink,
“The MARTINI Coarse-Grained Force Field: Extension to Proteins,” J. Chem. Theory
Comput., vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 819–834, May 2008.
S. Plimpton, “Fast Parallel Algorithms for Short-Range Molecular Dynamics,” J. Comput.
Phys., vol. 117, no. 1, pp. 1–19, 1995.
T. Schneider and E. Stoll, “Molecular-dynamics study of a three-dimensional
one-component model for distortive phase transitions,” Phys. Rev. B, vol. 17, no. 3, pp.
1302–1322, Feb. 1978.
G. Bellesia and J.-E. Shea, “Effect of β-sheet propensity on peptide aggregation,” J. Chem.
Phys., vol. 130, no. 14, p. 145103, 2009.
J. J. Parmar, J. F. Marko, and R. Padinhateeri, “Nucleosome positioning and kinetics near
transcription-start-site barriers are controlled by interplay between active remodeling
and DNA sequence,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 128–136, Sep. 2013.
P. Ranjith, D. Lacoste, K. Mallick, and J. F. Joanny, “Nonequilibrium self-assembly of a
filament coupled to ATP/GTP hydrolysis,” Biophys. J., vol. 96, no. 6, pp. 2146–2159, 2009.
R. V Pappu, X. Wang, A. Vitalis, and S. L. Crick, “A polymer physics perspective on driving
forces and mechanisms for protein aggregation,” Arch. Biochem. Biophys., vol. 469, no. 1,
pp. 132–141, 2008.

