bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cranial anatomy of the predatory actinopterygian Brazilichthys
macrognathus from the Permian (Cisuralian) Pedra de Fogo Formation,
Parnaíba Basin, Brazil
RODRIGO T. FIGUEROA, 1, * MATT FRIEDMAN, 2 and VALÉRIA GALLO1
1

Laboratório de Sistemática e Biogeografia, Departamento de Zoologia, Universidade

do Estado do Rio de Janeiro, Rua São Francisco Xavier, 524, Pavilhão Haroldo Lisboa
258, Rio de Janeiro, 20550-013, Brazil, rotinof@gmail.com, gallo@uerj.br;
2

Museum of Paleontology and Department of Earth and Environmental Sciences,

University of Michigan, 3114 Biological Sciences Building 1105, North University
Ave, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1079, U.S.A., mfriedm@umich.edu

*Corresponding author

RH: FIGUEROA ET AL.—CRANIAL ANATOMY OF BRAZILICHTHYS
MACROGNATHUS

Submitted to the Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology in January 22, 2019

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT—Brazilichthys macrognathus is the only named actinopterygian from the
Permain (Cisuralian) Pedra de Fogo Formation of northeastern Brazil, where it is
represented by a single three-dimensionally preserved but incompletely described skull
of unclear systematic placement. We used X-ray computed microtomography (µ-CT) to
better document its anatomy and phylogenetic affinities. µ-CT reveals parts of the
internal skeleton. We correct errors in original description, including the number of
infraorbital bones and the misidentification of the dermosphenotic as sclerotic
ossifications. These reinterpretations of external anatomy are joined by new data on
internal structure, including the palate, parasphenoid, and branchial and hyoid arches. A
maximum parsimony analysis of anatomical data resolves Brazilichthys as a stem
actinopterygian, crownward of all Devonian species. This placement is supported by the
absence of a dermosphenotic posterior ramus and the presence of opercular process of
the hyomandibula. A similar placement is suggested by a Bayesian analysis of this same
dataset, although relationships throughout the tree are less resolved. Our results reject
previous interpretations of Brazilichthys as a relative of Birgeriidae, a Triassic group
consistently placed within the actinopterygian crown. Although Acrolepis is too poorly
known to be included in our analysis, we also reject a close relationship between this
taxon and Brazilichthys, as their only shared similarities appear to be broadly distributed
among early actinopterygians.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION

The late Paleozoic is an important episode of actinopterygian evolution,
representing a bridge from low-disparity and low-diversity ray-finned fish faunas of the
Devonian to the emergence of the earliest teleosts in the Triassic (Sallan, 2014;
Friedman, 2015). This Permo-Carboniferous interval is marked by substantial
innovation in skull and body morphology (Sallan and Friedman, 2012), as well as the
possible origin of the crown radiation and divergence of the cladistian, chondrostean,
and neopterygian total groups (Giles et al., 2017). Despite its clear significance, the
Permo-Carboniferous remains a poorly known interval in the fossil record of fishes.
Despite relatively abundant actinopterygian fossils during some parts of the late
Paleozoic, their taxonomy is confused and relatively few species are known in detail.
Consequently, fossil fishes of Carboniferous and Permian age are among the least stable
taxa in analyses of actinopterygian interrelationships (Giles et al., 2017). Compounding
these issues, the known Permo-Carboniferous record shows a strong geographic
collecting and research bias toward northern landmasses, with the best known
actinopterygian faunas of this age deriving from North American (Mississippian: Bear
Gulch; Pennsylvanian: Mazon Creek, Linton, Kinney Brick Quarry; Schultze and
Bardack, 1987; Kues and Lucas, 1992; Hansen, 1996; Poplin and Lund, 2002) and
European (Mississippian: Foulden, Wardie, Bearsden; Pennsylvanian: Bohemian
Massif; Permian: East Greenland, Zechstein; Aldinger, 1937; Gardiner, 1985; Haubold
and Schaumberg, 1985; Coates, 1998; Štamberg, 2013) localities. While a handful of
productive localities are known from southern continents, these have generally been the
subject of broad faunal overviews (e.g. Witteburg Group of South Africa; Gardiner,
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1969) or detailed descriptions of only single constituent taxa (e.g. Ebenaqua from
Rangal Coal Measures of Blackwater, Australia; Campbell and Phuoc, 1983).

Brazilian deposits yield the vast majority of Permo-Carboniferous
actinopterygians known from South America (Cione et al., 2010), with only a handful
of examples known from elsewhere, mostly based on poorly preserved specimens (e.g.
Beltan, 1978; this material is now considered lost, pers. comm. Piñeiro, G., April 18,
2017). Despite the relative neglect of the South American record of Paleozoic fishes,
sporadic research efforts reveal substantial assortment of Permian actinopterygians from
Brazil. These span the Permian and overwhelmingly derive from deposits in the Paraná
Basin of southern Brazil: the Rio do Sul (Cisuralian in age and yielding Elonichthys
gondwanus; Richter et al., 1985), Campo Mourão (Cisuralian in age and yielding
Roslerichthys riomafrensis and Santosichthys mafrensis; Hamel, 2005; Malabarba,
1988), Rio Bonito Formation (Guadalupian-Lopingian in age yielding Tholonosteon
santacatarinae; Richter et al., 1985) Rio do Rasto (Guadalupian-Lopingian in age and
yielding Rubidus pascoalensis and Paranaichthys longianalis; Richter, 2002; Dias,
2012), and Corumbataí (Lopingian in age and yeilding Tholonotus brasiliensis and
Angatubichthys mendesi; Dunkle and Schaeffer, 1956; Figueiredo and Carvalho, 2004)
formations. By contrast, Brazilichthys macrognathus is the only Permian
actinopterygian known from the Parnaíba Basin in northeastern Brazil (Figueroa and
Machado, 2018). Brazilichthys in many ways encapsulates the problems surrounding
the study of Permo-Carboniferous fishes from Brazil and elsewhere. Known only from
the holotype specimen, Brazilichthys has only been described externally (Cox and
Hutchinson, 1991). The limited data available for the genus have led to informal
alignment with multiple lineages of early actinopterygians on the basis of overall

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

resemblance: first Acrolepidae by Cox and Hutchinson (1991), and then Birgeriidae by
Romano and Brinkmann (2009).

Some of the ambiguity surrounding the phylogenetic placement of many early
ray-finned fishes stems from restricted anatomical description, often restricted to
superficial details of the dermal skeleton. The widespread availability of micro
computed tomography (µ-CT) now permits detailed examination of character-rich
internal skeletal features. Application of µ-CT to previously described early
actinopterygians has resulted in substantial new information for previously described
taxa that has helped to refine--and in some cases substantially change--their inferred
phylogenetic positions (Giles et al., 2017; Argyriou et al., 2018; Coates and Tietjen,
2019; Friedman et al., in 2019). Here we provide a revised description of Brazilichthys
macrognathus based on µ-CT scans of the type and only specimen. Using these new
data in combination with a recently developed character matrix, we examine the
phylogenetic placement of Brazilichthys among early actinopterygians, comparing our
results to previous hypothesis regarding the actinopterygian stem. Further, we compare
Brazilichthys to large predatory Paleozoic actinopterygians, proposing steps for future
studies.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Specimens Examined

Brazilichthys macrognathus, holotype, DGM 1061-P (Fig. 1A-C).
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Computed Microtomography

Computed microtomography (µ-CT) of DGM 1061-P was conducted at the
Laboratório de Instrumentação Nuclear, of the Instituto Alberto Luiz Coimbra de Pósgraduação e Pesquisa de Engenharia (COPPE), located in the Centro de Tecnologia
(CT) of the Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), using a SkyScan 1173
scanner.

Parameters of the scan were: current = 61 µA; voltage =130 kV; projections =
2234. A 1 mm copper filter was used and projections were processed in in the
proprietary software NRecon 1.6.9.4 to produce a tomogram stack. The resolution of the
scan was 35.61 µm.

Segmentation was completed in Spiersedit 2.20 (Smith et al., 2016), using
tomograms saved as .bmp format. Downsampling (by 50% in x, y, and z axes) of the
data was done to speed the construction of the 3D model, without any conspicuous loss
of detail. The slices were then processed manually, with the resulting 3D model was
initially visualized using Spiersview 2.20. More minor modifications such as smoothing
and brightness were made using this software, along with removal of ‘islands’ of
sediment or unidentifiable bone fragments. Production of final images was completed in
Blender (blender.org) (Garwood and Dunlop, 2014). Illustrations of the resulting
renders and specimen reconstructions were completed in Inkscape (inkscape.org;
Harrington, 2005). Blender models exported as .ply files and the tomographic stack are
publically available through the following link:
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.7600103.
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Phylogenetic Dataset

Brazilichthys macrognathus was coded for the characters in the matrix presented
by Giles et al. (2017). Brachydegma caelatum was excluded from this matrix because
its anatomy is under revision by M. Friedman and others, and available descriptions are
not reliable. The complete matrix contains 93 taxa and 265 unweighted characters
(Supplementary Data 1). Brazilichthys can be evaluated for 33% of all characters. The
analysis includes several non-actinopterygian fishes, with Dicksonosteus arcticus set as
the outgroup. In contrast to Giles et al. (2017), we did not enforce relationships among
non-actinopterygian taxa. All characters were treated as unordered in both analysis.

Parsimony Analysis—An equally weighted parsimony analysis was conducted
using the software TNT 1.5 (Goloboff et al., 2016). The New Technology search
algorithm was used, with 5 initial additional sequences. Bremer support was calculated
in TNT using the TBR (“tree bisection and reconnection”) for all most parsimonious
trees. The results where then plotted against the strict consensus tree. Nodes with
Bremer support below 1 were automatically collapsed. A formatted file is provided in
Supplementary Data 2 to reproduce results of the parsimony analysis.

The most parsimonious trees (Supplementary Data 3) were used to calculate
the strict consensus topology, and the file was exported to Mesquite (Maddison and
Maddison, 2018) where we mapped the evolution of each character based on the
likelihood and parsimony algorithms (Lewis, 2001). The strict consensus tree with the
character mapping is available through the link:
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.7600103.
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bayesian Analysis—The Bayesian analysis was conducted on MrBayes 3.2.5
(Ronquist et al., 2012) using the Metropolis Coupled Markov Chain Algorithm
(MCMC) and the MkV model for discrete morphological data (Lewis, 2001; Wright and
Hillis, 2014). Character coding was set to “variable” and a gamma distribution was
incorporated. The number of substitution types was set to “nst2”, which mean that all
transitions have potentially different rates. The number of generations was initially set
to 500,000, with the number of generations increased until reaching a low standard
deviation of split frequencies. Burn-in fraction was set to 50% of the resulting
topologies. A complete script for MrBayes is given in Supplementary Data 4.

The resulting phylogram (Supplementary Data 5) was visualized in FigTree
1.4.3 (Rambaut, 2018) and the tree file was exported to Mesquite (Maddison and
Maddison, 2018) where we mapped the evolution of each character based on the
likelihood and parsimony algorithms (Lewis, 2001). The Bayesian consensus with all
mapped synapomorphies is available through the link:
https://doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.7600103.

Terminological Conventions

Following McCune and Schaeffer (1986; see also Friedman and Giles 2016), we
apply the term ‘paleopterygian’ to designate the assemblage of Paleozoic ray-finned
fishes of uncertain relationships to one another and modern actinopterygian clades. Our
use of this term is not a suggestion that species falling within this category represent a
natural group, as we explicitly seek to avoid the taxonomic connotations associated with
baggage-laden terms like ‘palaeonoiscoid’ or ‘palaeonisciform’. This nomenclature is
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

plastic and with no implication of evolutionary affinities, although it is our anticipation
that groups will be extracted from this paleopterygian assemblage as their relationships
to fossil and living actinopterygians are clarified with further anatomical and
phylogenetic investigation.

Bone nomenclature adopted here follows the conventional terminology for
actinopterygians as in Gardiner (1984). We acknowledge that the frontals and parietals
of actinopterygians under this scheme are the homologues of sarcopterygian pareitals
and postparietals, respectively (Westoll, 1943; Schultze and Arsenault, 1985).

Anatomical Abbreviations— Ac.Vo, accessory vomer; Ang, angular; app,
anterior process of parasphenoid; Art, articular; asp, ascending process of
parasphenoid; B.rays, branchiostegal rays; bpt, basipterygoid process; Cbr,
ceratobranchial; Chy, ceratohyal; Cla, clavicle; Cor, coronoid; Den, dentary; Dhy,
dermohyal; Dsp, dermosphenotic; e.g, extralateral gular; Epb, epibranchial; f, foramen;
f.mand.V, foramen for mandibular branch of trigeminal nerve; f.scl, sensory canal
foramen; fo.add, fossa for adductor muscle; h.op, opercular process of hyomandibula;
Hb, hypobranchials; Hb1, first hypobranchial; Hh, hypohyal; Hy, hyomandibula; hy.c,
hyomandibular canal; i.sc, infraorbital sensory canal; Inf, infraorbitals; Inf.s,
infraorbital series; Ju, jugal; l.g, lateral gular; m.g, median gular; Men,
mentomeckelian; Mx, maxilla; n.ao, anterior nasal opening; n.po, posterior nasal
opening; Na, nasal; p.l, pit-line; Pa, parietal; pal.te, palatal teeth; Part, prearticular;
Pmx, premaxilla; Pop, preoperculum; Pq, palatoquadrate; Propt, propterygium; Psp,
parasphenoid; San, surangular; Sc.r, sclerotic ring; scl, sensory canal line; Sob,
supraorbital; spig, spiracular groove; Sub, suborbital; Te, teeth; V, foramen or canal for
trigeminal nerve.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SYSTEMATIC PALEONTOLOGY

ACTINOPTERYGII Cope, 1887

BRAZILICHTHYIDAE Cox & Hutchinson, 1991

BRAZILICHTHYS Cox & Hutchinson, 1991

BRAZILICHTHYS MACROGNATHUS Cox & Hutchinson, 1991

Type and Only Specimen—DGM 1061-P, incomplete skull. The specimen is
housed at the paleontological collection of the Museu de Ciências da Terra (MCT), of
the Departamento Nacional de Produção Mineral (DNPM), on behalf of the Centro de
Pesquisas de Recursos Minerais (CPRM)

Type Locality and Horizon—Pedra de Fogo Formation, Pastos Bons Locality
(~ 6o 40’ S, 44o 04’ W), between the cities of Pastos Bons and Nova Iorque, state of
Maranhão, Brazil (Fig. 1D). The Pedra de Fogo Formation is assigned to the ArtinskianKungurian stages of the Permian based on its palynological assemblage (Iannuzzi et al.,
2018).

Emended Diagnosis—‘Paleopterygian’ actinopterygian distinguished by the
following combination of characters: parasymphysial fangs, some of which are strongly
procumbent; flexed symphysial region of the mandible in lateral view; widely spaced
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

glenoid fossae of articular; long ellipsoidal median and lateral gulars; presence of long
extralateral gulars; rod-like dermosphenotic; parasphenoid with distinct basipterygoid
processes, short and rectangular ascending processes and robust anterior process, and a
prominent dorsal keel on the anterior corpus.

Notes—The bones originally mentioned by Cox and Hutchinson (1991) were:
nasal, rostral, pre-maxilla, infraorbito-suborbital, infraorbital (jugal), infraorbital
(lacrimal?), suborbital, maxilla, dentary, angular, clavicle, median gular, lateral gulars,
branchiostegal rays, and part of the sclerotic ring. However, the holotype of B.
macrognathus lacks the rostral bone described by Cox & Hutchinson (1991), suggesting
loss or other damage in the time between their account and this redescription. Cox &
Hutchinson (1991) also illustrated the delicate ornamentation of the dermal bones of the
skull, which is composed of closely spaced wavy ridges.

Description

Skull Roof—The skull roof is represented only by isolated fragments visible
dorsal to the circumorbital series. A small fragment dorsal to the dermosphenotic might
represent part of the frontal (Figs 2,3), but it lacks any diagnostic features (e.g. sensory
canals). A posterior element above the suborbital might be part of the left parietal bone,
but this too lacks any characteristic detail.

Snout Region and Circumorbital Series—The nasal is large and bears notches
for the anterior and posterior nasal openings (Fig. 4). There is no obvious indication of
the sensory canal externally, but it is apparent internally as a slight longitudinal groove
near the anterior border of the bone. The positioning of this groove is consistent with
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the sensory canal line of the nasals of early actinopterygians. The anterior nasal opening
would have been enclosed anteriorly by the the rostral, which is not preserved but was
reported in a previous description (Cox & Hutchinson, 1991). The posterior nasal
opening is confluent with the orbital opening.

A slender bone located inside the orbital cavity of the DGM 1061-P was
originally identified as part of the sclerotic ring. However, µ-CT revealed an enclosed
canal extending through half of the length of the bone, exiting by a foramen in the
center of the outer surface (Figs. 2,3). Bones of the sclerotic ring are not canal bearing,
indicating a different affinity than that proposed by Cox & Hutchinson (1991). Due to
the peculiar path drawn by this canal and its positioning, the bone is interpreted here as
the dermosphenotic. It is an elongate robust bone that contacts the nasal anteriorly, the
jugal posteriorly, and probably the frontal dorsally, composing the dorsal margin of the
orbit.

The sclerotic ring is partially visible superficially on the specimen. However, a
large, thin element mesial to the nasal and premaxilla represents a concealed part of the
sclerotic ring (Fig. 4). This element is large in comparison to the orbital opening but its
outline closely matches it in shape.

The rest of the circumorbital series is well preserved. The infraorbital series is
composed of three infraorbitals. These are, from anterior to posterior: the lachrymal, a
single infraorbital, and the jugal. The jugal is lunate and the infraorbital sensory canal
line lies near its anterior border, without any evidence of posterior branching. This bone
slightly overlaps the postorbital expansion of the maxilla. The infraorbital lies anterior
to the jugal and bears the extension of the infraorbital sensory canal line. The lachrymal
is displaced within the orbital cavity but would contact the premaxilla and the nasal
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

anteriorly and the infraorbital posteriorly. A poorly preserved rhomboidal bone lies
ventral to the jugal and the posterior expansion of the maxilla. Cox & Hutchinson
(1991) interpreted it as a suborbital, an identification adopted here due to the absence of
any sensory canals.

The premaxilla is a short and robust bone. Its triangular posterior border,
restricted to the anterior margin of the orbit. It bears an enclosed sensory canal that exits
to the surface medially by small foramina on the exposed surface of the premaxilla. It is
partially overlapped posterodorsally by the nasal. We assume it would contact the
(unpreserved) rostral anterodorsally. The premaxilla bears at least 3 small conical teeth.

Jaws and Palate—Both the dentary and the maxilla bear two series of teeth
(Figs. 5), one inner series composed of large conical and posteriorly directed teeth and
one outer series of much smaller teeth. Tooth rows extend the complete length of these
bones, even on the portion of the maxilla that overlaps the dentary. The teeth in this area
are anteriorly directed. The big teeth of the lingual series bear acrodin tooth caps (Fig.
1C).

The maxilla is the largest bone of the upper jaw. It consists of a curved
suborbital arm and a large postorbital expansion (Fig. 2). The dorsal margin of this
expansion is incomplete. Roughly the upper one-third of the bone is missing with the
exception of two small fragments immediately posterior to the jugal and suborbital. The
ventral margin of the maxilla is ‘S’-shaped, and bears two series of teeth: large, widely
spaced inner teeth and smaller, closely spaced outer teeth.

The dentary is the largest bone of the lower jaw (Figs 2B, 5A), covering almost
its entire lateral surface. It bears at least 12 large conical teeth. The mandibular sensory
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

canal extends along the ventral border of the dentary, and there is a foramen below the
mentomeckelian that represents the exit of the trigeminal nerve to the inner jaw surface
(Fig. 5). The ornamentation of this bone is similar to the other dermal bones of the skull,
being only distinct due to the more robust ornamentation on the anterior portion of this
bone. The angular and surangular represent the remaining bones on the external surface
of the mandible. The angular is partially covered by the dentary but its ventral margin is
visible along the posterior half of the dentary. The dentary partially overlaps the angular
posteriorly, and tapers in this region. The surangular bone is poorly preserved, but
represents a thin lamina dorsal to the angular and composes most of the external margin
of the adductor fossa.

The primary jaw is only partially mineralized. The articular is ossified and
rhomboidal, bearing two concave articular facets that mark the joint with the quadrate
condyles (Fig. 5B). A small rugose ossification on the distalmost portion of the inner
surface of the dentary might be a mentomeckelian ossification (Fig. 5C).

The internal wall of the lower jaw is presumably formed by the prearticular and
the coronoids (Fig. 5B), although their boundaries cannot be discerned. The region
interpreted as the prearticular consists of a vertical sheet of bone that forms the mesial
wall of the adductor chamber and has a convex ventral margin. The anteriormost
coronoids bear small conical teeth, but no teeth can be resolved more posteriorly in
scans. The adductor fossa is large and triangular in dorsal view, bordered by the dentary
anteriorly, the surangular and prearticular laterally and the articular posteriorly (Fig.
5C).

The palatoquadrate complex is partially preserved, and divisions between
constituent ossifications are not apparent. Its shape broadly mirrors that of maxilla, with
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

an expanded posterior blade and narrow subortbital ramus. At the junction of these two
regions, the dorsal margin of the palatoquadrate bears a shallow embaument marking
the position of the basipterygoid articulation. This is open dorsally, rather than being an
enclosed fenestra (Fig. 5C). One series of teeth extends along the ventral margin of the
palate. These teeth are intermediate in size between those of the two dentary tooth rows.
It is unclear if this tooth row is restricted to the dermopalatines or are also borne by the
ectopterygoid.

Operculo-gular Apparatus—The median gular is elongate and ellpisoidal, and
bears a longitudinally oriented pit-line on the its external surface. The lateral gulars are
similar in size to the median gular, but do not bear a pit-line. Both median and lateral
gulars cover the anterior half of the intramandibular region (Fig. 6A-B). μCT reveals
one extra pair of gulars buried within the matrix. Due to their position and shape they
are herein described as extralateral gulars, laying behind the lateral gulars and extending
until the first pair of branchiostegal rays (Fig. 6C-D).

At least seven pairs of branchiostegal rays are partially preserved and visible
externally. The posterior rays are partially broken, near the jaw articulation. The first
pair is elongated but differs from the lateral and extralateral gulars by not being
flattened. The exposed branchiostegal rays exhibit the same ornamentation pattern of
other dermal bones of the skull: thin, wavy and closely arranged ridges.

The opercular series is almost completely missing, with the exception of the left
opercle, which is preserved as a thin lamina behind the palatoquadrate complex (Fig.
3B). Due to the poor preservation of this element, it is impossible to provide accurate
descriptions of the opercular series. Small fragments of a canal bearing overlapping the

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dorsal part of the palatoquadrate likely represent portions of the preoperculum, but are
too incomplete to provide clear information on the bone.

Parasphenoid, Braincase and Associated Ossifications—The parasphenoid
(Fig. 7A-F) coprises a long, slender anterior corpus that is expanded anterodorsally,
likely for articulation with the vomer(s) and ethmoid region of the braincase, neither of
which is well preserved. The anterior process of the parasphenoid is sub-triangular in
cross-section. The ventral surface of the parasphenoid is smooth, with no evidence of a
buccohypophysial foramen, any dentigerous area or ornamentation. However,
individual denticles are likely beyond the resolution of the scan, so it is not possible to
exclude the possibility that a denticle field was present. Stout dermal basipterygoid
processes emerge from the lateral margin of the parasphenoid corpus immediately
anterior to the broad ascending processes. Viewed dorsally, each basipterygoid process
bears a small notch along its anterior margin at its junction with the body of the
paraphenoid. The ascending processes expand dorsally, terminating with a straight
margin. A shallow spiracular groove extends along the external surface of the left
ascending process. There is no evidence of a posterior extension of the parasphenoid
behind the ascending processes.

Two long laminar bones preserved lateral to the parasphenoid represent
accessory vomers (Fig. 7G-J). These plates contributed to the roof of the mouth in life,
and would occupy the entire lateral margins of the anterior corpus of the parasphenoid.
As the parasphenoid, these accessory vomers do not bear teeth large enough to be
apparent in our scans. Compression of the skull resulted in a displacement of the right
accessory vomer to the opposite side of the skull.

There is no trace of the neurocranium, and is assumed to be cartilaginous.
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hyoid and Branchial Arches—The left hyomandibula (Fig. 8A-D) is well
preserved. It is strongly reclined, and the angle between its dorsal and ventral limbs is
subtle. The dorsal limb is spatulate, with a compressed and proximal region
representing the articular head. By contrast, the ventral limb is more cylindrical, with a
rounded cross-section. Attached to the anterodorsal portion of the hyomandibula there is
a fragment of what would be the preopercle (Fig. 8D), but the poor preservation of this
element turns impossible its identification. The hyomandibular canal extends along the
mesial surface of this element, exiting to the lateral surface by a foramen, before the
expanded anterior surface of the hyomandibula. A sight dorsal expansion at the junction
between the dorsal and ventral limbs of the hyomandibula represents a weakly
developed opercular process. No dermohyal is preserved, and it was apparently not
fused to the hyomandibula.

The hypohyals (Fig. 8E-G) are well preserved, located in the distal portion of the
ventral surface of the lower jaw. They are cylindrical and expand posteriorly, and curve
toward one another along the midline. There is no evidence of a mineralized
basibranchial.

Preserved components of the branchial skeleton (Fig. 9) are located in the
posterior half of the skull and consist of four pairs of long rods that probably represent
ceratobranchials. There are two short epibranchials that do not show an evidence of
developed uncinate processes. The hypobranchials are long, expanded anteriorly to for
their articulation with the unpreserved basibranchial. Other smaller elements are
present, but fragmentation and displacement makes identifications difficult.

Shoulder Girdle—The clavicles (Fig. 10A-B) bound the branchial skeleton
ventrally. Each clavicle has an elongated anterior ramus and terminates in a lamina with
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a triangular profile in dorsal view. There is a displaced, ellipsoidal bone between the
branchial rays and dorsal to the clavicles that could be a poorly preserved interclavicle
(Fig. 10C), however it is not possible to accurately identify this bone, and therefore it
was not coded as present in the phylogenetic matrix. Other components of the shoulder
girdle are not preserved. However, one small rhomboid element located posteriorly to
the end of the clavicles could be interpreted as the first fin rays that fused to form this
rigid structure.

Phylogenetic results

Parsimony Analysis—The parsimony analysis including Brazilichthys
recovered four equally parsimonious trees (length = 1325 steps; consistency index:
0.22; retention index: 0.64). The strict consensus is well resolved (Fig. 11), showing
conventional actinopterygian, sarcopterygian and chondrichthyan clades. Devonian
actinopterygians form a grade on the actinopterygian stem. Meemannia, a clade uniting
the species of Cheirolepis, and a clade uniting Osorioichthys and Tegeolepis are earliest
diverging actinopterygian lineages, with Middle-Late Devonian taxa (Donnrosenia,
Howqualepis, Mimipiscis, Gogosardina, Raynerius, Moythomasia) forming a more
crownward clade (Bremer decay index [BDI] = 2). Brazilichthys is resolved crownward
of all Devonian taxa, in a polytomy with two other clades (BDI = 2). The first of these
includes most late Paleozoic taxa conforming to a generalized ‘palaeoniscoid’ habitus
and is poorly supported (BDI = 1). The second unites Saurichthys and Australosomus
with the actinopterygian crown. Discoserra, Ebenaqua, Platysomus, Amphicentrum,
Styracopterus and Fouldenia are the most highly nested Paleozoic taxa, and are placed

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on the chondrostean stem (BDI = 3). Among extant actinopterygians, chondrosteans and
cladistians represent successively more remote outgroups to neopterygians.

The following characters are optimized as arising along the branch subtending
the clade including Brazilichthys plus all other post-Carboniferous taxa: dermopterotic
carying lateral line canal between dermosphenotic and skull roof (36; 0 – 1); absence of
a distinct posterior ramus of the dermosphenotic (56; 1 – 0); presence of two coronoids
(91; 1 – 3); presence of median posterior myodome (136; 0 – 2); spiracle enclosed in
canal (138; 1 – 2); presence of fossa bridgei (143; 0 – 1); absence of anterolaterally
divergent olfactory tracts (180; 1 – 0); optic lobes of same width or wider than
cerebellum (184; 0 – 1); optic tectum divided into bilateral halves (186; 0 – 1); presence
of cerebellar corpus (187; 0 – 1); 193 (crus commune ventral to endocranial roof (193; 0
– 1); presence of opercular process of hyomandibula (211; 0 – 1); and absence of
interclavicle (233; 0 – 1). These synapomorphies were found using both parsimony and
likelihood ancestral state reconstructions. It is interesting to notice that despite being
recovered as a synapomorphy, the presence of two coronoids has a low probability
(0.47). However, of these synapomorphies only the absence of a distinct posterior
process of the dermosphenotic and presence of an opercular process of the
hyomandibula can be shown for Brazilichthys, and both characters show some degree of
homoplasy. Sarcopterygians have a dermosphenotic (sarcopterygian intertemporal;
Schultze, 2008) that lack a posterior ramus, while Devonian actinopterygians bear a
distinct posterior ramus of the bone. This posterior extension is lost in the clade uniting
Brazilichthys and all post-Devonian actinopterygians, with multiple reversals within the
group (e.g. Beagiascus, Wendyichthys, Cyranorhis, Birgeria, Bobasatrania and some
neopterygians). With respect to the hyomandibula, sarcopterygians, chondrichthyans
and the earliest actinopterygians show absence of an opercular process. The node
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

including Brazilichthys and all other post-Devonian is united by presence of opercular
process, with reversals in Acipenser, Amphicentrum, Birgeria, Chondrosteus, and
Kalops.

Bayesian Analysis—The Bayesian analysis shows a similar result to the
parsimony analysis presented above. Major differences, described in more detail below,
include: the degree of phylogenetic resolution among Paleozoic actinopterygians; the
content of the chondrostean stem; and the interrelationships of neopterygians. With the
exception of those subtending (1) Cladistia inclusive of scanilepiforms and (2)
Condrosteus plus Acipenser, nodes that are well-supported in the parsimony analysis
parsimony analysis (BDI ≥ 3) are not represented in the Bayesian tree.
As in the parsimony tree, Meemannia and Cheirolepis represent the earliestdiverging ray-finned fishes, although the monophyly of the latter genus is not supported
(Fig. 11). All other Devonian actinopterygians are placed crownward of Cheirolepis,
although their relationships are unresolved apart from a poorly supported clade uniting
Osorioichthys and Tegeolepis (Bayesian posterior probability [BPP] = 0.55) and a better
supported clade containing Mimipiscis with Gogosardina nested within that genus (BPP
= 1.00). Post-Devonian actinopterygians, including Brazilichthys, form a clade (BPP =
0.87). The relationships among most Paleozoic members of this group are not resolved.
Brazilichthys is placed in a polytomy with the actinopterygian crown (BPP = 0.52),
eurynotiforms (BPP = 1.00), a clade uniting Wendyichthys and Cyranorhis (BPP =
0.86), and over a dozen species-level lineages of unresolved affinity. Within the
actinopterygian crown, the relationships between the cladistian, chondrostean, and
neopterygian lineages are unresolved. Scanilepiforms are placed as stem cladistians
with high support (BPP = 0.99), but Birgeria is the only member placed on the
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

chondrostean stem (BPP = 0.80) apart from the phylogenetically uncontroversial
Chondrosteus. Platysomus and a clade uniting Discoserra, Ebenaqua, and Bobasatrania
(BPP = 83) are placed as the deepest diverging lineages on the neopterygian stem, and
include the only Paleozoic members of the actinopterygian crown.

The placement of Brazilichthys crownward of all Devonian actinopterygians
(Fig. 11) is supported by the same characters as in the parsimony solution. Ancestral
state reconstruction using maximum likelihood and parsimony provides a similar
picture of character support, the exception that the presence of three coronoids
(probability = 0.48)--rather than two (probability = 0.28)--representing the most
probable state at the base of this post-Devonian radiation. This uncertainty over this
character was also present in the ancestral state reconstruction over the parsimony
topology, as mentioned above. Ancestral-state reconstruction also suggests additional
synapomorphies of the post-Devonian clade not indicated by parsimony mapping. Of
these, characters 141 (presence of dermal component of basipterygoid process (141; 0 1) and absence of a multifid anterior margin of the parasphenoid (173; 1 - 0) and
absence of buccohypophyseal canal piercing parasphenoid (174; 0 - 1) are the only ones
that can be confirmed for Brazilichthys. A complete list of synapomorphies for the node
uniting Brazilichthys and post-Devonian taxa is available in Supplementary Data 4.

DISCUSSION

The Interrelationships of Early Actinopterygians: How Far from Consensus?

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Until relatively recently, the dominant systematic paradigm for early
actinopterygian systematics placed nearly all Paleozoic taxa within the crown. This
arrangement began with relatively abbreviated, hand-constructed solutions presented by
Patterson (1982) and Gardiner (1984), followed by more extensive (Gardiner and
Schaeffer, 1989) and algorithmic analyses (Coates, 1999; Gardiner et al., 2005; Xu et
al., 2014). However, several cladistic analyses have suggested that many Paleozoic
forms are stem actinopterygians (Cloutier and Arratia, 2004), a viewpoint recently
reinforced by the confirmation that scanilepiforms represent stem cladistians (Giles et
al., 2017). The latter discovery reveals that many of the apparently primitive features of
extant polypterids are secondary, with the consequence that many fossils previously
placed with the actinopterygian crown have shifted to the stem. Despite the addition of
new taxa, modification of specific aspects of coding, or the investigation of new
characters, this pattern has emerged consistently in re-analysis of datasets that trace
their origin to that of Giles et al. (2017; e.g. Argyriou et al., 2018; Latimer and Giles,
2018). Apart from the placement of most Paleozoic taxa on the actinopterygian stem,
this set of results is characterized by a series of similar features. Apart from
uncontroversial aspects of relationships within the crown (e.g. the monophyly of major
living lineages) or long-established patterns on the stem (e.g. the early divergence of
Cheirolepis) these include the monophyly of all post-Devonian taxa and the placement
of one or more deep-bodied Paleozoic lineages within the actinopterygian crown. Both
patterns merit further discussion.

With respect to the monophyly of post-Devonian taxa, this ‘phylogenetic
bottleneck’ could be interpreted as the radiation of a single surviving lineage after the
end-Devonian extinction, mirroring models of diversification sometimes proposed for
birds (Prum et al. 2016) and mammals (O’Leary et al., 2013) in the early Cenozoic.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

While there is undoubtedly ample evidence for taxonomic (Gardiner, 1993),
morphological (Sallan and Friedman, 2012), and ecological (Friedman et al. 2019)
diversification of actinopterygians in the Carboniferous relative to the Devonian, the
recent interpretation of the earliest Carboniferous Arvonichthys as the nested within the
clade uniting the Middle-Late Devonian Howqualepis, Donnrosenia, Moythomasia, and
Mimipiscis complicates this model of diversification from a single surviving lineage
(Wilson et al., 2018). Further study of Famennian and Tournaisian study is vital for
clarifying patterns of actinopterygian turnover at the end-Devonian extinction.

With respect to the placement of deep-bodied lineages of Paleozoic
actinopterygians within the crown, the pattern is more complicated than this general
summary suggests. The exact placement of these lineages varies between studies, as
well as within studies as a function of the approach to phylogenetic inference (i.e.
parsimony versus Bayesian). Only Discoserra, Platysomus, and Ebenaqua (along with
the similar Triassic Bobastrania) are always placed within the crown, with
eurynotiforms vacillating between the crown and stem. When any taxa are placed within
the crown, they lie either on the chondrostean (e.g. Wilson et al., 2018) or neopterygian
(e.g. Argyriou et al., 2018) stem. More broadly, this reflects a common pattern across
this set of hypotheses of early actinopterygian interrelationships: overall similarities at
very coarse scales, but substantial disagreement at lower levels. The fact that these
relationships vary with relatively minor modifications to either the dataset of mode of
phylogenetic inference suggests that caution should be applied in interpreting the
significance of branching patterns among Paleozoic actinopterygians at medium to fine
phylogenetic scales. It is worth reiterating that deficient anatomical knowledge of most
Permo-Carboniferous fishes appears to be a major contributor to their phylogenetic
instability (Giles et al., 2017). We therefore remain optimistic that more detailed studies
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of internal structure in fossils of this age (Coates and Tietjen, 2019; Friedman et al.
2019), including our own redescription of Brazilichthys, will prove helpful in
solidifying our understanding of relationships among Paleozoic actinopterygians. This
will represent an important phylogenetic foundation for the increasing number of
studies addressing macroevolutionary patterns in Paleozoic fishes, many of which have
been conducted in a non-phylogenetic framework (e.g. Anderson et al., 2011; Sallan and
Giamberti, 2015).

The Relationships of Brazilichthys and Ecomorphologically Similar Taxa

Assessment of previous hypotheses—Prior to this study, Brazilichthys had not
been included in a formal phylogenetic analysis. Instead, interpretations of its
systematic position have been based on perceived similarities with other early rayfinned fishes. In their original description of Brazilichthys, Cox and Hutchinson (1991)
suggested a relationship with Acrolepidae, based on a suggestion from B. G. Gardiner
citing the “form of the teeth and the elongated maxilla.” As originally delimited by
Aldinger (1937), acrolepids contained a diverse set of generalized early
actinopterygians ranging in age from Devonian to Jurassic in age (Watsonichthys,
Acrolepis, Acropholis, Plegmolepis, Reticulolepis, Hyllingea, Boreosomus,
Acrorhabdus, Diaphorognathus, Pytcholepis, and Stegotrachelus). There is little in his
diagnosis that appears unique to the group, or indeed which is shared among all its
members, with strongly contrasting states being described as diagnostic for the family
(e.g. either few or many branchiostegal rays, either a large median gular or a small
median gular, either a vertical suspensorium or an oblique suspensorium, and so on).
Gardiner (1963) referred to Aldinger’s diagnosis with no modifications, and Stamberg
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(1991) only provided modest amendments. We have no confidence that Acrolepidae, as
construed by these authors, represents a monophyletic group. Here we restrict our
comparisons with Acrolepis, the type acrolepid. Numerous species have been
questionably referred to Acrolepis (see summary in Aldinger, 1937), with many
removed to other genera (e.g. ‘Acrolepis’ laetus, which is now recognized as a species
of Pteronisculus; Schaeffer and Mangus, 1976). We therefore further restrict our
comparisons to the type species, A. sedgwicki from the Permian Marl Slate of England.
Descriptions of this taxon are sparse, with published interpretive drawings secondary
representations derived from unpublished sources (e.g. Aldinger, 1937: fig. 74, from T.
S. Westoll’s unpublished 1934 dissertation from the University of Durham on the
Permian ‘paleoniscoids’ of the Marl Slate; Gardiner and Schaeffer 1989: fig. 9,
attributed only to an unpublished drawing by P. Hutchinson). Apart from shared
generalities, there appears to be little evidence that Acrolepis and Brazilichthys might be
closely related. Derived features shared between these taxa (e.g. absence of a posterior
process of the dermosphenotic, the presence of at least one suborbital) are widely
distributed among post-Devonian actinopterygians. Unfortunately, Acrolepis has not
been included in a formal phylogenetic analysis and is too incomplete to include here.
While we regard Acrolepis and Brazilichthys as plausibly branching from the same
general region of actinopterygian phylogeny—on the actinopterygian stem crownward
of Devonian forms—we see no particular reason to regard them as especially closely
related to one another to the exclusion of other Permo-Carboniferous paleopterygians.
Indeed, there are several broad disagreements between known skeletal anatomy between
Acrolepis and Brazilichthys, mostly related to the geometry of the suspensorium and the
proportions of the maxilla and mandible. We would not be surprised if more detailed

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

understanding of internal anatomy of Acrolepis highlighted further differences from
what we report here in Brazilichthys.

More recently, Romano and Brinkmann (2009) suggested a possible relationship
between Brazilichthys and Birgeria. Like the interpretation proposed by Cox and
Hutchinson (1991) these authors made this proposal on the basis of personal
communication with a colleague (R. J. Mutter) with no reference to specific anatomical
evidence. However, it seems likely that this comparison derives from the long mandible
and cheek region and the posteriorly directed suspensorium apparent in both taxa,
combined with a mistaken interpretation of Brazilichthys as being late—rather than
mid—Permian in age and thus a more immediate stratigraphic antecedent of Birgeria.
However, apart from such generalities there are no obvious synapomorphies that would
unite Birgeria and Brazilichthys to the exclusion of a variety of other early
actinopterygians. Indeed, our new findings about the internal anatomy of Brazilichthys
reveal several pronounced contrasts with Birgeria. Among the most conspicuous relate
to the dermal basipterygoid process of the parasphenoid (present in Brazilichthys, but
absent in Birgeria; Nielsen, 1949: fig. 70), the posterior stalk of the parasphenoid
(absent in Brazilichthys, but present in Birgeria; Nielsen, 1949: fig. 70), the posterior
margin of the orbit (defined by a single jugal ossification in Brazilichthys, but
comprising a chain of ossicles in Birgeria; Nielsen, 1949: fig. 69), and the geometry of
the hyomandibula (subequal dorsal and ventral limbs in Brazilichthys, but a much
longer dorsal limb in Birgeria; Nielsen, 1949: fig. 72). Our analyses strongly reject the
hypothesis of a close relationship between Birgeria and Brazilichthys, placing these
genera far apart from one another. Regardless of the mode of phylogenetic inference,
Brazilichthys is always resolved as a stem actinopterygian crownward of all Devonian

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

taxa, while Birgeria lies within the crown radiation as either a stem chondrostean
(Bayesian) or stem actinopteran (parsimony).

The Problem of Large, Predatory Paleopterygians—Past attempts to
determine the likely phylogenetic placement of Brazilichthys reflect a broader problem
relating to the systematics of early actinopterygians more generally. While some early
actinopterygians form reasonably well circumscribed groups supported by clear
synapomorphies (e.g. eurynotiforms, platysomids, haplolepids), the vast majority of
early ray-finned fishes present an outwardly similar suite of characters of the dermal
skeleton with only minor variations between them. Within this assemblage of
anatomically generalized taxa, there are a variety of forms characterized by reasonably
large size (cranial length ca. 50 mm or larger) and the presence of a proportionately
large row of inner dentary teeth, traits that suggest a predatory—and likely
piscivorous—ecology, and inference supported in some cases by the presence of gut
contents (e.g. Gardiner 1963). Permo-Carboniferous taxa of this broad ecological gestalt
are divided between a series of notional families in addition to Acrolepidae, including
Pygopteridae, Cosmoptychiidae, and Rhabdolepidae. Excluding the monogeneric
Rhabdolepidae, all of these groups—like Acrolepidae—are of questionable monophyly.
The association of Brazilichthys with both Birgeria and acrolepids reflects a series of
general (oblique suspensorium) and more specialized (proportionally large teeth)
features that equally characterize these other Permo-Carboniferous taxa. However, it is
not possible to discern the mutual relationships of these ecomorphologically similar
Paleozoic fishes in light of data currently available, which is almost entirely restricted to
cursory descriptions of the external dermal skeleton. However, many of these taxa are
known from relatively uncrushed, three-dimensionally preserved skulls (Cosmoptychius
and Nematoptychius from Wardie, Scotland; Rhabdolepis from Lebach, Germany). We
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

are hopeful that additional details of the internal anatomy of some of these taxa will
help to establish their relative phylogenetic relationships, providing some insight into
the number of times this particular ecomorph arose in early actinoperygian history.
This, in turn, is relevant for understanding patterns of actinopterygian trophic
diversification in the Carboniferous (Sallan and Friedman 2012). Such an effort would
also help to reduce the seemingly overwhelming early actinopterygians by identifying
smaller candidate clades that could reduce the overall scale of the phylogenetic problem
through stepwise approach to the resolution of relationships (cf. eurynotiforms; Sallan
and Coates 2013; Friedman et al. 2019).

CONCLUSIONS

Re-examination of the holotype of the mid-Permian (Artinskian-Kungurian)
actinopterygian Brazilichthys macrognathus from Brazil reveals considerable new
anatomical information. Revisions of details of external anatomy relative to the initial
description by Cox and Hutchinson include reinterpretation of a supposed sclerotic as a
dermosphenotic and identification of three rather than two bones composing the
infraorbital series. A median rostral element previously described appears to be missing,
possibly due to damage to the specimen. µ-CT provides important new information on
internal anatomy not accessible to earlier researchers. This reveals the palate (including
accessory vomers), the inner surface of the mandible, the parasphenoid, the hyoid arch,
disrupted branchial arches, and portions of the clavicles. The braincase is
unmineralized. Overall, the cranial anatomy of Brazilichthys shows generalized
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

conditions for actinopterygians, but the presence of derived features like the presence of
an ascending process and dermal basipterygoid processes of the parasphenoid, a
suborbital, an opercular process of the hyomandibula, and absence of a long posterior
process of the dermosphenotic suggest that it branches crownward of the very earliest
diverging ray-finned fishes. Formal phylogenetic analyses place Brazilichthys
crownward of all Devonian actinopterygians. The parsimony solution resolves
Brazilichthys as the sister lineage to all remaining members of the post-Devonian
actinopterygian clade, while the Bayesian analysis places the genus in a large polytomy
at the base of this radiation. We reject previous hypotheses for the placement of
Brazilichthys, which are based largely on overall similarities reflecting primitive
actinopterygian conditions. This genus is retained as the only member of
Brazilichthyidae pending more detailed analysis of large-bodied Permo-Carboniferous
fishes with similarly generalized external anatomy and jaws suggestive of a predatory
ecology.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The authors are thankful to the Centro de Pesquisa de Recursos Minerais –
CPRM, Departamento Nacional de Produção Mineral – DNPM and R.M. da Silva for
allowing the loan of DGM 1061-P. We thank the Laboratório de Instrumentação
Nuclear, R.T. Lopes and A. Machado for conducting the CT-scan of the analyzed
specimen. Acknowledgements are needed for L.M. Diele-Viegas for kindly reviewing
an early version of the manuscript and S. Giles for assistance on the 3D rendering and
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

taxonomy. RF also acknowledges Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de
Nível Superior – CAPES and Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Rio de Janeiro –
FAPERJ for the scholarships that funded this research. VG is supported by Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - CNPq and have an
UERJ/FAPERJ Prociência grant.

REFERENCES

Aldinger, H. 1937. Permische Ganoidfische aus Ostgrönland. Meddelelser om Grønland
102:1–392.

Anderson, P. S. L., M. Friedman, M. D. Brazeau and E. J. Rayfield. 2011. Initial
radiation of jaws demonstrated stability despite faunal and environmental
change. Nature 476:206–209.

Argyriou, T., S. Giles, M. Friedman, C. Romano, I. Kogan, and M. R. Sánchez-Villagra.
2018. Internal cranial anatomy of Early Triassic species of †Saurichthys
(Actinopterygii: †Saurichthyiformes): implications for the phylogenetic
placement of †saurichthyiforms. BMC Evolutionary Biology 18:161.

Beltan, L. 1978. Découverte d’une ichthyofaune dans le Carbonifère supérieur
d’Uruguay. Rapports avec les faunes ichthyologiques contemporaines des autres
régions du Gondwana. Annales de la Société Géologique du Nord 351–357.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Campbell, K. S. W., and L. D. Phuoc. 1983. A Late Permian actinopterygian fish from
Australia. Palaeontology 26(1):33–70.

Cloutier, R., and G. Arratia. 2004. Early diversification of actinopterygians; pp. 217270 in G. Arratia, M. V. H. Wilson, and R. Cloutier (eds), Recent Advances in
the Origin and Early Radiation of Vertebrates, Verlag Dr. Friedrich Pfeil,
München, Germany.

Cione, A. L., S. Gouiric-Cavalli, J. A. Mennucci, D. A. Cabrera, and R. H. Freije. 2010.
First vertebrate body remains from the Permian of Argentina (Elasmobranchii
and Actinopterygii). Proceedings of the Geologists’ Association 121:301–312.

Coates, M. I. 1998. Actinopterygians from the Namurian of Bearsden, Scotland, with
comments on early actinopterygian neurocrania. Zoological Journal of the
Linnean Society 122:27–59.

Coates, M. I. 1999. Endocranial preservation of a Carboniferous actinopterygian from
Lancashire, UK, and the interrelationship of primitive actinopterygians.
Phylosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, Biological Sciences
354:435–462.

Coates, M. I., and K. Tietjen. 2019. ‘This strange little palaeoniscid': a new early
actinopterygian genus, and commentary on pectoral fin conditions and function.
Earth and Environmental Science Transactions of The Royal Society of
Edinburgh 1-17.

Cox, C. B., and P. Hutchinson. 1991. Fishes and amphibians from the Pedra de Fogo
Formation of Northern Brazil. Palaeontology 34:561–573.
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Dias, E. V. 2012. A new deep-bodied fossil fish (Actinopterygii) from the Rio do Rasto
Formation, Parana Basin, Brazil. Zootaxa 3192:1–23.

Dunkle, D. H., and B. Schaeffer. 1956. Preliminary description of Paleoniscoid Fish
from the Late Paleozoic of Brazil. Boletim da Faculdade de Filosofia Ciências e
Letras, Universidade de São Paulo, Geologia 13:5–22.

Figueiredo, J. F., and B. C. M. C. Carvalho. 2004. A new actinopterygian fish from the
late Permian of the Paraná Basin, southern Brazil. Arquivos do Museu Nacional
62(4):531–547.

Figueroa, R. T., and D. M. C. Machado. 2018. The Paleozoic ichthyofauna of the
Amazonas and Parnaíba basins, Brazil. Journal of South American Earth
Sciences 82:122-132.

Friedman, M., and S. Giles. 2016. Actinopterygians: The ray-finned fishes–An
explosion of diversity. In: J.A. Clack et al., Evolution of the vertebrat ear–
Evidence from the fossil record, Springer Handbook of Auditory Research
59:17-49.

Friedman, M. 2015. The early evolution of ray-finned fishes. Palaeontology 58:213–
228.

Friedman, M., S. E. Pierce, M. Coates, and S. Giles. 2019. Feeding structures in the rayfinned fish Eurynotus crenatus (Actinopterygii: Eurynotiformes): implications
for trophic diversification among Carboniferous actinopterygians. Earth and
Environmental Science Transactions of The Royal Society of Edinburgh 1–15.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Gardiner, B. G. 1963. Certain palaeoniscoid fishes and the evolution of the snout in
actinopterygians. Bulletin of the British Museum (Natural History) 8:258–325.

Gardiner, B. G. 1969 New palaeoniscoid fish from the Witteberg series of South Africa.
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 48(4):423–452.

Gardiner, B. G. 1984. The relationships of the palaeoniscid fishes, a review based on
new specimens of Mimia and Moythomasia from the Late Devonian of West
Australia. Bulletin of the British Museum of Natural History 34:173–440.

Gardiner, B. G. 1985. Actinopterygian fish from the Dinantian of Foulden,
Berwickshire, Scotland. Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh: Earth
Sciences 76:61–66.

Gardiner, B. G. 1993. Osteichthyes: basal actinopterygians; p 611 in M.J. Benton (ed),
The Fossil Record 2, Chapman and Hall, London.

Gardiner, B. G., and B. Schaeffer. 1989. The interrelationships of lower actinopterygian
fishes. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 97:135–187.

Gardiner, B. G., B. Schaeffer, and J. A. Masserie. 2005. A review of lower
actinopterygian phylogeny. Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society 144:511–
525.

Garwood, R., and J. Dunlop. 2014. The walking dead: blender as a tool for
paleontologist with a case study on extinct arachnids. Journal of Paleontology
88:735–746.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Giles, S. G. -H. Xu, T. J. Near, and M. Friedman. 2017. Early members of the ‘living
fossil’ lineage imply later origin of modern ray-finned fishes. Nature 549:265–
268.

Goloboff, P. A., and S. A. Catalano. 2016. TNT version 1.5, including a full
implementation of phylogenetic morphometrics. Cladistics 32:221–238.

Hamel, M. 2005. A new lower actinopterygian from the Early Permian of the Parana´
Basin, Brazil. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 25:19–26.

Hansen, M. C. 1996. Phylum Chordata--vertebrate fossils; pp. 288-369 in R. M.
Feldmann and M. Hackathorn (eds), Fossils of Ohio. Bulletin, Ohio Division of
Geological Survey 70.

Harrington, B. 2005. Inkscape. Available at http://www.inkscape.org/.

Haubold, H., and G. Schaumberg. 1985. Die Fossilen des Kupferschiefers. A. Ziemsen
Verlag, Wittenburg Lutherstadt, Germany 223 pp.

Iannuzzi, R., R. Neregato, J. C. Cisneros, K. D. Angielkzyc, R. Röbler, R. Rohn, C.
Marsicano, J. Fröbish, T. Fairchild, R. M. H. Smith, F. Kurzawe, M. Richter, M.
C. Langer, T. M. V. Tavares, C. F. Kammerer, D. M. Conceição, J. D. Pardo,
and G. A. Roesler. 2018. Re-evaluation of the Permian macrofossils from the
Parnaíba Basin: biostratigraphic, palaeoenvironmental and palaeogeographical
implications. In: Daly, M. C., R. A. Fuck, J. Julia, D.I.M. Macdonalds, and A. B.
Watts, Cratonic Basin Formation: A case study of the Parnaíba Basin of Brazil,
Geological Society, London, Special publications, 472:10.1144/SP472.14.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Kues, B. S., and S. G. Lucas. 1991. Overview of Upper Pennsylvanian stratigraphy and
paleontology, Kinney Quarry, Manzanita Mountains, New Mexico; pp. 1-11 in J
Zidek (ed.), Geology and Paleontology of the Kinney Brick Quarry, Late
Pennsylvanian, Central New Mexico. Bulletin, New Mexico Bureau of Mines &
Mineral Resources 138.

Latimer, A. E., and S. Giles. 2018. A giant dapediid from the Late Triassic of
Switzerland and insights into neopterygian phylogeny. Royal Society Open
Science 5:180497

Lewis, P. O., 2001. A likelihood approach to estimating phylogeny from discrete
morphological character data. Systematic biology, 50(6):913-925.

McCune, A. R., and B. Schaeffer. 1986. Triassic and Jurassic fishes: Patterns of
diversity; pp. 171-181 in The beginning of the age of dinosaurs, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.

Maddison, D. R., and W. P. Maddison. 2018. Mesquite Project. mesquiteproject.org.

Malabarba, M. C. L. 1988. A new genus and species of stem group actinopteran fish
from the Lower Permian of Santa Catarina State, Brazil. Zoological Journal of
the Linnean Society 94:287–299.

O’Leary, M. A., J. I. Block, J. J. Flynn, T. J. Gaudin, A. Giallombardo, N. P. Giannini,
S. L. Goldberg, B. P. Kraatz, Z. -X. Luo, J. Meng, X. Ni, M. J. Novacek, F. A.
Perini, Z. S. Randall, G. W. Rougier, E. J. Sargis, M. T. Silcox, N. B. Simmons,
M. Spaulding, P. M. Velazco, M. Weksler, J. R. Wible, A. L. Cirranello. The

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Placental Mammal Ancestor and the Post–K-Pg Radiation of Placentals. Science
339:662–667.

Poplin, C. M., and Lund, R. 2002. Two Carboniferous fine-eyed palaeoniscoids (Pisces,
Actinopterygii) from Bear Gulch (USA). Journal of Paleontology 76(6):1014–
1028.

Prum, R. O., J. S. Berv, A. Dornburg, D. J. Field, J. P. Townsend, E. M. Lemmon, and
A. R. Lemmon. 2015. A comprehensive phylogeny of birds (Aves) using
targeted next-generation DNA sequencing. Nature 526:567-573.

Rambaut, A. 2018. FigTree. Available at tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/.

Richter, M., A. E. Piccoli, and M. C. Souza Lima. 1985. Variação morfológica de restos
de paleoniscídeos (Pisces) no Permiano da Bacia do Paraná. MME/DNPM, Série
Geologia 27:111–122.

Richter, M. 2002. A ray-finned fish (Osteichthyes) from the Late Permian of the state of
Santa Catarina (Parana Basin) Southern Brazil. Revista Brasileira de
Paleontologia 3:56–61.

Romano, C., and W. Brinkmann. 2009. Reappraisal of the lower actinopterygian
Birgeria stensioei Aldinger, 1931 (Osteichthyes; Birgeriidae) from the Middle
Triassic of Monte San Giorgio (Switzerland) and Besano (Italy). Neues
Jahrbuch für Geologie und Paläontologie 251(1):17–31.

Ronquist, F., M. Teslenko, P. van der Mark, D. L. Ayres, A. Darling, S. Höhna, B.
Larget, L. Liu, M. A. Suchard, and J. P. Huelsenbeck., 2012. MrBayes 3.2:

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Efficient Bayesian Phylogenetic inference and model choice across a large
model space. Systematic Biology 61(3):539–542.

Sallan, L. C., and M. Friedman. 2012. Heads or tails: staged diversification in vertebrate
evolutionary radiations. Proceedings of the Royal Society B 279:2025–2032.

Sallan, L. C., and M. I. Coates. 2013. Styracopterid (Actinopterygii) ontogeny and the
multiple origins of post-Hangenberg deep-bodied fishes. Zoological Journal of
the Linnean Society 169:156–199.

Sallan, L., and A. K. Galimberti. 2015. Body-size reduction in vertebrates following the
end-Devonian mass extinction. Science 350:812-815.

Sallam, L. C. 2014. Major issues in the origin of ray-finned fish (Actinopterygii)
biodiversity. Biological Reviews 89:950–971.

Santos, M. E. C. M., and M. S. S. Carvalho. 2009. Paleontologia das bacias do Parnaíba,
Grajaú e São Luís, Serviço Geológico do Brasil, CPRM, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.

Schaeffer, B., and M. Mangus. 1976. An Early Triassic fish assemblage from British
Columbia. Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural History 156:519-559.

Schultze, H. -P. and M. Arsenault. 1985. The panderichthyid fish Elpistostege a close
relative of tetrapods? Palaeontology 28:293–309.

Schultze, H. -P., and D. Bardack. 1987. Diversity and size changes in palaeonisciform
fish (Actinopterygii, Pisces) from the Pennsylvanian Mazon Creek fauna,
Illinois, USA. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology 7(1):1–23.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Smith, D. B., G. Bernhardt, N. E. Raine, R. L. Abel, D. Sykes, F. Ahmed, I. Pedroso,
and R. J Gill. 2016. Exploring miniature insect brains using micro-CT scanning
techniques. Scientific Reports 6:21768.

Štamberg, S. 1991. Actinopterygians of the Central Bohemian Carboniferous Basins.
Acta Musei Nationalis Pragae 47:25–104.

Štamberg, S. 2013. Knowledge of the Carboniferous and Permian actinopterygian fishes
of the Bohemian Massif - 100 years after Antonín Fric. Acta Musei Nationalis
Pragae, Series B - Historia Naturalis 69(3):159–182.

Štamberg, S., and J. Zajic. 2000. New data on the osteology of actinopterygian fish
Sphaerolepis kounoviensis. Vestník Ceského geologického ústavu 75(4):455–
458.

Westoll, T. S. 1943. The origin of the tetrapods. Biological Reviews 18:78–98.

Wilson, C. D., J. D. Pardo, and J. S. Anderson. 2018. A primitive actinopterygian
braincase from the Tournaisian of Nova Scotia. Royal Society Open Science
5:171727.

Wright, A. M., and D. M. Hillis. 2014. Bayesian analysis using a simple likelihood
model outperforms parsimony for estimation of phylogeny from discrete
morphological data. PLoS ONE 9(10):e109210.

Xu, G. -H., K. -Q. Gao and J. A. Finarelli. 2014. A revision of the Middle Triassic
scanilepiform fish Fukangichthys longidorsalis from Xinjiang, China, with
comments on the phylogeny of the Actinopteri. Journal of Vertebrate
Paleontology, 34: 747-759.
38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Captions

FIGURE 1. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, holotype, Pedra de Fogo
Formation, Pastos Bons locality, state of Maranhão, Brazil. A, Specimen photograph in
left lateral view. B, Interpretive drawing. C, Close-up of maxilla showing fine ornament
ridges and acrodin caps on teeth; D, Type locality within the Pedra de Fogo Formation
(black) of the Parnaíba Basin (grey), based on Santos and Carvalho (2009).

FIGURE 2. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, skull in left-lateral view. A,
Surface rendering based on µ-CT data; B, Interpretive drawing.

FIGURE 3. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, skull in right-lateral view. A,
Surface rendering based on µ-CT data; B, Interpretive drawing.

FIGURE 4. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, left antorbital region. A,
Surface rendering in external view based on µ-CT data; B, interpretive drawing; C,
surface rendering in internal view based on µ-CT data; D, interpretive drawing.

FIGURE 5. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, left palate, lower jaw,
hyomandibula, and regions of dermal skull in mesial view. A, surface render based on
µ-CT data; B, dorsal view of articular region and adductor fossa; C, interpretive
drawing.
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 6. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, ventral view of jaws and
intermandibular region. A, surface render based on µ-CT data; B, interpretive drawing
of A; C, surface render of the gulars in dorsal view based on µ-CT data; D, interpretive
drawing of C.

FIGURE 7. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, parasphenoid and accessory
vomer. A, surface render in left-lateral view based on µ-CT data; B, interpretive
drawing; C, surface render in dorsal view; D, interpretive drawing; E, surface render in
ventral view; F, interpretative drawing; G, surface render in right-lateral view based on
µ-CT data; H, interpretive drawing; I, surface render in left-lateral view; J, interpretive
drawing.

FIGURE 8. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, hyoid complex. A, surface
render in mesial view based on µ-CT data; B, interpretive drawing; C, surface render in
lateral view; D, interpretive drawing; E, hypohyals in right-lateral view shown in
position relative to the mandible; F, render of ventral hyoid arch in dorsal view based
on µ-CT data; G, interpretive drawing of F.

FIGURE 9. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, hyoid and branchial arches in
right-lateral view. A, surface render based on µ-CT data; B, interpretive drawing.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 10. Brazilichthys macrognathus, DGM 1061-P, clavicles in ventral view. A,
surface render based on µ-CT data; B, interpretive drawing. C, surface render of
possible interclavicle.

FIGURE 11. Phylogenetic hypothesis of early actinopterygian interrelationships, based
on maximum parsimony analysis of 265 morphological characters (from Giles et al.,
2017). Tree length: 1326 steps; consistency index: 0.22; retention index: 0.64. Node
colors represent Bremer support values: white = 1, light gray = 2, black ≥ 3. Numbers
represent posterior probabilities (x 100), and are only shown for nodes found in the
majority-rule consensus of the posterior distribution of trees in the Bayesian analysis.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 1

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 2

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 3

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 4

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 5

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 6

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 7

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 8

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 9

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 10

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/540310; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 11

52

