bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Paternally expressed imprinted Snord116 and Peg3 regulate hypothalamic orexin neurons
Pace Marta1#, Falappa Matteo1,2#, Freschi Andrea1, Balzani Edoardo1, Berteotti Chiara3,
Lo Martire Viviana3, Fatemeh Kaveh4, Eivind Hovig4,5, Zoccoli Giovanna3, Cerri Matteo6,
Amici Roberto6, Urbanucci Alfonso 4, Tucci Valter *1

1

Genetics and Epigenetics of Behaviour Laboratory, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, via

Morego 30, 16163, Italy.
2

Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Riabilitazione, Oftalmologia, Genetica e Scienze

Materno-Infantili (DINOGMI), Università degli Studi di Genova, Genova, Italy;
3

PRISM Lab, Department of Biomedical and Neuromotor Sciences, University of

Bologna, Bologna, Italy
4

Department of Tumor Biology, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University

Hospital, Oslo Norway
5

6

Department of Informatics, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway
Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences, Alma Mater Studiorum -

University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy;

#

These authors contributed equally

* corresponding author: valter.tucci@iit.it
General information:
Abstract words: 186; words count: 9525; figures: 4; Supplementary material: figures 6;
table 8

Conflict of Interest: each author discloses the absence of any conflicts of interest
relative to the research covered in the submitted manuscript.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Highlights

•

Snord116 regulates neuronal activity in the lateral hypothalamus (LH), which is time-locked
with cortical states of sleep.

•

Loss of Snord116 reduces orexin neurons in the LH and affects sleep homeostasis and
thermoregulation in mice.

•

Snord116 and Peg3 independently control orexin expression in the LH.

•

Paternally expressed alleles maximize the patrilineal effects in the control of REM sleep by
the LH in mammals.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Imprinted genes are highly expressed in the hypothalamus; however, whether specific imprinted
genes affect hypothalamic neuromodulators and their functions is unknown. It has been suggested
that Prader-Willi syndrome (PWS), a neurodevelopmental disorder caused by lack of paternal
expression at chromosome 15q11-q13, is characterised by hypothalamic insufficiency. Here, we
investigate the role of the paternally expressed Snord116 gene within the context of sleep and
metabolic abnormalities of PWS, and we report a novel role of this imprinted gene in the function
and organisation of the two main neuromodulatory systems of the lateral hypothalamus (LH),
namely, the orexin (OX) and melanin concentrating hormone (MCH) systems. We observe that the
dynamics between neuronal discharge in the LH and the sleep-wake states of mice with paternal
deletion of Snord116 (PWScrm+/p-) are compromised. This abnormal state-dependent neuronal
activity is paralleled by a significant reduction in OX neurons in the LH of mutants. Therefore, we
propose that an imbalance between OX- and MCH-expressing neurons in the LH of mutants reflects
a series of deficits manifested in the PWS, such as dysregulation of rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep, food intake and temperature control.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction:
Both maternally and paternally derived genes are essential for survival beyond post-fertilization;
these genes differentially affect embryonic brain development and, consequently, postnatal and
adult physiology. In particular, paternally derived genes are thought to control the organization of
the subcortical limbic system [1]. For example, androgenetic (two paternal copies) cells are mainly
distributed in the hypothalamus, although the specific impact of such parental genetic information
on hypothalamic functions remains unknown.
The hypothalamus is an ancient structure that orchestrates primitive physiological processes for
survival [2], such as motivated behaviours for feeding and drinking, the regulation of body
temperature and the switch between sleep and wakefulness. Therefore, a number of paternally
expressed genes that are highly expressed in the hypothalamus are potential regulators of
mammalian sleep and sleep-mediated metabolism [3]. To this end, over the last decade, we have
demonstrated that parent-of-origin imprinted genes exert a pivotal role in the control of sleep
physiology and feeding behaviour [3, 4]
Among the pathological conditions that depend on genomic imprinting defects, Prader–Willi
syndrome (PWS) is the neurodevelopmental disorder that best describes the link among sleep,
metabolism and imprinted genes. PWS results from the loss of a cluster of paternally expressed
genes on the chromosome 15q11-q13 region, many of which are highly expressed in the
hypothalamus and are characterized by sleep-wake (e.g., rapid-eye-movement, REM, alterations)
and metabolic (e.g., hyperphagia) abnormalities. All these symptoms are generally associated with
hypothalamic insufficiency [5-7].
We have previously described that microdeletion of the small nuclear ribonucleic acid (RNA)-116
(SNORD116) cluster within the PWS locus induces REM and temperature dysregulations in mice
and human subjects [5]. Specifically, the deletion of Snord116 in mice causes an EEG profile
characterized by the intrusion of REM sleep episodes into the transition between wakefulness and
sleep accompanied by an increase in body temperature. REM sleep intrusions have been reported in
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

several clinical studies in which PWS subjects manifest narcolepsy and express symptoms such as
sleep attacks during active wakefulness, cataplexy (a transient loss of muscle tone during
wakefulness), sleep paralysis and sleep fragmentation [8]. Narcolepsy is a sleep condition that
causes the loss of hypothalamic OX neurons (also known as hypocretin; HCRT)[9], and previous
studies have observed that subjects with PWS show OX alterations [10-12].
OX neurons are located in the lateral hypothalamus (LH), where this class of neurons promotes
wakefulness [13] by facilitating the release of other arousal-promoting brain neuromodulators (i.e.,
noradrenaline, histamine and acetylcholine) [14]. However, in the LH, OX neurons are intermingled
with a group of neurons that release the melanin-concentrating hormone (MCH) and promote sleep,
and these neurons are active mainly during REM sleep [15]. Both OX and MCH neurons project
widely throughout the brain, exerting antagonistic actions on brain states and energy balance.
However, whether these two groups of neurons of the LH exert abnormal control over sleep-wake
cycles, feeding and temperature in the PWS remains unclear.
In this study, we tested the hypothesis that the paternally expressed Snord116 modulates the
neuromodulatory systems of LH, therefore controlling sleep, feeding and temperature. We found
that mice with paternal deletion of Snord116 have altered dynamics in how neuronal activity of the
LH is associated with cortical states. We report that in mutant mice, compared with wild-type mice,
a high proportion of LH neurons do not uniquely respond to cortical states, such as those occurring
in sleep, wakefulness or feeding. This altered modulation between cortical states and subcortical
neuronal activity in Snord116-deleted mice is compatible with a loss of OX-expressing neurons in
the LH, while MCH-expressing neurons remained unaffected, thereby creating an imbalance
between the two systems. We also report, for the first time, a link between Snord116 and a different
paternally imprinted gene, Peg3, which plays a pivotal role in the control of the hypothalamic OX
neuromodulatory system.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results:

Loss of paternal Snord116 alters neuronal dynamics in the LH associated with sleep
homeostasis
To investigate whether the firing pattern of neurons within the LH manifests signs of paternaldependent subcortical regulation throughout different arousal states of the brain, we studied mice
with paternal deletion of the Snord116 gene [16], PWScrm+/p- mice, and their wild-type littermate
controls, PWScrm+/p+ mice. We identified neurons in the LH that are time-locked (see Methods and
Figure 1A-F for full details on the procedure) to sleep (S-max) and to wake (W-max) states and to
food intake (Type I, II and III). Strikingly, we observed a significant increase in S-max and a
reduction in W-max neurons in PWScrm+/p- mutant mice compared with controls at baseline (Figure
1G and Table S2). A more detailed analysis of B1 and B2 confirmed this distribution of the classes
of LH neurons according to EEG states (Figure S1B and Table S2). Moreover, when the pressure of
sleep is low (i.e., B1), mutant mice exhibit more REM sleep than their littermate controls (Figure
S1A). This finding suggests that the pressure/need of sleep may be either a permissive or a blocking
mechanism with respect to excess REM sleep due to the lack of Snord116. This phenomenon is
confirmed by the profile of the power densities in REM sleep (Figure S1C). Indeed, in PWScrm+/pmutant mice, the theta (4.5-9 Hz) band, which is characteristic of REM sleep, is higher in both B1
and B2, but at B2, the EEG frequency phenotype is not accompanied by longer REM sleep
duration, implying that the overall higher sleep pressure masks differences in microstructural
aspects of electrophysiological sleep. Moreover, the delta (0.5-4.5 Hz) band presents an opposite
trend in the two groups of animals; counterintuitively, reduced power is observed in mutant mice as
the pressure of sleep increases (Figure S1C). Again, this phenomenon suggests abnormal
homeostatic control of sleep in mutant mice.
Thus, we sought to explore the physiological responses of mice following 6-h of total sleep
deprivation (SD) by investigating the distributions of the neuronal classes at different time points
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

during 18 h of recovery (i.e., SD1, SD2 and SD3, Figure 1B). We observed that SD induced an
increase in S-max neurons in wild-type PWScrm+/p+ mice, while in mutant PWScrm+/p- mice, the
distribution of classes of neurons remained unaltered compared with baseline (Figure 1G). This
result indicates that control mice homeostatically respond to SD by modulating LH neuronal
dynamics, as previously reported in the literature [17], while mutant mice lack this hypothalamic
modulatory process.
Across different conditions, neurons may continue responding to the same state, may respond to
different state, or may become aspecific in their activity. Within the rearrangements of neuronal
modulation across different phases, an interesting observation in our study is represented by the
behaviour of the non-responding neurons following SD (Figure S1A, Table S3). In wild-type mice
after SD, the number of neurons of this latter class increases three times compared with the previous
baseline, a phenomenon that is gradually recovered over the following 18-h after deprivation. This
change comes with a cost for wake-dependent neurons in wild-type animals. In PWScrm+/p- mutants,
this SD effect is missing, reinforcing the observation of a lack of neuromodulation caused by the
paternally derived genetic defect.
Finally, the dramatic drop in delta and theta power densities in PWScrm+/p- mutant mice compared
with controls at SD2 (Figure S1C) coincides with the permissive role of sleep pressure at this time
of the day for the sleep defects in mutants.

OX putative neurons are reduced in PWScrm+/p- mutants compared with controls
The LH is made by a heterogeneous group of cells that express various neuropeptides, such as OX
and MCH neurons. To gain insight about the heterogeneous nature of our recording units, we
plotted the mean firing rate versus the mean logarithm of the EMG signals across three groups of
putative neurons (W-max; S-max and ws neurons) of the whole sleep experiment (Figure S1D). The
graphical representation of these neurons within the 2D scatter plot enables us to distinguish
between MCH putative and OX putative neurons. MCH putative neurons fire maximally during
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

REM sleep and are thought to present a low EMG amplitude and a low average discharge rate of
1.1 ± 0.26 Hz, while OX putative neurons fire maximally during wake and are characterized by a
high firing rate, 3.17 ± 0.79 Hz, as both classes of neurons were previously described [18]. Based
on these criteria, we assessed MCH putative and OX putative neurons between PWScrm+/p+ wildtype and PWScrm+/p- mutant mice. The percentage of recorded MCH putative neurons was
unchanged between the two genotypes; although non-statistically significant, a total of 211 OX
putative neurons were identified in PWScrm+/p- mutant mice compared with 315 OX putative
neurons identified in control mice. This observation suggested that PWS mutants may express a
reduced number of OX neurons in the LH (Figure S1D).

A high proportion of neurons in the LH do not respond to food intake in PWScrm+/p- mutant
mice
Mice underwent food deprivation (FD) during the dark period/resting phase (Figure 1B) to increase
their drive for food intake. When food was made available again, pellets were automatically
provided in the home cages of each mouse (see Methods). The frequency of nose-poke activity to
gain food was similar between the two genotypes (PWScrm+/p-: 107 trials; PWScrm+/p+: 116 trials),
indicating no obvious behavioural differences between the two genotypes, as previously described
[19, 20].
As for the sleep experiment, our attention fell on the distribution of neuronal modulation between
the two genotypes. We found that PWScrm+/p- mutant mice had less than half the number of type II
neurons, which have reduced firing during food intake, of control mice (Figure 1G). This reduction
may be explained by the fact that mutant mice had twice as many non-responding neurons as
control mice. Indeed, type I neurons were almost identical in the two groups (Table S4). These
results also suggest for an abnormal distribution of OX neurons in the LH of mutants, as OX
neurons drive food intake.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Sleep homeostasis is disrupted in PWS mutant mice
We explored the 24-h EEG profile of sleep (see Methods) and the responses to sleep loss in a
different cohort of animals.
The results confirmed our previous observations that sleep is altered in the PWS mutants [5]. In
particular, REM sleep is increased in PWScrm+/p- mutants compared with controls, showing a peak
increase at ZT (Zeitgeber Time) 20 and an overall increase in theta power (Figure 2A). These
experiments were conducted at standard room temperature of 22°C. Interestingly, the theta profile
in mutants did not show circadian rhythm (Figure 2A); PWScrm+/p- mutants had an increase in theta
power during the transition between light and dark, when the pressure of sleep is low. Overall,
REM sleep abnormalities remained a selective phenotype in these mutants, while the other EEGdetermined arousal states were unchanged between the two genotypes (Figure S2A).
Moreover, we tested for the first time the homeostatic EEG response following SD in PWScrm+/pmutant mice compared with littermate controls. Compared with control mice, PWScrm+/p- mice
showed reduced delta activity during non-REM (NREM) sleep rebound following SD (Figure 2B),
although the total amount of NREM sleep was unaltered over the long-term recovery process
(Figure S2A). Notably, delta power is the best electrophysiological marker of sleep propensity,
although the temporal distribution of its rebound following SD is less characterised. The behaviour
of delta sleep in mutant mice suggests a dysregulation in the daily distribution of sleep pressure in
these mice.
Our results also showed a significant decrease in REM sleep during the first 2-h of rebound in
mutants compared with controls (Figure 2A), confirming both the alteration of homeostatic control
in mutants and the alteration of REM sleep.

Thermoneutrality does not increase REM sleep in mutants
REM sleep is an evolutionarily recent physiological state of sleep that, in mammals, is largely
dependent on the environmental temperature [21, 22]. The maximum REM sleep expression in mice
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

is attained when the environmental temperature is near 29°C. The latter represents a thermoneutral
zone (TNZ) for this species [23].
In a new set of experiments, we modified the temperature environment of the animals to allow the
duration of REM sleep to reach a maximum [23]. Mice were housed for 5 weeks at 30°C, and then,
EEG/EMG were recorded for 24-h at the TNZ. Mutant mice showed a significant increase in all
sleep stages (Figure S2) compared with wild-type mice, but REM sleep did not significantly
increase in the mutant mice, perhaps due to the high REM sleep percentage at baseline (Figures 2A,
S2C and S2D). However, PWScrm+/p- mutant mice maintained a significant increase in REM sleep
compared with controls at ZT 20 (Figures 2A and S2A).

Peripheral thermoregulatory responses are absent in PWS mutants
We tested whether loss of paternally expressed Snord116 affects peripheral responses and whether
these changes impact the overall body temperature and body weight of the animals. We monitored
the peripheral and cutaneous body temperature at the head (T-head) and tail (T-tail), and
consequently, we derived the heat loss index (HLI) (see Methods). Recordings were made at room
temperatures of both 22°C and 29-30°C (TNZ). The TNZ imposes body temperature adjustments by
changing the vasomotor tone in specialized heat exchange organs, such as the tail, in mice [24]. We
observed an increase in the vasculature tail skin tone at the TNZ in both genotypes compared with
22°C (Figure 2C, upper panel). However, greater tail vasodilatation was observed in control mice,
particularly between the switch from light to dark periods. These results indicate that while at TNZ,
wild-type control mice present a proper peripheral thermoregulatory response when the pressure of
sleep is low, which is instrumental in maintaining the core body temperature of the animal at this
time of the day, mutant mice lack such an important physiological response. A significant increase
in the HLI was recorded in both genotypes, but a greater increase was found in PWScrm+/p+ wildtype mice than in mutant mice (Figure 2C, middle panel). We also observed that the peripheral
body temperature recorded at 22°C increased in PWScrm+/p- mutant mice compared with control
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mice during the light period (Figure 2C, bottom panel), suggesting a lack of homeostatic control
when sleep is physiologically facilitated in mice. Moreover, mutant mice failed to show the
circadian oscillatory profile of temperature at RT that is present in PWScrm+/p+ mice. However, at
TNZ, the difference between the two genotypes during the light period was no longer observed.
Furthermore, in agreement with previous reports [20], we observed that PWScrm+/p- mutant mice had
a smaller body size when kept at 22°C (Figure S3). Interestingly, the smaller body size was
observed both when the mutant mice were exposed to 30°C later in their development (e.g., for only
5 weeks) and when they were exposed to the TNZ from birth and kept at the TNZ for up to 20
weeks of age (Figure S3). However, while the former 5-week experimental strategy resulted in an
increase in body weight in both cohorts of animals, which was more pronounced in wild-type
animals than in mutants, the latter (birth) strategy resulted in no changes over time according to
temperature (Figure S3). Notably, maintaining at the TNZ from birth resulted in an overall body
weight in mutants that was comparable to the body weight at RT. The latter observation suggests
that the TNZ is a condition that permits an increase in body weight in PWS animals, although this
cannot neutralise the differences with wild-type animals under the same conditions.

Lack of Snord116 impairs the OX system in the LH
To assess the regulation of the main neuropeptides in the LH, we examined the expression of OX
and MCH. Thus, we assessed the precursor of MCH (Pmch) and the prepro-OX (Ppox). We
examined three conditions (Figure S4A): at ZT 6, we tested both the baseline condition (T0) and the
effects of SD (T1); and at ZT 7, 1-h after SD (T2), we tested the effects during the recovery from
the loss of sleep.
We observed that PWScrm+/p- mutant mice showed a significant increase in Ppox at T0 baseline
compared with control mice, while Pmch was unchanged in both genotypes at T0 (Figure 2D). At
T1, both Ppox and Pmch were significantly reduced in PWScrm+/p- mice compared with control mice
(Figure S4B), confirming that the homeostatic response in mutants is reduced and that these two
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

systems are dysregulated in mutant mice. At T2, the difference between the two genotypes for Ppox
and Pmch was repristinated (Figure S4B), confirming that the effects of SD in mutants are only
acute and follow the immediate response after sleep deprivation.
Then, we evaluated the receptors. We assessed mRNA levels of OX receptor-1 (Ox1R) OX
receptor-2 (Ox2R) and MCH receptor 1 (Mch1R) in the hypothalamus and in other brain areas as
control measures. The expression levels were overall unchanged between the two genotypes, except
for Ox2R in the parietal cortex (Figure S4C).
The overall contrast between neuropeptides and the mRNA levels of their receptors prompted us to
quantify whether these chemical changes within the OX and MCH systems had consequences for
the organization of the neuronal populations of the LH. We observed a significant reduction in OX
neurons in the LH of PWScrm+/p- mutant mice (PWScrm+/p+ mice 95

± 9; PWScrm+/p- mice 53

± 10; p= .0005; Figure 2E), while MCH neurons, which are located near the OX neurons, were
unaffected (PWScrm+/p+ mice 66

± 5; PWScrm+/p- mice 63

± 5; Figure 2E). The discrepancy

between the increased Ppox and the reduced neuronal population may be due to a mechanism to
compensate for the low number of neurons with an overproduction of the peptide.

Loss of Snord116 leads to transcriptional reprogramming in the hypothalamus
Next, we investigated whether the loss of Snord116 affects overall gene expression in the
hypothalamus of PWScrm+/p− mutant mice compared with PWScrm+/p+ control mice by performing
RNA sequencing (RNA-seq). The mice were investigated at the beginning of the light period ZT 0
(group 1, G1), 6-h later at ZT 6 (group 2, G2) and at ZT 6 but following 6-h of SD (group 3, G3).
First, we sought to identify the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the two genotypes in
the G1 group. We identified 4777 downregulated genes and 4271 upregulated genes between
genotypes (adjusted p < 0.05; see Methods) and a minimum fold change of 2 (Table S8). Next, we
compared the down- and upregulated DEGs (Figure 3 A-B) in G1 PWScrm+/p− mutant mice with
DEGs derived from post-mortem hypothalamic data from PWS patients vs normal patients [25].
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

More than 40% of human DEGs overlapped with mouse DEGs, suggesting that loss of Snord116
recapitulates approximately 40% of the transcriptional changes found in the human hypothalamus.
To more closely evaluate the functional importance of these overlapping DEGs, we performed gene
ontology (GO) enrichment analysis using Metascape [26]. We found enrichment of several
biological processes important for normal neural functions among the downregulated DEG genes,
while inflammatory systems were the processes significantly enriched among the upregulated DEGs
(Figure 3A-B).
Interestingly, we found that Ppox was significantly downregulated in PWScrm+/p− mutant mice and
in human PWS patients (Figure 3C), confirming that OX is involved in the abnormal regulation of
REM sleep in PWS.
Next, we focused on how SD affects gene expression in the hypothalamus in both normal and
PWScrm+/p− mutant mice. We compared DEGs in G2 versus G3 of each genotype (Figure 3D). We
found that 6 h of SD largely influenced the transcriptome of mutant mice (i.e., 833 DEGs)
compared with control mice (i.e., 30 DEGs). Surprisingly, in the mutant dataset, most of the DEGs
were downregulated (804 genes downregulated vs 29 upregulated). GO analysis of all 833 DEGs
revealed enrichment of cell organization, development and growth-related processes (Figure 3E),
indicating that poor sleep negatively impacts the hypothalamus in PWS subjects. Finally, we
investigated the RNA-seq dataset to determine whether Snord116 loss significantly affects the
expression of imprinted genes in humans and mice (refer to Table S9). Maternally expressed
imprinted genes, such as Meg3, Gnas, and H19, as well as paternally expressed imprinted genes,
such as Nap1l5 and Peg3, were differentially expressed in mutant mice before and after SD (Figure
3F).

OX regulation in the hypothalamus depends on two paternally expressed genes, Snord116 and
Peg3

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We next sought to confirm selected physiologically relevant DEGs identified within the RNA
sequencing dataset by qRT-PCR. Among maternally and paternally imprinted genes that were
altered in the hypothalamus of PWScrm+/p- mutant mice, Peg3 was the only confirmed gene,
showing a remarkable increase in expression in PWScrm+/p- mice (Figure 4A) compared with the
control mice (Figure S5A). Peg3 binds to DNA based on its multiple zinc finger motifs and nuclear
localization [27, 28]. Interestingly, a recent study found an association between Peg3 and OX
expression [29]. However, whether Peg3 is able to bind and regulate the expression of OX in living
mice remains unclear. We noticed that two conserved promoter regions within a 3.2-kb fragment
located upstream of the Ppox gene (Figure S5F) target specific expression within the LH [30]. We
showed that PEG3 binds one of these regions. Specifically, chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis
(ChIP) [31] followed by quantitative real-time PCR (ChIP qRT-PCR, and Figure 4A) revealed that
PEG3 binds the 2.5 kb OX regulatory element region in the hypothalamic mouse brain.
Interestingly, a significant reduction in PEG3 binding was observed in PWScrm+/p- mice (Figure
4A), which may be associated with a significant reduction in OX-expressing neurons in mutant
mice. Our results show that PEG3 positively regulates the expression of Ppox by enhancing its
expression, as indicated by the presence of a strong enrichment of the H3K4me2/3 in the same
region (Figure 4A). Conversely, H3K27me3, which is a marker of condensed chromatin[32],
showed no enrichment in either genotype. The GAPDH promoter was used as a negative control for
the ChIP experiment (Figure S5E). These data reinforce the evidence that PEG3 contributes to the
regulation of Ppox by enhancing its expression (Figure 4A).
Then, we sought to investigate whether Peg3 or Snord116 plays any causal role in the regulation
and formation of OX neurons, and we assessed the expression of these two genes in OX-deficient
mice. Specifically, we used two genetic mouse models of OX deficiency, Ppox knockout (KO) mice
[9] and OX neuron-ablated (ataxin-3 [Atx]) mice [33] (Figure 4B).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Atx mice selectively degenerate postnatally, and a loss of 99% of neurons or more occurs by the
age of 4 months [33]. Therefore, in Atx mice, not only are OX neurons ablated, but co-transmitters
are also eliminated [34]. Conversely, KO mice are only deficient in Ppox (Figure 4B).
Interestingly, we observed that Peg3 was significantly increased in Atx mice compared with KO
mice (p= .03). Moreover, Snord116 was also increased in Atx mice compared with KO mice and
control mice (p= .03; Figure 4B). Other imprinted genes tested were unchanged between genotypes
(Figure S5B). These data suggest that dysregulation of both Snord116 and Peg3 are important and
associated with the physiological maintenance of OX neurons. Indeed, we observed that both genes
were significantly altered only in narcoleptic mice, in which OX neurons and their co-transmitters
were ablated, but not in narcoleptic mice lacking only Ppox.
Finally, to test whether the alteration of Peg3 observed in the PWScrm+/p- mice and in the Atx mice
is linked to the absence of Snord116 and whether Snord116 modulates the expression of Peg3, we
used an RNA-interfering approach aimed at silencing Snord116 in immortalised embryonic rat
hypothalamus cells (embryonic rat hypothalamus cell line R7). Specifically, cells transfected with a
Snord116-specific siRNA showed significant Snord116 inhibition of approximately 80% at 48 h
after transfection (Figure 4C). However, the levels of Peg3 were unchanged (Figure 4C), indicating
that Snord116 does not regulate the expression of the Peg3 gene. Pmch and Snurp were also
unchanged (Figure S5).

Discussion
Overall, these new results reinforce the evidence that loss of Snord116 plays a crucial role in the
regulation of REM sleep and thermoregulation, both phenotypes being dysregulated in PWScrm+/pmutant mice and patients [5, 35]. In particular, we repeatedly observed REM sleep alterations at a
particular time of the day when the pressure of sleep was increased [36, 37]; in mice, this occurs at
a time in the sleep-wake cycle that corresponds to the “siesta time” [36, 37]. This new evidence
could be instrumental for future experimental designs aimed at addressing temporally precise
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pharmacological treatments.
Snord116 is one of the most important candidate genes involved in the aetiology of the major
endophenotypes of PWS. Individuals lacking the SNORD116 snoRNA cluster and the IPW
(Imprinted In Prader–Willi Syndrome) gene suffer the same characteristics of failure to thrive,
hypotonia, and hyperphagia that are observed in subjects with larger deletions and maternal
uniparental disomy [38, 39].
Our Snord116 mouse model remarkably recapitulates all the sleep deficits of human PWS, but only
incompletely mimics the metabolic alterations. Indeed, both PWS mice and human patients show an
alteration of body weight, but the two species show opposite phenotypes; indeed, PWS patients
exhibit increased body weight, while mouse models across different studies show reduced weight
[20, 40]. This overall result suggests that evolutionary divergency between the two species may
have played an important role in the metabolism of PWS, but to date, there is no evidence for such a
change.
We report for the first time a lack of neuromodulation of the LH in Snord116 mutant mice, which is
accompanied by an imbalance between OX and MCH neurons, causing a 60% reduction in OX
neurons in the LH. Within the same 15q11-q13 region, it was previously reported that Magel2 KO
mice lose 40% of OX neurons [41]. These results suggest that multiple paternally expressed genes
within the PWS region regulate the OX system in the LH, most likely in a dose-dependent manner.
At baseline, we observed that fire discharge associated with sleep (i.e., S-max neurons) is higher in
mutant mice than in controls, suggesting that the role of Snord116 that originates from the LH is
important in the determination of abnormal sleep in PWS. Indeed, several lines of evidence indicate
that LH exerts pivotal control of cortical sleep, including REM sleep [42]. Furthermore, while we
observed that the proportion of S-max and W-max neurons significantly changed after 6 h of SD
with an increase in sleep neurons of approximately 13% in wild-type control mice, PWS mutants
lack this neuronal response by the LH to sleep loss. In the LH, OX and MCH systems exert
opposing effects on REM sleep [43]: OX suppresses while MCH promotes REM sleep. Therefore,
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the imbalance between OX and MCH systems in PWS mutants is in agreement with an increase in
REM sleep.
Additionally, OX and MCH neurons in the LH regulate food intake and metabolism [44, 45]. We
found that mutant mice displayed a higher proportion of neurons, which were classified as nonresponding neurons (type III), relative to food intake than controls. In contrast, type II neurons,
which are downregulated in the LH during eating, were significantly reduced in mutants. It has been
demonstrated that OX neurons decrease their firing during eating and remain in a depressed state
throughout the entire eating phase [46]. These findings suggest a lack of regulatory feedback
mechanisms mediated by the OX system in relation to food intake in the LH of PWS model mice, a
phenomenon that can relate to the hyperphagia and obesity phenotype observed in PWS patients.
This evidence of neuromodulatory dysregulation of the LH is in agreement with previous results
[19], which describe that a late onset of mild hyperphagia and obesity in mice can be induced only
when Snord116 is selectively disrupted in the hypothalamus in adult mice.
Dysregulation of the OX system has been reported in a few clinical studies, although to date, the
results remain contradictory. One study described an increase in the OX-A level in PWS subjects
[47], while another showed a decrease in the peptide in the cerebrospinal fluid [11]. Taken together,
these findings call for an alteration of the OX system in PWS, although the contrasting results may
also suggest that the loss of function of paternal alleles within the PWS region results in an
increased phenotypic variance.
Our data suggest that Snord116 is essential for the regulation, formation and maintenance of the OX
system in the LH. We assessed Snord116 expression in two different strains with OX deficiency,
OX/ataxin-3 (Atx) mice and OX peptide knockout (KO) mice [9, 33], and we found that only Atx
mice showed a significant increase in Snord116. This line selectively loses OX neurons and their
co-transmitters. In contrast, in KO mice that do not display a loss of OX neurons but are lacking
OX peptides, the level of Snord116 was unaffected. The increase in Snord116 in mice with
depletion of OX neurons is probably a compensatory mechanism. Our conclusions are supported by
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a recent study [48] that described the role of Peg3 in the development and expression of OX and
MCH neurons. Our study demonstrates for the first time that Peg3 is able to bind OX promotors by
increasing the expression of OX. However, a reduced binding of Peg 3 was observed in mutant
mice relative to control mice, which may be explained by a reduction in OX neurons. Thus, Peg3
was selectively altered in our PWScrm+/p- mutant mice as well as in narcoleptic mice. In particular,
Peg3 was found to be altered only in Atx narcoleptic mice, while it was unchanged in Ppox KO
mice. This may be explained by the fact that Peg3 binds the OX promoter, which is not altered in
KO mice because they have a null mutation. Our study reveals that these two paternally imprinted
genes, Snord116 and Peg3, are unlikely to interact with each other, but both contribute to the
development and functions of OX neurons. Indeed, in our in vitro experiment with immortalised
hypothalamic cells, knockdown of Snord116 did not change the levels of Peg3.
All these evidence are in line with the pioneering evidence in androgenetic mice [1] that paternally
imprinted genes are important for the formation of the hypothalamus. In particular, our study
implies that Snord116 and Peg3 plays a crucial role in the formation of OX neurons.

We observed that PWScrm+/p- mutant mice present a high body temperature coupled with an
increase and lack of appropriate thermoregulatory responses. Thermoregulation is tightly integrated
with the regulation of sleep and is also controlled by OX neuromodulation [34, 49]. For example,
narcoleptic subjects exhibit a paradoxical lower core body temperature while awake [50] and a
higher body temperature during sleep [51, 52]. In mammals, in physiological conditions, peripheral
vasodilatation helps decrease the core body temperature during sleep initiation. Our mutant mice
displayed a high body temperature during the light period, which corresponded to their resting
phase/subjective sleep. Interestingly, narcoleptic mice show body similar temperature abnormalities
[53]. Moreover, when PWS mutant mice were kept at the TNZ, where resting metabolic rate
remains stable and where REM sleep is preferentially increased [54, 55], we observed a surprising
thermoregulatory response coupled with an altered homeostatic REM sleep response. REM sleep
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

did not increase, and the peripheral thermoregulatory response of the mutant mice resembled what
would be expected in a sub-neutrality (e.g., 22°C) environment. REM sleep is a stage of sleep in
which thermoregulation is suspended; for this reason, REM sleep expression is more sensitive to
ambient temperature manipulation than NREM sleep [54, 55]. A recent study [56] described that
endotherms have evolved neural circuits to opportunistically promote REM sleep when the need for
thermoregulatory defence is minimized, such as in TNZ conditions, suggesting a tight link between
thermoregulation and REM sleep. In our study, the increase in body weight observed at the TNZ
suggests that thermoneutrality is a permissive condition that induces body weight gain but does not
compensate for the metabolic abnormality in these mice. Indeed, the differences with wild-type
mice remained unchanged. Mutants showed growth retardation at both environmental conditions
investigated, namely, at both 22°C and 30°C.

The transcriptomic analysis in the hypothalamus suggests that loss of Snord116 might negatively
affect synaptic organization while promoting inflammatory responses in the hypothalamus, as
previously observed in post-mortem hypothalamic brain tissue from PWS patients [25]. GO
analysis of all 833 DEGs in the mutant hypothalamus following SD suggested, instead, that loss of
Snord116 leads to a homeostatic response that relies on several cellular growth processes of the
hypothalamus (Figure 3E). This result indicates that defects in sleep homeostasis in PWS can be
derived from development processes of the hypothalamus, as has been described in other
neurodevelopmental disorders [57-59].

In conclusion, our study demonstrates for the first time that paternally expressed genetic elements in
the LH affect the dynamics between neuronal activity in the LH and cortical EEG sleep states. This
new evidence reinforces the recent hypothesis that genomic imprinting plays a crucial role in
mammalian sleep [3] and confirms original studies in androgenetic chimeric mice [1], suggesting
that the paternal genome may account for regulatory mechanisms in the hypothalamus.
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods:

Animal husbandry, breeding, and genotyping
All animals were housed in controlled temperature conditions (22 ± 1 °C) under a 12 h light/dark
cycle (light on 08:00–20:00), with libitum access to food (standard chow diet) and water unless
otherwise required by the experimental procedure.
Experiments were performed using adult mice at 15-17 weeks with paternal deletion of the
Snord116 gene and IPW exons A1/A2 B [16] (PWScrm+/p-) and their wild-type littermates as control
mice (PWScrm+/p+). To maintain the colony, mice were bred and kept through paternal inheritance
on a C57BL/6J background. Genotyping was performed as previously described [5]. Briefly, PCR
analysis of genomic DNA from ear punches was performed using the primer pair
PWScrF1/PWScrR2

(5’-AGAATCGCTTGAACCCAGGA

and

5’-

GAGAAGCCCTGTAACATGTCA, respectively). The deletion of PWScr resulted in a PCR
product of approximately 300 bp, which was absent in the wild-type genotype.
For experiments in narcoleptic mice, 3 age-matched groups of male and female congenic mice from
two different strains (≥ 9 generations of backcrossing) on the C57Bl/6J genetic background were
used, as follows: (i) mice with congenital deficiency of OX gene (Ppox) knockout (KO) [9] (n=11);
(ii) mice hemizygous for a transgene (ataxin-3 [Atx] mice), the targeted expression of which causes
selective ablation of OX neurons [33] (n=4); and (iii) wild-type controls (n= 4). Mouse colonies
were maintained in the facilities of the Department of Biomedical and NeuroMotor Sciences at the
University of Bologna, Italy. Mice were housed under a 12-h light/dark cycle at an ambient
temperature of 25°C with free access to water and food (4RF21 diet, Mucedola, Settimo Milanese,
Italy).
All animal procedures were approved by the Animal Research Committee and the Veterinary Office
of Italy for Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT) Genova. All efforts were made to minimize the
number of animals used and any pain and discomfort according to the principles of the 3Rs [60].
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Experimental approach
Neuronal activity in the mouse LH is time-locked with different behavioural and physiological
states of the brain
To identify neuronal populations in the LH that control different physiological behaviours, we
adopted a combined experimental approach (Figure 1A) in which we monitored single unit activity
(SUA) at the LH in parallel with the cortical state of each animal by means of
electroencephalogram and electromyogram (EEG/EMG) recordings. The EEG/EMG information
allows the identification of wakefulness, REM sleep and NREM sleep states in the animal, which
represent the three main behavioural states of the mammalian brain. Mice were kept throughout a
regular sleep-wake cycle, and EEG/EMG/SUA were recorded during the light-to-dark transition
(baseline 1, B1) and during the dark-to-light transition (baseline 2, B2) to test the neuronal
responses during the minimum and maximum levels of sleep pressure, respectively (Figure 1B
upper panel). Then, each mouse underwent sleep deprivation (SD) to test the homeostatic response
following sleep loss (Figure 1B middle panel). A total of 569 well-sorted units were successfully
recorded from PWScrm+/p+ wild-type mice, and 548 units were recorded from PWScrm+/p- mutant
mice across all time points.
Based on the distribution of the firing activity of each unit, we were able to distinguish populations
of putative neurons in the LH that were time-locked with the occurrence of specific sleep-wake
states (Figures 1C and 1E). In particular, we identified neurons (Figure 1E) associated with sleep
(S-max) or wakefulness (W-max). However, we distinguished between NREM (NR-max), REM
(R-max) neurons and neurons firing in both stages (NRR-max) (Table S1). We also identified a
group of neurons that did not show significant changes in their firing rate across the sleep-wake
states, and we called this latter class of neurons “ws” (wake and sleep).
Moreover, to test the other fundamental function of LH, feeding, we food deprived each animal
during the 12 h of darkness of the light/dark cycle, and then, when food was made available, we
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

evaluated the neuronal responses to food intake (Figure 1B lower panel). In this experiment, a total
of 147 units were identified from PWScrm+/p+ mice and 74 units from the PWScrm+/p- mice in
response to food deprivation.
Following the food deprivation protocol, we also distinguished three different classes of neurons in
the LH that respond to food intake. In particular, we defined type I and II neurons as those that fire
maximally after or before nose-poking/feeding activity, respectively (Figures 1D and 1F). In this
experiment, a third class of neurons, type III neurons, was defined as non-responding neurons.

Experimental protocols
LH neuronal activity recordings
To investigate the neuronal dynamics of the lateral hypothalamus (LH), EEG/EMG and SUA were
simultaneously recorded in eight male adult PWScrm+/p- and PWScrm+/p+ mice. Animals were
individually housed after surgery in their home cages with a food hopper (a hole with an infrared
beam) connected to a food dispenser that automatically delivers food pellets after a nose poke
(powered by AM-Microsystems [61]. The food used was 20 mg dustless precision pellets (Bioserv).
After a 7-day recovery period after surgery, each mouse was connected to a flexible cable and
swivel that allowed free movement within the cages; the mice were habituated for 2 days to the
cable before SUA and EEG/EMG recordings (Figure 1A). Recordings of EEG/EMG with SUA
were acquired at two different baseline (BL) time points (B1 and B2; Figure 1A) for 2 h according
to the C Process and S Process of sleep. Next, to investigate sleep homeostasis, SUA and
EEG/EMG were recorded during the first hour of the rebound period (RB, Figure 1A) following 6 h
of total sleep deprivation (SD) and at other two time points over the 18-h recovery period (SD1 and
SD2, Figure 1A).
After a restoration period of 5 days from the previous SD, animals were fasted for 12 h during the
dark period, which corresponds to the active phase of mice. At the beginning of the light period,
mice were fed. A few food pellets were initially provided to encourage the mice to eat, and
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

thereafter, food pellets were provided only after nose-poke activity. SUA was continuously
recorded for 2 h after being fed (Figure 1A). EEG/EMG was not recorded during this time.

Homeostatic investigation of sleep
To investigate the role of the Snord116 gene in the regulation of the homeostatic component of
sleep, we recorded EEG/EMG in ten male adult PWScrm+/p- and PWScrm+/p+ mice over 24 h of
baseline (BL) at 22 ± 1°C. The BL recordings began at ZT 0 (the time of light onset in the 12 h
light/dark cycle), and then, mice were sleep deprived during the first 6 h of the light phase (ZT 0–6)
by gentle handling (introduction of novel objects into the cage, tapping on the cage, and, when
necessary, delicately touching) and then allowed 18 h of recovery (ZT 6–24, RB).

Homeostatic investigation of REM sleep
To investigate the REM sleep propensity, we housed male adult PWScrm+/p- and PWScrm+/p+ mice
for five weeks at 30 ± 1°C, which is close to or within the thermoneutral zone (TNZ) of mice [62,
63]. Then, these mice underwent continuous recordings for 24 h at 30°C ambient temperature while
undisturbed and freely moving in their cages.

Surgery
Mice were anaesthetised using 1.5%–2.5% isoflurane in oxygen and placed in a stereotaxic frame
(David Kopf Instruments, Tujunga, CA). To assess the sleep-wake cycle, mice were surgically
implanted with a telemetric transmitter (volume, 1.9 cm 3; total weight, 3.9 g; TL11M2-F20-EET;
DSI, St. Paul, MN, USA) connected to electrodes for continuous EEG/EMG recordings. A wireless
EEG transmitter/receiver, which also contained a sensor to detect body temperature, was
subcutaneously implanted. Specifically, EEG wire electrodes were implanted into the frontal cortex
(coordinates: 2 mm posterior to the bregma and 2 mm lateral to the midline in the right parietal
skull) and the parietal cortex (coordinates: 3 mm anterior to the lambda and 2 mm lateral to the
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

midline in the right frontal skull). EMG was recorded by two stainless steel wires inserted
bilaterally into the neck muscles. Subsequently, to record SUA, a tetrode-based 16-channel microwire array (4 x 4, 5.3 mm, 100-200-1250) of silicon probes (NeuroNexus Technologies) was
implanted into the LH (coordinates relative to the bregma: –1.45 mm anteroposterior, –1.0 mm
mediolateral, and –4.8 mm dorsoventral) of the contralateral hemisphere with respect to the EEG
electrodes (Figure 1A). Mice were operated on by performing a small craniotomy, and the dura
mater was removed for placement of the tetrodes in the LH. Two screws (1 mm diameter) were
used to anchor the implant. One screw placed in the cerebellum was wrapped by the electrode
ground. Next, the tetrode and the ground wire were covered with dental acrylic. Following surgery,
all animals were administered paracetamol (200 mg/kg; once a day; PO; Tempra) and enrofloxacine
(10 mg/kg; once a day; SC; Baytril) for two days.

Histology
At the end of the last recording session, animals were sacrificed, and the locations of the recording
electrodes were verified histologically. Mice were anaesthetised using pentobarbital anaesthesia
(100 mgr/kg, i.p.), and microlesions were made at the tip of one or two microwires by passing a
small current (5 m A, 10 s). The animals were transcardially perfused with 10 ml of phosphatebuffered saline (PBS) before infusion of 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS. The brains were
removed and equilibrated in 30% sucrose, sectioned at 40 µm on a freezing microtome, mounted
onto gelatin-coated slides, air dried, dehydrated in ethanol, stained with Nissl substance, cleared
with xylene, and cover slipped with DPX (Figure 1A). Three mice were excluded from the study
because the electrode was not correctly placed in the LH (Figure 1A).

Thermal imaging
Surface body temperature was continuously recorded in PWScrm+/p- and PWScrm+/p+ mice for 24 h at
22°C and 30°C using an infrared thermocamera (FLIR A20). The thermocamera was positioned
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

above the cage where the mice were individually housed. Head (T-head) and tail temperatures (Ttail) were obtained by manually analysing the recorded video (1 frame/s) using a dedicated software
program (Thermocam Research, FLIR). T-head was used to compute the heat loss index (HLI). HLI
was calculated by the equation (T-head - Ta)/(T-tail - Ta) [71]. T-head, T-tail and HLI values were
collapsed into 2-h bins and compared between conditions, before and after drug treatment, in the
two experimental groups.
Additionally, body weight was measured weekly in small groups of both PWScrm+/p- and
PWScrm+/p+ mice for 5 weeks at 22°C and at the TNZ (n= 10); the first body weight measurement
was recorded at 15 weeks of age. Another group of animals (n=10) born and raised at the TNZ was
also investigated. Body weight was assessed from 9 to 20 weeks of age.
A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures on both factors (group x time) was used for the
statistical analysis of T-head, T-tail, and HLI over the conditions investigated between the two
genotypes (+/+ vs. -/-). A two-way ANOVA was employed for the statistical analysis of body weight
(group x time).

Real-time quantitative PCR
Thirty PWScrm+/p- and PWScrm+/p+ mice were sacrificed by cervical dislocation at three different
time points: at ZT 6 (T0), immediately after 6-h of total SD (T1), and 1 h after previous SD (ZT 7;
T2). Total RNA was extracted from the hypothalamus by the Trizol method (Sigma-Aldrich)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions [72]. RNA concentrations were then determined by a
NanoDrop 2000c spectrophotometer. The complementary DNA was obtained from up to 2 mg of
total RNA by using a high-capacity RNA-to-cDNA kit (Invitrogen) and then analysed with SYBR
GREEN qPCR mix. Reactions were performed in three technical replicates using an AB 7900HT
fast real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). The relative expression levels were quantified
according to the previously described ΔΔCT calculation method [64]. Gapdh was used as a reference
gene. The specific primer pairs used for the analysis were designed using Primer3 (Supplementary
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Tables 5 and 6). An unpaired t-test was used to compare the differences between the genes
investigated in the two genotypes.
Narcoleptic mice were sacrificed between ZT 6 and ZT 7, and the hypothalamus and cortex of the
brain were dissected and immediately frozen.

Perfusion and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
PWScrm+/p- and PWScrm+/p+ mice were transcardially perfused with 10 ml of PBS before infusion of
4% PFA in PBS. Perfused brains were postfixed for 24 h in 4% PFA at 4°C before immersion in
30% sucrose. To quantify lateral hypothalamic neurons expressing OX and MCH neurons, serial
cryosections were cut coronally at 40 μm intervals to include brain regions within–1.10/–1.90 mm
of the bregma. Before IHC staining, the sections were washed three times with PBS for 10 min each
and then blocked in 5% of the appropriate serum (normal goat serum or normal donkey serum) in
0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS for 1 h. The sections were incubated with rabbit PPOX polyclonal (1:20;
Millipore) and pro-melanin-concentrating hormone (PMCH; 1:50; Invitrogen) primary antibodies in
1% serum in 1% Triton X-100/PBS at room temperature overnight. The sections were then washed
three times in PBS for 5 min each. They were incubated with appropriate secondary antibodies
(1:1000) (goat anti-rabbit IgG, Alexa Fluor 488) in 1% serum in 1% Triton X-100/PBS for 2 h at
room temperature in the dark, washed three times in PBS for 5 min each, and counterstained with
Hoechst (1:400 in PBS; Sigma-Aldrich). Finally, the sections were washed in PBS and mounted on
glass slides using ProLong gold antifade reagent (Invitrogen). The sections were imaged with an
upright Widefield Epifluorescence Olympus BX51 microscope equipped with a 4x UPLFLN N.A
objective. The microscope was controlled by Neurolucida software.
The percentage of OX- and MCH-positive cells was manually scored using NIH ImageJ software.
A total of 3-5 sections were evaluated for each mouse (n= 4 for genotype), and the neuron counts
were normalized to the total number of DAPI-stained nuclei (approximately 300 nuclei per
microscopic field). All digital images were processed in the same way between experimental
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

conditions to avoid artificial manipulation between different data sets. An unpaired t-test was used
to compare differences between the two genotypes.

Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
For the analysis of PEG3 binding, H3K4me2/3 and H3K27me3, ChIP was performed on
formaldehyde cross-linked chromatin isolated from the hypothalamus of 28 PWScrm+/p- and
PWScrm+/p+ mice. Briefly, the tissue of seven different hypothalamic was minced. Formaldehyde
was added to the tissue, which was resuspended in PBS at a final concentration of 1% and
incubated at room temperature for 15 min while shaking. The reaction was stopped by the addition
of glycine to a final concentration of 0.125 M. The tissue was washed twice with ice-cold PBS,
centrifuged and resuspended in lysis buffer 1 (50 mM HEPES pH 8, 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA,
10% glycerol, 0.5% NP-40 and 0.25% Triton X-100) for 90 min at 4°C. Isolated nuclei were lysed
in lysis buffer 2 (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 mM EGTA) for 60
min at 4°C. The chromatin was sheared in sonication buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM
NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate and 0.5% N-lauroylsarcosine) to
an average size of 100–400 bp using the Sonifier 150 (Branson).
For each IP, 100 μg of sonicated chromatin was diluted in a final volume of 600 μl with sonication
buffer and pre-cleared with 30 μl protein A/G agarose beads (Santa Cruz) for 4 h at 4°C on a
rotating wheel. Anti-PEG3 antibody (7 μg, Abcam Ab99252), anti-histone H3K4me3 (7 μg, Abcam
Ab8895), and anti_Histone H3K27me3 (7 μg, Abcam Ab195477) or rabbit IgG were added to the
pre-cleared chromatin and incubated overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel. Chromatin was
precipitated with 30 μl protein A/G agarose beads for 4 h at 4°C with rotation. The beads were then
washed five times with 500 μl RIPA buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM
EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100 and 0.1% SDS) and once
with each of the following buffers: WASH buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1%
Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl and 0.2% NaN3), LiCl buffer (0.25 M LiCl, 0.5% NP28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA and 10 mM Tris pH 8) and TE buffer (10 mM Tris
pH 8, 1 mM EDTA). The bound chromatin was eluted in 100 μl TE buffer. Crosslinks were
reversed by incubation with O/N at 65°C after the addition of 1 μl RNAse cocktail (Ambion) and 2
h at 50°C after the addition of 2.5 μl SDS 20% + 2.5 μl 20 mg/ml proteinase K (Sigma). DNA was
extracted by using a QIAquick Gel Extraction Kit (Qiagen). Immunoprecipitated or 1% input DNAs
were analysed by real-time PCR using SYBRGreen PCR Master Mix (Bio-Rad) on a 7900HT Fast
Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems). Each reaction was performed in triplicate, and
experiments were performed twice. The specific primer pairs used for the analysis were designed
using Primer3 (Supplementary Table 7). An unpaired t-test was used to compare differences
between the two genotypes.

Hypothalamic cell culture transfected with Snord116-siRNA
Embryonic rat hypothalamus cell line R7 (rHypoE-7 – Tebu-bio) cells were cultured in Dulbecco's
modified Eagle's medium (Sigma Co. Ltd, St Louis, MO, USA) supplemented with 10% foetal
bovine serum, 50 units of penicillin and 50 μg/ml of streptomycin at 37°C under an atmosphere of
5% CO2. Cells were seeded in six-well plates (Nunc Co., Roskilde, Denmark) at a density of 1 ×
105 cells per well. The day after cell seeding, 20 μM of Silencer® Snord116-siRNA (Ambion®)
was mixed with RNAiMAX Lipofectamine (Life Technologies) reagent, and the mixture was added
to each dish. We used MISSION® siRNA universal negative control #1 (Sigma) as a negative
control at 20 μM. Cells were incubated for 48-h after transfection, and RNA was extracted by using
the Trizol method for gene expression analysis (Supplementary Table 6). Experiments were
conducted in triplicate. An unpaired t-test was used to compare differences between the two
genotypes.

RNA sequencing and analysis

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Total RNA was homogenized in Trizol Reagent (Sigma-Aldrich). Libraries were prepared using a
TruSeq polyA mRNA kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and sequenced by
using the NovaSeq 6000 System (Illumina). Raw sequence reads were quality controlled through
FASTQC

(https://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc/)

and

trimmed

using

Trimmomatic (v0.38) (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24695404). To quantify the transcript
abundances, we used Kallisto (v0.44.0) [73]. Kallisto was also used to build an index from the
mouse reference genome (EnsDb.Mmusculus.v79) with default parameters. To import and
summarize transcript-level abundance of Kallisto, the R package Tximport was used. Differential
expression was assessed using DSeq2 [74]. Adjusted p-values less than 0.05 were selected, and only
genes with > 2-fold change were considered in the analyses.
GO analysis was performed using Metascape [75] (http://metascape.org/). The identified DEGs are
listed in Tables S8 and S9.

Electrophysiological data analysis
Cortical EEG/EMG signals were recorded using Dataquest A.R.T. (Data Science International).
Signals were digitized at a sampling rate of 500 Hz with a filter cut-off of 50 Hz. EEG signals were
filtered at 0.3 Hz (low-pass filter) and 0.1 KHz (high-pass filter). The polysomnographic recordings
were visually scored offline using SleepSign software (Kissei Comtec Co. Ltd, Japan) per four
second epoch window to identify wakefulness (W), NREM or REM sleep stages, as previously
described [64, 65]. Scoring was performed by a single observer who was blinded to the mouse
groups.
Specifically, W, NREM and REM states were scored when characteristic EEG/EMG activity
occupied 75% of the epoch [64, 65]. EEG epochs determined to have artefact (interference caused
by scratching, movement, eating, or drinking) were excluded from the analysis. Artefact comprised
<5-8% of all recordings used for analysis.
The percentage of time spent in total sleep, NREM and REM sleep out of the total recording time
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

was determined. The amount of time spent in each stage was established by counting the types of
epochs (W or NR or R) and averaging over 2-h periods. The spectral characteristics of the EEG
were further analysed. The EEG power densities of the delta (0, 5–4 Hz) and theta (5–9 Hz)
frequencies in NREM and REM sleep were computed for all conditions investigated. To exclude
variability due to the implantation, the power density of each animal was normalized to the power
density of the last 4-h of the light period of the 24-h recording (22°C and 30°C, respectively). The
temperature was recorded at a sampling rate of 5 Hz within the range of 34°C – 41°C and averaged
over 2-h periods. A two-way ANOVA with repeated measures (factors of group x time) was used
for the statistical analysis of the 2-h averaged time-course changes in the percentage of each sleep
stage (W, NREM and REM sleep), delta power, theta power and body temperature between the two
genotypes (+/+ vs.

-/-

). The statistical analysis of the cumulative amount of W, NREM, and REM

sleep over the dark and light periods among the groups at BL, after SD and at the TNZ was
performed with one-way ANOVA. An unpaired t-test was used to compare differences in the sleep
stages and in the delta and theta power during the first 4 h of rebound after SD between the two
genotypes.
SUA data acquisition was performed using an RX7 system (Tucker Davis Technology, TDT). The
synchronization between the behavioural set up and the TDT system was guaranteed with
transistor-transistor logic (TTL) from the CHORA feeders to the TDT system. The data were
digitally sampled at 12 kHz. To detect spike timestamps, the neural traces were filtered with a
bandpass filter (300 – 5000 Hz), and then, the common average reference (CAR) was applied [66].
Spikes were detected using a hard threshold that was computed as previously described [67]. A
correlation filter was applied between each detected spike and the corresponding signal chunk in the
other recording sites to detect and exclude false positive spikes given by movement artefact.
To specifically identify active neurons in the LH, we imposed two criteria: (i) the refractory period
following a spike was set to 1 ms; and (ii) the maximum duration of a waveform was set to 5 ms.
Spikes of individual neurons were sorted offline using the noise robust LDA-GMM algorithm based
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

on a linear discriminant analysis [68]. To identify neurons that specifically respond to a particular
sleep-wake cycle, the unit activity was subsequently analysed per 4-s epoch in each sleep-wake
stage for the average discharge rate (spikes per second). Classification of units according to the
state in which their maximal discharge rate occurred was performed by ANOVA followed by post
hoc paired t-tests with the Bonferroni correction, (P <0.05)[69]. This analysis allowed the
classification of units into three main neuronal populations that were shown to respond during
specific sleep-wake stages (Figure 1B).
Moreover, to identify the neurons related to feeding behaviour in the LH, we assessed the firing rate
of neurons that responded after the food was released by aligning the unit firing to the pellet release
from the CHORA feeder after a spontaneous nose-poke activity. The mean baseline firing rate of
each neuron was determined in the interval of 5 s before the pellet was released. Paired Student’s ttests were used to classify the firing rate differences of the same units before and after the food was
released. To motivate the mice to perform more trials, they were food deprived for 12 h during the
dark period, and the recording session started at the beginning of the light period for the following 2
h. Sessions were videotaped and reviewed to eliminate trials in which the mice performed the nosepoke activity but the food was not eaten. Video analysis also demonstrated that grooming rarely
occurred and, thus, did not affect SUA. Indeed, grooming has been shown to induce moderate OX
neuron activity [70]. Among all sessions, a mean of 3.25 ± 1.49 trials for the PWScrm+/p- mice and 2
± 0.69 trials for the PWScrm+/p- mice were removed from the analysis because the food was not
eaten.

Statistics
Values were tested for a Gaussian distribution with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. Data are
presented as the mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM). Two-way repeated-measures analysis of
variance (ANOVA) was used to perform group comparisons with multiple measurements. Paired
and unpaired t tests were used for single value comparisons. One-way ANOVA was used to
32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

compare more than two groups, followed by post hoc Tukey’s test. The Bonferroni correction was
further applied in the post hoc analysis, as appropriate, to correct for multiple comparisons.
Neuronal dynamics of the LH were analysed by the chi-square test. Phenopy [61] was used for
sleep, temperature and SUA analyses, while GraphPad Prism6 (GraphPad Prism Software, Inc.)
was used for statistical analysis. Type I error α was set to 0.05 (p < 0.05).

Author contributions
MP and VT designed the study. MP, MF performed the animal experiments. VT provided
infrastructural support. AF and MP performed the gene expression analysis. MP and MF performed
the EEG and SUA analysis. AF and MP analysed the gene expression data. AF performed the ChiP
experiment. MC analysed data from the infrared thermocamera. AU FK and EK analysed the
RNAseq. CB, ?? and ZG provide and dissected brain samples from narcoleptic mice. MP, MF, MC,
RA, AU and VT drafted and finalized the manuscript. All authors revised and finalized it.

Acknowledgement
We thank Simone Bellini, a master student of Tucci’s laboratory for her help with the RNA
extraction and RT-qPCR. This study was financially supported by Jerome Lejeune Foundation
under Grant Agreements No 1599-TV2016B, by the The Foundation for Prader Willi Research.
Additionally, this project received the Seal of Excellence by the European Union’s Horizon 2020, N
753417.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.

Keverne, E.B., Fundele, R., Narasimha, M., Barton, S.C., and Surani, M.A. (1996).
Genomic imprinting and the differential roles of parental genomes in brain development.
Brain Res Dev Brain Res 92, 91-100.

2.

Bonnavion, P., Mickelsen, L.E., Fujita, A., de Lecea, L., and Jackson, A.C. (2016). Hubs
and spokes of the lateral hypothalamus: cell types, circuits and behaviour. J Physiol 594,
6443-6462.

3.

Tucci, V. (2016). Genomic Imprinting: A New Epigenetic Perspective of Sleep Regulation.
PLoS genetics 12, e1006004.

4.

Tucci, V., Isles, A.R., Kelsey, G., Ferguson-Smith, A.C., and Erice Imprinting, G. (2019).
Genomic Imprinting and Physiological Processes in Mammals. Cell 176, 952-965.

5.

Lassi, G., Priano, L., Maggi, S., Garcia-Garcia, C., Balzani, E., El-Assawy, N., Pagani, M.,
Tinarelli, F., Giardino, D., Mauro, A., et al. (2016). Deletion of the Snord116/SNORD116
Alters Sleep in Mice and Patients with Prader-Willi Syndrome. Sleep 39, 637-644.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

6.

Holm, V.A., Cassidy, S.B., Butler, M.G., Hanchett, J.M., Greenswag, L.R., Whitman, B.Y.,
and Greenberg, F. (1993). Prader-Willi syndrome: consensus diagnostic criteria. Pediatrics
91, 398-402.

7.

Swaab, D.F. (1997). Prader-Willi syndrome and the hypothalamus. Acta Paediatr Suppl 423,
50-54.

8.

Vgontzas, A.N., Bixler, E.O., Kales, A., Centurione, A., Rogan, P.K., Mascari, M., and
Vela-Bueno, A. (1996). Daytime sleepiness and REM abnormalities in Prader-Willi
syndrome: evidence of generalized hypoarousal. The International journal of neuroscience
87, 127-139.

9.

Chemelli, R.M., Willie, J.T., Sinton, C.M., Elmquist, J.K., Scammell, T., Lee, C.,
Richardson, J.A., Williams, S.C., Xiong, Y., Kisanuki, Y., et al. (1999). Narcolepsy in
orexin knockout mice: molecular genetics of sleep regulation. Cell 98, 437-451.

10.

Mignot, E., Lammers, G.J., Ripley, B., Okun, M., Nevsimalova, S., Overeem, S., Vankova,
J., Black, J., Harsh, J., Bassetti, C., et al. (2002). The role of cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin
measurement in the diagnosis of narcolepsy and other hypersomnias. Archives of neurology
59, 1553-1562.

11.

Omokawa, M., Ayabe, T., Nagai, T., Imanishi, A., Omokawa, A., Nishino, S., Sagawa, Y.,
Shimizu, T., and Kanbayashi, T. (2016). Decline of CSF orexin (hypocretin) levels in
Prader-Willi syndrome. Am J Med Genet A 170A, 1181-1186.

12.

Nevsimalova, S., Vankova, J., Stepanova, I., Seemanova, E., Mignot, E., and Nishino, S.
(2005). Hypocretin deficiency in Prader-Willi syndrome. European journal of neurology :
the official journal of the European Federation of Neurological Societies 12, 70-72.

13.

Adamantidis, A.R., Zhang, F., Aravanis, A.M., Deisseroth, K., and de Lecea, L. (2007).
Neural substrates of awakening probed with optogenetic control of hypocretin neurons.
Nature 450, 420-424.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

14.

Schone, C., and Burdakov, D. (2017). Orexin/Hypocretin and Organizing Principles for a
Diversity of Wake-Promoting Neurons in the Brain. Curr Top Behav Neurosci 33, 51-74.

15.

Ohmura, Y., Tanaka, K.F., Tsunematsu, T., Yamanaka, A., and Yoshioka, M. (2014).
Optogenetic activation of serotonergic neurons enhances anxiety-like behaviour in mice. Int
J Neuropsychopharmacol 17, 1777-1783.

16.

Skryabin, B.V., Gubar, L.V., Seeger, B., Pfeiffer, J., Handel, S., Robeck, T., Karpova, E.,
Rozhdestvensky, T.S., and Brosius, J. (2007). Deletion of the MBII-85 snoRNA gene
cluster in mice results in postnatal growth retardation. PLoS genetics 3, e235.

17.

Schoonakker, M., Meijer, J.H., Deboer, T., and Fifel, K. (2018). Heterogeneity in the
circadian and homeostatic modulation of multiunit activity in the lateral hypothalamus.
Sleep 41.

18.

Hassani, O.K., Lee, M.G., and Jones, B.E. (2009). Melanin-concentrating hormone neurons
discharge in a reciprocal manner to orexin neurons across the sleep-wake cycle. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 2418-2422.

19.

Polex-Wolf, J., Lam, B.Y., Larder, R., Tadross, J., Rimmington, D., Bosch, F., Cenzano,
V.J., Ayuso, E., Ma, M.K., Rainbow, K., et al. (2018). Hypothalamic loss of Snord116
recapitulates the hyperphagia of Prader-Willi syndrome. J Clin Invest 128, 960-969.

20.

Qi, Y., Purtell, L., Fu, M., Lee, N.J., Aepler, J., Zhang, L., Loh, K., Enriquez, R.F., Baldock,
P.A., Zolotukhin, S., et al. (2016). Snord116 is critical in the regulation of food intake and
body weight. Sci Rep 6, 18614.

21.

Amici, R., Zamboni, G., Perez, E., Jones, C.A., and Parmeggiani, P.L. (1998). The influence
of a heavy thermal load on REM sleep in the rat. Brain research 781, 252-258.

22.

Amici, R., Cerri, M., Ocampo-Garces, A., Baracchi, F., Dentico, D., Jones, C.A., Luppi, M.,
Perez, E., Parmeggiani, P.L., and Zamboni, G. (2008). Cold exposure and sleep in the rat:
REM sleep homeostasis and body size. Sleep 31, 708-715.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

23.

Szymusiak, R., and Satinoff, E. (1981). Maximal REM sleep time defines a narrower
thermoneutral zone than does minimal metabolic rate. Physiology & behavior 26, 687-690.

24.

Li, P., Sur, S.H., Mistlberger, R.E., and Morris, M. (1999). Circadian blood pressure and
heart rate rhythms in mice. The American journal of physiology 276, R500-504.

25.

Bochukova, E.G., Lawler, K., Croizier, S., Keogh, J.M., Patel, N., Strohbehn, G., Lo, K.K.,
Humphrey, J., Hokken-Koelega, A., Damen, L., et al. (2018). A Transcriptomic Signature of
the Hypothalamic Response to Fasting and BDNF Deficiency in Prader-Willi Syndrome.
Cell Rep 22, 3401-3408.

26.

Zhou, Y., Zhou, B., Pache, L., Chang, M., Khodabakhshi, A.H., Tanaseichuk, O., Benner,
C., and Chanda, S.K. (2019). Metascape provides a biologist-oriented resource for the
analysis of systems-level datasets. Nat Commun 10, 1523.

27.

Thiaville, M.M., Huang, J.M., Kim, H., Ekram, M.B., Roh, T.Y., and Kim, J. (2013). DNAbinding motif and target genes of the imprinted transcription factor PEG3. Gene 512, 314320.

28.

Kuroiwa, Y., Kaneko-Ishino, T., Kagitani, F., Kohda, T., Li, L.L., Tada, M., Suzuki, R.,
Yokoyama, M., Shiroishi, T., Wakana, S., et al. (1996). Peg3 imprinted gene on proximal
chromosome 7 encodes for a zinc finger protein. Nature genetics 12, 186-190.

29.

Seifinejad, A., Li, S., Mikhail, C., Vassalli, A., Pradervand, S., Arribat, Y., Pezeshgi
Modarres, H., Allen, B., John, R.M., Amati, F., et al. (2019). Molecular codes and in vitro
generation of hypocretin and melanin concentrating hormone neurons. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America.

30.

Moriguchi, T., Sakurai, T., Takahashi, S., Goto, K., and Yamamoto, M. (2002). The human
prepro-orexin gene regulatory region that activates gene expression in the lateral region and
represses it in the medial regions of the hypothalamus. J Biol Chem 277, 16985-16992.

31.

Ye, A., He, H., and Kim, J. (2016). PEG3 binds to H19-ICR as a transcriptional repressor.
Epigenetics 11, 889-900.
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

32.

Bogliotti, Y.S., and Ross, P.J. (2012). Mechanisms of histone H3 lysine 27 trimethylation
remodeling during early mammalian development. Epigenetics 7, 976-981.

33.

Hara, J., Beuckmann, C.T., Nambu, T., Willie, J.T., Chemelli, R.M., Sinton, C.M.,
Sugiyama, F., Yagami, K., Goto, K., Yanagisawa, M., et al. (2001). Genetic ablation of
orexin neurons in mice results in narcolepsy, hypophagia, and obesity. Neuron 30, 345-354.

34.

Kuwaki, T. (2015). Thermoregulation under pressure: a role for orexin neurons.
Temperature (Austin) 2, 379-391.

35.

McVea, S., Thompson, A.J., Abid, N., and Richardson, J. (2016). Thermal dysregulation in
Prader-Willi syndrome: a potentially fatal complication in adolescence, not just in infancy.
BMJ Case Rep 2016.

36.

Ehlen, J.C., Jones, K.A., Pinckney, L., Gray, C.L., Burette, S., Weinberg, R.J., Evans, J.A.,
Brager, A.J., Zylka, M.J., Paul, K.N., et al. (2015). Maternal Ube3a Loss Disrupts Sleep
Homeostasis But Leaves Circadian Rhythmicity Largely Intact. J Neurosci 35, 1358713598.

37.

Huber, R., Deboer, T., and Tobler, I. (2000). Effects of sleep deprivation on sleep and sleep
EEG in three mouse strains: empirical data and simulations. Brain research 857, 8-19.

38.

de Smith, A.J., Purmann, C., Walters, R.G., Ellis, R.J., Holder, S.E., Van Haelst, M.M.,
Brady, A.F., Fairbrother, U.L., Dattani, M., Keogh, J.M., et al. (2009). A deletion of the
HBII-85 class of small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) is associated with hyperphagia, obesity
and hypogonadism. Hum Mol Genet 18, 3257-3265.

39.

Sahoo, T., del Gaudio, D., German, J.R., Shinawi, M., Peters, S.U., Person, R.E., Garnica,
A., Cheung, S.W., and Beaudet, A.L. (2008). Prader-Willi phenotype caused by paternal
deficiency for the HBII-85 C/D box small nucleolar RNA cluster. Nature genetics 40, 719721.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

40.

Ding, F., Li, H.H., Zhang, S., Solomon, N.M., Camper, S.A., Cohen, P., and Francke, U.
(2008). SnoRNA Snord116 (Pwcr1/MBII-85) deletion causes growth deficiency and
hyperphagia in mice. PLoS One 3, e1709.

41.

Kozlov, S.V., Bogenpohl, J.W., Howell, M.P., Wevrick, R., Panda, S., Hogenesch, J.B.,
Muglia, L.J., Van Gelder, R.N., Herzog, E.D., and Stewart, C.L. (2007). The imprinted gene
Magel2 regulates normal circadian output. Nature genetics 39, 1266-1272.

42.

Jego, S., Glasgow, S.D., Herrera, C.G., Ekstrand, M., Reed, S.J., Boyce, R., Friedman, J.,
Burdakov, D., and Adamantidis, A.R. (2013). Optogenetic identification of a rapid eye
movement sleep modulatory circuit in the hypothalamus. Nature neuroscience 16, 16371643.

43.

Naganuma, F., Bandaru, S.S., Absi, G., Mahoney, C.E., Scammell, T.E., and Vetrivelan, R.
(2018). Melanin-concentrating hormone neurons contribute to dysregulation of rapid eye
movement sleep in narcolepsy. Neurobiology of disease 120, 12-20.

44.

Burdakov, D., Karnani, M.M., and Gonzalez, A. (2013). Lateral hypothalamus as a sensorregulator in respiratory and metabolic control. Physiol Behav 121, 117-124.

45.

Barson, J.R., Morganstern, I., and Leibowitz, S.F. (2013). Complementary roles of orexin
and melanin-concentrating hormone in feeding behavior. International journal of
endocrinology 2013, 983964.

46.

Gonzalez, J.A., Jensen, L.T., Iordanidou, P., Strom, M., Fugger, L., and Burdakov, D.
(2016). Inhibitory Interplay between Orexin Neurons and Eating. Curr Biol 26, 2486-2491.

47.

Manzardo, A.M., Johnson, L., Miller, J.L., Driscoll, D.J., and Butler, M.G. (2016). Higher
plasma orexin A levels in children with Prader-Willi syndrome compared with healthy
unrelated sibling controls. Am J Med Genet A 170, 2097-2102.

48.

Seifinejad, A., Li, S., Mikhail, C., Vassalli, A., Pradervand, S., Arribat, Y., Pezeshgi
Modarres, H., Allen, B., John, R.M., Amati, F., et al. (2019). Molecular codes and in vitro

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

generation of hypocretin and melanin concentrating hormone neurons. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116, 17061-17070.
49.

Cerri, M., Del Vecchio, F., Mastrotto, M., Luppi, M., Martelli, D., Perez, E., Tupone, D.,
Zamboni, G., and Amici, R. (2014). Enhanced slow-wave EEG activity and
thermoregulatory impairment following the inhibition of the lateral hypothalamus in the rat.
PloS one 9, e112849.

50.

Fronczek, R., Raymann, R.J., Romeijn, N., Overeem, S., Fischer, M., van Dijk, J.G.,
Lammers, G.J., and Van Someren, E.J. (2008). Manipulation of core body and skin
temperature improves vigilance and maintenance of wakefulness in narcolepsy. Sleep 31,
233-240.

51.

Mosko, S.S., Holowach, J.B., and Sassin, J.F. (1983). The 24-hour rhythm of core
temperature in narcolepsy. Sleep 6, 137-146.

52.

Pollak, C.P., and Wagner, D.R. (1994). Core body temperature in narcoleptic and normal
subjects living in temporal isolation. Pharmacol Biochem Behav 47, 65-71.

53.

Mochizuki, T., Klerman, E.B., Sakurai, T., and Scammell, T.E. (2006). Elevated body
temperature during sleep in orexin knockout mice. American journal of physiology.
Regulatory, integrative and comparative physiology 291, R533-540.

54.

Parmeggiani, P.L. (2003). Thermoregulation and sleep. Frontiers in bioscience : a journal
and virtual library 8, s557-567.

55.

Cerri, M., Luppi, M., Tupone, D., Zamboni, G., and Amici, R. (2017). REM Sleep and
Endothermy: Potential Sites and Mechanism of a Reciprocal Interference. Front Physiol 8,
624.

56.

Komagata, N., Latifi, B., Rusterholz, T., Bassetti, C.L.A., Adamantidis, A., and Schmidt,
M.H. (2019). Dynamic REM Sleep Modulation by Ambient Temperature and the Critical
Role of the Melanin-Concentrating Hormone System. Curr Biol 29, 1976-1987 e1974.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

57.

Kronk, R., Bishop, E.E., Raspa, M., Bickel, J.O., Mandel, D.A., and Bailey, D.B., Jr.
(2010). Prevalence, nature, and correlates of sleep problems among children with fragile X
syndrome based on a large scale parent survey. Sleep 33, 679-687.

58.

Hardiman, R.L., and Bratt, A. (2016). Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis function in
Fragile X Syndrome and its relationship to behaviour: A systematic review. Physiology &
behavior 167, 341-353.

59.

Esbensen, A.J., and Schwichtenberg, A.J. (2016). Sleep in Neurodevelopmental Disorders.
Int Rev Res Dev Disabil 51, 153-191.

60.

Tornqvist, E., Annas, A., Granath, B., Jalkesten, E., Cotgreave, I., and Oberg, M. (2014).
Strategic focus on 3R principles reveals major reductions in the use of animals in
pharmaceutical toxicity testing. PloS one 9, e101638.

61.

Balzani, E., Falappa, M., Balci, F., and Tucci, V. (2018). An approach to monitoring homecage behavior in mice that facilitates data sharing. Nat Protoc 13, 1331-1347.

62.

Swoap, S.J., Overton, J.M., and Garber, G. (2004). Effect of ambient temperature on
cardiovascular parameters in rats and mice: a comparative approach. American journal of
physiology. Regulatory, integrative and comparative physiology 287, R391-396.

63.

Speakman, J.R., and Keijer, J. (2012). Not so hot: Optimal housing temperatures for mice to
mimic the thermal environment of humans. Molecular metabolism 2, 5-9.

64.

Pace, M., Adamantidis, A., Facchin, L., and Bassetti, C. (2017). Role of REM Sleep,
Melanin Concentrating Hormone and Orexin/Hypocretin Systems in the Sleep Deprivation
Pre-Ischemia. PloS one 12, e0168430.

65.

Pace, M., Camilo, M.R., Seiler, A., Duss, S.B., Mathis, J., Manconi, M., and Bassetti, C.L.
(2018). Rapid eye movements sleep as a predictor of functional outcome after stroke: a
translational study. Sleep 41.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

66.

Ludwig, K.A., Miriani, R.M., Langhals, N.B., Joseph, M.D., Anderson, D.J., and Kipke,
D.R. (2009). Using a common average reference to improve cortical neuron recordings from
microelectrode arrays. Journal of neurophysiology 101, 1679-1689.

67.

Erickson, J.C., O'Grady, G., Du, P., Obioha, C., Qiao, W., Richards, W.O., Bradshaw, L.A.,
Pullan, A.J., and Cheng, L.K. (2010). Falling-edge, variable threshold (FEVT) method for
the automated detection of gastric slow wave events in high-resolution serosal electrode
recordings. Ann Biomed Eng 38, 1511-1529.

68.

Keshtkaran, M.R., and Yang, Z. (2017). Noise-robust unsupervised spike sorting based on
discriminative subspace learning with outlier handling. J Neural Eng 14, 036003.

69.

Lee, M.G., Hassani, O.K., and Jones, B.E. (2005). Discharge of identified orexin/hypocretin
neurons across the sleep-waking cycle. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of
the Society for Neuroscience 25, 6716-6720.

70.

Mileykovskiy, B.Y., Kiyashchenko, L.I., and Siegel, J.M. (2005). Behavioral correlates of
activity in identified hypocretin/orexin neurons. Neuron 46, 787-798.

71.

Romanovsky, A.A., Ivanov, A.I., and Shimansky, Y.P. (2002). Selected contribution:
ambient temperature for experiments in rats: a new method for determining the zone of
thermal neutrality. J Appl Physiol (1985) 92, 2667-2679.

72.

Chomczynski, P., and Mackey, K. (1995). Short technical reports. Modification of the TRI
reagent procedure for isolation of RNA from polysaccharide- and proteoglycan-rich sources.
BioTechniques 19, 942-945.

73.

Bray, N.L., Pimentel, H., Melsted, P., and Pachter, L. (2016). Near-optimal probabilistic
RNA-seq quantification. Nat Biotechnol 34, 525-527.

74.

Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15, 550.

75.

Tripathi, S., Pohl, M.O., Zhou, Y., Rodriguez-Frandsen, A., Wang, G., Stein, D.A.,
Moulton, H.M., DeJesus, P., Che, J., Mulder, L.C., et al. (2015). Meta- and Orthogonal
42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Integration of Influenza "OMICs" Data Defines a Role for UBR4 in Virus Budding. Cell
Host Microbe 18, 723-735.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure legends:
Figure 1
Loss of paternal Snord116 alters neuronal dynamics in the LH associated with sleep and food.
A) The cartoon on the left shows mice chronically implanted with a microwire array of 16 channels
with an EEG-EMG wireless transmitter to record the sleep-wake cycle. On the right, a schematic
representation of the mouse skull depicting EEG, EMG (red circle) and single unit activity (SUA)
in the contralateral hemisphere is shown. The correct placement of the SUA electrode was
histologically verified by 40-μm Nissl-stained coronal brain sections (bregma –1.10/–1.90). B) The
panel shows a schematic representation of the experimental design used to record SUA and the
sleep-wake cycle in relation to sleep pressure depicted by EEG/EMG. Recordings were performed
at two different baseline (BL) time points (B1 and B2) over the first hour of the rebound period
(SD1) following 6-h of total sleep deprivation (SD) and at other two time points over the 18-h
recovery period (SD2 and SD3). Each recording is 2-h, except for SD1 (1-Hr). Each recording is
represented by cyan bars. After 5 days of recovery from the previous SD, the animals were fasted
for 12-h during the dark period and fed at the beginning of the light period. Food pellets were
provided only after a nose-poke activity. SUA was continuously recorded for 2-h after being fed.
The black bar indicates the dark period of the light/dark cycle, while the white bar indicates the
light period of the cycle. C) The panel shows an example of EEG/EMG traces with the sleep stages
identified (wakefulness is represented in grey, while sleep, including both NREM and REM sleep
stages, is shown in orange) aligned with the firing rate recorded in the LH. The heatmaps at the
bottom show the response firing rate in spikes/second from 0 Hz (blue) to 20 Hz (red). D) The
heatmaps show the response firing rate used to classify neurons before and after food consumption
(firing rate in spikes/second from 0 Hz [blue] to 20 Hz [red]). E) Violin plots of classified units
according to the sleep-wake states in which they maximally fired according to ANOVA followed
by post hoc Bonferroni correction (p < .05) see Methods. F) Violin plots of classified units
according to their discharge related to food consumption (paired Student’s t-test of the firing rate
44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

between before and after the pellet was released, binned at 50 ms, p < 0.05). See Methods. G) The
pie chart represents the distribution of recorded neurons according sleep-wake stage: wake (Wmax), sleep (both NREM and REM sleep, S-max) and not responding (ws). The rows show the two
genotypes (PWScrm+/p+ on the top and PWScrm+/p- on the bottom), while the columns show the
different recording time points, B, RB and food. According to the neuronal classification (see
Methods), W-max neurons are shown in green, S-max neurons are shown in blue, and ws neurons
are shown in yellow. Type I, neurons that fire maximally immediately after nose-poke activity and
during feeding shown in grey; Type II, neurons that show a sharp increase in firing rate at the
beginning of feeding shown in green; Type III, neurons that do not respond to food shown in red.
Differences between the two genotypes are indicated by $, while differences within groups across
time points are indicated by §. Significance was computed with the chi-square test; for details on
the statistical analysis, see Table S2, S3 and S4. The two genotypes investigated were PWScrm+/p−
mice (n=4) and PWScrm+/p+ mice (n= 4).

Figure 2
Snord116 influenced REM sleep and its homeostatic regulation, thermoregulatory response
via the orexin system. A) Left panel, REM sleep distribution over an uninterrupted 24-h period
over a 12-h light/dark cycle as baseline values and the following 18-h after total SD. Recordings
were made with animals maintained at 22°C (cyan bar in the graph) or at 30° C (orange bar in the
graph). REM sleep was significantly altered in mutant mice relative to control mice at baseline and
over the recovery period following 6-h of SD (two-way ANOVA: F (20, 160) = 8.66 p= <0.0001;
“time”; F (8, 160) = 3.33; p= <0.001; “genotypes”). REM sleep was also altered in mutant mice
relative to control mice when the sleep-wake cycle was recorded at the TNZ (two-way ANOVA: F
(11, 88) = 11.61 p= <0.0001; “time”). Data are reported as the percentage in 2 h bins, averaged
within genotypes (mean ± SEM; n = 5 PWScrm+/p+ and n = 5 PWScrm+/p- mice). PWScrm+/p- mice are
represented by red circles, while control mice are represented by black circles. Middle panel, the
45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cumulative amount (mean ± SEM) of REM sleep during the 12-h of the light period (white bar
above the bars) and during the 12-h of the dark period (black bar above the bars) for the three
groups investigated (recordings at 22°C are shown in blue, after 6-h of SD in white and at 30°C in
orange). The within-group statistical analysis was performed by one-way ANOVA, followed by a
post hoc analysis with the Bonferroni multiple comparison test. During the dark period, PWScrm+/pmice showed an increase in REM sleep (F(1.85, 4.74)= 18.06, p = .0082). Student’s unpaired t-test
between genotypes indicates an increase in REM sleep in PWScrm+/p- mutant mice relative to
PWScrm+/p+ mice (t(8) = 2.30, p = .04). The right panel shows the spectral analysis. Theta power at
22°C between genotypes. The theta power of each subject was normalized by the mean of the last
4-h of the light period. Theta power during REM sleep was increased in PWScrm+/p− mice (two-way
ANOVA:, F(11,88)= 3.08, p = <.001 “time”; F(1,8)= 8.04, p= .02 “genotypes”). Data are reported
in 2-h bins and are shown as the mean ± SEM. B) The panel shows the delta power at 22°C
between baseline vs rebound for PWScrm+/p+ and PWScrm+/p- mice. The delta power of each subject
was normalized by the mean of the last 4-h of the light period. Wild-type mice displayed a
significant increase in delta power following SD from ZT 6 to ZT 10 (two-way ANOVA: F(11,88)=
28,77 p= <0.0001 “interaction”), while mutant mice showed a mild increase only at ZT 6 (two-way
ANOVA: F(11,88)= 12,25 p= <0.0001 “interaction”). Data are reported in 2-h bins and are shown
as the mean ± SEM. Right panel, the average of the first 4-h of recovery after SD between the two
genotypes for the delta power. PWScrm+/p- mice showed lower delta than PWScrm+/p+ mice (unpaired
t-test: t(8) = 2.31, p = .04). Values are reported as the mean ± SEM. Asterisks (*) indicate a
significant difference between genotypes: * P ≤ .05; **p ≤ .01; *** p

≤ .001; **** p ≤ .0001. Two

genotypes were investigated: PWScrm+/p− mice (n= 10, 5 mice at 22°C and 5 mice at 30°C) and
PWScrm+/p+ mice (n= 10, 5 mice at 22°C and 5 mice at 30°C). C) Temperature profile for
PWScrm+/p+ and PWScrm+/p-. The top panel shows the T-tail profile recorded with an infrared
thermocamera over 24-h. Recordings were performed under two different environmental
conditions: at 22°C (cyan bar over the graph, shown on the left) and at 30°C, corresponding to the
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

thermoneutrality zone (TNZ) (orange bar over the graph, shown on the right). Middle panel, the
heat loss index (HLI) was calculated according to the following formula:

ሺ்ି௕௥௔௜௡ሻିሺ்௔ሻ
ሺ்ି௧௔௜௟ ሻିሺ்௔ሻ

(see

Methods) and assessed at 22°C (left) and at the TNZ (right). Bottom panel, the core body
temperature profile recorded simultaneously with EEG over 24-h was recorded using a telemetric
system in which the probe was subcutaneously implanted. PWScrm+/p- mice are represented by red
circles, while PWScrm+/p+ mice are represented by black circles. Values are expressed as a 2-h mean
± SEM. At 22°C, no differences were observed between the two genotypes for T-tail and HLI.
PWScrm+/p- mice showed an increase in body temperature during the light period at ZT 6 at 22°C
(two-way ANOVA: F(11,88)= 3.53, p = .0004 “time”; F(11,88)= 7.86, p = <.0001 “genotypes”). At
30°C, T-tail (two-way ANOVA: F(11,88)= 2.68, p = <.0001; “interaction”) and HLI (two-way
ANOVA: main effect of time-of-day, F(11,88)= 4.72, p = <.0001 “interaction”) were increased in
PWScrm+/p+ mice relative to mutant mice. No differences in body temperature were observed at
30°C. Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference between genotypes (* P ≤ .05). Two genotypes
were investigated: PWScrm+/p− mice (n= 10, 5 mice at 22°C and 5 mice at 30°C) and PWScrm+/p+
mice (n= 10, 5 mice at 22°C and 5 mice at 30°C). D) Ppox and Pmch gene expression analysis in
PWScrm+/p− mice versus controls. PWScrm+/p− mice (red bar) showed an increase in Ppox (unpaired
t-test: t(8) = 2.49, p = .03) compared with PWScrm+/p+ mice (black bar). No differences in the
mRNA Pmch level was observed between the two genotypes. Values are reported as the mean ±
SEM. Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference between genotypes: * P

≤ .05. E) Cell count

distribution of orexin (OX) immunoreactive neurons (upper) and melanin concentrate hormone
(MCH) immunoreactive neurons (below) in the lateral hypothalamus of PWScrm+/p− mice (right)
versus controls (left). Coronal sections were stained with OX- and MCH-specific antibodies,
counterstained with DAPI and scored. Values are expressed as the percentage of positive neurons
relative to all stained nuclei (mean ± SEM). The number of OX+ neurons was reduced in the
PWScrm+/p− mouse group (unpaired t-test: t(33) = 3.85, p = .0005). No differences were found in the

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

number of MCH+ neurons. Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference between genotypes: *** p

≤ .001. Two genotypes were investigated: PWScrm+/p− mice (n=4) and PWScrm+/p+ mice (n= 4).
Figure 3
Snord116 loss significantly impacts molecular machinery in the hypothalamus. A-B) Venn
diagrams illustrating the number of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) that are down- (A) and
upregulated (B) in the hypothalamus of Prader–Willi syndrome (PWS) PWScrm+/p− mice relative to
control mice and that overlap in human patients (according to [25]. The results of gene ontology
(GO) enrichment analysis of biological processes for the overlapping DEGs are also shown in both
A and B. C) Volcano plots of 637 and 727 DEGs in PWScrm+/p− mice in group 1 (G1; non-sleep
deprived). D) Significantly down- and upregulated genes in the hypothalamus of PWScrm+/p−
mutant mice compared with PWScrm+/p+ control mice affected by sleep deprivation (G2 vs G3). E)
GO enrichment analysis of biological processes for 833 (804 down- and 29 upregulated genes in
panel D) DEGs in PWScrm+/p−mutant mice that are significantly affected by sleep deprivation. F)
Heatmap of the relative expression of imprinted genes common in humans and mice assessed in
PWScrm+/p− mutant mice compared with the PWScrm+/p+ mice in G1, G2 and G3. See also Tables S8
and S9.

Figure 4
Snord116 and Peg3 play roles in the formation and maintenance of OX neurons. Peg3
regulates orexin expression in an independent manner from paternal Snord116. A) Upper panel, the
gene expression analysis of Peg3 in PWScrm+/p− mice (red) versus controls (black). Peg3 mRNA
assessed by qRT-PCR was significantly increased in PWScrm+/p− mice compared with PWScrm+/p+
mice (unpaired t-test: t(6) = 2.45, p = .04). Values expressed are relative to the wild-type control
mean ± SEM. Gapdh was used as a housekeeping gene; see Methods. Asterisks (*) indicate a
significant difference between genotypes. Bottom panel, ChIP analysis of PEG3 binding to the
48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/820738; this version posted October 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Ppox promoter region in PWScrm+/p− mice (red) versus controls (black). PEG3 binding was lower in
PWScrm+/p- mice than in PWScrm+/p+ mice (unpaired t-test: t(2) = 7.11, p = .01). Values are
expressed as the mean of the input ± standard deviation. Asterisks (*) indicate a significant
difference between genotypes. B) Peg3 gene expression (upper panel) and Snord116 gene
expression (bottom panel) in Ppox knockout (KO) and orexin neuron-ablated (ataxin-3 [Atx] mice).
One-way ANOVA indicated that Peg3 was significantly increased in Atx mice relative to KO mice,
(F(2,16)= 0.02, Bonferroni post hoc test p = .03). Snord116 was increased in Atx mice relative to
KO and control mice (WT) (one-way ANOVA F(2,16)= 3.50, Bonferroni post hoc test p = .002).
Values are reported as the mean ± SEM. Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference between
genotypes. The following genotypes of narcoleptic mice were investigated: WT (n=4), KO (n= 12)
and Atx (n=4). C) Snord116 and Peg3 gene expression analysis in the Snord116-siRNA-treated
immortalised hypothalamic rat cell line. Snord116-siRNA (green bars) reduced the expression of
the Snord116 gene compared with untreated cells or scrambled siRNA-treated cells (white and
orange bars) (one-way ANOVA: F(2, 6)= 11.36, Bonferroni post hoc test p = .009). Peg3 mRNA
levels were unchanged, similar to Snord116-SiRNA, in untreated cells and scrambled siRNAtreated cells. The experiment was conducted in triplicate. Data are presented as the mean ± SEM.
Asterisks (*) indicate a significant difference between genotypes: * P ≤ .05; **p ≤ .01.

49

D

SUA
Unit 1

EEG

GND

Unit 2

nose-poke activity
20

u1
u2
un

EMG

0

spike/s

A

0
Time

E

wireless
trasmitter

Baseline (B)

Sleep
pressure

spikes/s

B

B1

B2

12
10
8
6
4
2
0

W-max

*

*

wake

F

Time

S-max

Food
Deprication (FD)

spikes/s

Sleep
pressure
Food
availability

SD1 SD2

SD3 Time

SUA recording

Type II

*

*

wake

sleep

Type III

10
5
before

after

before

B(B1 + B2)
5%

after

RB(SD2 + SD3)

9%

18%

before

after

Food available

7%
19%

Time

§

m+/p+

W-max
10%

S-max
ws

EEG
86%

EMG

31%

20

u1
u2
u3
u4
un

71%

75%
$

15%

33%

$

13%

$
30% 22%

spike/s

C

sleep

15

0

G

wake

Type I
20

Sleep
Deprivation (SD)

sleep

ws

Type I

m+/p-

Type II

0
Time

Type III

,

$§

p < 0.0001

54%

54%

49%

Figure 1

BL

m+/p+

*

10

**

*

*

5
0

0

12

20
6
Time [ZT]

12

20

0

12
Time [ZT]

RB

Theta

TNZ

15
REM [%]

REM [%]

15

m+/p-

22°C
30°C

10

*
*

5
0

20

Normalized
EEG power

A

m+/p+

m+/p-

**

1.2
1.0
0.8

m+/p-

0

12
20
Time [ZT]

D
Baseline

m+/p-

Rebound

m+/p-

**

1.15
6

m+/p+

12
Time [ZT]

m+/p-

20

0

38
T-Tail
36
34
32
30
1.5

HLI

0.2
0.1

*

* *

* *

*

T-body
0

12
Time [ZT]

20

Temperatur [°C]

38
36
34

3

*

2
1
0

m+/p-

1

ZT 6 - 10

E
m+/p+

OX

m+/p-

OX

*

15
***

10
5
0

1.0

m+/p+

m+/p+
+

0.5

38
37
36
35

m+/p+

2

0

* * *

0.0

0.0

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

20

30°C

0.4
0.3
HLI

12
Time [ZT]

22°C

31
T-Tail
30
29
28
27
26

32
30

6

3

Pmch/Gapdh

T-body
0

12
Time [ZT]

Mch

m+/p-

Mch

m+/p-

% MCH neurons
[normalized to DAPI]

0

Delta

*

Ppox/Gapdh

% OX neurons
[normalized to DAPI]

Delta

2.5
2.0

Rebound
Rebound
Relative fold
change

*

1.50

C

Temperatur [°C]

Normalized
EEG power

****

1.85

0.80

Temperatur [°C]

m+/p-

m+/p+ Rebound

Temperatur [°C]

Normalized
EEG power

2.20

m+/p+ Baseline

m+/p+

Relative fold
change

B

m+/p+

1.4

15
10
5
0

20

Figure 2

C

Down regulated genes
Humans
1314

704
GO: 0006836 neurotrasmitter transport
GO: 0050808 synapse organization
GO: 0042391 membrane potential organization
GO: 0048812 neuron projection morphogenesis
GO: 0007610 behaviour
GO: 0043269 ion transport regulation
R-MMU-112316 neuronal system

637

Mice
4667

0

2

4

6 8 10 12 14 16
-log10(P)

Up regulated genes
Humans
1610

R-MMU-975956NMD independent of the EJC
GO: 0006954 inflammatory response
GO: 0001816 cytokine production
GO: 0001944 vasculature development
GO: 0097190 apoptotic signaling
GO: 0019221 cytokine-medieted signaling
GO: 0002237 response to bacterial origin molecule
GO: 0008630 intrinsic apoptotic signaling
GO: 0008285 negative regulation of cell proliferation
GO: 0007169 transmembrane receptor protein
GO: 0002521 leukocyte differentiation
mmu04657 IL-17 signaling
GO: 0043086 negative regulation of catalytic activity
GO: 0030335 positive regulation of cell migration
GO: 0030099 myeloid cell differentiation

883
727

Mice
4468
3741

0

D

Down regulated genes
m+/p+
18

12

m+/p+
12

798

E

Pitpnm3
Timp1

10

Stxbp5l

11

28

0

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
-log10(P)

Ccn5

Ppox

HSpb7

5

Ptgr

Grm4

Mmp1b

0
-10

0

10

20

30

Log2 fold change

F
GO: 0001944 vasculature development
GO: 0030198 extracellular matrix
GO: 0001501 skeletal system development
R-MMU-1474244 extracellular matrix organization
GO: 0001817 regulation of cytokine production
GO: 0008285 negative regulation of cell proliferation
GO: 0030155 regulation of cell adhesion
GO: 0048729 tissue morphogenesis
GO: 0048598 embryonic morphogenesis
GO: 0031589 cell-substrate adhesion
GO: 0001503 ossification
GO: 0007507 heart development
GO: 0050673 epithelial cell proliferation
GO: 0032101 external stimulus regulation response
GO: 0042060 wound healing
GO: 0070848 growth factor response
GO: 0031347 regulation of defense response
GO: 0097435 supramolecular fiber organization
GO: 0048771 tissue remodeling
GO: 0043068 programmed cell death

1

m+/p29

Irs4

15

10 15 20 25 30 35 40
-log10(P)

Up regulated genes

6

m+/p804

5

Nrsn1

G1 G2 G3

m+
m+/p+
m+/p/
m+ p+
/
m+ p/
m+ p+
/p-

B

4030

20

-Log10adjusted P

A

0 2 4 6 8
Relative expression

Figure 3

B

in vivo

m+/p+

m+/p-

WT

Peg3/Gapdh
2.0

4
3
2
1

1.5

*

1.5
1.0
0.5

1.55

**

Relative fold
change

1.05
**

0.05
0.05
0.00

3
2
1

/3

m
27
3K

H

3K

4m

e2

g3
Pe

e3

0

H

Snord116/Gapdh
1.5

**

Relative fold
change

4

m+/p+

0.5

Snord116/Gapdh

ChIP

0.55

1.0

0.0

0.0

0

Ig
G

Peg3/Gapdh

Relative fold
change

*

Relative fold
change

Relative fold
change

Atx

Ox Neuron

Peg3/Gapdh
5

KO

in vitro

Embryonic rat hypotalamus
cell line R7

Co-localized
trasmitters

Neuron

Snord116

C

in vivo

PpOX

input [%]

A

**

1.0

Inhibition
80%

0.5
0.0

WT

untread

KO

Control siRNA

Atx

Snord116 siRNA

m+/p-

Figure 4

