bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

StretchfMRI: a new technique to quantify the contribution of the
reticular formation to long-latency responses via fMRI
Andrea Zonnino Student Member, IEEE, Andria J. Farrens Student Member, IEEE,
David Ress, Senior Member, IEEE, and Fabrizio Sergi, Member, IEEE
Abstract— Increased reticulospinal (RS) function has been
observed to cause both positive and negative outcomes in the
recovery of motor function after corticospinal lesions such as
stroke. Current knowledge of RF function is limited by the lack
of accurate, noninvasive methods for measuring RS function.
Recent studies suggest that the RS tract may be involved in
processing and generating Long Latency Responses (LLRs).
LLRs, elicited by applying precisely controlled perturbations,
can act as a reliable stimulus to measure LLR-related brainstem
function using fMRI with high signal-to-noise ratio.
In this paper, we present StretchfMRI, a new technique that
enables simultaneous recording of neural and muscular activity during motor responses conditioned by velocity-controlled
robotic perturbations, which allows for direct investigation of
the neural correlates of LLRs using fMRI.
Via preliminary validation experiments, we demonstrate that
our technique can reliably elicit and identify LLRs in two
wrist muscles–FCR and ECU. Moreover, via a single-subject
pilot experiment, we show that the occurrence of an LLR
in a flexor and extensor muscle modulates neural activity in
distinct regions of the brainstem. The observed somatotopic
organization is in agreement with the double reciprocal model
of RS function observed in animal models, in which the right
medullary and left pontine reticular formation are responsible
for control of the motor activity in flexors and extensors,
respectively.

I. I NTRODUCTION
Stroke is a leading cause of disability, affecting more
than one new US citizen every minute, 50% of which are
left with residual motor disability [1]. Motor disabilities are
mainly a consequence of the reduced corticospinal drive that
results in a loss of movement accuracy, in a decreased ability
to independently control joint movement, and in muscles
flaccidity. To this date, different rehabilitative interventions
have been proposed to promote motor recovery based on
either traditional or robotic [2] therapy. Both approaches aim
to promote neuroplasticity with the ultimate goal to help the
patients restore the natural corticospinal drive and re-use the
same body segments in a way that resembles unimpaired
conditions as closely as possible.
However, there are multiple other descending pathways
that concur with the corticospinal tract in controlling generation of voluntary motor actions [3]. Within these secondary
motor pathways, the reticulospinal tract (RST) is especially
important as it has been shown to be involved in locomotion
FS (corresponding author - fabs@udel.edu), AZ, and AJF are with
the Human Robotics Laboratory, Department of Biomedical Engineering,
University of Delaware, Newark DE, 19713 USA.
DR is with the Department of Neuroscience, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, 77020 USA

control [4], maintenance of posture [5], reaching [6] and
grasping [7]. While previous research advanced that the RST
could be a useful target for neuro-rehabilitative interventions
that aimed to strengthen neural drive to skeletal muscles
[8]–[10], recent research also shows that in humans RST
function is associated with post-stroke impairment, including
loss of independent joint control and hyperexcitability of
stretch reflex [11], [12].
The RST consists of two different pathways that originate
from the Reticular Formation (RF), a region in the brainstem
composed of a constellation of multiple nuclei [13], [14],
and connect to the motorneurons via segmental interneurons.
Animal experiments advance a possible organization of motor function in the RF, where the different nuclei provide
excitatory signals for ipsilateral flexors and contralateral extensors, while inhibitory signals are provided to contralateral
flexors and ipsilateral extensors [10]. However, it is currently
unknown if this model is accurate in humans, mostly because
accurate imaging of RF function in humans is an open
challenge.
Recent studies advanced the hypothesis that the RF may
be involved in processing long-latency responses generated
by feedback control of human movements [15]. Identified
over 60 years ago [16], [17], the long-latency response
(LLR) is a set of muscle activation bursts that, for the
upper extremity, occur 50-100 ms after an undesired limb
displacement stretches the spindles of a set of muscles.
LLRs are a fundamental component of motor control, as they
gracefully blend the fast reaction time afforded by reflexes
with the flexible and skilled action of voluntary movement
[18]. Thereby, investigating how the neural activity in the
RF is modulated by the generation of a LLR would be a
powerful tool to improve our understanding of the role of
the RF in motor control. Moreover, as LLRs are “semireflexive” responses, confounds that usually affect voluntary
motor tasks, such as individual subject skill and task-related
performance, are expected to affect the neurophysiology of
LLRs with smaller between-subject variability, opening the
possibility to directly measure the activity in the RF using
neuroimaging.
In this paper we present StretchfMRI, a novel technique
that we have developed to study the neural substrates of LLR
in-vivo in humans. StretchfMRI combines robotic perturbations with electromyography (EMG) with functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) allowing to obtain simultaneous recording of neural and muscular activity during the
generation of LLRs. This paper focuses on our novel protocol

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Investigations of the neural substrates of LLR via fMRI
requires simultaneous acquisition of muscular and neural
activity during the amplication of velocity-controlled perturbations that elicit LLRs in a known set of upper extremity
muscles. While previous studies primarily investigated the
reflex activity of proximal muscles by applying perturbations
to the shoulder and elbow joints [15], we focused our
attention to forearm muscles during wrist perturbations. By
targeting wrist movements, we expect to have reduced head
and body motion, two factors that can degrade the quality of
the fMRI images [19] and the EMG recordings.
A. Simultaneous recording of fMRI and EMG data
Measuring EMG during fMRI protocols is technically
challenging because of the large artifacts introduced in the
EMG recordings by the coupling of the fMRI time- and
spatially- varying electromagnetic fields–i.e. static magnetic
field, gradient magnetic field, radio wave–and the undesired
movement of the EMG electrodes. While the radio waves
introduce noise at a frequency that is far from the spectrum
expected for physiological muscle contractions, and so it
a can be easily removed using standard low-pass filters,
the same is not true for gradient and movement artifacts,
whose spectrum overlaps with the one expected for muscle
contractions.
Different algorithms have been proposed to compensate
for the gradient artifacts in Electroencephalogram (EEG) and
EMG protocols [20], [21], however, they are not capable of
fully removing the artifacts when they couple with electrodes
movement. Given our interest in only short periods of the
EMG recordings–i.e. those where we expect to observe a
LLR–we pursued a simplified approach to avoid gradient
artifacts. We introduced in the MRI scanning protocol a
200 ms silent window after each acquisition volume where
no fMRI excitation is generated. By synchronizing the application of the velocity controlled perturbations with the
timing of the fMRI sequence it was then possible to obtain
gradient artifact-free measurements of LLR (Fig. 1). Doing
so, we leveraged the intrinsic delay of the hemodynamic
signal that decouples temporally the measurement of muscle
activity associated with an LLR–which completes its course
within 100 ms of a perturbation–with the measurement of
the associated blood-oxygen level dependent (BOLD) signal–
which occurs for several seconds after a reflex is elicited (Fig.
1).
While this approach avoids artifacts associated with RF
and gradients, preliminary analyses have highlighted the
presence of artifacts introduced by the coupling between the

fMRI

ON

ON

ON

Angle

ON

5s

EMG

II. M ATERIAL AND M ETHODS

1 s 200 ms

5s

Noisy EMG
Clean EMG

BOLD

detailing three main aspects: the design of a novel MRcompatible wrist robot, the perturbation protocol used during
fMRI imaging, and the acquisition and processing of the
EMG data. We also present a set of experiments conducted
to validate the different components of our technique. Finally,
the integrated StretchfMRI protocol was used to determine
the neural substrates of LLR in a pilot, single-subject study.

Time
Fig. 1. Timing diagram of the MRI sequence (first line) with the 200
ms silent windows between acquisition of different volumes; (second line)
commanded robot joint trajectory; (third line) expected EMG signal, which
is clean during MRI silent windows; (fourth line) expected BOLD signal
associated with the LLR.

static magnetic field and the electrodes movement. As such,
we have implemented an optimization-based adaptive filter
for the EMG data (see Sec. II-C.2) that determines the set
of filtering parameters that minimize the difference between
measurements of LLR amplitude taken inside and outside
the MRI scanner.
B. Design of the MR-StretchWrist
Previous studies observed that LLRs can be elicited in
the forearm muscles with background wrist torque and
perturbation velocities that range from 0 to 0.5 Nm and
from 100 to 250 deg/s, respectively. In order to determine the
maximum torque characteristic required to apply an effective
perturbation, we modeled the wrist joint as a mass-spring
system [22], assuming the hand inertia to be Ih = 0.0024 kg
m2 [22] and considering the stiffness to result from the shortrange stiffness behavior of muscle fibers, as modeled in [23].
With these assumptions we determined that to accelerate the
hand to 250 deg/s in 50 ms when a background torque of 0.5
Nm is applied, a peak torque τR = 3 Nm would be required.
To apply such perturbations, we have developed a novel
robotic device, the MR-StretchWrist (MR-SW) shown in
Fig. 2. The MR-SW is a 1-Degree of Freedom (DOF)
robot capable of applying controlled movement to the wrist
Flexion/Extension (FE) axis in a range of θF E = [−45; 45]
deg. It is actuated by a ultrasonic piezoelectric motor (EN60
motor, Shinsei Motor Inc., Japan) which provides 1 Nm peak
torque and 900 deg/s peak velocity, previously utilized for
several MR-compatible robotic applications [24]–[26]. To
fulfill the design specifications, we have employed a capstan
transmission with 3:1 gear ratio to transfer motion from
the motor to the end effector. The capstan drive consists
of two pulleys with different diameters connected together
with a smooth cable that, to ensure no-slippage high-friction
contact, is wrapped around the pulleys multiple times (Fig.
2). Such transmission is ideal for this application as it is char-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

acterized by no-backlash, low friction, high-bandwidth properties and it is easily manufacturable using MR-compatible
materials. Finally, to measure the wrist joint torque we have
instrumented the MR-SW with a six-axis MR-compatible
Force/Toque sensor (Mini27Ti, ATI Industrial Automation,
Apex, NC).

Fig. 3.

Placement of the electrodes on the forearm

value of perturbation velocity. After each perturbation a rest
period of 5 s was included before the robot slowly moved
the hand back to the neutral position. The return velocity
was set to 15 deg/s. A new perturbation was triggered 5 s
after the onset of the return movement (Fig. 1). In each of
the experimental sessions presented in this paper, we applied
perturbations at six different velocities vdes =[-200 -150 100 100 150 200] deg/s when no background torque was
applied. Each velocity in vdes was repeated 10 times with a
pseudo-random order generated for each run. Perturbations
have always been applied to the subject’s right hand.
C. EMG acquisition and processing

Fig. 2.
Exploded view (Top) and prototype (Bottom) of the MRStretchWrist. (1) Ultrasonic motor, (2) Output pulley, (3) Input pulley, (4)
Tensioning mechanisms, (5) Structural bearings, (6) Force/Torque sensor,
(7) Hand support.

To ensure MR-compatibility of the entire system, all
structural components have been manufactured using ABSbased 3D-printed plastic (RS-F2-GPWH-04, Formlabs Inc.,
MA, USA) and connected using brass screws. For the cable
of the capstan transmission we have used a microfiber
braided line (SpiderWire Stealth 0.4 mm diameter braided
fishing line, 80 lb test). The output shaft is supported by
ceramic radial bearings (Boca Bearings, Boynton Beach, FL,
USA), while bronze sleeve bearings are included to support
the tensioning mechanisms. To reduce the electromagnetic
interference introduced in the MRI scanner room by the
motor and the motor encoder, a tripolar twisted-pair shielded
cable was used for encoder line and shielded cable was used
for the motor power line. Both lines are filtered when passing
through the scanner patch panel using 5.6 pF and 1.3 pF
capacitive filters, respectively.
1) Perturbation protocol: Since the impact dynamics that
characterize the end of a perturbation generates undesired
oscillations in the EMG recording, each perturbation was
kept active for a fixed time of 200 ms, regardless of the

Surface EMG was recorded with the BrainVision Recorder
software (Brain Products, Munich, Germany) using a 16channel MR-compatible bipolar amplifier (ExG, Brain Products, Munich, Germany). Given our interest in studying the
neural substrates of LLR for both flexors and extensors, the
perturbations were applied in both directions, and EMG was
recorded from two of the muscles involved in controlling the
wrist in flexion and extension: Flexor Carpi Radialis (FCR)
and Extensor Carpi Ulnaris (ECU).
1) Data acquisition: After having carefully cleaned the
skin with a 70% Isopropyl Alcohol solution, we placed
Ag/AgCl bipolar electrodes (multitrode, Brian Products,
Munich, Germany) on the muscles belly, parallel to the
muscle fibers, with an additional reference electrode that
was placed on the lateral epicondyle of the elbow. We then
filled the central hole of each electrode with an abrasive
Electrolyte-Gel (Abralyt HiCl, Rouge Resolution, Cardiff,
UK) to ensure contact between the skin and the electrodes.
Contact impedance for each electrode was measured using
the BrainVision Recoder software. A cotton swab dipped
in abrasive gel was swirled on the skin until the measured
contact impedance was lower then 10 kΩ, as described in
the product technical specification. In order to minimize
movement artifacts, we then carefully taped each electrode
and the respective lead on the skin and applied pre-wrap
around the entire forearm (Fig. 3).
2) Data processing: Pre-processing of the raw EMG data
was based on a standard pipeline composed of three steps:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

band-pass filter to remove motion artifact and high frequency
noise (4th order Butterworth filter with cut-off frequencies
fLP , and fHP ), signal rectification, and low-pass filter to extract the envelope of the EMG signal (4th order Butterworth
filter with cut-off frequency fEN V ). To extract the magnitude
of the long-latency response Hj [i] that the perturbation i
elicited on the muscle j, we used the cumsum method [27],
quantifying Hj [i] as the area underlying the processed EMG
¯ G in the temporal window [50, 100] ms after the
signal EM
perturbation onset t0 [i]:
Z

t0 [i]+100

Hj [i] =

¯ Gj dt
EM

(1)

t0 [i]+50

where t0 [i] is the time of the i-th perturbation onset.
Perturbations were classified as reflexive or areflexive by
comparison of the metric Hj with a threshold Hnoisej
defined as the values that yield 0.05 false positive classification in 50-ms rest periods measured 600 times in the
first 30 s of the experimental protocol. To more closely
resemble the experimental conditions, the EMG in rest
condition was acquired while the MR-SW was applying a
position-controlled sinusoidal movement to the wrist joint.
The maximum velocity was set to be low enough as to
not elicit any reflex (vmax = 20 deg/s). Since the noise
characteristic of an EMG recording is intrinsically electrodespecific, we have determined two noise thresholds, one per
each EMG channel. For the experimental session performed
outside the MRI room (LAB) we set the filtering parameter
to be fLP =  kHz, fHP =  Hz, and fEN V =  Hz,
while for the MRI experimental condition we determined
the filtering parameters f M RI = [fLP , fHP , fEN V ] using an
optimization-based adaptive filter that seeks to minimize the
cost function:

g(f

M RI

)=

V
X
i=1


αk

H̄j,vi
Hnoisej

M RI

H̄j,vi
−
Hnoisej

2
(2)
LAB

where H̄j,vi is the average of the metric H measured for
the muscle j when perturbations are applied at the velocity
vi ; V is the number of the different perturbation velocities
used in the experimental protocol. αk is a weight coefficient
that accounts for the fact that LLRs are observed when a
muscle is both stretched and shorten. We considered k = 1
when the perturbation vi stretches the muscle j and k = 0
when, instead, perturbation vi shorten the muscle j. Since
we expected to have a greater signal-to-noise ratio when
measuring LLR of muscles that are being stretched, we set
α1 = 0.7 and α0 = 0.3.
III. VALIDATION EXPERIMENTS
To validate the different components of the developed
methodology, we have performed a set of preliminary experiments by first assessing the MR-compatibility of the MR-SW,
and then testing its ability to elicit reflex activity both during
MRI scanning and in a laboratory setting. MR-compatibility
experiments were conducted at the Center for Biomedical

and Brain Imaging c/o University of Delaware using a
64 channel head coil on a Siemens Prisma 3T scanner.
Behavioral tests to asses the capability of our methods to
elicit and identify a LLR were instead conducted outside
the scanner in our lab at University of Delaware on three
volunteers.
A. MR-compatibility
We performed three different experiments to assess the
MR-compatibility of the MR-SW. Experiments 1 and 2 were
performed as described in [28] to test whether the robotic
device: 1. introduces RF noise to the scanner operational
frequency band, and 2. increases the temporal signal-to-noise
ratio of the MR images acquired using a Multi-Band Accelerated EPI Pulse sequence (CMMR), a standard sequence
used for fMRI protocols. Silent acquisition windows were
included in the sequence as described in Sec. II-A. Finally,
experiment 3 was performed to test whether our experimental
protocol introduces signal correlated with the experimental
stimulus (i.e. robot motion). This effect would increase the
number of false positive voxels identified to correlate with
the generation of a LLR, limiting the validity of our results.
All test were done using gel phantom (composed of distilled
H2 O doped with 1.25g NiSO4 x6H2 O per 1kg H2 O) that
provides temporally and spatially constant signal.
For the methods of experiments 1 and 2 please refer to
[28].
For experiment 3 we have used the same acquisition
sequence adopted for experiment 2. Seven repeated acquisitions were performed in two different conditions: the first
one with the MR-SW outside the scanner room (BL) and the
second one with the robot inside the scanner performing a the
experimental protocol described in sec. II-B.1 (MVT). Seven
additional acquisitions in the BL condition were performed
after the removing the robot from the scanner to evaluate
the test-retest error of the procedure. To replicate conditions
similar to those that characterize our experimental protocol,
we positioned the MR-SW and the EMG amplifier at a
distance from the scanner’s isocenter that is representative
of the one used in nominal operative conditions–i.e. about
1 m away. Moreover, a phantom hand, realized by filling a
plastic glove with ager gel, was attached to end effector to
resemble the same body mass movement of a human subject
experiment.
To quantify the voxel-wise correlation of the image intensity with the three states of the perturbation protocol (REST,
PERTURB, RETURN) we ran a first-level analysis using
SPM12. A general linear model was constructed using the
three states as regressors yielding three F-maps for each of
the 21 acquisition. The correlation of the regressor corresponding to the “PERTURB” condition was then quantified
as the number of statistically significant voxels in a cuboid
ROI placed in the center of the phantom including 50x50x17
= 42500 voxels. Three different uncorrected significance
levels were considered α = [0.05, 0.01, 0.001] and the
number of significant voxels (false positives) was compared

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

IV. P ILOT VALIDATION EXPERIMENT
One subject was recruited and exposed to an experimental
session that featured all the components of the StretchfMRI
technique to establish the involvement of RF in the generation of the LLR. The experiment was composed of three
sessions, one performed in the lab, necessary to obtain the
expected LLR rate required in the adaptive filter, and two
performed during fMRI imaging. Imaging parameters included: Multi-Band Accelerated EPI Pulse sequence; 2x2x2
mm3 voxel resolution, with 0.3 mm slice spacing, 46 deg
degree flip angle, 880x880 px per image, 64x110x110 mm3
image volume; TR=1000 ms, and TE=30 ms; pixel bandwidth=1625 Hz/pixel, receiver gain: high. In each session
subjects were exposed to 60 perturbations, pseudo-randomly
selected from a pool of six different perturbation velocities
([-200 -150 -100 100 150 200] deg/s) each repeated 10 times,
while EMG was recorded from the FCR and ECU muscles.
After the two functional sessions, a high resolution structural scan (magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition with
gradient echo (MPRAGE)–1x1x1 mm3 resolution, with
TR=2300 ms, and TE=3.2 ms; 160 slices with a 256x256
px per image, for a 160x256x256 mm3 image volume–was
acquired for registration and normalization of the results to a
common space. The full experimental protocol took about 85
minutes divided as 20 minutes per each experimental session,
7 minutes for the structural scan and 18 for the robot setup
and the electrode placement.
fMRI data was pre-processed in SPM12 using a standard
processing pipeline composed of realignment, normalization,
and high-pass filtering. We then performed a first-level
analysis using the following general linear model:
y = β1 ĤF + β2 ĤE + β3 |v| + β0 + βR R

(3)

where ĤF and ĤE are binary variables that indicate whether
a reflex has been triggered during a specific perturbation in

V. R ESULTS
1) MR compatibility: Visual inspection of the averaged
RF signal intensity spectrum acquired in the MVT condition
(Fig. 4 top), showed no peaks of intensity outside the 95%
confidence interval, previously determined with 20 repeated
measurement in the BL condition, confirming that the MRSW does not introduce significant RF noise in the scanner.
Distribution of the tNSR values measured in the prebaseline (BL1), MVT and post-baseline (BL2) conditions are
represented in Fig. 4 (bottom left). Pairwise comparisons of
the MVT condition with both pre-BL and post-BL conditions
fail to reject the null hypothesis that the tNSR measured in
the MVT condition is equal to that measured in baseline at
a significance level of p <0.05, demonstrating that the MRSW does not significantly alter the tNSR characteristic of the
scanner.
Finally, the distributions of the percent number of voxels
that significantly correlate (α = 0.05) with the application of
the velocity controlled perturbations in the three conditions
(BL1, MVT, and BL2) are reported in Fig. 4 (bottom right).
Two-sample t-test between the MVT and BL conditions fail
to reject the null hypothesis that false positive rate is equal
in the MVT than in BL condition, for all tested levels of
significance. Significance level for the t-test was set to p
<0.05.
2) Identification of the LLRs: Analysis of the EMG signal
recorded during LAB experimental sessions shows the capaRF noise

60

50
Signal Intensity
95% CI
40
-250

-125

0

125

250

f [kHz]
tNSR

0.89

0.055

Voxels [%]

After signing an informed consent, three volunteers have
performed a two-session experimental protocol, the first one
involving fMRI scanning (MRI) and the second conducted in
a lab environment (LAB). During the MRI session subjects
were exposed to the protocol described in Sec. II-B.1 while
undergoing our modified whole-brain fMRI sequence. The
same set of perturbations was then applied in the LAB
session that, due to the pseudo-randomic selection of perturbation velocities, was arranged in with different order.
EMG data processing was done as described in the section
II-C.2 and the metric H was extracted for the FCR and
ECU, in both experimental conditions. For each velocity we
have then computed the LLR rate, defined as the number of
perturbations identified as reflexive over the total number
of perturbations, for both LAB and MRI sessions, and
calculated the LLR rate error as the difference between the
two values, for all muscles, at different velocities.

Intensity [-]

B. Identification of the LLRs

the FCR and ECU, respectively. |v| is, instead, a continuous
variable that indicate the absolute value of the perturbation
velocity. R is the regressor of the head movement determined
by the data pre-processing. The presence of brain areas
whose activity significantly correlates with the generation
of a LLR in the FCR and ECU was assessed by analysis
of the F-maps corresponding the the coefficients β1 and
β2 , respectively. Significance level was set to p< 0.05
uncorrected.

tNSR [%]

between different experimental conditions using two sample
t-tests.

0.88
0.87
0.86

False positive -

= 0.05

0.05

0.045
BL1

MVT

BL2

BL1

MVT

BL2

Fig. 4.
Results of the MR-compatibility experiments. (Top left) 95%
confidence intervals of the percent of voxels identified to correlate with
the perturbation protocol as a function of the significance level of the first
level analysis; (Top right) bootstrapped confidence intervals for mean tNSR
for each condition at the p <0.05 level; (Bottom) Frequency spectrum of
the RF averaged signal intensity

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mm and 1 deg, respectively. Analysis of the activation maps
show significant neural activity in the brainstem when LLRs
are generated in both FCR and ECU (Fig. 7). The results
show a different somatotopical organization for FCR and
ECU with the neural activity corresponding to FCR located
in the right medullay reticular formation and the activity
of the ECU located instead in the left pontine reticular
formation.

Fig. 5.
First row: trajectory of the MR-StretchWrist for the different
perturbation velocity. Second and third rows: EMG responses measured in a
single subject for the three perturbation velocities. In all graph the thick line
represents the mean and the shaded area the 95% confidence interval. To
facilitate interpretation on the graphs a gray shaded area has been included
in each graph in the time interval where a LLR is expected.

Fig. 7. The activation maps that show the neural activity in the brainstem
that correlates with the generation of a LLR in the FCR (shown in orange)
and ECU (shown in red).

VI. D ISCUSSIONS AND C ONCLUSION
bility of our protocol to condition and detect long-latency
responses in both FCR and ECU (fig. 5) for all magnitude
of applied velocities.
Finally, comparison between the LLR rate measured in
the MRI and LAB conditions shows good agreement for
each of the tested values of perturbation velocity (fig.6).
The difference between of the LLR rate measured in the
MRI and LAB averaged across velocities is 21% in the ECU
and 15% in the FCR. Due to the different weighting of the
perturbations that stretch and shortens the muscles used in
the adaptive filter, for each muscle there is a smaller LLR
rate for the direction of perturbation that stretches the muscle
compared to the one that shortens it.

FCR
LLR rate [%]

Extension

Flexion

LAB
MRI

100
80
60
40

ECU
LLR rate [%]

20

100
80
60
40
20
100

150

200

100

150

200

Velocity [deg/s]

Fig. 6. LLR rate measured for the FCR and ECU during sessions done
outside the scanner (MRI) and during MRI scanning (MRI)

A. Pilot Experiment
Head movement and rotation were estimated form the
imaging parameters and were confirmed to be lower then 1

In this work we have presented and validated the
StretchfMRI, a novel non-invasive technique that can be
used to investigate the neural correlates of the Long-Latency
Response. The StretchfMRI technique is composed of three
different key elements: an MRI compatible wrist robot (the
MR-StretchWrist) capable of safely applying velocity controlled wrist perturbations during fMRI scanning, an MRI
sequence that allows for gradient artifact-free recordings of
the LLR EMG activity, and an adaptive filtering approach
for the EMG data processing that allows for reliable identification of LLRs.
A first set of experiments aimed to test the fMRI compatibility of the experimental protocol, showed that the MRStretchWrist in operative conditions does not significantly
alter the quality of the MR-images, allowing a safe use
of the device during fMRI procedures. Analysis of the
EMG data recorded in a lab experimental session, where
there are no confounders related to the MRI electromagnetic
fields, validated our experimental protocol, demonstrated the
capability of the MR-SW to elicit LLRs in both flexors and
extensors muscles for different levels of applied perturbation
velocities. Finally, comparison of the reflex rate measured in
lab experiments and during fMRI scanning, that show only
an 18% average difference in elicited LLR rate, suggests the
capability of our algorithm to reliably identify LLR during
fMRI protocol.
A final pilot experiment that integrated all the components
of our novel technique showed significant neural activation
modulated in the brainstem by the generation of LLRs in
both flexors and extensors. The responses of FCR and ECU
showed a different somatotopic arrangement as described by
the double reciprocal model of the reticulospinal tract, with
the neural activity of flexors and extensors located in the
medullary and pontine reticular formation, respectively [10].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582692; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

While a single-subject experiment cannot be used to draw
conclusions on the organization of motor function in the
reticular formation, our work provided a first preliminary
confirmation of the organization of motor responses in the
reticular formation previously observed only in animal models. Such encouraging results suggest the StretchfMRI to be
a promising tool to investigate the contribution of the RF to
motor control and more in general to understand the neural
correlates of the processing and generation of long-latency
responses.
Our protocol currently used an Echo Planar Imaging (EPI)
sequence routinely used for fMRI studies. While the results
of our pilot study suggest that our imaging technique has
sufficient contrast-to-noise ratio and robustness from motion
artifacts to detect meaningful change in deep brainstem
nuclei, we are considering to include a high-resolution multishot sequence that has specifically been developed for brainstem imaging expecting a 10-20% increase in contrast-tonoise ratio [29].
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We acknowledge support from the University of Delaware
Research Foundation grant no. 16A01402, from ACCEL
NIGMS IDeA grant no. U54-GM104941, and from startup
funds by the University of Delaware.
R EFERENCES
[1] E. J. Benjamin, S. S. Virani, C. W. Callaway, A. M. Chamberlain,
A. R. Chang, S. Cheng, S. E. Chiuve, M. Cushman, F. N. Delling,
R. Deo, S. D. De Ferranti, J. F. Ferguson, M. Fornage, C. Gillespie,
C. R. Isasi, M. C. Jiménez, L. C. Jordan, S. E. Judd, D. Lackland, J. H.
Lichtman, L. Lisabeth, S. Liu, C. T. Longenecker, P. L. Lutsey, J. S.
MacKey, D. B. Matchar, K. Matsushita, M. E. Mussolino, K. Nasir,
M. O’Flaherty, L. P. Palaniappan, A. Pandey, D. K. Pandey, M. J.
Reeves, M. D. Ritchey, C. J. Rodriguez, G. A. Roth, W. D. Rosamond,
U. K. Sampson, G. M. Satou, S. H. Shah, N. L. Spartano, D. L.
Tirschwell, C. W. Tsao, J. H. Voeks, J. Z. Willey, J. T. Wilkins, J. H.
Wu, H. M. Alger, S. S. Wong, and P. Muntner, Heart disease and
stroke statistics - 2018 update: A report from the American Heart
Association, 2018, vol. 137, no. 12.
[2] G. Kwakkel, B. J. Kollen, and H. I. Krebs, “Effects of RobotAssisted Therapy on Upper Limb Recovery After Stroke: A Systematic
Review,” Neurorehabilitation and Neural Repair, vol. 22, no. 2, pp.
111–121, 2008.
[3] H. G. J. M. Kuypers, “Anatomy of the Descending Pathways,” jan
2011.
[4] K. Matsuyama and T. Drew, “Vestibulospinal and reticulospinal neuronal activity during locomotion in the intact cat. II. Walking on an
inclined plane 2,” J.Neurophysiol., vol. 84, no. 5, pp. 2237–2256, 2000.
[5] B. Schepens and D. Trevor, “Independent and Convergent Signals
From the Pontomedullary Reticular Formation Contribute to the Control of Posture and Movement During Reaching in the Cat,” Journal
of Neurophysiology, vol. 92, no. 4, pp. 2217–2238, 2004.
[6] B. Schepens and T. Drew, “Descending Signals From the Pontomedullary Reticular Formation Are Bilateral, Asymmetric, and
Gated During Reaching Movements in the Cat,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 96, no. 5, pp. 2229–2252, 2006.
[7] S. N. Baker, “The primate reticulospinal tract, hand function and
functional recovery,” Journal of Physiology, vol. 589, no. 23, pp.
5603–5612, 2011.
[8] B. Zaaimi, S. A. Edgley, D. S. Soteropoulos, and S. N. Baker,
“Changes in descending motor pathway connectivity after corticospinal tract lesion in macaque monkey,” Brain, vol. 135, no. 7, pp.
2277–2289, 2012.

[9] C. N. Riddle, S. A. Edgley, and S. N. Baker, “Direct and Indirect
Connections with Upper Limb Motoneurons from the Primate Reticulospinal Tract,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 29, no. 15, pp. 4993–
4999, 2009.
[10] A. G. Davidson, M. H. Schieber, and J. A. Buford, “Bilateral SpikeTriggered Average Effects in Arm and Shoulder Muscles from the
Monkey Pontomedullary Reticular Formation,” Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 27, no. 30, pp. 8053–8058, 2007.
[11] J. G. Mcpherson, A. Chen, M. D. Ellis, J. Yao, C. J. Heckman, J. P. A.
Dewald, J. Taylor, and R. Carson, “Progressive recruitment of contralesional cortico- reticulospinal pathways drives motor impairment post
stroke The Journal of Physiology,” vol. 7, pp. 1211–1225, 2018.
[12] Y.-t. Chen, S. Li, P. Zhou, and S. Li, “A startling acoustic stimulation
(SAS)-TMS approach to assess the reticulospinal system in healthy
and stroke subjects,” Journal of the Neurological Sciences, 2019.
[13] K. M. R. Foysal, F. de Carvalho, and S. N. Baker, “Spike TimingDependent Plasticity in the Long-Latency Stretch Reflex Following
Paired Stimulation from a Wearable Electronic Device,” The Journal
of Neuroscience, vol. 36, no. 42, pp. 10 823–10 830, 2016.
[14] D. S. Soteropoulos, E. R. Williams, and S. N. Baker, “Cells in the
monkey ponto-medullary reticular formation modulate their activity
with slow finger movements,” Journal of Physiology, vol. 590, no. 16,
pp. 4011–4027, 2012.
[15] I. L. Kurtzer, “Long-latency reflexes account for limb biomechanics
through several supraspinal pathways,” Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience, vol. 8, no. January, pp. 1–19, 2015.
[16] D. P. C. Lloyd, “Conduction and synaptic transmission of the reflex
response to stretch in spinal cats,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 6,
no. 4, pp. 317–326, 1943.
[17] P. . Hammond, “Involuntary activity in biceps following the sudden
application of velocity to the abducted foream,” J. Physiol., vol. 127,
pp. 23–25, 1954.
[18] J. A. Pruszynski and S. H. Scott, “Optimal feedback control and the
long-latency stretch response,” Experimental Brain Research, vol. 218,
no. 3, pp. 341–359, 2012.
[19] R. M. Birn, R. W. Cox, and P. A. Bandettini, “Experimental designs
and processing strategies for fMRI studies involving overt verbal
responses,” NeuroImage, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 1046–1058, 2004.
[20] P. J. Allen, O. Josephs, and R. Turner, “A method for removing
imaging artifact from continuous EEG recorded during functional
MRI,” NeuroImage, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 230–239, 2000.
[21] J. N. van der Meer, M. A. Tijssen, L. J. Bour, A. F. van Rootselaar, and
A. J. Nederveen, “Robust EMG-fMRI artifact reduction for motion
(FARM),” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 121, no. 5, pp. 766–776,
2010.
[22] S. van Eesbeek, J. H. de Groot, F. C. T. van der Helm, and E. de Vlugt,
“In vivo estimation of the short-range stiffness of cross-bridges from
joint rotation,” Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 43, no. 13, pp. 2539–
2547, 2010.
[23] A. Zonnino and F. Sergi, “Model-based analysis of the stiffness of the
wrist joint in active and passive conditions,” Journal of Biomechanical
Engineering, feb 2019.
[24] Z. Tang, S. Sugano, and H. Iwata, “A finger exoskeleton for rehabilitation and brain image study,” IEEE International Conference on
Rehabilitation Robotics, pp. 1–6, 2013.
[25] S. J. Kim and J. Kim, “MR-compatible hand exoskeleton for monitoring brain activity during active assistance,” Proceedings of the Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society, EMBS, vol. 2015-Novem, pp. 5752–5755, 2015.
[26] A. Erwin, M. K. O’Malley, D. Ress, and F. Sergi, “Kinesthetic
Feedback During 2DOF Wrist Movements via a Novel MR-compatible
Robot,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering, vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 1489–1499, 2017.
[27] R. S. A. Brinkworth and K. S. Türker, “A method for quantifying reflex
responses from intra-muscular and surface electromyogram,” Journal
of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 122, no. 2, pp. 179–193, 2003.
[28] A. Farrens, A. Zonnino, A. Erwin, M. OMalley, C. Johnson, D. Ress,
and F. Sergi, “Quantitative Testing of fMRI-compatibility of an Electrically Active Mechatronic Device for Robot-Assisted Sensorimotor
Protocols,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 9294,
no. 16, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[29] V. Singh, J. Pfeuffer, T. Zhao, and D. Ress, “Evaluation of Spiral
Acquisition Variants for Functional Imaging of Human Superior
Colliculus at 3T Field Strength,” vol. 1940, pp. 1931–1940, 2018.

