bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Mucin O-glycans facilitate symbiosynthesis to maintain gut immune homeostasis
Short title: Mucin as a fermentation substrate for gut microbiota

Takahiro Yamada1, Shingo Hino2, Hideki Iijima3, Tomomi Genda2, Ryo Aoki4, Ryuji Nagata5, Ho
Han5, Masato Hirota1, Yusuke Kinashi1, Hiroyuki Oguchi1, Wataru Suda6,7, Yukihiro Furusawa8,
Yumiko Fujimura1, Jun Kunisawa9-12, Masahira Hattori6,13, Michihiro Fukushima5, Tatsuya
Morita2*, and Koji Hase1,12*

* Corresponding authors
Koji Hase, Division of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University, Minato-ku, Tokyo
105-8512, Japan; E-mail: hase-kj@pha.keio.ac.jp; Tel: +81-3-5400-2484

Tatsuya Morita, Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agriculture,
Shizuoka University, Shizuoka, Japan; E-mail: morita.tatsuya@shizuoka.ac.jp; Tel: +81-54-2385132

Author affiliations:
1

Division of Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Keio University, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan

2

Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, Graduate School of Agriculture, Shizuoka
University, Shizuoka, Japan

3

Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan

4

Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, School of Medicine, Keio University, Shinjukuku, Tokyo, Japan

5

Department of Food Science, Obihiro University of Agriculture and Veterinary Medicine,
Hokkaido, Japan

6

Graduate School of Frontier Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Chiba, Japan

7

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

8

Department of Liberal Arts and Sciences, Toyama Prefectural University, Toyama, Japan

9

Laboratory of Vaccine Materials and Laboratory of Gut Environmental System, National
Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition (NIBIOHN), Osaka, Japan

10

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
Hyogo, Japan

11

Graduate School of Medicine, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School
of Dentistry, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan

12

International Research and Development Center for Mucosal Vaccines, The Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo (IMSUT), Tokyo, Japan

13

Graduate School of Advanced Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
The dysbiosis of gut microbiota has been implicated in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel
diseases (IBDs); however, the underlying mechanisms have not yet been elucidated. Heavily
glycosylated mucin not only establishes a first-line barrier against pathogens, but also serves as a
niche for microbial growth. We hypothesized that dysbiosis may cause abnormal mucin utilization
and microbial metabolic dysfunction. To test this hypothesis, we analyzed short-chain fatty acids
(SCFAs) and mucin components in the stool samples of 40 healthy subjects, 49 ulcerative colitis
(UC) patients, and 44 Crohn’s disease (CD) patients from Japan. The levels of n-butyrate were
significantly lower in the stools of both the CD and UC patients than in those of the healthy
subjects. Correlation analysis identified 7 bacterial species positively correlated with n-butyrate
levels, among which the major n-butyrate producer, Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, was
particularly underrepresented in CD patients, but not in UC patients. In UC patients, there were
inverse correlations between mucin O-glycan levels and the production of SCFAs, such as nbutyrate, suggesting that mucin O-glycans act as an endogenous fermentation substrate for nbutyrate production. Indeed, mucin-fed rodents exhibited enhanced n-butyrate production,
leading to the expansion of RORgt+Treg cells and IgA-producing cells in the colonic lamina
propria. Importantly, the availability of mucin-associated O-glycans to the microbiota was
significantly reduced in n-butyrate-deficient UC patients. Taken together, our findings highlight
the biological significance of the symbiosynthesis pathway in the production of n-butyrate, which
maintains gut immune homeostasis.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), such as ulcerative colitis (UC) and Crohn’s disease
(CD), are recurrent inflammatory disorders caused by both genetic and environmental factors
[1,2]. Accumulating evidence has demonstrated that abnormal gut microbial composition, termed
dysbiosis, plays a role in the pathogenesis and/or exacerbation of IBD in Caucasian patients [3,4].
The gut microbiota of IBD patients is characterized by diminished microbial diversity alongside
the underrepresentation of Firmicutes and overrepresentation of Proteobacteria [3,5-8]. These
characteristics are evident in the gut microbiota of CD patients, and the severity of dysbiosis in
rectal mucosa-associated microbiota correlates well with disease score [7]. Changes in gut
microbiota composition are less obvious in UC patients that in CD patients, and their association
with IBD pathogenesis has not yet been elucidated [6,8]. Animal experiments have demonstrated
that the gut microbiota shapes the host intestinal immune system under physiological conditions
by inducing the maturation of gut-associated lymphoid tissues and the differentiation of Th17 and
regulatory T cells [9]. In contrast, the gut microbiota drives intestinal inflammation under
dysbiosis [10,11]. Similarly, the transplantation of microbiota from CD patients into Il10deficient mice has been shown to accelerate colitis [12]; however, the underlying mechanisms by
which dysbiosis promotes the inflammatory response have not yet been fully elucidated.
Short-chain fatty acids (SCFAs) such as acetate, propionate, and n-butyrate, are produced
by intestinal microbiota via the microbial fermentation of indigestible carbohydrates [i.e. soluble
dietary fibers, oligosaccharides, and resistant starches (RS)] in the colon and cecum of humans
[13] and rodents [14], respectively. SCFAs not only serve as nutrients for the colonic epithelium
[15], but also enhance mucosal barrier function by maintaining epithelial integrity [16], increasing
mucin production [17], and triggering the IgA response [18]. Furthermore, n-butyrate exhibits
anti-inflammatory effects by suppressing NF-κB signaling in the colonic epithelium [19]. It has
previously been reported that n-butyrate facilitates regulatory T cell differentiation in the colonic
lamina propria [20,21]. n-Butyrate is mainly produced by bacterial species classified under
Clostridium cluster IV or XIVa. In IBD patients, these butyrate producers, including
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (Clostridium cluster IV) and Lachnospiraceae (Clostridium cluster

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

XIVa) [22,23], are markedly underrepresented compared to that in healthy subjects [24-26]. SCFA
mixture or n-butyrate enemas have been shown to effectively reduce the inflammatory symptoms
of UC on the colonic mucosa [27,28]. These observations suggest that reduced n-butyrate
production in IBD patients may exacerbate gut inflammation.
The luminal secretion of mucins by goblet cells establishes a mucus layer which functions
as a physicochemical barrier, thus preventing microbial attachment to the epithelial surface [29].
Mucins predominantly consist of the heavily glycosylated MUC2 protein, which confers viscosity
to the mucus in order to restrict bacterial motility. The stratified inner layer of the mucus is
impenetrable to intestinal bacteria [30], whereas the outer layer of the mucus serves as a habitat
for certain bacterial species which utilize mucin as an energy resource [31,32]. Experimental
observations using mice devoid of Muc2 or its O-glycans have demonstrated that mucin barrier
dysfunction enhances bacterial translocation into the lamina propria, resulting in chronic
inflammation of the colon [33,34]. The same has been shown for UC, since the colonic mucus of
UC patients is less protective than that of healthy subjects, therefore commensal bacteria often
penetrate into the inner mucus layer [35].
The aforementioned abnormalities in mucin and SCFA production due to dysbiosis may be
implicated in the development of IBD; however, the relevance of these major pathological events
remains obscure. Therefore, we explored the relationship between the intestinal microbiota, SCFA
levels, and mucin profiles of Japanese IBD patients. We observed reduced n-butyrate levels in the
stools of both CD and UC patients; however, this may have been a result of different etiologies.
Considerable reductions in the number of n-butyrate-producing bacteria diminished n-butyrate
synthesis in CD patients, whereas reduced mucin O-glycan availability was observed in UC
patients lacking n-butyrate. Herein, we demonstrated that mucin O-glycan is utilized by intestinal
microbiota as an endogenous fermentation source to produce n-butyrate, and that this pathway is
likely affected in UC.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results
Reduced n-butyrate in the stools of IBD patients
To accurately characterize the altered composition of the intestinal microbiota in IBD patients,
we initially analyzed the concentrations of various organic acids, including SCFAs, in stool
samples. The disease status of UC and CD patients was classified as either active or in remission
based on endoscopic assessment (S1 and S2 Table). We observed that fecal n-butyrate levels were
significantly lower in the UC and CD groups than that in the healthy subjects (Fig 1). Notably, a
substantial number of CD and UC patients lacked n-butyrate in their stools, particularly patients
with active CD, 50 % of whom were devoid of n-butyrate. Thus, reduced stool n-butyrate levels
reflect disease status in CD. In contrast, n-butyrate concentration was not affected by any other
factors, including the site of disease development (i.e. right or left colon in UC, small or large
intestine in CD), treatment with probiotics (lactic acid bacteria and Clostridium butyricum), 5azathiopurine, and anti-TNF antibodies (S2 Fig, S3 and S4 Table).
The stool concentrations of propionate, another beneficial metabolite [36], were also slightly
decreased in active UC and CD, although these differences were not statistically significant. nValerate was detected in 16.3 % of the healthy subjects, but not in UC patients (S1A Fig), whereas
elevated levels of succinate were observed in a small number of UC and CD patients. The amounts
of other organic acids, including acetate, formate, and lactate, were similar among the groups.
Correlation analysis between the individual organic acids revealed that n-butyrate levels were
positively correlated with propionate and acetate, but not formate, lactate, or succinate (S1B Fig).
Together, these observations support the notion that reduced levels of anti-inflammatory SCFAs,
especially n-butyrate, may be involved in the development and/or exacerbation of IBDs.

Fig 1. Fecal organic acid concentrations in IBD patients and healthy subjects.
Fecal organic acid concentrations were analyzed in healthy subjects, patients with active (UC-A)
or remissive (UC-R) UC, and patients with active (CD-A) or remissive (CD-R) CD. Data
represent the mean ± SD (n = 12-43/group). *p < 0.05,

**

p < 0.01, and

***

p < 0.001 (ANOVA

followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test or the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

multiple comparison test).

Characterization of microbial communities in IBD patients
We performed 16S rRNA sequencing on the stool samples to characterize the microbial
community composition of the IBD patients. The obtained data were subjected to principal
coordinate analysis (PCoA) based on unweighted UniFrac (Fig 2A). The microbiota of the healthy
subjects were grouped within one region, whereas those of the UC and CD patients were scattered,
indicating that the microbial compositions of UC and CD patients were distinct from those of the
healthy subjects (adonis based on unweighted UniFrac versus healthy microbiota; UC: R2 = 0.074
and p = 0.001; CD: R2 = 0.18 and p = 0.001). Furthermore, microbial composition differed
significantly different between the active and remission phases of both diseases (S3 Fig). In
accordance with previous studies of Caucasian IBD patients [6,7], α-diversity was significantly
reduced in the Japanese UC and CD patients, particularly during the active stages (Fig 2B).
The microbiota of the CD patients was characterized by the underrepresentation of
Firmicutes and Verrucomicrobia (including only Akkermansia muciniphila), and the
overrepresentation of Proteobacteria at the phylum level (Fig 2C and S4A Fig). The latter was
also slightly elevated in UC patients. At the class level, patients with active CD exhibited
decreased occupancy of Clostridia and a reciprocal increase in the occupancy of
Gammaproteobacteria and Bacilli (S4B Fig). BugBase [37] predicted the outgrowth of facultative
anaerobes and the reduction of anaerobes in this group (S5 Fig). A similar trend was also observed
to a lesser extent in the microbiota of CD patients in remission, active UC patients, and UC
patients in remission (Fig 2A-D, S4 and S5 Fig).

Fig 2. Microbial signature of IBD patients and healthy subjects.
(A) Principal coordinate analysis of unweighted UniFrac distance among the microbiota of IBD
patients and healthy subjects. (B) Species richness (Chao 1) of the microbiota of IBD patients and
healthy subjects. (C, D) Taxa discriminating between the microbiota of (C) CD or (D) UC patients
and healthy subjects, determined by LEfSe [38] analysis. The discriminating taxa for the indicated

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

groups are annotated on the phylogenetic trees. (E) Venn diagram showing the criteria for
butyrate-associated bacteria. (F, G) Relative abundance of butyrate-associated bacteria at the
genus (F) and species (G) levels. The left panels represent the total number of butyrate-associated
bacteria, and the right panels indicate the abundance of individual bacterial genera or species.
Each boxplot represents the median, interquartile range (IQR), and the lowest and highest values
within 1.5 IQRs of the first and third quartiles (n = 7-23/group). The outliers are not shown.
Different letters over the boxplots indicate significant differences (p < 0.05; Kruskal-Wallis test
followed by Dunn’s multiple test).

Reduced numbers of butyrate-associated bacteria in IBD patients
To identify the bacterial species contributing towards the production of intestinal metabolites,
including n-butyrate, we performed correlation analyses between the abundance of bacterial taxa
and each metabolite. We found that the abundance of 12 genera and 28 species were positively
correlated with n-butyrate levels (Spearman correlation analysis, FDR < 0.05; S5 and S6 Table),
whereas only a few genera were correlated with acetate, n-valerate, or i-butyrate levels. The other
metabolites analyzed here showed no significant correlation with any specific genera or species.
Among the n-butyrate-associated bacteria, 5 bacterial genera and 7 species occupied 1 % or more
of the microbial communities of healthy subjects, suggesting that these bacteria may play a central
role in n-butyrate biosynthetic pathways (Fig 2E). Thereafter, we termed these “butyrateassociated bacteria” (Fig 2F and 2G), which included well-known n-butyrate producers such as
F. prausnitzii and Eubacterium rectale [22]. Consistent with the data concerning stool n-butyrate
concentration, the overall abundance of butyrate-associated bacteria was considerably lower in
CD patients (Fig 2F and 2G). Notably, F. prausnitzii, which was the most abundant n-butyrate
producer in the microbiota of healthy individuals, was almost absent in the microbiota of active
CD patients (Fig 2G, right). In contrast, the abundance of F. prausnitzii was not significantly
reduced in active or remission UC patients (Fig 2F and 2G). The minor populations of n-butyrateassociated bacteria, namely, Blautia wexlerae, Eubacterium rectale, Ruminococcus bromii, and
E. hallii were underrepresented in active UC patients (Fig 2G, right).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Reduced availability of mucin O-glycans to UC-associated microbiota
Mucin O-glycans form complex structures, consisting of N-acetylgalactosamine, galactose,
and N-acetylglucosamine, which are elongated and terminated by fucose, sialic acids, and sulfate
residues in the human colon [39]. We hypothesized that the quality and quantity of the mucin
components may be affected in IBD. We therefore explored the amounts of these components in
the stool mucin (Fig. 3). The protein content of the mucin fraction was significantly lower in the
UC patients, which may reflect may reflect the previously reported downregulation of Muc2
expression [40,41]. Nevertheless, mucin O-glycan levels were slightly higher in these patients
than in the healthy subjects (Fig. 3B). Consequently, the mucin ratio of O-glycans to protein was
significantly higher in the UC patients, indicating the reduced availability of mucin O-glycans to
UC-associated microbiota. This abnormality was characteristic of UC, but not of CD. Notably,
the composition of mucin O-glycan components was mostly intact in UC and CD patients (S7
Table), except for NeuGc which was detected at higher levels in the UC patients than in the
healthy subjects (S8 Table).

Fig 3. Stool mucin components of IBD patients and healthy subjects.
(A, B) The levels of mucin (A), mucin-associated protein, and (B), O-glycan were analyzed in
the stools of the IBD patients and healthy subjects. Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 5-38/group).
*p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test or the KruskalWallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test). (C) Correlation network of the levels
of SCFAs, mucin components, and bacteria in the stool samples. Nodes represent the SCFAs,
mucin components, or bacterial genera with average levels higher than 1.0 %. Node colors reflect
the average levels in UC patients compared to those in healthy subjects. Red and blue lines
indicate positive (Spearman’s correlation coefficient > 0.3) and negative (correlation
coefficient < –0.3) correlations, respectively. Edge thickness represents the strength of the
correlation. Line color intensity reflects the extent of the correlation. (D) Scatter density plots of
fecal n-butyrate levels versus mucin O-glycan levels for individual disease groups. The increase
in the intensity of each color (white to black, blue, or red) reflects the density of the scatter plot.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Spearman coefficients (rho) and FDRs are shown. (E) UC and CD patients were classified into
two groups each based on fecal n-butyrate detection in order to compare fecal levels of mucin Oglycans. Patients with n-butyrate concentrations below 0.1 μmol/g were classified as
“Undetected”, while the others were classified as “Detected”.

Impaired mucin O-glycan availability may reduce n-butyrate production in UC patients
We generated correlation networks (rho > 0.3 or rho < –0.3) of bacterial genera, mucin
components, and SCFAs. Correlation network analysis highlighted positive correlations between
n-butyrate concentration and butyrate-associated bacteria (i.e. Faecalibacterium, Eubacterium,
and Anaerostipes) (Fig 3C). The butyrate-associated bacteria were inversely correlated with
Escherichia, Enterococcus, and Lactobacillus, which were overrepresented in UC patients (S6
Fig). Notably, network analysis revealed inverse correlations between the levels of mucin Oglycan and each SCFA (Fig 3C). Of the three groups, the inverse correlations between mucin Oglycan and the SCFAs were the most prominent in UC patients (total SCFAs: rho = –0.45, FDR
= 0.014; acetate: rho = –0.44, FDR = 0.014; propionate: rho = –0.43, FDR = 0.014; n-butyrate:
rho = –0.35, FDR = 0.035; Fig 3D and S5 Fig). These data suggest that intestinal microbiota could
utilize mucin O-glycans as an endogenous fermentation substrate to produce SCFAs, such as nbutyrate. This idea was further supported by the reduced utilization of mucin O-glycans in the nbutyrate-deficient UC patients (Fig 3D). Thus, the development of dysbiosis may impair mucin
O-glycan availability in patients with UC, which could eventually affect n-butyrate production.
To confirm this hypothesis, we assessed mucin glycan degradation (mucinase activity) in the
fresh stool samples of newly recruited UC patients and healthy subjects (Fig 4). We observed a
clear decrease in the stool mucinase activity in the UC patients compared to that in the healthy
subjects. Mucinase activity exhibited a positive correlation with the stool concentrations of total
SCFAs and butyrate, both of which were significantly lower in the UC patients (Fig 4B and S9
Fig). The decrease in SCFA levels was not attributed to the dietary habits of the UC patients since
there were no significant differences in the nutrient intake (including soluble fiber intake) of the
UC patients and healthy subjects (S10 Fig and S9 Table). Taken together, these data suggest that

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

abnormal mucin O-glycan utilization may cause reduced n-butyrate production in UC.

Fig 4. Stool mucinase activity in UC patients and healthy subjects.
(A) The stool samples of UC patients and healthy subjects were analyzed for mucinase activity.
Boxplots represent the median, interquartile range (IQR), and the lowest and highest values within
1.5 IQRs of the first and third quartiles (n = 10-11/group). (B, C) Scatter plots of mucinase activity
and (B) total SCFAs and (C) n-butyrate concentrations. Spearman’s correlation coefficient (rho)
and FDR are shown. Box plots represent stool concentrations of total SCFAs (B) and butyrate (C)
in the two groups (n = 6-10/group). *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 (Wilcoxon’s rank sum test).

Mucin supplementation facilitates SCFA production
To directly investigate whether the gut microbiota utilize mucin as a fermentation source to
produce SCFAs, we cultured rat cecal microbiota in the presence or absence of mucin using an in
vitro fermentation system [42]. The cecum is a major site of microbial fermentation in rodents
[43]. Within 48 h, mucin supplementation had increased the concentration of SCFAs, including
n-butyrate, in the culture media (Fig 5A). Thus, the microbial fermentation of mucin O-glycans
generates SCFAs.
We further corroborated the importance of mucin O-glycans as an endogenous fermentation
substrate in vivo. We fed rats synthetic diets containing 0.6 or 1.2 % (w/w) purified mucins for 2
weeks. The 1.2 % mucin diet significantly increased acetate and n-butyrate concentrations in the
ceca (Fig 5B), and slightly increased the propionate concentration. Importantly, the level of mucin
O-glycans in the cecum was similar in all the groups (Fig 5C), indicating that the exogenous
mucin O-glycans were efficiently consumed via intestinal microbial fermentation. Furthermore,
mucin administration increased microbial mucinase activity in a dose-dependent manner (Fig 5D).
Thus, O-glycan utilization may be a key determinant for maintaining SCFA production.

Fig 5. Mucin supplementation increases SCFA production by gut microbiota.
(A) Rat cecal contents were cultured in the in vitro fermentation system in the presence or absence

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

of porcine gastric mucin and SCFA concentrations were measured at the indicated time points.
Data are representative of two independent experiments with similar results. (B-D) Cecal SCFA
levels (B), O-glycan levels (C), and mucinase activity (D) in the stools of rats fed a control diet
or diets containing 0.6 or 1.2 % porcine stomach mucin. Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 5-6).
*

p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 (ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparison test or the Kruskal-

Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test, compared to the control group).

The mucin-SCFA axis shapes the gut immune system
Finally, we investigated the biological significance of the mucin-dependent symbiosynthetic
pathway by feeding mice a 1.5 % mucin-containing diet for 3 weeks. The microbiota of the mucinfed mice was considerably different to that of the controls, characterized by higher α-diversity
and increased abundances of Allobaculum, unclassified Bacteroidales S24-7, and Akkermansia
(S11 Fig). Consistent with the observations made in the rats, the administration of mucin to mice
increased the cecal concentration of SCFAs such as n-butyrate (Fig 6A). Gut microbiota-derived
butyrate induces the differentiation of peripherally generated Treg (pTreg) cells [18,20,44], while
SCFAs facilitate the development of B220−IgA+ plasma cells in the colonic lamina propria
[18,20,44]. In agreement with these reports, the frequencies of RORγt+Foxp3+ pTreg cells in the
mucin-fed mice was twice as high as in the control mice (Fig 6B and 6C). Notably, the mucin diet
also increased RORγt−Foxp3+ thymus-derived Treg (tTreg) cells, suggesting that the colonic
migration and/or proliferation of tTreg cells was also enhanced in the mucin-fed group.
Furthermore, the mucin-containing diet increased the number of IgA+ plasma cells in the colon
(Fig 6D and 6E). Based on these observations, mucin not only serves as a mucosal barrier but
also shapes the intestinal immune system by facilitating microbial fermentation to increase
luminal SCFA concentrations (S12 Fig.).

Fig 6. Immune modulation by the mucin-containing diet.
(A-E) Cecal SCFA levels (A), the frequency of Foxp3+RORγt+ cells and Foxp3+RORγt- cells
within CD4+ T cells (B and C), and IgA+B220- cells within CD45+ cells (D and E) in the colonic

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

mucosa of mice fed a control diet or a diet containing 1.5 % porcine stomach mucin for 3 weeks.
Representative flow cytometry plots are shown in B and D. Data represent the mean ± SD (n = 5).
*

p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, and ***p < 0.001 (two-tailed Student’s t-test).

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Discussion
In this study, we confirmed that Japanese IBD patients exhibit symptoms of dysbiosis, and that
the intestinal microenvironments of CD and UC patients display several different features. The
microbial community was less diverse in CD patients than in UC patients (Fig 2B), whilst
microbial composition during the active stage of CD was characterized by the expansion of
Gammaproteobacteria and Bacilli alongside an underrepresentation of Clostridia (Fig 2C).
Consequently, the frequency of anaerobes was markedly decreased (S5 Fig), and n-butyrate
producers (mainly F. prausnitzii) were nearly absent during active CD (Fig 2G). Diminished
microbial diversity alongside an underrepresentation of n-butyrate producers has also been
reported in Caucasian CD patients [7,8,24,26]; therefore, these microbial alterations are
considered hallmarks of CD and are closely associated with disease severity. N-butyrate producers
such as F. prausnitzii and E. rectale have been identified based on their in vitro metabolic activity
[7,24-26]; however, the contribution of these bacteria to n-butyrate production in the human
intestine has remained unclear. Our integrated analysis demonstrated that these bacteria are
positively correlated with fecal n-butyrate concentration (Fig 2G), thus an underrepresentation of
n-butyrate producers should be the main cause of reduced n-butyrate production in active CD.
During CD remission, the abundances of n-butyrate-associated bacteria slightly increased
compared to active CD, thus raising the fecal concentration of n-butyrate.
Conversely, the gut microbiota of UC patients showed only a slight decrease in microbial
diversity and retained normal levels of F. prausnitzii, even during the active stage (Fig 2B and
2G). Nevertheless, some of the UC patients were deficient in fecal n-butyrate. To elucidate the
underlying mechanism, we analyzed the mucin components which serve as a nutrient source for
gut microbiota. The levels of mucin protein were lower in the stools of UC patients, presumably
reflecting reduced net mucin production [40,41]. In contrast, the levels of mucin O-glycan in the
stools were significantly higher in UC patients lacking stool n-butyrate than in healthy subjects.
These observations imply that mucin O-glycan availability is compromised in the intestinal
microbiota of UC patients. Indeed, the stool samples of UC patients exhibited lower mucinase
activity than those of healthy subjects. Mucin O-glycan availability is considered a key

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

determinant for the colony-forming ability of certain bacterial species on the mucosal surface
[45,46]. Additionally, we believe that mucin O-glycans are utilized as an endogenous
fermentation source to produce SCFAs. Several lines of evidence support this hypothesis. Firstly,
there was an inverse correlation between the levels of mucin O-glycan and SCFAs in the stool
samples of UC patients, whilst mucinase activity was positively correlated with the concentration
of SCFAs. Secondly, it has previously been reported that substantial levels of SCFAs are still
generated in the large intestines of rodents fed synthetic diets lacking dietary fiber and RS [43,47],
indicative of the presence of endogenous fermentation sources in the gut. Intestinal microbiota
may utilize mucin as a major fermentation source in the absence of fermentable dietary
ingredients. We verified this hypothesis by showing that the exogenous administration of purified
mucin facilitated the microbial production of SCFAs in vitro and in vivo. The mucin-containing
diet increased the numbers of Allobaculum, unclassified Bacteroidales S24-7, and Akkermansia
in the cecal microbiota of mice, suggesting that these bacteria may utilize mucin as an energy
source to different degrees. Indeed, Akkermansia and certain Bacteroides spps. have been
reported to degrade mucin [48,49]. Furthermore, mucinase activity was increased in the cecal
contents of mucin-fed rats. Allobacullum species are known to produce butyrate; however,
Allobacullum mainly consumes mono- or di-saccharides [50]. These results suggest that
Allobacullum may utilize the mono- or di-saccharides produced from mucin O-glycans by the
other two bacteria. Notably, the abundance of Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae, the major
butyrate producers [22,23], was unchanged in the mucin-fed mice. Therefore, the administration
of exogenous mucin is likely to have altered microbial composition by promoting the outgrowth
of mucin utilizers and enhancing the production of SCFAs, including butyrate. Thirdly, previous
studies using an in vitro gut model demonstrated that Firmicutes dominate the gut mucus
microbiota, with Clostridium cluster XIVa species accounting for approximately 60 % of all
mucus-colonizing bacteria [51]. 16S rRNA gene analysis of the mucosa-associated bacteria
showed that Firmicutes were more abundant in the mucus region, with Clostridium cluster XIVa
(Lachnospiraceae and Ruminococcaceae) being the predominant families [52]. Certain gut
bacteria, such as A. muciniphila, are capable of utilizing mucin O-glycans, but not dietary

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

polysaccharides [49]. Mucus-associated bacteria express mucin glycan utilization-associated
genes at high levels, indicating that these bacteria utilize mucin glycans [32]. Therefore, we
suspect that certain bacteria in the mucus utilize mucin O-glycans for n-butyrate production even
in the presence of dietary fibers. Consequently, we propose a new model of symbiotic interaction
in which host cell-derived mucin O-glycans are efficiently metabolized by intestinal microbiota
under physiological conditions to produce n-butyrate, which is further utilized as an energy source
by colonic epithelial cells and shapes the colonic immune system. This “symbiosynthesis” based
on the mucin O-glycan–n-butyrate axis may play a significant role in establishing host–microbe
symbiosis. In UC, the symbiosynthetic pathway seems to be impaired due to dysbiosis, at least
partly contributing to the reduced production of n-butyrate which may be implicated in the
pathogenesis of UC.
Furthermore, we demonstrated the immunomodulatory functions of mucin in the colon (Fig.
6B-E). We confirmed that exogenous mucin expanded Treg cell and IgA+ plasma cell populations,
indicating that it has a significant role in shaping the immune system. Given that n-butyrate
induces the differentiation of colonic pTreg cells and IgA+ plasma cells [18,20], we speculate that
the intake of exogenous mucin increased these immune cell populations by enhancing n-butyrate
biosynthesis. Interestingly, mucin administration also induced the expansion of tTreg cell
populations (Fig. 6B and C), suggesting that mucin facilitates the differentiation, migration,
and/or proliferation of tTreg cells. Increased propionate levels may be responsible for this event
[53,54]. Although these mechanisms are not yet fully elucidated, these findings emphasize the
importance of mucin as a fermentation source in the maintenance of colonic immune homeostasis.
Correlation analysis identified 7 species as butyrate-associated bacteria. Among these was
the well-documented n-butyrate producer: F. prausnitzii [22]. E. rectale and E. hallii, which
belong to the Clostridium cluster XIVa, also produce n-butyrate [22,23]. Interestingly, these
Eubacterium spp. accumulate in the mucus layer [51,55] and their numbers are significantly lower
in patients with active UC (Fig 2G). This may reflect the impaired mucin O-glycan–n-butyrate
axis in UC. The genus Anaerostipes is another member of the Clostridium cluster XIVa and
includes several butyrate producers, such as A. caccae and A. hadrus [56,57]. The remaining

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

species, R. bromii, B. wexlerae, and B. vulgatus, may indirectly contribute to n-butyrate
production as part of a bacterial metabolic web for n-butyrate biosynthesis. For example, B.
vulgatus has an abundance of genes associated with polysaccharide utilization [58], whilst R.
bromii and B. wexlerae, classified as Clostridium cluster IV and XIVa, respectively, are known as
amylolytic bacteria. In particular, R. bromii plays a central role in the degradation and utilization
of RS in the human colon [59] and B. wexlerae utilizes RS during fermentation in vitro [60]. Such
carbohydrate digestion processes may be involved in n-butyrate production. R. bromii and B.
wexlerae numbers were significantly lower in active UC patients; therefore, we speculate that the
digestion of polysaccharides and RS might be reduced in the microbiota of these patients.
In conclusion, we observed that n-butyrate biosynthesis was decreased in both CD and UC
patients; however, the underlying mechanisms differed between the two diseases (S12 Fig). In
CD patients, n-butyrate levels are reduced by the loss of the majority of n-butyrate producers,
including F. prausnitzii. Conversely, UC-associated microbiota utilize mucin-O-glycans poorly,
which eventually leads to a decrease in n-butyrate production. Although further studies are
required to clarify the precise molecular mechanisms of the mucin-O-glycan-dependent nbutyrate pathway, our findings offer a new perspective on the pathogenesis of UC and the
development of intestinal dysbiosis (S12 Fig).

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods
Sample collection
To analyze organic acid concentration, bacterial composition, and mucin components, the
stool samples of 44 healthy subjects, 40 CD patients, and 49 UC patients from Japan were
collected at the Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology in Osaka University Hospital
(Study 1; Table 1). In a separate study, the stool samples of 11 healthy subjects and 10 UC patients
were collected to analyze mucinase activity (Study 2; Table 2). A validated food frequency
questionnaire was used to investigate nutrient intake [61]. Patients were diagnosed with CD or
UC according to endoscopic, radiological, histological, and clinical criteria provided by the
Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences of the World Health Organization
and the International Organization for the Study of Inflammatory Bowel Disease [62-64]. Clinical
disease activity was assessed via clinical disease activity and CDAI in UC and CD, respectively
[65,66]. The endoscopic disease activity obtained by ileocolonoscopy was assessed using Matt’s
score and modified Rutgeert’s score in UC and CD, respectively [67,68]. Endoscopic remission
was defined as a Matt’s score of 1 in UC and a modified Rutgeert’s score of 0 or 1 in CD. All
participants provided written informed consent to participate after receiving verbal and written
information about the study. The protocol was approved by the ethics committees of Osaka
University (#13165-2), The University of Tokyo (#25-42-1122), Keio University (#150421-1),
Shizuoka University (#14-11), and NIBIOHN (#72) prior to subject inclusion.

Table 1. IBD patient information (Study 1).
The information of the patient number, age, sex, disease duration, disease severity based on
endoscopic and clinical diagnosis.

Healthy

Ulcerative Colitis

Crohn’s Disease

n = 44

n = 49

n = 40

Median age, years (S.D.)

33 (9.1)

46 (13.8)

40 (13.6)

Male (%)

41 (95.3 %)

27 (55.1 %)

29 (72.5 %)

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Disease Duration, years (S.D.)

-

12.4 (10.5)

13.4 (11.7)

Active stage

-

25 (51.0 %)

12 (30 %)

Remission stage

-

24 (49.0 %)

28 (70 %)

Active stage

-

7 (14.3 %)

10 (25 %)

Remission stage

-

42 (85.7 %)

30 (75 %)

Endoscopic Diagnosis

Clinical Diagnosis

Table 2. UC patient information (Study 2).
The information of the patient number, age, sex, disease duration, disease severity based on
endoscopic and clinical diagnosis.

Healthy

Ulcerative Colitis

n = 11

n = 10

Mean age, years (S.D.)

32.0 (12.7)

42.8 (14.9)

Male (%)

11 (100 %)

6 (60 %)

Disease Duration, years (S.D.)

-

10.3 (7.5)

Active stage

-

7 (70 %)

Remission stage

-

3 (30 %)

Active stage

-

2 (20 %)

Remission stage

-

8 (80 %)

Endoscopic Diagnosis

Clinical Diagnosis

Metagenomic 16S rRNA sequencing
Approximately 200 mg of the stool samples was transferred into 2 mL tubes containing 0.1
mm zirconia/silica beads (BioSpec Products, Bartlesville, OK) and 3.0 mm zirconia beads
(Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan). The stool samples were homogenized at 1,500 rpm for

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

20 min with Shake Master Neo (Biomedical Sciences, Tokyo, Japan) after adding the Inhibit EX
buffer from the QIAamp Fast DNA Stool Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Genomic DNA
was then extracted using the kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions and was resuspended in 10 mM Tris-HCl buffer at 5 ng/μL. A library of 16S rRNA genes was prepared
according to the protocol described in an Illumina technical note [69]. Briefly, each DNA sample
was amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) using KAPA HiFi HS ReadyMix (KAPA
Biosystems, Wilmington, MA) and primers specific for variable regions 3 and 4 of the 16S rRNA
gene. The PCR products were purified using Agencourt AMPure XP Beads (Beckman Coulter,
Brea, CA) and appended by PCR using the Nextera XT index kit (Illumina, San Diego, CA). The
libraries were further purified using Agencourt AMPure XP Beads, diluted to 4 nM with 10 mM
Tris-HCl buffer, and pooled. The pooled samples were sequenced using the Miseq system
(Illumina) with a 2 × 300-base pair protocol. All the sequences analyzed in this study were
deposited in the DNA Data Bank of Japan (DDBJ)/GenBank/European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL) database under the accession number DRA006094.

Bacterial composition analysis
We used the join_paired_ends.py QIIME script [70] and the fastq-join method to join pairedend reads, and trimmed sequencing adaptor sequences using cutadapt [71]. We converted the
FASTQ files into FASTA files and removed chimera reads using the identify_chimeric_seqs.py
and filter_fasta.py QIIME scripts with usearch61 [72]. Next, we concatenated the FASTA files of
individual samples into one FASTA file and used the pick_open_reference_otus.py QIIME script
to pick OTUs. We assigned taxonomy using the assign_taxonomy.py QIIME script with the RDP
classifier and the Greengenes reference database, clustered at 97 % identity. Subsequently, we
created an OTU table using the make_otu_table.py QIIME script and removed OTUs lower than
0.005 % using the filter_otus_from_otu_table.py script. We subsampled to a depth of 10,000 reads
per sample and performed diversity analysis using the core_diversity_analyses.py QIIME script.
To analyze the human stool microbiota, taxonomy was assigned to each OTU by similarity
searching against the publicly available 16S (RDP ver. 10.27 and CORE update 2 September

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

2012) and NCBI genome databases using the GLSEARCH program, as described previously [73].
Phylum-, class-, genus-, and species-level assignments were performed at 70 %, 90 %, 94 %, and
97 % sequence identity thresholds, respectively. To analyze the cecal microbiota of the mice,
taxonomic assignments were performed using the summarize_taxa.py QIIME script with the
Greengenes reference database, clustered at 97 %, since there were abundant OTUs which lacked
sequence homology with any species in the NCBI database. Diversity analyses of the fecal
microbiota (α- and β-diversity) were performed using the Vegan package in R. The phenotype of
the microbiome was predicted using BugBase [37] with the default parameters.

Organic acid analysis
The levels of organic acids (formate, acetate, propionate, i-butyrate, n-butyrate, i-valerate,
n-valerate, succinate, and lactate) in the human stools and rat cecal contents were measured
according to the internal standard method using an HPLC (LC-6A; Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan)
equipped with a Shim-pack SCR-102H column (8 mm internal diameter × 30 cm long; Shimadzu)
and an electroconductivity detector (CDD-6A; Shimadzu), as described previously
[43]. Approximately 200 mg of human stool sample or 300 mg of rat cecal contents were
homogenized in 2 mL of 10 mmol/L sodium hydroxide solution containing 0.5 g/L crotonic
acid as an internal standard, then centrifuged at 10,000 x g for 15 min. The supernatant obtained
was subjected to HPLC analysis. The detection limit for the organic acids was 0.1 μmol/g.
Levels of organic acids in the mouse cecal contents were measured using a gas
chromatography-mass spectrometer (GC-MS) according to the modified methods of Moreau et
al. [74]. Approximately 50 mg of mouse cecal contents was homogenized in 9 times the volume
of H2O (w/w). After centrifugation (10,000 x g at 4 °C for 15 min), 200 μL of the supernatant was
spiked with 10 µL of 1 mM 2-ethyl butyric acid (2-EB) as an internal standard and 20 µL of 20 %
(w/v) 5-sulfosalichylic acid solution for deproteinization. After centrifugation (10,000 x g at 4 °C
for 15 min), 200 μL of the supernatant was acidified using 10 μL of 37 % HCl, and organic acids
were extracted via two rounds of 1 mL diethyl ether extraction. Next, 500 μL of the organic
supernatant was mixed with 50 μL of N-tert-butyldimethylsilyl-N-methyltrifluoracetamide

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(MTBSTFA; Sigma-Aldrich Co., St. Louis, MO) in a new glass vial and left for 24 h at room
temperature to derivatize. The derivatized samples were run through a JMS-Q1500GC GC/MS
System (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan) equipped with an HP-5 capillary column (60 m × 0.25 mm ×
0.25 μm, Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, CA). Pure helium (99.9999 %) was used as a
carrier gas and delivered at a flow rate of 1.2 mL/min. The following temperature program was
used: 60 °C (3 min), 60–120 °C (5 °C/min), 120–290 °C (20 °C/min), 290 °C (3 min). Organic
acid concentrations were determined by comparing their peak areas with the standards. Acetate
was obtained from Nakarai Tesque, Inc., (Kyoto, Japan); propionate, n-butyrate, succinate and
lactate from Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd., (Osaka, Japan); and i-butyrate, i-valerate and
n-valerate from Kanto Chemical Co., Inc (Tokyo, Japan).

Mucin component analysis
The mucin fraction was isolated as described previously [75]. After being diluted
appropriately, the O-linked oligosaccharide chains were analyzed as described previously
[76]. Standard solutions of N-acetylgalactosamine (Sigma-Aldrich) were used to calculate the
amount of oligosaccharide chains released from the mucins during the procedure. Approximately
20 mg of the mucin fraction was completely dried, resuspended in 200 mL of 4 mol/L HCl, and
then hydrolyzed at 100 °C for 4 h in a heating block. The sulfate levels in the mucin fraction were
determined according to the method of Harrison and Packer [77]. Solutions of 0.79, 1.59, 3.18,
6.38, and 12.8 mmol sulfate/L (Multi-anion standard solution-1; Wako Pure Chemicals, Osaka,
Japan) were used as standards. Sialic acid levels were measured as described previously [78].
Briefly, the mucin fractions were hydrolyzed in 50 mM HCl at 80 °C for 1 h, and the Nacetylneuraminic acid (NeuAc) and N-glycolylneuraminic acid (NeuGc) released were labeled
with 1,2-diamino-4,5-methylenedioxybenzene (DMB) using a commercial kit (Takara, Shiga,
Japan). The DMB-labeled sialic acids were analyzed by HPLC equipped with a TSK-ODS80Ts
column (Tosoh, Tokyo, Japan) and a fluorescence detector (RF-10AXL; Shimadzu).

Preparation of mucin-containing diets

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Semi-purified porcine stomach mucin (Sigma-Aldrich) was suspended in phosphate-buffered
saline and filtered to remove contaminants. Ethanol was added to the filtrate to prepare a 60 %
ethanol (w/w) solution. Glycosylated mucin was precipitated at -30 °C and collected by
centrifugation. This treatment was repeated twice to further purify the mucin. The purified mucin
was added to the AIN73-formula diet as a substitute for corn starch.

Animal experiments
All animal experiments were performed according to protocols approved by the Animal Use
Committees of Keio University and Shizuoka University. The rats and mice were maintained in
accordance with the guidelines for the care of laboratory animals of Shizuoka University and Keio
University, respectively. Male Wister rats were purchased from the Shizuoka Laboratory Animal
Center and housed in individual wire screen-bottomed, stainless steel cages at 23 ± 2 °C in a
lighting-controlled room (lit from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m.).
C57BL/6J male mice were purchased from CLEA Japan, Inc (Tokyo, Japan). The mice were
fed an AIN93 diet (Oriental Yeast, Tokyo Japan) for 7 days, then either a 1.5 % mucin-containing
diet or an AIN76-formula control diet for 3 weeks.

Mucinase activity analysis
Mucinase activity was analyzed as described previously [79]. Briefly, fecal samples were
mixed with acetate buffer (pH 5.5) at a ratio of 1:400 (w/v) and used for the mucinase assay with
porcine stomach mucin as a substrate, according to a previously described method [80]. Fecal
mucinase activity was expressed as the amount of liberated sugars per protein in the fecal
homogenates per minute (nmol/mg protein/min).

In vitro fermentation analysis
We employed the use of a previously described in vitro fermentation system [42]. Briefly,
the cecal contents were obtained from rats fed an AIN93G diet for 7 days and diluted 50-fold in
saline. Then, 110 mL of the diluted cecal contents was incubated in a jar fermenter at 37 ℃ under

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

anaerobic, gently-stirred, and pH-controlled (pH > 5.2) conditions. After preincubation overnight,
3.3 g of porcine stomach mucin was added to the culture. To monitor the organic acid contents, 4
mL of each sample was collected 0, 24, 48 h after mucin supplementation.
Preparation of colonic lamina propria cells
Colonic lymphocytes were prepared according to the methods of Weigmann et al. In brief,
colonic tissues were treated with HBSS (Nakarai Tesque) containing 1 mM dithiothreitol and 20
mM EDTA (Nakarai Tesque) at 37 °C for 20 min to remove epithelial cells. The tissues were then
minced and dissociated with RPMI 1640 medium (Nakarai Tesque) containing 0.5 mg/ml
collagenase (Wako Pure Chemical Industries), 0.5 mg/mL DNase I (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany),
2 % FCS (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, CA), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin, and
12.5 mM HEPES (pH 7.2) at 37 °C for 30 min to obtain a single-cell suspension which was
filtered, washed with 2 % FCS in RPMI1640, and separated using a Percoll gradient.

Flow cytometry
Cell staining was performed as described previously [81]. In brief, colonic lymphocytes were
incubated with anti-mouse CD16/CD32 antibodies (93; BioLegend, Inc., San Diego, CA) to block
their Fc receptors, then stained using antibodies conjugated with fluorescein isothiocyanate
(FITC), phycoerythrin (PE), PerCP-Cyanine5.5, redFluor 710, eFluor 450, Brilliant Violet 510,
or Brilliant Ultraviolet 737. Anti-CD45R/B220 (RA3-6B2), anti-IgA (C10-3), anti-RORγt (Q31378), and anti-CD3e (145-2C11) antibodies were obtained from BD Biosciences (San Joses, CA);
anti-CD3 (17A2) and anti-CD45R/B220 (RA3) antibodies were obtained from Tonbo
Biosciences (San Diego, CA); anti-CD45 (30-F11) antibodies were obtained from BioLegend;
and anti-Foxp3 (FJK-16s) and anti-CD4 (RM4-5) antibodies were obtained from Thermo Fisher
Scientific (Waltham, MA). 7-AAD (BioLegend) was added to the cell suspension to label any
dead cells. To visualize intracellular Foxp3 and RORγt, the cells were stained for surface antigens,
fixed, and permeabilized using a Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (Themo Fisher
Scientific). The permeabilized cells were then stained with anti-Foxp3 and anti-RORγt antibodies.
Dead cells were detected using the Fixable Viability Stain 780 (BD Biosciences) for intracellular

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

staining. The stained cells were analyzed using an LSR II Flow Cytometer (BD Biosciences) and
FlowJo software ver. 10.4.2 (BD Biosciences).

Statistical analysis
To analyze organic acid and mucin component levels, differences between two or more
groups were analyzed using the Student’s t-test or ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple
comparison test, respectively. When the variances were not homogeneous, the data were analyzed
by the Wilcoxon’s rank sum test or the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple
comparison test. These statistical tests were performed in Prism ver. 7 (GraphPad Software, Inc.,
La Jolla, CA). The following statistical tests were performed in R 3.3.0. All correlation analyses
were performed using Spearman’s correlation test with Benjamini–Hochberg false discovery rate
(FDR) correction in the multtest R software package. Comparisons of bacterial taxon abundance
were performed by LEfSe [38] using the default parameters, or the Kruskal-Wallis test followed
by Dunn’s multiple comparison test in the dunn.test R software package. The biomarkers for each
group identified using LEfSe were graphically annotated on to phylogenetic trees using GraPhlAn
[82]. The correlation network was visualized using Cytoscape 3.3.0. No statistical methods were
used to predetermine sample size. The experiments were not randomized. The investigators were
not blinded to allocation during experiments and outcome assessment.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Yun-Gi Kim for their comments and suggestions, and Koichiro Suzuki
for their technical support.

Author Contributions
K.H., T.M., J.K., and H.I. conceived the study. T.Y., Y.Fu., Y.Fr., and K.H. performed the
microbiome analysis experiments. H.S and T.G analyzed mucin and metabolite levels and
performed the rat experiments. R.N., H.H., and M.F. performed the in vitro fermentation analysis.
T.Y., M.H., and Y.K. performed the mouse experiments. T.Y. and H.S. analyzed the data with M.H.
and H.O. T.Y. performed the bioinformatic analysis with support from R.A., W.S. and M.H. H.I.
collected clinical samples. T.Y., S.H., T.M., and K.H. interpreted the data. T.Y. and K.H. wrote
the manuscript.

Funding
This study was supported by grants from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
(#16H01369, 17KT0055, and 18H04680 to KH), Health Labour Sciences Research Grant (KH
and JK), AMED-Crest (#16gm0000000h0101, 17gm1010004h0102, and 18gm1010004h0103 to
KH; 16gm0000000h0201, 17gm1010004h0202, and 18gm1010004h0203 to JK), AMED
(#18ek0109303h0001 to KH and JK), Yakult Foundation (KH), Keio Gijuku Academic
Development Funds (KH), The Aashi Grass Foundation, and The Canon Foundation (JK).

Competing Interests
The authors have declared that no competing interests exist.

Abbreviations
CD: Crohn's disease, DNA: deoxyribonucleic acid, FDR: false discovery rate, HPLC: high
performance liquid chromatography, IBD: inflammatory bowel disease, IgA: immunoglobulin A,
OTU: operational taxonomic unit, PCR: polymerase chain reaction, RS: resistant starch, RNA:

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ribonucleic acid, rRNA: ribosomal RNA, SCFA: short chain fatty acid, Treg cell: regulatory T
cell, Tris: tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane, UC: ulcerative colitis.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References

1.

Khor B, Gardet A, Xavier RJ. Genetics and pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease.
Nature. 2011;474: 307–317. doi:10.1038/nature10209

2.

Wlodarska M, Kostic AD, Xavier RJ. An integrative view of microbiome-host interactions
in

inflammatory

bowel

diseases.

Cell

Host

Microbe.

2015;17:

577–591.

doi:10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.008
3.

Honda K, Littman DR. The Microbiome in Infectious Disease and Inflammation. Annu
Rev Immunol. 2012;30: 759–795. doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-020711-074937

4.

Kamada N, Seo S-U, Chen GY, Núñez G. Role of the gut microbiota in immunity and
inflammatory

disease.

Nature

Reviews

Immunology.

2013;13:

321–335.

doi:10.1038/nri3430
5.

Manichanh C, Rigottier-Gois L, Bonnaud E, Gloux K, Pelletier E, Frangeul L, et al.
Reduced diversity of faecal microbiota in Crohn’s disease revealed by a metagenomic
approach. Gut. 2006;55: 205–211. doi:10.1136/gut.2005.073817

6.

Qin J, Li R, Raes J, Arumugam M, Burgdorf KS, Manichanh C, et al. A human gut
microbial gene catalogue established by metagenomic sequencing. Nature. 2010;464: 59–
65. doi:10.1038/nature08821

7.

Gevers D, Kugathasan S, Denson LA, Vázquez-Baeza Y, Van Treuren W, Ren B, et al.
The Treatment-Naive Microbiome in New-Onset Crohn’s Disease. Cell Host Microbe.
2014;15: 382–392. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2014.02.005

8.

Halfvarson J, Brislawn CJ, Lamendella R, Vázquez-Baeza Y, Walters WA, Bramer LM,
et al. Dynamics of the human gut microbiome in inflammatory bowel disease. Nature
Microbiology 2017 2:5. 2017;2: nmicrobiol20174. doi:10.1038/nmicrobiol.2017.4

9.

Honda K, Littman DR. The microbiota in adaptive immune homeostasis and disease.
Nature. 2016;535: 75–84. doi:10.1038/nature18848

10.

Garrett WS, Lord GM, Punit S, Lugo-Villarino G, Mazmanian SK, Ito S, et al.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Communicable Ulcerative Colitis Induced by T-bet Deficiency in the Innate Immune
System. Cell. 2007;131: 33–45. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2007.08.017
11.

Elinav E, Strowig T, Kau AL, Henao-Mejia J, Thaiss CA, Booth CJ, et al. NLRP6
Inflammasome Regulates Colonic Microbial Ecology and Risk for Colitis. Cell. 2011;145:
745–757. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.04.022

12.

Nagao-Kitamoto H, Shreiner AB, Gillilland MG III, Kitamoto S, Ishii C, Hirayama A, et
al. Functional Characterization of Inflammatory Bowel Disease–Associated Gut
Dysbiosis in Gnotobiotic Mice. Cellular and Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology.
2016;2: 468–481. doi:10.1016/j.jcmgh.2016.02.003

13.

Cummings JH. Fermentation in the human large intestine: evidence and implications for
health. Lancet. 1983;1: 1206–1209.

14.

Høverstad T, Midtvedt T. Short-chain fatty acids in germfree mice and rats. J Nutr.
1986;116: 1772–1776.

15.

Cummings JH. Short chain fatty acids in the human colon. Gut. 1981;22: 763–779.

16.

Kelly CJ, Zheng L, Campbell EL, Saeedi B, Scholz CC, Bayless AJ, et al. Crosstalk
between Microbiota-Derived Short-Chain Fatty Acids and Intestinal Epithelial HIF
Augments Tissue Barrier Function. Cell Host Microbe. 2015;17: 662–671.
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2015.03.005

17.

Gaudier E, Rival M, Buisine M-P, Robineau I, Hoebler C. Butyrate enemas upregulate
Muc genes expression but decrease adherent mucus thickness in mice colon. Physiol Res.
2009;58: 111–119.

18.

Kim M, Qie Y, Park J, Kim CH. Gut Microbial Metabolites Fuel Host Antibody Responses.
Cell Host Microbe. 2016;20: 202–214. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2016.07.001

19.

Yin L, Laevsky G, Giardina C. Butyrate suppression of colonocyte NF-kappa B activation
and

cellular

proteasome

activity.

J

Biol

Chem.

2001;276:

44641–44646.

doi:10.1074/jbc.M105170200
20.

Furusawa Y, Obata Y, Fukuda S, Endo TA, Nakato G, Takahashi D, et al. Commensal

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

microbe-derived butyrate induces the differentiation of colonic regulatory T cells. Nature.
2013;504: 446–450. doi:10.1038/nature12721
21.

Arpaia N, Campbell C, Fan X, Dikiy S, van der Veeken J, deRoos P, et al. Metabolites
produced by commensal bacteria promote peripheral regulatory T-cell generation. Nature.
2013;504: 451–455. doi:10.1038/nature12726

22.

Barcenilla A, Pryde SE, Martin JC, Duncan SH, Stewart CS, Henderson C, et al.
Phylogenetic relationships of butyrate-producing bacteria from the human gut. Appl
Environ Microbiol. 2000;66: 1654–1661.

23.

Louis P, Duncan SH, McCrae SI, Millar J, Jackson MS, Flint HJ. Restricted distribution
of the butyrate kinase pathway among butyrate-producing bacteria from the human colon.
J Bacteriol. 2004;186: 2099–2106. doi:10.1128/JB.186.7.2099-2106.2004

24.

Frank DN, St Amand AL, Feldman RA, Boedeker EC, Harpaz N, Pace NR. Molecularphylogenetic characterization of microbial community imbalances in human inflammatory
bowel

diseases.

Proc

Natl

Acad

Sci

USA.

2007;104:

13780–13785.

doi:10.1073/pnas.0706625104
25.

Fujimoto T, Imaeda H, Takahashi K, Kasumi E, Bamba S, Fujiyama Y, et al. Decreased
abundance of Faecalibacterium prausnitzii in the gut microbiota of Crohn's disease. J
Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013;28: 613–619. doi:10.1111/jgh.12073

26.

Machiels K, Joossens M, Sabino J, De Preter V, Arijs I, Eeckhaut V, et al. A decrease of
the butyrate-producing species Roseburia hominis and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii
defines dysbiosis in patients with ulcerative colitis. Gut. 2014;63: 1275–1283.
doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2013-304833

27.

Harig JM, Soergel KH, Komorowski RA, Wood CM. Treatment of diversion colitis with
short-chain-fatty

acid

irrigation.

N

Engl

J

Med.

1989;320:

23–28.

doi:10.1056/NEJM198901053200105
28.

Scheppach W, Sommer H, Kirchner T, Paganelli GM, Bartram P, Christl S, et al. Effect
of butyrate enemas on the colonic mucosa in distal ulcerative colitis. Gastroenterology.
1992;103: 51–56.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

29.

McGuckin MA, Lindén SK, Sutton P, Florin TH. Mucin dynamics and enteric pathogens.
Nat Rev Microbiol. 2011;9: 265–278. doi:10.1038/nrmicro2538

30.

Johansson MEV, Phillipson M, Petersson J, Velcich A, Holm L, Hansson GC. The inner
of the two Muc2 mucin-dependent mucus layers in colon is devoid of bacteria. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA. 2008;105: 15064–15069. doi:10.1073/pnas.0803124105

31.

Johansson MEV, Larsson JMH, Hansson GC. The two mucus layers of colon are
organized by the MUC2 mucin, whereas the outer layer is a legislator of host-microbial
interactions.

Proc

Natl

Acad

Sci

USA.

108

Suppl

1:

4659–4665.

doi:10.1073/pnas.1006451107
32.

Li H, Limenitakis JP, Fuhrer T, Geuking MB, Lawson MA, Wyss M, et al. The outer
mucus layer hosts a distinct intestinal microbial niche. Nat Commun. 2015;6: 8292.
doi:10.1038/ncomms9292

33.

Van der Sluis M, De Koning BAE, De Bruijn ACJM, Velcich A, Meijerink JPP, Van
Goudoever JB, et al. Muc2-deficient mice spontaneously develop colitis, indicating that
MUC2 is critical for colonic protection. Gastroenterology. 2006;131: 117–129.
doi:10.1053/j.gastro.2006.04.020

34.

Sommer F, Adam N, Johansson MEV, Xia L, Hansson GC, Bäckhed F. Altered mucus
glycosylation in core 1 O-glycan-deficient mice affects microbiota composition and
intestinal

architecture.

Sanz

Y,

editor.

PLoS

ONE.

2014;9:

e85254.

doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0085254
35.

Johansson MEV, Gustafsson JK, Holmén-Larsson J, Jabbar KS, Xia L, Xu H, et al.
Bacteria penetrate the normally impenetrable inner colon mucus layer in both murine
colitis models and patients with ulcerative colitis. Gut. 2014;63: 281–291.
doi:10.1136/gutjnl-2012-303207

36.

Yamada T, Takahashi D, Hase K. The diet-microbiota-metabolite axis regulates the host
physiology. J Biochem. 2016;160: 1–10. doi:10.1093/jb/mvw022

37.

Ward T, Larson J, Meulemans J, Ben Hillmann, Lynch J, Sidiropoulos D, et al. BugBase
Predicts

Organism

Level

Microbiome

Phenotypes.

bioRxiv.

2017;133462.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1101/133462
38.

Segata N, Izard J, Waldron L, Gevers D, Miropolsky L, Garrett WS, et al. Metagenomic
biomarker discovery and explanation. Genome Biol. 2011;12: R60. doi:10.1186/gb-201112-6-r60

39.

Larsson JMH, Karlsson H, Sjövall H, Hansson GC. A complex, but uniform Oglycosylation of the human MUC2 mucin from colonic biopsies analyzed by nanoLC/MSn.
Glycobiology. 2009;19: 756–766. doi:10.1093/glycob/cwp048

40.

Tytgat KM, Van der Wal JW, Einerhand AW, Büller HA, Dekker J. Quantitative analysis
of MUC2 synthesis in ulcerative colitis. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996;224: 397–
405. doi:10.1006/bbrc.1996.1039

41.

Dorofeyev AE, Vasilenko IV, Rassokhina OA, Kondratiuk RB. Mucosal barrier in
ulcerative colitis and Crohn's disease. Gastroenterol Res Pract. 2013;2013: 431231.
doi:10.1155/2013/431231

42.

Han K-H, Kobayashi Y, Nakamura Y, Shimada K-I, Aritsuka T, Ohba K, et al.
Comparison of the effects of longer chain inulins with different degrees of polymerization
on colonic fermentation in a mixed culture of Swine fecal bacteria. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol.
2014;60: 206–212.

43.

Morita T, Kasaoka S, Ohhashi A, Ikai M, Numasaki Y, Kiriyama S. Resistant proteins
alter cecal short-chain fatty acid profiles in rats fed high amylose cornstarch. J Nutr.
1998;128: 1156–1164.

44.

Ohnmacht C, Park J-H, Cording S, Wing JB, Atarashi K, Obata Y, et al. The microbiota
regulates type 2 immunity through RORγt+ T cells. Science. 2015;349: 989–993.
doi:10.1126/science.aac4263

45.

Tailford LE, Crost EH, Kavanaugh D, Juge N. Mucin glycan foraging in the human gut
microbiome. Front Genet. Frontiers; 2015;6: 81. doi:10.3389/fgene.2015.00081

46.

Ouwerkerk JP, de Vos WM, Belzer C. Glycobiome: bacteria and mucus at the epithelial
interface.

Best

Pract

Res

Clin

Gastroenterol.

2013;27:

25–38.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1016/j.bpg.2013.03.001
47.

Thorburn AN, McKenzie CI, Shen S, Stanley D, Macia L, Mason LJ, et al. Evidence that
asthma is a developmental origin disease influenced by maternal diet and bacterial
metabolites. Nat Commun. 2015;6: 7320. doi:10.1038/ncomms8320

48.

Derrien M, Vaughan EE, Plugge CM, de Vos WM. Akkermansia muciniphila gen. nov.,
sp. nov., a human intestinal mucin-degrading bacterium. International Journal of
Systematic

and

Evolutionary

Microbiology.

2004;54:

1469–1476.

doi:10.1099/ijs.0.02873-0
49.

Desai MS, Seekatz AM, Koropatkin NM, Kamada N, Hickey CA, Wolter M, et al. A
Dietary Fiber-Deprived Gut Microbiota Degrades the Colonic Mucus Barrier and
Enhances

Pathogen

Susceptibility.

Cell.

2016;167:

1339–1353.e21.

doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.10.043
50.

Greetham HL, Gibson GR, Giffard C, Hippe H, Merkhoffer B, Steiner U, et al.
Allobaculum stercoricanis gen. nov., sp. nov., isolated from canine feces. Anaerobe.
2004;10: 301–307. doi:10.1016/j.anaerobe.2004.06.004

51.

Van den Abbeele P, Belzer C, Goossens M, Kleerebezem M, de Vos WM, Thas O, et al.
Butyrate-producing Clostridium cluster XIVa species specifically colonize mucins in an
in vitro gut model. ISME J. 2013;7: 949–961. doi:10.1038/ismej.2012.158

52.

Nava GM, Friedrichsen HJ, Stappenbeck TS. Spatial organization of intestinal microbiota
in the mouse ascending colon. ISME J. 2011;5: 627–638. doi:10.1038/ismej.2010.161

53.

Obata Y, Furusawa Y, Endo TA, Sharif J, Takahashi D, Atarashi K, et al. The epigenetic
regulator Uhrf1 facilitates the proliferation and maturation of colonic regulatory T cells.
Nat Immunol. 2014;15: 571–579. doi:10.1038/ni.2886

54.

Smith PM, Howitt MR, Panikov N, Michaud M, Gallini CA, Bohlooly-Y M, et al. The
Microbial Metabolites, Short-Chain Fatty Acids, Regulate Colonic Treg Cell Homeostasis.
Science. 2013;341: 1237242–573. doi:10.1126/science.1241165

55.

Louis P, Flint HJ. Diversity, metabolism and microbial ecology of butyrate-producing

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

bacteria from the human large intestine. FEMS Microbiol Lett. 2009;294: 1–8.
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6968.2009.01514.x
56.

Schwiertz A, Hold GL, Duncan SH, Gruhl B, Collins MD, Lawson PA, et al. Anaerostipes
caccae gen. nov., sp. nov., a new saccharolytic, acetate-utilising, butyrate-producing
bacterium from human faeces. Syst Appl Microbiol. 2002;25: 46–51. doi:10.1078/07232020-00096

57.

Allen-Vercoe E, Daigneault M, White A, Panaccione R, Duncan SH, Flint HJ, et al.
Anaerostipes hadrus comb. nov., a dominant species within the human colonic microbiota;
reclassification of Eubacterium hadrum Moore et al. 1976. Anaerobe. 2012;18: 523–529.
doi:10.1016/j.anaerobe.2012.09.002

58.

Kaoutari El A, Armougom F, Gordon JI, Raoult D, Henrissat B. The abundance and
variety of carbohydrate-active enzymes in the human gut microbiota. Nat Rev Microbiol.
2013;11: 497–504. doi:10.1038/nrmicro3050

59.

Ze X, Duncan SH, Louis P, Flint HJ. Ruminococcus bromii is a keystone species for the
degradation of resistant starch in the human colon. ISME J. 2012;6: 1535–1543.
doi:10.1038/ismej.2012.4

60.

Yang J, Martínez I, Walter J, Keshavarzian A, Rose DJ. In vitro characterization of the
impact of selected dietary fibers on fecal microbiota composition and short chain fatty
acid production. Anaerobe. 2013;23: 74–81. doi:10.1016/j.anaerobe.2013.06.012

61.

Takahashi K, Yoshimura Y, Kaimoto T, Kunii D, Komatsu T, Yamamoto S. Validation
of a Food Frequency Questionnaire Based on Food Groups for Estimating Individual
Nutrient Intake. The Japanese Journal of Nutrition and Dietetics; 2001;59: 221–232.
doi:10.5264/eiyogakuzashi.59.221

62.

Lennard-Jones JE. Classification of inflammatory bowel disease. Scand J Gastroenterol
Suppl. 1989;170: 2–6– discussion 16–9.

63.

Podolsky DK. Inflammatory bowel disease (1). N Engl J Med. 1991;325: 928–937.
doi:10.1056/NEJM199109263251306

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

64.

Podolsky DK. Inflammatory bowel disease (2). N Engl J Med. 1991;325: 1008–1016.
doi:10.1056/NEJM199110033251406

65.

Rachmilewitz D. Coated mesalazine (5-aminosalicylic acid) versus sulphasalazine in the
treatment of active ulcerative colitis: a randomised trial. BMJ. 1989;298: 82–86.

66.

Best WR, Becktel JM, Singleton JW, Kern F. Development of a Crohn's disease activity
index. National Cooperative Crohn's Disease Study. Gastroenterology. 1976;70: 439–444.

67.

Matts SG. The value of rectal biopsy in the diagnosis of ulcerative colitis. Q J Med.
1961;30: 393–407.

68.

Imaeda H, Bamba S, Takahashi K, Fujimoto T, Ban H, Tsujikawa T, et al. Relationship
between serum infliximab trough levels and endoscopic activities in patients with Crohn's
disease under scheduled maintenance treatment. J Gastroenterol. 2014;49: 674–682.
doi:10.1007/s00535-013-0829-7

69.

Illumina.

16S

Metagenomic

Sequencing

Library

Preparation.

2017;1–28.

http://support.illumina.com/content/dam/illumina-support/documents/documentation/che
mistry_documentation/16s/16s-metagenomic-library-prep-guide-15044223-b.pdf
70.

Caporaso JG, Kuczynski J, Stombaugh J, Bittinger K, Bushman FD, Costello EK, et al.
QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing data. Nat Methods.
2010;7: 335–336. doi:10.1038/nmeth.f.303

71.

Martin M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput sequencing reads.
EMBnetjournal. 2011;17: pp. 10–12. doi:10.14806/ej.17.1.200

72.

Edgar RC. Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinformatics.
2010;26: 2460–2461. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq461

73.

Tsuda A, Suda W, Morita H, Takanashi K, Takagi A, Koga Y, et al. Influence of ProtonPump Inhibitors on the Luminal Microbiota in the Gastrointestinal Tract. Clin Transl
Gastroenterol. 2015;6: e89. doi:10.1038/ctg.2015.20

74.

Moreau N, Goupry S, Antignac J, Monteau F, Lebizec B, Champ M, et al. Simultaneous
measurement of plasma concentrations and 13C-enrichment of short-chain fatty acids,

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

lactic acid and ketone bodies by gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry.
Journal of Chromatography B. 2003;784: 395–403. doi:10.1016/S1570-0232(02)00827-9
75.

Tanabe H, Sugiyama K, Matsuda T, Kiriyama S, Morita T. Small intestinal mucins are
secreted in proportion to the settling volume in water of dietary indigestible components
in rats. J Nutr. 2005;135: 2431–2437.

76.

Bovee-Oudenhoven IM, Termont DS, Heidt PJ, Van der Meer R. Increasing the intestinal
resistance of rats to the invasive pathogen Salmonella enteritidis: additive effects of
dietary lactulose and calcium. Gut. 1997;40: 497–504.

77.

Harrison MJ, Packer NH. Measurement of sulfate in mucins. Methods Mol Biol.
2000;125: 211–216. doi:10.1385/1-59259-048-9:211

78.

Ogata M, Hidari KIPJ, Murata T, Shimada S, Kozaki W, Park EY, et al. Chemoenzymatic
synthesis of sialoglycopolypeptides as glycomimetics to block infection by avian and
human influenza viruses. Bioconjug Chem. 2009;20: 538–549. doi:10.1021/bc800460p

79.

Komura M, Fukuta T, Genda T, Hino S, Aoe S, Kawagishi H, et al. A short-term ingestion
of fructo-oligosaccharides increases immunoglobulin A and mucin concentrations in the
rat cecum, but the effects are attenuated with the prolonged ingestion. Biosci Biotechnol
Biochem. 2014;78: 1592–1602. doi:10.1080/09168451.2014.925782

80.

Shiau SY, Chang GW. Effects of dietary fiber on fecal mucinase and beta-glucuronidase
activity in rats. J Nutr. 1983;113: 138–144.

81.

Suzuki K, Yamada T, Yamazaki K, Hirota M, Ishihara N, Sakamoto M, et al. Intestinal
Epithelial Cell-specific Deletion of α-Mannosidase II Ameliorates Experimental Colitis.
Cell Struct Funct. 2018;43: 25–39. doi:10.1247/csf.17022

82.

Asnicar F, Weingart G, Tickle TL, Huttenhower C, Segata N. Compact graphical
representation of phylogenetic data and metadata with GraPhlAn. PeerJ. 2015;3: e1029.
doi:10.7717/peerj.1029

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supporting Information
S1 Fig. Organic acid profiles of the UC, CD, and healthy groups.
(A) Fecal organic acid concentrations of the healthy subjects, patients with active UC (UC-A),
remissive UC (UC-R), active CD (CD-A), and remissive CD (CD-R) were analyzed. Data
represent the mean (n = 12‑43/group). *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s
multiple comparison test or the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test).
(B) Heatmaps show the Spearman’s correlation coefficients of the fecal organic acid levels in
each group, depicted as blue (negative correlation, −1) and red (positive correlation, +1) hues.

S2 Fig. Association between fecal organic acids and lesion sites.
Fecal organic acid concentrations of (A) UC patients or (B) CD patients grouped by lesion site
were compared. Data represent the mean (n = 4‑23/group). *p < 0.05 and

**

p < 0.01 (ANOVA

followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison test or the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s
multiple comparison test).

S3 Fig. Association between fecal bacterial composition and endoscopic assessment or lesion
site.
(A, C, E, and G) Principal coordinate analysis of the unweighted UniFrac distance between the
microbiota of UC patients grouped by (A) endoscopic assessment or (B) lesion site, and CD
patients grouped by (E) endoscopic assessment or (G) lesion sites. (B, D, F, and H) Violin plots
of the unweighted UniFrac distance between the microbiota of the healthy subjects. Median
values are shown. Statistical analysis was performed using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by
Dunn’s multiple comparison test (n = 7-23/group). The letters over the boxplots indicate
significant differences (p < 0.05).

S4 Fig. Microbial community comparison between IBD patients and healthy subjects.
Boxplots of relative bacterial abundance at the phylum (A) and class (B) levels. Each boxplot
represents the median, IQR, and the lowest and highest values within 1.5 IQRs of the first and
third quartiles. The outliers are not shown. Statistical analysis was performed using the KruskalWallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test (n = 7-23/group). The letters over the
boxplots indicate significant differences (p < 0.05). (C, D) Taxa discriminating between
microbiota of (C) UC or (D) CD patients in active or remission phase and healthy subjects, as
determined by LEfSe [38] analysis. The discriminative taxa are annotated on phylogenetic trees.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S5 Fig. Occupancy of anaerobes, facultative anaerobes, and aerobes in the microbial
communities of IBD patients and healthy subjects.
Relative abundance of anaerobic, facultatively anaerobic, and aerobic bacteria was predicted
using BugBase. Each boxplot represents the median, IQR, and the lowest and highest values
within 1.5 IQRs of the first and third quartiles. The outliers are not shown. Statistical analysis was
performed using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test (n = 723/group). The letters over the boxplots indicate significant differences (p < 0.05).

S6 Fig. Association between stool mucin components and lesion sites.
Stool mucin component concentrations and mucin O-glycan ratios per protein were compared
between the (A) UC patients and (B) CD patients grouped by lesion site. Data represent the mean
(n = 3‑18/group). *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 (ANOVA followed by Tukey’s multiple comparison
test or the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison test).

S7 Fig. Bacterial genera overrepresented in IBD patients.
Boxplots of the relative abundances of bacterial genera. Each boxplot represents the median, IQR,
and the lowest and highest values within 1.5 IQRs of the first and third quartiles. The outliers are
not shown. Statistical analysis was performed using the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by Dunn’s
multiple comparison test (n = 7-23/group). The letters over the boxplots indicate significant
differences (p < 0.05).

S8 Fig. Correlation between the fecal SCFAs and mucin components of the individual
disease groups.
Correlation analysis between the concentrations of major stool organic acids and mucin
components in the stool samples. Heatmaps of the Spearman’s correlation coefficients, depicted
as blue (negative correlation, −0.5) and red (positive correlation, +0.5) hues. The BenjaminiHochberg (BH) method was used for FDR adjustment in each group. +: FDR < 0.05, ++:
FDR < 0.01.

S9 Fig. Association between mucinase activity and fecal SCFA levels in UC patients and
healthy subjects.
(A) Organic acid concentrations were analyzed in the stool samples of healthy subjects and UC

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

patients. Data represent the mean (n = 6, 10/group). *p < 0.05 and **p < 0.01 (Student’s t test or
Wilcoxon’s rank sum test). (B) Scatter plots of mucinase activity versus the concentrations of
acetate or propionate. The Spearman’s correlation coefficient (rho) and FDR are shown.

S10 Fig. Comparison of nutrient intake between UC patients and healthy subjects.
(A) Principal component analysis plot of the nutrient intake data in S9 Table. Standard error
(95 %) ellipses are shown around the UC patients and healthy subjects. (B) Boxplot of soluble
fiber intake indicating the median, IQR, and the lowest and highest values within 1.5 IQRs of the
first and third quartiles. NS, not statistically significant (Student’s t test, n = 6, 10).

S11 Fig. Effects of mucin administration on cecal microbiota in mice.
(A) Species richness (number of observed OTUs) of the microbiota of control or mucin-fed mice.
*

p < 0.05 and

**

p < 0.01 (Wilcoxon’s rank sum test). (B) Principal coordinate analysis of the

weighted UniFrac distance between the control and mucin-fed mice. (C, D) Staked bar plot of
bacterial abundances at family (C) and genus (D) levels. Statistical analysis was performed using
LEfSe (n = 5/group).

S12 Fig. Distinct dysbiosis models in CD and UC.
In the healthy gut, intestinal microbiota utilize mucin O-glycan as an endogenous fermentation
source to produce butyrate (left). In Crohn’s disease, major butyrate producers such as
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii are almost absent due to severe dysbiosis, resulting in the loss of
luminal butyrate (center). In contrast, the gut microbiota of UC patients showed less severe
dysbiosis and normal levels of F. prausnitzii. However, O-glycan availability was compromised
in the UC-associated microbiota, leading to a substantial decrease in luminal butyrate (right).
Reduced butyrate production may render the hosts susceptible to chronic inflammation in the gut.

S1 Table. UC patient information (Study 1).
The number and ratio of patients with different lesion sites, disease severity score, or drug
treatments.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S2 Table. CD patient information (Study 1).
The number and ratio of patients with different lesion sites, disease severity score, or drug
treatments.

S3 Table. Effects of lesion site and drug treatment on fecal n-butyrate levels in UC patients
(Study 1).
Data represents the mean ± SD of fecal n-butyrate levels (μmol/g) and the p value of UC patients
with different lesion sites or drug treatments.

S4 Table. Effects of lesion site and drug treatment on fecal n-butyrate levels in CD patients
(Study 1).
Data represents the mean ± SD of fecal n-butyrate levels (μmol/g) and the p value of CD patients
with different lesion sites or drug treatments.

S5 Table. Summary of bacterial genera associated with fecal organic acid levels (Study 1).
Data represent the Spearman’s correlation coefficients, p values with Benjamini-Hochberg
correction (FDR), and average bacterial abundance of healthy subjects (%). Bacteria abundant
(more than 1 %) in the healthy subjects are shown in bold.

S6 Table. Summary of bacterial species associated with fecal organic acid levels (Study 1).
Data represent the Spearman’s correlation coefficients, p values with Benjamini-Hochberg
correction (FDR), and average bacterial abundance of healthy subjects (%). Bacteria abundant
(more than 1 %) in the healthy subjects are shown in bold.

S7 Table. Association between IBD and stool mucin O-glycan component ratio (Study 1).
Data represent the mean ± SD of the ratio of each mucin O-glycan component per mucin O-glycan
(nmol/nmol) and the p values of the healthy subjects and IBD patients classified by endoscopic
assessment.

S8 Table. Association between IBD and fecal NeuGc detection frequency (Study 1).
Data represent the proportion of subjects in whom NeuGc was detected. Statistical tests were
performed using Fisher’s exact test by comparing with healthy subjects.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/655597; this version posted May 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S9 Table. Summary of the nutrient intake of healthy subjects and UC patients (Study 2).
Data represent the mean ± SD of the daily nutrient intake and p values with Benjamini-Hochberg
correction (FDR).

41

C

D

_R

_A

_R
D

C

40

***
p = 0.06
**

C

y

50

_A

Propionate
Propionate

U

C

0

lth

μmol/g wet stools

20

U

_R

_A

40

ea

D

D

_R

_A

60

H

C

C

C

Acetate

U

y

0

C

50

lth

100

μmol/g wet stools

150

U

_R

_A

200

ea

D

D

_R

Acetate

H

C

C

_A

Total SCFAs

C

y

Total SCFAs

U

C

0

lth

100

μmol/g wet stools

p = 0.10

U

_R

_A

200

ea

D

D

300

H

C

C

y

_A

_R

C

lth

C

U

ea

U

H

μmol/g wet stools

Figure 1
n-Butyrate
n-Butyrate
**

30

20

10
0

Figure 2
A

B

b

a

b
c
c

D

C

Healthy
CD

E

Average abundance in
Healthy subjects > 0.01

Positive correlation
with n-butyrate levels

F

Healthy
UC

Total
a
a

Genus

b

b

a

a

c

a
b
bc

a
a
cd

Species

G

b

c

b

Total
a
ab

a

bc

b

a

a

a
ab
b

c

b
b

c

a
b

a

ab
b
c

a
c

ab
b bb

ab
bc

cd
d

a bc
ab
d cd

d

a

a
bb

ab
b
bb

a
b
b cc

Figure 3
A

B
*

3
2
1

_R

_A

D

D

C

_R
C

U

H

C

y
ea

C

lth

_R

_A
D

D
C

_R

C

_A

C
U

y

C

lth
ea

_A

0

U

_R
D

_A

C

_R

D

C

C

U

y

_A

lth

C
U

ea

D

_R

_A

C

_R

D

C

C

U

y

_A

lth

C
U

ea

5
0

0

0

10

**

4

U

5

μmol/mg Protein

μmol/g wet stools

20

10

H

mg/g wet stools

40

*

H

mg/g wet stools

p = 0.07

60

H

5

15

15

80

O-glycan/Protein

O-glycan

Protein

Mucin

C

Healthy
FDR = 0.26
rho = -0.24

UC
FDR = 0.013
rho = -0.45

CD

E

FDR = 0.68
rho = -0.19

15

μmol/g wet stools

*
p = 0.08

10
5
0

O-glycans (μmol/g)

O-glycans (μmol/g)

O-glycans (μmol/g)

He
al
th
y

SCFAs (μmol/g)

D

-

+

UC

-

+

CD

Figure 4

C

B

A

SCFAs (μmol/g)

rho = 0.75
FDR = 0.0034

Mucinase activity (nmol/mg/min)

n-Butyrate (μmol/g)

**
**

*

rho = 0.67
FDR = 0.0044

Mucinase activity (nmol/mg/min)

Figure 5
A

mM

n-Butyrate

B
**
**

*

*

***

*

*

C

D
O-glycan
N.S.

O-glycan/Cecum
N.S.

Mucinase activity
**
*

D
Foxp3 +RORγt+
(% in CD4+ T cells)

RORγt

***
***

Control

Control

IgA

Mucin

Mucin

C

E
**

Foxp3

IgA+ cell

*

Foxp3+RORγt(% in CD4+ T cells)

B

IgA+B220(% in CD45+ cells)

B220

μmol/g cecal contents

Figure 6

A
n-Butyrate

***
***

RORγt+ Treg

RORγt- Treg
**

S1 Fig

A

B
n-Valerate

Healthy

UC

i-Butyrate
Propionate
Acetate
Formate
Lactate
Succinate

i-Valerate

i-Valerate

i-Valerate
n-Butyrate

n-Valerate

CD
n-Butyrate

1.0

1.0

i-Butyrate

0.5
0.0
−0.5

Lactate
Succinate

i-Butyrate

0.5

Propionate

0.0

Acetate

−1.0Formate

n-Butyrate

−0.5

Propionate
Acetate

Formate
−1.0
Lactate
Succinate

rho
1.0
0.5
0.0
−0.5
−1.0

S2 Fig

A
*

B

*

S3 Fig
A

B
a
b
c

C

D
a
b
c
b

E

F
a

b

c

G

H
a
b
c
c

S4 Fig
A

B

Phylum

Class

a
a

a
a

a

b

b

c

b

bb
b

b

c
a

a

C

b

a

bc
b

a

ab
b

D

CD

Healthy
Remission
Active

b

bb

a

a

a

ab

UC

Healthy
Remission
Active

S5 Fig

Anaerobe
a

bc

bc

c

Facultative Anaerobe
b

c

b
a

b

b

Aerobe

μmol/mg

μmol/g wet stools

mg/g wet stools

mg/g wet stools

B

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/g wet stools

μmol/mg

μmol/g wet stools

mg/g wet stools

mg/g wet stools

S6 Fig

A
O-glycan/Protein

O-glycan/Protein

S7 Fig
Enterococcus

Escherichia

Lactobacillus

b
b
a

a
b

a

b
a

ab

S8 Fig
Correlation

Mucin
Whole

0.50

Protein

0.25

++

O-glycan

Healthy

++

+

++

Mucin

−0.25

Protein

−0.50

O-glycan

Mucin

UC

Protein

+

O-glycan

+

+

+

Mucin
Protein

op te
io
na
nt
Bu e
ty
ra
To
te
ta
lS
C
FA
s

et
a

Pr

Ac

cc

in
a

te

O-glycan

Su

CD

0.00

S9 Fig
A
**

*

B

rho = 0.71
FDR = 0.0039

rho = 0.68
FDR = 0.0044

S10 Fig
A

B

Soluble fiber

Healthy

g/day

N.S.

S11 Fig
A

B
**

C

Control

Mucin

Control

Mucin

D

S12 Fig

S1 Table
Ulcerative colitis (n=49)
Site of disease
Total (%)

22 (44.9%)

Rectal (%)

8 (16.3%)

Left (%)

19 (38.8%)

Matts Endoscopy Score
1

24 (49.0%)

2

14 (28.6%)

3

6 (12.2%)

4

5 (10.2%)

Clinical Activity Index
0–3

38 (22.4%)

4

11 (77.6%)

UC Drugs
Anti-TNF antibody

1 (2.0%)

Immunosuppressant

11 (22.4%)

Prodrug of 5-ASA

34 (69.4%)

PPI

7 (14.3%)

Steroid

7 (14.3%)

Probiotics

40 (81.6%)

S2 Table
Crohn’s Disease (n = 40)
Site of disease
Small Intestine (%)
Colon (%)
Both (%)
Modified Rutgeerts score
0-1 (remission)
2-4 (active)
CDAI
<150
150 – 220
220 – 300
300<
CD Drugs
Anti-TNF antibody
Immunosuppressant
Prodrug of 5-ASA
PPI
Antibiotics
Probiotics

13 (32.5 %)
4 (10 %)
23 (57.5 %)
12 (30 %)
28 (70 %)
30 (75 %)
6 (15 %)
2 (5 %)
2 (5 %)
23 (57.5 %)
13 (32.5 %)
34 (85.0%)
1 (2.5 %)
2 (5.0 %)
27 (67.5 %)

S3 Table

Total

Left

Rectal

p value

8.42±10.0

8.28±8.65

10.2±11.4

0.89 (ANOVA)

Treated

Untreated

p value

Immunosuppressant

5.73±8.06

9.48±9.87

0.26 (Student's t test)

Prodrug of 5-ASA

8.21±8.89

12.44±14.96

0.35 (Student's t test)

PPI

10.83±9.62

8.27±9.60

0.52 (Student's t test)

Steroid

4.96±10.49

9.25±9.37

0.28 (Student's t test)

Probiotics

8.39±10.12

10.51±5.89

0.71 (Student's t test)

Site of disease

S4 Table
Small Intestine

Colon

Both

p value

8.42±10.0

8.28±8.65

10.2±11.4

0.62 (Kruskal-Wallis)

Treated

Untreated

p value

Anti-TNF

5.30±4.84

5.11±4.52

0.90 (Student's t test)

Immunosuppressant

6.04±5.08

4.82±4.47

0.45 (Student's t test)

Prodrug of 5-ASA

5.26±4.52

4.98±5.76

0.90 (Student's t test)

PPI

2.80±1.11

5.41±4.77

0.52 (Student's t test)

Probiotics

5.70±5.20

4.22±3.17

0.35 (Student's t test)

Site of disease

S5 Table
n-Butyrate
Bacterial genera

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Haemophilus

0.55

0.000028

0.18

Faecalibacterium

0.53

0.000029

11.81

Eubacterium

0.51

0.000056

7.62

Roseburia

0.45

0.0010

0.79

Coprobacter

0.42

0.0031

0.03

Anaerostipes

0.39

0.0066

1.79

Eggerthella

0.35

0.022

0.33

Turicibacter

0.34

0.029

0.05

Parasutterella

0.34

0.029

0.39

Dorea

0.33

0.029

0.63

Ruminococcus

0.32

0.041

4.16

Gemmiger

0.32

0.041

2.67

Bacterial genera

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Proteus

0.46

0.0022

0.0017

Coprobacter

0.44

0.0022

0.03

Haemophilus

0.44

0.0022

0.18

Bacterial genera

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Faecalitalea

0.39

0.042

0.026

Bacterial genera

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Bacillus

0.39

0.049

0.0078

Acetate

n-Valerate

i-Butyrate

S6 Table
n-Butyrate
Bacterial species

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Haemophilus parainfluenzae

0.55

0.000037

0.18

Eubacterium ventriosum

0.54

0.000037

0.60

Faecalibacterium prausnitzii

0.53

0.000044

11.64

Ruminococcus obeum

0.48

0.00054

0.58

Eubacterium rectale

0.48

0.00056

2.38

Faecalibacterium sp.

0.47

0.00060

0.08

Eubacterium ramulus

0.46

0.00084

0.29

Eubacterium hallii

0.43

0.0023

2.04

Anaerostipes hadrus

0.42

0.0029

0.48

Roseburia inulinivorans

0.42

0.0030

0.21

Coprobacter fastidioåsus

0.42

0.0032

0.03

Blautia glucerasea

0.39

0.0067

0.25

Anaerostipes sp.

0.39

0.0067

1.28

Roseburia intestinalis

0.39

0.0067

0.43

Roseburia faecis

0.37

0.014

0.04

Haemophilus pittmaniae

0.36

0.017

0.01

Eggerthella lenta

0.35

0.020

0.33

Phascolarctobacterium sp.

0.35

0.020

0.25

Ruminococcus gauvreauii

0.33

0.027

0.01

Clostridium xylanolyticum

0.34

0.027

0.11

Parasutterella excrementihominis

0.34

0.027

0.39

Ruminococcus faecis

0.34

0.027

0.89

Turicibacter sanguinis

0.34

0.027

0.05

Clostridium disporicum

0.33

0.028

0.05

Blautia schinkii

0.32

0.033

0.19

Ruminococcus bromii

0.31

0.043

2.12

Blautia wexlerae

0.31

0.045

3.16

Bacteroides vulgatus

0.31

0.049

4.05

Bacterial species

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Coprobacter fastidiosus

0.44

0.0089

0.030

Harmophilus parainfluenzae

0.43

0.0089

0.17

Bacterial species

rho

FDR

Abundance in healthy subjects (%)

Ruminococcus gauvreauii

0.52

0.00035

0.013

Eubacterium cylindroides

0.39

0.048

0.026

Acetate

n-Valerate

S7 Table
UC

CD

O-glycan
components

Healthy

Active

Remission

Active

Remission

p value

Sulfate

0.48±0.17

0.46±0.22

0.44±0.19

0.56±0.20

0.43±0.18

0.72 (ANOVA)

Sialic acid

0.18±0.14

0.14±0.09

0.21±0.17

0.24±0.10

0.24±0.17

0.16 (Kruskal-Wallis)

NeuAc

0.17±0.13

0.14±0.09

0.21±0.17

0.24±0.10

0.23±0.17

0.15 (ANOVA)

NeuGc

0.007±0.017

0.007±0.014

0.005±0.010

0.003±0.014

0.010±0.064

0.56 (Kruskal-Wallis)

S8 Table
Disease

Detection ratio

p value

Healthy

8/38 (21%)

-

UC

17/38 (45%)

0.0497

CD

7/25 (28%)

0.558

S9 Table
Nutrient
Molybdenum (µg)

Healthy
116.7 34.7

UC
134.7

Copper (mg)

0.88

0.95

Manganese (mg)

2.1

Alcohol (g)

12.6

Chromium (µg)

5.7 1.4

5.8

Iodine (µg)

325.3

237.7

475.9

Magnesium (mg)

206.5

51.4

224.7

Biotin (µg)

23

Carbohydrate (g)

226.3

Salt (g)

8.3

Vitamin_K (µg)

164.5

Sodium (mg)

3286.8

0.21
0.6

0.22

2.2

15.6

7.8

37.7
0.5

0.19

42.5

2.3

3.2
76.9
1260.1

0.97
0.97

3763.3

0.9

2.8
15.4

Insoluble_fiber (g)

8.2 2.3

8.5

Iron (mg)

6.3

7

Niacin (mg)

15.8

3.1

12.4

Total_fiber (g)

11.8

3.3

Vitamin_B2 (mg)

0.83

0.41

Potassium (mg)

1984.5

Vitamin_D (µg)

4.4

Retinol activity equivalent (µgRAE)

367.1

n6_fatty_acid (g)

9.9

Water (g)

860.3

Polyunsaturated_fat (g)

11.7

2.1

11

Saturated_fat (g)

18.7

4.9

17.3

1298.8

0.8

0.97
0.97

4.7
2

0.97
0.97

2.6

0.97
4.5

0.97

12.8

3.5

0.97

1.0

0.67

0.97

2006.7
4.5

534.6

2.5

429.2
9.2

277

74.4

0.97
0.97

4.7

1.8

0.97

59.3

14

190.4

69.6

3.3

2.7

2.3

0.97

185

Soluble_fiber (g)

522.3

0.97

9.5

Ash (g)

1.7

0.97

426.1
10.1

247.1

0.97
0.97

0.28

27.1

FDR
0.21

0.97

190.8
4.2

856.2

0.97
0.97
0.97

323.9

4.7

0.97
0.97

8.5

0.97

Vitamin_B12 (µg)

4.3 2.4

4.2

1.8

0.97

Zinc (mg)

7.2

1

6.7

1.9

0.97

Vitamin_B1 (mg)

1.1

0.23

0.91

beta_carotene (µg)

2127.7 1541.3

2377.7

Monounsaturated_fat (g)

22.3

18.8

Retinol (µg)

160.7

beta_carotene equivalent (µg)

2455.7

Vitamin_B6 (mg)

1.2

Niacin equivalent (mg)
n3_fatty_acid (g)
Fat (g)

60.7

12

55.7

25.5

0.97

10.1

47.1

22.4

0.97

3.7
110.1
1730.1

0.37
812.8
9.6

197.1

159.3

2753.3

894.5

0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97

0.3

1.0

0.3

0.97

27.2

5

23

7

0.97

1.9

0.5

1.8

0.6

0.97

Fatty_acid (g)

52.7

Calcium (mg)

407.8

Energy (g)

1814.7

Folate (µg)

232.1

73.3

257.4

69.8

0.97

Phosphorus (mg)

865

195.9

847.7

250.2

0.97

alpha_tocopherol (mg)

6.5

1.4

6.7

Cholesterol (mg)

293

109.9

289.7

Pantothenic_acid (mg)

5.2

1.1

5.0

199.4
271.2

507.3

260.2

1731.2

Protein (g)

63.2

11.9

57.3

Vitamin_C (mg)

69.5

25.5

74

Selenium (µg)

55.5

15.7

50.6

559.6

2.7
135.8
1.6
16.8
18
16.5

0.97
0.97

0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.99

