bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 1 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

How structural brain network topologies associate with cognitive
abilities in a value-based decision-making task
Cristina Bañuelos1,2
​ ​, Timothy Verstynen, Ph.D.1,3,4
​
1​

Dept. Psychology, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
Dept. Biological Sciences, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
3​
Carnegie Mellon Neuroscience Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
4​
Biomedical Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213
2​

Value-based decision-making relies on effective communication across disparate brain networks.
Given the scale of the networks involved in adaptive decision-making, variability in how they
communicate should impact behavior; however, precisely how the topological pattern of
structural connectivity of individual brain networks influences individual differences in
value-based decision-making remains unclear. Using diffusion MRI, we measured structural
connectivity networks in a sample of community dwelling adults (N=124). We used standard
graph theoretic measures to characterize the topology of the networks in each individual and
correlated individual differences in these topology measures with differences in the Iowa
Gambling Task. A principal components regression approach revealed that individual differences
in brain network topology associate with differences in optimal decision-making, as well as
associate with differences in each participant’s sensitivity to high frequency rewards. These
findings show that aspects of structural brain network organization can constrain how
information is used in value-based decision-making.
Abbreviations: MRI - Magnetic Resonance Imaging; IGT – Iowa Gambling Task; DWI –
Diffusion Weighted Imaging; QSDR – Q-Space Diffeomorphic Reconstruction; PCA – Principal
Components Analysis; GLM – Generalized Linear Models
Keywords: Value-based decision-making; Adaptive decision-making; Decision-making; Iowa
Gambling Task; Graph-theoretic Topology; Structural brain networks

Introduction
The brain is a highly organized network
consisting of approximately 86 billion
interconnected neurons (Herculano-Houzel,
2009). There are input-output computations

made across all regions of the brain that are
connected by bundles of axon fibers that
communicate across long distances (Hopfield,
1982; Mountcastle, 1997). Fast and efficient
communication throughout the brain is
necessary for nearly all cognitive processes. This

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 2 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

highly complex network is organized through
cell bodies, dendrites, and axon terminals of
these neurons that, together, make up the “grey
matter,” whereas the axons connecting the cell
bodies to the axon terminals make up the “white
matter.” From a graph perspective, grey matter
are the nodes that process information, and
white matter forms the edges that determine
which information is sent between nodes. The
exact nature of the wiring architecture of the
human brain, much like a circuit in a computer,
impacts brain function, leading to subsequent
cognition (McCulloch, 1944; Johansen-Berg,
2010; Hermundstad et al., 2014). The static
organization of the structural architecture of the
brain is both modular and hierarchical,
supporting executing local operations and global
integration of segregated functions (Park &
Friston, 2013). Being able to measure the
individual differences in structural connectivity
of brain networks and their subsequent behavior
would allow for the ability to explain the neural
constraints on complex cognition (Verstynen,
2015).
The structural connectivity of brain
networks is measured through a technique
known as diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI).
DWI takes advantage of the diffusion properties
of water molecules within the axons of the
myelinated white matter fascicles. Diffusion
tensor imaging is one of the most popular DWI
sampling schemes, sampling a few dozen
orthogonal diffusion directions that are used to
calculate a tensor of average diffusion direction
within each voxel (for review, see Vettel et al.,
2017). DWI has been used in conjunction with
graph theoretic structural topology measures in
order to understand the functional organization
underlying structural networks (for review see
Bullmore & Sporns, 2009).

There is growing evidence that brain
networks have small-worldness properties, that
can be characterized as a dense local clustering
between neighboring nodes forming modules
paired with short path length between any pairs
between modules (Watts & Strogatz, 1998). This
small-worldness supports the distributed nature
of distinct brain areas while also demonstrating
how these modules are integrated into global
brain networks (Bassett & Bullmore 2006).
However, we still have a limited understanding
on how the topological organization of structural
connections in the brain predicts individual
differences in complex cognitive abilities.
In order to gain insights into how the
brain may be organized to carry out executive
processes, we looked into how the structural
network organization may explain differences in
executive abilities that are necessary to complete
complex cognitive tasks. Using DWI methods,
we measured whether individual differences in
white matter topology, as seen through graph
theoretic measures, associate with value-based
decision-making (payoff or sensitivity to
frequency of reward). Value-based
decision-making is a complex task that, at a
minimum, uses visual perception, attention,
working memory, reinforcement learning,
executive control, and other lower order
functions in order to synthesize our decisions,
and therefore relies on the efficient
communication across global brain networks
(Bechara et al., 1994). If small-worldness is a
property of efficient network communication,
then we hypothesize that individuals with more
small world structural networks would be better
at feedback driven, value-based
decision-making.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 3 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

Material and Methods
Participant Characteristics
We used an already collected sample of
community dwelling adults in Pittsburgh, taken
from the Weight-loss Intervention for brain
Networks Project, collected at the University of
Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University. The
sample of participants consisted of 124
participants (97 females, 27 males) between the
ages of 22 and 55 (M= 44.38 years, SD=8.49).
The participants had between 9 and 25 years of
education (M= 16 years, SD=2.67). This
research project was approved by the
institutional review boards at both the University
of Pittsburgh and Carnegie Mellon University.

magnitude, while in Deck B the punishment was
less frequent, and higher in magnitude.
Similarly, Deck C and Deck D had the same
overall net gain. In Deck C the punishment was
more frequent and smaller in magnitude, while
Deck D is less frequent and higher in magnitude.
From the selections made by the participants,
their overall payoff (P=(C + D) - (A + B)) and
their overall sensitivity to frequency of reward
(Q= (B + D) - (A + C)) was calculated.

Table 1: Iowa Gambling Task Deck Specifications. ​The
decks have a different combination of two separate features
including reward amount, frequency of reward, and result
in either a net yield of overall loss or gain.

Iowa Gambling Task
Participants completed a computerized
version of the IGT in which they are asked to
select a card from any of the four decks
presented with a varying amount of reward or
punishment (Figure 1; Bechara et al., 1994). The
participants were given a loan of $2000 and
were instructed that the goal of the task is to
maximize profit. They were also allowed to
switch between any of the decks, at any time,
and as often as they wished. The participants
were not aware of any of the deck specifications
and were only informed that each deck was
different (Table 1). From each selection from
Decks A or B​ (the “disadvantageous decks”),
participants have a net loss of money. From each
selection from ​Decks C or D​ (the “advantageous
decks”), participants have a net gain of money.
The amount of reward or punishment varied
between decks and the position within a deck.
Deck A and Deck B both had the same amount
of overall net loss. However, in Deck A the
punishment was more frequent and lower in

Figure 1: Computerized version of the Iowa Gambling
Task. ​The computerized version of the IGT that
participants were asked to complete is shown above. They
were asked to select a card from any of the four decks
presented with a varying amount of reward or punishment.
The amount of cash earned and lost is shown in the green
and red values, respectively.

Diffusion Weighted Imaging
All diffusion weighted images were acquired
using a single-shell, diffusion tensor imaging
protocol (voxel size = 2.4×2.4×2.4 mm, TR =
11100 ms, TE = 96 ms, 56 different directions,
b-value = 2000 s/mm​2​). DWI data was
reconstructed using a q-space diffeomorphic
reconstruction (QSDR) method that creates
models of water diffusion patterns for every

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 4 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

voxel in the brain in an averaged space that
allows for comparing across participants (Yeh &
Tseng, 2011). A deterministic fiber tractography
approach (Yeh et al., 2013) was then used to
estimate the structural connections between
brain areas for each participant (left in Figure 2),
using standard tractography parameters
(anisotropy threshold = 0.70, random seed
orientation, tracked streamline count = 250,000,
step size = 1mm, max turning angle = 75
degrees, smoothing = 0.50, minimum length =
20mm, maximum length = 160mm). The fiber
tractography output was integrated with a gray
matter brain atlas, using a well-established
parcellation of distinct regions known as nodes
(middle in Figure 2) to produce a connectivity
matrix (right in Figure 2).

Figure 2:​ ​Brain Network Connectome.​ The fiber
tractography DWI structural connections are used as the
edges. They are then added to gray matter that is
parcellated into distinct regions with a brain atlas to form
the brain topologies. Together they form a brain graph
representation of a brain network, and can be plotted as a
connectome.

Brain Network Connectivity Mapping
The weight of edges in the matrix were
defined by the amount of streamlines connecting
each pair of nodes (Tang et al., 2017). The
analyses were also replicated using a different
definition for edge weights in which they were

equal to the number of individual white matter
tracts connecting each pair of nodes divided by
the total volume of the node pair. The network
system was represented by a graph consisting of
(​n​, ​e​), where ​n​ refers to the node also known as
the grey matter regions of interest, and ​e​ referred
to the set of all edges on the graph. Each node
was assigned with a real value. The node states
present under one gray matter region were used
to define the map. The structural topology
measures (Figure 3) on each subject’s
connectivity matrix include:
● Density:​ the fraction of present connections
to all possible connections without taking
into account any connection weights in the
calculation (Rubinov & Sporns 2010)
● Clustering Coefficient:​ the fraction of
triangles around a node (Rubinov & Sporns
2010)
● Transitivity:​ the ratio of triangles to triplets
in the network, which can be used as an
alternative measure to the clustering
coefficient (Rubinov & Sporns 2010),
although these are not identical metrics
● Characteristic Path Length:​ the average
shortest path length in the network (Rubinov
& Sporns)
● Small-worldness:​ dense local clustering or
cliquishness of connections between
neighboring nodes yet a short path length
between any (distant) pair of nodes due to
the existence of relatively few long-range
connections (Bassett & Bullmore 2006)
● Global Efficiency:​ the average inverse
shortest path length in the network (Rubinov
& Sporns 2010)
● Local Efficiency:​ the global efficiency
computed on node neighborhoods, and is
related to the clustering coefficient (Rubinov
& Sporns 2010)
● Assortativity Coefficient:​ a correlation
coefficient between the degrees of all nodes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 5 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

on two opposite ends of a link, where a
positive value would indicate that nodes

tend to link to other nodes with the same or
a similar degree (Rubinov & Sporns 2010)

Figure 3: Graphed Structural Topology Measures.​ For each subject we looked at 8 measures of structural network topology,
related to the “small worldness” of the brain networks (Rubinov & Sporns 2010; Bassett & Bullmore 2006). The measures
included Density, Clustering Coefficient, Transitivity, Characteristic Path Length, Small Worldness, Global Efficiency, Local
Efficiency, and Assortativity Coefficient.

Table 2: Distribution of Measures.​ The distribution measures calculated are minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3,
maximum, skew, and the number of Grubbs test outliers.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 6 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

Results
Characteristics and Distribution of
Measures
The distribution measures calculated are
minimum, quartile 1, median, quartile 3,
maximum, skew, and the number of Grubbs test
outliers (Table 2). The Grubbs test outliers were
calculated with a significance alpha of 0.05.
Transitivity, Characteristic Path Length, and Q
scores have the greatest magnitude of skewness
calculated with 1.074, 1.238, and -0.780,
respectively. With the Grubbs test for
calculating outliers, all of the variables had a
total of 1 outlier.
When looking across the network
topology measures we found a high degree of
correlation r across individuals (Figure 4). The
greatest positive correlations observed were
between Small Worldness and Local Efficiency
with 0.88, Clustering Coefficient and Small
Worldness with 0.90, and Clustering Coefficient
and Local Efficiency with 0.97. Such strong
correlations among the structural topology
measures suggests that they share the common
variance. High correlations among variables
provides evidence of a low dimensional
structure in the topology measures.

Figure 4: ​Correlation matrix of the structural topology
measures. ​Strong negative correlations are depicted as
blue, zero correlations are depicted as white, and strong
positive correlations are depicted as red.​ ​Characteristic Path
Length and Global Efficiency was found to have a strong
negative correlation. Strong positive correlations were
found between Small Worldness and Local Efficiency,
Clustering Coefficient and Small Worldness, and
Clustering Coefficient and Local Efficiency.

Since strong correlations were observed
among the network topology measures in the
data, we used Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) to identify the lower dimensional
components that explain most of the variance in
these measures. ​PCA orthogonally transforms
the highly correlated data into linearly
uncorrelated principal components. PCA has the
ability to reduce the dimensionality of data while
maintaining useful information.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 7 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

Figure 5: Principal Components for 95% Variance Explained.​ The cumulative proportion variance for each of the 8 PCA
components are plotted in the blue bars. The red dotted line demonstrates the mark for 95% of cumulative proportion of variance.
The barplot shows that components 1 through 5 account for over 95% of the cumulative proportion variance. Components 1-5
have a cumulative proportion variance that is about equal to 99.10%.

Table 4: Table of PCA Component Loadings for Variables.​ The second component has 7 measures with significant loadings,
and it has a strong positive loading with Global Efficiency, and strong negative loadings with Clustering Coefficient,
Characteristic Path Length, and Local Efficiency. The fifth component has 6 variables with significant loadings, and it has a
strong positive loading with Density, and strong negative loadings with Transitivity and Assortativity.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 8 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

Table 4 shows the recovered 8
components and their mapping to the variables
measured. Loadings were considered to be
strong with a magnitude greater than 0.3. In the
first PCA component all of the 8 variables
measured are significantly loaded and there are
strong positive loadings with Density, Clustering
Coefficient, Small Worldness, and Local
Efficiency, and a strong negative loading with
Characteristic Path Length. The second
component has significant loadings from 7
components, and has strong positive loadings
with Global Efficiency, and strong negative
loadings with Clustering Coefficient,
Characteristic Path Length, and Local
Efficiency. The third component has 5 variables
with significant loadings and there is strong
positive loadings with Density, Transitivity, and
Assortativity, and has no strong negative
loadings. The fourth component has 5 variables
with significant loadings, and has a strong
positive loading with Assortativity, and a strong
negative loading with Transitivity. The fifth
component has 6 variables with significant
loadings, and it has a strong positive loading
with Density, and strong negative loadings with
Transitivity and Assortativity. The sixth
component has 5 variables with significant
loadings, with no strong positive loadings, and
with strong negative loadings with Characteristic
Path Length, Global Efficiency, and Local
Efficiency. The seventh component has 5
variables with significant loadings, with strong
positive loadings with Clustering Coefficient,
Characteristic Path Length, Small Worldness,
and Global Efficiency, and with a strong
negative loading with Local Efficiency. The
eighth component has 4 variables with
significant loadings, with a strong positive
loading with Clustering Coefficient, and a strong

negative loading with Small Worldness. It is
important to note that the last 3 components
(6-8) have a similar pattern of loadings strength
of loadings, with some variations in the sign of
the loadings.
When looking at the percent variance
accounted for (Figure 5), we found that only the
first 5 components explained 95% of the data.
Therefore our subsequent analysis only focuses
on these components.

Associations with IGT Performance
We used the generalized linear model
(GLM) to identify which of the 5 principal
components that explained the most variance
were associated with the P and Q scores of the
participants. We were able to find a significant
association between the second component and
the P score, which reflects the ability to
effectively use feedback to maximize returns,
with a significance level of less than 0.1 (Table
5). The GLM with the P scores and the first 5
principal components predicts P scores with a
correlation of 0.232. The rest of the components
do not appear to be able to predict P scores
accurately with a significance level of less than
0.1. The second component was found to have
mean bootstrap coefficient estimate of 3.05 and
a lower and upper bound of 2.735 and 3.365
(Table 9).
Furthermore, components 1, 2, 3, and 5
were found to have positive coefficient estimates
with standard errors ranging from 1.37 to 3.42
(Table 5). Component 4 was found to have
negative coefficient estimate with standard error
of 1.77 (Table 5). Component 2 with a
coefficient estimate of 3.07 and standard error of
1.77 was the only component found to can
predict P Scores with a significance of 0.1
(Table 5). The Intercept was found to have a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 9 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

coefficient estimate of 21.83 and a standard
error of 2.51 with a significance of p < 0.001
(Table 5). This is lower than the Bonferroni
corrected threshold of 0.005 (corrected for 10
comparisons). The cross validation errors
calculated from the GLM are 1.06 and 1.06,
which are significantly low values. The rest of
the components do not appear to be able to
predict P scores accurately with a significance
level of less than 0.1.

Furthermore, components 2, 4, and 5
were found to have positive coefficient estimates
with standard errors ranging from 1.41 to 3.52
(Table 6). Components 1 and 3 were found to
have negative coefficient estimates with
standard errors of 1.41 and 2.46, respectively
(Table 6). Component 5 with a coefficient
estimate of 7.46 and standard error of 3.52 was
the only component found to can predict Q
Scores with a significance of 0.01 (Table 6). The
Intercept was found to have a coefficient
estimate of 31.44 and a standard error of 2.59
with a significance of p < 0.001 (Table 6). This
is lower than the Bonferroni corrected threshold
of 0.005 (corrected for 10 comparisons). The
cross validation errors calculated from the GLM
are 1.06 and 1.06, which are significantly low
values. The rest of the components do not appear
to be able to predict Q scores accurately with a
significance level of less than 0.1.

Table 5: GLM Analysis on Principal Components to
Predict P Score. ​The generalized linear model to predict P
Scores with the PCA components shows that the second
component was able to reliably predict P scores with a
significance of p < 0.1.

In addition, we saw a significant
association between the fifth component and the
Q score, which reflects a sensitivity to high
frequency rewards (Table 6) with a significance
of p < 0.05. The GLM with the Q scores and the
first 5 principal components predicts Q scores
with a correlation of 0.318. The rest of the
components do not appear to be able to predict
Q scores accurately with a significance level of
less than 0.1. The fifth component was found to
have mean bootstrap coefficient estimate of
7.579 and a lower and upper bound of 6.7 and
8.065 (Table 9).

Table 6: GLM Analysis on Principal Components to
Predict Q Score.​ Component 5 with a coefficient estimate
of 7.46 and standard error of 3.52 was the only component
found to can predict Q Scores with a significance of 0.01.
The rest of the components do not appear to be able to
predict Q scores with a significance level of less than 0.01.

Using only the second component model
coefficients as weights for each component in
predicting P Scores, we can transform the value
of the weights from the components to data
space with the topology measures. Their data
space transformation demonstrates that Global

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 10 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

Efficiency leads to an increase in P Score,
whereas Characteristic Path Length, Clustering
Coefficient, Global Efficiency, Local Efficiency,
and Assortativity lead to a decrease in P Score.
Global Efficiency has the greatest positive effect

on P score, and Characteristic Path Length has
the greatest negative effect (Table 7).

Table 7: Structural Topology Weights of Component 2 in Topology Space. ​In topology space, component 2 was made up of
primarily Characteristic Path Length, Global Efficiency, Local Efficiency, Transitivity, Clustering Coefficient, and Assortativity.

Table 8: Structural Topology Weights of Component 5 in Topology Space. ​In topology space, component 5 was made up of
primarily Density, Transitivity, Global Efficiency, & Assortativity.

Using only the fifth component model
coefficients as weights for each component in
predicting Q Scores, we can transform the value
of the weights from the components to data
space with the topology measures. Their data
space transformation demonstrates that Density

and Characteristic Path Length lead to an
increase in Q Score, whereas Clustering
Coefficient, Transitivity, Small Worldness,
Global Efficiency, Local Efficiency, and
Assortativity lead to a decrease in Q Score
(Table 8). Density has the greatest positive

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 11 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

effect on Q score, and transitivity has the
greatest negative effect.

Table 9: Bootstrapping Analysis on Principal Components with P and Q Scores.​ Component 2 with P Score was found to
have a mean bootstrap coefficient estimate of 3.05, whereas Component 5 with Q Score was found to have a mean bootstrap
coefficient estimate of 7.579.

Discussion
Here we tested the hypothesis that
individuals with more small-world structural
brain networks would be better at feedback
driven value-based decision-making. First, we
found that the graph topology measures of white
matter networks had a low dimensional structure
that could be mostly explained by five principal
components. A regression analysis examining
how these components correlated with the
ability to use feedback to maximize long term
payoffs (P) and the sensitivity to high frequency
rewards (Q) found associations with both. One
component, component 2, mapping positively on
Global Efficiency, and negatively on
Characteristic Path Length and Local Efficiency
topology measures, reliably associated with the
ability to use feedback to maximize rewards,
such that the positive weights associate with
greater ability, and the negative weights
associate with lesser ability (Table 7). Another
component, component 5, mapping positively
on Density and Characteristic Path Length, and
negatively on Transitivity, Global Efficiency,
and Assortativity topology measures, reliably

associated with sensitivity to rewards, such that
these positive weights associate with greater
sensitivity, and negative weights associate with a
lesser sensitivity (Table 8).
Since the strength of connections in
white matter networks is highly plastic (Yeh et
al., 2016), a more optimal design may have been
a longitudinal study in which individuals were
tracked over time and compared to themselves.
Furthermore, we did not look at node-wise
topology measures, and primarily focused on
using the topology measures of global networks.
It could be that small differences in specific
pathways, such as the cortico-basal ganglia
thalamic loops (Alexander, DeLong, & Strick,
1986), are highly predictive of aspects of
value-based decision-making, but by looking at
global networks this effect is washed out. Future
directions could include focusing on regions of
interest, or subnetworks of interest, in order to
identify individual network associations rather
than global network associations. In addition,
the functional dynamics of the global networks
could be more sensitive to individual differences
in decision-making. By looking at functional
connectivity or task-linked responses, instead of
structural connectivity, we may be able to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 12 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

understand the nature of the communication
across these networks in order to understand
their associations.
Future applications of this work include
using the topological organization of the
structural connectivity of brain networks as
neuroimaging markers for different
decision-types or other cognitive states. ​For
example, performing a similar analysis on other
complex decision tasks (e.g., the Stroop task). In
addition, future studies could be more strategic
in the brain networks of interest. For example,
future work should have a more detailed focus
on regions of interest such as the basal ganglia
pathways, that plays a critical role reinforcement
learning and decision-making or integrate both
structural and functional connectivity measures,
to provide a holistic understanding of the
network form and function.
In summary, we have shown here how
the topology of white matter networks have a
low dimensional structure in their topological
organization and a subset of these low
dimensional components reliably associated
with individual differences in the ability to use
feedback to modify future decisions.

Acknowledgements
This research was supported through the
mentorship of Timothy Verstynen, Ph.D., I
would also like to appreciate the guidance from
Alexis Porter, and Daniel Brasier, Ph.D in the
completion of this research project.

Corresponding Author
Cristina Bañuelos
Carnegie Mellon University
cbanuelo@andrew.cmu.edu
5000 Forbes Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA, 15213

References
Alexander, G. E., DeLong, M. R., & Strick, P.
L. (1986). Parallel organization of functionally
segregated circuits linking basal ganglia and
cortex. ​Annual review of neuroscience,​ 9(1),
357-381.
Bassett, D. S., & Bullmore, E. D. (2006).
Small-world brain networks. ​The
neuroscientist​, 12(6), 512-523.
Bechara, A., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., &
Anderson, S. W. (1994). Insensitivity to
future consequences following damage
to human prefrontal cortex. ​Cognition​,
50(1-3), 7-15.
Bressler, S. L., & Menon, V. (2010). Large-scale
brain networks in cognition: emerging
methods and principles. ​Trends in
cognitive sciences,​ 14(6), 277-290.
Bullmore, E., & Sporns, O. (2009). Complex
brain networks: graph theoretical
analysis of structural and functional
systems. ​Nature reviews neuroscience​,
10(3), 186.
Di Martino A, et al. Unraveling the miswired
connectome: a developmental perspective.
Neuron. 2014;83:1335–1353. Doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2014.08.050.
Herculano-Houzel, S. (2009). The human brain
in numbers: a linearly scaled-up primate
brain. Frontiers in human neuroscience, 3, 31.
Hermundstad AM, et al. Structurally-constrained
relationships between cognitive states in the
human brain. PLoS Comput. Biol.
2014;10:e1003591. doi:
10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003591.
Hopfield, J. J. (1982). Neural networks and
physical systems with emergent collective
computational abilities. Proceedings of the
national academy of sciences, 79(8),
2554-2558.
Johansen-Berg H. Behavioural relevance of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/743245; this version posted August 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Page 13 of 13
Impulse​: The Premier Journal for Undergraduate Publications in the Neurosciences
SUBMISSION
2019

variation in white matter microstructure.
Curr. Opin. Neurol. 2010;23:351–358.
McCulloch, W. S. (1944). The functional
organization of the cerebral cortex.
Physiological Reviews, 24(3), 390-407.
Mountcastle, V. B. (1997). The columnar
organization of the neocortex. Brain: a
journal of neurology, 120(4), 701-722.
Muller, L., Destexhe, A., & Rudolph-Lilith, M.
(2014). Brain networks: small-worlds, after
all?. New Journal of Physics, 16(10), 105004.
Park, H. J., & Friston, K. (2013). Structural and
functional brain networks: from connections
to cognition. Science, 342(6158), 1238411.
Rubinov, M., & Sporns, O. (2010). Complex
network measures of brain connectivity: uses
and interpretations. Neuroimage, 52(3),
1059-1069.
Sutton, R. S., & Barto, A. G. (1998).
Introduction to reinforcement learning (Vol.
135). Cambridge: MIT press.
Tang, E., Giusti, C., Baum, G. L., Gu, S.,
Pollock, E., Kahn, A. E., ... & Gur, R. E.
(2017). Developmental increases in white
matter network controllability support a
growing diversity of brain dynamics. Nature
Communications, 8(1), 1252.
Verstynen, T. D. (2015). How form constrains
function in the human brain. Emerging
Trends in the Social and Behavioral Sciences:
An Interdisciplinary, Searchable, and
Linkable Resource, 1-16.
Vettel, J. M., Cooper, N., Garcia, J. O., Yeh, F.
C., & Verstynen, T. D. (2001). White Matter
Tractography and Diffusion-Weighted
Imaging. eLS, 1-9.
Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective
dynamics of ‘small-world’ networks.
nature, 393(6684), 440.
Yeh, F. C., & Tseng, W. Y. I. (2011). NTU-90: a
high angular resolution brain atlas
constructed by q-space diffeomorphic
reconstruction. Neuroimage, 58(1), 91-99.
Yeh, F. C., Verstynen, T. D., Wang, Y.,

Fernández-Miranda, J. C., & Tseng, W.
Y. I. (2013). Deterministic diffusion
fiber tracking improved by quantitative
anisotropy. PloS one, 8(11), e80713.
Yeh, F. C., Vettel, J. M., Singh, A., Poczos, B.,
Grafton, S. T., Erickson, K. I., ... & Verstynen,
T. D. (2016). Quantifying differences and
similarities in whole-brain white matter
architecture using local connectome
fingerprints. PLoS computational biology,
12(11), e1005203.

