bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A keeper of many crypts: the parasitoid Euderus set manipulates the behavior of a taxonomically diverse
array of oak gall wasp species.
Anna K. G. Ward1, Omar S. Khodor1, Scott P. Egan2, Kelly L. Weinersmith2 and Andrew A. Forbes1
1

Department of Biology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA

2

Department of BioSciences, Rice University, Houston, Texas 77005, USA

Abstract: Parasites of animals and plants can encounter trade-offs between their specificity to any single
host and their fitness on alternative hosts. For parasites that manipulate their host’s behavior, the
complexity of that manipulation may further limit the parasite’s host range. The recently described cryptkeeper wasp, Euderus set, changes the behavior of the gall wasp Bassettia pallida such that B. pallida
chews an incomplete exit hole in the side of its larval chamber and “plugs” that hole with its head. E. set
benefits from this head plug, as it facilitates the escape of the parasitoid from the crypt after it completes
development. Here, we ask whether this behavioral manipulator is limited to Bassettia hosts. We find that
E. set attacks and manipulates the behavior of at least six additional gall wasp species, and that these hosts
are taxonomically diverse. Interestingly, each of E. set’s hosts has converged upon similarities in their
extended phenotypes: the galls they induce on oaks share characters that may make them vulnerable to
attack by E. set. Behavioral manipulation in this parasitoid system may be less important to its host range
than other dimensions of the host-parasitoid interaction, like the host’s physical defenses.
Keywords: Host specificity, behavioral manipulation, extended phenotype, Euderus set, gall wasp
1. Introduction
Evolutionary biologists have proposed that trade-offs present limits to adaptation [1], as resources are
finite and optimization of all traits at once is impossible. This is most clear when energy needs to be
allocated to multiple competing functions. For example, when energy is dedicated towards growth, it may
not be available for reproduction [2]. One common trade-off in nature is the observation that when
parasites adapt to attack one group of hosts, those traits are often maladaptive for other hosts. This tradeoff has been used to explain, in part, the tendency for parasites to be more specialized (as opposed to
generalized) and only feed on a subset of available hosts (e.g., herbivorous insects on plant hosts or blood
feeding insects on animal hosts) [3].
The ability of parasites to control their host’s behavior may be a trait especially likely to result in
increased specialization and reduced fitness outcomes on alternative hosts. Parasite manipulation of host
behavior is a phenomenon in which a parasite changes the activities of its host in ways that are good for
the parasite, but are typically bad for the host [4–7]. Manipulation of host behavior may involve parasites
producing neuroactive compounds, influencing connections between the immune and nervous systems, or
inducing genomic/proteomic changes in the host, all with the goal of producing changes in host behavior
that favor the parasite [8]. Such intimate control of host physiology and behavior might reasonably be
expected to limit the number of host species a parasite can manipulate.
What do we know about the relationship between how parasites manipulate host behavior and parasite
host range? An analysis by Fredensborg [9] examined this question in the context of trophically
transmitted parasites (i.e., parasites that need their current host to be consumed by the next host in the
parasite’s life cycle [10]) that manipulate host behavior. This analysis revealed no difference in host
specificity between parasites whose manipulation was categorized as “simple” (specifically, they altered
host activity levels to make it more susceptible to predation by the next host on the parasite’s life cycle),
and those whose manipulation was categorized as “complex” (in which parasites increased the amount of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

time spent by hosts in microhabitats frequented by the next host). Fredensborg’s [9] work is a valuable
first look at the relationship between manipulation of hosts and host range, though we note that binning
manipulated behaviors in this way may obscure the multidimensionality of manipulation [11] and the
same behavior can be changed through multiple mechanisms which may differ in how complex they are
for the parasite to achieve.
The trophically transmitted parasites analyzed by Fredensborg [9] differ in critical ways from other types
of manipulators. For example, the most common outcome of manipulation by trophically transmitted
parasites is an increased likelihood that the host and its parasite are consumed by the right host at the right
time [12,13], while parasitoids (i.e., parasites that need to kill their hosts in order to complete their life
cycle [14]) may manipulate hosts to reduce the likelihood that their offspring are attacked by various
natural enemies [15]. These two categories of parasites also tend to differ taxonomically (trophically
transmitted parasites are often helminths, while parasitoids are often insects), and in size of the parasite
relative to its host [14]. These major differences between types of manipulators suggests that analyses are
needed for each manipulator type to explore the generality of rules associated with limits on the numbers
of hosts a parasite can manipulate. One reason these types of analyses are rare is because they require
careful work, including detailed natural history, specialized taxonomy, surveys of museum records, and
challenging field work, searching for evidence of manipulation in multiple different host species, and
careful work confirming the identity of the parasite infecting each of these hosts. Data such as these are
critical if we are to understand the evolution of manipulation, and limits on the number of hosts a parasite
can manipulate. Here, we help fill this gap by studying host specificity in a parasitoid that manipulates the
behavior of cynipid gall wasps.
Two recent papers [16,17] describe the discovery and life history of the parasitoid “crypt keeper wasp”
(Euderus set), so named because of its parasitism and behavioral manipulation of the “crypt-gall wasp”
(Bassettia pallida) in live oaks (Quercus virginiana & Q. geminata). Oviposition by a B. pallida female
into a young stem induces the formation of a swollen internal gall (known as a “crypt”) inside the stem,
where the developing larval wasp will then feed and grow. Unparasitized adult B. pallida later chew a
small exit hole in their gall and fly away. However, when parasitized by E. set, B. pallida chew
significantly smaller exit holes, do not (or cannot) leave the gall, and die with their heads blocking (or
“plugging”) the exit hole. Euderus set then feeds on the now disabled body of the host wasp, and, upon
maturing into an adult wasp, chews through the “head plug” and exits the gall (Figure 1). Because B.
pallida manipulates oaks to develop galls in their young branches, E. set is a “hypermanipulator” – a
rarely quantified phenomena in which a parasite manipulates a parasite that itself manipulates its host.
Though many species of Euderus have previously been described as parasitoids of a taxonomically
diverse series of insect hosts [18], E. set represents the first definitive example of behavioral manipulation
in this genus.
The parasitoid communities of most oak gall wasps are understudied or unknown such that it is premature
to assert that the manipulation of B. pallida by E. set is a unique relationship. Indeed, Weinersmith et al.
[17] report additional examples of “head plugging” in the gall wasp Bassettia ligni on the host plants Q.
lobata and Q. douglasii. These examples were from museum specimens, which were not destructively
sampled to confirm the presence of Euderus within the gall. They also report evidence of head-plugging
in an unidentified cynipid on Q. nigra in southeast Texas [17], that has since been keyed to genus
Bassettia (possibly B. aquaticae; A.A.F. unpublished data). Further, our own parasitoid rearing studies
have yielded several unidentified Euderus from non-Bassettia galls (A.K.G.W. and A.A.F., unpublished
data). These observations raise at least two questions about Euderus. First, are these other unidentified
Euderus also members of the species E. set, or do different Euderus species attack different species of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

North American oak gall wasps? And second, is behavioral manipulation of oak gall wasps limited to the
Euderus that attack Bassettia hosts, or do other Euderus associated with oak gall wasps also manipulate
their hosts’ behavior?
The above two questions are not mutually exclusive, such that four outcomes are possible for this study.
First, we may find a “many manipulating specialists” scenario, in which many Euderus species attack
North American oak gallers and each induces head plugs in its respective host. Second, we might find
many “many specialists, few manipulators,” i.e., that several Euderus species may each attack one or a
few gall wasp species, but only E. set – or a subset of species – induce the head-plugging phenotype.
Third, E. set may be a lone “master manipulator,” attacking and inducing head plugs in several hosts. Or
fourth, E. set may a “contingent manipulator,” attacking many oak gall wasp species but only inducing
the head plugging phenotype in Bassettia galls. We consider “head-plugging” to be a relatively simple
manipulation, as it requires the host to initiate a behavior it would have performed in its uninfected state,
yet the parasitoid stops the behavior before completion. However, without knowing the mechanism
through which this manipulation is achieved, it is difficult to favor one of the proposed hypotheses above
the others.
Here, we evaluate support for these four scenarios by studying the identity and behaviors of Euderus
reared from six oak gall wasp host species in seven species of oak tree across a wide geographic range. In
doing so, we address a critical question and a gap in our current knowledge regarding how manipulation
of insect behavior by parasitoids is (or is not) translatable across disparate hosts, and provide critical
information for future analyses examining constraints on the number and type of hosts a parasitoid can
manipulate.
2. Methods
(a) Collections and discovery of new Euderus / galler associations
From August 2015 to August 2018, we collected more than 23,000 galls from a variety of oak species and
locations, with a focus on maximizing the diversity of gall wasp species and on collecting mature galls
that were most likely to have been parasitized. All galls were North American, and most collections
(~60%) were made in Midwestern states, but at least some collections extended farther afield, including
to e.g., New England, North Carolina, and Texas (Supplementary Table 1). We placed oak galls of the
same gall wasp species, tree host, collection date, and location in individual cups in an environmental
chamber (SANYO Electric Co. Ltd, Osaka, Japan) that approximated the average day and night
temperatures and light and dark cycles in Iowa City, IA, with the exception that we used a minimum
temperature of 5°C during winter months. We checked the incubator daily for the presences of emergent
animals and placed new emergences in 95% ethanol at -80°C. Emergent animals included gall wasps and
a large diversity of parasitoids, inquilines, and hyperparasitoids, which we identified to family or genus
using taxonomic keys found in [19] and [20]. We identified Euderus to species using [18] and Egan et al.
[16]. Most gall wasp species are identifiable by their gall’s morphology, such that keying out emerging
adult gall wasps to species was largely unnecessary.
(b) MtCOI sequencing and assessment of species status
When Euderus emerged from galls, we extracted DNA from representative samples using a CTAB/PCI
method based on Chen et al. [21]. We PCR amplified the mtCOI region using the following primers:
COI_PF2 5’ ACC WGT AAT RAT AGG DGG DTT TGG DAA 3’ and COI_2437d 5’ CGT ART CAT
CTA AAW AYT TTA ATW CCW G 3’ [22]. For four samples sequenced in 2016, we used the following
primers: LEP F 5’ TAA ACT TCT GGA TGT CCA AAA AAT CA 3’ and LEP R 5’ ATT CAA CCA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ATC ATA AAG ATA TTG G 3’ [23]. We then used EXO1 and SAP to clean PCR products before
Sanger sequencing in both forward and reverse directions on an ABI 3720 DNA Analyzer (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in the University of Iowa’s Roy J. Carver Center for Genomics. We aligned
reverse and forward sequences in the program Geneious 8.18 (Biomatters Ltd, Newark, NJ). Most of the
resulting fragments were 701bp in length, while the four sequenced in 2016 were 652bp, with 464 bp of
overlap between the two fragment types. We generated a multiple alignment of these new Euderus mtCOI
sequences and two known E. set sequences [16] (Supplementary Table 2). For outgroups, we used
sequences from NCBI from four other species in the same subfamily, including Euderus albitarsus and
Euderus cushmanii, introduced and native North American (respectively) parasites of Lepidopteran pupae
[18]. We inferred a Bayesian tree using Mr.Bayes 3.2.6 [24] and also directly compared the percentage
similarity among sequences.
(c) Observations of Euderus behavior and emergence phenology
We chose one galler species for a focused study of the natural history, behavior, and phenology of
Euderus host manipulation in a non-Bassettia gall. From June 15th to July 20th, 2018, we collected
Callirhytis quercusmodesta galls weekly from a single, heavily infested pin oak (Quercus palustris) tree
in Iowa City, IA. Galls of C. quercusmodesta manifest as parenchymal thickenings that project on both
sides of the leaf. Each gall contains multiple larval chambers ranging from a dozen to upwards of a
hundred (Figure 2A). Upon collection, we cut each multi-chambered gall from its leaf, assigned it a
number, photographed it from above using a Canon EOS Rebel T1i camera with a MP-E 65mm f/2.8 1-5x
Macro Lens (Canon USA, New York, NY) mounted on a StackShot automated macro rail (Cognisys Inc.,
Traverse City, MI), and placed it into an individual cup. Individual chambers in each gall were visible as
light green subcircles, and, especially in later collections, dark holes indicated that a galler, parasitoid, or
inquiline had emerged (Figure 2A). Twice daily, we checked galls for a) emergent animals in cups, b)
appearance of new emergence holes, c) signs of active chewing / movement at the gall surface, d)
apparent head plugs, and e) previously identified head plugs that had been chewed through or otherwise
destroyed. Head plugs were usually obvious, and defined as when gallers had chewed smaller-thannormal holes and had then stopped moving. We softly poked putative head plugs with the blunt end of a
0.20 mm minuten pin (BioQuip, Rancho Dominquez, CA) and only recorded an observation as a head
plug when the insect made no movement in response. All observations were recorded daily on printed
black and white photographs of each gall (Figure 2B). Late in the study, we dissected a subset of
remaining head plugs to capture details of Euderus interactions with its host while inside the gall. In two
chambers, we found gall wasps along with an apparently dead larva (Supplemental Figure 3). We
extracted DNA from these larvae and sequenced mtCOI as above.
For the five other non-Bassettia gall wasp species from which Euderus emerged in the lab, we inspected
post-emergence galls for evidence of head plugs, chewed heads, or other signs of hypermanipulation
previously described in the B. pallida / E. set interaction [17].
3. Results
(a) Collections and discovery of new Euderus / galler associations
Between 2015 and 2018 we collected more than 23,000 galls representing approximately 100 oak gall
wasp species (Supplementary Table 1) and subsequently reared >15,000 individual parasitoids, inquilines,
and hyperparasitoids (A.K.G.W. & A.A.F., unpublished data). Among these collections, we reared
Euderus wasps from six different gall wasp host species (Table 1): Andricus quercuspetiocola, Callirhytis
flavipes, Callirhtyis quercusmodesta, Callirhytis quercussctiula, Callirhytis tumifica and Neuroteras
noxiosus. All Euderus keyed morphologically to Euderus set.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(b) MtCOI sequencing
COI sequences also suggest that all Euderus wasps in this study were E. set. The 16 adult and two larval
Euderus sequenced in this study had mtCOI sequences that were 95-100% identical to one another,
differing by a maximum of 29 bp across the full 701bp sequence (Supplemental Figure 1). The four
shorter sequences from 2016 differed by 0-21 bp (96 -100% similarity) across their 461bp overlap with
the other sequences. Twelve wasps had mtCOI that differed by just 6-15 bp (98% - 99% similarity) from
the two sequences from E. set associated with B. pallida. Four other Euderus had mtCOI sequences that
were somewhat more divergent (20-29 bp, 95 - 97% similarity) from the other wasps, but percentage
sequence similarity should not alone be used to define species [25], and a lack of perceptible
morphological differences and representation of the same gall wasp hosts in both haplotype groups both
suggest that these are two somewhat divergent haplotype variants in a single species.
(c) Observations of Euderus behavior and emergence
Across 128 Callirhytis quercusmodesta galls, we reared 291 adult C. quercusmodesta gallers, 44 Euderus
wasps, and 649 other parasitoids and inquilines (Table 2; Supplemental Figure 2). During the course of
the study we observed 63 C. quercusmodesta “head plugs.” Thirty-nine Euderus were conclusively linked
to a specific head plug that had been noted during a previous observation period. The 24 head plugs from
which no Euderus emerged did not produce any other adult parasitoids, suggesting that Euderus died
inside of the chamber as in the two we found during dissections (Supplemental Figure 3). In five cases, a
Euderus emerged from a gall where we had not previously observed a head plug, indicating either a
failure of detection or a genuine lack of a plug. Evidence of head-plugs, both intact and eviscerated, was
also found in all other gall collections from which Euderus wasps emerged (Figure 3).
4. Discussion
Questions regarding the evolution of ecological specialization have vexed biologists for millennia [1].
Why do many taxa evolve to use only a subset of resources available to them in the environment? This
general pattern of specialization is thought to be influenced by trade-offs, where specialization on one
resource is maladaptive to others. For host-parasite systems that involve behavioral manipulation, pattern
and process have not been explored in great detail. In part, this is due to a dearth of study systems
available to address these important questions.
(a) Euderus in North America
Morphological and genetic data together imply that all Euderus wasps reared in this study are E. set, the
species described previously from Bassettia pallida [16], bringing its total number of confirmed hosts to
seven. Euderus set remains the only endemic cynipid-associated Euderus known from the eastern half of
North America. In Arizona and California, Euderus crawfordii has been reared from the native oak gall
wasp Dryocosmus coxii on Emory Oak (Quercus emoryi) and Silverleaf Oak (Quercus hypoleucoides)
[18,26], as well as from the introduced gall wasp Plagiotrochus suberi on non-native Cork Oak (Quercus
suber) [27,28]. While we have no sequence data available for this southwestern species, the
morphological resemblance [16] and similarity of habit between E. crawfordii and E. set suggest they
may be sister to one another. Another possible cynipid parasitoid, Euderus albitarsis, was introduced to
the Eastern U.S. for control of the western larch case bearer (Coleophora laricella [Lepidoptera:
Coleophoridae]) [26], but the single reference to an association with an unknown cynipid [29] has no
independent corroboration, so this record may be aberrant.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The current study does not allow for a complete accounting of E. set’s host range across seasons and
geographic distribution. Previous work described an overwintering habitat for E. set in a southern twiggalling wasp but did not identify a spring or summer host [16]. Conversely, here we do not identify an
overwintering host for E. set in any of the more northerly locations from which it was reared, though our
collections did include several overwintering galls (e.g., Andricus dimorphus, Andricus
quercusstrobilanus, Dryocosmus imbricarae).
(b) Host specificity in E. set
We find that Euderus set manipulates at least seven host species spanning four genera (Table 1). While
some parasites are more effective at manipulating more closely related hosts [e.g., 30], the ability to
effectively manipulate the behavior of distantly related hosts is not unknown. For example, the parasitoid
wasp Zatypota kauros can alter the web-building behavior of spider hosts from different families [31]. It
is also worth noting that the hosts of E. set may not be as distantly related as their names suggest. The
taxonomy of gall wasps is fluid, with taxa switching among genera with some regularity [26,32,33].
Indeed, the gall wasp genera Bassettia and Callirhytis are morphologically similar [34], to the extent that
some species have been indeterminately placed in one genus versus the other [e.g., 35]. On the other
hand, Andricus quercuspetiocola and Neuroterus noxiosus are seemingly more distantly related, at least
based on morphological characters [32]. At best, we might say that some – but not all – of the known
hosts of E. set may be more closely related than their specific names imply, but without a comprehensive
phylogeny of North American gall wasps, these conclusions remain tentative.
Many potential gall wasp hosts were also collected from the same tree host species at the same time as E.
set, and yet were not apparently manipulated or even infected by E. set. Our collections (Supplementary
Table 1) represent approximately 100 of the ~700 described species of Nearctic oak gall wasps [36]. If
relatedness of hosts determined host range for E. set, we would expect that other Callirhytis in our
collections might have yielded Euderus, especially those that we collected in large numbers (e.g., C.
punctata, C. futilis, C. quercusgemmaria). So while E. set is oligophagous and widespread (Iowa to
Pennsylvania; south to Texas and Florida), it is also not a broad generalist on all oak gall wasps.
If E. set is able to manipulate gall wasps from disparate genera residing on multiple different host plant
species, then why do we not find E. set manipulating all gall wasps from the host plants on which we find
this parasitoid? First, in some cases, it is reasonable to assume that we did not rear E. set from some hosts
because it has a patchy distribution, and/or because our collection numbers were variable from one gall
species to another. Negative rearing results should always be interpreted with caution. On the other hand,
it is also possible that something other than host phylogeny constrains E. set’s ability to infect and
manipulate particular hosts. The presence of behavioral alterations in multiple cockroach species infected
by the acanthocephalan Moniliformis moniliformis was not predicted by host phylogeny [37].
Additionally, the brain-infecting trematode Euhaplorchis sp. A is able to infect and manipulate particular
fish from two families (Fundulidae and Poecilidae), but is not able to infect and manipulate all fish in
these families (i.e., it could not infect Lucania parva, a fish in the Fundulidae family) [38]. In both of
these studies, controlled infections confirmed that parasites given access to a variety of hosts were unable
to infect and/or manipulate a subset of these hosts, suggesting that something other than phylogeny is
important in determining host specificity.
In this study we did not employ controlled infections, so we cannot be sure E. set had an opportunity to
encounter each host type. However, we never observed a possible gall wasp host species from which E.
set emerged in the absence of manipulation (e.g., presence of head plugs), nor did we observe E. set dead
inside of the galls of any other species. This argues against the idea that there are hosts that E. set is able

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

to successfully parasitize but not manipulate. Thus, the strongest emergent hypothesis for what limits host
range for E. set is not the identity of the gall wasp host, but the physical characters of the gall itself.
Authors have described Euderus as larval or pupal parasitoids [18,39], and they lack the long, exerted
ovipositors typical of some other genera of late-attacking galler parasitoids (e.g., genus Torymus [40]),
such that they may be limited to attacking hosts that are not buried deep within a gall nor protected by
complex defense structures. The galls of all seven known hosts are integral (i.e., enclosed within the
epidermis; not detachable without causing significant damage to the plant tissue), such that when a
developing gall wasp approaches the pupal stage and fills its gall chamber, it will be near the surface and
physically accessible to E. set. All known hosts also lack the baroque structural defenses found on many
other galls, which can include spines, fuzz, or larval cells suspended deep inside otherwise empty
chambers [41]. These defenses grow more substantial as the gall grows, which may render many galls
inaccessible to Euderus and other parasitoids of gall wasp pupae.
The phenology of the C. quercusmodesta system also bears out the narrative that E. set specializes on a
subset of relatively unprotected gall wasp pupae. Though we collected C. quercusmodesta galls weekly
across six weeks, E. set emerged only from galls collected in weeks four through six (7/6, 7/13/ & 7/20),
corresponding with the timing of C. quercusmodesta pupation and adult emergence (Supplementary
Figure 4). This supports the idea that E. set attacks galls close to when the gall wasp is mature and ready
to emerge from the gall. Further, this temporal pattern of attack is not due to mature E. set being scarce in
the environment until early July: emergence data from other hosts (Supplemental Figure 5) show that
adult E. set are present in nature well before C. quercusmodesta galls mature. Other authors have also
suggested that host ecology may play an important role in determining which hosts are manipulated by
parasites [e.g., 38], but thus far no studies have addressed this question explicitly.
Parasites that manipulate multiple host species do not always induce the same manipulated phenotypes in
all host species (e.g., [35]). However, the observation that E. set induces the same behavior in multiple
hosts suggests that it is exploiting a mechanism conserved across all of the manipulated hosts. At this
time we can only speculate on what this shared mechanism would be. Fredensborg’s study [9] suggested
that parasites with distantly related hosts are more likely to use debilitation to manipulate these hosts.
This suggests that the “head-plugging” behavior may arise by debilitating the host at an appropriate time.
But how does E. set “know” when to debilitate the host? Since we know from the C. quercusmodesta
collections that attack occurs before the chewing of the exit hole (some holes were not chewed until galls
were brought into the lab), some signal must induce E. set to interrupt the normal behavior of the
parasitized gall wasp. Could this signal be the production of cellulase, which some insects use to digest
plant material? Alternatively, perhaps the trigger is a plant-related signal, produced exclusively by the
epidermal tissue and encountered only as the gall wasp begins its exit, or a response by E. set to an
increase in light as its host chews its exit hole. The specific mechanisms underlying host control and the
rules underlying host range promise rich foundations for future research in this system.
(c) Evolution of crypt-keeping
When and how did this behavior evolve? Though very little is known about the biology and behavior of
most Euderus wasps, a study of Euderus lividus, parasitoid of Agromyza obtusa [Diptera: Tephritidae]
suggests what may be a precursor to this system, though without apparent behavioral manipulation.
Larval A. obtusa chew an exit hole in the side of the seed pods in which they are feeding. Ahmad [42]
found several new exit holes containing incapacitated A. obtusa larvae alongside E. lividus eggs,
suggesting that attack had occurred soon after the exit hole had been chewed. The exoparasitic E. lividus
larvae then fed on the A. obtusa, after which adult parasitoids developed and exited the holes. Ahmed [42]
further suggested that without the exit hole, E. lividus would have been trapped in the now extremely hard

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

seed pod. In the case of E. set, we know that attack can occur before the chewing of the exit hole, because
in our C. quercusmodesta study some holes that became head plugs were chewed by adult gall wasps after
galls were brought in from the field. If other Euderus species are also found to manipulate host behavior,
a phylogeny of Euderus that maps the presence, absence, and species-specific nature of behavioral
manipulation may aid in understanding the evolution of this trait.
(d) Synthesis and conclusions
There is a near universal pattern of parasites to be highly host specialized. For parasites that manipulate
the behavior of their hosts, the symbiotic intimacy implied by behavioral control might be expected to
further restrict host range – though the literature to date is equivocal on this point [9, 37, 38]. We have
discovered that the behavior-manipulating parasitoid wasp E. set is specialized on a subset of available
gall wasp hosts, but that these hosts are taxonomically diverse. Remarkably, each of E. set’s hosts
has converged upon similarities in their extended phenotypes suggesting that behavioral manipulation
may be less important to its host range than other dimensions of the host-parasitoid interaction, such as
host’s physical defenses.

Data accessibility. All data are available as electronic supplementary material.
Authors’ contributions. A.K.G.W. and A.A.F. conceived of the study. A.K.G.W. and O.S.K. conducted
the C. quercusmodesta study. All authors contributed to gall collections, insect rearing, and writing of this
paper.
Competing interests. We have no competing interests.
Funding. Support for collections-based travel was provided by University of Iowa’s Center for Global
and Regional Environmental Research (CGRER) to A.K.G.W.
Acknowledgements. Robin Bagley, Will Carr, Sara Devine, Rachel Erikson, Leo Gastel, Alaine Hippee,
Emily Manders, Danny McGarry, Moe Shakally, Joseph Verry, and Caleb Wilson assisted with gall
collections and rearing and preservation of insects. Thanks to Robbins Park Environmental Education
Center in Ambler, PA for permission to collect C. tumifica galls from a scarlet oak on their property.
Figure 1 was illustrated by the incomparable Mona Luo (http://www.monaluo.com/).

References
1. Futuyma DJ, Moreno G. 1988 The evolution of ecological specialization. Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics 19, 207–233. (doi:10.1146/annurev.es.19.110188.001231)
2. Reznick D. 1985 Costs of reproduction: An evaluation of the empirical evidence. Oikos 44, 257–267.
(doi:10.2307/3544698)
3. Forister ML et al. 2015 The global distribution of diet breadth in insect herbivores. PNAS 112, 442–
447. (doi:10.1073/pnas.1423042112)
4. Moore J. 2002 Parasites and the Behavior of Animals. New York: Oxford University Press.
5. Poulin R, Maure F. 2015 Host manipulation by parasites: A look back before moving forward.
Trends in Parasitology 31, 563–570. (doi:10.1016/j.pt.2015.07.002)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6. Hughes DP, Brodeur J, Thomas F, editors. 2012 Host Manipulation by Parasites. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
7. Weinersmith KL. 2019 What’s gotten into you?: A review of recent research on parasitoid
manipulation of host behavior. Current Opinion in Insect Science , online ahead of print.
8. Adamo SA. 2013 Parasites: evolution’s neurobiologists. Journal of Experimental Biology 216, 3–10.
(doi:10.1242/jeb.073601)
9. Fredensborg BL. 2014 Predictors of host specificity among behavior-manipulating parasites. Integr
Comp Biol 54, 149–158. (doi:10.1093/icb/icu051)
10. Lafferty KD, Shaw JC. 2013 Comparing mechanisms of host manipulation across host and parasite
taxa. The Journal of Experimental Biology 216, 56–66. (doi:10.1242/jeb.073668)
11. Cézilly F, Favrat A, Perrot-Minnot MJ. 2013 Multidimensionality in parasite-induced phenotypic
alterations: ultimate versus proximate aspects. Journal of Experimental Biology 216, 27–35.
(doi:10.1242/jeb.074005)
12. Parker GA, Ball MA, Chubb JC, Hammerschmidt K, Milinski M. 2009 When should a trophically
transmitted parasite manipulate its host? Evolution 63, 448–458. (doi:10.1111/j.15585646.2008.00565.x)
13. Lafferty KD. 1999 The evolution of trophic transmission. Parasitology Today 15, 111–115.
(doi:10.1016/S0169-4758(99)01397-6)
14. Lafferty KD, Kuris AM. 2002 Trophic strategies, animal diversity and body size. Trends Ecol. Evol.
17, 507–513.
15. Maure F, Daoust SP, Brodeur J, Mitta G, Thomas F. 2013 Diversity and evolution of bodyguard
manipulation. The Journal of Experimental Biology 216. (doi:10.1242/jeb.073130)
16. Egan SP, Weinersmith KL, Liu S, Ridenbaugh RD, Zhang YM, Forbes AA. 2017 Description of a
new species of Euderus Haliday from the southeastern United States (Hymenoptera, Chalcidoidea,
Eulophidae): the crypt-keeper wasp. ZooKeys 645, 37–49. (doi:10.3897/zookeys.645.11117)
17. Weinersmith KL, Liu SM, Forbes AA, Egan SP. 2017 Tales from the crypt: a parasitoid manipulates
the behaviour of its parasite host. Proc. R. Soc. B 284, 20162365. (doi:10.1098/rspb.2016.2365)
18. Yoshimoto CM. 1971 Revision of the genus EUDERUS of American north of Mexico
(Hymentoptera: Eulophidae). The Canadian Entomologist 103, 541–578.
19. Goulet H, Huber JT, editors. 1993 Hymenoptera of the World: An Identification Guide to Families.
Ottawa, Ontario: Research Branch, Agriculture Canada.
20. Gibson GAP, Huber JT, Woolley JB. 1997 Annotated keys to the genera of Nearctic Chalcidoidea
(Hymenoptera). NRC Research Press. (doi:10.1139/9780660166698)
21. Chen H, Rangasamy M, Tan SY, Wang H, Siegfried BD. 2010 Evaluation of five methods for total
DNA extraction from Western Corn Rootworm Beetles. PLOS ONE 5, e11963.
(doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0011963)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

22. Kaartinen R, Stone GN, Hearn J, Lohse K, Roslin T. 2010 Revealing secret liaisons: DNA barcoding
changes our understanding of food webs. Ecological Entomology 35, 623–638. (doi:10.1111/j.13652311.2010.01224.x)
23. Smith MA, Rodriguez JJ, Whitfield JB, Deans AR, Janzen DH, Hallwachs W, Hebert PDN. 2008
Extreme diversity of tropical parasitoid wasps exposed by iterative integration of natural history,
DNA barcoding, morphology, and collections. PNAS (doi:10.1073/pnas.0805319105)
24. Huelsenbeck JP, Ronquist F. 2001 MRBAYES: Bayesian inference of phylogenetic trees.
Bioinformatics 17, 754–755.
25. Cognato AI. 2006 Standard percent DNA sequence difference for insects does not predict species
boundaries. J Econ Entomol 99, 1037–1045. (doi:10.1093/jee/99.4.1037)
26. Burks BD. 1979 Cynipidae. In Catalog Of Hymenoptera in America North of Mexico Volume 1
Symphyta and Apocrita, Smithsonian Institution Press.
27. Bailey SF, Stange LA. 1966 The twig wasp of cork oak—Its biology and control. J Econ Entomol 59,
663–668. (doi:10.1093/jee/59.3.663)
28. Zuparko RL (University of C. 1996 Hymenoptera reared from Plagiotrochus suberi (Hymenoptera:
Cynipidae) galls in California. The Pan-Pacific entomologist (USA) , 27–30.
29. Boucek Z, Askew RR. 1968 Hym. Chalcidoidea. Palearctic Eulophidae (excl. Tetrastichinae). In
Index of Entomophagous Insects (eds V Delucchi, G Remaudiére), pp. 14–71. Paris: Le François.
30. Malfi RL, Davis SE, Roulston TH. 2014 Parasitoid fly induces manipulative grave-digging behaviour
differentially across its bumblebee hosts. Animal Behaviour 92, 213–220.
(doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2014.04.005)
31. Korenko S, Spasojevic T, Pekár S, Walter GH, Korenková V, Hamouzová K, Kolářová M, Kysilková
K, Klopfstein S. in press One generalist or several specialist species? Wide host range and diverse
manipulations of the hosts’ web-building behaviour in the true spider parasitoid Zatypota kauros
(Hymenoptera: Ichneumonidae). Insect Conservation and Diversity 0. (doi:10.1111/icad.12307)
32. Melika G, Abrahamson WG. 2002 Review of the world genera of oak Cynipid wasps (Hymenoptera,
Cynipidae, Cynipini). In Parasitic wasps, evolution, systematics, biodiversity and biological control
(eds G Melika, C Thuróczy), pp. 150–192. Agroinform, Budapest.
33. Ács Z, Melika G, Pénzes Z, Pujade‐Villar J, Stone GN. 2007 The phylogenetic relationships between
Dryocosmus, Chilaspis and allied genera of oak gall wasps (Hymenoptera, Cynipidae: Cynipini).
Systematic Entomology 32, 70–80. (doi:10.1111/j.1365-3113.2006.00351.x)
34. Weld LH. 1952 Cynipoidea (Hym.) 1905-1950, being a supplement to the Dalla Torre and Kieffer
Monograph: The Cynipidae in Das Tierreich, Lieferung 24, 1910, and bringing the systematic
literature of the world Up to date, including keys to families and subfamilies and lists of new generic,
specific and variety names. Privately printed
35. Melika G, Abrahamson WG. 2007 Review of the Nearctic gallwasp species of the genus Bassettia
Ashmead, 1887, with description of new species (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae: Cynipini). Acta
Zoologica Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae 53, 131–148.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/516104; this version posted March 29, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

36. Stone GN, Schönrogge K, Atkinson RJ, Bellido D, Pujade-Villar J. 2002 The population biology of
oak gall wasps (Hymenoptera: Cynipidae). Annual Review of Entomology 47, 633–668.
(doi:10.1146/annurev.ento.47.091201.145247)
37. Moore J, Gotelli NJ. 1996 Evolutionary patterns of altered behavior and susceptibility in parasitized
hosts. Evolution 50, 807–819.
38. Hernandez RN, Fredensborg BL. 2015 Experimental test of host specificity in a behaviour-modifying
trematode. Parasitology 142, 1631–1639. (doi:10.1017/S0031182015001171)
39. Bennett FD. 1995 Parasites of the pepper flower-bud moth (Lepidoptera: Gelechiidae) in Florida. The
Florida Entomologist 78, 546–549. (doi:10.2307/3495543)
40. Grissell E. 1976 A revision of western Nearctic Species of Torymus Dalman (Hymenoptera,
Torymidae). University of California Press.
41. Weld LH. 1959 Cynipid galls of the Eastern United States. Ann Arbor, MI: Privately printed.
42. Ahmad T. 1940 On the Biology of Euderus lividus (Ashm.), a Parasite of Agromyza obtusa Mall.
Indian Journal of Entomology 2.

Table 1. Description of oak gall wasps, tree habitats, and geographic locations from which Euderus set has been reared and identified.
Cynipid oak gallwasp

Oak host(s)
species and
section

Locations

Description of gall

Timing of galls collections
and Euderus emergences

Record

Andricus
quercuspetiolicola

Q. alba;
Q. bicolor
(section: Quercus)

IA

Multichambered integral leaf
gall, swelling of leaf petiole
and sometimes basal midrib
projecting on both sides of
leaf

Galls collected May August, most E. set
emergences June - July

This study

Bassettia pallida

Q. geminata;
Q. virginiana
(section: Quercus)

FL, GA,
LA, MS,
TX

Integral stem gall (a “crypt”)

Callirhytis
flavipes

Q. macrocarpae
(section: Quercus)

IA

Integral leaf gall, elongated
swelling of the midrib

Callirhytis
quercusmodesta

Q. palustris
Q. rubra
(Section: Lobatae)

IA, MO

Integral leaf gall, parenchyma
of leaf swelling, projecting on
both sides, multiple chambers

Galls collected May August, most E. set
emergences July-August

This study

Callirhytis
quercusscitula

Q. imbricaria
(Section: Lobatae)

IA, MO

Swelling of stem at the base of
where new leaves attach

Galls collected June, most
E. set emergences June –
July

This study

Callirhytis
tumifica

Q. coccinea
(Section: Lobatae)

PA

Integral leaf gall, swelling of
midrib on the bottom third of
leaf

Galls collected May- June,
most E. set emergences
July

This study

Neuroterus
noxiosus

Q. bicolor
(section: Quercus)

IA

Integral leaf gall

Galls collected June, most
E. set emergences JuneJuly

This study

Galls collected July –
October, most E. set
emergences Feb – March.
Galls collected May -July,
most Euderus emergences
June-July

[16, 17]

This study

Table 2. Insects reared from 128 Callirhytis quercusmodesta leaf gall clusters from a single Pin oak (Quercus palustris) in Iowa City, IA.

Family
Eupelmidae
Eulophidae
Eurytomidae
Ormyridae
Platygastridae
Cynipidae

Genus
Brasema
Euderus (E. set)
Galeopsomyia
Eurytoma
Sycophila (3 species)
Ormyrus
unknown
Ceroptres
Callirhytis (galler)

Cecidomyiidae
unknown
(Diptera)

No. reared
12
44
30
75
82
5
8
426
291
11

Figure 1. Life cycle of an oak gall wasp (in this case, Callirhytis quercusmodesta; pink), and the crypt keeper wasp, Euderus set (green). Artwork
by Mona Luo.

Figure 2. Details of methods for the C. quercusmodesta / Euderus emergence study. A) Photograph of a C. quercusmodesta gall one hour after
collection, showing both intact chambers (light green circles) and galls from which an insect had emerged prior to the gall’s collection (dark
circles). Very light tan-colored circles with a small pinprick of black in the center are animals that were either actively chewing out of their gall or
had stopped chewing and were already “head plugs.” B) Example of notations made across the course of the study. Any changes to the gall were
noted daily, such that all emergent animals found in the cup on any given day could be associated with the individual chamber from which they
emerged. This particular gall had four Euderus emerge from gall chambers for which chewing (“CW”) and/or a “head plug” (“HP”) had
previously been observed. Other notation refers to dates of observations, initials of observer (e.g., “RKB”), or the genus of the emergent animal
(e.g., “Eucer” for the inquiline Euceroptres); C) close-up of a “head plug” where a C. quercusmodesta galler has chewed a partial hole and then
stopped moving; D) close-up of C. quercusmodesta head after emergence of a Euderus parasitoid.

Figure 3. Evidence of Euderus set activity in galls formed by three other cynipid gall wasps in oaks. A) Head plug of Callirhytis quercusscitula in
a gall; B) Callirhytis tumifica mesothorax (head missing) extruding from an exit hole. This phenotype was also seen in B. pallida galls studied in
Egan et al. [16]; C) Andricus quercuspetiolicola head plug with eye visible (left) and partially chewed A. quercuspetiolicola head post-E. set
emergence (right).

