	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

An  Omentum-­inspired  3D  PEG  Hydrogel  for  Identifying  ECM-­drivers  of  Drug  Resistant  Ovarian  Cancer    
Elizabeth  A.  Brooks1,  Maria  F.  Gencoglu1,  Daniel  C.  Corbett2,  Kelly  R.  Stevens2,  and  Shelly  R.  Peyton1*    
1
Department   of   Chemical   Engineering,   University   of   Massachusetts   Amherst,   N540   Life   Science   Laboratories,   240  
Thatcher  Road,  Amherst,  MA  01003-­9364,  United  States  
2
Department  of  Bioengineering,  University  of  Washington,  Box  355061,  Seattle,  WA,  98195-­5061,  United  States  
*corresponding  author,  E-­mail:  speyton@ecs.umass.edu  
  
Abstract:  Ovarian  cancer  (OvCa)  is  a  challenging  disease  to  treat  due  to  poor  screening  techniques  and  late  diagnosis.  
There  is  an  urgent  need  for  additional  therapy  options,  as  patients  recur  in  70%  of  cases.  The  limited  availability  of  clinical  
treatment  options  could  be  a  result  of  poor  predictions  in  early  stage  drug  screens  on  standard  tissue  culture  polystyrene  
(TCPS).  TCPS  does  not  capture  the  mechanical  and  biochemical  cues  that  cells  experience  in  vivo,  which  can  impact  
how  cells  will  respond  to  a  drug.  Therefore,  an  in  vitro  model  that  captures  some  of  the  microenvironment  features  that  
the  cells  experience  in  vivo  could  provide  better  insights  into  drug  response.  In  this  study,  we  formed  3D  multicellular  
tumor  spheroids  (MCTS)  in  microwells,  and  encapsulated  them  in  3D  omentum-­inspired  hydrogels.  SKOV-­3  MCTS  were  
resistant  to  Paclitaxel  in  our  3D  hydrogels  compared  to  a  monolayer  on  TCPS.  Toward  clinical  application,  we  tested  
cells   from   patients   (ovarian   carcinoma   ascites   spheroids   (OCAS)),   and   drug   responses   predicted   by   using   the   3D  
omentum-­inspired   hydrogels   correlated   with   the   reported   pathology   reports   of   those   same   patients.   Additionally,   we  
observed  the  presence  of  collagen  production  around  the  encapsulated  SKOV-­3  MCTS,  but  not  on  TCPS.  Our  results  
demonstrated  that  our  3D  omentum-­inspired  hydrogel  is  an  improved  in  vitro  drug  testing  platform  to  study  OvCa  drug  
response  for  patient-­derived  cells,  and  helped  us  identify  collagen  3  as  a  potential  driver  of  Paclitaxel  resistance.    
  
Keywords:  ascites,  patient  cells,  spheroids,  Paclitaxel,  Carboplatin,  Mafosfamide  
  
Introduction  
cellular  signaling,  and  drug  responses  than  cells  found  in  
Ovarian   cancer   (OvCa)   is   the   fifth   deadliest   cancer   for   vivo.12   Three-­dimensional   (3D)   culture   models   are  
women,   and   the   deadliest   gynecological   disease   for   increasingly   used   in   basic   science   applications   because  
women  overall,  resulting  in  an  estimated  14,070  deaths  in   they   offer   environments   that   better   resemble   in   vivo  
the  United  States  in  2018.1  The  high  mortality  rate  of  OvCa   conditions,13,   14   and   they   can   be   tuned   to   model   different  
is  due  to  late  detection,  inadequate  screening  techniques,   tissues.15,  16  Most  3D  models  consist  of  hydrogels  or  similar  
and   a   lack   of   effective   second   line   therapies.2   OvCa   is   biomaterials  that  have  a  3D  structure  inside  which  cancer  
typically  detected  very  late,  partially  because  the  disease   cells   can   be   grown.17-­20 These   materials   can   be  
is  asymptomatic  until  Stage  III,3  where  the  cancer  cells  are   functionalized   with   peptides   to   mimic   cell-­extracellular  
no   longer   confined   to   the   ovaries.   At   the   time   of   staging   matrix  (ECM)  interactions,  ECM  degradability,  and  other  in  
laparectomy,   metastases   that   have   spread   through   the   vivo  properties.21,  22    
peritoneum   are   present   in   70%   of   patients.3   Tumor   cells     
spread   into   the   peritoneal   fluid,   where   they   form   ovarian   There   are   several   types   of   3D   models   in   which   cancer  
carcinoma  ascites  spheroids  (OCAS),  and  can  attach  onto   multicellular   tumor   spheroids   (MCTS,   which   resemble  
the   abdominal   peritoneum   or   omentum.4,   5   Prognosis   for   OCAS)   can   be   grown   in   vitro.23   During   peritoneal  
OvCa  patients  has  improved  little  in  the  last  three  decades   metastasis,  OvCa  cells  migrate  into  the  peritoneal  fluid  and  
since   the   introduction   of   platinum-­based   treatments.6   form   OCAS.3,   5   These   OCAS   later   attach   to   and   invade  
Although  first  line  therapy  results  in  complete  remission  in   surrounding   tissues.24   For   this   reason,   in   vitro   models   of  
40-­60%   of   patients,   over   70%   of   those   patients   relapse   OvCa   tissue   coupled   with   patient-­derived   OCAS   could  
within   two   years,   and   there   are   no   effective   second   line   improve  OvCa  drug  discovery.25  Thus,  they  promise  fewer  
treatments.7,   8 Additionally,   to   our   knowledge,   only   four   false   leads,   and   so   better   drug   discovery.   Moreover,   the  
targeted  drugs  have  been  approved  by  the  Food  and  Drug   use   of   established   cell   lines   does   not   capture   disease  
Administration  (FDA)  in  the  last  ten  years  for  OvCa.  There   heterogeneity   across   patients.26   While   genetic  
is  a  clear  need  for  innovation  in  drug  discovery  to  develop   mechanisms  of  OvCa  have  been  studied,27  these  findings  
additional  OvCa  treatments  to  improve  patient  outcomes.
alone   have   not   been   sufficient   for   explaining   drug  
  
response.28  The  use  of  primary  cells  isolated  from  patients  
A   possible   reason   for   the   inadequate   success   in   OvCa   would   improve   testing   of   drugs   in   a   more   personalized  
drug  discovery  is  that  current  pre-­clinical  in  vitro  screening   way.29  Ascites  fluid  from  OvCa  patients  is  drained  from  the  
methods  are  not  good  predictors  of  clinical  success  of  drug   peritoneal   cavity   from   the   patient   to   relieve   the   pain,   this  
candidates.  Many  hypothesize  that  this  is  largely  because   fluid  is  rich  in  single  malignant  cells  and  OCAS.30,  31  In  this  
in   vitro   screening   uses   cell   lines   grown   on   tissue   culture   study,  we  evaluated  the  response  of  SKOV-­3  OvCa  MCTS  
polystyrene   (TCPS).9,   10   The   TCPS   surface   has   no   and   patient-­derived   OCAS   to   several   drugs   across  
resemblance   to   the   in   vivo   microenvironment   chemically,   different   mechanisms   of   action   in   synthetic,   tailorable  
physically,   or   topologically.11   Cancer   cells   grown   in   this   hydrogels.  Through  this  study  we  revealed  a  non-­intuitive  
environment   have   different   morphologies,   phenotypes,   response  of  patient  cells  to  these  drugs,  and  we  nominate  
  

1  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

collagen   3   as   a   particularly   interesting   ECM   protein  
potentially   driving   resistance   to   platinum-­based   therapies  
in  3D.  These  hydrogels  are  easy  to  create  and  support  the  
viability  and  survival  of  patient-­derived  OCAS  cells,  and  we  
propose   this   as   a   useful   system   to   pre-­clinically   screen  
drug  candidates.  
  
Results    
OvCa   MCTS   were   viable   and   proliferative   in   3D   poly  
(ethylene  glycol)-­maleimide  (PEG-­MAL)  hydrogels  
OvCa   metastasizes   to   several   sites   within   the   peritoneal  
cavity.4   Here,   we   chose  to  focus   on   the   omentum   due   to  
the   availability   of   published   data   on   this   tissue   of  
metastasis  that  we  used  to  design  our  3D  hydrogel  model.  
Since  OvCa  metastasizes  to  the  omentum  as  aggregated  
cells,31  we  hypothesized  that  a  3D  hydrogel  with  integrin-­
binding  peptides  found  in  the  omentum  would  support  the  
viability   and   proliferation   of   OvCa   MCTS   (Figure   1).   We  
previously   used   three   methods   for   creating   MCTS   from  
established   cell   lines,23   and   here   we   chose   to   use   the  
microwell  formation  method,  since  this  is  more  akin  to  how  
OvCa   form   OCAS   (aggregated   cells   rather   than   clonal  
growth   from   a   single   cell)   in   vivo   during   metastasis.31  
Additionally,   our   previous   work   demonstrated   that   this  
method  is  fast  (MCTS  form  within  one  day),  and  resulted  
in   the   most   uniform   size   distribution   of   MCTS.23   For   this  
study  we  selected  the  widely  used  SKOV-­3  OvCa  cell  line  
to  form  MCTS.  We  then  chose  to  encapsulate  these  MCTS  
in   3D   poly   (ethylene   glycol)-­maleimide   (PEG-­MAL)  
hydrogels   to   capture   a   physiologically   relevant   stiffness  
with  high  water  content,  as  well  as  tailored  integrin-­binding  
and   matrix   degradability.   Since   PEG   hydrogels   are   not  
inherently   degradable   by   cells,   it   was   necessary   to  
incorporate   a   cell-­degradable   crosslinking   sequence  
during   hydrogel   synthesis   to   facilitate   cell   survival   and  
spreading  within  the  matrix.  For  this  study,  we  selected  a  
Pan-­matrix   metalloproteinase   (Pan-­MMP)   degradable  
peptide  crosslinker  that  can  be  degraded  by  many  MMPs  
at   the   glycine-­isoleucine   bond.32   To   optimize   MCTS  
survival,   we   varied   the   amount   of   Pan-­MMP   degradable  
crosslinking   within   the   hydrogel   that   contained   RGD  
peptide   integrin-­binding   (Figure   S1a).   The   total  
crosslinking   was   kept   to   a   1:1   molar   ratio   of   maleimide-­
functional   end   groups   to   thiol-­functional   end   groups   by  
completing  the  crosslinking  solution  with  linear  PEG-­dithiol  
(PDT)   while   the   amount   of   Pan-­MMP   degradable  
crosslinking  was  varied.  From  our  data  we  concluded  that  
12  molar  %  Pan-­MMP  degradable  crosslinking  supported  
MCTS   survival   and   we   used   this   condition   for   all  
subsequent  experiments  unless  otherwise  noted.    
  
We   tested   encapsulating   MCTS   from   one,   two,   or   three  
wells   of   the   12-­well   plate   containing   microwells   into   six  
PEG-­MAL   hydrogels   with   RGD   peptide   integrin-­binding  
and   25   molar   %   Pan-­MMP   degradable   crosslinking   with  
the  remainder  of  the  crosslinking  with  linear  PDT  to  ensure  
that   there   were   enough   MCTS   in   each   hydrogel   for   a  
detectable  output  signal  for  the  drug  screening  assay.  We  
found  that  the  ratio  of  one  well  from  the  12-­well  plate  to  six  
  

PEG-­MAL   hydrogels   was   ideal   for   a   CellTiter-­Glo   output  
signal   where   we   would   be   able   to   detect   changes   in   the  
MCTS   response   with   varying   drug   concentrations.  
Additionally,   we   found   that   the   relative   change   in   output  
signal   from   day   one   to   day   three   was   approximately   the  
same  for  each  ratio  of  wells  from  the  microwells  plate  to  six  
PEG-­MAL   hydrogels   (Figure   S1b).   We   used   MCTS   from  
one   well   of   a   12-­well   microwells   plate   for   six   PEG-­MAL  
hydrogels  for  the  remainder  of  the  study  since  it  allowed  us  
to  test   as   many   conditions   as   possible   using   one   12-­well  
microwells  plate  and  did  not  reduce  the  quality  of  the  final  
assay  output.    

Figure   1:   Three   biomaterial   platforms   that   were   used   to  
evaluate   SKOV-­3   drug   response.   a.   Schematic   of   the  
components   of   a   3D   PEG-­MAL   hydrogel   with   encapsulated  
SKOV-­3   MCTS   within   a   3D   hydrogel.   b.   Omentum-­inspired  
integrin-­binding   peptide   cocktail   based   on   healthy   omentum  
proteomic  data  from  Naba  et  al.33  c.  Schematic  of  cells  grown  on  
plastic   or   encapsulated   in   a   3D   hydrogel   model.   d.  
LIVE(green)/DEAD(red)  imaging  of  cells  in  each  platform  one  day  
post-­encapsulation.  e.  Ki67(pink)/DAPI(blue)  staining  of  cells  one  
day  post-­encapsulation  to  evaluate  cell  proliferation.  Scale  bar  =  
100   µm.   Images   are   representative   from   N   ³   2   independent  
experiments.  

  

2  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

We  measured  the  drug  response  of  SKOV-­3  MCTS  in  a  3D  
PEG-­MAL   hydrogel   with   RGD   integrin-­binding,   but   we  
hypothesized  that  adding  tissue  specificity  could  provide  a  
better   environment   for   MCTS   survival   and   therefore   the  
drug   responses   would   be   more   representative   of   what  
would  occur  in  vivo.  We  therefore  increased  the  complexity  
of   the   3D   hydrogel   model   by   adding   additional   integrin-­
binding  peptides  specific  to  the  omentum,  which  is  the  site  
of   many   OvCa   metastases.4   We   aimed   to   create   a   3D  
hydrogel  with  some  tissue  specificity  without  being  overly  
complex   that   would   limit   future   applications   in   drug  
screening  or  in  a  clinical  setting.  To  find  the  most  abundant  
integrin-­binding   proteins   in   the   omentum,   we   mined  
published   mass   spectrometry   data   of   healthy   omentum  
tissue.33   The   full   integrin-­binding   peptide   cocktail   is  
described   in   Figure   1b.   GFOGER,   which   is   the   binding  
sequence   in   collagen   1   and   other   fibrillar   collagens34  
comprises   a   majority   of   the   hydrogel,   but   this   cocktail  
contains   RGD,   as   well   as   PHSRN-­RGD   and   DGEA  
representative  of  other  proteins  described  in  Figure  1b.  For  
simplicity,   we   kept   the   Pan-­MMP   degradable   crosslinker  
used  with  the  RGD  only  integrin-­binding  hydrogel  to  allow  
for  MCTS  to  degrade  the  surrounding  hydrogel.  
  
Since  this  omentum-­inspired  hydrogel  is  new  to  the  field,  
we   first   ensured   that   cells   were   viable   and   proliferative  
before   drug   screening,   alongside   two   other   platforms   as  
internal   controls   (Figure   1c).   As   expected,   SKOV-­3   cells  
cultured   on   TCPS   showed   high   viability   and   proliferation  
indicated   by   LIVE/DEAD   and   Ki67   staining,   respectively  
(Figure   1d-­e).   Both   of   our   PEG-­MAL   hydrogel   models  
supported  cell  survival  with  very  few  dead  cells  inside  the  
MCTS.  By  visual  inspection  of  Ki67  stained  images,  there  
appeared  to  be  a  greater  proportion  of  proliferative  cells  in  
the  omentum  hydrogel  than  on  TCPS  (Figure  1e).  These  
results   allowed   for   subsequent   drug   screening  
experiments  in  these  platforms.    
  
SKOV-­3  OvCa  MCTS  were  resistant  to  Paclitaxel,  and  
sensitized   to   other   drugs   in   the   3D   PEG-­MAL  
hydrogels  relative  to  TCPS  
As   a   control,   we   first   established   drug   responses   of   the  
SKOV-­3  cells  to  five  drugs,  spanning  different  mechanisms  
of  action,  on  TCPS  (Figure  2,  S2-­3).  We  quantified  the  IC50,  
EC50,   and   GR5035   (Figure   S2)   for   each   cell   line   and   drug  
combination   using   the   online   GR   calculator.36   We  
calculated   and   reported   these   three   parameters   because  
they  each  provided  different  information  about  the  potency  
of   the   drug   on   the   cell   line.35   In   all   cases,   the   GR50   was  
lower  than  the  IC50  and  EC50  metrics  (Figure  S2),  because  
the  GR50  is  quantifying  the  reduction  in  growth  rate  and  not  
overall   inhibition   of   cell   number.   We   found   that   SKOV-­3  
MCTS   did   not   respond   to   Paclitaxel   in   the   3D   hydrogels  
(EC50,  Figure  2b,  S4-­5),  but  had  an  average  EC50  of  12.1  
µM  on  TCPS.  We  chose  to  report  and  compare  the  EC50  
for   each   condition   since   it   is   the   concentration   that  
corresponds  to  achieve  half  of  the  maximal  response  and  
does  not  require  at  least  50%  cell  death  as  the  IC50  does.35  
This   means   that   the   drug   responses   across   multiple  
  

conditions  could  still  be  compared  if  the  cells  did  not  grow  
exponentially   over   the   course   of   the   experiment   or   if  
greater  the  50%  cell  death  relative  to  the  control  was  not  
achieved  for  which  is  required  for  calculating  the  GR50  and  
IC50,   respectively.   We   found   that   it   was   not   possible   to  
calculate  the  GR50  in  many  of  the  3D  cases  that  we  tested.  
Since  Paclitaxel  is  a  first-­line  therapy  for  OvCa  patients,  we  
were  surprised  to  see  a  lack  of  response  of  SKOV-­3  MCTS  
in   our   hydrogel   models   to   this   chemotherapy.   However,  
this   result   has   been   previously   reported   in   another   3D  
model   by   Loessner   et   al.37  This   observation   is   important,  
because   the   drug   response   curve   for   SKOV-­3   with  
Paclitaxel   on   TCPS   is   typical   (Figure   S3b),   making   it  
appear  efficacious,  but  the  curve  looks  strikingly  dissimilar  
in  a  3D  culture  model.    
  

Figure   2:   Quantified   SKOV-­3   drug   response   reported   as  
EC50   on   TCPS,   or   as   MCTS   encapsulated   in   RGD   or  
omentum-­inspired  peptide-­binding  3D  PEG-­MAL  hydrogels.  
a.   Carboplatin.   b.   Paclitaxel.   c.   Doxorubicin.   d.   LY2606368.   e.  
Mafosfamide.  Data  are  reported  as  the  mean  ±  SEM.  The  EC50  
values  were  calculated  using  the  online  GR  calculator  and  from  
N  ³  2  independent  experiments  with  N  =  3  technical  replicates  
on  TCPS  and  N  ³  2  technical  replicates  in  hydrogels.    

Surprisingly,   we   found   that   the   MCTS   in   the   hydrogels  
were  more  sensitive  to  all  the  non-­platinum  drugs  that  we  
tested,   relative   to   TCPS   (EC50,   Figure   2,   S4-­5).   SKOV-­3  
MCTS  were  more  sensitive  (lower  EC50)  to  Carboplatin  and  
Doxorubicin  (Figure  2a,c)  in  the  omentum  hydrogel  than  in  
the  RGD  hydrogel.  On  the  other  hand,  MCTS  were  more  
sensitive  to  LY2606368  and  Mafosfamide  (Figure  2d-­e)  in  
the   omentum   hydrogel   than   on   TCPS,   although   MCTS  
were   less   sensitive   to   Mafosfamide   in   the   omentum  
hydrogel   compared   to   the   3D   RGD   hydrogel;;   note   these  
compounds   have   not   yet   become   clinically   approved   for  
OvCa   treatment.   An   expanded   future   study   with   these  
3  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

models   and   other   drugs,   both   clinically   approved   and   in  
development,  could  possibly  be  used  to  make  correlations  
between   pre-­clinical   studies   and   clinical   efficacy   in  
patients.    
  
Patient-­derived   OCAS   drug   sensitivity   reflected   the  
real   clinical   response   in   omentum-­mimicking  
hydrogels  
Our  goal  was  to  evaluate  how  OCAS  from  patient  samples  
responded   to   the   drugs   in   the   3D   omentum-­mimicking  
hydrogel  relative  to  TCPS.  We  collaborated  with  the  team  
at   UMass   Medical   School   to   obtain   ascites   fluid   for  
screening   OCAS.   We   then   encapsulated   OCAS   into   3D  
omentum   hydrogels,   and   compared   their   3D   drug  
responses  to  that  of  TCPS  (Figure  3).  The  basic  pathology  
reports  for  the  patient  samples  have  been  listed  in  Figure  
3a.   Prior   to   drug   screening,   samples   were   assessed   for  
viability  via  LIVE/DEAD  staining  (Figure  3b),  which  showed  
high   viability   across   all   samples   in   the   3D   PEG-­MAL  
omentum   hydrogels.   We   observed   that   samples   from  
Patient   1   were   resistant   to   Mafosfamide,   but   sensitive   to  
LY2606368  in  the  3D  hydrogel  relative  to  TCPS  (Figure  3c,  
S6),   an   inhibitor   that   is   currently   in  Phase   2   clinical   trials  
for   OvCa.38,   39   However,   upon   receiving   the   next   sample  
(Patient   12   was   the   same   as   Patient   1   with   six   weeks  
between  sample  collection),  resistance  in  3D  versus  TCPS  
increased   for   these   two   drugs.   Furthermore,   this   sample  
was  resistant  to  all  the  drugs  in  3D  relative  to  TCPS,  which  
demonstrated  how  resistant  OvCa  could  be  for  current  first  
line   therapy,   especially   since   this   patient   had   received  
Paclitaxel   treatment.   Patient   2   received   both   Carboplatin  
and   Paclitaxel   (Figure   3a).   Our   3D   omentum   hydrogel  
model   demonstrated   sensitivity   to   Carboplatin,  
Doxorubicin,   LY2606368,   and   Mafosfamide   relative   to  
TCPS,  and  only  slight  resistance  to  Paclitaxel.  If  Patient  2,  
in  reality,  was  not  responding  to  these  drugs  in  the  clinic,  
and   the   response   was   not   dependent   on   geometry,   we  
expected   to   see   similar   responses   on   TCPS   and   in   3D.  
Interestingly,   Doxorubicin,   LY2606368,   and   Mafosfamide  
all  appeared  to  be  more  effective  in  3D  versus  2D  for  the  
Patient   2   sample.   The   results   from   the   samples   with  
Patient  1  indicate  that  our  hydrogel  model  may  be  a  way  to  
predict  potential  drug  response  as  the  disease  progresses,  
which  could  be  a  way  to  help  guide  future  clinical  treatment  
decisions.   However,   more   samples   would   be   required   to  
establish  generalized  observations  of  eventual  prognostic  
value.      
SKOV-­3   cells   expressed   abundant   collagen   3  protein  
in  3D  hydrogels  
To   explore   possible   reasons   for   the   differences   in   drug  
responses   that   we   observed,   we   quantified   the   presence  
of   a   subset   of   ECM   proteins   via   immunofluorescence  
staining   (Figure   4).   Fibronectin   has   been   shown   to   be  
produced   by   mesothelial   cells   to   promote   OvCa  
metastasis,40   and   we   observed   fibronectin   production   on  
TCPS  and  in  3D  hydrogels  by  the  OvCa  cells  themselves  
(Figure   4a).   By   visual   inspection,   in   both   3D   hydrogel  
models   it   appeared   that   the   fibronectin   was   localized   to  
  

within   the   MCTS   rather   than   around   the   MCTS   surface.  
Collagen   1   is   a   major   component   of   the   omentum  
microenvironment,33   and   work   by   Januchowski   et   al.  
discovered   fibrillar   collagen   genes,   and,   in   particular,  
collagen   3A1   were   upregulated   in   Topotecan-­   and  
Paclitaxel-­resistant  OvCa  cells  on  TCPS.41  Therefore,  we  
looked   for   both   extracellular   collagen   1   and   collagen   3  
(detected   by   collagen   1   and   collagen   3A1   antibodies,  
respectively)   in   the   environments   tested   here.   We   found  
that  in  the  3D  hydrogels,  but  not  on  TCPS,  SKOV-­3  cells  
produced   collagen   1   (Figure   4b).   This   suggests   that  
perhaps  the  SKOV-­3  MCTS  were  working  to  produce  their  
own   fibrillar   collagen   1   for   survival   since   GFOGER   does  
not   provide   a   fibrillar   structure   for   the   cells   to   most  
effectively  bind.  Furthermore,  we  observed  some  collagen  
3A1  on  TCPS  on  day  3,  whereas  it  was  highly  expressed  
in  both  3D  conditions  at  both  timepoints  (Figure  4c).  These  
results  suggest  that  SKOV-­3  cells  may  produce  their  own  
ECM   proteins   to   increase   their   survival   to   prevent  
response  to  Paclitaxel  exposure  in  3D.  Future  work  could  
examine   a   larger   panel   of   ECM   proteins   to   attempt   at  
correlating   the   presence   on   specific   proteins   and   OvCa  
drug  resistance  in  3D  microenvironments.    

Figure   3:  OvCa   samples   derived  from   patient   ascites   were  
encapsulated  in  3D  omentum-­inspired  PEG-­MAL  hydrogels  
for  drug  screening.  a.  Pathology  report  of  patient  samples.  b.  
LIVE(green)/DEAD(red)  imaging  of  OCAS  in  3D  omentum  PEG-­
MAL   hydrogels   one   day   post-­encapsulation.   Scale   bars   =   100  
µm.   Images   are   representative   from   the   sample.   c.   Patient  
sample  drug  responses  displayed  as  log2  fold  change  in  EC50  in  
the   omentum   hydrogel   relative  to  the   EC50   on   TCPS.   Red  and  
blue  indicate  higher  and  lower,  respectively,  EC50  values  in  the  
3D  omentum  hydrogel  relative  to  the  EC50  on  TCPS.  

4  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Discussion  
There   is   clear   room   for   improvement   in   OvCa   treatment.  
The   availability   of   ascites  from   OvCa   patients   provides   a  
valuable   opportunity   for   developing   an   improved   OvCa  
drug   testing   pipeline   that   combines   patient   cells   and  
engineered   environments.   Others   have   recognized   the  
need   for   developing   more   clinically   relevant   OvCa   drug  
screening   platforms.37,   42   Similar   to   our   RGD   hydrogel,  
Loessner  et  al.  evaluated  the  response  of  SKOV-­3  MCTS  
to   Paclitaxel   in   a   3D   PEG-­based   hydrogel   with   RGD  
binding   sites   and   MMP-­degradable   sites.37   The   MCTS  
generation   approach   was   different   than   ours   where   their  
platform  allowed  for  the  formation  of  the  MCTS  from  single  
cells  within  the  PEG  hydrogel  over  12  days  rather  than  by  
the  aggregation  and  encapsulation  method  that  we  used.37
Even   with   a   different   3D   hydrogel   and   MCTS   formation  
method,   they   also   observed   resistance   to   Paclitaxel   in  
3D.37   However,   they   did   not   test   the   response   to   other  
drugs   in   their   study,   which   limits   what   we   can   compare  
between  studies.  Liu  et  al.,  with  3D  collagen  gels,  observed  
resistance  of  OV-­NC  and  OV-­206  OvCa  cell  lines  seeded  
as   single   cells   in   3D   to   Paclitaxel,   Carboplatin,   and   5-­
fluorouracil  relative  to  TCPS.43  Furthermore,  the  use  of  this  
collagen   gel   demonstrated   that   the   ability   of   OvCa   to  
interact   with   the   collagen   matrix   increased   the   invasive  
capacity   of   the   cells.43   From   this   observation   and   our  
collagen   staining   results,   it   appears   that   collagen   1   is  
necessary   for   OvCa   disease   progression   and/or   drug  
resistance  in  3D,  and  OvCa  cells  will  produce  this  protein  
themselves   if   it   is   not   provided   within   the   biomaterial  
environment.   To   model   the   omentum   for   understanding  
OvCa   metastasis,   a   multicellular   platform   containing  
mesothelial   cells,   fibroblasts,   and   ECM   was   developed.44  
The  application  of  this  platform  identified  that  mesothelial  
cells   from   the   omentum   caused   inhibition   and   fibroblasts  
and   ECM   promoted   attachment   and   invasion   of   OvCa  
cells.44   In   the   context   of   OvCa   drug   screening   and   the  
omentum   microenvironment,   we   see   our   study   as   a  
valuable   contribution   to   OvCa   drug   response   research  
because   we   compare   OCAS   derived   from   ascites   to   cell  
line   MCTS   help   establish   links   between   pre-­clinical   drug  
screening  models  and  clinical  response.    
  
We   suggest   that   our   synthetic   hydrogel   model   is   a   good  
tool   for   screening   patient   OCAS   drug   response.   By  
controlling  the  polymer  concentration  of  the  3D  hydrogels  
we   were   able   to   test   the   samples   at   a   stiffness   that   is  
physiologically  relevant  to  the  omentum.21,  45  Furthermore,  
the  3D  PEG-­MAL  hydrogels  are  easy  to  make  because  all  
of   the   peptides   and   polymer   precursors   can   be   made   in  
advance   and   simply   require   dissolution   for   sample  
encapsulation.   Thus,   whenever   patient   samples   are  
available,   one   can   process  the   sample   and   complete   the  
encapsulation   within   a   few   hours.   If   multiple   treatment  
options  are  being  considered  for  a  patient,  then  this  could  
be  a  simple,  but  valuable  tool  in  guiding  the  selection  of  the  
next  treatment  steps.  For  example,  LY2606368  is  currently  
in   Phase   II   clinical   trials38,   39   and   could   be   an   option   for  
patients   in   the   future.   Testing   this   compound   in   3D  
  

hydrogels  demonstrated  it  was  more  promising  as  a  patient  
treatment  than  screening  only  on  TCPS  by  comparing  the  
reported   EC50   values   (Figure   3c).   Furthermore,   patient  
sample   12   was   received   about   6   weeks   after   patient  
sample   1,   and   we   observed   an   increase   in   resistance   to  
the   drugs   that   we   tested.   This   implies   that   as   disease  
progresses,   the   patient’s   ability   to   respond   to   treatment  

Figure   4:   Immunofluorescence   staining   of   SKOV-­3   cells  
demonstrated   that   they   produce   their   own   ECM   proteins  
over   the   time   frame   of   a   drug   screening   assay.   a.  
Fibronectin(green)/DAPI(blue).   Fibronectin   can   be   seen   on  
plastic   as   well   as   between   cells   in   the   MCTS.   b.   Collagen  
1(green)/DAPI(blue).   Collagen  1   production   was  not   observed  
on  plastic,  but  was  visible  around  the  spheroids.  c.  Collagen3A1  
(pink)/DAPI   (blue).   Some   collagen   3A1   may   be   present   on  
plastic,   but   is  clearly   visible   surrounding  the   spheroids   in   both  
hydrogels.  Scale  bar  =  100  µm.  Images  are  representative  from  
N  ³  2  independent  experiments.  

5  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

decreases.   To   our   knowledge,   Mafosfamide   has   never  
been   tested   in   clinical   trials   for   OvCa,   but   has   shown  
promise   in   vitro   on   TCPS.46,   47   The   results   from   our   3D  
hydrogel   approach   suggest   that   this   drug   could   be  
beneficial   for   patients,   and  this   prediction   of   efficacy  was  
likely  missed  with  earlier  studies  that  relied  solely  on  TCPS  
(Figure  3c,  S6).  If  the  additional  integrin-­binding  peptides  
of  the  omentum  hydrogel  more  faithfully  capture  the  in  vivo  
microenvironment,  then  this  could  potentially  help  explain  
how   some   compounds   have   been   able   to   successfully  
become   clinical   OvCa   treatments.   However,   it   should   be  
noted   that   the   added   complexity   of   additional   integrin-­
binding   peptides   in   the   omentum   hydrogel   was   not  
necessary  for  observing  the  SKOV-­3  resistant  to  Paclitaxel  
in  3D.  From  our  experiments,  however,  it  is  not  clear  if  the  
3D   MCTS   structure   or   if   the   3D   hydrogel   environment   is  
driving  this  lack  of  response  across  the  concentrations  of  
Paclitaxel   what   we   tested.   Overall,   we   suggest   that   our  
approach   could   and   should   be   extrapolated   to   more  
possible   OvCa   drugs   either   originally   overlooked   or  
currently  under  consideration/development.  
  
In  our  previously  published  work,  we  compared  differences  
in   gene   expression   of   MCTS   spheroids   created   with   a  
variety   of   different   methods   (i.e.   clonal   growth   in  
polyNIPAAM   vs.   aggregation   in   microwells).23   In   this   first  
generation  approach,  we  created  MCTS  by  clonal  growth  
from  SKOV-­3  cells  and  compared  their  response  and  the  
response  of  OCAS  from  patients  to  a  small  panel  of  drugs  
in   a   non-­degradable   RGD   integrin-­binding   3D   synthetic  
PEG  hydrogel.23  The  results  suggested  further  exploration  
of   OvCa   in   a   3D   model   may   be   useful  for   understanding  
drug   response   in   patient   samples.   Here   we   used  
microwells,   an   aggregation   formation   method,   to   create  
MCTS,  since  OCAS  form  by  aggregation  in  patients.31  By  
simply  encapsulating  the  cells  and  OCAS  from  ascites  we  
preserved  the  cell-­cell  contacts  and  any  associated  ECM  
directly   from   the   patient.   Because   we   were   limited   in  
sample   sizes,   we   are   unsure   of   how   much   ECM   comes  
with  the  OCAS,  but  we  observed  that  the  SKOV-­3  cell  line  
secreted  fibronectin,  collagen  3,  and  collagen  1  within  one  
day  of  encapsulation  (Figure  4).  Since  these  ECM  proteins  
were  not  seen  on  TCPS  for  all  of  these  cases,  we  suspect  
that   ECM   production   facilitated   survival   in   3D   by   adding  
new  integrin  binding  sites  in  addition  to  those  we  provided  
via  peptides.  Our  results  aid  in  identifying  collagen  3  as  an  
important  contributor  to  OvCa  drug  resistance  since  it  was  
identified  to  be  co-­expressed  with  the  ECM  protein  lumican  
in  a  Topotecan-­resistant  OvCa  cell  line  on  2D  by  another  
research  group.48  Perhaps  this  suggests  future  work  could  
potentially  explore  how  these  ECM  proteins  directly  impact  
OvCa  response  to  drug.    
  
It   has   been   well-­established   that   cells   grow   at   different  
rates  in  2D  and  3D  cultures.12,  49  Since  the  ability  of  cells  to  
respond   to   chemotherapy   is   proliferation-­dependent,  
response   is   expected   to   vary   depending   on   growth  
conditions.  To  account  for  differences  in  growth  rates  that  
will  impact  traditional  drug  screening  metrics,  the  GR50  was  
  

established.36   One   key   condition   that   must   be   met   when  
applying   this   analysis   is   that   the   cells   are   growing  
exponentially  over  the  course  of  the  assay.36,  50  We  have  
found  that  this  key  condition  is  not  always  met,  especially  
in  biomaterial  platforms,  and  have  discussed  this  in  further  
detail.35   In   this   study,   we   were   not   able   to   calculate   the  
GR50  for  all  of  the  conditions  that  we  tested  due  to  growth  
limitations.   Therefore,   the   EC50   is   what   we   were   able   to  
report  here  for  all  of  the  conditions  that  we  tested.  Due  to  
the  differences  in  growth  rates  of  cells  in  2D  and  3D,  our  
3D  model  helps  aid  in  understanding  growth  of  the  MCTS  
in  3D  in  vitro  before  moving  to  in  vivo  studies.  We  tested  
drugs   used   clinically   to   treat   patients,   a   drug   that   is   in  
clinical  trials,  and  Mafosfamide,  which  has  shown  promise  
in  vitro  on  TCPS,46,  47  but  to  our  knowledge,  has  never  been  
studied   in   clinical   trials.   As   more   becomes   known   about  
how  the  microenvironment  impacts  drug  response,  it  may  
be  possible  to  evaluate  additional  quantitative  phenotypes  
that   would   aid   in   comparing   drug   responses   across  
different   geometries.   Others   have   created   models   with  
other   cell   types   including   mesothelial   cells   and  
fibroblasts,44,  51,  52  but  here  our  system  was  focused  on  the  
parameters   of   integrin   binding   sites,   stiffness,   and   3D  
geometry   without   the   contribution   of   other   cells   present  
within   the   omentum   microenvironment.   Since   ascites   is  
rich   in   cytokines   and   growth   factors,30 perhaps   future  
studies   with   patient   derived   OCAS   could   incorporate  
ascites-­derived  cytokines  as  an  additional  feature  for  more  
faithfully   modeling   the   omentum   microenvironment   for  
OvCa   drug   screening.   By   evaluating   the   presence   of   a  
subset   of   ECM   proteins   in   addition   to   the   EC50   for   each  
condition,   we   have   enabled   an   approach   to   couple   the  
microenvironment  composition  and  drug  response,  which  
could   be   applied   in   other   drug   screening   studies   with  
biomaterials.  This  could  help  establish  large  drug  response  
and  ECM  composition  data  sets,  which  could  then  possibly  
be   used   to   determine   correlations   between   ECM  
composition   and   drug   response   that   may   aid   in   making  
better   clinical   predictions   for   the   success   of   a   drug  
candidate.      
  
OvCa  is  a  challenging  disease  to  treat  and  development  of  
second  line  therapies  is  critical,  since  recurrence  occurs  in  
a   majority   of   patients.   We   propose   that   this   can   be  
achieved   by   using   a   3D   PEG-­MAL   hydrogel   with  
encapsulated   MCTS   to   aid   in   making   better   pre-­clinical  
predictions   for   new   therapeutic   compounds.   Our   results  
demonstrated  that  screening  for  therapies  on  TCPS  and  in  
3D  hydrogels  did  not  yield  the  same  drug  responses.  This  
observation  may  be  dependent  on  the  ECM  composition,  
and   we   concluded   that   TCPS   may   not   be   sufficient   for  
evaluation  of  OvCa  drug  response.  Most  patients  have  the  
presence  of  ascites,  which  is  removed  as  part  of  treatment  
and  contains  many  OCAS.  The  integration  of  OCAS  in  an  
omentum-­inspired   3D   hydrogel   model   to   study   the   drug  
response  their  drug  response  yielded  results  also  different  
than  on  TCPS.  We  discovered  that  our  3D  hydrogel  model  
demonstrated   drug   response   results   that   we   could   not  
have  captured  on  TCPS  alone,  and  recommend  that  future  
6  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

OvCa   drug   screens   employ   our   materials   to   aid   in  
understanding  OvCa  response  in  vitro.  
  
Methods  
Cell  culture    
All  cells  were  maintained  at  37°C  and  5%  CO2,  and  all  cell  
culture   supplies   were   purchased   from   Thermo   Fisher  
Scientific   (Waltham,   MA)   unless   otherwise   noted.   The  
SKOV-­3  cell  line  was  purchased  from  the  American  Type  
Culture   Collection   (ATCC,   Manassas,  VA).   SKOV-­3   cells  
were   grown   in   Roswell   Park   Memorial   Institute   (RPMI)  
medium  supplemented  with  10%  fetal  bovine  serum  (FBS)  
and  1%  penicillin/streptomycin  (pen/strep).  
  
Primary  ovarian  cancer  ascites  culture    
Ascites   samples   were   received   from   patients   undergoing  
paracentesis   at   UMass   Medical   School   (Worcester,   MA),  
transported   to   UMass   Amherst   the   same   day   as   the  
procedure,   and   used   for   experiments   immediately   upon  
receipt.  Samples  were  deidentified  and  were  IRB  exempt.  
Pathology   reports   are   provided   in   Figure   3a.   Single   cells  
and   OCAS   were   recovered   from   patient   samples   and  
treated  as  described  previously.23  Samples  containing  both  
single   cells   and   OCAS   were   grown   on   2D   TCPS   or  
encapsulated   directly   into   3D   PEG-­MAL   hydrogels.   All  
experiments  with  primary  OvCa  samples  were  conducted  
as   one   biological   replicate   with   RPMI   +   10%   FBS   +   1%  
pen/strep.  
  
Microwell  MCTS  
Square   pyramidal   microwells   (400   μm   side-­wall  
dimension)   were   fabricated   as   described   previously.53  
Briefly,   master   molds   containing   square-­pyramidal   pits  
were   generated   by   anisotropic   etching   of   100   crystalline  
silicon   in   potassium   hydroxide   (KOH).   Microwells   were  
generated   from   poly(dimethylsiloxane)   (PDMS)   using   a  
two-­stage  replica  molding  process  of  the  master  mold  as  
described   previously.53   Microwells   were   arranged   in   a  
square   array   with   no   space   between   adjacent   wells   and  
placed   in   12-­well   plates.   For   cell   seeding,   microwell  
surfaces  were  UV  sterilized  for  30  minutes,  pretreated  with  
5%   Pluronic   F-­127   (Sigma-­Aldrich,   St.   Louis,   MO)   for   5  
minutes  at  3,500  RPM  (2,465  x  g,  Eppendorf  5810R  v3.3  
centrifuge   with   A-­4-­62   rotor,   Eppendorf,   Hamburg,  
Germany)   with   an   additional   30-­minute   incubation   on   the  
bench,   and   then   washed   twice   with   sterile   water.   Cells  
were   seeded   1.00   ×   105   cells/well   (approximately   26,000  
cells/cm2).   After   24   hours,   MCTS   were   collected   by  
shaking   the   plate   gently   to   dislodge   most   of   them,   and  
gently  aspirating  medium  and  MCTS.  MCTS  solution  was  
spun  down  at  400  RPM  (Thermo  Scientific  Sorvall  ST16R  
centrifuge)  for  5  minutes.  Medium  was  removed  and  MCTS  
were  encapsulated  in  3D  hydrogels  and  RPMI  +  5%  FBS  
+  1%  pen/strep  was  added  to  each  well  after  the  hydrogels  
had  polymerized.    
  
3D  PEG-­MAL  hydrogel  platform  
MCTS   or   OCAS   were   encapsulated   into   3D   PEG  
hydrogels   as   described   previously23   with   minor  
  

modifications.  The  3D  RGD  hydrogel  was  prepared  with  a  
20   kDa   4-­arm   PEG-­maleimide   (PEG-­MAL,   Jenkem  
Technology,   Plano,   TX)   at   10   wt   %   solution   (measured  
Young’s  modulus  at  this  condition21  corresponds  with  initial  
average   measured   elastic   modulus   of   omental   tissue45)  
with   2   mM   of   cell   adhesion   peptide   GSPCRGDG   (RGD,  
Genscript,  Piscataway,  NJ)  and  crosslinked  with  a  90  mM  
combination  of  the  1  kDa  linear  PEG-­dithiol  (JenKem,  79.2  
mM)   and   cell-­degradable   cross-­linker,   Pan-­matrix  
metalloproteinase   (Pan-­MMP,   GCRDGPQGIWGQDRCG,  
Genscript,  10.8  mM)32  in  sterile  2  mM  triethanolamine  (pH  
7.4).The  hydrogels  were  synthesized  by  pipetting  1  μL  of  
PDT  and  Pan-­MMP  solution  onto  the  well  surface  of  a  48-­
well   TCPS   plate,   followed   by   pipetting   9   μL   of   the  
MCTS/OCAS-­containing   PEG−MAL   solution.   The   3D  
omentum   hydrogel   was   prepared   with   2   mM   of   the  
omentum   integrin-­binding   peptide   cocktail.   The   omentum  
cocktail   is   fully   described   in   Figure   1b   and   consists   of  
(GRGDSPCG,  
Genscript),  
GFOGER  
(CGP(GPP)5GFOGER(GPP)5,   Genscript),   PSHRN-­RGD  
(CGPHSRNGGGGGGRGDS,   same   methods   as  
described   previously21),   DGEA   (GCGDGEA,   same  
methods   as   described   previously21).   The   MCTS   from  
microwells  were  transferred  to  either  a  3D  RGD  hydrogel  
or  3D  omentum  hydrogel  at  a  ratio  of  one  well  of  a  12-­well  
microwells   plate   to   six   10   μL   PEG-­MAL   hydrogels.   The  
PEG-­MAL  solution  containing  MCTS  was  transferred  with  
cut  pipette  tips  to  minimize  shear  stress.    
  
Drug  Screening    
Single   SKOV-­3   cells   were   seeded   in   RPMI   with   5%   FBS  
and   1%   pen/strep   at   6,250   cell/cm2   on   TCPS   96-­well  
plates.  SKOV-­3  MCTS  were  recovered  and  encapsulated  
in  3D  hydrogels  with  the  same  medium  as  TCPS.  Samples  
collected  from  ascites  were  seeded  in  RPMI  with  10%  FBS  
and   1%   pen/strep   at   the   same   density   on   TCPS.   Drugs  
were  added  after  24  hours  in  the  same  type  of  medium  that  
the  cells  were  seeded  in  and  the  cells  were  incubated  with  
drugs  for  48  hours.  Carboplatin  (Tocris  Bioscience,  United  
Kingdom)   was   added   in   10-­fold   serial   dilutions   at  
concentrations   of   2x10−5   to   2x102   μM.   Paclitaxel   (MP  
Biomedicals,   Santa   Ana,   CA),   Mafosfamide   (Niomech,  
Germany),   and   Doxorubicin   (LC   Laboratories,   Woburn,  
MA)   were   added   in   10-­fold   serial   dilutions   at  
concentrations   of   1x10−5   to   1x102   μM.   LY2606368  
(AbovChem   LLC,   San   Diego,   CA)   was   added   in   10-­fold  
serial  dilutions  at  concentrations  of  3  ×  10−5  to  3  ×  101  μM.  
Dimethyl  sulfoxide  (DMSO,  Sigma-­Aldrich)  was  used  as  a  
vehicle   control   for   all   drugs   except   carboplatin   was  
dissolved  in  water.54  Cell  viability  was  assayed  at  24  hours  
post-­cell   seeding   in   a   control   plate   and   after   48   hours   of  
drug   incubation   using   the   CellTiter-­Glo   luminescent  
viability  assay  (Promega,  Madison,  WI).  After  five  (TCPS)  
or   20   (hydrogels)   minutes   after   adding   the   CellTiter-­Glo,  
luminescence  values  were  measured  in  a  BioTek  Synergy  
H1   plate   reader   (BioTek,   Winooski,   VT).   The   drug  
response   metrics   were   calculated   using   the   online   GR  
calculator36  
found  
at  
http://www.grcalculator.org/grcalculator/   for   each   cell   line  
7  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and   drug   combination.   However,   the   EC50   values   for  
LY2606368   drug   responses   of   Patient   1   and   the   second  
biological   replicate   of   SKOV-­3   MCTS   in   the   omentum-­
inspired  hydrogel  were  calculated  using  GraphPad  Prism  
v7.0c   (GraphPad   Software,   Inc.,   LaJolla,   CA)   due   to  
limitations   of   the   GR   calculator   with   the   drug   response  
curves   in   these   cases.   Conditions   that   were   reported   as  
“did   not   respond   in   3D”   were   determined   by   visual  
inspection  of  the  drug  response  curves.  The  SKOV-­3  data  
reported  are  from  N  ³  2  independent  experiments  with  N  ³  
2  technical  replicates  in  each  experiment.    
  
Immunofluorescence  (IF)  staining  
All   antibodies   and   corresponding   dilutions   used   for   IF  
staining   are   listed   in   Table   S1.   Single   cells   seeded   on  
TCPS   or  MCTS   encapsulated   in   3D   hydrogels   for   1   or   3  
days   were   assessed   for   proliferation   via   Ki67  
immunofluorescence.  For  the  Ki67  staining,  samples  were  
rinsed   with   PBS,   fixed   with   10%  formalin   for   15  minutes,  
permeabilized   with   tris-­buffered   saline   (TBS)   containing  
0.5%   Triton  X-­100   (Promega),   and   blocked   with   AbDil   (2  
wt   %   bovine   serum   albumin   (BSA,   Thermo)   in   TBS   with  
0.1%  Triton  X-­100,  TBS-­T)  for  20  minutes.  Samples  were  
incubated   for   1   (TCPS)   or   2   (hydrogels)   hours   at   room  
temperature  with  the  primary  antibody,  rinsed  three  times  
with  TBS-­T,  and  incubated  with  a  secondary  antibody  for  1  
(TCPS)  or  2  (hydrogels)  hours.  To  stain  for  ECM  proteins,  
the  cells  were  incubated  with  the  antibodies  listed  in  Table  
S1   for   the   incubation   times   described   above.   Cell   nuclei  
were  labeled  with  DAPI  (Thermo)  at  1:1,000  in  phosphate  
buffered   saline   (PBS)  for  five  minutes   and  samples   were  
rinsed   three   times   with   PBS.   Fluorescence   imaging   was  
obtained  on  a  Zeiss  Spinning  Disc  Cell  Observer  SD  (Carl  
Zeiss   AG,   Oberkochen,   Germany).   The   brightness   and  
contrast  were  adjusted  post-­image  collection  and  SKOV-­3  
images   are   representative   from   N   ³   2   independent  
experiments.    
  
LIVE/DEAD  cell  viability  staining  
Cells   seeded   on   TCPS   or   MCTS   encapsulated   in   3D  
hydrogels  for  1  and  3  days,  were  assessed  for  viability  with  
LIVE/DEAD  staining  (L3224,  Thermo)  in  accordance  with  
the  manufacturer’s  instructions.  Imaging  was  obtained  on  
a   Zeiss   Spinning   Disc   Cell   Observer   SD   (Zeiss).   The  
brightness   and   contrast   were   adjusted   post-­image  
collection  and  SKOV-­3  images  are  representative  from  N  
³  2  independent  experiments.  
  
Acknowledgements  
The   authors   are   grateful   to   Dr.   Kathleen   Arcaro   and   Dr.  
Jungwoo  Lee  for  use  of  equipment.  Also,  we  would  like  to  
thank  Hong  Bing  (Amy)  Chen,  Chien-­I  (Mike)  Chang,  and  
Cristian   Fraioli   at   the   Cancer   Center   Tissue   and   Tumor  
Bank  at  UMass  Medical  School  for  primary  ovarian  cancer  
ascites.   We   would   like   to   thank   Sualyneth   Galarza   for  
helpful  discussions  about  designing  the  omentum  peptide  
cocktail.   This   work   was   funded   by   a   grant   from   the   NIH  
(1DP2CA186573-­01)  and  a  CAREER  grant  from  the  NSF  
(1454806)   to   SRP.   EAB   was   partially   supported   by   a  
  

fellowship  from  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  as  part  of  
the   University   of   Massachusetts   Chemistry-­Biology  
Interface   Training   Program   (National   Research   Service  
Award  T32  GM008515).  SRP  is  a  Pew  Biomedical  Scholar  
supported   by   the   Pew   Charitable   Trusts.   SRP   and   MFG  
were   partially   supported   by   a   Barry   and   Afsaneh   Siadat  
Career  Development  Award.    
  
Conflict  of  Interest  
The  authors  declare  no  competing  financial  interests.  
  
Author  contributions  
EAB  and  MFG  performed  all  of  the  cell  experiments.  DCC  
and   KRS   designed   and   created   the   microwells.   SRP  
supervised   the   study.   EAB,   MFG,   and   SRP   wrote   the  
manuscript.    
  
LITERATURE  CITED  
  
  
1.  
R.   L.   Siegel,   K.   D.   Miller   and   A.   Jemal,   CA:   A  
Cancer  Journal  for  Clinicians  68  (1),  7-­30  (2018).  
2.  

R.  F.  Ozols,  M.  A.  Bookman,  D.  C.  Connolly,  M.  B.  

Daly,   A.   K.   Godwin,   R.   J.   Schilder,   X.   Xu   and   T.   C.  
Hamilton,  Cancer  Cell  5  (January),  19-­24  (2004).  
3.  

D.  S.  P.  Tan,  R.  Agarwal  and  S.  B.  Kaye,  Lancet  

Oncology  7  (November),  925-­934  (2006).  
4.  

E.   Lengyel,   The   American   Journal   of   Pathology  

177  (3),  1053-­1064  (2010).  
5.  

M.-­L.   Puiffe,   C.   Le   Page,   A.   Filali-­Mouhim,   M.  

Zietarska,   V.   Ouellet,   P.   N.   Tonin,   M.   Chevrette,   D.   M.  
Provencher   and   A.-­M.   Mes-­Masson,   Neoplasia   9   (10),  
820-­829  (2007).  
6.  

S.   Vaughan,   J.   I.   Coward,   R.   C.   Bast   Jr,   A.  

Berchuck,   J.   S.   Berek,   J.   D.   Brenton,   G.   Coukos,   C.   C.  
Crum,  R.  Drapkin,  D.  Etemadmoghadam,  M.  Friedlander,  
H.  Gabra,  S.  B.  Kaye,  C.  J.  Lord,  E.  Lengyel,  D.  A.  Levine,  
I.  A.  McNeish,  U.  Menon,  G.  B.  Mills,  K.  P.  Nephew,  A.  M.  
Oza,  A.  K.  Sood,  E.  A.  Stronach,  H.  Walczak,  D.  D.  Bowtell  

8  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and   F.   R.   Balkwill,   Nature   Reviews   Cancer   11,   719-­719  

18.  

(2011).  

M.   A.   Randolph   and   K.   S.   Anseth,   Advanced   healthcare  

7.  

R.   Agarwal   and   S.   B.   Kaye,   Nature   Reviews  

B.  V.  Sridhar,  J.  L.  Brock,  J.  S.  Silver,  J.  L.  Leight,  

materials  4  (5),  702-­713  (2015).  

Cancer  3  (7),  502-­516  (2003).  

19.  

8.  

S.   Anseth,   ACS   Applied   Materials   &   Interfaces   8   (34),  

K.   Pliarchopoulou   and   D.   Pectasides,   Critical  

K.  M.  Mabry,  M.  E.  Schroeder,  S.  Z.  Payne  and  K.  

Reviews  in  Oncology/Hematology  79  (1),  17-­23  (2011).  

21914-­21922  (2016).  

9.  

20.  

P.  Horvath,  N.  Aulner,  M.  Bickle,  A.  M.  Davies,  E.  

S.  Pedron,  E.  Becka  and  B.  A.  Harley,  Advanced  

D.  Nery,  D.  Ebner,  M.  C.  Montoya,  P.  Östling,  V.  Pietiäinen,  

Materials  27  (9),  1567-­1572  (2015).  

L.  S.  Price,  S.  L.  Shorte,  G.  Turcatti,  C.  V.  Schantz  and  N.  

21.  

O.   Carragher,   Nature   Reviews   Drug   Discovery   15   (11),  

Yurkevicz  and  S.  R.  Peyton,  ACS  Biomaterials  Science  &  

751-­769  (2016).  

Engineering  4  (2),  707-­718  (2018).  

10.  

22.  

S.   A.   Langhans,   Frontiers   in   Pharmacology   9  

E.  A.  Brooks,  L.  E.  Jansen,  M.  F.  Gencoglu,  A.  M.  

M.  Caiazzo,  Y.  Okawa,  A.  Ranga,  A.  Piersigilli,  Y.  

(JAN),  1-­14  (2018).  

Tabata   and   M.   P.   Lutolf,   Nature   Materials   15   (January),  

11.  

344-­352  (2016).  

R.  Edmondson,  J.  J.  Broglie,  A.  F.  Adcock  and  L.  

Yang,  Assay  and  Drug  Development  Technologies  12  (4),  

23.  

207-­218  (2014).  

Brooks,  A.  D.  Schwartz,  D.  C.  Corbett,  K.  R.  Stevens  and  

12.  

S.  R.  Peyton,  ACS  Biomaterials  Science  &  Engineering  4  

B.   M.   Baker   and   C.   S.   Chen,   Journal   of   Cell  

M.   F.   Gencoglu,   L.   E.   Barney,   C.   L.   Hall,   E.   A.  

Science  125  (13),  3015  LP-­3024  (2012).  

(2),  410-­420  (2018).  

13.  

24.  

K.  S.  M.  Smalley,  M.  Lioni  and  M.  Herlyn,  In  Vitro  

K.  M.  Burleson,  R.  C.  Casey,  K.  M.  Skubitz,  S.  E.  

Cellular   &   Developmental   Biology   -­   Animal   42   (October),  

Pambuccian,  T.  R.  O.  Jr  and  A.  P.  N.  Skubitz,    93,  170-­181  

242-­247  (2006).  

(2004).  

14.  

25.  

K.  L.  Schmeichel  and  M.  J.  Bissell,  Journal  of  Cell  

T.   Ishiguro,   H.   Ohata,   A.   Sato,   K.   Yamawaki,   T.  

Science  116  (12),  2377-­2388  (2003).  

Enomoto  and  K.  Okamoto,  Cancer  Science  108  (3),  283-­

15.  

289  (2017).  

M.  W.  Tibbitt  and  K.  S.  Anseth,  Biotechnology  and  

Bioengineering  103  (4),  655-­663  (2009).  

26.  

16.  

N.  Schultz,  Nature  Communications  4  (2126),  1-­10  (2013).  

L.   Jansen,   T.   McCarthy,   M.   Lee   and   S.   Peyton,  

S.  Domcke,  R.  Sinha,  D.  A.  Levine,  C.  Sander  and  

bioRxiv,  275842-­275842  (2018).  

27.  

17.  

E.  A.  Phelps,  N.  O.  Enemchukwu,  V.  F.  Fiore,  J.  C.  

D.  W.  Garsed,  J.  George,  S.  Fereday,  K.  Nones,  P.  Cowin,  

Sy,  N.  Murthy,  T.  A.  Sulchek,  T.  H.  Barker  and  A.  J.  Garcia,  

K.  Alsop,  P.  J.  Bailey,  K.  S.  Kassahn,  F.  Newell,  M.  C.  J.  

Advanced  Materials  24  (1),  64-­70  (2012).  

Quinn,   S.   Kazakoff,   K.   Quek,   C.   Wilhelm-­Benartzi,   E.  

  

A.  M.  Patch,  E.  L.  Christie,  D.  Etemadmoghadam,  

9  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Curry,   H.   S.   Leong,   A.   Hamilton,   L.   Mileshkin,   G.   Au-­

Hynes,  Journal  of  Proteome  Research  16  (8),  3083-­3091  

Yeung,  C.  Kennedy,  J.  Hung,  Y.  E.  Chiew,  P.  Harnett,  M.  

(2017).  

Friedlander,  M.  Quinn,  J.  Pyman,  S.  Cordner,  P.  O'Brien,  

34.  

J.  Leditschke,  G.  Young,  K.  Strachan,  P.  Waring,  W.  Azar,  

Knight,  C.-­F.  Tiger,  O.  T.  Pentikäinen,  M.  S.  Johnson,  R.  

C.   Mitchell,   N.   Traficante,   J.   Hendley,   H.   Thorne,   M.  

W.   Farndale,   J.   Heino   and   D.   Gullberg,   The   Journal   of  

Shackleton,  D.  K.  Miller,  G.  M.  Arnau,  R.  W.  Tothill,  T.  P.  

Biological  Chemistry  278  (9),  7270-­7277  (2003).  

Holloway,   T.   Semple,   I.   Harliwong,   C.   Nourse,   E.  

35.  

Nourbakhsh,  S.  Manning,  S.  Idrisoglu,  T.  J.  C.  Bruxner,  A.  

Cornelison,  J.  M.  Munson  and  S.  Peyton,  bioRxiv  (2018).  

N.  Christ,  B.  Poudel,  O.  Holmes,  M.  Anderson,  C.  Leonard,  

36.  

A.   Lonie,   N.   Hall,   S.   Wood,   D.   F.   Taylor,   Q.   Xu,   J.   Lynn  

Nat  Methods  13  (6),  521-­527  (2016).  

Fink,   N.   Waddell,   R.   Drapkin,   E.   Stronach,   H.   Gabra,   R.  

37.  

Brown,  A.  Jewell,  S.  H.  Nagaraj,  E.  Markham,  P.  J.  Wilson,  

Hutmacher,   J.   A.   Clements   and   S.   C.   Rizzi,   Biomaterials  

J.  Ellul,  O.  McNally,  M.  A.  Doyle,  R.  Vedururu,  C.  Stewart,  

31  (32),  8494-­8506  (2010).  

E.   Lengyel,   J.   V.  Pearson,   N.   Waddell,  A.   Defazio,   S.  M.  

38.  

Grimmond  and  D.  D.  L.  Bowtell,  Nature  521  (7553),  489-­

C.   M.   Annunziata,   M.   J.   Merino,   E.   M.   Swisher,   M.   I.  

494  (2015).  

Harrell,   J.   B.   Trepel,   M.-­J.   Lee,   M.   H.   Bagheri,   D.-­A.  

28.  

Botesteanu,  S.  M.  Steinber,  L.  Minasian,  I.  Ekwede  and  E.  

A.   Letai,   Nature   Medicine   23   (9),   1028-­1035  

(2017).  
29.  

W.-­M.   Zhang,   J.   Käpylä,   J.   S.   Puranen,   C.   G.  

E.   A.   Brooks,   S.   Galarza,   M.   F.   Gencoglu,   R.   C.  

M.  Hafner,  M.  Niepel,  M.  Chung  and  P.  K.  Sorger,  

D.   Loessner,   K.   S.   Stok,   M.   P.   Lutolf,   D.   W.  

J.-­M.  Lee,  N.  Jayakumar,  A.  Zimmer,  S.  Lipkowitz,  

C.  Kohn,  The  Lancet  Oncology  19  (2),  207-­215  (2018).  
E.   Kipps,   D.   S.   P.   Tan   and   S.   B.   Kaye,   Nature  

39.  

J.-­M.   Lee,   F.   H.   Karzai,   A.   Zimmer,   C.   M.  

Reviews  Cancer  13  (4),  273-­282  (2013).  

Annunziata,  S.  Lipkowitz,  B.  Parker,  N.  Houston,  I.  Ekwede  

30.  

and   E.   C.   Kohn,   Annals   of   Oncology   27,   vi296–vi312  

N.   Ahmed   and   K.   L.   Stenvers,   Frontiers   in  

Oncology  3  (September),  1-­12  (2013).  

(2016).  

31.  

40.  

K.  Shield,  M.  L.  Ackland,  N.  Ahmed  and  G.  E.  Rice,  

H.   A.   Kenny,   C.   Y.   Chiang,   E.   A.   White,   E.   M.  

Gynecologic  Oncology  113  (1),  143-­148  (2009).  

Schryver,   M.   Habis,   I.   L.   Romero,   A.   Ladanyi,   C.   V.  

32.  

M.  P.  Lutolf,  J.  L.  Lauer-­Fields,  H.  G.  Schmoekel,  

Penicka,  J.  George,  K.  Matlin,  A.  Montag,  K.  Wroblewski,  

A.  T.  Metters,  F.  E.  Weber,  G.  B.  Fields  and  J.  A.  Hubbell,  

S.   D.   Yamada,   A.   P.   Mazar,   D.   Bowtell   and   E.   Lengyel,  

PNAS  100  (9),  5413-­5418  (2003).  

Journal   of   Clinical   Investigation   124   (10),   4614-­4628  

33.  

(2014).  

A.  Naba,  O.  M.  T.  Pearce,  A.  Del  Rosario,  D.  Ma,  

H.  Ding,  V.  Rajeeve,  P.  R.  Cutillas,  F.  R.  Balkwill  and  R.  O.  

  

10  

	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/560482; this version posted February 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

41.  

R.  Januchowski,  M.  Świerczewska,  K.  Sterzyńska,  

50.  

M.  Hafner,  L.  M.  Heiser,  E.  H.  Williams,  M.  Niepel,  

K.  Wojtowicz,  M.  Nowicki  and  M.  Zabel,  Journal  of  Cancer  

N.  J.  Wang,  J.  E.  Korkola,  J.  W.  Gray  and  P.  K.  Sorger,  Sci.  

7  (10),  1295-­1310  (2016).  

Data  4,  170166  (2017).  

42.  

51.  

S.   Raghavan,   M.   R.   Ward,   K.   R.   Rowley,   R.   M.  

F.  Xu,  J.  Celli,  I.  Rizvi,  S.  Moon,  T.  Hasan  and  U.  

Wold,   S.   Takayama,   R.   J.   Buckanovich   and   G.   Mehta,  

Demirci,  Biotechnology  Journal  6  (2),  204-­212  (2011).  

Gynecologic  Oncology  138  (1),  181-­189  (2015).  

52.  

43.  

Kenny   and   M.   Ferrer,   SLAS   Discovery   22   (5),   494-­506  

M.   Liu,   X.   Zhang,   C.   Long,   H.   Xu,   X.   Cheng,   J.  

M.  Lal-­Nag,  L.  McGee,  R.  Guha,  E.  Lengyel,  H.  A.  

Chang,  C.  Zhang,  C.  Zhang  and  X.  Wang,  RSC  Advances  

(2017).  

8  (16),  8910-­8919  (2018).  

53.  

44.  

H.   A.   Kenny,   T.   Krausz,   S.   D.   Yamada   and   E.  

Ng,  B.  Carvalho,  K.  S.  Christine,  R.  R.  Chaturvedi,  C.  Y.  Li,  

Lengyel,   International   Journal   of   Cancer   121   (7),   1463-­

P.   W.   Zandstra,   C.   S.   Chen   and   S.   N.   Bhatia,   Nature  

1472  (2007).  

Communications  4  (2013).  

45.  

54.  

Alkhouli,  Nadia,  J.  Mansfield,  E.  Green,  J.  Bell,  B.  

K.   R.   Stevens,   M.   D.   Ungrin,   R.   E.   Schwartz,   S.  

M.  D.  Hall,  K.  A.  Telma,  K.-­e.  Chang,  T.  D.  Lee,  J.  

Knight,   N.   Liversedge,   J.   C.   Tham,   R.   Welbourn,   A.   C.  

P.  Madigan,  J.  R.  Lloyd,  I.  S.  Goldlust,  J.  D.  Hoeschele  and  

Shore,  K.  Kos  and  C.  P.  Winlove,  Am  J  Physiol  Endocrinol  

M.   M.   Gottesman,   Cancer   Research   17   (14),   3913-­3923  

Metab  305  (12),  E1427–E1435  (2013).  

(2014).  

46.  

  

D.   S.   Alberts,   J.   G.   Einspahr,   R.   Struck,   G.  

Bignami,   L.   Young,   E.   A.   Surwit   and   S.   E.   Salmon,  
Investigational  New  Drugs  2  (2),  141-­148  (1984).  
47.  

A.   O.   Mueck,   H.   Seeger,   D.   Wallwiener   and   J.  

Huober,  European  Journal  of  Gynaecological  Oncology  25  
(6),  699-­701  (2004).  
48.  

A.   Klejewski,   K.   Sterzynska,   K.   Wojtowicz,   M.  

Swierczewska,   M.   Partyka,   M.   Brazert,   M.   Nowicki,   M.  
Zabel   and   R.   Januschowski,   Oncotarget   8   (43),   74466-­
74478  (2017).  
49.  

M.   Ravi,   A.   Ramesh   and   A.   Pattabhi,   Journal   of  

Cellular  Physiology  232  (10),  2679-­2697  (2017).  

  

11  

