bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Title: Chromatin regulatory dynamics of early development and regional specification in a directed
differentiation model of the human small intestine
Authors: Yu-Han Hung1, Sha Huang2,3, Michael K. Dame3, Jason R. Spence2,3, Praveen Sethupathy1
1

Department of Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY,
USA
2
Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
3
Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA
Correspondence: Praveen Sethupathy, Address: Department of Biomedical Sciences, Cornell University,
Ithaca, NY, USA. E-mail: pr46@cornell.edu, Phone: 607-253-4375
Grant Support: ADA Pathway to Stop Diabetes Research Accelerator (1-16-ACE-47 to P.S.); Empire
State Stem Cell Fund (C30293GG to Y.-H. H.); Intestinal Stem Cell Consortium (U01DK103141 to
J.R.S.); a collaborative research project funded by the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID), the
NIAID Novel Alternative Model Systems for Enteric Diseases (NAMSED) consortium (U19AI116482 to
J.R.S.); the support from the University of Michigan Center for Gastrointestinal Research (UMCGR)
(NIDDK 5P30DK034933).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
The appropriate development of the small intestine (SI) is critical for efficient nutrient absorption and
barrier function after birth. Most of the molecular features and regional patterning of the SI are programmed
very early in prenatal development. However, the chromatin regulatory dynamics that underpin early SI
development in humans is largely unknown. To fill this knowledge void, we apply a cutting-edge genomic
technology to a state-of-the-art model of human SI development. Specifically, we leverage chromatin runon sequencing (ChRO-seq) to define the landscape of active transcriptional regulatory elements across early
stages of directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) into SI organoids. Through
comprehensive bioinformatic analysis of the data we provide the first-ever view of the changing chromatin
regulatory landscape and define stage-specific key enhancer hotspots during human SI development. We
also identify candidate transcription factors and their cistromes that are associated with the acquisition of
SI identity and the initiation of regional patterning. This work offers a rich resource for studying
transcriptional regulation of early human SI development.
KEY WORDS: small intestine; development; chromatin run-on sequencing (ChRO-seq); enhancer; gene
regulation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
The embryonic development of the small intestine (SI) is critical for a fetus to thrive and grow. The genetic
programming of SI cell identity and regional specification during early development is fundamental to
ensure proper SI morphogenesis and maturation with specialized functions, including nutrient digestion and
absorption, energy balance, and pathogen defense. Several seminal studies have identified important
molecular regulators associated with gut development1,2, and more recent studies have leveraged advanced
genomic technologies (e.g., single cell RNA-seq and ATAC-seq) to provide insights at a more granular
level into gut development3-7; however, this work relies almost exclusively on animal models. Studies of
human SI development have been few, due in large part to limited access to primary human fetal tissues.
Early time points of gut development in the human are essentially unexplored. In this study, we sought to
fill this important knowledge gap by profiling for the first time the chromatin regulatory dynamics and
transcriptional programs that are associated with early development of the human SI.
Robust temporal and spatial regulation of gene expression is fundamental to all biological processes
including development8,9. Transcriptional programs are precisely controlled by promoters and distal cisregulatory regions known as enhancers. Enhancers harbor binding sites for transcription factors (TFs),
activate long-range gene transcription, and are often cell-type specific10,11. RNA polymerases are known
to be recruited to active enhancers, generating divergent short transcripts (also known as enhancer RNA or
eRNAs)12,13. Recently, an approach called chromatin run-on sequencing (ChRO-seq)14 was developed for
genome-wide identification of promoters, active enhancers, and actively transcribed gene bodies in a single
assay. ChRO-seq represents the newest generation of nascent RNA sequencing technologies, and
overcomes several limitations of previous versions including global run-on sequencing (GRO-seq)15 and
precision run-on sequencing (PRO-seq)16. ChRO-seq was very recently successfully applied to archived
solid tumor tissues to define the distinct regulatory landscapes across different subtypes of glioblastoma
multiforme14.
Advances in the directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), including human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs), provide a powerful strategy for studying the early development of human
SI17,18. Human SI organoids generated from hPSCs recapitulate many aspects of in vivo SI development19,20,
including embryonic patterning into different regions of the GI tract21, and ultimately exhibit molecular,
structural, and functional features similar to those of the human fetal SI22. While hPSC differentiation into
different regions of the SI has been described, the molecular mechanisms governing this pattering is unclear.
To reveal temporal dynamics of the chromatin state during early human SI development and differentiation,
we performed ChRO-seq in the early stages of the hPSC-derived SI model, including hESC, definitive
endoderm (DE), duodenal spheroid (primitive SI with proximal regional identity), and ileal spheroid
(primitive SI with distal regional identity). This study provides the first-ever view of the changing
chromatin regulatory landscape and defines stage-specific key enhancer hotspots during human SI
development. We also identify candidate key transcription factors and their cistromes that are associated
with the acquisition of SI identity and the initiation of regional patterning. Moreover, we offer an
unprecedented resource for the research community to develop and test targeted hypotheses about key
regulatory hotspots and molecular drivers of early events of human SI development.
RESULTS
Generation of SI spheroids by directed differentiation of hPSCs
The directed differentiation of hPSCs (here we used H9 hESCs) into SI organoids was carried out as
previously described19,21 (Figure 1A). For genomic analysis, we included four early stages of the hPSCderived SI model: hESC, DE, duodenum (Duo) spheroid, and ileal (Ile) spheroid21. These region-patterned
spheroids, which represent the primitive fetal SI, are comprised of mainly stem/progenitor cells23 that can
give rise to different mature lineages after prolonged organoid culture, or following transplantation into a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

murine host24. We performed ChRO-seq, together with deep RNA-seq, on these four stages in order to
define the chromatin and gene expression dynamics in the key events of human SI development: DE
formation (DE vs. hESC), SI identity acquisition (Duo spheroid vs. DE), and regional specification (Ile vs.
Duo spheroid) (Figure 1A). ChRO-seq enables the quantification of genome-wide nascent transcriptional
activity at gene bodies, promoters, and enhancers, whereas RNA-seq enables only determination of steady
state levels of gene expression (Figure 1A).
ChRO-seq reveals temporal dynamics of nascent transcription at gene loci during early
development of human SI
To assess nascent transcription of genes, we first analyzed ChRO-seq signals within the body of annotated
genes. Hierarchical clustering analysis and principal component analysis (PCA) of the gene transcriptional
profiles is sufficient to cleanly stratify different stages of the hPSC-derived SI model (Figure 1B and C).
The ChRO-seq and RNA-seq signal for genes encoding transcription factors (TFs) that are well-established
protein markers of specific stages indicate the appropriate specificity (Figure 1D, Supplementary Figure
1A). Moreover, global comparison of the ChRO-seq and RNA-seq profiles across all stages (Figure 1E)
and within each stage (Supplementary Figure 1B) reveal a robust correlation, indicating that nascent
transcription profiles globally reflect steady state expression profiles in this model system (albeit not
perfectly, as expected due to other layers of gene regulation such as those at the post-transcriptional level).
Next we sought to identify from the ChRO-seq data differentially transcribed genes during DE formation,
SI identity acquisition, and regional specification to the Ile region (DESeq2: padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, log2 fold
change > 1, average TPM > 25) (Figure 1F-L). During the transition from hESC to DE, 1886 genes (1328
up; 558 down) are altered (Figure 1F) and the Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis reveals that the uptranscribed genes in DE are enriched in pathways that drive endoderm formation (Figure 1G). Upon the
formation of Duo spheroids from DE, 4024 genes (2546 up; 1478 down) are altered and the up-transcribed
genes are enriched in glucose metabolism processes (Figure 1H and I). In the comparison of Ile relative
to Duo spheroids, there are as expected fewer genes that are significantly altered (total 362 genes; 182 up;
180 down) (Figure 1J). Although the GO term enrichment analysis of up-transcribed genes in Ile spheroids
reveals only general transcriptional processes (Figure 1K), and although canonical WNT targets (CTNNB1
and AXIN2) are not altered (Supplementary Figure 1C), pathway enrichment analyses with the BioPlanet
2019 and NCI-Nature 2016 databases show a significant over-representation in the AP-1 TF network
(Figure 1L), which likely reflects an increase in non-canonical WNT signaling. The pathway analyses of
down-transcribed genes in all relevant comparisons are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. Also, the
results of all of the same analyses carried out on RNA-seq data are shown in Supplementary Figure 2.
Identification of stage-specific markers at the levels of both transcription and steady state
expression during early development of human SI
First we demonstrated from the ChRO-seq data that markers of the esophagus, lung, stomach, liver,
pancreas, and colon lineages are transcribed at low levels, as expected, in the Duo and Ile spheroids
(Supplementary Figure 3A and 3B) compared to CDX2 (Supplementary Figure 1A), which is a known
marker of SI. Next we determined that previously reported markers of human fetal duodenum and ileum21
(Supplementary Figure 3C) are not sufficient to mark SI spheroids but rather only mature SI organoids
after culture for 28 days (Supplementary Figure 3D). This likely reflects that fact that spheroids, which
are newly differentiated, represent the early gut lineage and have not been given time in vitro to mature into
SI organoids, which are typically cultured for ~1 month prior to analysis. Given the lack of known markers
distinguishing Duo from Ile spheroids, we next sought to fill this knowledge void.
To identify genes that label a specific stage during early human SI development at the levels of both
transcription and steady-state expression, we performed integrative analysis of the ChRO-seq and RNAseq data (see Methods). The results of hierarchical clustering analysis of those genes actively transcribed
(TPM > 50) in at least one stage are shown in Figure 2A. We identified genes that are significantly elevated

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

according to both transcription and expression in each stage relative to all other stages: hESC (n=239), DE
(n=149), SI spheroid irrespective of regional identity (n=88), Duo spheroid (n=9), and Ile spheroid (n=40)
(Figure 2B; Supplementary Data 2). The stage-specific genes we identified include well-established
markers such as POU5F1 and SOX2 for hESCs (Figure 2C), NODAL, SOX17, GATA6, EOMES and
LEFTY2 for DE (Figure 2D), and CDX2 for SI spheroid irrespective of regional identity (Figure 2E). We
defined many novel stage-specific markers including HES4 and HOXB family members for SI spheroids
irrespective of regional identity, FOXJ1 for Duo spheroids, and FJX1 for Ile spheroids. We also identified
several long, non-coding RNA (lncRNA) and anti-sense transcript markers: LINC00678 for hESCs (Figure
2C), LINC00543 for SI spheroids irrespective of regional identity (Figure 2E), and EVX1-AS for Ile
spheroids (Figure 2G).
Active transcriptional regulatory element landscapes reveal chromatin re-wiring during early
development of human SI
Active transcriptional regulatory elements (TREs), including promoters and enhancers, are identified in
ChRO-seq data by the hallmark feature of short bidirectional transcription (Figure 3A). To identify active
TREs across the entire genome in each stage, we employed dREG25, which was developed specifically for
this purpose. Using this method, we identified a total of 125,863 active TREs across all four stages included
in this study. The length distribution of these active TREs is consistent with what has been reported
previously26 (Figure 3B). We found that, as expected, the vast majority of the active TREs are located in
intergenic regions, introns, and annotated transcription start sites (TSS) (Figure 3C). PCA showed that
active TRE profiles are sufficient to cleanly stratify samples based on developmental stage and SI regional
identity (Supplementary Figure 4A). We next categorized the identified TREs into 49,855 proximal and
76,008 distal TREs, which from here on in we refer to as promoters and enhancers, respectively (Figure
3A). Then we carried out unsupervised hierarchical clustering analyses using profiles of promoters plus
enhancers, promoters only, and enhancers only (Figure 3D-F). We observed that enhancer profiles stratify
different stages more accurately than promoters or all TREs (Figure 3D-F, Supplementary Figure 4B-D),
consistent with the notation that enhancer signature is the most cell-type specific8,10.
Identification of genes associated with stage-specific TREs during the process of SI identity
acquisition and regional patterning
Next we defined stage-specific TREs, determined the density of stage-specific TREs for every transcribed
gene in each stage, and identified genes associated with the most stage-specific TREs (Figure 4A; see
Methods). We identified a total of 4166 Duo-specific and 540 Ile-specific active TREs (Figure 4B and
F). We confirmed that, as expected, genes associated with a greater number of Duo-specific TREs also
exhibit greater increases in transcription (ChRO-seq signal) in Duo spheroids relative to DE (Figure 4C).
Similarly, genes associated with a greater number of Ile-specific TREs also exhibit greater increases in
transcription (ChRO-seq signal) in Ile spheroids relative to Duo (Figure 4G). Of the 3317 genes highly
transcribed in Duo, 195 are associated with at least one Duo-specific TRE, are significantly up-transcribed
(ChRO-seq) relative to DE, and significantly increased in steady-state expression (RNA-seq) relative to DE
(Figure 4D). As expected, CDX2 is one of the top genes ranked by the density of Duo-specific TREs
(Figure 4 E). Notably, most of the other top ranked genes are HOXB family members (Figure 4E). Of
the 3418 genes highly transcribed in Ile, only 48 are associated with at least one Ile-specific TRE, are
significantly up-transcribed (ChRO-seq) relative to Duo, and significantly increased in steady-state
expression (RNA-seq) relative to Duo (Figure 4H). The genes associated with the greatest number of Ilespecific TREs include members of the HOXA, C and D families, factors involved in canonical or noncanonical WNT signaling (JUND, FJX1 and CSRNP1), as well as HOTTIP (Figure 4I). Several of these
genes were identified as Ile spheroid-specific markers (Figure 2G). The results of similar analyses focused
on hESCs in comparison to DE, DE in comparison to hESCs, and Ile in comparison to DE are shown in
Supplementary Figure 5B-M.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The same analyses as described above using the active enhancers only reveals the same temporal dynamics
of the HOX cluster genes (Supplementary Fig. 6). Indeed, we detected high transcriptional activity
(ChRO-seq) in Duo spheroids and high density of nearby Duo-specific TREs for HOXB genes (Figure 5A
and B). The increase in transcription of each HOXB family member in Duo relative to DE correlates with
the density of Duo-specific TREs (Figure 5C). Also, we observed dramatic increases in transcriptional
activity (ChRO-seq) in Ile spheroids and high density of Ile-specific TREs for HOXA, C, and D family
members (Figure 5D and E). The increase in transcription of each HOXA/C/D family member in Ile
relative to Duo tracks closely with the density of nearby Ile-specific TREs (Figure 5F). Together, these
observations indicate an initial activation of HOXB during SI identity acquisition, likely driven by the
identified nearby Duo-specific TREs, followed by the activation of the other HOX clusters during ileal
specification, likely driven by the identified nearby Ile-specific TREs.
Identification of stage-specific enhancer hotspots associated with SI identify acquisition and ileal
regional patterning
It has been shown in previous studies that dense clusters of highly active enhancers (which we refer to as
‘hotspots’) occur nearby to genes that are especially critical for defining cell identity and status27-29. We
sought to define for the first time the changing landscape of enhancer hotspots in a model of human SI
development. To accomplish this, we adapted a previously described methodology27,28, which requires
several different histone modification ChIP-seq datasets, to work with ChRO-seq data instead (see Methods;
Supplementary Data 3).
To identify enhancer hotspots and the candidate genes which they may regulate in SI identity acquisition
(Figure 6A), we first analyzed Duo-specific distal TREs to define ‘stitched enhancers’ specific to Duo
spheroids relative to DE. Among the 2389 stitched enhancers, we identified 145 that exhibit strong enough
transcriptional activity to be designated as Duo-specific ‘enhancer hotspots’ (Figure 6B). The distribution
of the distance between every gene and its nearest Duo-specific enhancer hotspot is shown in Figure 6C.
We assigned every stitched enhancer in Duo spheroids (non-hotspots and hotspots) to the nearest gene and
found that the overall increase in transcription is significantly greater for the set of genes associated with
Duo-specific hotspots compared to those associated with stitched enhancers that are not hotspots (Figure
6D). This finding is consistent with the notion that hotspots exert particularly strong effects on transcription.
Among the 110 genes linked to Duo-specific enhancer hotspots, 30 exhibit highly significant increases in
both transcription (ChRO-seq) and steady state expression (RNA-seq) during the transition from DE to Duo
spheroid (Figure 6E and F). Many of these 30 (e.g., CDX2, FOXA1, HOXB family members, and
LINC00543) were defined earlier as SI or Duo-specific markers (Figure 2).
We next performed a similar analysis to identify enhancer hotspots and nearby genes associated with ileal
regional specification. Among 310 stitched enhancers formed by Ile-specific enhancers (relative to Duo
spheroids), we defined 29 Ile-specific enhancer hotspots (Figure 6G). The distribution of the distance
between every gene and its nearest Ile-specific enhancer hotspot is shown in Figure 6H. Similar to the
observation made for SI fate acquisition, the genes nearest to Ile-specific enhancer hotspots exhibit a
significantly greater increase in transcription compared to those linked to non-hotspot stitched enhancers
(Figure 6I). Among the 31 genes linked to Ile-specific enhancer hotspots, 12 exhibit highly significant
increases in both transcription (ChRO-seq) and steady state expression (RNA-seq) in Ile relative to Duo
spheroids (Figure 6J). These genes include HAND2, HOXC/D family members, FJX1, DLX5, and PITX1
(Figure 6K), many of which were also identified earlier as Ile-specific markers (Figure 2). Similar
analyses were performed for the hESC and DE stages and the results are summarized in Supplementary
Figure 7.
Identification of candidate TFs and cistromes associated with SI identity acquisition and ileal
regional patterning

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To discover putative key transcription factor (TF) drivers and their cistromes (the genome-wide set of TF
targets) along the early developmental axis of the hPSC-derived SI model, we developed and executed the
following bioinformatic pipeline (Figure 7A, see Methods): (1) Motif enrichment analysis was performed
by HOMER in stage-specific TREs (Supplementary Data 4), (2) The enriched binding motifs were filtered
further based on the RNA-seq expression levels of the cognate TFs, and (3) The cistromes with different
candidate TFs of interest were defined and compared across different TFs.
We first sought to identify candidate TF-motif modules that are associated with SI identity acquisition.
Among the 4166 Duo-specific TREs, we detected significant enrichment for the binding motifs of CDX4,
CDX2, and many forkhead box TFs including FOXA1 and FOXM1 (Figure 7B; Supplementary Figure
9G). The motif enrichment analyses using only Duo-specific enhancers generated similar results
(Supplementary Figure 8). We chose the top ranked motifs associated with CDX4, CDX2, FOXA1 and
EP300 for cistrome analysis (Figure 7C; Supplementary Figure 10), which led to several notable
observations. First, FOXA1 and CDX2 are associated with Duo-specific TREs that harbor FOXA1 and
CDX2 binding sites, strongly suggesting that the transcription of these two TFs may be activated and
maintained in part through an auto-regulatory mechanism. Second, we found that although the genes
associated with Duo-specific TREs that contain CDX2 or CDX4 binding sites are largely overlapping as
expected, there are some genes uniquely associated with only one or the other, indicating that there may be
some distinct functional roles in SI fate acquisition. Third, many of the genes we had identified as markers
of SI spheroids (and even specifically Duo-spheroids), including HOXB genes, FOXJ1, WFDC2, and
LINC00543, are indeed associated with one or more of the TFs that are associated with SI fate acquisition.
We next performed a similar analysis for ileal regional specification. Among the 540 Ile-specific TREs,
we detected significant enrichment for several key TF families (Figure 7B; Supplementary Figure 9G
and 10). We observed an enrichment for motifs of HOXD11 and PITX1, which themselves are associated
with Ile-specific enhancer hotspots (Figure 6), suggesting that these two factors are associated with Ilespecific chromatin re-wiring both upstream and downstream of their activity. Surprisingly, we also detected
significant enrichment for motifs of CDX2 and CDX4 in Ile-specific TREs; suggesting that these two
factors have stage-specific binding sites and therefore may have different cistromes for controlling SI fate
acquisition and ileal regional specification. Finally, and perhaps most notably, we identified very strong
enrichment in Ile-specific TREs of several AP-1 related factors (JUN, JUNB, JUND and FOSL2), which
underscores a point made earlier in the GO analysis that the AP-1 transcriptional network may be critical
for ileal regional specification (Figure 1L). The motif enrichment analyses using only Ile-specific
enhancers generated similar results (Supplementary Figure 8). We next chose the motifs of CDX2, AP1 factors, HOXD11 and PITX1 for further cistrome analysis (Figure 7E), which yielded several findings.
First, many of the genes we had identified as markers of Ile spheroids, including HAND2, DXL5, FJX1, and
HOXA/C/D family members are indeed associated with one or more of the TFs that we have identified as
important in the Ile-specific cistrome. Second, the members of the HOXA, C, and D families are associated
with overlapping but distinct TF regulators. For example, while HOXD9-11 are strongly associated with
all four major TFs including AP-1, the HOXA genes are associated with all of the TFs except AP-1. Similar
analyses were performed for the hESC and DE stages and the results are summarized in Supplementary
Figure 9 and 10.
Overall, based on the chromatin regulatory dynamics defined by the analyses in this study, we have
provided a working model of transcriptional programming that may drive SI fate acquisition and ileal
regional patterning (Figure 8).
DISCUSSION
By leveraging the recently developed ChRO-seq technology, we generated for the first time ever
comprehensive chromatin regulatory landscapes across the beginning stages of directed differentiation from

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

hPSC to SI organoids. Specifically, we defined: (1) marker genes that label specific stages along the
developmental axis of the human SI, (2) the map of active regulatory elements (promoters and enhancers)
as well as enhancer hotspots associated with SI identity acquisition and ileal regional patterning, and (3)
candidate key TF drivers and their cistromes relevant to these critical developmental events.
The markers that we identified as labels of SI fate acquisition and Duo or Ile regional identity provide the
first glimpse of genes that are involved in early SI development and patterning. Several markers (candidate
regulators) of SI spheroids drew our attention. HES4 is identified for the first time in the context of gut
development; one reason for this is that it is absent in the genome of the mouse30, the model organism most
used previously to study gut development. FOXA1, which is involved in endoderm formation in mice, was
identified as a marker of SI spheroids and among the genes strongly associated with active enhancers that
emerge only during SI identity acquisition. In fact, a recent study linked dysregulation of intestinal FOXA1
with necrotizing enterocolitis in infants31, which further supports its functional relevance in human SI
development and thereby warrants future investigation. Our finding of WFDC2 as a marker of SI spheroids
is consistent with the enrichment of Wfdc2 in SI spheroids derived from the murine fetal progenitor
population compared to SI organoids derived from murine adult stem cells32. Notably, some of the cells in
this model are committed to the mesoderm lineage (Supplementary Figure 1A), consistent with previous
observations18,19. Our marker analysis highlights genes that are traditionally thought to be mesenchymal
(e.g., WNT5A, DLX5, HAND2) and have been shown to be critical for early gut development in mice or to
be involved in regional patterning in other tissue types. Future experiments are required to confirm the cell
type in which these candidate regulators are expressed and have functional roles in human SI development.
Future experiments are also required to assess sufficiency and necessity of the stage-specific enhancers and
enhancer hotspots identified in this study for controlling transcriptional networks relevant to human SI
development and patterning.
Our ChRO-seq analysis highlights the spatiotemporal dynamics of HOX clusters during early development
of human SI, unveiling the complexity of HOX biology in this context. We found that the HOXB cluster
is associated with the acquisition of the SI fate whereas the other HOX clusters (HOXA, C and D) are
associated with the initiation of ileal regional patterning. In fact, our study in the human SI model, together
with a recent single cell RNA-seq study in E8.75 mouse gut3, does not suggest the typical spatial collinearity
of HOX coding observed in various organ types33,34. Importantly, we were able to identify known and novel
TF drivers of HOX genes in the context of human SI development (Figure 8). Our observation that CDX2
likely targets and regulates the HOXB cluster genes has been validated by a very recent CDX2 ChIP-seq
study of SI-patterned endoderm monolayer derived from hPSCs5, demonstrating that ChRO-seq is a very
sensitive and robust tool to identify key TFs and their target genes in any particular biological context. Also,
our finding supports the finding that ectopic co-expression of CDX2 and HOXB genes in gastric intestinal
metaplasia and Barrett esophagus35-37 leads to the cells acquiring an intestine-like identity. Interestingly,
we also found that CDX2 is predicted to regulate HOXA, C and D clusters only during ileal regional
specification, which is a new discovery that merits further investigation.
We identified several candidate TF drivers, including PITX1 and AP-1 family members, associated with
ileal specification. A recent scRNA-seq study of primary human fetal gut tissues showed that the regulatory
network of JUN, JUNB and FOS are more enriched in an early stage of SI development compared to a late
stage4; however, their roles in early SI development remained unknown. Our findings suggest that AP-1
members likely contribute to early SI development by establishing ileal identity. Notably, multiple AP-1
members are expressed in the H4 cell line established from human fetal ileum38 and JunD is found to be
enriched in ileal compared to duodenal enterocytes of adult mice39, both of which indicate the relevance of
AP-1 TFs to ileal properties. Interestingly, AP-1 factors are known to be involved in non-canonical WNT
signaling; FJX1 (a marker of Ile identity in our study) functions through the Wnt/planar cell polarity
(PCP) pathway to determine anterior-posterior axis in Drosophila40,41 and is expressed in the epithelium of
developing gut in mice42. Whether these genes/TF networks enriched in Ile spheroids function through

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

non-canonical WNT pathways and how they interplay with canonical WNT signaling during ileal regional
patterning warrant detailed future investigation.
The use of the state-of-art in vitro model of human fetal SI is a critical feature of this study given the lack
of other existing platforms to study early organogenesis of human SI and the growing appreciation for
cross-species differences in developmental processes in vertebrates at the molecular level43-46. Furthermore,
the genome-wide characterization of the chromatin regulatory landscape by ChRO-seq in this model system
generates valuable translational knowledge for a better understanding of initial transcriptional programming
of human SI development. This analysis pipeline can also be applied to other hPSC-derived organoid
systems to gain insights into dynamic transcriptional programming and chromatin status during early stages
of human organogenesis. Most importantly, the identification of the candidate drivers in the present study
may ultimately improve methods of generating therapeutic replacement SI as well as molecular therapies
for children and possibly adult patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank members of the Sethupathy laboratory, most notably Dr. Michael Shanahan, Dr.
Ajeet Singh, and Dr. Matt Kanke, for helpful comments and feedback on the study and manuscript. We
specially thank Dr. Matt Kanke and Dr. Tim Dinh in the Sethupathy laboratory for providing technical
consultation on bioinformatics, and Ramja Sritharan in the Sethupathy laboratory for offering technical
consultation on the ChRO-seq protocol. Additionally, we are grateful to the Danko laboratory, specifically
Ed Rice and Dr. Charles Danko, for helpful conversations on improving implementation of the ChRO-seq
protocol. Finally, we also thank Dr. Jen Grenier and the Cornell Transcriptional Regulation & Expression
Facility for RNA sequencing support; Michael Dellheim of the University of Michigan BRCF Flow
Cytometry Core; Gina Newsome, Erika Katz, Maliha Berner, and Angeline Wu of the Michigan Medicine
Translational Tissue Modeling Laboratory; and a University of Michigan funded initiative (Center for
Gastrointestinal Research, Office of the Dean, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Departments of Pathology,
Pharmacology, and Internal Medicine) with support by the Endowment for Basic Sciences.
We also thank the following funding supports: ADA Pathway to Stop Diabetes Research Accelerator (116-ACE-47 to P.S.); Empire State Stem Cell Fund (C30293GG to Y.-H. H.); Intestinal Stem Cell
Consortium (U01DK103141 to J.R.S.); a collaborative research project funded by the National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) and the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID), the NIAID Novel Alternative Model Systems for Enteric Diseases (NAMSED)
consortium (U19AI116482 to J.R.S.); the support from the University of Michigan Center for
Gastrointestinal Research (UMCGR) (NIDDK 5P30DK034933).
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Conceptualization, Y.-H.H., P.S.; Cell culture, S.H.; Cell sorting, M.K.D.; Chromatin isolation and
library preparation for sequencing studies, Y.-H.H.; Bioinformatic analyses and data curation, Y.H.H.; Writing (original draft), Y.-H.H., P.S.; Review and editing, Y.-H.H., J.R.S., and P.S.; Supervision,
P.S.; Funding acquisition, Y.-H.H., J.R.S., and P.S.
CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
The authors disclose no conflicts.
FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. ChRO-seq defines patterns of nascent transcription of gene bodies during early stages of
directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells to small intestinal organoids. (A) Overview
of the early stages in the hPSC-HIO model and the genomics approaches (ChRO-seq and RNA-seq) used

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in the study. (B) Hierarchical clustering analysis of gene transcription profiles (ChRO-seq signal across
gene bodies) across multiple stages of development. (C) PCA of gene transcription profiles (ChRO-seq
signal across gene bodies) across multiple stages of development. (D) Normalized ChRO-seq signal of
genes encoding important TFs during human SI development. (E) Genome-wide correlation of transcribed
levels (ChRO-seq) and expressed levels (RNA-seq) of genes. Transcription (ChRO-seq) and expression
(RNA-seq) levels of genes are averaged across all stages. No transcription and expression thresholds are
used (see also Supplementary Figure 1). (F, H, J) Volcano plots showing differentially transcribed genes
in the indicated comparisons. Numbers in red and blue are for up- and down-transcribed genes in the
comparison (average TPM > 25, log2 fold change of transcription > 1, padj < 0.2 and p < 0.05 by Wald test;
DESeq2). (G, I, K) Pathway enrichment analyses of up-transcribed genes in the indicated comparisons
(GO Biological Process 2018) (also see Supplementary Figure 1). (L) Additional pathway enrichment
analyses suggest enrichment of AP-1 TF network in genes up-transcribed in Ile compared to Duo spheroids.
hESC, n= 3; DE, n = 4; Duo spheroid (Duo), n = 3; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 3.
Figure 2. Identification of stage-specific markers that label specific stages at both transcribed and
expressed levels during early development of the human SI. (A) Hierarchical clustering analysis of
genes with TPM > 50 at least in one stage. Color denotes variation across stages (normalized by z-score).
(B) Identification of stage-specific markers at both transcribed (ChRO-seq) and expressed (RNA-seq) levels.
The total number of markers (center of the donut plot) and the proportion of marker types are shown for
each stage (ChRO-seq: TPM > 50 padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold change > 1.5 by DESeq2 in the stage of interest
compared to all the other stages; RNA-seq: base mean > 100, padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold change > 1.5 by
DESeq2 in the stage of interest compared to all the other stages). Also see Supplementary Table 1. (C)
Top 50 most variable markers specific to hESC stage. (D) Top 50 most variable markers specific to DE
stage. (E) Top 50 markers specific to SI spheroids regardless of region identity. (F) Markers specific to
Duo spheroids. (G) Top 50 most variable markers specific to Ile spheroids. In (C)-(F), color denotes
variation across stages (normalized by z-score). ChRO-seq study: hESC, n = 3; DE, n = 4; Duo spheroid
(Duo), n = 3; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 3. RNA-seq study: hESC, n = 2; DE, n = 3; Duo spheroid (Duo), n =
6; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 4.
Figure 3. ChRO-seq defines profiles of active transcriptional regulatory elements (TREs) during
early development of the human SI. (A) Schematic for definition and categorization of active TREs.
Proximal TREs are considered promoters and distal TREs are considered enhancers. (B) Size distribution
of TREs identified across all the samples. (C) Annotations of TRE locations across all the samples. (D-F)
Hierarchical clustering analysis of profiles of overall TRE (D), proximal TRE only (E), and distal TRE only
(F) across all four stages. Also see Supplementary Figure 4. hESC, n = 3; DE, n = 4; Duo spheroid (Duo),
n = 3; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 3.
Figure 4. Identification of genes associated with stage-specific TREs during SI identity acquisition
and Ile specification. (A) Definition of stage-specific TREs (log2 fold change > 2.5, padj < 0.05 by
DESeq2) followed by TRE density calculation (100 kb up and downstream of TSSs) for every gene in the
genome. (B) Venn diagram showing stage-specific and shared TREs between DE and Duo spheroids. Duospecific TREs (n = 4166) represent TREs emerging during SI identity acquisition. (C) Cumulative
distribution of Duo-transcribed genes (TPM > 50) grouped into three different density categories of Duospecific TREs. (D) Identification of genes associated with Duo-specific TREs (n = 195). (E) Bar graph
showing genes associated with Duo-specific TREs (n = 195; left panel). Top 20 genes based on TRE density
are highlighted (right panel). (F) Venn diagram showing stage-specific and shared TREs between Ile and
Duo spheroids. Ile-specific TREs (n = 540) represent TREs emerging during Ile regional specification. (G)
Cumulative distribution of Ile-transcribed genes (TPM > 50) grouped into three different density categories
of Ile-specific TRE. (H) Identification of genes associated with Ile-specific TREs (n = 48). (I) Bar graph
showing genes associated with Ile-specific TREs (n = 48). ChRO-seq study: DE, n = 4; Duo spheroid (Duo),
n = 3; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 3. RNA-seq study: DE, n = 3; Duo spheroid (Duo), n = 6; Ile spheroid (Ile), n
= 4.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. TRE density analysis reveals distinct HOX clusters associated with SI identity acquisition
and Ile regional specification. (A) ChRO-seq transcription levels of HOX cluster genes in Duo spheroids.
Color shade of each bar shows the density of Duo-specific TREs (defined in Figure 4B). The dashed line
indicates transcribed level of TPM = 50. (B) Normalized ChRO-seq signals in the HOXB cluster in DE
and Duo spheroids and the Duo-specific TREs identified around the region. (C) Lollipop graph showing
ChRO-seq fold change of HOX genes in Duo spheroids (relative to DE) with color shade indicating the
density of Duo-specific TREs (relative to DE). Only genes with TPM > 50 in Duo spheroids are shown.
(D) ChRO-seq transcription levels of HOX cluster genes in Ile spheroids. Color shade of each bar shows
the density of Ile-specific TREs (defined in Figure 4F). The dashed line indicates transcribed level (TPM
> 50). (E) Normalized ChRO-seq signals in the HOXD cluster in Duo and Ile spheroids and the Ile-specific
TREs identified around the region. (F) Lollipop graph showing ChRO-seq fold change of HOX genes in
Ile spheroids (relative to Duo) with color shade showing the density of Ile-specific TREs (relative to Duo).
Only genes with TPM > 50 in Ile spheroids are shown. DE, n = 4; Duo spheroid (Duo), n = 3; Ile spheroid
(Ile), n = 3.
Figure 6. Identification of stage-specific enhancer hotspots involved in SI identity acquisition and Ile
regional patterning. (A) Enhancer hotspots are defined as dense clusters of enhancers (< 12.5 kb between
one and another) with high transcriptional activity. (B) TRE clusters formed by Duo-specific enhancers
(relative to DE) are ranked by ChRO-seq transcriptional activity. The clusters with the highest transcription
activity are defined as Duo-specific enhancer hotspots (n = 145; blue) and the rest are defined as Duospecific stitched enhancers (n = 2244; black). (C) Density plot showing distance between the TSS of genes
transcribed in Duo (TPM > 50) and their closest Duo-specific stitched enhancers or enhancer hotspots.
Dashed line indicates 500 kb. (D) ChRO-seq fold change of genes associated with Duo-specific stitched
enhancers or enhancer hotspots (Student’s t-test). (E) Identification of genes associated with Duo-specific
enhancer hotspots. (F) The Duo-specific enhancer hotspots and their relative position to the closest genes
(n = 30) are shown. Negative and positive position indicate upstream and downstream of the TSS,
respectively. Dot size denotes transcriptional activity of a given Duo-specific enhancer hotspot. (G) TRE
clusters formed by Ile-specific enhancers (relative to Duo) are ranked by ChRO-seq transcriptional activity.
The clusters with the highest transcriptional activity are defined as Ile-specific enhancer hotspots (n = 29;
yellow) and the rest are defined as Ile-specific stitched enhancers (n = 276; black). (H) Density plot
showing distance between the TSS of genes transcribed in Ile (TPM > 50) and their closest Ile-specific
stitched enhancers or enhancer hotspots. Dashed line indicates 500 kb. (I) ChRO-seq fold change of genes
associated with Ile-specific stitched enhancers or enhancer hotspots (Student’s t-test). (J) Identification of
genes associated with Ile-specific enhancer hotspots. (K) The Ile-specific enhancer hotspots and their
relative position to the closest genes (n = 30) are shown. Negative and positive position indicate upstream
and downstream of the TSS, respectively. Dot size denotes transcriptional activity of a given Ile-specific
enhancer hotspot. ChRO-seq study: DE, n = 4; Duo spheroid (Duo), n = 3; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 3. RNAseq study: DE, n = 3; Duo spheroid (Duo), n = 6; Ile spheroid (Ile), n = 4.
Figure 7. Identification of TFs and their candidate target genes associated with SI identity acquisition
and ileal specification. (A) Overview of our approach for identifying candidate stage-specific TF-TRE
modules and their associated genes. (B) Binding motifs enriched in Duo-specific TREs (n = 4166) relative
to non-Duo-specific TREs (n = 87784) as determined by HOMER (filter criteria: % target sequence > 5 ,
q-value < 0.05, fold of enrichment > 1.3). Only TFs for which the RNA-seq base mean > 100 in Duo
spheroids are shown. (C) Identification of genes associated with active binding motifs of CDX2, CDX4,
FOXA1, and EP300 in Duo spheroids relevant to DE. The Venn diagram shows the number of unique or
shared genes likely regulated by these TFs. (D) Binding motifs enriched in Ile-specific TREs (n = 540)
against non-Ile-specific TREs (n = 76517) as determined by HOMER (filter criteria: % target sequence >
5 , q-value < 0.05, fold of enrichment > 1.3). Only TFs for which the RNA-seq base mean > 100 in Ile
spheroids are shown. (E) Identification of genes associated with active binding motif of CDX2, HOXD11,
AP-1 (JUND, JUN, JUNB, FOSL2), and PITX1 in Ile relevant to Duo spheroids. The Venn diagram shows

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the number of unique or shared genes likely regulated by these TFs. ChRO-seq study: DE, n = 4; Duo
spheroid (Duo), n = 3. RNA-seq study: DE, n = 3; Duo spheroid (Duo), n = 6.
Figure 8. Proposed model of transcriptional programming of human SI during development. (A)
Early SI development. (B) Ileal regional specification. The arrow types indicate specific regulatory
relationships identified through ChRO-seq analyses.
METHODS
Directed differentiation of hESCs. Differentiation of H9 hESCs and organoids was performed as
previously published, with minor modifications20,55. Briefly, the endoderm was generated by treatment of
activin A (100 ng/ml) for 3 consecutive days in Roswell Park Memorial Institute 1640 (RPMI-1640) media
supplemented with 0% (v/v), 0.2% (v/v) and 2.0% (v/v) Hyclone defined fetal bovine serum (dFBS). The
endoderm cultures then received daily treatments of FGF4 (500 ng/mL) and CHIR99021 (2 μM) for next
10 days. The intestinal spheroids representing fetal duodenum and ileum were collected on day 5 and day
10, respectively21. Subsets of spheroids collected at day 5 and day 10 were then cultured in Matrigel with
the previously defined intestine growth media21 for 28 days in order to mature into organoids. The resulting
organoids were then prepared for cell sorting to purify EPCAM+ cell population (epithelial fraction) and
the sorted cells were processed for RNA-seq library preparation. The cells generated at the stages of hESC,
endoderm, duodenal spheroids and ileal spheroids were subject for ChRO-seq and RNA-seq library
preparation.
Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS). Methods for organoid dissociation into single cells followed
by selection of the epithelial component with FACS, were based on previously described procedures56. All
solutions, including overnight pretreatment of the organoid cultures, contained 10μM Y27632 (Tocris).
Matrigel was digested for 30 minutes with cold 4mM EDTA-DPBS and organoids were washed 4X with
cold DPBS. Structures were enzymatically dissociated into single cells using the Tumor Dissociation Kit
(human) (Miltenyi Biotec) with a gentleMACS™ Octo Dissociator (with heaters; Miltenyi Biotec) for 50
minutes at 37°C. The cell suspension was then washed with 0.5% BSA-2mM EDTA-DPBS over a
succession of cell strainers, 100μm, 40μm (Corning) and 20μm (CellTrics) and centrifuged for 5 minutes
at 500xg. Cells were labeled with EpCAM phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated antibody (BioLegend) and an
EpCAM isotype-PE control (BioLegend), and were sorted in 0.1% BSA 2mM EDTA-DPBS on a MoFlo
Astrios 1 (Beckman Coulter; Brea, California) instrument at the University of Michigan BRCF Flow
Cytometry Core facility. Events were first selected with light-scatter and doublet discrimination gating,
followed by exclusion of dead cells using 1μM DAPI dilactate (Molecular Probes). EpCAM-PE(+)/DAPI(-)
cells were sorted into cold Advanced DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen). Collected cells were reanalyzed for a
purity-check and showed greater than 89% viable and 98% EpCAM-PE(+) events. Cells were pelleted at
500xg for 5 minutes and flash-frozen for subsequent RNA isolation.
Chromatin isolation. The chromatin isolation for ChRO-seq library preparation was performed as
previously described14,57. Briefly, chromatin was isolated from the cells with 1× NUN buffer [0.3 M NaCl,
1 M Urea, 1% NP-40 (w/v), 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 7.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 20 units
per mL SUPERase In RNase Inhibitor (Life Technologies, AM2694), 1× Protease Inhibitor Cocktail
(Roche, 11 873 580 001)] and incubation at 12 °C on a ThermoMixer for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged
at 12,500xg for 30 min at 4 °C. The chromatin pellet was washed 3 times with 1 mL 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH
7.5, supplemented with 40 units per ml RNase inhibitor. Chromatin storage buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH
8.0, 25% glycerol (v/v), 5 mM Mg(CH3COO)2, 0.1 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, 40 units per ml RNase
inhibitor) was added to each sample. The samples were loaded into a Bioruptor and sonicated to get the
chromatin into suspension. Samples were stored at −80 °C before proceeding to ChRO-seq library
preparation.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ChRO-seq library and sequencing. After chromatin isolation, the ChRO-seq library preparation closely
followed the protocol described previously58. Brifely, chromatin from at least 1 × 106 cells per sample in
chromatin storage buffer was mixed with an equal volume of 2×chromatin run-on buffer [10 mM Tris-HCl,
pH 8.0, 5 mM MgCl2,1 mM DTT, 300 mM KCl, 400 μM ATP (NEB, N0450S), 40 μM Biotin-11-CTP
(Perkin Elmer, NEL542001EA), 400 μM GTP (NEB, N0450S), 40 μM Biotin-11-UTP (Perkin Elmer,
NEL543001EA), 0.8 units per μL RNase inhibitor, 1% (w/v) Sarkosyl (Fisher Scientific, AC612075000)].
The run-on reaction was incubated at 37 °C for 5 min. The reaction was stopped by adding Trizol LS (Life
Technologies, 10296-010) and pelleted with GlycoBlue (Ambion, AM9515) to visualize the RNA pellet.
The RNA pellet was resuspended in diethylpyrocarbonate (DEPC)-treated water and heat denatured at
65 °C for 40 s. In the present study, base hydrolysis of RNA was performed by incubating RNA with 0.2N
NaOH on ice for 4 min. Nascent RNA was purified by binding streptavidin beads (NEB, S1421S) before
and in between the following procedures: (1) 3′ adapter ligation with T4 RNA Ligase 1 (NEB, M0204L),
(2) 5′ de-capping with RNA 5′ pyrophosphohydrolase (RppH, NEB, M0356S), (3) 5′ end phosphorylation
using T4 polynucleotide kinase (NEB, M0201L), (4) 5′ adapter ligation with T4 RNA Ligase 1 (NEB,
M0204L). The resulting RNA fragments were used for a reverse transcription reaction using Superscript
III Reverse Transcriptase (Life Technologies, 18080-044) to generate cDNA. cDNA was then amplified
using Q5 High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB, M0491L) to generate the ChRO-seq libraries. Libraries
were sequenced (single-end 75x) using the NextSeq500 high-throughput sequencing system (Illumina) at
the Cornell University Biotechnology Resource Center. Supplementary Data 1 provides the mapping
statistics of the ChRO-seq experiments.
Total RNA isolation, mRNA-seq library and sequencing. Total RNA was isolated using the Total
Purification kit (Norgen Biotek, Thorold, ON, Canada). High Capacity RNA to cDNA kit (Life
Technologies, Grand Island, NY) was used for reverse transcription of RNA. Libraries were generated
using the NEBNext Ultra II Directional Library Prep Kit (New England Biolabs, Ipswich, MA) and
subjected to sequencing (single-end 92x) on the NextSeq500 platform (Illumina) at the Cornell University
Biotechnology Resource Center. At least 80M reads per sample were acquired.
Mapping sequencing reads. In the ChRO-seq studies, the publicly available pipeline25 was used to align
ChRO-seq reads. Since the libraries were prepared using adapters that contained a molecule-specific unique
identifier (first 6 bp sequenced), the PCR duplicates were first removed using PRINSEQ lite. Adapters
were trimmed from the 3′ end of remaining reads using cutadapt with a 10% error rate. Reads were mapped
with the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA) to the human reference genome hg38 plus a single copy of the
Pol I ribosomal RNA transcription unit (GenBank U13369.1). The location of active RNA polymerase was
represented by a single base that denotes the 3′ end of the nascent RNA, which corresponds to the position
on the 5′ end of each sequenced read. Mapped reads were converted to bigwig format using BedTools and
the bedGraphToBigWig program in the Kent Source software package. ChRO-seq signal for visualization
purpose was normalized by total bigwig signal (wigsum) of 10,000,000. The transcription (ChRO-seq)
levels of genes were normalized by the length of gene bodies to transcripts per million (TPM).
In the RNA-seq studies, reads were mapped to human genome hg38 using STAR (v2.5.3a)59 and transcript
quantification was performed using Salmon (v0.6.0)60 with GENCODE release 25 transcript annotations.
The expression (RNA-seq) levels of genes were normalized using DESeq261. All the samples except an Ile
HIO sample had > 80% mapping rates. Although the Ile HIO sample had an unfavorable mapping rate, it
was able to show elevated levels of Ile-associated regional markers compared to the Duo HIO sample
(Supplementary Figure 2).
Differential expression and pathway analyses. The differential analysis of gene bodies and TRE regions
in ChRO-seq data was performed using DESeq2 package61. The differential analysis of RNA-seq was
performed using DESeq2 package61. For all the analyses except stage-specific marker analysis (see below),
the normalized levels of transcription or expression, foldchange and the statistic filtering were based on the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

DESeq2 analysis including only the two stages in a comparison. The pathway enrichment analyses with
subsets of genes were assessed using Enrichr62.
ChRO-seq quantification of gene transcription activity. The quantification of transcription activity of
genes was determined with exclusion of reads within 500 base downstream of transcription start site
(TSS) to avoid bias generated by the RNA polymerase pausing at the promoters. Genes with gen body <
1000 base were excluded from all the gene body related analysis, given that genes with short gene bodies
are likely biased TPM quantification when excluding the pause peak. ChRO-seq generates reads from
both strands of chromatin. Only the reads from the corresponding strand of annotated genes were counted
for quantification of transcription level.
Identification of faithful stage-specific markers. To identify genes that label stage of hESC, DE, Duo
spheroids or Ile spheroids in ChRO-seq study, genes which are actively transcribed in the stage of interest
(TPM > 50) are filtered with padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold change > 1.5 compared to all the other stages
(DESeq2). To identify genes that label hESC, DE, Duo spheroids or Ile spheroids in RNA-seq study, genes
which are expressed in the stage of interest (base mean > 100) are filtered with padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold
change > 1.5 compared to all the other stages (DESeq2). To identify genes that label stage of SI spheroids
irrespective of regional identities, genes which are actively transcribed and expressed in both Duo and Ile
spheroids (TPM > 50 and base mean > 100) are filtered with padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold change > 1.5
compared to all the other stages and fold change < 1.5 between Duo and Ile spheroids (DESeq2). For each
of the stage, the fateful markers at both transcription and expression level were identified by intersecting
ChRO-seq and RNA-seq gene lists generated by the criteria mentioned above. The genes annotated under
pseudogene category were excluded from this analysis.
TRE identification, annotation and categorization. The active transcriptional regulatory elements (TREs)
were identified by dREG tool25. The annotation of the identified TREs was defined using annotatePeaks.pl
function (genome = hg38) of HOMER package54. To assign active TREs as promoters, the TREs with at
least 1 base overlapping with the window of -1000 base and +200 base of annotated TSSs were defined as
proximal TREs, or promoters. The rest of the active TREs were defined as distal TREs, or enhancers.
Defining stage-specific TREs. The stage-specific TREs were defined as TREs of which the ChRO-seq
intensity is significantly higher in a stage of interest relative to a comparative stage (padj < 0.05 and log2fold
change > 2.5 by DESeq2)61. The ChRO-seq intensity was determined by the sum of the un-normalized
ChRO-seq reads from both strands within a TRE region.
Stage-specific TRE density analysis. The density of stage-specific TREs was determined by the number
of TREs present within the window of +100 kb and -100 kb around the TSS for all the genes which are
actively transcribed in the stage of interest (TPM > 50 in the ChRO-seq study). The genes which are
associated with stage-specific TREs are defined using the following criteria: (1) genes have density of stagespecific TRE > 0, (2) genes are actively transcribed (TPM > 50 in the ChRO-seq) and expressed (base mean
> 100 in the RNA-seq) in the stage of interest, and (3) the genes are significantly uptranscribed and
upregulated (padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold change > 1.5 in both ChRO-seq and RNA-seq by DESeq2) in the
stage of interest relative to a comparison stage.
Identification of de novo stage-specific enhancer hotspots and the associated genes. The stage-specific
active distal TREs (enhancers) were used in the enhancer hotspot analysis. The enhancer hotspots in this
study were identified by the criteria similar (with slight modifications) to the studies describing ‘superenhancers’27,28. Briefly, the stage-specific enhancers in proximity of distance (< 12.5kb) were stitched. For
each of the stage-specific stitched enhancers, the transcription activity was determined by the sum of unnormalized ChRO-seq signals from both strands of each individual enhancer. To further identify stagespecific enhancer hotspots, a tangent line was applied the stage-specific stitched enhancers and they were

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ranked based on their transcriptional activities in a plot. The ones above the tangent line in the analysis
were defined as stage-specific enhancer hotpots. To identify the genes which are associated with stagespecific stitched enhancers, a given stage-specific stitched enhancer is assigned to the gene of which the
transcription in the gene body is active (TPM > 50 in the matching stage) and the TSS is closest to the
border of the enhancer region.
Transcription factor binding motif enrichment analysis. HOMER tool54 was used to determine
enrichment of sites corresponding to known motifs with stage-specific TREs (relative to a comparative
stage). More specifically, we used function findMotifsGenome.pl (genome = hg38 and size = given) and
the TREs which are shared or unique to the comparative stage were used as background.
Transcription factor cistrome analysis. For a TF of interest, the binding motifs present in the stage-specific
TREs were identified and the density of the motif was determined by the number of motifs within the
window of +100 kb and -100 kb around the TSS for all the genes which are actively transcribed in the stage
of interest (TPM > 50). The cistrome of a TF is defined using the following criteria: (1) genes have motif
density > 0, (2) genes are actively transcribed (TPM > 50 in the ChRO-seq) and expressed (base mean >
100 in the RNA-seq) in the stage of interest, and (3) the genes are significantly uptranscribed and
upregulated (padj < 0.2, p < 0.05, fold change > 1.5 in both ChRO-seq and RNA-seq by DESeq2) in the
stage of interest relative to a comparison stage.
Statistics. All the padj and p values presented in this study were determined by Wald test (DESeq2), unless

otherwise specifically noted.
Data availability. Raw and processed data generated in the sequencing studies will be made available upon
publication.
REFERENCES
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

Sheaffer, K. L. & Kaestner, K. H. Transcriptional networks in liver and intestinal development.
Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 4, a008284, doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a008284 (2012).
Sherwood, R. I., Chen, T. Y. & Melton, D. A. Transcriptional dynamics of endodermal organ
formation. Dev Dyn 238, 29-42, doi:10.1002/dvdy.21810 (2009).
Nowotschin, S. et al. The emergent landscape of the mouse gut endoderm at single-cell
resolution. Nature 569, 361-367, doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1127-1 (2019).
Gao, S. et al. Tracing the temporal-spatial transcriptome landscapes of the human fetal digestive
tract using single-cell RNA-sequencing. Nat Cell Biol 20, 721-734, doi:10.1038/s41556-0180105-4 (2018).
Kumar, N. et al. The lineage-specific transcription factor CDX2 navigates dynamic chromatin to
control distinct stages of intestine development. Development 146, doi:10.1242/dev.172189
(2019).
Dong, J. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis unveils a prevalent epithelial/mesenchymal hybrid
state during mouse organogenesis. Genome Biol 19, 31, doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1416-2 (2018).
Banerjee, K. K. et al. Enhancer, transcriptional, and cell fate plasticity precedes intestinal
determination during endoderm development. Genes Dev 32, 1430-1442,
doi:10.1101/gad.318832.118 (2018).
Nord, A. S. et al. Rapid and pervasive changes in genome-wide enhancer usage during
mammalian development. Cell 155, 1521-1531, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.11.033 (2013).
Xie, W. et al. Epigenomic analysis of multilineage differentiation of human embryonic stem
cells. Cell 153, 1134-1148, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.04.022 (2013).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31

Heintzman, N. D. et al. Histone modifications at human enhancers reflect global cell-typespecific gene expression. Nature 459, 108-112, doi:10.1038/nature07829 (2009).
Long, H. K., Prescott, S. L. & Wysocka, J. Ever-Changing Landscapes: Transcriptional
Enhancers in Development and Evolution. Cell 167, 1170-1187, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.09.018
(2016).
Kim, T. K. et al. Widespread transcription at neuronal activity-regulated enhancers. Nature 465,
182-187, doi:10.1038/nature09033 (2010).
Koch, F. et al. Transcription initiation platforms and GTF recruitment at tissue-specific enhancers
and promoters. Nat Struct Mol Biol 18, 956-963, doi:10.1038/nsmb.2085 (2011).
Chu, T. et al. Chromatin run-on and sequencing maps the transcriptional regulatory landscape of
glioblastoma multiforme. Nat Genet 50, 1553-1564, doi:10.1038/s41588-018-0244-3 (2018).
Core, L. J., Waterfall, J. J. & Lis, J. T. Nascent RNA sequencing reveals widespread pausing and
divergent initiation at human promoters. Science 322, 1845-1848, doi:10.1126/science.1162228
(2008).
Kwak, H., Fuda, N. J., Core, L. J. & Lis, J. T. Precise maps of RNA polymerase reveal how
promoters direct initiation and pausing. Science 339, 950-953, doi:10.1126/science.1229386
(2013).
Wells, J. M. & Spence, J. R. How to make an intestine. Development 141, 752-760,
doi:10.1242/dev.097386 (2014).
Sinagoga, K. L. & Wells, J. M. Generating human intestinal tissues from pluripotent stem cells to
study development and disease. EMBO J 34, 1149-1163, doi:10.15252/embj.201490686 (2015).
Spence, J. R. et al. Directed differentiation of human pluripotent stem cells into intestinal tissue
in vitro. Nature 470, 105-109, doi:10.1038/nature09691 (2011).
McCracken, K. W., Howell, J. C., Wells, J. M. & Spence, J. R. Generating human intestinal tissue
from pluripotent stem cells in vitro. Nat Protoc 6, 1920-1928, doi:10.1038/nprot.2011.410
(2011).
Tsai, Y. H. et al. In vitro patterning of pluripotent stem cell-derived intestine recapitulates in vivo
human development. Development 144, 1045-1055, doi:10.1242/dev.138453 (2017).
Watson, C. L. et al. An in vivo model of human small intestine using pluripotent stem cells. Nat
Med 20, 1310-1314, doi:10.1038/nm.3737 (2014).
Hill, D. R. et al. Bacterial colonization stimulates a complex physiological response in the
immature human intestinal epithelium. Elife 6, doi:10.7554/eLife.29132 (2017).
Finkbeiner, S. R. et al. Transcriptome-wide Analysis Reveals Hallmarks of Human Intestine
Development and Maturation In Vitro and In Vivo. Stem Cell Reports,
doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.04.010 (2015).
Chu, T., Wang, Z., Chou, S. P. & Danko, C. G. Discovering Transcriptional Regulatory Elements
From Run-On and Sequencing Data Using the Web-Based dREG Gateway. Curr Protoc
Bioinformatics 66, e70, doi:10.1002/cpbi.70 (2019).
Andersson, R. et al. An atlas of active enhancers across human cell types and tissues. Nature 507,
455-461, doi:10.1038/nature12787 (2014).
Whyte, W. A. et al. Master transcription factors and mediator establish super-enhancers at key
cell identity genes. Cell 153, 307-319, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.035 (2013).
Hnisz, D. et al. Super-enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease. Cell 155, 934-947,
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.09.053 (2013).
Boyd, M. et al. Characterization of the enhancer and promoter landscape of inflammatory bowel
disease from human colon biopsies. Nat Commun 9, 1661, doi:10.1038/s41467-018-03766-z
(2018).
Kageyama, R., Ohtsuka, T. & Kobayashi, T. The Hes gene family: repressors and oscillators that
orchestrate embryogenesis. Development 134, 1243-1251, doi:10.1242/dev.000786 (2007).
Wu, Y. Z. et al. Dysregulation of miR-431 and target gene FOXA1 in intestinal tissues of infants
with necrotizing enterocolitis. FASEB J 33, 5143-5152, doi:10.1096/fj.201801470R (2019).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51

Mustata, R. C. et al. Identification of Lgr5-independent spheroid-generating progenitors of the
mouse fetal intestinal epithelium. Cell Rep 5, 421-432, doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2013.09.005 (2013).
Mallo, M., Wellik, D. M. & Deschamps, J. Hox genes and regional patterning of the vertebrate
body plan. Dev Biol 344, 7-15, doi:10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.04.024 (2010).
Deschamps, J. & van Nes, J. Developmental regulation of the Hox genes during axial
morphogenesis in the mouse. Development 132, 2931-2942, doi:10.1242/dev.01897 (2005).
Stairs, D. B., Kong, J. & Lynch, J. P. Cdx genes, inflammation, and the pathogenesis of intestinal
metaplasia. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci 96, 231-270, doi:10.1016/B978-0-12-381280-3.00010-5
(2010).
Tu, W. et al. Overexpression of HOXB7 is associated with a poor prognosis in patients with
gastric cancer. Oncol Lett 10, 2967-2973, doi:10.3892/ol.2015.3630 (2015).
di Pietro, M. et al. Evidence for a functional role of epigenetically regulated midcluster HOXB
genes in the development of Barrett esophagus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 9077-9082,
doi:10.1073/pnas.1116933109 (2012).
Cahill, C. M. et al. Differential Expression of the Activator Protein 1 Transcription Factor
Regulates Interleukin-1ss Induction of Interleukin 6 in the Developing Enterocyte. PLoS One 11,
e0145184, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0145184 (2016).
Haber, A. L. et al. A single-cell survey of the small intestinal epithelium. Nature 551, 333-339,
doi:10.1038/nature24489 (2017).
Villano, J. L. & Katz, F. N. four-jointed is required for intermediate growth in the proximal-distal
axis in Drosophila. Development 121, 2767-2777 (1995).
Zeidler, M. P., Perrimon, N. & Strutt, D. I. The four-jointed gene is required in the Drosophila
eye for ommatidial polarity specification. Curr Biol 9, 1363-1372, doi:10.1016/s09609822(00)80081-0 (1999).
Rock, R., Heinrich, A. C., Schumacher, N. & Gessler, M. Fjx1: a notch-inducible secreted ligand
with specific binding sites in developing mouse embryos and adult brain. Dev Dyn 234, 602-612,
doi:10.1002/dvdy.20553 (2005).
Allison, T. F. et al. Identification and Single-Cell Functional Characterization of an
Endodermally Biased Pluripotent Substate in Human Embryonic Stem Cells. Stem Cell Reports
10, 1895-1907, doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2018.04.015 (2018).
Chu, L. F. et al. Single-cell RNA-seq reveals novel regulators of human embryonic stem cell
differentiation to definitive endoderm. Genome Biol 17, 173, doi:10.1186/s13059-016-1033-x
(2016).
Tiyaboonchai, A. et al. GATA6 Plays an Important Role in the Induction of Human Definitive
Endoderm, Development of the Pancreas, and Functionality of Pancreatic beta Cells. Stem Cell
Reports 8, 589-604, doi:10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.12.026 (2017).
Cardoso-Moreira, M. et al. Gene expression across mammalian organ development. Nature 571,
505-509, doi:10.1038/s41586-019-1338-5 (2019).
Munera, J. O. et al. Differentiation of Human Pluripotent Stem Cells into Colonic Organoids via
Transient Activation of BMP Signaling. Cell Stem Cell 21, 51-64 e56,
doi:10.1016/j.stem.2017.05.020 (2017).
Trisno, S. L. et al. Esophageal Organoids from Human Pluripotent Stem Cells Delineate Sox2
Functions during Esophageal Specification. Cell Stem Cell 23, 501-515 e507,
doi:10.1016/j.stem.2018.08.008 (2018).
Dye, B. R. et al. In vitro generation of human pluripotent stem cell derived lung organoids. Elife
4, doi:10.7554/eLife.05098 (2015).
Mun, S. J. et al. Generation of expandable human pluripotent stem cell-derived hepatocyte-like
liver organoids. J Hepatol 71, 970-985, doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2019.06.030 (2019).
D'Amour, K. A. et al. Production of pancreatic hormone-expressing endocrine cells from human
embryonic stem cells. Nat Biotechnol 24, 1392-1401, doi:10.1038/nbt1259 (2006).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.18.881219; this version posted December 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62

McCracken, K. W. et al. Modelling human development and disease in pluripotent stem-cellderived gastric organoids. Nature 516, 400-404, doi:10.1038/nature13863 (2014).
Xie, R. et al. Dynamic chromatin remodeling mediated by polycomb proteins orchestrates
pancreatic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 12, 224-237,
doi:10.1016/j.stem.2012.11.023 (2013).
Heinz, S. et al. Simple combinations of lineage-determining transcription factors prime cisregulatory elements required for macrophage and B cell identities. Mol Cell 38, 576-589,
doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.004 (2010).
Finkbeiner, S. R. et al. Generation of tissue-engineered small intestine using embryonic stem cellderived human intestinal organoids. Biol Open 4, 1462-1472, doi:10.1242/bio.013235 (2015).
Dame, M. K. et al. Identification, isolation and characterization of human LGR5-positive colon
adenoma cells. Development 145, doi:10.1242/dev.153049 (2018).
Wuarin, J. & Schibler, U. Physical isolation of nascent RNA chains transcribed by RNA
polymerase II: evidence for cotranscriptional splicing. Mol Cell Biol 14, 7219-7225,
doi:10.1128/mcb.14.11.7219 (1994).
Mahat, D. B. et al. Base-pair-resolution genome-wide mapping of active RNA polymerases using
precision nuclear run-on (PRO-seq). Nat Protoc 11, 1455-1476, doi:10.1038/nprot.2016.086
(2016).
Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29, 15-21,
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts635 (2013).
Patro, R., Duggal, G., Love, M. I., Irizarry, R. A. & Kingsford, C. Salmon provides fast and biasaware quantification of transcript expression. Nat Methods 14, 417-419, doi:10.1038/nmeth.4197
(2017).
Love, M. I., Huber, W. & Anders, S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for
RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol 15, 550, doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8 (2014).
Kuleshov, M. V. et al. Enrichr: a comprehensive gene set enrichment analysis web server 2016
update. Nucleic Acids Res 44, W90-97, doi:10.1093/nar/gkw377 (2016).

Figure 1.

B

A
DE fate acquisition

SI fate acquisition

Definitive
endoderm
(DE)

RNA pol Biotin-rUTP
Enhancer

Ileal (Ile)
spheroid

3’
Gene body

Promoter

Nascent RNA
transcripts

Chromatin

SOX2 (stem cell marker)

AAA…A -3’

5’

3’

E

D

Steady-state
mRNAs

GATA6 (endoderm marker)

CDX2 (SI marker)
25 (+)

Ile Duo DE hESC

D

Duodenal (Duo)
spheroid

CHIRON
/FGF4
(10 days)

RNA-seq

ChRO-seq

Activin A
(3 days)

25 (-)
25 (+)
25 (-)
25 (+)
25 (-)
25 (+)
25 (-)

G

I

H
GO Term of up-transcribed
genes in DE vs. hESC

J

Reads/kb/106

F

C

Regional patterning

/FGF4
CHIRON
(5 days)

Human
embryonic
stem cell
(hESC)

C

B

P value

GO Term of up-transcribed
genes in Duo vs. DE

P value

Canonical glycolysis

5.425e-38

Endoderm development

1.572e-6

Endoderm formation

1.83e-5

Glycolysis through glucose-6phosphate

7.596e-38

Regulation of SMAD protein
phosphorylation

2.94e-5

Glucose catabolism to pyruvate

1.117e-36

BMP signaling pathway

8.463e-5

Protein import into peroxisome matrix

2.684e-35

Cellular response to BMP stimulus

2.015e-4

Intracellular estrogen receptor
signaling

8.402e-34

GO Term of up-transcribed
genes in Ile vs. Duo

P value

Regulation of transcription
from RNA pol II promoter

2.822e-11

Negative regulation of transcription
from RNA pol II promoter

1.183e-8

Positive regulation of DNA-templated
transcription

1.124e-7

Positive regulation of transcription
From RNA pol II promoter

2.519e-7

Negative regulation of erythrocyte
differentiation

1.477e-5

K

L
*

BioPlanet 2019

P value

AP-1 TF network

7.928e-10

BDNF signaling pathway

8.842e-7

Telomerase regulation

*

NCI-Nature 2016

P value

AP-1 TF network

6.850e-10

Telomerase regulation

3.396e-5

3.396e-5

HIF-1a TF network

3.454e-4

Nrf2 Oxidative stress
response

3.594e-5

FOXM1 TF network

4.792e-4

FGF1

8.662e-5

Delta-Np63
transcriptional targets

7.540e-4

Figure 2.

A

B

1.7%
6.3%

92%

hESC

C

DE

Duo

D

Ile

E

F

G

Figure 3.

A

1. Active RNA pol captured by ChRO-seq

D

TSS
Gene body
Promoter

Enhancer
-1000

200

2. TREs featured in ChRO-seq
(+)
(-)
3. TREs defined by dREG
(+)

E

(-)
Distal TRE

Proximal TRE

B
Mean 409.2
Medium 390

F
C

Figure 4.
A
1. Define stage-specific TREs by
DESeq2
Stage A

(+)
(-)

2. Determine density of stage-specific TREs

TSS

a)
b)

Gene body

(+)
(-)

Stage B

c)

(+)
(-)

-100 kb

100 kb

0

B

F

C

G

D

H
Duo-specific TRE > 0
(ChRO-seq: Fold Change > 1.5,
padj < 0.2, pvalue < 0.05)

941

Up-regulated in Duo vs. DE

195

E

Ile-specific TRE > 0

3418

Up-transcribed in Duo vs. DE

1231

TRE density > 0
Active nascent transcription
of gene bodies (ChRO-seq)
High expression level of
genes (RNA-seq)

Genes transcribed in Ile (TPM > 50)

Genes transcribed in Duo (TPM > 50)

3317

3. Identify genes associated
with stage-specific TREs

Up-transcribed in Ile vs. Duo
(ChRO-seq: Fold Change > 1.5,
padj < 0.2, pvalue < 0.05)

291
78

(RNA-seq: Fold Change > 1.5,
padj < 0.2, pvalue < 0.05, Duo
base mean > 100)

48

I

Up-regulated in Ile vs. Duo
(RNA-seq: Fold Change > 1.5,
padj < 0.2, pvalue < 0.05, Ile
base mean > 100)

Figure 5.

A

D

B

E
Duo
DE
Ile

Duo
Duo-specific
TRE

C

Ile-specific
TRE

F

Figure 6.

F

A
Enhancer
hotspot

I

TSS
Gene body

(+)
(-)
< 12.5 kb

< 12.5 kb

B
J

Ile transcribed genes (TPM > 50) associated with
Ile-specific enhancer hotspots (< 500 kb)
Up-transcribed in Ile vs. Duo

31

(ChRO-seq: Fold Change > 1.5,
padj < 0.2, pvalue < 0.05)

15
12

C
K

G
D

H

E
Duo transcribed genes (TPM > 50) associated with
Duo-specific enhancer hotspots (< 500 kb)
Up-transcribed in Duo vs. DE

110

(ChRO-seq: log2FoldChange > 0.5,
padj < 0.3, pvalue < 0.05)

96

Up-regulated in Duo vs. DE

30

(RNA-seq: log2FoldChange > 0.5,
padj < 0.3, pvalue < 0.05, Ile base
mean > 100)

Up-regulated in Ile vs. Duo
(RNA-seq: Fold Change > 1.5,
padj < 0., pvalue < 0.05,
Ile base mean > 100)

Figure 7.

A

1. Identify stage-specific TF-motif module

2. Determine density of specific binding motif
present in stage-specific TREs

TF (RNA-seq: base mean > 100
in stage of interest)

TSS

3. Define cistrome of TF on interest
Genes have:
a) Motif density > 0
b) Active nascent transcription (ChRO-seq: TPM > 50,
Fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.2, p < 0.05)
c) High expression level (RNA-seq: base mean > 100,
Fold change > 1.5, padj < 0.2, p < 0.05)

Gene bodies

stage-specific TREs (motif
enrichment analysis by HOMER)

-100 kb

B

0

100 kb

WFDC2
RIPPLY3
PTCH

C

FOXJ1

WNT5A
CDX2
FOXA1
HOXB1-9
LINC00092
LINC00543

D

CGB7
DLL3
PDGFA

E
FJX1
ID1

DXL5
DXL6

1

CXCL12
HOXC9-11
HOXA3-11
HAND2
LARGE2

HOXD9-11

Figure 8.

B

A
DE

Temporal dynamics of
early SI development

Duo spheroid

Duo spheroid

Duo-specific TREs

CDX2

HOXB

Ile spheroid

Ile-specific TREs

FOXA1

LINC00543
LINC00092

- - - ≥1 stage-specific TREs

Ileal regional
specification

FOXJ1

CDX2

HOXD11

AP-1

HOXA

HOXC
HOXD

FJX1

⏤ stage-specific enhancer hotspot

⏤ ≥1 stage-specific TF motif

