bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Characterization of a novel type III effector provides new insights
into the allosteric activation and suppression of the Cas10 DNase

Jinzhong Lin1*, Mingxia Feng1,3 Heping Zhang4 and Qunxin She1,2*
1

Archaea Centre, Department of Biology, University of Copenhagen, Ole Maaløes Vej 5, DK-2200

Copenhagen N, Denmark
2

Microbial Technology Institute and State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Shandong

University, 72 Binhai Road, Jimo, Qingdao, Shandong, 266237, China
3

College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, China

4

Key Laboratory of Dairy Biotechnology and Engineering, Inner Mongolia Agricultural University,

Hohhot, 010018, China
* Correspondence. Jinzhong Lin, email: jinzhong.lin@bio.ku.dk; Qunxin She, email:
shequnxin@sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Antiviral defense by type III CRISPR-Cas systems relies on two distinct activities of their effectors: the
RNA-activated DNA cleavage and synthesis of cyclic oligoadenylate. Both activities are featured as
indiscriminate nucleic acid cleavage and subjected to the spatiotemporal regulation. To yield further
insights into the involved mechanisms, we reconstituted LbCsm, a lactobacilli III-A system in
Escherichia coli. Upon activation by target RNA, this immune system mediates robust DNA degradation
but devoids the synthesis of cyclic oligoadenylates. Mutagenesis of the Csm3 and Cas10 conserved
residues revealed that Csm3 and multiple structural domains in Cas10 function in the allosteric
regulation to yield an active enzyme. Target RNAs carrying various truncations in the 3ʹ anti-tag were
designed and tested for their influence on DNA binding and DNA cleavage of LbCsm. Three distinct
ternary LbCsm complexes were identified. In particular, binding of target RNAs carrying a single
nucleotide in the 3ʹ anti-tag to LbCsm yielded an active LbCsm DNase regardless whether the
nucleotide shows a mismatch, as in the cognate target RNA (CTR), or a match in the noncognate target
RNAs (NTR), to the 5’ tag of crRNA. In addition, further increasing the number of 3ʹ anti-tag in CTR
facilitated the substrate binding and enhanced the substrate degradation whereas doing the same as
in NTR gradually decreased the substrate binding and eventually shut off the DNA cleavage by the
enzyme. Together, these results provide the mechanistic insights into the allosteric activation and
repression of LbCsm enzymes.
Introduction
CRISPR-Cas (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, CRISPR-associated) systems
constitute the adaptive and heritable immune system in bacteria and archaea, which mediates antiviral
defense against invasive genetic elements in a small RNA-guided fashion1-8. The immune system
consists of two parts: CRISPR arrays containing spacers derived from invading nucleic acids, and cas
gene cassettes coding for enzymes or structural proteins that function in mediating the CRISPR
immunity. CRISPR-Cas systems are classified into two broad classes based on the composition of their
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

effector complexes: Those of Class 1 carry multi-subunit effectors and those of Class 2 possesses a
single effector protein, and these antiviral systems are further divided into six main types (types I - VI)
with >20 subtypes9-11.
Type III CRISPR systems are unique because they exhibit both RNA interference and DNA
interference in vivo to protect their microbial hosts against invading nucleic acids4,12-23. Three activities
are associated with these Type III immune systems, including target RNA cleavage18,24-30, target RNAactivated indiscriminate single-stranded (ss) DNA cleavage, a secondary DNase activity15,19,20,31-37 and
synthesis of cyclic oligoadenylate (cOA), a second messenger that activates RNases of Csm6/Csx1
families, mediating cell dormancy or cell death38-45. Activation of the immunity requires mismatches
between the 3ʹ anti-tag of a cognate target RNA (CTR) and the 5ʹ tag of crRNA whereas the full match
between the 3ʹ anti-tag of non-cognate target RNA (NTR) and the 5ʹ tag of crRNA completely represses
the immune response (see reviews46-49). Upon activation by the secondary messenger, Csx1/Csm6
RNases exhibit indiscriminate cleavage of viral and cellular RNAs, leading to cell dormancy or cell death
to curb virus infection38-43,50,51. It is further believed that the type III CRISPR DNase eventually clears up
remaining invading nucleic acids52, whereas the cOA secondary messenger is to be removed by ring
nucleases53, allowing cells recover from the Type III immune response and restore the growth.
Structure of the Streptococcus thermophilus III-A (StCsm) effector complex has recently been
resolved. This includes that of the StCsm binary complex and those of the StCsmCTR and StCsmNTR
ternary effector complexes. The two ternary complexes have undergone major conformational change,
relative to the binary one, but the active StCsmCTR complex and the inactive StCsmNTR complex show
minimal conformational change except for the fact that the 3ʹ anti-tag of CTR and that of NTR are placed
in different channels54. Very similar results were obtained from the structural analysis of the
Thermococcus onnurineus Csm effector complex55 and the StCsm effector of different composition56.
In particular, the active site of these Csm DNases exhibits little difference between the NTR-bound
effector complex and the corresponding CTR-bound effector complex. As a result, the process of the
activation of a binary Csm complex by CTR as well as its inhibition by NTR remains elusive.
To gain an further insight into the molecular mechanisms of the allosteric regulation of type III-A
effector complexes, we characterized a Csm present in Lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus
(LbCsm). Its effector complex was reconstituted by expression in, and purified from, Escherichia coli.
Investigation of the interactions between purified effector complexes and their target RNAs unravels an
active ternary LbCsm complexes with CTR or NTR carrying a single nucleotide at their 3ʹ anti-tag
regions, and these results provide a novel insight for allosteric activation and repression of the LbCsm
DNase.
Results
L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus encodes a novel III-A CRISPR-Cas system defective in cOA
synthesis
The L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus strain carries a type III-A CRISPR-Cas system (LbCsm) including
a CRISPR array of 16 spacers (Fig. 1A), in addition to a type II CRISPR-Cas9 system in another
chromosome location (GenBank: CP016393.1). This LbCsm system was chosen for characterization
since phylogenetic analyses of a selected set of Cas10 proteins revealed that its Cas10, the L.
delbrueckii subsp. bulgarius Csm1, is distantly related to the Cas10 proteins that have been studied
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

thus far (Fig. S1).
We chose to reconstitute the LbCsm effector in E. coli since recombinant protein purification
procedure has not been established for this lactobacillus yet. Three different E. coli vectors, i.e. p15AIE,
pUCE and pET30a, were employed to clone all components of the immune system, including the
complete set of III-A cas genes, a His-tag version of csm2 and a synthetic CRISPR array (Fig. S2).
Expression of these plasmid-borne genes in the same cell yielded all this III-A Cas proteins, a Histagged LbCsm2 protein and crRNAs (Fig. 1B), which were allowed to assemble into recombinant
LbCsm ribonucleoprotein complexes in E. coli. The resulting effector complexes were then purified in
two-step purification, the nickel-His tag affinity chromatography and the size exclusion chromatography
(SEC). A single protein peak appeared in 10-12 ml in the SEC purification (Fig. 1C), indicative of
copurification of large complexes. Analysis of these SEC samples by SDS-PAGE showed that each
SEC sample contained 5 protein bands corresponding to the predicted sizes of Csm1, Csm2, Csm3,
Csm4, and Csm5, respectively (Fig. 1D). The RNA component was extracted from the effector
complexes using the Trizol agent. Denaturing PAGE analysis of extracted RNAs by radio-labelling and
northern blot analysis of these RNAs by the radio-labeled DNA probe revealed 3 major RNA
components of ~76, 38 and 32 nt. The largest species represented the complete unit of S1 crRNA
carrying the 5ʹ-repeat handle+S1 spacer+3ʹ-repeat handle, representing the Cas6-cleaved crRNA
product of a single spacer, whereas the two smaller RNA species were matured crRNAs (Fig. 1E and
Fig. S3). Together, these results indicated that LbCsm ribonucleoprotein complexes were reconstituted
in E. coli. Since F5-F7 fractions mainly contained the LbCsm complex of 32 nt crRNA (Fig. 1E), the
smallest ribonucleoprotein effector complex, they were pooled together, annotated as LbCsm and
characterized.
To test if the E. coli-expressed effector could be active in RNA cleavage, LbCsm was mixed with four
different radio-labeled RNAs individually, i.e. (a) a non-homologous RNA, S10, (b) the protospacer
target RNA (PTR), S1-40, lacking any 3ʹ anti-tag, (c) the cognate target RNA (CTR), S1-46, exhibiting
mismatches between its 6 nt 3ʹ anti-tag and the 5ʹ tag of the corresponding crRNA, and (d) the
noncognate target RNA (NTR), S1-48, possessing the fully complementary sequence between its 3ʹ
anti-tag and the 8 nt 5ʹ tag of the crRNA (Fig. 2A). These reaction mixtures were incubated at 37°C for
10 min and analyzed by denaturing PAGE. We found that, while the non-homologous RNA was not a
substrate of LbCsm (Fig. S4A), the effector cleaved all three homologous target RNAs in 6-nt periodicity
with similar efficiencies. These results indicated that LbCsm possesses the backbone RNA cleavage
activity and 3ʹ anti-tag sequences on target RNAs do not influence the RNA cleavage (Fig. 2B). Then,
all three target RNAs were tested for their capability of mediating RNA-activated DNA degradation to
S10-60, a single-stranded non-homologous DNA substrate (Table S1). As shown in Fig. 2C, only CTR
activated the LbCsm DNase, indicating that mismatches between the 3ʹ anti-tag of the target RNA and
the corresponding 5ʹ tag of crRNA are essential for the activation. These results are in good agreement
with those reported for other characterized type III CRISPR-Cas systems15,17,19,20,31,34,35.
To date, all studied type III effectors are capable of producing cOAs, a secondary messenger that
activates CRISPR-associated Rossmann fold (CARF) domain RNases of the Csm6/Csx1 family for
general degradation of cellular RNAs38-42. To investigate if LbCsm could also do that, the effector was
mixed with ATP and CTR in the presence of Mg++, and incubated for 2 h. Samples were analyzed by
denaturing PAGE. As shown in Fig. 2D, whereas the Sulfolobus islandicus III-B Cmr- (a positive
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reference38) consumed almost all 100 μM ATP for cOA synthesis, but LbCsm did not produce any
detectable cOA in the same reaction setup. We repeated the experiments several times and also tested
with a number of different metal ions, but constantly failed to detect any cOA in the ATP reaction (Fig.
S4F).
We noticed that LbCsm1 carries a QGDD motif in Palm 2, the active site for cOA synthesis, which
differs from the GGDD consensus (Fig. S5A). To test if the occurrence of glutamine (Q597) residue in
the motif could be responsible for cyclase inactivation in LbCsm, a Q597G substitution mutant was
constructed to restore the common GGDD motif in LbCsm1, denoted Csm1Q597G. Characterization of
the resultant mutated effector revealed that the GGDD-restored LbCsm still appeared to be inactive in
cOA synthesis (Fig. S4F). To this end, the LbCsm cyclase inactivation could more likely be resulted
from evolution rather than any spontaneous mutation at the Cas10 cyclase domain.

Fig. 1 Cloning, expression and purification of the L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus Csm complex
in E. coli. (A) Schematic of the LbCsm system. Lbcsm genes and the adjacent CRISPR assay are
indicated with filled large arrows and small rectangles, respectively. Line with an arrowhead denotes
the promoter of the csm gene cassette and the direction of transcription. (B) Strategy for reconstitution
of the LbCsm effector in E. coli. Lbcsm genes (cas6+csm1-5 genes) were cloned into p15AIE, yielding
p15AIE-cas (Fig. S2). A CRISPR array carrying 10 copies of S1 spacer was generated and inserted
into pUCE, giving pUCE-S1 (Fig. S2). Lbcsm2 was cloned into pET30a, giving pET30a-Csm2 that yields
the His-tagged Csm2 upon plasmid-born gene expression in the cell. All three plasmids were introduced
into E. coli BL21(DE3) by electroporation. (C) UV spectrum of SEC purification of LbCsm effector
complex. E. coli cell extracts were employed for Nickel-His tag affinity purification of LbCsm2 by which
LbCsm effector complexes were copurified. The resulting protein samples were further purified by SEC.
Blue: UV absorbance at 280 nm; red: UV absorbance at 254 nm. (D) SDS-PAGE analysis of SEC
samples collected in the peak region. M: protein mass marker; Input: proteins purified by nickel Csm2His affinity chromatography. (E) Denaturing gel electrophoresis of 5ʹ-labeled crRNAs. RNAs were
extracted from the SEC-purified LbCsm samples. M: RNA size ladder.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 2 Biochemical characterization of the LbCsm effector complex. (A) Schematic of three
different homologous target RNAs: CTR, cognate target RNA carrying 6-nt 3ʹ anti-tag with mismatch to
the 5ʹ tag of the corresponding crRNA; NTR, noncognate target RNA containing 8-nt 3ʹ anti-tag that is
complementary to the 5ʹ tag of the corresponding crRNA, and PTR, 40 nt protospacer target RNA
completely lacking 3ʹ anti-tag. (B) Analysis of target RNA cleavage by LbCsm. Different target RNAs
(50 nM) were individually mixed with 50 nM LbCsm and incubated for 10 min. The resulting samples
were analyzed by denaturing PAGE. (C) Analysis of RNA-activated ssDNA cleavage by LbCsm. 50 nM
S10-60 ssDNA substrate was mixed with 50 nM LbCsm and 500 nM of each of the target RNA and
incubated for 10 min. Samples were analyzed by denaturing PAGE. (D) Analysis of cOA synthesis by
LbCsm. ~2 nM [α-32P]-ATP was mixed with a range of cold ATP (48 nM – 1 mM) and incubated with 50
nM LbCsm in the presence of 500 nM CTR for 120 min, the S. islandicus Cmr-α complex was used as
the positive reference.
LbCsm system mediates anti-plasmid interference in E. coli
To investigate if the LbCsm system could mediate DNA interference in vivo, three test plasmids were
constructed using pBad, an E. coli vector exhibiting arabinose-inducible expression. These included
pBad-eGFP (pBad-G), a reference plasmid and two protospacer-carrying plasmids: one containing the
CTR-S1 protospacer-GFP fusion gene (pBad-CTR), and the other possessing the NTR-S1 protospacereGFP (pBad-NTR) (Fig. 3A). Meanwhile, E. coli strain for the in vivo assay was generated by
introduction of the expression plasmid p15AIE-Cas-S1 into E. coli BL21 (DE3) by electroporation. The
rationale of the experiment is that plasmid-borne gene expression from p15AIE-Cas-S1 would yield
binary LbCsm effector complexes in the host cells, which would mediate anti-plasmid activity if a
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cognate target RNA was to be expressed from a test plasmid. In addition, since the expression of CTRS1 or NTR-S1 target RNA is controlled by the Bad promoter that confers very stringent arabinoseinducible expression, target RNAs would only be synthesized in L-arabinose media but not in glucose
media. Therefore, examination of colony formation efficiency of each plasmid on both arabinose plates
and glucose media would reveal in vivo transcription-dependent anti-plasmid interference of the
immune systems to be tested (Fig. 3B).
All test plasmids were introduced into the genetic host by transformation, and transformed E. coli
cells were plated on 6 different medium plates containing 0.5% glucose or arabinose of different
contents (0.01-0.08%). Following transformation data were obtained: (a) pBad-G and pBad-NTR
produced very similar numbers of transformants on all 6 growth media, (b) pBad-CTR gave very similar
transformation efficiency data on plates containing glucose or very low contents of L-arabinose (0.01 or
0.02%), (c) increasing the L-arabinose content in the medium to 0.04% and 0.06%, yielded ca. 10 and
100-fold decrease in transformation efficiency, and (d) the presence of 0.08% inducer completely
abolished colony formation by pBad-CTR-containing cells (Fig. 3C). These results indicated, while NTR
can effectively turn off the LbCsm immunity, CTR is capable of conferring plasmid clearance to the
LbCsm system albeit it only possesses the RNA-activated ssDNA cleavage activity, suggesting LbCsm
represents the novel type III CRISPR-Cas system, which exhibits the robust RNA activated DNase
activity to resist the invasive plasmid.

Fig. 3 Anti-plasmid activity of the LbCsm system. (A) Schematic of the test plasmids pBad-G, pBadCTR and pBad-NTR. Gene expression from these plasmids is under the control of a L-arabinoseinducible Bad promoter. Therefore, mRNAs carrying CTR or NTR are expressed from the corresponding
plasmids (pBad-CTR or pBad-NTR) in the presence of L-arabinose but their expression is completely
repressed in glucose media. (B) Schematic of the interference plasmid assay for determination of the
LbCsm anti-plasmid activity. (C) Transformation efficiency data of the three different plasmids obtained
from different growth media.
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Multiple Cas10 domains contribute to the LbCsm DNase activity
The largest subunit Cas10 in type III-A effector complexes contains 4 conserved domains, including a
HD domain, two Palm domains (Palm1 and Palm2), a Linker and a D4 structural region (Fig. 4A).
Biochemical and structural analyses of different type III CRISPR-Cas systems have revealed that the
HD domain is responsible for ssDNA cleavage15,19,20,31,34,35, Palm1 and Palm2 domains function in cOA
synthesis38-41,43 whereas the Linker domain plays a regulatory role in both target RNA-activated DNA
cleavage and cOA synthesis54. However, it remained to investigate whether a concerted action of
different Cas10 domains would be required to yield Csm DNase with optimal activity. The robustness
of the LbCsm DNase rendered it a good system for this characterization.
Nine conserved amino acids present in the HD, Linker, and Palm2 domains of LbCsm1 were chosen
for substitution mutagenesis, giving 6 single domain mutants. These included Csm1dHD, a HD domain
mutant carrying H15A and D16A double substitution, 3 Linker domain mutants, i.e. Csm1LinE (E415A
substitution), Csm1LinEC (E415A and C416A substitutions), and Csm1LinCC (C416A and C419A
mutations), and 2 Palm2 domain mutants, Csm1P2DxD (D541A and D543A substitutions) and Csm1P2DD
(D599A and D600A mutations). Then, some mutated motifs were combined, yielding double domain
mutations including two HD/Linker mutants (Csm1dHD_LinEC and Csm1dHD_LinCC), two HD/Palm2 mutants
(Csm1dHD_P2DxD and Csm1dHD_P2DD) and Csm1LinE_P2DxD, a Linker and a Palm2 mutant (Table S2).
Each mutated csm1 gene was used to replace the wild-type csm1 on p15AIE-cas, and the resulting
plasmids were into E. coli to express LbCsm effectors carrying each of the mutated LbCsm1 protein.
These mutated LbCsm effector complexes were obtained as described for the wild-type LbCsm effector.
The protein components of these effector complexes were checked by SDS-PAGE, and this showed
that they all contained 5 different Csm subunits as for the wild-type LbCsm complex (Fig. S5B),
indicating that none of these Csm1 mutations affected the effector assembly. These effector complexes
were then tested for target RNA cleavage using S1-46, the CTR, as the substrate and they all exhibited
the backbone cleavage (Fig. S5C).
Next, RNA-activated DNase activity was examined for each mutated complex in reactions containing
50 nM effector, 50 nM ssDNA and 500 nM CTR. For single domain mutants, we found that all mutations
(except for Csm1P2DD) strongly impaired the ssDNase activity, including Csm1dHD, Csm1LinE, Csm1LinEC
Csm1LinCC and Csm1P2DxD (Fig. 4B). These results indicated that, in additional to the HD domain, the
putative cleavage site, three other Csm1 motifs, i.e. E415 and C416 C419 in the Linker region and DxD
in the Palm2 domain are also important for the LbCsm DNase. Analysis of the double motif mutants
further showed, while combined mutations of Csm1dHD_LinEC, Csm1dHD_LinCC and Csm1dHD_P2DD
possessed similar DNase activities relative to those of single motif mutants, those of Csm1dHD_P2DxD and
Csm1LinE_P2DxD completely abolished the LbCsm DNase cleavage (Fig. 4B). To this end, we concluded
that three Cas10 motifs, including HD, E415, C416 and C419 (Zinc finger) in the Linker as well as
D451and D453 (DxD) in Plam2, play critical roles in the LbCsm DNA cleavage.
To yield a further insight into the LbCsm DNA cleavage, all these Csm1-mutated effector complexes
were tested for substrate binding in which 25, 50 or 100 nM effector complex was mixed with 500 nM
CTR and 5 nM radio-labeled S1-60 ssDNA. After incubation for 3 min, the formation of LbCsm-ssDNA
complexes was checked by nondenaturing PAGE. As shown in Fig. S5E, the substrate affinity of these
effector complexes fell into three different categories. First, wild-type (WT) and LbCsm_Csm1P2DD
showed a strong binding (100% and ~80%), which is consistent with their unimpaired DNase activity;
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

second, LbCsm_Csm1dHD and LbCsm_Csm1P2DxD retained ~30% of the binding capacity of the wildtype LbCsm effector, whereas the last group included those with mutations in Linker, only exhibiting 520% of substrate binding. Taken together, these data indicated that the HD motif, the Zinc finger and
the DxD motif function in facilitating substrate binding of the LbCsm effector complex.

Fig. 4 Effect of LbCsm1 mutations on ssDNA binding and cleavage by the LbCsm effector
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

complex. (A) Domain architecture of the LbCsm1 protein. HD represents the HD-type nuclease domain;
Palm 1 and Palm 2 denote the two cyclase domains; Linker is a domain that adjoins the Palm1 and
Palm2 domains, consisting 4 cysteine residues, D4 is located in the C-terminus rich in α-helices. Amino
acid residues selected for alanine substitution mutagenesis are indicated with their names and positions.
(B) RNA-activated ssDNA cleavage by effectors carrying one of the constructed LbCsm1 mutants. 50
nM S10-60 ssDNA substrates were mixed with 50 nM mutated LbCsm carrying each of LbCsm1 mutant
proteins and 500 nM CTR, and incubated for 10 min. Samples were analyzed by denaturing PAGE.
(C) ssDNA binding by effectors carrying each of the constructed LbCsm1 mutants. 5 nM labeled S1060 ssDNA were incubated with 100 nM of LbCsm effectors indicated in each experiment. 400 nM of
non-homologous RNA (S10 RNA) or in the presence of 500 nM of one of the target RNAs, PTR or CTR
or NTR for 3 min. Samples were analyzed by non-denaturing PAGE. Red arrowheads indicate the CsmssDNA complex. (D) Relative ssDNA binding between the wild-type LbCsm effector and its LbCsm1
mutated derivatives. The relative ssDNA binding activities were estimated by image quantification of
the non-denaturing PAGE in (C) by the accessory analysis tool in Typhoon FLA 7000, the ssDNA activity
of LbCsm in non-homologous RNA was used as the standard and set up as 1. Results shown are
average of three independent assays, bars represent the mean standard deviation (± SD).
LbCsm1 Linker domain and Palm2 DxD motif function in the allosteric control of the LbCsm
DNase
The establishment of ssDNA binding assay with LbCsm prompted us to investigate how target RNAs
could regulate the LbCsm DNase. For this purpose, 400 nM, S10 RNA (non-homologous RNA) and 500
nM of PTR, NTR or CTR was mixed with 100 nM LbCsm and 5 nM of labeled S1-60 DNA individually.
After incubation at 37 C for 3 min, samples were analyzed by non-denaturing PAGE. We found that,
while the WT LbCsm effector showed little DNA-binding activity in the presence of non-homologous
RNA or NTR, PTR greatly enhanced the DNA binding, and that activity was further facilitated by CTR
for ca. 4-fold (Fig. 4C & 4D), indicating that CTR induces allosteric regulation on substrate binding of
LbCsm. These results also indicated that the CTR-mediated allosteric regulation of LbCsm DNase
involves a protospacer region-induced minimal regulation, in which protospacer region-bound facilities
the ssDNA substrate binding but the complexes remain inactive, and CTR-dependent activation of the
LbCsm DNase. Therefore, 3ʹ anti-tag of both CTR and NTR regulate LbCsm DNA binding.
Analyses of all above Csm1-mutated effector complexes revealed that, while five mutated effectors
(LbCsm_Csm1P2DD,
LbCsm_Csm1

dHD_P2DD

LbCsm_Csm1dHD,

LbCsm_Csm1LinCC,

LbCsm_Csm1dHD_LinCC,

and

) exhibited a pattern of target RNA activation that is very similar to that of the wild-

type LbCsm, those carrying E415A and/or alanine substitutions in Palm2 DxD did not show such a
significant CTR-enhanced ssDNA substrate binding; their CTR and PTR ternary complexes basically
remained inactive (Fig. 4C & 4D). These results indicated that among the three motifs essential for the
LbCsm DNase, HD is not involved in CTR-induced allosteric regulation of LbCsm whereas both E415
and P2-DxD are essential for the allosteric regulation.
Examination of ssDNA cleavage products in Fig. 4C further revealed that target RNA-independent
DNA cleavage was observed for mutated effectors carrying LinEC, LinCC, dHD_LinEC or dHD_LinCC
mutations on LbCsm1. Common for these mutants was a mutation in the CC motif of the Zinc finger
within the Linker domain, and these results indicated that the Zinc finger motif is essential for preventing
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

target RNA-dependent activation of the LbCsm DNase. To this end, the Zinc finger motif could function
as another layer of LbCsm DNase regulation by influencing substrate binding.
Taken together, our results unraveled three distinctive functions for the Cas10 protein: (a) consistent
with the results obtained with other type III effectors, the HD motif of LbCsm1 hosts the catalytic site of
the DNase; (b) E415 and P2-DxD are involved in mediating allosteric regulation of the ternary effector
to yield active enzyme.
Identification of Csm3 amino acids involved in the regulation of the LbCsm DNase
The ssDNA substrate binding assay showed that PTR-bound ternary LbCsm showed a higher substrate
binding compared with that in the presence of non-homologous RNA (Fig. 4C), indicating that the
protospacer region-bound drives certain regulation of LbCsm complex. To yield an further insight into
the mechanism, some Csm3 variants were constructed and the mutated effector complexes were
purified and characterized in vitro.
Alignment of a selected set of Csm3 proteins revealed a number of conserved amino acids among
which may have a structural function or form the intermolecular contacts with crRNA or target RNA (Fig.
S6). There are three conserved residues: H20, D34 and D106 do not a structural function or crRNA and
target RNA interaction (LbCsm3 number). D34 was the predicted active site of the LbCsm RNase
whereas functions of the remaining two amino acids were uncertain. To study that, we constructed
several LbCsm3 mutants, including alanine substitution of H20, D34, or D106 as well as double
substitutions (H20/D34 and D34/D106). LbCsm effector complexes carrying each of these Csm3
mutations (designated Csm3H20A, Csm3D34A, Csm3D106A, Csm3H20/D34-A and Csm3D34/D106-A) were purified
from E. coli and characterized. Target RNA cleavage assay showed that, while neither Csm3H20A nor
Csm3D106A substitutions influenced the target RNA cleavage, Csm3D34A substitution greatly impaired the
RNA cleavage of the effector (Fig. 5A). These results confirmed that the D34 is the active site of target
RNA cleavage of the LbCsm system as demonstrated for the conserved aspartic acid residue in all
other known type III CRISPR-Cas systems. Analysis of RNA-activated ssDNA cleavage showed that,
the LbCsm complex containing the Csm3D34A substitution exhibited higher ssDNase activity relative to
WT complex, DNase activity was strongly impaired in the remaining 4 mutated Csm3 complexes (Fig.
5B).
To test their spatiotemporal regulation, these Csm3 mutated complexes were incubated with the
ssDNA substrate in the presence of different RNAs. We found that, except for Csm3H20A substitution
exhibiting an impaired ssDNA binding for all tested RNAs, Csm3D34A exhibited a higher ssDNA substrate
binding enhancement in presence of PTR vs. non-homologous RNA than WT complex (ca. 3-fold vs. 2fold, respectively), which might due to the reduced target RNA cleavage allows a longer persistence of
the PTR-bound ternary LbCsm complex. However, Csm3D106A substitution and the double substitutions
Csm3H20/D34-A and Csm3D34/D106-A did not show such a significant PTR-induced ssDNA substrate binding
enhancement relative to WT complex (Fig. 5C & 5D). Together, These results confirmed that the target
RNA-mediated regulation of LbCsm complex involves a protospacer region-induced regulation,
consistent with the results obtained from structural analysis with other Csm or Cmr complexes54,55,57.
These results also indicated that two Csm3 residues, H20 and D106, are involved in mediating
regulation of the ternary LbCsm complex to yield active enzyme.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 5 Effect of LbCsm3 mutations on the ssDNA cleavage and binding of LbCsm. (A) Target RNA
cleavage of LbCsm3 mutated derivatives. 50 nM of S1-46 RNA were incubated with 50 nM of LbCsm
or the indicated mutant derivatives for 10 min and the samples were analyzed by denaturing PAGE.
(B) RNA-activated ssDNA cleavage by effectors carrying one of the constructed LbCsm3 mutants.
Reaction conditions were the same as in Fig. 4B. (C) ssDNA binding by effectors carrying each of the
constructed LbCsm3 mutants. Reaction conditions were the same as in Fig. 4C. (D) Relative ssDNA
binding between the wild-type LbCsm effector and its LbCsm3 mutated derivatives. The ssDNA activity
of LbCsm in non-homologous RNA was used as the standard and set up as 1. Results shown are
average of three independent assays, bars represent the mean standard deviation (± SD).
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Identification of different target RNA-LbCsm ternary complexes with distinctive substrate
binding and DNA cleavage
To investigate how target RNA could activate the LbCsm DNase, 3’-truncation variants of the cognate
target RNA were generated, carrying +1, +2, +3, +4, +5, +6 nt of the 3ʹ anti-tag region of CTR (annotated
as CTR+1 to CTR+6) as well as the full length CTR (CTRFull) (Table S1). Each target RNA was tested for
its capability to facilitate DNA binding and DNA cleavage by LbCsm. As shown in Fig. 6A, while the
binary LbCsm showed little DNA binding, PTR, the target RNA lacking any 3ʹ anti-tag sequence, greatly
facilitated the substrate binding of the LbCsm complex (ca. 55% of CTR-LbCsm) but it failed to mediate
DNA cleavage, suggesting that this complex (LbCsm-PTR) could represent the one step in the allosteric
regulation of LbCsm. Next, when CTR1, a target RNA that extended the PTR by a nucleotide at the 3ʹ
anti-tag position, formed a ternary effector complex with LbCsm, the resulting effector not only showed
further increased substrate binding activity (ca. 90% of the full activity) but also activated for the DNA
cleavage (ca. 35% of full activity). This suggested that a single nucleotide at the 3ʹ anti-tag of CTR is
flipped by the LbCsm to convert the inactive ternary LbCsm complex to an active one. Finally, DNA
cleavage activity by the LbCsm effector peaked with CTR+4 that carries 4 nt 3ʹ anti-tag of CTR, which
could have completed the allosteric regulation of the immune system (Fig. 6A).

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 6 Target RNA-directed allosteric regulation of LbCsm involves activation and deactivation
mechanisms. (A) CTR activates the LbCsm DNase. (B) NTR mediates autoimmunity avoidance by
deactivation. Reactions were set up with 5 nM S10-60 ssDNA, 100 nM of LbCsm and 400 nM nonhomologous RNA (non-h. RNA) or 500 nM target RNA. After addition of one of target RNAs, the mixture
was incubated at 37 C for 3 min. Samples were then analyzed by non-denaturing PAGE (in this page)
or denaturing PAGE (Fig. S7). Red arrowheads indicate the LbCsm-ssDNA complex. Relative ssDNA
binding and percentage ssDNA cleaved of LbCsm facilitated by each of these target RNAs were
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

estimated by image quantification of bands on non-denaturing PAGE and denaturing PAGE, using the
accessory analysis tool equipped with a Typhoon FLA 7000. For the quantification of the substrate
binding, the amount of ssDNA-LbCsm-CTR+6 complex is arbitrarily defined as 1. Results of average of
three independent assays are shown with bars representing the standard deviation (± SD).
NTR inhibits the LbCsm DNase by preventing substrate binding
The same approach was then employed to investigate how NTR could inhibit the LbCsm DNase.
Truncated derivatives of NTR were generated (i.e. NTR+1 through NTR+6) as for the CTR derivatives,
and in addition, a few PTR truncations (PTR-8 to PTR-2) were also made (Table S1). These target RNAs
were tested for their capability of facilitating substrate binding and cleavage as above described. We
found that PTR and its truncated derivatives (PTR-4 to PTR-8) showed marginal differences both in
ssDNA binding and in ssDNA cleavage, suggesting that these ternary complexes could belong to the
same category, equivalent to the stage of the binary LbCsm effector (Fig. 6B). While PTR-2 and PTR
showed similar effects on ssDNA binding, NTR+1, however, mediated a major stimulation to the LbCsm
DNA binding (ca. 70% of the full activity), and it also facilitated the DNA cleavage (ca. 35% of full activity),
and in fact, the stimulating effect by NTR+1 is comparable to that by CTR+1 (Fig. 6). These results not
only implied the first nucleotide at the 3ʹ anti-tag of NTR can still be flipped by the complex to allow
activation of the HD nuclease domain, but also indicated that the process of repression by NTR shares
some common activation with the CTR-dependent activation process of LbCsm DNase. Thereafter,
extension of the 3ʹ anti-tag of NTR greatly reduces the DNA binding and gradually decreases DNA
cleavage (Fig. 6B), suggesting that the interaction between 3ʹ anti-tag of NTR and the 5ʹ tag of crRNA
could have deactivated the enzyme by restricting the accessibility of the ssDNA substrate to the active
site.
Discussion
Type III CRISPR-Cas systems characterized thus far show three different interference activities: target
RNA cleavage, RNA-activated indiscriminate DNA cleavage and cOA synthesis among which the latter
two activities are responsible for the DNA interference by these systems whereas target RNA cleavage
plays a regulatory role (see reviews46,47,49). Here we report a type III-A subtype CRISPR-Cas system
that shows robust RNA-activated ssDNA cleavage, but devoiding of cOA synthesis. This is consistent
with the fact that the genome of the L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus genome does not code for any
detectable Csm6 homologs. Interestingly, we find that a plasmid-borne LbCsm system is sufficient to
mediate interference plasmid clearance in E. coli. This suggests that the LbCsm system probably only
utilizes the RNA-activated ssDNase to mediate the antiviral immunity in the original host. We have also
explored the simplicity of the LbCsm antiviral mechanism for investigating mechanisms of the DNA
cleavage by type III CRISPR-Cas systems and our research has yielded mechanistic insights into the
target RNA-mediated activation and repression of the LbCsm DNase.
Structures of several type III effector complexes have been solved54-58 and these analyses have
revealed that formation of target RNA-Csm ternary effectors involves a minimal conformational change
that is very similar between the CTR ternary effectors and the corresponding NTR ternary ones although
only the former has been activated for DNA cleavage54-56. As a result, there is no major structural
difference at the catalytic site of active versus inactive Csm DNases, and the only difference is the 3ʹ
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

anti-tag sequences of the two different types of target RNAs are individually placed in different channels
in their structures54. Furthermore, in the structure of the PTR-StCsm complex, major conformational
change also occurs although the target RNA lacking any 3ʹ anti-tag. Since structure of a DNA substratebound Csm effector complex has not been resolved, how these effectors interact with their DNA
substrates remains to unknown. For this reason, the only biochemical criterion to distinguish different
effector complexes is to analyze their DNA cleavage activity. In this work, we have established a ssDNA
binding assay for LbCsm, and our detailed analysis of substrate binding for this immune system has
revealed that different target RNAs are capable of facilitating differential substrate binding and DNA
cleavage to the LbCsm effector. Thus, it is very interesting to study how allosteric regulation differentially
influences the two activities of the LbCsm DNase.
Structural analysis of StCsm by You et al.54 has indicated that the Cas10 Linker domain functions in
mediating conformational change. Here, we find that that both the DxD motif in Palm 2 and the E415
residue in the Linker domain play an essential role in mediating the allosteric regulation of the LbCsm
complex in vitro. To date, detailed functions of the Cas10 linker E415 and P2 DxD motifs have not been
studied for other type III CRISPR-Cas systems although all three amino acids are well conserved in
Cas10 proteins (Fig. S5A). Therefore, it is of a great interest to investigate if their functions revealed for
LbCsm represent a general mechanism for all type III immune systems.
In this paper, we have presented the detailed biochemical analysis of substrate binding by LbCsm
effector complex, and our analysis shows that the Cas10 Zinc finger modulates the enzyme substrate
binding since E415A substitution yielded an enzyme with greatly reduced DNA binding and inactive in
DNA cleavage (Fig. 4). As E415 is probably part of the Zinc finger motif, this suggests that the Cas10
Zinc finger domain can have dual function in this immune system, namely both as an executor to the
allosteric regulation and as a regulator to substrate binding46,59. The other study on substrate binding
was conducted by single-molecule fluorescence microscopy analysis of Staphylococcus epidermidis
Csm by Wang et al60. They find that Cas10 subunit is locked in a static configuration upon NTR binding
in which the DNA binding pocket of the effector appears to be in a closed form, inaccessible to substrate.
However, upon CTR binding, Cas10 exhibits a larger conformational space in the active site60. Together
with our biochemical data, it is plausible to predict that there exists a substrate-binding pocket in the
DNase of type III effector complexes although this structural domain remains to be illustrated by their
structural analysis.
The possibility of characterization of effector complexes for both substrate binding and DNA cleavage
allows us to identify target RNA-LbCsm effector complexes exhibiting differential activities, and we
propose that these effector complexes probably represent intermediates for structural analysis to study
the molecular mechanisms of the CTR activation or NTR repression of the LbCsm system (Fig. 7).
These include: (a) The LbCsm-PTR complex showing an elevated level of substrate binding but inactive
in catalysis, (b) the LbCsm-CTR+1 and LbCsm-NTR+1 exhibiting most of substrate binding and catalysis
activities, representing another type of intermediates. There are two apparent features with the two
effectors: they differ from LbCsm-PTR only by the first nucleotide present in the 3ʹ anti-tag of target
RNAs, and the nucleotide in CTR is different from that in NTR. Thus, this nucleotide could functions as
a trigger to induce the major allostery in LbCsm ternary to yield an active effector complex and the
interaction between the effector with the nucleotide should not be specific, (c) LbCsm-CTR+4 represents
another effector complex that should have adopted the same conformation since it exhibits the maximal
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

substrate binding and catalysis, and finally (d) and LbCsm-NTRFull represents the inactive conformation
of the effector completely deactivate the LbCsm complex, ensuring autoimmunity avoidance of the
LbCsm system (Fig. 7). These LbCsm effector complexes provide good model for structural analysis to
reveal the molecular mechanisms of activation and repression of Csm DNases.

Fig. 7 Model of allosteric activation and repression of the LbCsm DNase. The previous works have
proposed that the initial recognition of nascent transcript at the 5ʹ end of target RNA for type III complex,
since both of Csm5 subunit in Csm complex and Cmr1 subunit in Cmr complex are crucial for target
RNA binding36,37,66. These suggested that the binary LbCsm effector complex interacts with target
transcript initially at the 5ʹ end of target RNA and further via sequence complementarity between the
protospacer and the corresponding crRNA, leading to the formation of a ternary effector complex with
a major formational change. Addition of a single nucleotide at the 3ʹ-end of protospacer RNA results in
an important allosteric change in the LbCsm DNase, giving an active enzyme. CTR-bound LbCsm
exhibits the full level of substrate binding and DNA cleavage whereas NTR-bound LbCsm closes the
substrate-binding pocket, which deactivates the DNase. Finally, multiple Csm3 subunits cleave the
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

target transcripts, and release of target RNA cleavage products restores the binary conformation,
completing the spatiotemporal regulation of LbCsm systems.
Materials and Methods
Bacterial strains and growth conditions
L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus ND04 (GenBank: CP016393.1) was grown in MRS broth (Oxoid, UK)
at 37°C without shaking. E. coli JM109 and BL21(DE3) were propagated in Luria-Bertani (LB) medium
at 37°C with 200 rpm/min shaking. If applicable, antibiotics were added as the following: ampicillin (100
μg/ml, sigma), kanamycin (25 μg/ml, sigma) and chloramphenicol (10 μg/ml, sigma).
Construction of different vectors and plasmids
To construct a p15A replicon-based expression vector, the origin fragment was obtained from pTRKH2
61

, ampicillin resistance gene (Amp) was derived from pUC19 (New England Biolabs) whereas gene

expression cassette were amplified from and pET30a (Novagen) by PCR, using three sets of primers
(p15A-F and-R, Amp-F and -R, as well as LacI-F and T7-R) listed in Table S1. Ligation of these DNA
fragments generated the expression vector p15AIE (Fig. S2A). The same strategy was employed to
construct pUCE in which the origin was amplified from pUC19, chloramphenicol resistance gene was
obtained from pCI372 whereas the expression cassette, from pET30a, using the primer sets of pUC,
Cm and T7, respectively (Table S1). Ligation of these DNA fragments gave pUCE (Fig. S2B).
The vector for invader plasmid assay was constructed in two steps. First, fragment 1 containing the
origin of pBR322 and kanamycin resistance gene (Kan) was obtained from pET30a by PCR (pBR-Kan
primers); second, DNA fragments carrying an arabinose-inducible Bad promoter, multiple cloning sites
(MCS) and transcriptional terminator (T) were generated by PCR from E. coli BL21(DE3) genome and
plasmid pELX1

62

, using the primer sets of PBad and MCS-T listed in Table S1, respectively, and they

were then fused together by splicing overlapping extension PCR (SOE-PCR)

63

; third, ligation of the

fragment 1 and the SOE DNA fragment yielded pBad vector. Then, three DNA fragments carrying eGFP
gene were amplified from pEGFP-N1

64

by PCR using GFR-F/GFR-R, CTR-GFR-F/GFR-R and NTR-

GFR-F/GFR-R, and insertion of each fragment into pBad individually gave pBad-G, pBad-CTR and
pPBad-NTR. All primers employed in this work were listed in Table S1.
Chromosomal DNA was extracted from cells of L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus ND04 using OMEGA
Genomic DNA Purification Kit (OMEGA Bio-tek). DNA fragment covering the cas6-cas10-csm2-csm3csm4-csm5 gene cassette was amplified by PCR with the primers SalI-Cas6-F and NotI-Csm5-R using
ND04 genome DNA as template. The PCR product inserted into p15AIE via SalI and NotI, yielding
p15AIE-Cas. csm2 gene was amplified from ND04 genome using primers Csm2-F and Csm2-R. PCR
product was then digested with NdeI and XhoI and cloned into pET30a expression vectors, giving
pET30a-Csm2. To construct a CRISPR array plasmid, fusion PCR amplification was performed using
three primers Re-S1-F, S1-R1, Re-S1-R to generate the multiple copies of 36 nt length repeats
interspaced by multiple S1 spacer (40 nt) of identical sequence, then PCR products of ~1 kb were
recovered from an agarose gel using an OMEGA gel-purification kit (OMEGA Bio-tek). The purified DNA
fragments were cloned into pJET1.2 (CloneJET PCR Cloning Kit, Thermo Scientific). After confirming
the sequence of the synthetic CRISPR array on pJET clones (GATC Bio-tech), the DNA fragment was
amplified and cloned into plasmid pUCE at the BglII site, yielding pUCE-S1 carried 10 identical spacers
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(S1) in the CRISPR array. Finally, plasmid p15AIE-Cas-S1 was constructed by insertion of the CRISPR
array into p15AIE-Cas at the NheI site.
Purification of LbCsm effector complexes from E. coli
Three plasmids (p15AIE-Cas, pUCE-S1 and pET30a-Csm2) were introduced into E. coli BL21 (DE3)
by electroporation, yielding a E. coli strain containing all three plasmids. This bacterial strain was
employed as host to overexpress the LbCsm system. The strain was cultured 200 ml LB medium
containing ampicillin, kanamycin, chloramphenicol (at 37°C, 200 rpm) to the mid-log phase (OD600 was
0.8), then IPTG was added to 0.3 mM and the culture was further cultured at 25°C for 16 h. Cells were
harvested by centrifugation at 5,000 rpm for 5 min, and cell pellets were resuspended in 20 ml buffer A
[20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.25 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole and 10% glycerol], yielding cell suspension
that was treated with a French press for cell lysis at 4°C. Cell debris was then removed from treated
cell suspension by centrifugation at 10,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. The Csm complex was captured on
the HiTrap affinity column (GE Healthcare) by LbCsm2 copurification and eluted with buffer B [20 mM
Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.25 M NaCl, 200 mM imidazole and 10% glycerol]. The resulting LbCsm effector
complex preparation was further purified by size exclusion chromatography (SEC) with Superdex 200
(GE Healthcare) using the chromatography buffer [20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), 0.25 M NaCl and 5%
glycerol]. SEC fraction samples were analyzed by sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and those containing the complete set and high quality of Csm complex
components were pooled together and used for further analysis. Csm complex concentration was
measured according to the Bradford method using the protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific) with bovine
serum albumin as the standard.
Extraction and analysis of crRNA
The purified LbCsm complex (100 μl) was first mixed with l00 μl Trizol agent (Sigma), and then 200 μl
chloroform:isoamylalcohol (24:1, v/v) was added. After vortex for 30 s, the mixture was centrifuged at
12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4 °C. The upper phase was transferred into a new tube and reextracted with
200 μl chloroform:isoamylalcohol. crRNA in the upper phase was precipitated with one volume of
isopropanol and washed twice with 1 ml of 70% ice-cold ethanol. The pellet was air-dried for 30 min at
the room temperature and dissolved in 20 μl DEPC-H2O. Ten nanograms of crRNA was 5ʹ-labeled with
[γ-32P]-ATP (PerkinElmer) using T4 polynucleotide kinase (New England Biolabs) and separated on a
12% denaturing polyacrylamide gel. The labeled crRNAs were identified by exposing the gel to a
phosphor screen (GE Healthcare) and scanned with a Typhoon FLA 7000 (GE Healthcare). For northern
blotting of crRNA, 100 ng of unlabeled crRNA was mixed with equal volume of 2 × RNA loading dye
(New England Biolabs) and fractionated in the 12% denaturing polyacrylamide gel. Northern blotting
analysis was conducted as described previously 65, using radiolabeled RNA S1-40 (Table S1).
Labeling of DNA and RNA Substrates
All DNA, S10 (nonhomologous RNA), S1-40 (PTR), S1-46 (CTR) and S1-48 (NTR) oligonucleotides
were purchased from IDT, other RNA oligonucleotides were generated by in vitro transcription using
TranscriptAid T7 High Yield Transcription Kit (Thermo Scientific) (Table S1). DNA and RNA
oligonucleotides to be used as substrate for cleavage and binding assays were purified by recovering
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the corresponding bands from either a native polyacrylamide gel (for double-stranded DNA) or from
denaturing polyacrylamide gel (for ssDNA or RNA) after electrophoresis. ssDNA and RNA substrates
were 5ʹ labeled with [γ-32P]-ATP and T4 polynucleotide kinase followed by denaturing gel purification.
Double strand DNA, bubble DNA and R-loop DNA was generated as described previously 31.
Cleavage assay
Nucleic acid cleavage assays were conducted in 10 μl of reaction containing the indicated amount of
effector complex and substrates in the cleavage buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 6.8), 10 mM MgCl2, 50 mM
KCl, 0.1 mg/ml BSA]. In DNA cleavage assay, 500 nM (unless otherwise indicated) unlabeled RNA was
supplemented to activate DNA cleavage activity. Samples were incubated at 37°C and stopped for
indicated time periods and the reaction was stopped by addition of 2 × RNA loading dye (New England
Biolabs). For electrophoresis, samples were heated for 3 min at 95°C and analyzed on an 18%
polyacrylamide denaturing gel. RNA ladders were generated by Decade™ Marker RNA (Ambion)
following the instructions and labeled by [γ-32P]-ATP with T4 polynucleotide kinase. Results were
recorded by phosphor imaging.
Determination of cyclic oligoadenylates synthesis activity
Each reaction mixture contained 50 nM Csm complex, 500 nM unlabeled S1-46 RNA (CTR), ~2 nM [α32

P]-ATP (PerkinElmer) and an indicated content of ATP in 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 6.8) and 0.1 mg/ml BSA

supplementing with ions. Reactions were incubated at 37°C for 120 min and 2 × RNA loading dye was
added at the indicated time points to stop the reaction. Samples were kept on ice until use. For
electrophoresis, samples were treated at 95°C for 3 min and analyzed by 24% denaturing PAGE. Gels
were analyzed by phosphor imaging.
Electrophoretic Mobility Shift Assay
ssDNA binding assay was performed by incubating different amounts of Csm complex (specified in
each experiment) with 5 nM

32

P-5ʹ-labeled S10-60 ssDNA in the cleavage buffer. All reactions were

incubated at 37°C for the indicated time periods. Then, the same volume of 2 × native loading buffer
[0.1% bromophenol blue, 15% sucrose, w/v] was added and the samples were immediately put on ice
and kept there until needed for electrophoresis on an 8% nondenaturing polyacrylamide gel.
Electrophoresis was carried out at 4°C using 40 mM Tris, 20 mM acetic acid (pH 8.4 at 25°C) as the
running buffer. Gels were analyzed by phosphor imaging.
Relative ssDNA binding and cleavage activities of LbCsm facilitated by each of these target RNAs
were estimated by image quantification of bands on non-denaturing PAGE and denaturing PAGE,
respectively, using the accessory analysis tool equipped with a Typhoon FLA 7000. Results of average
of three independent assays are shown with bars representing the mean standard deviation (± SD).
Mutagenesis of LbCsm1 and LbCsm3
Lbcsm1 mutants were generated using the splicing overlapping extension PCR protocol previously
reported

63

. In brief, several mutations were designed in the internal partial overlapping primers, initial

PCRs were preformed using the external primer and their corresponding internal primers to generate
overlapping gene segments, then, the two PCR products were fused together by overlapping extension
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

PCR. The resulting fragments were digested with restriction endonuclease (DNA fragment containing
LbCsm1 H15D16A mutation was cleaved with SalI and SacI, those carrying LbCsm1 E415A,
E415C416A, C416C419A, D541D543A, D599D600A or Q597G were digested with StuI and SacI.
LbCsm3 H20A, D34A and D106A was obtained via StuI and KpnI. After purification, these DNA
fragments were inserted into the plasmid p15AIE-Cas at the corresponding restriction sites, yielding the
plasmids carrying each designed Lbcsm1 mutation. All mutations were verified by DNA sequencing
(GATC Biotech).
Plasmid interference assay
Plasmid interference assays were performed as previously described

51

. Briefly, an E. coli BL21(DE3)

strain carrying p15AIE-Cas-S1 (80 μl) was transformed with 100 ng of one of the following plasmids,
pBad-G, pBad-CTR or pBad-NTR. Electroporation was performed in a 1-mm cuvette (Bio-Rad, USA),
with the setting of 1,600 V, 200 Ω and 25 μF, using a Gene Pulser II Electroporation System (Bio-Rad).
Then, 920 μl of SOC medium was immediately added to electroporated cells and incubated with shaking
(200 rpm) at 37°C for 60 min. A series of dilutions were then made for each transformation, and 100 μl
of each dilution was plated onto LB agar plates containing 0.05 mM IPTG, Ampicillin, Kanamycin and
various concentrations of L-arabinose. Plates were incubated overnight at 37°C and the transformation
efficiency was calculated. Transformation experiments were conducted for three independent times.

Acknowledgments
We thank colleagues in the Archaea Centre for stimulating discussions and Dr. Søren M. Madsen
(Bioneer A/S, Hørsholm, Denmark) for a kind gift of pTRKH2 and pCI372 plasmids. This work has been
supported by grants from Danish Council for Independent Research (DFF-4181-00274), National
Science Foundation of China (31771380) and the National Transgenic Science and Technology
Program (2019ZX08010-003) to Q.S. and grants from Shandong University.

Author contributions
H.Z. provided the L. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus strain; J.L., and Q.S. designed experiments; J.L. and
M.F. performed experiments; J.L., M.F. and Q.S. analyzed data; J.L. and Q.S. wrote the paper. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.

Conflict of interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

Additional information
Supplemental Information includes Supplemental figures and Supplemental tables can be found with
this article online.
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1

Barrangou, R. et al. CRISPR provides acquired resistance against viruses in prokaryotes.
Science 315, 1709-1712 (2007).

2

Horvath, P. & Barrangou, R. CRISPR/Cas, the immune system of bacteria and archaea.
Science 327, 167-170 (2010).

3

Marraffini, L. A. CRISPR-Cas immunity in prokaryotes. Nature 526, 55-61 (2015).

4

Marraffini, L. A. & Sontheimer, E. J. CRISPR interference limits horizontal gene transfer in
staphylococci by targeting DNA. Science 322, 1843-1845 (2008).

5

van der Oost, J., Westra, E. R., Jackson, R. N. & Wiedenheft, B. Unravelling the structural and
mechanistic basis of CRISPR-Cas systems. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 12, 479-492 (2014).

6

Wright, A. V., Nunez, J. K. & Doudna, J. A. Biology and Applications of CRISPR Systems:
Harnessing Nature's Toolbox for Genome Engineering. Cell 164, 29-44 (2016).

7

Hille, F. et al. The Biology of CRISPR-Cas: Backward and Forward. Cell 172, 1239-1259 (2018).

8

Han, W. & She, Q. CRISPR History: Discovery, Characterization, and Prosperity. Prog. Mol.
Biol. Transl. Sci. 152, 1-21 (2017).

9

Koonin, E. V., Makarova, K. S. & Zhang, F. Diversity, classification and evolution of CRISPRCas systems. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 37, 67-78 (2017).

10

Mohanraju, P. et al. Diverse evolutionary roots and mechanistic variations of the CRISPR-Cas
systems. Science 353, aad5147 (2016).

11

Makarova, K. S. et al. An updated evolutionary classification of CRISPR-Cas systems. Nat. Rev.
Microbiol. 13, 722-736 (2015).

12

Marraffini, L. A. & Sontheimer, E. J. Self versus non-self discrimination during CRISPR RNAdirected immunity. Nature 463, 568-571 (2010).

13

Deng, L., Garrett, R. A., Shah, S. A., Peng, X. & She, Q. A novel interference mechanism by a
type IIIB CRISPR-Cmr module in Sulfolobus. Mol. Microbiol. 87, 1088-1099 (2013).

14

Hale, C. R. et al. RNA-guided RNA cleavage by a CRISPR RNA-Cas protein complex. Cell 139,
945-956 (2009).

15

Kazlauskiene, M., Tamulaitis, G., Kostiuk, G., Venclovas, C. & Siksnys, V. Spatiotemporal
Control of Type III-A CRISPR-Cas Immunity: Coupling DNA Degradation with the Target RNA
Recognition. Mol. Cell 62, 295-306 (2016).

16

Peng, W., Feng, M., Feng, X., Liang, Y. X. & She, Q. An archaeal CRISPR type III-B system
exhibiting distinctive RNA targeting features and mediating dual RNA and DNA interference.
Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 406-417 (2015).

17

Samai, P. et al. Co-transcriptional DNA and RNA Cleavage during Type III CRISPR-Cas
Immunity. Cell 161, 1164-1174 (2015).

18

Tamulaitis, G. et al. Programmable RNA shredding by the type III-A CRISPR-Cas system of
Streptococcus thermophilus. Mol. Cell 56, 506-517 (2014).

19

Elmore, J. R. et al. Bipartite recognition of target RNAs activates DNA cleavage by the Type IIIB CRISPR-Cas system. Genes Dev. 30, 447-459 (2016).

20

Estrella, M. A., Kuo, F. T. & Bailey, S. RNA-activated DNA cleavage by the Type III-B CRISPRCas effector complex. Genes Dev. 30, 460-470 (2016).

21

Manica, A., Zebec, Z., Steinkellner, J. & Schleper, C. Unexpectedly broad target recognition of
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the CRISPR-mediated virus defence system in the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. Nucleic
Acids Res. 41, 10509-10517 (2013).
22

Zebec, Z., Manica, A., Zhang, J., White, M. F. & Schleper, C. CRISPR-mediated targeted mRNA
degradation in the archaeon Sulfolobus solfataricus. Nucleic Acids Res. 42, 5280-5288 (2014).

23

Goldberg, G. W., Jiang, W., Bikard, D. & Marraffini, L. A. Conditional tolerance of temperate
phages via transcription-dependent CRISPR-Cas targeting. Nature 514, 633-637 (2014).

24

Hale, C. R., Cocozaki, A., Li, H., Terns, R. M. & Terns, M. P. Target RNA capture and cleavage
by the Cmr type III-B CRISPR-Cas effector complex. Genes Dev. 28, 2432-2443 (2014).

25

Hale, C. R. et al. Essential features and rational design of CRISPR RNAs that function with the
Cas RAMP module complex to cleave RNAs. Mol. Cell 45, 292-302 (2012).

26

Hatoum-Aslan, A., Samai, P., Maniv, I., Jiang, W. & Marraffini, L. A. A ruler protein in a complex
for antiviral defense determines the length of small interfering CRISPR RNAs. J. Biol. Chem.
288, 27888-27897 (2013).

27

Rouillon, C. et al. Structure of the CRISPR interference complex CSM reveals key similarities
with cascade. Mol. Cell 52, 124-134 (2013).

28

Staals, R. H. et al. RNA targeting by the type III-A CRISPR-Cas Csm complex of Thermus
thermophilus. Mol. Cell 56, 518-530 (2014).

29

Staals, R. H. J. et al. Structure and activity of the RNA-targeting Type III-B CRISPR-Cas
complex of Thermus thermophilus. Mol. Cell 52, 135-145 (2013).

30

Zhang, J. et al. Structure and mechanism of the CMR complex for CRISPR-mediated antiviral
immunity. Mol. Cell 45, 303-313 (2012).

31

Han, W. et al. A type III-B CRISPR-Cas effector complex mediating massive target DNA
destruction. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 1983-1993 (2017).

32

Ichikawa, H. T. et al. Programmable type III-A CRISPR-Cas DNA targeting modules. PLOS One
12, e0176221 (2017).

33

Jiang, W., Samai, P. & Marraffini, L. A. Degradation of Phage Transcripts by CRISPRAssociated RNases Enables Type III CRISPR-Cas Immunity. Cell 164, 710-721 (2016).

34

Liu, T. Y., Iavarone, A. T. & Doudna, J. A. RNA and DNA Targeting by a Reconstituted Thermus
thermophilus Type III-A CRISPR-Cas System. PLOS one 12, e0170552 (2017).

35

Park, K. H. et al. RNA activation-independent DNA targeting of the Type III CRISPR-Cas system
by a Csm complex. EMBO rep. 18, 826-840 (2017).

36

Li, Y. et al. Cmr1 enables efficient RNA and DNA interference of a III-B CRISPR-Cas system by
binding to target RNA and crRNA. Nucleic Acids Res. 45, 11305-11314 (2017).

37

Pan, S. F. et al. A seed motif for target RNA capture enables efficient immune defence by a type
III-B CRISPR-Cas system. RNA Biol. 16, 1166-1178 (2019).

38

Han, W. et al. A Type III-B Cmr effector complex catalyzes the synthesis of cyclic oligoadenylate
second messengers by cooperative substrate binding. Nucleic Acids Res. 46, 10319-10330
(2018).

39

Kazlauskiene, M., Kostiuk, G., Venclovas, C., Tamulaitis, G. & Siksnys, V. A cyclic
oligonucleotide signaling pathway in type III CRISPR-Cas systems. Science 357, 605-609
(2017).

40

Niewoehner, O. et al. Type III CRISPR-Cas systems produce cyclic oligoadenylate second
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

messengers. Nature 548, 543-548 (2017).
41

Rouillon, C., Athukoralage, J. S., Graham, S., Gruschow, S. & White, M. F. Control of cyclic
oligoadenylate synthesis in a type III CRISPR system. eLife 7, e36734 (2018).

42

Han, W., Pan, S., Lopez-Mendez, B., Montoya, G. & She, Q. Allosteric regulation of Csx1, a
type IIIB-associated CARF domain ribonuclease by RNAs carrying a tetraadenylate tail. Nucleic
Acids Res. 45, 10740-10750 (2017).

43

Jia, N., Jones, R., Sukenick, G. & Patel, D. J. Second Messenger cA4 Formation within the
Composite Csm1 Palm Pocket of Type III-A CRISPR-Cas Csm Complex and Its Release Path.
Mol. Cell 75, 933-943 (2019).

44

Jia, N., Jones, R., Yang, G., Ouerfelli, O. & Patel, D. J. CRISPR-Cas III-A Csm6 CARF Domain
Is a Ring Nuclease Triggering Stepwise cA4 Cleavage with ApA>p Formation Terminating
RNase Activity. Mol. Cell 75, 944-956 (2019).

45

Guo, T. et al. Cmr3 regulates the suppression on cyclic oligoadenylate synthesis by tag
complementarity in a Type III-B CRISPR-Cas system. RNA Biol. 16, 1513-1520 (2019).

46

Tamulaitis, G., Venclovas, C. & Siksnys, V. Type III CRISPR-Cas Immunity: Major Differences
Brushed Aside. Trends Microbiol. 25, 49-61 (2017).

47

Zhang, Y., Lin, J., Feng, M. & She, Q. Molecular mechanisms of III-B CRISPR-Cas systems in
archaea. Emer. Topics Life Sci. 2, 483–491 (2018).

48

Varble, A. & Marraffini, L. A. Three New Cs for CRISPR: Collateral, Communicate, Cooperate.
Trends Genet. 35, 446-456 (2019).

49

Pyenson, N. C. & Marraffini, L. A. Type III CRISPR-Cas systems: when DNA cleavage just isn't
enough. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 37, 150-154 (2017).

50

Molina, R. et al. Structure of Csx1-cOA(4) complex reveals the basis of RNA decay in Type IIIB CRISPR-Cas. Nat. Comm. 10, 4302 (2019).

51

Foster, K., Kalter, J., Woodside, W., Terns, R. M. & Terns, M. P. The ribonuclease activity of
Csm6 is required for anti-plasmid immunity by Type III-A CRISPR-Cas systems. RNA Biol. 16,
449-460 (2019).

52

Rostol, J. T. & Marraffini, L. A. Non-specific degradation of transcripts promotes plasmid
clearance during type III-A CRISPR-Cas immunity. Nat. Microbiol. 4, 656-662 (2019).

53

Athukoralage, J. S., Rouillon, C., Graham, S., Gruschow, S. & White, M. F. Ring nucleases
deactivate type III CRISPR ribonucleases by degrading cyclic oligoadenylate. Nature 562, 277280 (2018).

54

You, L. et al. Structure Studies of the CRISPR-Csm Complex Reveal Mechanism of Cotranscriptional Interference. Cell 176, 239-253 (2019).

55

Jia, N. et al. Type III-A CRISPR-Cas Csm Complexes: Assembly, Periodic RNA Cleavage,
DNase Activity Regulation, and Autoimmunity. Mol. Cell 73, 264-277 (2019).

56

Guo, M. et al. Coupling of ssRNA cleavage with DNase activity in type III-A CRISPR-Csm
revealed by cryo-EM and biochemistry. Cell Res. 29, 305-312 (2019).

57

Taylor, D. W. et al. Structural biology. Structures of the CRISPR-Cmr complex reveal mode of
RNA target positioning. Science 348, 581-585 (2015).

58

Osawa, T., Inanaga, H., Sato, C. & Numata, T. Crystal Structure of the CRISPR-Cas RNA
Silencing Cmr Complex Bound to a Target Analog. Mol. Cell 58, 418-430 (2015).
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/2019.12.17.879585; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this
preprint (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in
perpetuity. It is made available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

59

Huo, Y. G. et al. Cryo-EM structure of Type III-A CRISPR effector complex. Cell Res. 28, 11951197 (2018).

60

Wang, L. et al. Dynamics of Cas10 Govern Discrimination between Self and Non-self in Type
III CRISPR-Cas Immunity. Mol. Cell 73, 278-290 (2019).

61

Osullivan, D. J. & Klaenhammer, T. R. High-Copy-Number and Low-Copy-Number Lactococcus
Shuttle Cloning Vectors with Features for Clone Screening. Gene 137, 227-231 (1993).

62

Chen, Z. et al. Characterization of pMC11, a plasmid with dual origins of replication isolated
from Lactobacillus casei MCJ and construction of shuttle vectors with each replicon. Appl.
Microbiol. Biotechnol. 98, 5977-5989 (2014).

63

Heckman, K. L. & Pease, L. R. Gene splicing and mutagenesis by PCR-driven overlap
extension. Nat. protoc. 2, 924-932 (2007).

64

Cormack, B. P., Valdivia, R. H. & Falkow, S. FACS-optimized mutants of the green fluorescent
protein (GFP). Gene 173, 33-38 (1996).

65

Deng, L., Kenchappa, C. S., Peng, X., She, Q. & Garrett, R. A. Modulation of CRISPR locus
transcription by the repeat-binding protein Cbp1 in Sulfolobus. Nucleic Acids Res. 40, 24702480 (2012).

66

Mogila, I. et al. Genetic Dissection of the Type III-A CRISPR-Cas System Csm Complex
Reveals Roles of Individual Subunits. Cell Rep. 26, 2753-2765 (2019).

24

