bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Single cell transcriptomic analysis of the adult mouse
pituitary reveals a novel multi-hormone cell cluster and
physiologic demand-induced lineage plasticity
Yugong Ho1,5, *. Peng Hu1,3,5, Michael T. Peel1, Sixing Chen1, Pablo G. Camara1,4,
Douglas J. Epstein1, Hao Wu1,3, *, and Stephen A. Liebhaber1,2,
Departments of Genetics1 and Medicine2, Penn Epigenetics Institute3, and Penn Institute
for Biomedical Informatics4, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104
5

These authors contributed equally

*

Corresponding authors

Running title: Single cell transcriptomic analysis of the adult mouse pituitary

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The anterior pituitary gland drives a set of highly conserved physiologic processes
in mammalian species. These hormonally-controlled processes are central to somatic
growth, pubertal transformation, fertility, lactation, and metabolism. Current models,
largely built upon candidate gene based immuno-histochemical and mRNA analyses,
suggest that each of the seven hormones synthesized by the pituitary is produced by a
specific and exclusive cell lineage. However, emerging evidence suggests more complex
models of hormone specificity and cell plasticity. Here we have applied massively
parallel single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), in conjunction with a set of
orthogonal mRNA and protein imaging studies, to systematically map the cellular
composition of adult male and female mouse pituitaries at single-cell resolution and in
the setting of major physiologic demands. These analyses reveal sex-specific cellular
diversity associated with normal pituitary homeostasis, and identify an array of cells with
complex complements of hormone-enrichment as well as a series of non-hormone
producing interstitial and supporting cell lineages. These scRNA-seq studies identify a
major cell population that is characterized by a unique multi-hormone gene expression
profile. The detection of dynamic shifts in cellular representations and transcriptome
profiles in response to two well-defined physiologic stresses suggests corresponding roles
of a number of these clusters in cellular plasticity within the adult pituitary. These studies
point to an unanticipated complexity and plasticity in pituitary cellular composition that
expands upon current models and concepts of pituitary gene expression and hormone
production.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The pituitary is a key regulatory gland in mammalian organisms. Complex arrays
of hormonal outputs from the pituitary play central roles in physiological pathways and a
wide array of inherited and acquired pathologic processes (Kelberman et al., 2009).
These pathways impact post-natal growth, puberty, fertility, lactation, and metabolism.
The pituitary contains a posterior lobe that comprises a direct extension of the central
nervous system, and an anterior/median lobe (referred herein as anterior lobe) that is
derived from oral ectoderm (Davis et al., 2013). The anterior pituitary contains cells that
synthesize seven hormones: growth hormone (GH), prolactin (PRL), the β subunits of
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSHβ), luteinizing hormone β-subunit, (LHβ), and folliclestimulating hormone β-subunit (FSHβ), as well as adrenocorticotrophic hormone
(ACTH), and α melanocyte-stimulating hormone (α-MSH) (Fig. S1) (Zhu et al., 2007).
Hormone synthesis and release from the anterior pituitary is coordinated by regulatory
factors generated within signaling centers in the hypothalamus and transmitted to the
pituitary via a dedicated hypothalamic-pituitary portal circulatory system (VazquezBorrego et al., 2018). A complete understanding of how these regulatory networks impact
physiologic function requires defining the composition and relationships of cell lineages
of the anterior pituitary and their corresponding patterns of hormone gene expression in
an unbiased and comprehensive manner.
The prevailing model of anterior pituitary structure and function is based
predominantly on the assumption that each hormone is expressed from a distinct cell type
(Davis et al., 2013; Zhu et al., 2007); i.e. seven hormones secreted synthesized by a set of
six corresponding cell lineages (in this model the two gonadotrope hormones, FSHβ and

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

LHβ, are co-expressed from a single lineage) (Fig. S1). While compelling in many
respects, this model is primarily based on targeted immuno-histochemical and mRNA
analyses. The varying sensitivities and specificities of these approaches (Nakane, 1970),
their inductive nature, and their limited capacity to examine multiple hormonal
expressions within single cells, suggest that they may not be unbiased and fully
informative. The possibility of a more complex composition of pituitary cell lineages and
hormone expression has been suggested by previous reports of pituitary cells that express
multiple hormones (Seuntjens et al., 2002a; Villalobos et al., 2004a, b). In addition,
reports of pituitary cells with mitotic markers and factors linked to stem cell functions
have been used to support complex models of pituitary dynamics linked to cellular
expansion, trans-differentiation, and lineage plasticity. Thus, the degree to which the
current model of hormone expression fully encompasses pituitary structure and function
remains open to further study. This goal may be facilitated by assignment and cataloging
of the gene expression profiles of individual cells in the pituitary using a comprehensive
and unbiased approach.
The advent of single cell technologies has facilitated the analysis of cell lineages
within a rapidly expanding array of tissues and has been used to effectively explore how
defined cell lineages in various tissues respond to physiologic stresses and mediate
specific functions (Tanay and Regev, 2017). Newly developed approaches of single cell
isolation linked to high-throughput RNA sequencing approaches, such as Drop-Seq and
10X Genomics platforms (Macosko et al., 2015; Zheng et al., 2017), can now be applied
to massively parallel analysis of single cell transcriptomes. These comprehensive and
unbiased approaches can be of particular value in uncovering cellular heterogeneity and

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

novel cell types, and in revealing corresponding regulatory factors involved in lineage
differentiation and function (Campbell et al., 2017; Chen et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2017;
Shekhar et al., 2016).
In the current study, we have applied Drop-seq technology (Macosko et al., 2015),
in conjunction with a set of orthogonal single cell protein and RNA-based validation
approaches, to define the steady state cellular composition of the adult mouse anterior
pituitary at single cell resolution. Our data are concordant with certain aspects of current
models, most notably in the identification of individual cell clusters expressing specific
pituitary hormones and the presence of sexual dimorphism in pituitary cell compositions.
Remarkably, these data also reveal the presence of a major cluster of multi-hormone
expressing cells that contribute to the response of the pituitary to robust physiologic
stresses linked to post-partum lactation and to stimulation by a hypothalamic regulatory
factor. These analyses provide a comprehensive view of pituitary gene expression in
adult pituitary and generate testable models of cell plasticity that underlie the capacity of
the pituitary to respond to major physiologic demands.

Results
scRNA-seq analysis reveals an unexpected complexity of hormone gene expression
within the Pou1f1+ clusters
Studies of pituitary development and lineage differentiation have suggested a
model in which each of six distinct hormone expressing cell lineages expresses a
corresponding polypeptide hormone (Fig. S1) (Zhu et al., 2007). The differentiation of
these cell is controlled by a variety of transcription factors and signaling molecules

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Kelberman et al., 2009). Multiple lines of genetic and biochemical evidence have
converged on the conclusion that pituitary specific POU homeodomain transcription
factor, Pou1f1, serves an essential function in driving terminal differentiation of cells
expressing Gh (somatotropes), Prl (lactotropes), and Tshb (thyrotrope) (‘Pou1f1
dependent lineages’; Fig. S1) (Camper et al., 1990; Li et al., 1990). The most compelling
support for this function is the observation that loss of Pou1f1 gene expression results in
the combined loss of Gh, Prl, and Tshb gene expression in both mice (Camper et al., 1990;
Li et al., 1990) and humans (Ohta et al., 1992; Radovick et al., 1992). Based on these data,
we performed single-cell transcriptomic analysis with the assumption that the Pou1f1
lineages would be organized into three discrete clusters, defined by their mutually
exclusive expression of Gh, Prl, and Tshb mRNAs.
We employed Drop-seq technology to assess this model of Pou1f1 lineage
organization in an unbiased manner and to explore the full spectrum of pituitary cell
composition (Macosko et al., 2015). Single cell transcriptome data were generated from 9
independent analyses including pituitaries harvested from different genders, ages, and
physiologic conditions (Fig. S2). After excluding cells of low sequencing complexity (see
Methods and Fig. S2), the transcriptomes of 18,797 cells were retained for downstream
analysis. Dimensionality reduction and clustering of the full set of 18,797 single cell
transcriptomes was based on principal component analysis (Macosko et al., 2015).
Visualization of the data by Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection (UMAP)
(Stuart et al., 2019a), revealed nine spatially distinct clusters surrounding a set of three
major clusters (Fig. S2).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We first analyzed the cellular clusters in the 7 to 8-week old, sexually naïve
female and male mice (Fig. 1). Among the three major Pou1f1-expressing cell clusters
identified in the UMAP plot (centrally located in Fig. 1B), the largest of them was
assigned as somatotropes (Som) based on the high level enrichment for both Gh and the
cell surface receptor for the hypothalamic growth hormone releasing hormone (Ghrhr)
(see violin and feature plots Figs. 1B and C) (Lin et al., 1993). The second Pou1f1+
cluster was identified as lactotropes (Lac) based on the high level expression of Prl
mRNA (Fig. 1C) in conjunction with markers previously linked to Prl expression and
lactotrope functions; glutamine receptors (Gria2, Grik2, and Grik5) involved in PRL
hormone release (Durand et al., 2008), two transcriptional co-activators of estrogen
receptor function (Ddx5 and Ddx17) (Janknecht, 2010), and two transcription factors
recently identified as enriched in Prl+ cells and implicated in Prl gene activation (Nr4a1
and Nr4a2) (Table S1) (Peel et al., 2018).
The characteristics of a third major Pou1f1+ cluster could not be clearly linked to
any of the currently defined pituitary cell lineages. This Pou1f1-enriched cluster (‘Mult’,
as defined below) encompassed 11.1 % of pituitary cells from 7 to 8-week old CD1 mice
(Fig. 1A) and was remarkable in several respects. First, the co-expression of Gh and Prl
mRNAs was detected at high levels that were comparable to those detected in the
somatotrope (Som) and lactotrope (Lac) clusters (Fig. 1B). Secondly, the cells in this
cluster were also highly enriched for mRNAs transcribed from the Pomc gene at levels
comparable to that detected in the ‘Pou1f1-independent’ melanotrope and corticotrope
lineages (Fig. 1B and C) (Zhu et al., 2007). Thirdly, substantial number of cells in this
third cluster also contained mRNAs encoding the gonadotrope hormone, Lhb (Fig. 1B

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and C). Lastly, 32% of the cells in the anterior pituitary that contained Tshb mRNA
mapped to this cluster (Fig. 1C). On the basis of these observations, we provisionally
assigned this cluster as a ‘multi-hormone’ producing cluster (Mult). Further analysis of
the differentially expressed genes revealed that several genes involved in metabolism
(Gpx3, Ddah1, and Nme1) were exclusively enriched in this cluster (Table S1). In
summary these data revealed a novel Pou1f1+ multi-hormone producing cluster that
comprises a substantial fraction of the pituitary cell population.
The scRNA seq analysis revealed a fourth Pou1f1+cell cluster, substantially
smaller than the three noted above, that expresses proliferating cell markers such as
Top2a and Mki67 (Fig. 1B). This observation is consistent with prior reports that the
majority of proliferating cells in the adult pituitary are positive for Pou1f1 expression
(Cao et al., 2016; Zhu et al., 2015).
In summary the single cell analysis of the adult pituitary revealed three major
Pou1f1+ cell clusters representing the expected populations of somatotropes and
lactotropes, predominantly expressing Gh and Prl mRNAs, respectively, as well as a
novel Pou1f1+ cluster containing cells with a complex pattern of multi-hormone gene
expression.

Single cell RNA-seq identifies POU1F1 independent hormone-producing cell
lineages and non-hormonal cell clusters in the adult pituitary.
The eight remaining cell clusters that identified in the UMAP plot lacked the high
level of Pou1f1 mRNA (Fig. 1B and C). Three of these eight clusters could be directly
assigned to specific hormone-expressing cell lineages based on patterns of marker gene

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expression (Fig. 1B and C). A cluster corresponding to melanotropes (‘Mel’) was
assigned based on the co-expression of pro-opiomelanocortin (Pomc) prohormone
mRNA, the transcription factor Tbx19, and the melanotrope-restricted paired
homeodomain transcription factor Pax7 (Budry et al., 2012; Mayran et al., 2018). A
second cluster was assigned as a corticotrope cell cluster (‘Cort’). These cells shared with
the melanotrope cluster in enrichment for Pomc and Tbx19 mRNAs but lacked substantial
level of Pax7 mRNA (Lamolet et al., 2001; Liu et al., 2006; Philips et al., 1997). A third
Pou1f1-negative cluster was assigned to the gonadotrope lineage (‘Gona’ cluster) based
on the enrichment for mRNAs encoding the two gonadotrope-specific hormone subunits,
Fshb and Lhb, in conjunction with the gonadotrope-restricted cell surface receptor for the
hypothalamic regulatory factor, Gnrh (Ingraham et al., 1994; Zhu et al., 2007). Thus the
initial clustering analysis of the single cell transcriptomes from the adult mouse pituitary
identified a set of Pou1f1-enriched clusters and a set of clusters corresponding to three
Pou1f1-independent lineages (melanotropes, corticotropes, and gonadotropes) (Fig. 1A).
The scRNA-seq data sets identified five additional clusters that represented nonhormonal cell lineages. Two of these clusters were identified as folliculostellate (FS)
cells based on known marker genes (‘FS1 and 2’; Fig. 1A and B). FS cells have been
proposed to serve a variety of structural, paracrine, and/or support functions in the
pituitary (Le Tissier et al., 2012). Histologic identification of these cells has been based
on an array of protein markers including Anxa1, Vim, and S100 (Devnath and Inoue,
2008; Nakajima et al., 1980; Theogaraj et al., 2005). Differences in the relative
expression levels of these markers has been used to define sub-types of FS cells in the
anterior pituitary (Allaerts and Vankelecom, 2005).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The largest cluster among the non-hormonal lineages, representing 5.8% of the
cell in the analysis, was assigned as a putative stem cell cluster (‘Sox2+’ clusters; Fig.
1A). This assignment was based on the shared expression of the progenitor/stem marker
Sox2 (Fig. 1B) (Andoniadou et al., 2013; Rizzoti et al., 2013). A separate cluster was
identified as macrophage (‘MacPh’ cluster) based on the expression of the known
macrophage marker gene, C1qa (Zahuczky et al., 2011) (Fig 1B). An erythrocyte cell
cluster, defined by robust globin gene expression (Rbc cluster in Fig. 1) was assumed to
originate from blood in the dissected pituitaries. In summary, these data reveal four cell
clusters in the pituitary that serve functions other than direct production of polypeptide
hormones; two FS cell clusters, a stem cell cluster, and a cluster representing a
macrophage population.
To assess platform-specific bias in our study, we compared the Drop-seq analysis
(above) with a transcriptome profile of 3,927 cells using 10X Genomic platform (cells
isolated from four 7-8 week old, sexually naïve CD mice (Cheung et al., 2018; Zheng et
al., 2017) (See methods and Fig. S3). This analysis using the 10X platform identified all
of the cellular clusters identified using the Drop-seq platform (Fig. S3). Of particular note
was the comparable identification of a multi-hormone cluster between Drop-seq (11.1%)
and 10X Genomics (14.8%) data sets (Fig. S3). These results support the technical
robustness and biological reproducibility of our scRNA-seq analysis.
In summary, the analysis of single cell transcriptomes from the adult mouse
pituitary identifies eight hormone-expressing clusters, two clusters of folliculostellate
cells, a set of putative stem cell clusters, and a single cluster of corresponding to a
macrophage population.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Single cell mRNA and protein analyses validate the prevalence of multi-hormone coexpression.
The Drop-seq analysis revealed that 31.6% (995/3,148) of the cells in Pou1f1+
clusters of the 7 to 8-week old mice were positive for both Gh and Prl mRNAs
(Gh+/Prl+). As an initial step in validating this prevalent co-expression of these two
hormone mRNAs, we probed tissue sections and dissociated cells from adult male and
female pituitaries by single cell RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization (scRNA FISH).
Pituitary tissue sections of 8-week old mice were hybridized with arrays of fluorescent
oligo probes antisense to the Prl and Gh mRNAs (Fig. 2 and S4A). As expected, Prl and
Gh expression was observed to be restricted to the anterior lobe (AL) while Pomc
expression was detected in both the intermediate lobe (IL) and AL (Fig. S4A). The RNAFISH analysis further confirmed that a fraction of the Gh and Prl expressing cells were
dual positive for these two mRNAs (Fig. 2A and B). The level of co-expression of Gh
and Prl mRNAs was determined by analysis of 5 or more randomly selected fields (> 600
cells per pituitary) of pituitary tissue sections. This analysis revealed that 30.8% of all the
Gh and/or Prl expressing cells in the female pituitary co-expressed Prl and Gh mRNAs
(Gh+/Prl+) while 25.8% were uniquely positive for Gh mRNA (Gh+/Prl-) and 43.4% cells
were uniquely positive for Prl mRNA (Fig. 2A, right graph). A parallel study of
pituitary cells from male mice revealed 31% of the cells as dual positive (Gh+/Prl+),
52.3% as uniquely Gh positive (Gh+/Prl-), and 16.7% as uniquely Prl mRNA positive
(Prl+/Gh-) (Fig. 2B, right graph). We conclude from these studies that co-expression Gh
and Prl mRNAs is prevalent in the Pou1f1 cell population in the adult pituitary. These

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

studies also revealed a marked sexual dimorphism in the representation of cells that
express Gh in the absence of Prl and Prl in the absence of Gh.
To further explore the prevalent co-expression Gh and Prl genes, we next
combined IF analyses of GH and PRL hormone proteins with scRNA FISH of the
corresponding hormone mRNAs in pituitary tissue sections (Fig. 2C). Analysis of 933
cells confirmed concordance of mRNA and protein expression from these two genes; all
cells with Gh or Prl mRNA as visualized by scRNA FISH had a comparable IF signal for
the corresponding protein (Fig. 2C); when Gh or Prl mRNA was abundant the
corresponding protein was also abundant and when either mRNA was at trace levels or
undetectable the corresponding protein was comparably trace or negative by IF
(examples in Fig. 2C). In no case did we observe a substantial discordance between
corresponding IF and scRNA FISH signals.
We next assessed the prevalence of GH and PRL co-expression at the protein
level (Fig. S4B). A double IF for GH and PRL analysis was performed in the tissue
sections of an 8-week old male mouse and an 8-week old female mouse. We observed
that a significant proportion of cells expressing either GH or PRL co-expressed both of
the hormones (14% in the males and 19% in the females) (Fig. S4B). The difference in
the percentages of dual positive cells detected by RNA-FISH and by IF (Figs. 2 and S4B)
most likely reflects the different sensitivities of these two approaches as indicated in our
combined RNA-FISH and IF studies (Fig. 2C).
Pomc mRNA encodes a prohormone that generates multiple smaller peptide
hormones by site-specific cleavages specific to particular cells in the pituitary (Cawley et
al., 2016). Two of these peptides, ACTH and α-MSH are lineage specific markers for

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

anterior lobe (AL) corticotropes and intermediate lobe (IL) melanotropes, respectively
(Zhu et al., 2007). The mapping of Pomc expression by Drop-seq revealed that Pomc
mRNA was present at high levels (equivalent to that detected in the corticotrope lineage)
in the cells that constituted the multi-hormone cluster (Fig. 1B and C) and was coexpressed with Gh and Prl mRNAs. This observation was validated by scRNA FISH.
Combined RNA-FISH analyses of Pomc and Prl mRNAs revealed that majority of the
Prl mRNA positive cells were also positive for Pomc mRNA (Fig. 3B). Remarkably,
scRNA FISH analysis in female pituitary cells (n=3 pituitaries) revealed that 74% of the
cells co-expressed Pomc and Prl and only 9.8% of the cells were Pomc+ but Prl- (Fig.
3C, left graph). A second scRNA FISH analysis in male pituitary cells (n= 3 pituitaries)
revealed that 59% of all analyzed cells from male pituitary (n=3 pituitaries) co-expressed
both Pomc and Gh while only 18.3% of the cells were Pomc+ but Gh- (Fig. 3B, right
graph). These scRNA FISH studies are concordant with the initial Drop-seq data and
lead us to conclude that the Pomc gene is co-expressed with the Gh and/or Prl gene(s) in
majority of cells in the AL of the adult mouse pituitary.

Tshb expression is primarily localized in the multi-hormone cluster rather than in a
dedicated thyrotrope lineage.
Tshb is generally considered to constitute one of the three Pou1f1-dependent
pituitary hormone genes (Fig. S1) and the expression of Tshb is thought to define a
distinct POU1F1-dependent ‘thyrotrope’ lineage (Zhu et al., 2007). While the scRNA-seq
analysis defined clusters corresponding to the two major POU1F1-dependent lineages,
somatotrope and lactotrope, as well clusters corresponding to all three of the POU1F1-

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

independent lineages (corticotrope, melanotrope, and gonadotrope), the analysis failed to
identify a discrete cell cluster that specifically corresponded to thyrotropes. Instead,
Tshb+ cells mapped to all three of the the major ‘Pou1f1 lineage’ clusters with a
substantial representation in the multi-hormone cluster (Fig. 1C). A 2-dimensional scatter
plot of Tshb, Gh, and Prl mRNA distributions revealed that 86.4% of Tshb+ cells coexpressed both Gh and/or Prl mRNAs (Fig. 4A). This observation was validated by
combining IF detection of TSHβ protein with scRNA FISH detection of Gh mRNA in
male pituitaries; 84.6% of the TSHβ positive cells by IF were also positive for Gh mRNA
by scRNA FISH (Figs. 4B and C). The co-expression of TSHβ and GH proteins was
confirmed by IF in cells from an 8-week WT CD1 male mouse; 61% % of TSHβ+ cells
were also positive for GH protein (Figs. S4C and D). These orthogonal studies lead us
conclude that Tshb expression, while demonstrating the expected localization to Pou1f1+
cells, does not define a distinct ‘thyrotrope’ cell cluster. Instead, we find that Tshb is
expressed in conjunction with Gh and/or Prl, and maps predominantly to the multihormone cluster.

Sexual dimorphism in the organization and composition in the mouse pituitary
Synthesis and secretion of the pituitary hormones are impacted by multiple
gender-specific developmental and physiologic stimuli. These controls drive critical
somatic alterations linked to puberty, reproductive cycling, pregnancy, and lactation. The
degree to which these gender specific functions are linked to differences in the cellular
composition of the male and female pituitaries remains poorly defined (Lamberts and
Macleod, 1990; Nishida et al., 2005). To address the issue of sexual dimorphism at the

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

single-cell level we compared the transcriptomes of cells isolated from male and female
pituitaries in our Drop-seq data set (Fig. 5A). Gender-specific analysis of Gh and Prl
expression showed that Gh+/Prl- cells were more abundant in the male pituitary while
the Gh-/Prl+ cells were more abundant in the female pituitary (Fig. 5B). Further analysis
of major Pou1f1+ clusters revealed a relative predominance of somatotropes over
lactotropes in males with a reciprocal enrichment of lactotropes over somatotropes in
females (Fig. 5C). These data were consistent with the scRNA-FISH data (Fig. 2). The
scRNA-FISH analysis of tissue sections confirmed this observation, revealing that the
Gh-/Prl+ cells and Gh+/Prl- cells were relatively enriched in the females and males,
respectively.
Marked sexual dimorphism was also evident in the gonadotrope cluster. This
cluster constituted a substantially larger fraction of the pituitary cell population in male
compared with female mice (6.5% vs 3.3% of total pituitary cells, respectively) (Fig. 5A
and C). This dimorphism in gonadotrope cluster size in the male is consistent with
previously-reported higher serum levels of FSHβ in male vs female mice (Michael et al.,
1980). In contrast to the predominant localization of Fshb mRNA in the gonadotrope
cluster, the expression of Lhb was equivalent between males and females and was
predominantly expressed in the multi-hormone cluster in both sexes (Fig. 5D). These
data lead us to conclude that relative representations of somatotropes and lactotropes
populations differ between the two genders and that the two gonadotrope hormones, Lhb
and Fshb, are differentially expressed in the male and female pituitaries both
quantitatively and with relation to cell clustering.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The response of hormone expressing clusters to major physiologic demands
We next sought validate and extend our analyses of pituitary cell populations to
settings of defined physiologic stress. One of the most dramatic alterations in pituitary
hormone production is the 10-15 fold increase in serum PRL levels during lactation in
both mice and humans (Le Tissier et al., 2015). The molecular mechanisms underlying
this increase are unclear (Castrique et al., 2010). In particular, it remains unclear to what
extent this increase reflects an expansion of the lactotrope lineage and/or to alterations in
hormone gene expression per lactotrope. To address this issue, we compared in two
independent experiments the pituitary cell-type composition in three 13 week-old
lactating female mice with an age-matched virgin female control ([Rep 1 (one mouse)
and Rep 2 (two mice)] Fig. 6). This analysis revealed several noteworthy observations.
First, the overall pattern of cell clustering in these 13 week old females was similar to
that of 7-8 week old mice (male and female) with the formation of a multi-hormone
cluster in both studies (compare Figs. 6A and 1A). Second, the comparison revealed an
expansion of the lactotrope cluster in the lactating state (from 29% in control to 35.5% in
lactating mice) with reciprocal decreases in representation of clusters representing multihormone, gonadotropes, corticotropes, and Sox2+ cells while the representation of
somatotropes remained unchanged (Fig. 6B). These data demonstrate substantial shifts
in specific pituitary cell populations in the transition to the lactating state with a net
increase in the representation of lactotropes.
The question of how lactation impacts Prl production was further explored by a
focused analysis on the lactotrope transcriptomes. We performed PCA analysis on 3,785
cells in the lactotrope cluster (2,750 from lactating mice and 1,035 cells from age-

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

matched control mice). The level of Prl mRNA was significantly higher in cells within
the lactotrope cohort of cells originating from the lactating mice (adjusted p-value
=0.0095) (Fig. 6C). This higher level of Prl mRNA levels in the lactotropes of the
lactating mice was paralleled by an increase in expression of the neuroendocrine vesicle
secretory protein Chgb (Barbosa et al., 1991; Gill et al., 1991) (adjusted p-value
=3.36x10-37) (Fig. 6C). The increase in Chgb is consistent with the high demand for PRL
secretion during lactation. These data lead us to conclude that the enhancement of PRL
production during lactation reflects the combined effects of an increase in the lactotrope
population as well as an elevation in Prl gene expression within the lactotrope cells.
In addition to its expression in lactotropes, Prl expression is also a prominent
attribute of the multi-hormone cell cluster (Figs. 1 and 6C). For this reason, we next
sought to determine whether the cells in the multi-hormone cluster contributed to the
increased pituitary production of PRL in support of lactation. We noted that the
representation of the multi-hormone cluster in the lactating mice decreased from that in
the control (13.1% vs 9.5%, respectively) (Fig. 6B) while the expression of Prl in the
cells within this cluster increased substantially (adjusted p-value = 8.42x10-16) (Fig. 6C).
In contrast, the expression of Lhb in the cells within this cluster significantly decreased
(adjusted p-value = 2.34 x10-8). This is consistent with prior reports that the LHβ
secretion is decreased during pregnancy in parallel with the inhibition of estrous cycle
(Smith and Fox, 1984). We also observed a highly significant increase of Prl expression
(adjusted p-value = 9.11x10-126) in the somatotropes of lactating mice compared with the
control (Fig. 6C). In summary, these results demonstrated that the cells in the multihormone and somatotrope clusters undergo transcriptomic shifts that support increased

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

production of PRL from lactotropes in the lactating female. These findings lead us to
conclude that the induction of Prl expression in lactating females is based on shifts in cell
composition along with shifts in cluster transcriptome profiles.
We next assessed the impact of a second major stress on the pituitary; the
overexpression of Ghrh. GHRH is the major hypothalamic regulator of somatotrope
function (Mayo et al., 1988); it is delivered to the anterior pituitary via the
hypothalamic/pituitary venous portal circuit and binds to somatotrope cell surface
receptors (GHRHR) to stimulate somatotropes proliferation of as well as to stimulate
expression and secretion of GH (Gaylinn, 2002; Mayo et al., 2000). A well-described
mt/hGhrh transgenic model (Mayo et al., 1988) has been previously reported and shown
to drive high levels of GH expression in the mouse with resultant gigantism (Ho et al.,
2002; Mayo et al., 1988). We performed Drop-seq analysis of 2,706 pituitary cells
isolated from two 8-week old virgin female mice carrying the mt/hGhrh transgene (Mayo
et al., 1988) and age-matched virgin non-transgenic females. This analysis revealed the
assembly of an array of clusters that paralleled those detected in 8-week old nontransgenic mice as well as the 13-week old virgin and lactating females (Fig. 7A c/w
Figs. 1 and 6). A multi-hormonal cluster was again observed in this analysis as well as
the full array of hormone-expressing and non-hormonal cell clusters that were seen in the
preceding analyses. When compared with the WT control, the analysis of the hGhrh
transgenic pituitaries revealed a marked expansion in the somatotrope cluster; from
21.9% of total pituitary cells in WT to 33.8% in the hGhrh transgenic (Fig. 7B). This
increase in the representation of the somatotrope cluster was paralleled by a reciprocal
decrease in the representations of the multi-hormone (13.8% to 7.7%) and lactotrope

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(31.5% to 25.9%) clusters (Fig. 7B). Differential gene expression analysis of lactotropes
in the hGhrh-transgenic pituitaries revealed significant increases in Gh mRNA (Fig. 7C).
Importantly, Gh expression was significantly increased in the multi-hormone cells with
reciprocal decreases in Prl, Lhb, and Pomc mRNAs were (Fig. 7C). These changes in cell
cluster representation and gene expression in response to Ghrh overexpression highlight
the contributions and coordination of the three major Pou1f1-expressing cell clusters in
both their relative cell representations and in their gene expression profiles. These studies
further validated the utility of scRNA-seq analysis in identifying shifts in cell
representation and transcriptome expression profiles in response to physiologic demands.

Discussion
Current understanding of pituitary function is based upon a binary model in which
each of the six distinct endocrine cell types is dedicated to the synthesis and secretion of
its corresponding polypeptide hormone (Fig. S1). The function of each lineage is
considered as mutually exclusive and under the control of a corresponding set of discrete
hypothalamic/pituitary regulatory circuits (Davis et al., 2013; Kelberman et al., 2009;
Zhu et al., 2007). However, scattered reports of pituitary cells co-expressing multiple
hormones have suggested that the organization and function of the pituitary may be more
complex than commonly appreciated (Childs, 2000; Frawley and Boockfor, 1991;
Seuntjens et al., 2002a; Villalobos et al., 2004b) and the prevalence and complexity of
‘multi-hormone’ cells in the adult anterior pituitary has remained undefined on a
systematic and global level. Thus, understanding the compositions and functions of

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pituitary cell lineages and their relationships to hormone expression warrants further
study.
Here we report a series of orthogonal single-cell analyses that address
fundamental aspects of pituitary cell organization, lineage specification, and functional
plasticity. Our single cell transcriptome analysis yielded findings that were consistent
with certain aspects of existing models while substantially extending and modifying
others. While the analysis confirmed the presence of three discretely clustering Pou1f1independent cell lineages (corticotropes, melanotropes, and gonadotropes (Fig. 1A)), it
reveals that the organization and functions of the Pou1f1-dependent lineages are
substantially complex (Fig. 1). The initial presumption going into this study was that the
clustering analysis would generate three Pou1f1+ clusters corresponding to somatotropes,
lactotropes, and thyrotropes, each dedicated to the exclusive expression of its
corresponding hormone; Gh, Prl, and Tshb, respectively (Fig. S1) (Zhu et al., 2007).
However, our unbiased scRNA-seq failed to confirm the existence of a unique
‘thyrotrope’ lineage and instead revealed that the majority of Tshb mRNA expression,
along with a significant fraction of Gh and Prl mRNAs, were derived from a novel
Pou1f1-expressing ‘multi-hormonal’ cell cluster. The discovery of this multi-hormone
cell cluster challenges current models of pituitary lineage distinctions and the segregation
of hormone expression.
Our multiple independent scRNA-seq analyses on pituitaries isolated from mice
of varying ages and genders as well as under two well defined setting of physiologic
stress reproducibly identified the unique multi-hormone cluster (Figs, 1, 6, and 7). Most
intriguing was the observation that the cells in this cluster not only expressed well

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

defined POU1F1-dependent genes such as Gh, Prl, and Tshb, but also expressed robust
levels of mRNAs encoded by two genes, Pomc and Lhb, that as traditionally categorized
as POU1F1-independent. A series of single cell RNA and protein imaging studies
documented co-expression of the ‘POU1F1-dependent’ and the ‘POU1F1-independent’
hormone genes within individual cells (Figs. 2, 3, S4, and S5).
While multi-hormone producing cells have been previously identified by others
using immuno-fluorescent and targeted RT-PCR analyses (Seuntjens et al., 2002a;
Seuntjens et al., 2002b; Villalobos et al., 2004a), their abundance, array of hormone gene
expression, and physiological function(s) have remained unclear. Our analyses reveal that
the cells in this multi-hormone cluster can be defined by a unique transcriptional
signature and respond to physiological demands in vivo. For example, in lactating
females, the level of Prl expression increases in the cells in this cluster with reciprocal
decreases in Lhb and Gh mRNAs. Likewise, in transgenic mice overexpressing the hGhrh
gene, Gh expression increases in the multi-hormone cells while the expression of other
pituitary hormones significantly decrease. These observations suggest that cells in the
multi-hormone cluster are able to respond to substantial physiological demands and
exhibit plasticity of pituitary function and hormone production.
The multi-hormone cluster constitutes a substantial fraction (11.1%) of total
pituitary cell population. The cells within this cluster appear to serve as a transitional cell
pool that can respond to shifts in hormone production. Such shifts are likely essential to
support physiological demands imposed by pregnancy, lactation, and pubertal growth.
Changes in hormone gene expression patterns in such large number of cells can
significantly facilitate the response of the hypothalamic/pituitary axis to acute

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

physiologic demands. It will be of interest to further explore the molecular/signaling
pathways that control the cellular plasticity of the cells within the multi-hormone cluster.
The developmental origin(s) of the Pou1f1+ multi-hormonal cells in adult mouse
pituitary is presently unclear. The broad functional capacity of these cells cannot be
accounted for in current models of anterior pituitary development and cellular
differentiation (Fig. S1). However, recent studies suggest that these cells may be induced
by the actions of PROP1. PROP1, a paired-like homeodomain transcription factor, was
initially described as a factor that triggers the activation of Pou1f1 and the differentiation
of the POU1F1-dependent lineages during pituitary development (Andersen et al., 1995;
Gage et al., 1996). However, recent lineage tracing studies in the mouse reveal that
PROP1 is in fact expressed in progenitor cells that generate the full spectrum of
endocrine cell types in the pituitary, those considered to be ‘POU1F1-dependent’ as well
as those considered to be ‘POU1F1-independent’ (Davis et al., 2016; Perez Millan et al.,
2016). Multi-hormone expressing cells may therefore be generated through the activity of
PROP1 during pituitary development.
In addition to revealing the presence of the multi-hormone cell cluster, the Dropseq analysis highlighted complex relationships between the functions of the two other
major POU1F1 clusters, the somatotropes and lactotropes. While the cells in these two
clusters could be readily identified by a preponderant expression of either Gh or Prl as
well as by a number of corresponding signatory mRNAs (see Fig, 1 and accompanying
text), the majority of these cells co-expressed Gh and Prl to varying degrees (Fig. 1 and
Fig. 2). Furthermore, the levels of Prl expression in somatotropes increased substantially
in lactating mice while Gh expression increased significantly in the lactotropes of the

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hGhrh transgenic mice (Fig. 6 and 7). These data suggest that the capacity of the
somatotrope and lactotrope lineages to express both Prl and Gh may be critical to a
robust response to major physiological demands.
The synthesis and secretion of the pituitary hormones are impacted by multiple
physiologic variables that directly relate to sexual maturation, reproduction, and somatic
development. As such, sexual dimorphism in pituitary structure and hormonal output has
been previously identified in a number of these settings (Lamberts and Macleod, 1990;
Michael et al., 1980; Nishida et al., 2005). Of interest, the Drop-seq analysis of the
pituitaries of 7-8 week old, sexually-naïve mice confirmed that even at the young adult
stage there is strong evidence for sexual dimorphism. The most striking gender
distinctions in this regard was the dominance of the somatotropes in the males (Fig. 5),
the relative enrichment of lactotropes in in females (Fig. 5), and the distinct patterns of
gonadotrope hormone expression between the two genders (Fig. 5).
In conclusion, we have combined single-cell RNA sequencing with RNA and
protein single cell imaging to analyze the transcriptomes of cells within the adult mouse
pituitary. The results have revealed unanticipated levels of cellular diversity and lineage
plasticity in pituitary cell-type composition and hormone expression. The findings reveal
a significant fraction of cells that co-express multiple hormones, sexual dimorphisms of
lineage composition and cell prevalence, and the plasticity of cell functions in response to
major physiologic demands. These single-cell transcriptomic data sets, along with
experimental approaches to identifying the factors that underlie these complexities of
lineage structure and function, can now be further extended to explore pituitary functions
in settings of physiologic stress and disease.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Animals
Six-week old CD1 mice were purchased from Charles River (Wilmington, MA)
and were housed for a minimum of 1 to 2 weeks in rooms with 12-hour light/dark cycles
prior to studies. All aspects of the mouse studies were approved by the University of
Pennsylvania Laboratory Animal Use and Care Committee. The mt/hGhrh transgenic
mice were originally obtained from Dr. Ralph Brinster at the University of Pennsylvania
(Hammer et al., 1985) and have been described in a number of our prior reports (Ho et
al., 2002; Ho et al., 2008).

Single cell preparation for Drop-seq
Single cell pituitary suspensions were prepared by non-enzymatic methods as
previously descripted (Ho et al., 2011) with minor modifications to adapt to the Drop-seq
protocol (Macosko et al., 2015). Briefly, the pituitaries were isolated and washed with
cold PBS, incubated with 1 ml of enzyme-free cell dissociation buffer (Life technologies,
Carlsbad, CA) for 1 minute, passed through a 40 µm cell strainer, and then re-suspend in
10 ml of PBS. The cells were diluted to 100 cells/µl in PBS with 0.01% BSA prior to the
capture of the cells

Single-cell RNA-Seq library preparation and sequencing
Drop-seq was performed as previously described with minor modifications
(Macosko et al., 2015). Specifically, cells were captured on barcoded beads, reverse
transcribed, and treated with exonuclease prior to amplification. The cDNA from an

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

aliquot of 6,000 beads was amplified by PCR in a volume of 50 µL (25 µL of 2x KAPA
HiFi hotstart readymix (KAPA biosystems), 0.4 µL of 100 µM TSO-PCR primer
(AAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGT), 24.6 µL of nuclease-free water) to determine
an optimal number of PCR cycles for cDNA amplification. The thermal cycling
parameter was set to: 95°C for 3 min; 4 cycles of 98°C for 20 sec, 65°C for 45 sec, 72°C
for 3 min; 9 cycles of 98°C for 20 sec, 67°C for 45 sec, 72°C for 3 min; 72°C for 5 min,
hold at 4°C. The amplified cDNA was purified twice with 0.6x SPRISelect beads
(Beckman Coulter) and eluted with 10 µL of water. 10% of amplified cDNA was used to
perform real-time PCR analysis (1 µL of purified cDNA, 0.2 µL of 25 µM TSO-PCR
primer, 5 µL of 2x KAPA FAST qPCR readymix, and 3.8 µL of water) to determine the
additional number of PCR cycles needed for optimal cDNA amplification (Applied
Biosystems QuantStudio 7 Flex). PCR reactions were then optimized per total number of
barcoded beads collected for each Drop-seq run, adding 6,000 beads per PCR tube, and
run according to the aforementioned program to enrich the cDNA for 4 + 12 to 13 cycles.
The amplified cDNA was ‘tagmented’ using the Nextera XT DNA sample preparation kit
(Illumina, cat# FC-131-1096), starting with 550 pg of cDNA pooled in equal amounts
from all PCR reactions for a given run. After quality control analysis using a Bioanalyzer
(Agilent), libraries were sequenced on an Illumina NextSeq 500 instrument using the 75cycle High Output v2 Kit (Illumina). The library was loaded at 2.0 pM and the Custom
Read1 Primer (GCCTGTCCGCGGAAGCAGTGGTATCAACGCAGAGTAC) was
added at 0.3 µM in position 7 of the reagent cartridge. The sequencing configuration was
20 bp (Read1), 8 bp (Index1), and 50 or 60 bp (Read2). Two male samples and two
female samples (two mice per sample) from 8-week old CD1 mice, 1 sample from 13-

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

week old virgin mouse, 2 samples from 13-week lactation mice and 1 sample from two
mt/hGRF transgenic mice (Table S2), were analyzed with Drop-seq in five sequencing
runs.
Read mapping
Paired-end sequencing reads of Drop-seq were processed as previous described
(Hu et al.). Briefly, after mapping the reads to the mouse genome (mm10, Gencode
release vM13), exonic reads mapped to the predicted strands of annotated genes were
retrieved for the cell type classification. Uniquely mapped reads were grouped by cell
barcode. To digitally count gene transcripts, a list of UMIs in each gene, within each cell,
was assembled, and UMIs within ED = 1 were merged together. The total number of
unique UMI sequences was counted, and this number was reported as the number of
transcripts of that gene for a given cell. Raw digital expression matrices were generated
for all of the 8 samples.

Cell type classification
To enable directly comparative analyses among different conditions, such as male
versus female, lactation versus virgin, WT versus mt/hGRF transgenic mice, we used
Seurat 3 (v. 3.0.0) which has been demonstrated as an effective approach to perform joint
analyses and build an integrated reference (Stuart et al., 2019b) (Figs. S2A and S2B).
The raw digital expression matrices of all 8 samples from Drop-seq runs were combined
and loaded into the Seurat 3. For normalization, UMI counts for all cells were scaled by
library size (total UMI counts), multiplied by 10,000, and transformed to log space. Only
genes found to be expressing in >10 cells were retained. Cell with a high percentage of

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

UMIs mapping to mitochondrial genes (>=0.1) were discarded. In addition, cells with
fewer than 300 UMI counts, fewer than 100 detected genes, or more than 4,000 detected
genes were discarded, resulting in 19,867 cells from 8 samples. The nUMIs and nGenes
are shown (Fig. S2C). The top 2,000 highly variable genes (HVGs) were identified using
the function FindVariableFeatures with "vst" method. Canonical correlation analysis
(CCA) was used to identify common sources of variation among WT, hGHRF transgenic
mice, and lactating mice. The first 30 dimensions of the CCA was chosen to integrate the
6 datasets, including 2 replicates of 8-week old WT mice, 1 replicate of 13-week old
virgin female mice, 2 replicates of 13-week old lactation female mice and 1 replicate of
8-week old mt/hGRF transgenic mice. After integration, the expression levels of HVGs in
the cells were scaled and centered along each gene and was subjected to PCA analysis.
The top 25 PCs were selected and used for 2-dimension reduction by Uniform Manifold
Approximation and Projection (UMAP). Clusters were identified using the function
FindCluster in Seurat with the resolution parameter set to 0.4. Assessing a number of
different PCs for clustering revealed that the variation of PC number selection was
relatively insensitive to the clustering results (Fig. S2D). Cells were classified into 14-22
clusters with the resolution parameter from 0.4 to 1 (Fig. S2E). Clustering resolution
parameters were varied quantitatively based on the number of cells being clustered. After
the clustering results with different resolutions were compared and evaluated, we chose a
resolution value of 0.4. Using this approacg we were able to assign 19,660 cells to 14
clusters. We further filtered out two clusters; one cluster contained 638 cells with low
quality and the other cluster, with almost double number of genes per cell as compared to
other cell clusters, were considered cell doublets. In all, 1,070 cells (5.3% of input data)

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were removed from the downstream analysis and 18,797 cells were assigned into 12 cell
clusters. Marker genes were identified using the function FindMarkers in Seurat. Cell
type was annotated based on top ranked marker genes. To this end, the information was
used to build an integrated cell type reference of mouse pituitary (Table S2).
The single cell suspension of 8-week old mouse pituitary was loaded onto a well
on a 10x Chromium Single Cell instrument (10x Genomics). Library preparation was
performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For cell type classification of
10xgenomic data set, low quality cells were filtered out using the same criterion as Dropseq analysis pipeline (100 <nGenes < 4000 and nUMI > 300). We projected the PCA
structure of Drop-seq built reference onto the 10x genomic dataset using
FindTransferAnchors with the parameter “dims=1:25” in Seurat. TransferData function
was used to classify the cell types of 10x genomic data set based on the reference data.
3,929 cells in 10xgenomic data set were assigned with cell type information (Table S2
and Fig. S3).

Background correction of the cell transcriptomes
After clustering, we found that highly transcribed hormone genes (Gh, Prl and
Pomc) could be detected in blood cells (Fig. S2F). This observation most likely
represented cross-contamination of free RNAs. Since these mRNAs are highly expressed
in the pituitary but should be absent in the blood cells, their levels in blood cells represent
a background noise signals. We adapted a previous background correction approach (Han
et al., 2018) to correct the level of contaminated mRNA. We assumed that the cell
barcodes with less than 100 UMI or 100 nGene correspond to the empty beads exposed to

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

free RNA during the cell dissociation or droplet breakage steps. The average of nUMI for
the cell barcodes (< 100 Gene or < 100 UMI) was therefore calculated and used to
perform a background correction by subtracting this value from the raw nUMI digital
expression matrix, and the negative value was then set to zero. After correction, UMI
counts for all cells were scaled by total UMI counts, multiplied by 10,000, and
transformed to log space. We used the background corrected date set to generate feature
plots and violin plots (Figs. 1B, 1C, 4A, 5B, and 5D).

Identification of Differentially Expressed Genes
Differential gene expression analysis between control mice and Ghrh transgenic
mice or between control mice and lactating mice was performed using the
function FindMarkers in Seurat, using a Wilcoxon rank sum test. Genes with an adjust Pvalue less than 0.05 were considered to be differentially expressed.

Probe design for single-cell RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization (scRNA FISH)
The strategy for the scRNA FISH probe design followed the strategy generally
used for Single-molecule Oligopaint FISH studies (Beliveau et al., 2015). Each 40 nt
primary probe contained 20 nt complementary to the exons of the mRNAs (Gh, Prl, and
POMC) with a 20 nt non-genomic tag located at the 5’ end. 20 distinct primary probes
scanning each targeted mRNA were used in each probe library. The tag sequence was
unique for each mRNA library (Beliveau et al., 2015). A fluorophore-labeled secondary
oligo with base complementarity to the tag sequence was used to detect the hybridized
primary probes. All oligos were synthesized by Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT;

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Coralville, IA). The sequences of the primary and secondary oligos are available upon
request.

Preparation of pituitary tissue sections
The pituitaries of 8-week old mice were excised and washed in ice-cold PBS.
The tissue was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde for 2 hours at 4°C. The tissue was cryoprotected in 30% sucrose and embedded in Tissue-Tek OCT compound (Sakyra Finetek
USA Inc, REF:4583) and frozen at -80°C. Coronal or sagittal sections (6 µm thickness)
were generated and mounted on slides. The slides were dried at room temperature for 2
hours and stored at -20°C prior to analysis.

scRNA FISH and immuno-fluorescent-scRNA (IF-scRNA) FISH
The procedures for RNA FISH were as described (Beliveau et al., 2015; Ho et al.,
2013; Ragoczy et al., 2006) with modifications. Briefly, slides were removed from -20°C
storage and dried at room temperature for 1 hour. The slides were washed with PBS,
fixed with 3.7% formaldehyde in PBS for 20 minutes, washed with PBS and treated with
70% ethanol at 4°C for overnight. 500 pmol of primary oligo library (19 to 22 oligos) and
equal amount of fluorophore-labeled secondary were used for each slide (6-8 tissue
sections). Prior to hybridization, the slides were washed with PBS, sequentially
dehydrated in 70%, 90%, and 100% ETOH, and then equilibrated in 10% formamide/2X
SSC, pH 7.0. The mixture of the primary oligo probes and the secondary probes were
hybridized to the cells in 10% formamide/10% dextran sulfate/2XSSC/5 mM
ribonucleotide vanadate complex/0.05% BSA/1µg/µl E.coli tRNA. The probes were heat
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

denatured at 85°C for 5 min., pre-annealed at 37°C, and then hybridized overnight at
37°C in a humidified chamber. Slides were sequentially washed in 10% formamide/2X
SSC, pH 7 followed by 2X SSC at 37°C and then mounted with Fluoroshield with DAPI
(Sigma, St. Louis, MO).
For IF analysis, the slides were removed from -20°C, dried at room temperature
for 1 hour, washed with PBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBST) (3x 15 minutes),
incubated with blocking buffer (2% BSA, 0.1% Triton X-100, and 5% normal donkey
serum in PBS) for 1 hour and then incubated with primary antibodies for overnight at
4°C. GH was detected using monkey anti-rat GH that cross-reacts with mGh. PRL was
detected using rabbit anti-mouse PRL (National Hormone and Peptide Program, NIH) or
goat anti-PRL antibody (ThermoFisher Scientific, PA5-47140). ACTH and TSHβ were
detected using rabbit-anti-ACTH antibody or TSHβ antibody, respectively (National
Hormone and Peptide Program, NIH). The secondary antibodies used were donkey antihuman, anti-rabbit, anti-goat antibodies (Jackson immnoResearch Inc). The slides were
mounted as for the scRNA FISH.
For the combined IF/scRNA FISH studies, the RNA FISH was performed as
described above and the slides were then equilibrated in PBST for 10 minutes at room
temperature, blocked with blocking buffer containing 2 mM ribonucleotide vanadate
complex, and IF was performed as described above.
For the scRNA FISH and IF studies of disassociated single cells, the pituitaries
were disassociated as described in the Drop-seq procedure followed by fixation in polylysine coated slides and the procedures for RNA and protein analyses were then
performed as described above.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Image Analysis
Image capture were collected on an Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope
platform. The images were analyzed using ImageJ software (NIH).

Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Sonny Nguyen for technical suggestions on scRNA FISH. We are grateful
to Dr. Andrea Stout of the Microscopy Core in the Department of Cell and Development
Biology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania for help with the
image capture. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) Grants
DK107453 (to S.L and Y.H) and R00HG007982, DP2HL142044 and a University of
Pennsylvania Epigenetics Institute Pilot Grant (to H.W).

Author Contributions
Y.H., H.W., and S.A.L designed experiments. Y.H., P.H., M.P, and S.C conducted the
experiments. P.H., H.W., and P.G-C performed the bioinformatic analyses. Y.H. S.C and
D.E. designed and performed the RNA-FISH in tissue sections. Y.H., P.H., H.W., and
S.A.L wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the manuscript.

Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing financial interests.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Allaerts, W., and Vankelecom, H. (2005). History and perspectives of pituitary
folliculo-stellate cell research. Eur J Endocrinol 153, 1-12.
Andersen, B., Pearse, R.V., 2nd, Jenne, K., Sornson, M., Lin, S.C., Bartke, A., and
Rosenfeld, M.G. (1995). The Ames dwarf gene is required for Pit-1 gene activation.
Dev Biol 172, 495-503.
Andoniadou, C.L., Matsushima, D., Mousavy Gharavy, S.N., Signore, M., Mackintosh,
A.I., Schaeffer, M., Gaston-Massuet, C., Mollard, P., Jacques, T.S., Le Tissier, P., et al.
(2013). Sox2(+) stem/progenitor cells in the adult mouse pituitary support organ
homeostasis and have tumor-inducing potential. Cell Stem Cell 13, 433-445.
Barbosa, J.A., Gill, B.M., Takiyyuddin, M.A., and O'Connor, D.T. (1991). Chromogranin
A: posttranslational modifications in secretory granules. Endocrinology 128, 174190.
Beliveau, B.J., Boettiger, A.N., Avendano, M.S., Jungmann, R., McCole, R.B., Joyce, E.F.,
Kim-Kiselak, C., Bantignies, F., Fonseka, C.Y., Erceg, J., et al. (2015). Single-molecule
super-resolution imaging of chromosomes and in situ haplotype visualization using
Oligopaint FISH probes. Nat Commun 6, 7147.
Budry, L., Balsalobre, A., Gauthier, Y., Khetchoumian, K., L'Honore, A., Vallette, S.,
Brue, T., Figarella-Branger, D., Meij, B., and Drouin, J. (2012). The selector gene Pax7
dictates alternate pituitary cell fates through its pioneer action on chromatin
remodeling. Genes Dev 26, 2299-2310.
Campbell, J.N., Macosko, E.Z., Fenselau, H., Pers, T.H., Lyubetskaya, A., Tenen, D.,
Goldman, M., Verstegen, A.M., Resch, J.M., McCarroll, S.A., et al. (2017). A molecular
census of arcuate hypothalamus and median eminence cell types. Nat Neurosci 20,
484-496.
Camper, S.A., Saunders, T.L., Katz, R.W., and Reeves, R.H. (1990). The Pit-1
transcription factor gene is a candidate for the murine Snell dwarf mutation.
Genomics 8, 586-590.
Cao, D., Ma, X., Cai, J., Luan, J., Liu, A.J., Yang, R., Cao, Y., Zhu, X., Zhang, H., Chen, Y.X., et
al. (2016). ZBTB20 is required for anterior pituitary development and lactotrope
specification. Nat Commun 7, 11121.
Castrique, E., Fernandez-Fuente, M., Le Tissier, P., Herman, A., and Levy, A. (2010).
Use of a prolactin-Cre/ROSA-YFP transgenic mouse provides no evidence for
lactotroph transdifferentiation after weaning, or increase in
lactotroph/somatotroph proportion in lactation. J Endocrinol 205, 49-60.
Cawley, N.X., Li, Z., and Loh, Y.P. (2016). 60 YEARS OF POMC: Biosynthesis,
trafficking, and secretion of pro-opiomelanocortin-derived peptides. J Mol
Endocrinol 56, T77-97.
Chen, R., Wu, X., Jiang, L., and Zhang, Y. (2017). Single-Cell RNA-Seq Reveals
Hypothalamic Cell Diversity. Cell Rep 18, 3227-3241.
Cheung, L.Y.M., George, A.S., McGee, S.R., Daly, A.Z., Brinkmeier, M.L., Ellsworth, B.S.,
and Camper, S.A. (2018). Single-Cell RNA Sequencing Reveals Novel Markers of Male
Pituitary Stem Cells and Hormone-Producing Cell Types. Endocrinology 159, 39103924.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Childs, G.V. (2000). Green fluorescent proteins light the way to a better
understanding of the function and regulation of specific anterior pituitary cells.
Endocrinology 141, 4331-4333.
Davis, S.W., Ellsworth, B.S., Perez Millan, M.I., Gergics, P., Schade, V., Foyouzi, N.,
Brinkmeier, M.L., Mortensen, A.H., and Camper, S.A. (2013). Pituitary gland
development and disease: from stem cell to hormone production. Curr Top Dev Biol
106, 1-47.
Davis, S.W., Keisler, J.L., Perez-Millan, M.I., Schade, V., and Camper, S.A. (2016). All
Hormone-Producing Cell Types of the Pituitary Intermediate and Anterior Lobes
Derive From Prop1-Expressing Progenitors. Endocrinology 157, 1385-1396.
Devnath, S., and Inoue, K. (2008). An insight to pituitary folliculo-stellate cells. J
Neuroendocrinol 20, 687-691.
Durand, D., Pampillo, M., Caruso, C., and Lasaga, M. (2008). Role of metabotropic
glutamate receptors in the control of neuroendocrine function. Neuropharmacology
55, 577-583.
Frawley, L.S., and Boockfor, F.R. (1991). Mammosomatotropes: presence and
functions in normal and neoplastic pituitary tissue. Endocr Rev 12, 337-355.
Gage, P.J., Brinkmeier, M.L., Scarlett, L.M., Knapp, L.T., Camper, S.A., and Mahon, K.A.
(1996). The Ames dwarf gene, df, is required early in pituitary ontogeny for the
extinction of Rpx transcription and initiation of lineage-specific cell proliferation.
Mol Endocrinol 10, 1570-1581.
Gaylinn, B.D. (2002). Growth hormone releasing hormone receptor. Receptors
Channels 8, 155-162.
Gill, B.M., Barbosa, J.A., Dinh, T.Q., Garrod, S., and O'Connor, D.T. (1991).
Chromogranin B: isolation from pheochromocytoma, N-terminal sequence, tissue
distribution and secretory vesicle processing. Regul Pept 33, 223-235.
Hammer, R.E., Brinster, R.L., Rosenfeld, M.G., Evans, R.M., and Mayo, K.E. (1985).
Expression of human growth hormone-releasing factor in transgenic mice results in
increased somatic growth. Nature 315, 413-416.
Han, X., Wang, R., Zhou, Y., Fei, L., Sun, H., Lai, S., Saadatpour, A., Zhou, Z., Chen, H., Ye,
F., et al. (2018). Mapping the Mouse Cell Atlas by Microwell-Seq. Cell 173, 1307.
Ho, Y., Elefant, F., Cooke, N., and Liebhaber, S. (2002). A defined locus control region
determinant links chromatin domain acetylation with long-range gene activation.
Mol Cell 9, 291-302.
Ho, Y., Shewchuk, B.M., Liebhaber, S.A., and Cooke, N.E. (2013). Distinct chromatin
configurations regulate the initiation and the maintenance of hGH gene expression.
Mol Cell Biol 33, 1723-1734.
Ho, Y., Tadevosyan, A., Liebhaber, S.A., and Cooke, N.E. (2008). The juxtaposition of a
promoter with a locus control region transcriptional domain activates gene
expression. EMBO Rep 9, 891-898.
Hu, P., Fabyanic, E., Kwon, D.Y., Tang, S., Zhou, Z., and Wu, H. Dissecting Cell-Type
Composition and Activity-Dependent Transcriptional State in Mammalian Brains by
Massively Parallel Single-Nucleus RNA-Seq. Molecular Cell 68, 1006-1015.e1007.
Hu, P., Fabyanic, E., Kwon, D.Y., Tang, S., Zhou, Z., and Wu, H. (2017). Dissecting CellType Composition and Activity-Dependent Transcriptional State in Mammalian
Brains by Massively Parallel Single-Nucleus RNA-Seq. Mol Cell 68, 1006-1015 e1007.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ingraham, H.A., Lala, D.S., Ikeda, Y., Luo, X., Shen, W.H., Nachtigal, M.W., Abbud, R.,
Nilson, J.H., and Parker, K.L. (1994). The nuclear receptor steroidogenic factor 1 acts
at multiple levels of the reproductive axis. Genes Dev 8, 2302-2312.
Janknecht, R. (2010). Multi-talented DEAD-box proteins and potential tumor
promoters: p68 RNA helicase (DDX5) and its paralog, p72 RNA helicase (DDX17).
Am J Transl Res 2, 223-234.
Kelberman, D., Rizzoti, K., Lovell-Badge, R., Robinson, I.C., and Dattani, M.T. (2009).
Genetic regulation of pituitary gland development in human and mouse. Endocr Rev
30, 790-829.
Lamberts, S.W., and Macleod, R.M. (1990). Regulation of prolactin secretion at the
level of the lactotroph. Physiol Rev 70, 279-318.
Lamolet, B., Pulichino, A.M., Lamonerie, T., Gauthier, Y., Brue, T., Enjalbert, A., and
Drouin, J. (2001). A pituitary cell-restricted T box factor, Tpit, activates POMC
transcription in cooperation with Pitx homeoproteins. Cell 104, 849-859.
Le Tissier, P.R., Hodson, D.J., Lafont, C., Fontanaud, P., Schaeffer, M., and Mollard, P.
(2012). Anterior pituitary cell networks. Front Neuroendocrinol 33, 252-266.
Le Tissier, P.R., Hodson, D.J., Martin, A.O., Romano, N., and Mollard, P. (2015).
Plasticity of the prolactin (PRL) axis: mechanisms underlying regulation of output in
female mice. Adv Exp Med Biol 846, 139-162.
Li, S., Crenshaw, E.B., 3rd, Rawson, E.J., Simmons, D.M., Swanson, L.W., and
Rosenfeld, M.G. (1990). Dwarf locus mutants lacking three pituitary cell types result
from mutations in the POU-domain gene pit-1. Nature 347, 528-533.
Lin, S.C., Lin, C.R., Gukovsky, I., Lusis, A.J., Sawchenko, P.E., and Rosenfeld, M.G.
(1993). Molecular basis of the little mouse phenotype and implications for cell typespecific growth. Nature 364, 208-213.
Liu, N.A., Liu, Q., Wawrowsky, K., Yang, Z., Lin, S., and Melmed, S. (2006). Prolactin
receptor signaling mediates the osmotic response of embryonic zebrafish
lactotrophs. Mol Endocrinol 20, 871-880.
Macosko, Evan Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M., Tirosh, I.,
Bialas, Allison R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, Emily M., et al. (2015). Highly Parallel
Genome-wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets. Cell
161, 1202-1214.
Mayo, K.E., Hammer, R.E., Swanson, L.W., Brinster, R.L., Rosenfeld, M.G., and Evans,
R.M. (1988). Dramatic pituitary hyperplasia in transgenic mice expressing a human
growth hormone-releasing factor gene. Mol Endocrinol 2, 606-612.
Mayo, K.E., Miller, T., DeAlmeida, V., Godfrey, P., Zheng, J., and Cunha, S.R. (2000).
Regulation of the pituitary somatotroph cell by GHRH and its receptor. Recent Prog
Horm Res 55, 237-266; discussion 266-237.
Mayran, A., Khetchoumian, K., Hariri, F., Pastinen, T., Gauthier, Y., Balsalobre, A., and
Drouin, J. (2018). Pioneer factor Pax7 deploys a stable enhancer repertoire for
specification of cell fate. Nat Genet 50, 259-269.
Michael, S.D., Kaplan, S.B., and Macmillan, B.T. (1980). Peripheral plasma
concentrations of LH, FSH, prolactin and GH from birth to puberty in male and
female mice. J Reprod Fertil 59, 217-222.
Nakajima, T., Yamaguchi, H., and Takahashi, K. (1980). S100 protein in
folliculostellate cells of the rat pituitary anterior lobe. Brain Res 191, 523-531.
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Nakane, P.K. (1970). Classifications of anterior pituitary cell types with
immunoenzyme histochemistry. J Histochem Cytochem 18, 9-20.
Nishida, Y., Yoshioka, M., and St-Amand, J. (2005). Sexually dimorphic gene
expression in the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and cortex. Genomics 85, 679-687.
Ohta, K., Nobukuni, Y., Mitsubuchi, H., Fujimoto, S., Matsuo, N., Inagaki, H., Endo, F.,
and Matsuda, I. (1992). Mutations in the Pit-1 gene in children with combined
pituitary hormone deficiency. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 189, 851-855.
Peel, M.T., Ho, Y., and Liebhaber, S.A. (2018). Transcriptome analyses of female
somatotropes and lactotropes reveal novel regulators of cell identity in the pituitary.
Endocrinology.
Perez Millan, M.I., Brinkmeier, M.L., Mortensen, A.H., and Camper, S.A. (2016).
PROP1 triggers epithelial-mesenchymal transition-like process in pituitary stem
cells. Elife 5.
Philips, A., Maira, M., Mullick, A., Chamberland, M., Lesage, S., Hugo, P., and Drouin, J.
(1997). Antagonism between Nur77 and glucocorticoid receptor for control of
transcription. Mol Cell Biol 17, 5952-5959.
Radovick, S., Nations, M., Du, Y., Berg, L.A., Weintraub, B.D., and Wondisford, F.E.
(1992). A mutation in the POU-homeodomain of Pit-1 responsible for combined
pituitary hormone deficiency. Science 257, 1115-1118.
Ragoczy, T., Bender, M.A., Telling, A., Byron, R., and Groudine, M. (2006). The locus
control region is required for association of the murine beta-globin locus with
engaged transcription factories during erythroid maturation. Genes Dev 20, 14471457.
Rizzoti, K., Akiyama, H., and Lovell-Badge, R. (2013). Mobilized adult pituitary stem
cells contribute to endocrine regeneration in response to physiological demand. Cell
Stem Cell 13, 419-432.
Seuntjens, E., Hauspie, A., Roudbaraki, M., Vankelecom, H., and Denef, C. (2002a).
Combined expression of different hormone genes in single cells of normal rat and
mouse pituitary. Arch Physiol Biochem 110, 12-15.
Seuntjens, E., Hauspie, A., Vankelecom, H., and Denef, C. (2002b). Ontogeny of
plurihormonal cells in the anterior pituitary of the mouse, as studied by means of
hormone mRNA detection in single cells. J Neuroendocrinol 14, 611-619.
Shekhar, K., Lapan, S.W., Whitney, I.E., Tran, N.M., Macosko, E.Z., Kowalczyk, M.,
Adiconis, X., Levin, J.Z., Nemesh, J., Goldman, M., et al. (2016). Comprehensive
Classification of Retinal Bipolar Neurons by Single-Cell Transcriptomics. Cell 166,
1308-1323 e1330.
Smith, M.S., and Fox, S.R. (1984). Regulation of gonadotropin secretion during
lactation. Arch Biol Med Exp (Santiago) 17, 231-238.
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W.M., 3rd, Hao,
Y., Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2019a). Comprehensive Integration of
Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888-1902 e1821.
Stuart, T., Butler, A., Hoffman, P., Hafemeister, C., Papalexi, E., Mauck, W.M., Hao, Y.,
Stoeckius, M., Smibert, P., and Satija, R. (2019b). Comprehensive Integration of
Single-Cell Data. Cell 177, 1888-1902.e1821.
Tanay, A., and Regev, A. (2017). Scaling single-cell genomics from phenomenology to
mechanism. Nature 541, 331-338.
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Theogaraj, E., John, C.D., Christian, H.C., Morris, J.F., Smith, S.F., and Buckingham, J.C.
(2005). Perinatal glucocorticoid treatment produces molecular, functional, and
morphological changes in the anterior pituitary gland of the adult male rat.
Endocrinology 146, 4804-4813.
Vazquez-Borrego, M.C., Gahete, M.D., Martinez-Fuentes, A.J., Fuentes-Fayos, A.C.,
Castano, J.P., Kineman, R.D., and Luque, R.M. (2018). Multiple signaling pathways
convey central and peripheral signals to regulate pituitary function: Lessons from
human and non-human primate models. Mol Cell Endocrinol 463, 4-22.
Villalobos, C., Nunez, L., and Garcia-Sancho, J. (2004a). Anterior pituitary
thyrotropes are multifunctional cells. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 287, E11661170.
Villalobos, C., Nunez, L., and Garcia-Sancho, J. (2004b). Phenotypic characterization
of multi-functional somatotropes, mammotropes and gonadotropes of the mouse
anterior pituitary. Pflugers Arch 449, 257-264.
Zahuczky, G., Kristof, E., Majai, G., and Fesus, L. (2011). Differentiation and
glucocorticoid regulated apopto-phagocytic gene expression patterns in human
macrophages. Role of Mertk in enhanced phagocytosis. PLoS One 6, e21349.
Zheng, G.X., Terry, J.M., Belgrader, P., Ryvkin, P., Bent, Z.W., Wilson, R., Ziraldo, S.B.,
Wheeler, T.D., McDermott, G.P., Zhu, J., et al. (2017). Massively parallel digital
transcriptional profiling of single cells. Nat Commun 8, 14049.
Zhu, X., Gleiberman, A.S., and Rosenfeld, M.G. (2007). Molecular physiology of
pituitary development: signaling and transcriptional networks. Physiol Rev 87, 933963.
Zhu, X., Tollkuhn, J., Taylor, H., and Rosenfeld, M.G. (2015). Notch-Dependent
Pituitary SOX2(+) Stem Cells Exhibit a Timed Functional Extinction in Regulation of
the Postnatal Gland. Stem Cell Reports 5, 1196-1209.

Figure Legends.

Figure 1. Single cell transcriptome analysis of the adult mouse pituitary

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A. Clustering of adult pituitary cells based on principal component analysis of single
cell transcriptomes. The spectral UMAP plot reflects the clustering analysis of
individual adult pituitary cell transcriptomes (n = 4,777). The data represent the
summation of 2 independent studies of pituitaries isolated from 7-8 week old, sexually
naïve male and female mice. Each color-coded cluster was assigned an ‘identity’ based
on the expression of sets of informative markers (as in C below; see text for details). The
number and the percentage of cells in each cluster are indicated to the right of the UMAP
plot.
B. Expression of a subset of the marker genes used to assign cell cluster identities.
The violin plots summarize mRNA expression corresponding to each indicated gene.
The provisional identification of each cluster is noted at the bottom of each
corresponding lane. Clusters corresponding to hormone expressing cells, including the
Mki67+ cluster, are bracketed above the corresponding lanes.

C. Feature plots demonstrating the distributions of mRNAs encoding the pituitary
transcription factors (Pou1f1, Tbx19, and Pax7), the signal receptors (Ghrhr, Gnrhr,
and Crhr1), marker genes for each cluster, and six pituitary hormones. These
distributions are superimposed on the cell cluster diagram (A). Each feature map is
labeled according to its respective mRNA. The heat map legend is displayed at the
bottom right corner.

Figure 2. Single cell RNA fluorescent in situ hybridization (scRNA FISH) analysis
detects the co-repression of Gh and Prl mRNAs in cells in the mouse pituitary.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A. ScRNA FISH analysis of female adult mouse pituitary tissue sections reveals a
concordance of Gh with Prl expression in vivo.
Left panel: Prl mRNA detection. Prl mRNAs were detected by FISH using an
array of anti-sense oligonucleotide probes (see Methods). Bars = 5 µm.
Right panel: Gh mRNA detection. GH mRNA was detected by FISH using an
array of anti-sense oligonucleotide probes (see Methods). Bars = 5 µm
The white arrows in the two frames indicate four examples of Gh and Prl dual
positive cells. The orange arrows indicate three cells with robust Gh mRNA expression
but without Prl mRNA expression. The yellow arrows indicate three cells with robust Prl
mRNA expression but without Gh mRNA expression.
Histogram: analysis of female pituitary cells for Gh and/or Prl mRNA.
Pituitary tissue sections from 8-week old, sexually naïve adult female mice (n=2) were
analyzed by RNA FISH. Cells from 5 randomly selected images from each pituitary were
analyzed (>600 cells per pituitary). The histogram displays the representation of cells
positive for Gh but not Prl mRNA (Gh+Prl-; 25.8%), cells positive for Prl but not Gh
mRNA(Gh-Prl+; 43.4%), and those dual positive cells (Gh+Prl-; 30.8%) in Gh and/or Prl
expressing cells.

B. scRNA FISH analysis of male adult mouse pituitary tissue sections reveals a
concordance of Gh with Prl expression in vivo.
Left panel: Prl mRNA detection. Prl mRNA was detected by FISH using an
array of anti-sense oligonucleotide probes as described in Methods. Bars = 5 µm.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Right panel: Gh mRNA detection. GH mRNA was detected by FISH using an
array of anti-sense oligonucleotide probes as described in Methods. Bars = 5 µm
The white arrows indicate four representatives of the Gh and Prl dual positive
cells. The orange arrows indicate three cells with robust Gh mRNA expression but
without Prl mRNA expression. The yellow arrow indicates a cell with Prl mRNA
expression but without Gh mRNA expression.
Histogram: analysis of male pituitary cells. Pituitary tissue sections from 8week old, sexually naïve male mice (n=2) were analyzed by scRNA FISH for Gh and Prl
mRNA expression as described in A. The histogram represents the percent of the total
cell population positive for Gh but not Prl mRNA (Gh+Prl-; 52.3%), positive for Prl but
not Gh mRNA (Gh-Prl+; 16.7%), and positive for both Gh and Prl mRNA (Gh+Prl+ 31%)
in Gh and/or Prl expressing cells.

C. Combined single cell RNA FISH and IF analyses (scRNA FISH/IF) confirm the
concordance of hormone mRNA and protein expressions.
Top panels: Detection of Gh mRNA and GH protein. The scRNA FISH analysis for
Gh mRNA and IF analysis for GH protein were performed in the pituitary tissue sections
of male adult pituitary (see Methods).
Left panel: detection of Gh mRNA by scRNA FISH. Scale bar=5 µm.
Right panel: detection of GH proteins by IF analysis in the some field. Scale
bar; 5 µm.
The white arrows indicate the cells with robust signals for both Gh mRNA and
GH protein. The yellow arrows indicated cells with trace levels of Gh mRNA and lack of

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

GH protein signal. The orange arrow indicates a cell lacking Gh mRNA and GH protein
signals.

Bottom panels: Correlation of Prl mRNA and PRL protein. The scRNA FISH
analysis of Prl mRNA and IF analysis of PRL protein were performed in female adult
pituitaries (see Methods).
Left panel: detection of Prl mRNA by scRNA FISH analysis. Scale bar=5 µm.
Right panel: detection of GH protein by IF analysis in the same field. Scale
bar; 5 µm. The white arrows indicate four cells with robust signals for both Prl mRNA
and PRL protein. The orange arrows indicate two cells lacking Prl mRNA and PRL
protein signals.

Figure 3. Pomc mRNA is co-expressed with the Prl mRNA and Gh mRNA in the
anterior lobe of the adult pituitary.
A. Pomc mRNA is broadly expressed in the anterior lobe (AL) of the adult pituitary.
Left panel: Pomc mRNA (gray) were detected by RNA FISH analysis using antisense oligonucleotide probes (see Methods). Scale bar = 5 µm.
Middle panel: ACTH protein (red) was detected by IF analysis using antibody
against ACTH. The ACTH antibody also recognizes α-MSH, the peptide hormone
generated by the cleavage of ACTH in the intermediate lobe (IL). Scale bar = 5 µm
Right panel: The merged images of the Pomc RNA FISH and ACTH IF in the
same field. Scale bar = 5 µm,

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The white arrows indicate cells with Pomc mRNA and robust levels of ACTH
protein in the AL. The orange arrows indicate cells with Pomc mRNA in noncorticotropes (ACTH negative) in AL. The merged images further confirm the robust
expression of Pomc mRNA in the melanotropes (α-MSH+) (red arrows in the IL).

B. RNA FISH analysis detects co-expression of Pomc mRNA and Prl mRNA in cells
of the anterior lobe of adult pituitary.
Prl mRNA was detected by FISH using an array of 488-conjugated anti-sense
oligonucleotide probes (green in left panel). Pomc mRNA was detected by FISH using
an array of Cy5-conjugated anti-sense oligonucleotide probes (gray in middle panel). The
right panel is the merged images of the Prl mRNA FISH and Pomc RNA FISH in the
same field. The white arrows indicate cells with co-expression of Prl and Pomc mRNAs,
the orange arrows indicate cells with robust signal for Pomc mRNA and without Prl
mRNA, and the red arrow indicates a cell that is negative for both Prl and Pomc mRNAs.
Scale bar = 5 µm.

C. Histogram summarizes the number of Pomc+ cells that co-express Prl or Gh mRNAs
in adult pituitary.
Left graph: histogram summarizes the number of dual positive cells
(POMC+Prl+; 74%) and cells positive for Pomc but not Prl mRNA (POMC+/Prl-; 9.8%).
Right graph: histogram summarizes the number of dual positive cells
(POMC+Gh+; 59%) and cells positive for Pomc but not Gh mRNA (POMC+/Prl-; 18.3%).

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Tshb mRNA is predominantly co-expressed along with Gh and/or Prl
mRNAs.
A. 2D scatter plot of Gh or Prl mRNAs in the Tshb mRNA expressing cells. The
analysis of Drop-seq data reveals that majority of the Tshb-expressing cells co-express
Gh and/or Prl mRNAs. The levels of Gh and Prl mRNAs are represented on each of two
labeled axes. The level of Tshb mRNA in each cell is indicated (heat map legend to the
right). A small subset of cells express Tshb mRNA in the absence of Gh and/or Prl
mRNAs [13.6% (30/220) in Drop-seq analysis].
B. Prevalence of TSHβ and Gh co-expression as revealed by combined RNAFISH/IF. Detection of TSHβ protein (red in the left panel) was performed by IF (red in
left panel) and Gh RNA detection was established by scRNA FISH (gray in the middle
panel). The right panel is a merge of the RNA FISH and IF images. This single field
analysis is representative of pituitary cells from tissue sections of three mice (two male
mice and one female mouse). The white arrows indicate cells with robust expression of
TSHβ protein and Gh mRNA. The orange arrow indicates a cell with robust expression
of Gh mRNA but without TSHβ protein signal. The yellow arrow indicates a cell with
TSHβ protein but without Gh mRNA signal. Nuclei were stained with DAPI (blue). Scale
bar = 5 µm.
C. Summary of the analysis of cells expressing TSHβ and Gh mRNAs. The RNA
FISH/IF analysis was performed in three pituitaries (n = 3). The data reveals that 84.6%
of the TSHβ protein positive cells co-expressed Gh mRNA.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. Clustering analysis of scRNA-seq data reveals sexual dimorphism in
pituitary cell composition.
A. UMAP plot of cells isolated from age matched male (left panel) and female (right
panel) pituitaries. The clusters are color-coded as in Fig. 1.
B. 2D scatter plot of Gh or Prl mRNAs in the cells from the pituitaries of 8-week old
WT mice. The cells from different genders are labeled. The data reveal that the majority
of the Gh+ but Prl- cells are in the males while the majority of the Prl+ but Gh- cells are
in the females. The data is consistent with the data in figure 2.
C. Sexual dimorphism of the pituitary cell composition. The histogram summarizes
the relative distributions of cells in the male and female pituitary in each defined cluster,
(derived from A.). The percent of total pituitary cell population represented in each
cluster is shown above the respective bars. These data reveal relative enrichment for
somatotropes in the male and a reciprocal enrichment for lactotropes in the female.
Analysis of the Pou1f1-negative clusters reveals a significant enrichment of gonadotropes
in the males.
D. Sexual dimorphism of gonadotrope hormones and the gonadotrope cluster. The
feature plots reveals differences in the expression patterns of the gonadotrope hormones
(Lhb and Fshb) in male mice (top panels) vs female mice (bottom panels). The heat map
legend is at the bottom right corner.

Figure 6. Single cell transcriptome analysis of the pituitary during lactation
A. Clustering of adult pituitary cells based on principal component analysis of single
cell transcriptomes. The UMAP plot reflects the clustering analysis of individual adult

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pituitary cell transcriptomes (n = 11,566). The data represent the summation of pituitaries
isolated from 13-week old female mice. Each color-coded cluster was assigned as in Fig.
1.
B. The pituitary cell composition in lactating females. The histogram compares the
cell representation in each indicated cluster between the age matched (13w) control vs the
lactating (Lac) mice. The percent of total pituitary cell population represented in each
cluster is shown above the respective bar.
C. Differential gene expression analysis of the Pou1f1+ lineages from lactating and
sexual naïve control mice.
Left panel: Analysis of lactotrope cluster. The analysis was performed on
1,035 lactotropes from control and 2,750 lactotropes from lactating mice. The volcano
plot shows the Log fold change (lactation/Virgin) in this value between the two groups on
the X-axis and the significance (Log10 p-value) of the binary comparison for each gene on
the Y-axis. Genes of particular interest (the hormones Prl, Gh, Lhb, and the
neuroendocrine vesicle secretory protein, Chgb) are indicated as labeled red dots (details
in text).
Middle panel. Analysis if somatotrope cluster. The analysis was performed on
1,892 somatotropes from lactating mice compared with 924 somatotropes from an age
matched female control. The volcano plot is organized as in left panel and highlights
genes of particular interest (Prl, Gh, and Chgb) (details in text).
Right panel. Analysis of multi-hormone cluster. The analysis compared the
levels of expression of genes in the multi-hormone cluster in lactating females (n = 736)
with an age matched female control (n = 469). Each dot represents mRNA expression

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

from a specific gene. The volcano plot is organized as in left panel and highlights genes
of particular interest (Prl, Gh, Lhb, and Chgb) (details in text)

Figure 7. Single cell transcriptome analysis of the pituitary cells of mice
overexpressing an hGhrh transgene
A. Clustering of adult pituitary cells based on principal component analysis of single
cell transcriptomes in hGhrh transgenic mice. The UMAP plot reflects the clustering
analysis of individual adult pituitary cell transcriptomes from four 8-week old female
CD1 mice (Fig. 5A left panel) (n=2,110) and two 8-week old female hGhrh transgenic
mice (n =2,706). Each color-coded cluster was assigned an ‘identity’ as in Fig. 1.
B. The pituitary cell composition in WT and hGhrh transgenic mice. The histogram
shows the cell compositions in the transgenic and 8-week old female CD1 (nontransgenic control; WT) mouse pituitaries, respectively. The representation of each total
pituitary cell population, shown as a percent of total, is shown above the respective bar.

C. Differential gene expression analysis of the Pou1f1+ lineages in hGhrh transgenic
mice
Left panel. The comparison of the transcriptomes of lactotropes from WT
and hGhrh transgenic mice. The volcano plot (configured as in Fig. 8) shows the genes
in which the expression was significantly altered during lactation. The positions of Prl,
Gh, and Pomc are labeled in red (details see text).

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Middle panel. The comparison of the transcriptomes of somatotropes from
WT and hGhrh transgenic mice. The positions of Gh, Prl, and Pomc are labeled in red
(details see text).
Right panel. The comparison of the transcriptomes of multi-hormone cluster
from WT and hGhrh transgenic mice. The positions of Prl, Gh, Lhb and Pomc are
labeled in red (details see text).

Supplemental Figure Legends

Figure S1. Standard model of anterior pituitary development and lineage
specification
This diagram summarizes the standard model of pituitary lineage differentiation. The
development of the mouse anterior pituitary from the oral ectoderm is driven by a
complex array of signaling pathways and transcription factors, a subset of which are
indicated. The adult pituitary is characterized by the presence of six terminally
differentiated cell types, each defined by the expression of its corresponding hormone
(Prl, prolactin; Gh, growth hormone; Tshb; β subunit of thyroid stimulating hormone;
Lhβ and Fshβ, the β subunits of the luteinizing and follicle stimulating hormones;
POMC, proopiomelanocortin prohormone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; αMSH, melanocyte stimulating hormone). Differentiation of three lineages (lactotropes,
somatotropes and thyrotropes) is specifically driven by, and dependent on, the POU-

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

homeo domain transcription factor, Pou1f1. The remaining three lineages (corticotropes,
melanotropes, and gonadotropes) are considered to be Pou1f1-independent.

Figure S2. Cell type classification and background correction
A. UMAP projections of 18,797 cells generated by integrating data sets of Drop-seq
runs.

B. UMAP projections across different replicates, ages, and physical conditions. The
clusters are color-coded and the identities of the clusters are labeled to the right of the
UMAP plots.

C. Bar plot shows the average nGene and nUMI across cell clusters.

D. Robustness of cell type classification to variation of number of PCs. UMAP plots
using varying PC numbers as shown above each respective the plot. Bar plot shows the
effect of varying PC numbers on the cell type composition.

E. UMAP plots show the effect of varying resolution parameters on the number of
cell clusters.

F. Violin plots show the expression of marker genes before and after background
correction.

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S3. Single cell RNA-seq analysis of 3,927 cells using the 10X Genomics
platform
The bar plots compare the cell distribution of cells across each types using the Drop-seq
and 10X genomic technologies.

Figure S4. RNA FISH and IF analyses in adult pituitary tissue sections detect the
presence of the multi-hormone cells at both mRNA and protein levels.
A. RNA FISH demonstrates that the morphology of the adult pituitary is conserved
in pituitary tissue sections. This analysis was performed on pituitary tissue sections of
8-week old male and female mice.
Left panel: RNA FISH shows that the robust expression of the Prl mRNA
(green) is restricted to the anterior lobe (AL).
Middle panel: RNA FISH shows the robust expression of the Gh mRNA (red) is
restricted to the anterior lobe (AL).
Right panel: RNA FISH shows the broad expression of Pomc mRNA (grey) in
the intermediate lobe (IL) and anterior lobe (AL).

B. IF analysis performed on 8-week old female mice confirms co-expression of GH
and PRL proteins in pituitary cells. The IF was performed in the pituitary tissue
sections of an 8-week old female mouse using antibodies specifically for PRL and GH.
Left panel: IF detection of PRL protein (green). Scale bar = 5 µm.
Middle panel: IF detection of GH protein (red) in the same field as in left panel. Scale
bar = 5 µm.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/475558; this version posted August 27, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Right panel: The merged images of the PRL IF and GH IF. The white arrows indicate
the cells with robust levels of GH protein and PRL protein. The yellow arrows indicate
cells with robust level of PRL but without GH protein signal. The orange arrows indicate
cells with robust level of GH protein but without PRL protein signal.
Histogram: co-expression of GH and PRL in the pituitary of male or female mouse. The
IF analysis was performed in pituitary tissue sections of one male mouse (499 GH and/or
PRL expressing cells were analyzed) and one female mouse (664 GH and/or PRL
expressing cells were analyzed).

C. IF analysis identifies cells co-expressing of TSHβ and GH proteins in vivo.
IF was performed in the pituitary tissue sections of an 8-week old male mouse using
antibodies specifically for GH (red in the left panel) and TSHβ (green in the middle
panel). The right panel is the merged images of the IF. Two TSHβ positive cells are
indicated with arrows. One of these cells is also expressing high level GH (white arrow)
while the other cell is expressing relative lower level of GH (yellow arrow).
Histogram: Quantification of cells co-expressing TSHβ and GH proteins. Of 64
TSH(+) cells detected in this study, 39 were also positive for GH (61%).

Table S1. List of marker genes in each cluster.
Table S2. The cell numbers in each cluster and each sample.

50

Figure. S1
Pou1f1 dependent lineages
Prl

Lactotropes (Lac)
Gh

Oral
Ectoderm

Pitx1,2
Isl 1

Somatotropes (Som)

Pou1f1

Prop1

Tshb

Thyrotropes (Thy)

Tbx19

Pax7
Tbx19

POMC
(ACTH)

Corticotropes
(Cor)

Gata2
Nr5a1
Lhb
Fshb

POMC
(a-MSH)

Melanotropes
(Mel)

Gonadotropes
(Gon)

(Intermediate lobe)

Pou1f1 independent lineages

Fig. S3
40

30

30

10xgenomic
dropseq

23.6

20

21.6

14.8
9.4
4.1

1.8 1.8

0.2 0.6

bc

2

5.3

Ph

3

M
ac

+

2.7

R

5.8

So
x2

t
or
C

el
M

a
on

+

M

ki

67

t
ul
M

m
So

c

0

2.9

G

0.5 1.2

3.5 4.1

2

5.1

FS

8.4

FS
1

11.1

10

La

cell percentage

36.5

