bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Degradation of the repetitive genomic landscape in a close
relative of C. elegans
Gavin C. Woodruff1∗ and Anastasia A. Teterina1,2
1 Institute
2 Center

of Ecology and Evolution, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA
of Parasitology, Severtsov Institute of Ecology and Evolution RAS, Moscow, Russia

Abstract
The abundance, diversity, and genomic distribution of repetitive elements is highly variable among species.
These patterns are thought to be driven in part by reproductive mode and the interaction of selection
and recombination, and recombination rates typically vary by chromosomal position. In the nematode C.
elegans, repetitive elements are enriched at chromosome arms and depleted on centers, and this mirrors
the chromosomal distributions of other genomic features such as recombination rate. How conserved is
this genomic landscape of repeats, and what evolutionary forces maintain it? To address this, we compared
the genomic organization of repetitive elements across five Caenorhabditis species with chromosome-level
assemblies. As previously reported, repeat content is enriched on chromosome arms in most Caenorhabditis
species, and no obvious patterns of repeat content associated with reproductive mode were observed. However,
the fig-associated Caenorhabditis inopinata has experienced rampant repetitive element expansion and
reveals no association of global repeat content with chromosome position. Patterns of transposable element
superfamily-specific distributions reveal this global pattern is driven largely by a few transposable element
superfamilies that in C. inopinata have expanded in number and have weak associations with chromosome
position. Additionally, 15% of predicted protein-coding genes in C. inopinata align to transposon-related
proteins. When these are excluded, C. inopinata has no enrichment of genes in chromosome centers, in
contrast to its close relatives who all have such clusters. Forward evolutionary simulations reveal that
chromosomal heterogeneity in recombination rate is insufficient for generating structured genomic repetitive
landscapes. Instead, heterogeneity in the fitness effects of transposable element insertion is needed to promote
heterogeneity in repetitive landscapes. Thus, patterns of gene density along chromosomes are likely drivers of
global repetitive landscapes in this group, although other historical or genomic factors are needed to explain
the idiosyncrasy of genomic organization of various transposable element taxa within C. inopinata. Taken
together, these results highlight the power of comparative genomics and evolutionary simulations in testing
hypotheses regarding the causes of genome organization.

Introduction

2018)). And not only does the global repeat
content among genomes vary—heterogeneity
in repeat content both within and between
chromosomes occurs (Rizzon, et al. 2002;
Stitzer, et al. 2019). Furthermore, repeat
density in genomes has been observed to
covary with patterns of genomic diversity
(Clark, et al. 2007), recombination rate (Rizzon,
et al. 2002), gene density (Medstrand, et al.
2002), chromatin state (Peng and Karpen 2008),
centromeric regions (Plohl, et al. 2014) and
physical spatial position (Guelen, et al. 2008).
Repetitive elements are then a major feature
of genomic organization, and the origin and
maintenance of their genomic landscape

epetitive elements are a conspicuous
feature of eukaryotic genomes. Over
half of the human genome is comprised
of such elements (de Koning, et al. 2011),
and the maize genome has a repeat content
of over 80% (Baucom, et al. 2009; Schnable,
et al. 2009). But at the same time, the range
in repeat content among eukaryotic genomes
is great, with some species having a scant
number of repetitive elements (0.8% in one
species of bdelloid rotifer (Nowell, et al.

R

∗ Correspondence:

gavincw@uoregon.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

demands explanation.
Transposable elements are generally considered deleterious by replicating at the expense
of its host and abrogating functional sites
through insertion. This is largely consistent
with experiments revealing that fitness declines with increased transposable element
activity (Pasyukova, et al. 2004; Bégin and
Schoen 2006). Thus it has been proposed that
variation in repeat content among species
is driven by variation in population size;
weaker selection in species with smaller population sizes should lead to increased repeat
content (Lynch 2007). This is also thought
to explain within-genome heterogeneity in
repeat content—low recombining regions
have higher repeat content than regions with
high recombination rates in multiple systems
(including fruit flies (Rizzon, et al. 2002);
yeast (Pan, et al. 2011); mice (Jensen-Seaman,
et al. 2004); humans (Jensen-Seaman, et al.
2004); Arabidopsis thaliana (Wright, et al. 2003;
Kent, et al. 2017); and maize (Liu, et al. 2009),
among others). This is presumably because
of weakened selection in low-recombining
regions (Hill and Robertson 1966; Langley, et
al. 1988). However, in mice and humans, the
association of transposable element content
with recombination rate varies depending on
repeat type (Myers, et al. 2005; Shifman, et
al. 2006). Furthermore, transposable element
activity was not correlated with recombination
rate after accounting for chromatin states in
Drosophila melanogaster (Adrion, et al. 2017).
Others have noted that transposable element
abundance should either increase or decrease
depending on the model of natural selection
and the mode of reproduction (Wright and
Schoen 1999; Bestor 2000; Morgan 2001;
Glémin, et al. 2019). At the same time, it has
also been proposed that repetitive elements
themselves can be adaptive (Shapiro and
Von Sternberg 2005), and individual cases of
adaptation via transposable element insertion
abound (Oliver and Greene 2009; Casacuberta
and González 2013). And in nematodes, repeat
content is atypically positively correlated

2

with recombination (Duret, et al. 2000), and
little difference is observed between selfing
and outcrossing close relatives (Fierst, et al.
2015). What drives the landscape of repetitive
elements both between species and within
genomes?
One approach towards tackling this question
is investigating a group of recently diverged
species where evolutionary signals are still detectable (Jenner and Wills 2007; Raff 2012). The
nematode Caenorhabditis elegans was the first
metazoan to have its genome sequenced, and
consequently it is among the more thoroughly
annotated and understood sequences available
(Gerstein, et al. 2010). Recently, many genomes
of close relatives of C. elegans have been sequenced, some of which have been assembled
to chromosome-level contiguity (Fierst, et al.
2015; Kanzaki, et al. 2018; Ren et al. 2018;
Yin, et al. 2018; Stevens, et al. 2019). Here,
we harness these new resources to interrogate
the evolution of repetitive genomic landscapes
among five Caenorhabditis species. We find a
conserved chromosomal structure of repetitive
elements among four species, whereas the ecologically and morphologically divergent C. inopinata (Kanzaki, et al. 2018; Woodruff and
Phillips 2018; Woodruff, et al. 2018) harbors an
atypically uniform repetitive landscape driven
by a handful of transposable element superfamilies.

Methods
Genome assemblies
Five Caenorhabditis genome assemblies with
chromosome-level contiguity were used for
this study (Fig. 1). The C. elegans, C. briggsae,
and C. nigoni (Yin, et al. 2018) genomes
were retrieved from WormBase ParaSite
(parasite.wormbase.org; (Howe, et al. 2016)).
The C. inopinata genome (Kanzaki, et al. 2018)
was retrieved from the Caenorhabditis Genomes
Project (Caenorhabditis.org; (Slos, et al.
2017; Stevens, et al. 2019)).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 1. Caenorhabditis phylogeny. Species addressed in this study are included in the gray box. C. elegans
and C. briggsae are hermaphroditic species (indicated by the symbol), whereas C. nigoni, C. remanei, and
C. inopinata are female/male. The topology is derived from the Bayesian phylogeny inferred from protein
sequences in (Stevens et al. 2019).

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

A new chromosome-level assembly of the C. remanei genome was kindly shared by Patrick
Phillips and AAT (pers. comm.; genome
manuscript in preparation). Protein sets of
28 Caenorhabditis species and Diploscapter coronatus were retreived from the Caenorhabditis Genomes Project (caenorhabditis.org).
Versions of all genome assemblies and
protein sets can be found with the deposited data and code associated with
this work (https://github.com/gcwoodruff/
transposable_elements_2019).
Repeat inference and quantification
After excluding mitochondrial DNA, assemblies were masked and annotated for
repeat content through a hybrid approach
using multiple software packages (inspired
by (Berriman, et al. 2018) and avrilomics.
blogspot.com/2015/09/lrtharvest.html).
De novo repeat libraries were generated
with RepeatModeler (options -engine ncbi
-pa 16; (Benson 1999; Bao and Eddy 2002;
Price, et al. 2005)). Concurrently, sequences
that align to transposable elements were
detected with TransposonPSI using default parameters (transposonpsi.sourceforge.net).
LTRHarvest was also used to identify LTR
retrotransposon sequences in these assemblies
(options -seqids yes -tabout no -gff3; (Ellinghaus, et al. 2008)). LTRHarvest output was
further filtered (LTRHarvest option -hmms)
to extract just those sequences containing
only LTR retrotransposon domains; this was
done with Pfam (Finn, et al. 2015) Hidden
Markov Models of known LTR retrotransposon
domains reported in (Steinbiss, et al. 2009).
The RepeatModeler, TransposonPSI, and
LTRHarvest species-specific repeat libraries
were then concatenated with additional repeat
libraries. One of these is the Rhabditida library
(“Rhabditida.repeatmasker”) associated with
the RepeatMasker software (Tarailo-Graovac
and Chen 2009). Additionally, the C. elegans
and C. briggsae repeat libraries (“cbrapp.ref,”
“celapp.ref,” “cbrrep.ref,” and “celrep.ref”)
from RepBase (Bao, et al. 2015) were also

4

combined with the above libraries to generate
redundant repeat libraries for each assembly.
USEARCH (Edgar 2010) was then used to
cluster repeats (options -id 0.8 -centroids -uc
-consout -msaout) and generate non-redundant
libraries. These repetitive sequences were then
classified with RepeatClassifier (part of the
RepeatModeler software) with default parameters. Repeats classified as “Unknown” were
then aligned to Caenorhabditis species-specific
protein sets with blastx (options -num_threads
24 -outfmt 6 -evalue 0.001; (Camacho, et al.
2009)); unclassified repeats that aligned to
predicted proteins were then removed from
the repeat libraries. These subsequent repeat
libraries were then used with RepeatMasker
(part of the RepeatModeler software; options
-s -gff -pa 16) to mask the genome assemblies.
To measure and visualize the global landscape
of repeats, Bedtools nuc (Quinlan 2014) was
used to measure the fraction of masked
bases in non-overlapping windows across the
genomes (both 10 kb and 100kb window size;
default parameters). This was also done for all
specific transposable element classes, orders,
superfamilies, and families. Repeats classified
by RepeatClassifier (i.e., repeats not classified
as “Unknown”) were annotated by a custom
repeat taxonomy (repeat_taxonomy.tsv) informed by the classification system in (Wicker,
et al. 2007). To measure the general trend
of repeat density along all chromosomes
simultaneously, windows were normalized
by chromosome position using custom Linux
scripts (all code associated with this work
has been deposited (https://github.com/
gcwoodruff/transposable_elements_2019))
by setting the median chromosome base pair
to 0 and the end chromosome base pairs to 0.5.
To further understand and quantify repetitive
element genomic structure, chromosome
arms were defined as genomic regions with
normalized chromosome positions ≥ 0.25;
chromosome centers were defined as regions
with normalized chromosome positions < 0.25.
To measure the impact of specific transposable
element taxa on the global structure of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

repetitive elements, specific taxa were removed
from the GFF file generated by RepeatMasker
with custom Linux scripts, and assemblies
were re-masked with Bedtools maskfasta with
annotations excluding each specific family.
Masked assemblies were then processed as
above to quantify and visualize global repeat
structure.
To understand the extent of transposon representation in protein-coding genes, all predicted
protein sequences from 28 Caenorhabditis
genomes were aligned to the TransposonPSI
(transposonpsi.sourceforge.net) transposon
protein database (“transposon_db.pep”)
using blastp (options -outfmt 6 -evalue 0.001;
(Camacho, et al. 2009)). Unique proteins
that aligned to transposons were extracted
and counted with custom Linux scripts to
determine the fraction of transposon-aligning
protein-coding genes per genome. In the
case of C. inopinata, its transposon-aligning
protein set was aligned to the set of C. elegans
proteins (with its 100 transposon-aligning
proteins removed) in the same manner to find
the intersection of protein-coding genes that
align to both transposons and to otherwise
homologous nematode proteins.
Measures of the divergence of individual repetitive element insertions in C. inopinata were
performed with phylogenetic analyses. Here,
phylogenies were only performed on repetitive elements that had ≥100 insertions in the
C. inopinata genome that were also not low
complexity repeats. Repetitive elements of the
same kind were defined as belonging to the
same "cluster" as inferred by USEARCH above.
Individual insertions were extracted from the
repeat annotation files generated by RepeatMasker with custom Linux scripts and Bedtools getfasta. Insertions derived from the same
cluster were were aligned with MAFFT (options –auto and –adjustdirection) (Katoh and
Standley 2013). Alignments were then trimmed
with trimAl (option -automated1) (CapellaGutiérrez, et al. 2009). Both trimmed and
untrimmed alignments were then used to gen-

erate phylogenetic trees with FastTree (options
-nt -gtr -quiet) (Price, et al. 2010). Before phylogenetic inference, trimmed alignments were
filtered to exclude those <50 bp in length; this
led to 265 clusters with untrimmed alignments
being pared down to 165 clusters with trimmed
alignments. The terminal branch lengths of
all trees were extracted with the "phytools"
R package (Revell 2012); the terminal branch
length of each insertion was used as a measure of its divergence. Branch lengths were
not converted to strict ages due to known dating issues in Caenorhabditis nematodes (Cutter
2008; Cutter, et al. 2019); these are likely exacerbated when using rapidly evolving transposable elements. All version information regarding the software used here can be found with
the deposited data and code associated with
this work (https://github.com/gcwoodruff/
transposable_elements_2019).
Simulations of transposable element evolution
Simulations of transposon element evolution
were conducted in SLiM 3.3 (Haller and
Messer 2018) with a script based on recipe
13.6 ("Modeling transposon elements") from
the SLiM 3.0 manual (28 February 2018
revision). In the recipe, active transposons
that able to "copy and paste" themselves were
simulated. Transposable elements are also
disabled at some frequency, losing their ability
to reproduce. We simulated the transposable
element evolutionary dynamics with varying
recombination landscapes and fitness effects
depending on the genomic region of a transposon element insertion. For all simulations,
the population size was 5,000 individuals.
Genomes were modeled as a single 3 MB
chromosome.
Recombination was either
uniform across the chromosome (r=1x10-8 ) or
had three domains of different recombination
rates in the chromosome arms and centers. In
the case of three recombination domains, the
chromosome arms had high a recombination
rate (r=1x10-8 ) while chromosome centers had
a lower recombination rate (r=1x10-10 ). The
probability of transposable element replica-

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

tion/insertion was 1x10-4 , and the probability
of transposable element deactivation was
5x10-5 . All simulations were run for 50,000
generations. All scenarios were replicated 50
times. From the simulations, we estimated the
number of active and disabled transposable
elements in the central and peripheral domains
under different selection scenarios. All SLiM
scripts for simulations have been deposited on
Github (https://github.com/gcwoodruff/
transposable_elements_2019). We studied
the following scenarios:
a. All transposable element insertions are
neutral (s = 0, Figure 8a);
b. Transposable elements are weakly deleterious; the fitness effects are drawn from a
gamma distribution with mean s= -0.003 and
alpha = 0.3 (Figure 8b);
c. Transposable elements are highly deleterious; the fitness effects are drawn from a
gamma distribution with mean s= -0.03 and
alpha = 0.3 (Figure 8c);
d. Transposable elements only located in the
central domain are weakly deleterious; fitness
effects are drawn from a gamma distribution
with mean s= -0.003 and alpha = 0.3 (Figure
8d);
e. Transposable elements only located in the
central domain are highly deleterious; fitness
effects are drawn from a gamma distribution
with mean s= -0.03 and alpha = 0.3 (Figure 8e);
f. Transposable elements located in the center
are more deleterious than in the arms; fitness
effects are drawn from a gamma distribution
with mean s = -0.03 (centers) and mean s =
-0.003 (arms) with alpha = 0.3 (Figure 8f);
g. Transposable elements located in the center
are more deleterious than in the arms; fitness
effects are drawn from a gamma distribution
with mean s = equal -0.03 (centers) and mean
s= -0.003 (arms) with alpha = 0.3 but TEs
replicate via "cut-and-paste" (Figure 8g);
h. All transposable elements are weakly
deleterious; fitness effects are drawn from a
gamma distribution mean s= -0.003 and alpha
= 0.3. In addition, highly beneficial mutations
with fitness effects drawn from a gamma
distribution with mean s = 0.1 and alpha = 0.3

6

occur with the mutation rate u = 1x10-9 .
Statistical analyses
All statistical analyses and plots were generated with the R statistical language (Team
2019). The lm and wilcox.test functions in base
R were used for linear models and performing
Wilcoxon rank sum tests. The cohen.d function in the "effsize" (Torchiano 2019) package
was used to estimate Cohen’s d effect sizes.
The "ggplot2" (Wickham 2016), "lemon" (Edwards 2019), and "ggforce" (Pedersen 2019)
R packages were used to make plots. Code
and data for all analyses have been deposited
in Github (https://github.com/gcwoodruff/
transposable_elements_2019).

Results
Repeat density covaries with chromosomal position
in all species but C. inopinata
The genomic landscape of repetitive elements
was inferred in five Caenorhabditis assemblies
(Fig. 1) through a combination of de novo and
element class-specific methods (see methods;
Fig. 2). For context, intrachromosomal heterogeneity of numerous genomic features has
long been known in C. elegans, which has led to
the definition of high-recombining, repeat-rich
chromosome "arms" and low-recombining,
gene-rich chromosome "centers" or "clusters"
(Cutter, et al. 2009). These patterns appear to
not be influenced by discrete centromeres as
C. elegans has holocentric chromosomes where
spindle attachment sites span the entire length
of chromosomes (Albertson and Thomson
1982; Howe, et al. 2001). As previously
described in nematodes (Duret, et al. 2000;
Rizzon, et al. 2003; Stein, et al. 2003; Cutter, et
al. 2009; Yin, et al. 2018), four of the assemblies
reveal an enrichment of repetitive elements
on chromosome arms relative to chromosome
centers (Fig. 2; Supplemental Figure 1-2).
Although there is a range in the repeat density
difference between chromosome arms and
centers among species

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

7
Figure 2. The genomic landscape of repetitive elements in five Caenorhabditis assemblies. Columns
represent the six chromosomes; rows are the species ordered phylogenetically as in Figure 1. Plotted are the
percentages of 10 kb windows that contain repetitive regions by genomic position. Percentage of the whole
genome that is repetitive is noted in parentheses. Blue lines were fit with generalized additive models.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

(1-18% repeat content per 10kb window),
C. remanei reveals the greatest difference in
mean repeat content (Fig. 2; Supplemental
Figure 1-2). Surprisingly, the closest relative
of C. elegans used in this study, C. inopinata,
revealed far less enrichment in chromosome
arms (1% increased repeat content on arms
compared to centers; Fig. 2; Supplemental
Figure 1). After normalizing all genomic
positions relative to chromosome centers, C.
inopinata is the only species that did not reveal
a significant relationship between chromosome
position and repeat density in a linear model
(Supplemental Figures 2-3; r2 =1.8x10-5 ; F=1.2;
β1 = -1.5; p=0.27). Conversely, all other species
had a positive relationship between repeat
density and distance from chromosome center
(Supplemental Figures 2-3; r2 =0.078-0.24;
F=999-3165; β1 =32-60; p<0.0001 for all). There
is then a largely conserved pattern of enrichment of repetitive elements in chromosome
arms although it varies in its extent across
species; C. inopinata is an exception in that
it has almost no detectable global repeat
chromosomal structure.

Divergent genomic repetitive landscapes are driven
by diversity in repeat taxon abundance and chromosomal structure
Transposable elements harbor abundant
structural and replicative diversity. To understand the impact of such diversity on the
genomic repetitive landscape, transposable
elements were systematized into a taxonomy
(repeat_taxonomy.tsv) informed by (Wicker, et
al. 2007). The genomic landscapes of repeat
taxa vary widely (Fig. 3; see Supplemental
Material for the genomic distributions of all
repeat taxa in all species). Repeat superfamilies (of which twenty-six were found among
the repetitive elements in Caenorhabditis)
can reveal conserved genomic landscapes
with enrichment on chromosome arms (hAT
superfamily, Fig. 3) or with little apparent
chromosomal structure (Mutator superfamily,
Fig. 3). Conversely, repeat superfamilies

8

can vary widely in their genomic landscapes
among species (such as PiggyBac, Bel-Pao,
Tc1-Mariner, and RTE superfamilies; Fig. 2;
Supplemental Material). Genomic repetitive
landscapes are thus composed of dozens of
repeat taxa that can each harbor idiosyncratic
abundances and chromosomal structures
among species and within genomes.
To further explore genomic landscapes of
repeat taxa and their contributions to global
repetitive structure, repeat taxon densities
among chromosome arms and centers were
compared (Fig.
4a-b; Supplemental Figures 4-10). Additionally, the total genomic
abundances of various repeat taxa were
also compared (Fig. 4c-d; Supplemental
Figures 4-10; Supplemental Material). Among
repeat classes (here including unclassified
repeats, satellite DNA, and low complexity
repetitive elements), transposable elements
were most abundant (Supplemental Figure
4-5; Supplemental material), with class
II DNA transposons generally being the
dominant repeat class (Supplemental Figure
4-5). Consistent with global repeat structure,
transposable elements tend to be enriched
on chromosome arms (Supplemental Figure
4-5; Supplemental Material). However, in C.
inopinata, class II DNA transposons are not
enriched on chromosome arms (arm-center
Cohen’s d effect size= 0.044, linear model
p=0.69; Supplemental Figure 4-5), and class
I DNA retrotransposons are enriched on
chromosome centers, in exception to all other
species (arm-center Cohen’s d effect size= -0.18,
linear model p<0.0001; Supplemental Figure
4-5). Thus, variation in the chromosomal
distributions and abundances of repeat classes
underlies diversity in global repeat content.
Repeat taxa of lower ranks were interrogated
further to understand the exceptional repetitive landscape of C. inopinata. All species but
C. inopinata reveal a significant correlation between repeat superfamily genomic abundance
and arm-center effect size (Figure 4c; Supplemental Figure 11; C. inopinata: r2 =0.061, F=1.2,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 3. Repeat superfamilies vary in their chromosomal distributions. Plotted are the percentages of 10 kb
windows that contain a given repeat superfamily (columns) along chromosome III in five species (rows). Six
superfamilies among twenty-six detected were chosen to illustrate the diversity in repetitive landscapes (see
Supplemental Material for all distributions of all repeat taxa on all chromosomes).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 4. The genomic structure of repeat superfamilies in Caenorhabditis.
a. The genomic landscape of repetitive elements in C. elegans and C. inopinata when normalized by chromosome position. Here, all genomic windows from all chromosomes are plotted, with the percentages of
10 kb windows that contain repetitive regions on the y-axis. "0" represents chromosome midpoints, and
"0.5" represents chromosome ends. Windows can then be binned into chromosome "centers" (normalized
chromosomal position < 0.25 (dotted red vertical line)) or "arms" (normalized chromosomal position greater
than or equal to 0.25) to quantify the impact of chromosome position on repeat density. The blue lines were
fit by generalized additive models (Continued on the following page.).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

(Continuing from previous page.)
b. Quantifying the chromosomal structure of repeat taxa. The genomic distribution of three repeat superfamilies in among two species are plotted with normalized chromosomal positions as in (a) (from top to bottom:
Bel-Pao in C. inopinata, RTE in C. inopinata, and Helitron in C. elegans). Points are colored by the Cohen’s
d effect size of chromosome position (chromosome arms - centers) on repeat density with the same color
gradient as in panel (d). Here and in all panels this is referred to as the "arm-center difference." An effect
size of 1 notes that the average repeat density among windows in chromosome arms is one pooled standard
deviation higher than those in centers; an effect size of 0 reveals on average no difference in repeat density
between chromosome arms and centers. Negative values reveal repeat densities higher in chromosome
centers compared to arms.
c. The relationship between repeat chromosomal structure and total genomic repeat content among repeat
superfamilies in five Caenorhabditis species. The "arm-center difference" is the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as described in (b). The five most abundant repeat superfamilies in C.
inopinata are labeled. All variables are log-transformed, (ln(variable+1)). All linear relationships p<0.05 except
for C. inopinata (p=0.29); additional regression statistics can be found in the text and in the supplemental
material. Supplemental Figure 11 shows the same data but not transformed.
d. Repeat superfamily content in C. inopinata. Bars are colored by arm-center chromosome position effect
size as described in panel (b).

β1 = -1.6, p=0.29;all other species: r2 =0.21-0.64,
F=5.0-38, β1 =2.1-4.5, p=3.4x10-6 -0.038). Some
superfamilies that reveal atypical chromosomal structure are highly abundant in the C. inopinata genome, particularly Tc1-Mariner (class
II transposon; 10.2% of the genome), RTE (class
I LINE retrotransposon; 5.7%), Bel-Pao (class I
LTR retrotransposon; 2.2%), and Gypsy (class
I LTR retrotransposon; 2.0%; Fig. 4c-d), consistent with the previous description of the C.
inopinata genome (Kanzaki, et al. 2018). Although these superfamilies are highly abundant and have atypical chromosomal structure, phylogenetic analyses suggest that insertions from these superfamilies are not on
average any younger that those of other superfamilies in C. inopinata (Supplemental Figures
12-15). When these four superfamilies are excluded, the global repetitive landscape retains
a chromosomal structure that resembles those
of its close relatives (r2 =0.048; F=621; β1 =17.7;
p<0.0001; Fig. 5). Thus, divergence in the repetitive genomic landscape can be driven in large
part by the activity of a small number of repeat
superfamilies that nonetheless differ greatly in
structure and mode of replication.

Gene density is negatively correlated with repeat
content in all species but C. inopinata
Previous reports have noted that the genomic
landscape of gene density mirrors that of repeat content in nematodes, and genes are enriched in chromosome centers relative to arms
(Cutter, et al. 2009; Fierst, et al. 2015; Yin, et al.
2018). Non-random distributions of genes and
repetitive elements also overlap with domains
of high and low recombination (Rockman and
Kruglyak 2009; Ross, et al. 2011). To explore
if gene density is associated with repeat content in the assemblies addressed here, gene
densities were estimated with publicly available genome annotations. When paired with
estimates of repeat content, we found that, as
expected, genes are moderately enriched in
chromosome centers relative to arms in all five
species (Supplemental figure 16-17; r2 =0.0250.12; F=33-180; β1 = -6.2 to -0.20; p<0.0001 for
all) and that gene density is negatively correlated with repeat content in four assemblies
(Figure 6; r2 =0.059-0.16; F=66-235; β1 = -0.73 to
-0.35; p<0.0001 for all but C. inopinata). However, C. inopinata revealed a positive correlation among repeat content and gene density
(Figure 6; r2 =0.050; F=65; β1 =0.54; p<0.0001).
As the previous description of the C. inopinata
genome mentioned a transposable element in11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 5. C. inopinata reveals a more conventional repetitive genomic landscape when four repeat superfamilies are removed. Plotted are the percentages of 10 kb windows that contain repetitive regions by genomic
position after removing Tc1-Mariner, RTE, Bel-Pao, and Gypsy repeat superfamilies. The blue dashed line
was fit by LOESS local regression.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 6. The relationship between gene and repeat density in Caenorhabditis. Plotted are the percent
repetitive region by gene count in 100 kb windows across all species. In the case of C. inopinata, an additional
plot excludes 2,489 transposon-aligning genes (that also do not align to any C. elegans proteins) from gene
counts. All linear relationships p<0.0001 except for the last panel (p=0.070); additional regression statistics
can be found in the text and in the supplemental material.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

sertion within the highly-conserved sex determination protein-coding gene her-1 (Kanzaki,
et al. 2018), we suspected this positive relationship may be due to the presence of repetitive content in the predicted protein-coding
gene set. To test this, we aligned all predicted
protein-coding genes from 28 Caenorahbditis genomes and one outgroup (Diploscapter
coronatus (Hiraki, et al. 2017)) to the TransposonPSI transposon protein database. In most
Caenorhabditis genomes, only a small fraction
of predicted protein-coding genes aligns to
transposon-related proteins (median= 1.08%;
IQR=0.47%). However, in C. inopinata and
C. japonica, a substantial fraction of their protein sets aligns to such proteins (Supplemental Figure 18; C. inopinata, 15%; C. japonica,
12%). Within C. inopinata, of the 3,349 proteins that aligned to the transposon database,
860 also aligned to C. elegans non-repetitive
proteins. Indeed, after C. inopinata proteins
aligning exclusively to transposable elements
are removed, there is no significant relationship between repeat content and gene density
(Figure 6; r2 =0.002; F=3.3; β1 =0.14; p=0.070).
Moreover, this also abolishes the relationship
between gene content and chromosomal position in this species (Figure 7; Supplemental
Figures 16-17, 19-20; r2 = -0.00090; F=0.89; β1 = 0.90; p=0.35). In tandem with patterns of repeat
content, this is suggestive of a radical remodeling of genomic structure along the C. inopinata
lineage.
Simulations reveal chromosomal heterogeneity in
insertion fitness effects is sufficient for promoting
non-random genomic repetitive organization
Recombination rate also covaries with chromosomal position in nematodes and is elevated in chromosome arms relative to centers
in both C. elegans and C. briggsae (Rockman
and Kruglyak 2009; Ross, et al. 2011). How
does intrachromosomal variation in recombination rate contribute to genomic repetitive
organization? To address this question, we
implemented forward simulations of transposable element evolution with the SLiM software

14

package (Haller and Messer 2018; Figure 8;
Supplemental material; see methods). Primarily, chromosomes with either a uniformly high
recombination rate or with three domains of
differing recombination rate (high in chromosome arms and low in centers) were modeled. In addition, various patterns of chromosomal heterogeneity in the fitness effects
of transposable element insertion were also
addressed. Notably, intrachromosomal variation in recombination alone was insufficient to
generate chromosomal heterogeneity in transposon density. This was true in all simulations where there was no within-chromosome
variation in the fitness effects of transposable
element insertion (Figure 8a-c, h; Arm-center
Cohen’s d effect size= -0.24-0.11; Wilcoxon rank
sum test W=1056-1338, p= 0.54-0.99). Conversely, heterogeneity in insertion fitness effects
consistently revealed genomic organizations
of repetitive elements reminiscent of those observed in nematodes (Figure 8d-g; Arm-center
Cohen’s d effect size=1.4-9.2; Wilcoxon rank
sum test W=1803-2500, p= 7.1x10-18 -6.2x10-9 ).
This was observed even in the absence of chromosomal domains of differing recombination
rates (Figure 8d-g, left column; Arm-center
Cohen’s d effect size=1.4-9.2; Wilcoxon rank
sum test W=1803-2500, p=7.1x10-18 -6.2x10-9 ).
Specifically, repeats are enriched in chromosomal regions where insertions are more deleterious than other chromosomal regions. This
holds for both "copy-and-paste" as well as "cutand-paste" (Figure 8g; Arm-center Cohen’s d
effect size=1.4, 2.2; Wilcoxon rank sum test
W=2139, 2368, p=9.1x10-9 , 1.3x10-14 ) models of
transposable element replication. Furthermore,
the introduction of beneficial mutations is also
insufficient to generate heterogenic genomic
organizations of transposable elements (Figure
8h; Arm-center Cohen’s d effect size= -0.00062,
0.093; Wilcoxon rank sum test W=1247, 1293,
p=0.99, 0.77). As transposable element insertion can abrogate gene function, the enrichment of gene density in chromosome centers is
then a potential contributor to genomic repetitive organization.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

15
Figure 7. Genomic landscapes of gene and repeat density in Caenorhabditis. (Continued on the following
page.).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

(Continuing from previous page.)
Columns represent the six chromosomes; rows represent species. Here, the gene densities of C. inopinata when
2,489 transposon-aligning genes are excluded are also plotted (last row; the repeat densities are identical
to the row above). 100kb windows are plotted. For repeats, densities are reported as the percentage of the
window that is repetitive. For genes, densities are reported as the number per window because gene length
also covaries with genomic position (Supplemental Figures 21-22). Lines were fit by LOESS local regression.

Discussion
Mobile elements are known to harbor tremendous diversity in their replication strategies.
However, it remains unclear to what extent
repeat taxon-specific evolution shapes the
abundance and chromosomal distribution
of global repetitive content among genomes.
Here, we described just these patterns of transposable element content in five Caenorhabditis
assemblies, and repeat taxon-specific evolution
(repeat_taxonomy.tsv) among lineages appears
widespread in this group. Diversity in the
abundances of various repeat superfamilies
is common. For instance, the Jockey TE
superfamily has expanded in the C. remanei
lineage; the Helitron superfamily of DNA
transposons is uniquely abundant in the C.
briggsae/C. nigoni clade (Supplemental Figure
8; Supplemental material). There is broad variation in repeat content both among and within
genomes across the range of TE taxa (Fig. 3;
Supplemental Figures 4-10; Supplemental
material). Such chromosomal heterogeneity
in repeat density depending on the type of
transposable element has also been observed
in multiple systems, including humans (Myers,
et al. 2005), mice (Shifman, et al. 2006), and
maize (Stitzer, et al. 2019). However, here
elements generally tend to be enriched on
chromosome arms relative to centers, as has
observed in numerous studies in Caenorhabditis
(Figure 2; Fig. 4c; Supplemental Figure 11;
Supplemental material; (Consortium 1998;
Stein, et al. 2003; Fierst, et al. 2015; Yin, et al.
2018)).
C. inopinata obviously bucks this general trend
in repeat organization. Although its high
repeat content has been previously noted

16

(Kanzaki et al. 2018), here we describe its
exceptional repetitive landscape. Despite this
divergent genomic structure, some repeat
taxa in this species exhibit the conventional
enrichment on chromosome arms, primarily
hAT, Mutator, and Helitron DNA transposons
(Fig. 4d; Supplemental Figure 6; Supplemental
material). Additionally, repetitive regions not
obviously related to transposable elements
(such as Satellite DNA, low complexity repeats,
and unclassified repetitive elements) are also
enriched on chromosome arms in C. inopinata
(Supplemental Figure 4; Supplemental material). Thus the breakdown in the repetitive
genomic landscape in this species is repeat
taxon-specific. The exclusion of four repeat
superfamilies that have high abundance and
atypical genomic organization reveal a more
conserved repeat structure (Fig 4c-d; Fig. 5).
Notably, these particular repeat superfamilies
vary greatly in their replicative diversity.
Tc1/Mariner elements are cut-and-paste class
II DNA transposons (Wicker, et al. 2007). RTE
is a class I LINE retrotransposon that uses its
own transcription product to prime reverse
transcription (Lynch 2007; Wicker, et al. 2007).
Bel-Pao and Gypsy are more complex LTR
retrotransposons whose autonomous copies
usually encode retroviral-derived proteins
and use tRNA’s to prime reverse transcription
(Lynch 2007; Wicker, et al. 2007). Thus
variation in the abundance and chromosomal
distribution of diverse repeat taxa underlies
change in repetitive landscapes.
This chromosomal heterogeneity in transposable element distribution among nematode
chromosomes has been widely noted (Duret,
et al. 2000; Rizzon, et al. 2003; Cutter, et al.
2009), and these patterns covary with multiple

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 8. Simulations reveal chromosomal heterogeneity in insertion fitness effects is sufficient for promoting
genomic repetitive organization. 3 MB chromosomes were evolved under multiple evolutionary scenarios.
Plotted are the total number of transposable elements at four points along the chromosome after 50,000
generations. The left column shows scenarios where there were uniformly high rates of recombination along
the chromosome (r= 1x10-8 ); the right column shows scenarios where there were three chromosomal domains
of recombination (boundaries denoted by the dashed lines; chromosome arms r= 1x10-8 ; chromosome centers
r= 1x10-10 ). Gray boxes represent chromosomal regions with deleterious fitness effects of transposable
element insertion (light gray, mean s= -0.003; dark gray, mean s= -0.03; white, s= 0 for all transposable
17
element insertions).(Continued on the following page.).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

(Continuing from previous page.)
When not neutral, fitness effects of insertion were drawn from a gamma distribution. Thick horizontal lines
represent mean transposable element number among simulations (N simulations=50); thin lines represent 1
SDM. Red lines represent scenarios with significant arm-center Cohen’s d effect sizes (Wilcoxon rank-sum
p=7.1x10-18 -6.2x10-9 ); black lines show scenarios with no significant chromosomal organization of repeats
(Wilcoxon rank-sum p=0.54-0.99). "A-C diff" is the arm-center Cohen’s d effect size of transposable element
number between chromosome arms and centers. All scenarios implemented "copy-and-paste" models of
transposable element replication with the exception of (g), which used a "cut-and-paste" model. Brief
descriptions of each scenario are described below (see methods for details):
a. All TE insertions neutral.
b. All TE insertions weakly deleterious.
c. All TE insertions highly deleterious.
d. TE insertions weakly deleterious in center; TE insertions neutral in arms.
e. TE insertions highly deleterious in center; TE insertions neutral in arms.
f. TE insertions highly deleterious in center; TE insertions weakly deleterious in arms.
g. TE insertions highly deleterious in center; TE insertions weakly deleterious in arms; "cut-and-paste" mode
of TE replication.
h. All TE insertions weakly deleterious; beneficial mutations introduced (u= 1x10-9 ).

genomic features that are also non-randomly
distributed along chromosomes (Cutter, et
al. 2009). In C. elegans, recombination rate
is elevated on chromosome arms (Rockman
and Kruglyak 2009), and protein-coding
genes are enriched on chromosome centers
(Consortium 1998). Heterochromatic regions
(Garrigues, et al. 2015) and piRNA’s (Shi, et
al. 2013) are also enriched on chromosome
arms; consistent with this, chromosome arms
are less transcriptionally active than chromosome centers (Garrigues, et al. 2015). As
heterochromatin and small RNA’s have been
connected to transposon regulation in other
systems (Lee 2015), transposable elements
may proliferate in such genomic regions
where insertions are less costly and easier to
control. Further, essential genes are enriched
in chromosome centers in C. elegans (Kamath,
et al. 2003). And, chromosome arms are
associated with each other in physical space
and tend to be tethered to nuclear membranes
(Cabianca, et al. 2019). Such patterns of
these genomic features have been observed
across Caenorhabditis (Stein, et al. 2003; Ross,
et al. 2011; Fierst, et al. 2015; Kanzaki, et al.
2018; Yin, et al. 2018). Taken together, this
suggests that this chromosomal organization

18

is an ancient, defining characteristic of the
Caenorhabditis genome. This may also explain
the counterintuitive observation that repetitive
elements are enriched in high recombining
regions in this system, whereas opposite
patterns are observed in other systems (Rizzon,
et al. 2002; Wright, et al. 2003; Jensen-Seaman,
et al. 2004; Liu, et al. 2009; Pan, et al. 2011)
and are predicted by evolutionary theory
(Hill and Robertson 1966; Langley, et al.
1988). Although it is difficult to disentangle
cause and effect, the heterochromatic, less
gene-dense chromosomal regions have higher
rates of recombination; repetitive elements
accumulate there perhaps because of their
potentially lower fitness effects upon insertion.
We performed evolutionary simulations to
understand how heterogeneity in recombination rate and insertion fitness effects along
the chromosome can influence repetitive
genomic landscapes (Figure 8). Notably, we
found that chromosomal heterogeneity in
recombination rate alone is insufficient for promoting heterogeneity in transposable element
content (Fig. 8a-c, h). This is largely consistent
with previous evolutionary simulations that
suggested that extremely low recombination

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

rates are needed for Hill-Robertson effects
to fix transposable elements (Dolgin and
Charlesworth 2008). Instead, chromosomal
domains of differing fitness effects of insertion
were sufficient for promoting such patterns of
repetitive content (Fig. 8d-g). This suggests
that stronger purifying selection on transposable element insertions in the genomic clusters
of genes in the centers of chromosomes are
driving the conserved repetitive genomic
landscapes in Caenorhabditis.
Indeed, C.
inopinata does not have protein-coding genes
enriched in the centers of chromosomes like
its close relatives (Fig. 7; Supplemental Figures
16-19, 19-20), which is consistent with its
divergent repetitive genomic landscape and
this hypothesis. However, not all transposable
element taxa have lost genomic structure
in C. inopinata (Fig. 3), so the weakened
chromosomal heterogeneity in protein-coding
gene content cannot explain its repetitive
genomic landscape entirely. It is possible
that the four exceptional repeat superfamilies
expanded recently, after C. inopinata lost its
central chromosomal clusters of protein-coding
genes. However, phylogenetic approaches
provide no evidence that such superfamilies
are on the whole much younger than other
transposable element taxa in this species
(although there are a number of young
insertions, Supplemental Figures 12-15). The
role of small RNA regulators on the evolution
of Caenorhabditis repetitive landscapes, and
these types of elements in particular, is
also an important open question because a
number of such genes have been lost in C.
inopinata (Kanzaki, et al. 2018). Particularly,
three genes in the ERGO-1 siRNA pathway
(ergo-1, eri-6/eri-7, and eri-9; (Piatek and
Werner 2014)) are not present in this species
(Kanzaki, et al. 2018). As ergo-1 encodes an
RNA-silencing argonaut protein (Yigit, et
al. 2006), and as small RNA’s are known
to regulate transposable elements in other
systems (Piatek and Werner 2014), the loss of
these genes in C. inopinata poses a tantalizing
line of future research for understanding
its repetitive landscape. Furthermore, the

demographic and evolutionary history of a
lineage can drive variation in the distributions
of transposable elements (Lockton, et al. 2008),
and this remains unexplored in C. inopinata. In
any case, future work on recombination and
the genomic organization of various features in
C. inopinata (such as heterochromatin, spatial
genomic structure, and transcription, among
others) within their evolutionary context will
be needed to better understand the causes of
its divergent repetitive genomic landscape.
C. inopinata was not a lone outlier in one
respect– C. japonica was also observed to have
a high percentage of its gene set aligning to
transposable elements (12%; Supplemental
Figure 18). Previously observed to have high
transposable element content (Fierst, et al.
2015; Szitenberg, et al. 2016), C. japonica shares
notable ecological features with C. inopinata.
They have only been observed on east Asian
islands—C. japonica on Kyushu Island in
Japan (Kiontke, et al. 2002; Yoshiga, et al.
2013) and C. inopinata in Okinawa and Taiwan
(Kanzaki, et al. 2018; Woodruff and Phillips
2018). Moreover, they are both phoretic
host specialists. Caenorhabditis nematodes
generally thrive on rotting plant material
(Kiontke, et al. 2011), and they travel from
one resource patch to another on invertebrate
carriers (Schulenburg and Félix 2017). Many
Caenorhabditis species are promiscuous with
respect to their hosts (including C. elegans,
C. briggsae, C. remanei)(Cutter 2015), whereas
others appear to be host specialists, having
only been found with one invertebrate carrier.
C. japonica is associated with the Japanese
shield bug Parastrachia japonensis (Okumura, et
al. 2013; Yoshiga, et al. 2013), and C. inopinata
disperses on Ceratosolen fig wasps (Kanzaki,
et al. 2018; Woodruff and Phillips 2018). The
proliferation of transposable elements in this
group may then somehow connected to host
specialization. However, some presumptive
host specialists do not have obvious expansion
of transposable element content among their
predicted protein-coding genes (C. angaria,
C. plicata, and C. monodelphis; Supplemental

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Figure 18; Volk 1951; Sudhaus, et al. 2011; Slos,
et al. 2017), and the extent of host preferences
among Caenorhabditis species remains largely
unknown (Cutter 2015). Additionally, there are
many potentially island-restricted Caenorhabditis species whose genomes have yet to be
assembled (Cutter 2015). Thus, the generation
of more genome assemblies, in tandem with
further exploration of Caenorhabditis ecology,
will be needed to frame this question in its
proper comparative phylogenetic context
and address the possible role of ecological
specialization in the evolution of transposable
elements.
Such detailed phylogenetic comparative
methods using more taxa would also be
needed to address the obvious question
regarding the impact of reproductive mode on
transposable element content (Glémin, et al.
2019). Evolutionary theory predicts conflicting
expectations regarding the abundance of
transposable elements in selfing lineages
(Wright and Schoen 1999; Morgan 2001),
with different models of selection leading
to either transposon expansion or reduction.
Additionally, selfing lineages of Arabidopsis
harbor more transposable elements than
outcrossers (Wright, et al. 2001; Lockton
and Gaut 2010). But in agreement with
previous results (Fierst, et al. 2015; Yin, et
al. 2018), we find no obvious pattern among
transposable element content and reproductive
mode, although our phylogenetic sample
is quite small. This is also consistent with
observations in asexual arthropods (Bast,
et al. 2015) and dbelloid rotifers (Nowell,
et al. 2018), that reveal no amplification of
repeat content upon change in reproductive
mode. As the Caenorhabditis genus only has
three independent transitions to self-fertile
hermaphroditism (Stevens, et al. 2019), this
group may not be well-suited for addressing
this question in a comparative phylogenetic
context. However, one study reported that
transposable element content among a broad
phylogenetic sample of nematodes found
no clear predictors of transposable element

20

abundance and concluded that genetic drift
is a major driver of transposon evolution
(Szitenberg, et al. 2016). Although we also see
no clear association of transposable element
abundance with predicted population sizes
here, as they range across at least two orders of
magnitude in the Caenorhabditis genus (Dey, et
al. 2013; Fierst, et al. 2015), future comparative
phylogenetic approaches can also be used to
test the prediction that genetic drift should
influence transposable element abundance.
Regardless of the forces underlying their
proliferation, the exceptional transposable
element expansion in the exceptionallymorphological C. inopinata lineage cannot be
ignored. Whereas many Caenorhabditis species
are largely morphologically indistinguishable,
C. inopinata is twice as long and develops twice
as slowly as its close relatives (Kanzaki, et al.
2018; Woodruff, et al. 2018; Woodruff, et al.
2019), and it thrives in the lumen of fresh figs
instead of on rotting plant material (Kanzaki,
et al. 2018; Woodruff and Phillips 2018). Its
divergent genomic structure is likewise striking. Repetitive elements have been shown to
be a source of adaptive mutations in numerous contexts—peppered moths (van’t Hof, et
al. 2016), oranges (Butelli, et al. 2012), and
stickleback fish (Ishikawa, et al. 2019) all have
evidence of such beneficial insertions. In addition to laying the groundwork for understanding the origins, maintenance, and stability of
genome structure in the face of rampant mobile
element proliferation, this work also sets the
stage for understanding how mobile elements
can promote or constrain rapid morphological
and ecological change.

Supplemental Material
Supplemental Figure 1. Distribution of repeat
densities on chromosome arms and centers.
Supplemental Figure 2. The genomic landscape of repetitive elements in Caenorhabditis
after normalizing genomic position by distance
from chromosome midpoints.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Supplemental Figure 3. Linear model coefficients for the relationship between global repeat density and distance from chromosome
center.

Supplemental Figure 15. Average branch
lengths of repetitive element insertions in C.
inopinata categorized by repeat superfamily
(trimmed alignments).

Supplemental Figure 4. The abundance and
genomic landscape of the dominant repeat categories and the two transposable element classes
in all species.

Supplemental Figure 16. Gene number among
100kb genomic windows in five Caenorhabditis
species.

Supplemental Figure 5. Heat map of the genomic landscape of all repeat categories and
the two transposable element classes in all
species.

Supplemental Figure 17. Distribution of gene
counts on chromosome arms and centers.
Supplemental Figure 18. Predicted proteincoding genes in all available Caenorhabditis
genomes align to transposon-related proteins.

Supplemental Figure 6. The abundance and
genomic landscape of all transposable element
orders in all species.

Supplemental Figure 19. Effect sizes of chromosome position on repeat and gene density.

Supplemental Figure 7. Heat map of the genomic landscape all transposable element orders in all species.

Supplemental Figure 20. Effect sizes of chromosome position on repeat density covaries
with effect sizes of chromosome position on
gene density.

Supplemental Figure 8. The abundance and
genomic landscape of all transposable element
superfamilies in all species.
Supplemental Figure 9. Heat map of the genomic landscape of all transposable element
superfamilies in all species.
Supplemental Figure 11. The relationship between repeat chromosomal structure and total
genomic repeat content among repeat superfamilies in five Caenorhabditis species (not logtransformed).
Supplemental Figure 12. Average branch
lengths of repetitive element insertions in C.
inopinata (untrimmed alignments).
Supplemental Figure 13. Average branch
lengths of repetitive element insertions in C.
inopinata categorized by repeat superfamily
(untrimmed alignments).
Supplemental Figure 14. Average branch
lengths of repetitive element insertions in C.
inopinata (trimmed alignments).

Supplemental Figure 21. Gene length among
100kb genomic windows in five Caenorhabditis
species.
Supplemental Figure 22. Distribution of gene
lengths on chromosome arms and centers.
Supplemental data (statistics_summary.xls;
repeat_classes_genomic_landscapes.pdf;
repeat_orders_genomic_landscapes.pdf; repeat_superfamilies_genomic_landscapes.pdf;
repeat_families_genomic_landscapes.pdf)
are available at Journal. Data, code, and
additional supplemental figures associated
with this study have been deposited in
Github at https://github.com/gcwoodruff/
transposable_elements_2019.

Data deposition and accessibility
Genome
sequences
and
annotations
were retrieved from WormBase ParaSite
(parasite.wormbase.org) and the Caenorhabditis Genomes Project (Caenorhabditis.org).
Data, code, and additional supplemental
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

figures associated with this study have been
deposited in Github at https://github.com/
gcwoodruff/transposable_elements_2019.

Author contributions
GCW re-masked genome assemblies, analyzed
data, made figures, and wrote the first draft of
the paper. AAT performed evolutionary simulations and informed the masking approach.
GCW and AAT revised the paper.

Acknowledgements
We thank Patrick Phillips for sharing genomic
data. Patrick Phillips, Bill Cresko, Peter Ralph,
Andy Kern, and their laboratory members provided helpful comments throughout the development of this work. Jeffrey Adrion provided valuable feedback on earlier versions of
this manuscript. This work was supported by
funding from the National Institutes of health
to GCW (5F32GM115209-03) and to Patrick
Phillips (R01 GM-102511; R01 AG049396).

References
Adrion JR, Song MJ, Schrider DR, Hahn MW,
Schaack S. 2017. Genome-wide estimates of
transposable element insertion and deletion
rates in Drosophila melanogaster. Genome biology and evolution 9:1329-1340.
Albertson DG, Thomson JN. 1982. The kinetochores of Caenorhabditis elegans. Chromosoma 86:409-428.
Bast J, Schaefer I, Schwander T, Maraun M,
Scheu S, Kraaijeveld K. 2015. No Accumulation
of Transposable Elements in Asexual Arthropods. Molecular Biology and Evolution 33:697706.

sequenced genomes. Genome research 12:12691276.
Baucom RS, Estill JC, Chaparro C, Upshaw
N, Jogi A, Deragon J-M, Westerman RP, SanMiguel PJ, Bennetzen JL. 2009. Exceptional
diversity, non-random distribution, and rapid
evolution of retroelements in the B73 maize
genome. PLoS genetics 5:e1000732.
Bégin M, Schoen DJ. 2006. Low impact of
germline transposition on the rate of mildly
deleterious mutation in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Genetics 174:2129-2136.
Benson G. 1999. Tandem repeats finder: a program to analyze DNA sequences. Nucleic acids
research 27:573-580.
Berriman M, Coghlan A, Tsai IJ. Creation
of a comprehensive repeat library for a
newly sequenced parasitic worm genome [Internet]. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1038/
protex.2018.054
Bestor TH. 2000. Sex brings transposons and
genomes into conflict. In. Transposable Elements and Genome Evolution: Springer. p.
289-295.
Butelli E, Licciardello C, Zhang Y, Liu J, Mackay
S, Bailey P, Reforgiato-Recupero G, Martin C.
2012. Retrotransposons control fruit-specific,
cold-dependent accumulation of anthocyanins
in blood oranges. The Plant Cell 24:1242-1255.
Cabianca DS, Muñoz-Jiménez C, Kalck V, Gaidatzis D, Padeken J, Seeber A, Askjaer P, Gasser
SM. 2019. Active chromatin marks drive spatial
sequestration of heterochromatin in C. elegans
nuclei. Nature:1.

Bao W, Kojima KK, Kohany O. 2015. Repbase
Update, a database of repetitive elements in
eukaryotic genomes. Mobile Dna 6:11.

Camacho C, Coulouris G, Avagyan V, Ma N,
Papadopoulos J, Bealer K, Madden TL. 2009.
BLAST+: architecture and applications. BMC
bioinformatics 10:421.

Bao Z, Eddy SR. 2002. Automated de novo
identification of repeat sequence families in

Capella-GutiÃl’rrez S, Silla-MartÃ nez JM, GabaldÃşn T. 2009. trimAl: a tool for automated

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

alignment trimming in large-scale phylogenetic
analyses. Bioinformatics 25:1972-1973.
Casacuberta E, González J. 2013. The impact of
transposable elements in environmental adaptation. Molecular ecology 22:1503-1517.
Clark RM, Schweikert G, Toomajian C, Ossowski S, Zeller G, Shinn P, Warthmann N, Hu
TT, Fu G, Hinds DA. 2007. Common sequence
polymorphisms shaping genetic diversity in
Arabidopsis thaliana. Science 317:338-342.
Consortium TCeS. 1998. Genome sequence of
the nematode C. elegans: a platform for investigating biology. Science:2012-2018.
Cutter AD. 2008.
Divergence times in
Caenorhabditis and Drosophila inferred from
direct estimates of the neutral mutation rate.
Molecular biology and evolution 25:778-786.
Cutter AD. 2015. Caenorhabditis evolution in
the wild. BioEssays 37:983-995.
Cutter AD, Dey A, Murray RL. 2009. Evolution
of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome. Molecular
biology and evolution 26:1199-1234.
Cutter AD, Morran LT, Phillips PC. 2019.
Males, Outcrossing, and Sexual Selection in
Caenorhabditis Nematodes. Genetics 213:2757.
de Koning AJ, Gu W, Castoe TA, Batzer
MA, Pollock DD. 2011. Repetitive elements
may comprise over two-thirds of the human
genome. PLoS genetics 7:e1002384.
Dey A, Chan CK, Thomas CG, Cutter AD. 2013.
Molecular hyperdiversity defines populations
of the nematode Caenorhabditis brenneri. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
110:11056-11060.
Dolgin ES, Charlesworth B. 2008. The effects
of recombination rate on the distribution and
abundance of transposable elements. Genetics
178:2169-2177.

Duret L, Marais G, Biémont C. 2000. Transposons but not retrotransposons are located
preferentially in regions of high recombination
rate in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 156:16611669.
Edgar RC. 2010. Search and clustering orders
of magnitude faster than BLAST. Bioinformatics 26:2460-2461.
Edwards SM. 2019. lemon: Freshing Up your
’ggplot2’ Plots.
Ellinghaus D, Kurtz S, Willhoeft U. 2008.
LTRharvest, an efficient and flexible software
for de novo detection of LTR retrotransposons.
BMC bioinformatics 9:18.
Fierst JL, Willis JH, Thomas CG, Wang W,
Reynolds RM, Ahearne TE, Cutter AD, Phillips
PC. 2015. Reproductive mode and the evolution of genome size and structure in Caenorhabditis nematodes. PLoS genetics 11:e1005323.
Finn RD, Coggill P, Eberhardt RY, Eddy SR,
Mistry J, Mitchell AL, Potter SC, Punta M,
Qureshi M, Sangrador-Vegas A. 2015. The
Pfam protein families database: towards a
more sustainable future. Nucleic acids research
44:D279-D285.
Garrigues JM, Sidoli S, Garcia BA, Strome
S. 2015. Defining heterochromatin in C. elegans through genome-wide analysis of the
heterochromatin protein 1 homolog HPL-2.
Genome research 25:76-88.
Gerstein MB, Lu ZJ, Van Nostrand EL, Cheng
C, Arshinoff BI, Liu T, Yip KY, Robilotto R,
Rechtsteiner A, Ikegami K. 2010. Integrative
analysis of the Caenorhabditis elegans genome
by the modENCODE project. Science 330:17751787.
Glémin S, François CM, Galtier N. 2019.
Genome Evolution in Outcrossing vs. Selfing vs. Asexual Species. In. Evolutionary
Genomics: Springer. p. 331-369.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Guelen L, Pagie L, Brasset E, Meuleman W,
Faza MB, Talhout W, Eussen BH, de Klein A,
Wessels L, de Laat W. 2008. Domain organization of human chromosomes revealed by mapping of nuclear lamina interactions. Nature
453:948.
Haller BC, Messer PW. 2019. SLiM 3: forward genetic simulations beyond the Wright–
Fisher model. Molecular biology and evolution
36:632-637.

Kamath RS, Fraser AG, Dong Y, Poulin G.
2003. Systematic functional analysis of the
Caenorhabditis elegans genome using RNAi. Nature 421:231.
Kanzaki N, Tsai IJ, Tanaka R, Hunt VL,
Tsuyama K, Liu D, Maeda Y, Namai S, Kumagai R, Tracey A, et al. 2018. Biology and
genome of a newly discovered sibling species
of Caenorhabditis elegans. Nature communications.

Hill WG, Robertson A. 1966. The effect of linkage on limits to artificial selection. Genetics
Research 8:269-294.

Katoh K, Standley DM. 2013. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7:
improvements in performance and usability.
Molecular biology and evolution 30:772-780.

Hiraki H, Kagoshima H, Kraus C, Schiffer PH,
Ueta Y, Kroiher M, Schierenberg E, Kohara Y.
2017. Genome analysis of Diploscapter coronatus: insights into molecular peculiarities of a
nematode with parthenogenetic reproduction.
BMC genomics 18:478.

Kent TV, UzunoviÄĞ J, Wright SI. 2017. Coevolution between transposable elements and
recombination. Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences
372:20160458.

Howe KL, Bolt BJ, Shafie M, Kersey P, Berriman
M. 2016. WormBase ParaSite− a comprehensive resource for helminth genomics. Molecular and biochemical parasitology.
Howe M, McDonald KL, Albertson DG, Meyer
BJ. 2001. HIM-10 is required for kinetochore
structure and function on Caenorhabditis elegans holocentric chromosomes. The Journal of
cell biology 153:1227-1238.
Ishikawa A, Kabeya N, Ikeya K, Kakioka R,
Cech JN, Osada N, Leal MC, Inoue J, Kume
M, Toyoda A. 2019. A key metabolic gene for
recurrent freshwater colonization and radiation
in fishes. Science 364:886-889.
Jenner RA, Wills MA. 2007. The choice of
model organisms in evo–devo. Nature Reviews
Genetics 8:311.
Jensen-Seaman MI, Furey TS, Payseur BA, Lu Y,
Roskin KM, Chen C-F, Thomas MA, Haussler
D, Jacob HJ. 2004. Comparative recombination
rates in the rat, mouse, and human genomes.
Genome research 14:528-538.
24

Kiontke K, Hironaka M, Sudhaus W. 2002.
Description of Caenorhabditis japonica n.
sp.(Nematoda: Rhabditida) associated with
the burrower bug Parastrachia japonensis (Heteroptera: Cydnidae) in Japan. Nematology
4:933-941.
Kiontke KC, Félix M-A, Ailion M, Rockman
MV, Braendle C, Pénigault J-B, Fitch DH.
2011. A phylogeny and molecular barcodes
for Caenorhabditis, with numerous new species
from rotting fruits. BMC Evolutionary Biology
11:339.
Langley CH, Montgomery E, Hudson R, Kaplan N, Charlesworth B. 1988. On the role of
unequal exchange in the containment of transposable element copy number. Genetics Research 52:223-235.
Lee YCG. 2015. The role of piRNA-mediated
epigenetic silencing in the population dynamics of transposable elements in Drosophila
melanogaster. PLoS genetics 11:e1005269.
Lockton S, Gaut BS. 2010. The evolution of
transposable elements in natural populations

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

of self-fertilizing Arabidopsis thaliana and its
outcrossing relative Arabidopsis lyrata. BMC
evolutionary biology 10:10.
Lockton S, Ross-Ibarra J, Gaut BS. 2008. Demography and weak selection drive patterns of
transposable element diversity in natural populations of Arabidopsis lyrata. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 105:1396513970.
Liu S, Yeh C-T, Ji T, Ying K, Wu H, Tang HM,
Fu Y, Nettleton D, Schnable PS. 2009. Mu transposon insertion sites and meiotic recombination events co-localize with epigenetic marks
for open chromatin across the maize genome.
PLoS genetics 5:e1000733.
Lynch M. 2007. The origins of genome architecture: Sinauer Associates Sunderland.
Medstrand P, Van De Lagemaat LN, Mager DL.
2002. Retroelement distributions in the human
genome: variations associated with age and
proximity to genes. Genome research 12:14831495.

japonica. Journal of Experimental Biology
216:568-572.
Oliver KR, Greene WK. 2009. Transposable
elements: powerful facilitators of evolution.
BioEssays 31:703-714.
Pan J, Sasaki M, Kniewel R, Murakami H,
Blitzblau HG, Tischfield SE, Zhu X, Neale MJ,
Jasin M, Socci ND. 2011. A hierarchical combination of factors shapes the genome-wide
topography of yeast meiotic recombination initiation. Cell 144:719-731.
Pasyukova E, Nuzhdin S, Morozova T,
Mackay T. 2004. Accumulation of transposable elements in the genome of Drosophila
melanogaster is associated with a decrease in
fitness. Journal of Heredity 95:284-290.
Pedersen TL. 2019. ggforce: Accelerating ’ggplot2’.
Peng JC, Karpen GH. 2008. Epigenetic regulation of heterochromatic DNA stability. Current
opinion in genetics & development 18:204-211.

Morgan MT. 2001. Transposable element number in mixed mating populations. Genetics
Research 77:261-275.

Piatek MJ, Werner A. 2014. Endogenous siRNAs: regulators of internal affairs. Biochemical
Society Transactions. 4:1174-1179.

Liu S, Yeh C-T, Ji T, Ying K, Wu H, Tang HM,
Fu Y, Nettleton D, Schnable PS. 2009. Mu transposon insertion sites and meiotic recombination events co-localize with epigenetic marks
for open chromatin across the maize genome.
PLoS genetics 5:e1000733.

Plohl M, Meštrović N, Mravinac B. 2014. Centromere identity from the DNA point of view.
Chromosoma 123:313-325.

Nowell RW, Almeida P, Wilson CG, Smith TP,
Fontaneto D, Crisp A, Micklem G, Tunnacliffe
A, Boschetti C, Barraclough TG. 2018. Comparative genomics of bdelloid rotifers: Insights
from desiccating and nondesiccating species.
PLoS biology 16:e2004830.
Okumura E, Tanaka R, Yoshiga T. 2013. Speciesspecific recognition of the carrier insect by
dauer larvae of the nematode Caenorhabditis

Price AL, Jones NC, Pevzner PA. 2005. De
novo identification of repeat families in large
genomes. Bioinformatics 21:i351-i358.
Price MN, Dehal PS, Arkin AP. 2010. FastTree
2âĂŞapproximately maximum-likelihood trees
for large alignments. PloS one 5:e9490.
Quinlan AR. 2014. BEDTools: the Swiss-army
tool for genome feature analysis. Current protocols in bioinformatics 47:11.12. 11-11.12. 34.
Revell LJ. 2012. phytools: an R package for
phylogenetic comparative biology (and other
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

things). Methods in Ecology and Evolution
3:217-223.
Rizzon C, Marais G, Gouy M, Biémont C.
2002. Recombination rate and the distribution of transposable elements in the Drosophila
melanogaster genome.
Genome research
12:400-407.
Rizzon C, Martin E, Marais G, Duret L, Ségalat L, Biémont C. 2003. Patterns of selection
against transposons inferred from the distribution of Tc1, Tc3 and Tc5 insertions in the mut-7
line of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 165:1127-1135.
Rockman MV, Kruglyak L. 2009. Recombinational landscape and population genomics
of Caenorhabditis elegans.
PLoS genetics
5:e1000419.

Shifman S, Bell JT, Copley RR, Taylor MS,
Williams RW, Mott R, Flint J. 2006. A highresolution single nucleotide polymorphism genetic map of the mouse genome. PLoS biology
4:e395.
Slos D, Sudhaus W, Stevens L, Bert W, Blaxter
M. 2017. Caenorhabditis monodelphis sp. n.:
defining the stem morphology and genomics
of the genus Caenorhabditis. BMC Zoology 2:4.
Stein LD, Bao Z, Blasiar D, Blumenthal T, Brent
MR, Chen N, Chinwalla A, Clarke L, Clee C,
Coghlan A. 2003. The genome sequence of
Caenorhabditis briggsae: a platform for comparative genomics. PLoS biology 1:e45.
Steinbiss S, Willhoeft U, Gremme G, Kurtz S.
2009. Fine-grained annotation and classification of de novo predicted LTR retrotransposons.
Nucleic acids research 37:7002-7013.

Ross JA, Koboldt DC, Staisch JE, Chamberlin
HM, Gupta BP, Miller RD, Baird SE, Haag ES.
2011. Caenorhabditis briggsae recombinant inbred line genotypes reveal inter-strain incompatibility and the evolution of recombination.
PLoS genetics 7:e1002174.

Stevens L, Félix M-A, Beltran T, Braendle C,
Caurcel C, Fausett S, Fitch DH, Frézal L, Kaur T,
Kiontke KC, et al. 2019. Comparative genomics
of ten new Caenorhabditis species. Evolution
Letters:1-20.

Schnable PS, Ware D, Fulton RS, Stein JC, Wei F,
Pasternak S, Liang C, Zhang J, Fulton L, Graves
TA. 2009. The B73 maize genome: complexity,
diversity, and dynamics. Science 326:1112-1115.

Stitzer MC, Anderson SN, Springer NM,
Ross-Ibarra J. 2019. The Genomic Ecosystem of Transposable Elements in Maize.
bioRxiv:559922.

Schulenburg H, Félix M-A. 2017. The Natural
Biotic Environment of Caenorhabditis elegans.
Genetics 206:55-86.

Sudhaus W, Giblin-Davis R, Kiontke K.
2011. Description of Caenorhabditis angaria n.
sp.(Nematoda: Rhabditidae), an associate of
sugarcane and palm weevils (Coleoptera: Curculionidae). Nematology 13:61-78.

Shapiro JA, Von Sternberg R. 2005. Why repetitive DNA is essential to genome function. Biological Reviews 80:227-250.
Shi Z, Montgomery TA, Qi Y, Ruvkun G. 2013.
High-throughput sequencing reveals extraordinary fluidity of miRNA, piRNA, and siRNA
pathways in nematodes. Genome research
23:497-508.

26

Szitenberg A, Cha S, Opperman CH, Bird DM,
Blaxter ML, Lunt DH. 2016. Genetic drift, not
life history or RNAi, determine long-term evolution of transposable elements. Genome biology and evolution 8:2964-2978.
Tarailo-Graovac M, Chen N. 2009. Using RepeatMasker to identify repetitive elements in
genomic sequences. Current protocols in bioinformatics 25:4.10. 11-14.10. 14.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Repetitive genomic landscapes in Caenorhabditis

Team RC. 2019. R: A language and environment for statistical computing.

Wright SI, Schoen DJ. 1999. Transposon dynamics and the breeding system. Genetica 107:139.

van’t Hof AE, Campagne P, Rigden DJ, Yung
CJ, Lingley J, Quail MA, Hall N, Darby AC,
Saccheri IJ. 2016. The industrial melanism mutation in British peppered moths is a transposable element. Nature 534:102-105.

Yigit E, Batista PJ, Bei Y, Pang KM, Chen C-CG,
Tolia NH, Joshua-Tor L, Mitani S, Simard MJ,
Mello CC. 2006. Analysis of the C. elegans Argonaute family reveals that distinct Argonautes
act sequentially during RNAi. Cell 127:747-757.

Volk J. 1951. Die Nematoden der Regenwurmer
und aasbesuchenden Kafer. Zool. Jb. Syst.
79:1–70.

Yin D, Schwarz EM, Thomas CG, Felde RL,
Korf IF, Cutter AD, Schartner CM, Ralston EJ,
Meyer BJ, Haag ES. 2018. Rapid genome shrinkage in a self-fertile nematode reveals sperm
competition proteins. Science 359:55-61.

Wicker T, Sabot F, Hua-Van A, Bennetzen JL,
Capy P, Chalhoub B, Flavell A, Leroy P, Morgante M, Panaud O. 2007. A unified classification system for eukaryotic transposable elements. Nature Reviews Genetics 8:973.
Wickham H. 2016. ggplot2: elegant graphics
for data analysis: Springer.

Yoshiga T, Ishikawa Y, Tanaka R, Hironaka M,
Okumura E. 2013. Species-specific and female
host-biased ectophoresy in the roundworm
Caenorhabditis japonica. Naturwissenschaften
100:205-208.

Woodruff GC, Johnson E, Phillips PC. 2019.
A large close relative of C. elegans is slowdeveloping but not long-lived. BMC Evolutionary Biology 19:74.
Woodruff GC, Phillips PC. 2018. Field studies
reveal a close relative of C. elegans thrives in the
fresh figs of Ficus septica and disperses on its
Ceratosolen pollinating wasps. BMC Ecology.
Woodruff GC, Willis JH, Phillips PC. 2018. Dramatic evolution of body length due to postembryonic changes in cell size in a newly discovered close relative of C. elegans. Evolution
Letters.
Wright SI, Agrawal N, Bureau TE. 2003. Effects of recombination rate and gene density
on transposable element distributions in Arabidopsis thaliana. Genome Research 13:18971903.
Wright SI, Le QH, Schoen DJ, Bureau TE. 2001.
Population dynamics of an Ac-like transposable element in self-and cross-pollinating Arabidopsis. Genetics 158:1279-1288.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 1. Distribution of repeat densities on chromosome arms and centers. Each point
represents one 10 kb genomic window. After normalizing chromosome positions by distance to
chromosome midpoint, windows were classified as being in chromosome “centers” (middle half of
chromosome) or “arms” (outer half of chromosome). Sina plots (strip charts with points taking the
contours of a violin plot) reveal the distribution of repeat densities of these windows in chromosome
centers and arms for all species. Black horizontal lines, means.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 2. The genomic landscape of repetitive elements in Caenorhabditis after
normalizing genomic position by distance from chromosome midpoints. Here, all chromosomes are
plotted, and “0” on the x-axis represents chromosome midpoints. Columns represent the six
chromosomes; rows are the species ordered phylogenetically as in Figure 1. Plotted are the percentages of
10 kb windows that contain repetitive regions by genomic position. Blue lines are fit by generalized
additive models.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 3. Coefficients (slopes) of linear models of the relationship between repeat density
(percentage of window repetitive) and normalized distance from chromosome center (range=0-0.5; “0” is
the chromosomal midpoint). All model p<0.0001 except for C. inopinata (p=0.27). See Supplemental
Material (supplemental_statistics.xls) for model statistics.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 4. The abundance and genomic landscape of the dominant repeat categories and the
two transposable element classes in all species. The y-axis represents the percentage of the genome
covered by that repeat category. The color gradient follows the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome
position on repeat density as illustrated in Figure 4b. “Low complexity” refers to A-, GA-, or G-rich
regions. “Simple repeat” refers to tandem repeats.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 5. Heat map of the genomic landscape of all repeat categories and the two
transposable element classes in all species. The same data as in Supplemental Figure 6 are plotted. The
color gradient follows the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as illustrated in
Figure 4b. The numbers in the tiles note the percentage of the genome occupied by the given repeat
category. Uncolored tiles represent taxa or categories that were not detected in that species. “Unknown”
are repetitive sequences that were not classified by RepeatClassifier. “ARTEFACT” refers to one
repetitive element in the C. briggsae and C. nigoni genomes that aligned to E. coli in a BLAST search.
“Low complexity” refers to A-, GA-, or G-rich regions. “Simple repeat” refers to tandem repeats.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 6. The abundance and genomic landscape of all transposable element orders in all
species. The y-axis represents the percentage of the genome covered by that repeat category. The color
gradient follows the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as illustrated in
Figure 4b. Some elements in higher taxa were unable to be categorized into lower taxonomic ranks.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 7. Heat map of the genomic landscape all transposable element orders in all species.
The same data as in Supplemental Figure 6 are plotted. The color gradient follows the Cohen’s d effect
size of chromosome position on repeat density as illustrated in Figure 4b. The numbers in the tiles note
the percentage of the genome occupied by the given transposable element order. Uncolored tiles represent
taxa that were not detected in that species. Some elements in higher taxa were unable to be categorized
into lower taxonomic ranks.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 8. The abundance and genomic landscape of all transposable element superfamilies
in all species. The y-axis represents the percentage of the genome covered by that repeat category. The
color gradient follows the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as illustrated in
Figure 4b. Some elements in higher taxa were unable to be categorized into lower taxonomic ranks.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 9. Heat map of the genomic landscape of all transposable element superfamilies in
all species. The same data as in Supplemental Figure 8 are plotted. The color gradient follows the
Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as illustrated in Figure 4b. The numbers
in the tiles note the percentage of the genome occupied by the given repeat superfamily. Superfamilies are
clustered by more-encompassing taxonomic groups, and they are colored by repeat orders. Uncolored
tiles represent superfamilies that were not detected in that species. Some elements in higher taxa were
unable to be categorized into lower taxonomic ranks.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 10. Heat map of the genomic landscape of all transposable element families in all
species. The color gradient follows the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as
illustrated in Figure 4b. The numbers in the tiles note the percentage of the genome occupied by the given
transposable element family. Uncolored tiles represent families that were not detected in that species.
Some elements in higher taxa were unable to be categorized into lower taxonomic ranks.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 11. The relationship between repeat chromosomal structure and total genomic repeat
content among repeat superfamilies in five Caenorhabditis species (not log-transformed). The “armcenter difference” is the Cohen’s d effect size of chromosome position on repeat density as described in
Figure 4b; this is the same data as Figure 4c but not log-transformed. The five most abundant repeat
superfamilies in C. inopinata are labeled. Regression statistics can be found in the text and in the
supplemental material.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 12. Average branch lengths of repetitive element insertions in C. inopinata
(untrimmed alignments). Each point represents the mean terminal branch length of a repetitive element
cluster phylogenetic tree in C. inopinata. Clusters are repetitive elements of the same type as inferred by
UCLUST; trees were inferred from alignments of all genomic insertions of that cluster (see methods).
Clusters with ≥100 insertions were used in this analysis. The terminal branch lengths of each insertion
were used as a measure of divergence. Here, clusters were categorized by whether or not they were in one
of the four exceptional repeat superfamilies in C. inopinata that are highly abundant and have atypical
chromosomal organization (Bel-Pao, Gypsy, RTE, and Tc1-Mariner). Horizontal black line, mean.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 13. Average branch lengths of repetitive element insertions in C. inopinata
categorized by repeat superfamily (untrimmed alignments). Each point represents the mean terminal
branch length of a repetitive element cluster phylogenetic tree in C. inopinata. Clusters are repetitive
elements of the same type as inferred by UCLUST; trees were inferred from alignments of all genomic
insertions of that cluster (see methods). Clusters with ≥100 insertions were used in this analysis. The
terminal branch lengths of each insertion were used as a measure of divergence. Same data as in
Supplemental Figure 11. Here, clusters are categorized by repeat superfamily. Black horizontal line,
mean.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 14. Average branch lengths of repetitive element insertions in C. inopinata (trimmed
alignments). Each point represents the mean terminal branch length of a repetitive element cluster
phylogenetic tree in C. inopinata. Clusters are repetitive elements of the same type as inferred by
UCLUST; trees were inferred from alignments of all genomic insertions of that cluster (see methods).
Clusters with ≥100 insertions were used in this analysis. Trimmed alignments were further filtered to
exclude those <50 bp in length; this led to 265 clusters with untrimmed alignments being pared down to
165 clusters with trimmed alignments. The terminal branch lengths of each insertion were used as a
measure of divergence. Here, clusters were categorized by whether or not they were in one of the four
exceptional repeat superfamilies in C. inopinata that are highly abundant and have atypical chromosomal
organization (Bel-Pao, Gypsy, RTE, and Tc1-Mariner). Horizontal black line, mean.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 15. Average branch lengths of repetitive element insertions in C. inopinata
categorized by repeat superfamily (trimmed alignments). Each point represents the mean terminal branch
length of a repetitive element cluster phylogenetic tree in C. inopinata. Clusters are repetitive elements of
the same type as inferred by UCLUST; trees were inferred from alignments of all genomic insertions of
that cluster (see methods). Clusters with ≥100 insertions were used in this analysis. Trimmed alignments
were further filtered to exclude those <50 bp in length; this led to 265 clusters with untrimmed alignments
being pared down to 165 clusters with trimmed alignments. The terminal branch lengths of each insertion
were used as a measure of divergence. Same data as in Supplemental Figure 13. Here, clusters are
categorized by repeat superfamily. Black horizontal line, mean.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 16. Gene number among 100kb genomic windows in five Caenorhabditis species.
Here, the gene densities of C. inopinata when 2,489 transposon-aligning genes are excluded are also
plotted. The blue line was fit by LOESS local regression.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 17. Distribution of gene counts on chromosome arms and centers. Each point
represents one 100 kb genomic window. After normalizing chromosome positions by distance to
chromosome midpoint, windows were classified as being in chromosome “centers” (middle half of
chromosome) or “arms” (outer half of chromosome). Sina plots (strip charts with points taking the
contours of a violin plot) reveal the distribution of repeat densities of these windows in chromosome
centers and arms for all species. Here, the gene densities of C. inopinata when 2,489 transposon-aligning
genes are excluded are also plotted (last position on x-axis). Black horizontal lines, means.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 18. Predicted protein-coding genes in all available Caenorhabditis genomes align to
transposon-related proteins. The parthenogenetic Diploscapter coronatus is included as an outgroup.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a. The percentage of protein-coding genes that align to transposons in all available Caenorhabditis
genomes. Species are roughly ordered by phylogeny and colored by reproductive mode.
b. The total number of predicted protein-coding genes before (light green) and after (dark green)
transposon-aligning genes are removed.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental figure 19. Effect sizes of chromosome position on repeat and gene density. Plotted are the
Cohen’s d effect sizes of chromosome arms compared to centers on gene and repeat density. Error bars
represent 95% confidence intervals. The gene densities of C. inopinata when 2,489 transposon-aligning
genes are excluded are also plotted (last position on x-axis). These effect sizes are based on repeat
percentages and gene counts in 100 kb genomic windows (same data as Figure 7).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental figure 20. Effect sizes of chromosome position on repeat density covaries with effect sizes
of chromosome position on gene density. Plotted are the Cohen’s d effect sizes of chromosome arms
compared to centers on gene and repeat density. The gene densities of C. inopinata when 2,489
transposon-aligning genes are excluded are also plotted. These effect sizes are based on repeat
percentages and gene counts in 100 kb genomic windows (same data as Figure 7 and Supplemental figure
18). The linear fit is significant (r2=0.67; F=11; β1= -2.8; p=0.029) but dubious as C. inopinata is doublecounted and the sample is small. When C. inopinata (including transposon-aligning genes) is excluded,
the fit remains significant (r2=0.81; F=18; β1= -2.5; p=0.024).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental figure 21. Gene length among 100kb genomic windows in five Caenorhabditis species.
Plotted is the average gene length in that window. Here, the genes of C. inopinata when 2,489
transposon-aligning genes are excluded are also plotted. The blue line was fit by LOESS local regression;
the shaded ribbon is the 95% confidence interval.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/797035; this version posted October 8, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental figure 22. Distribution of gene lengths on chromosome arms and centers. Each point
represents one 100 kb genomic window and the average gene length in that window. After normalizing
chromosome positions by distance to chromosome midpoint, windows were classified as being in
chromosome “centers” (middle half of chromosome) or “arms” (outer half of chromosome). Sina plots
(strip charts with points taking the contours of a violin plot) reveal the distribution of repeat densities of
these windows in chromosome centers and arms for all species. Here, the gene densities of C. inopinata
when 2,489 transposon-aligning genes are excluded are also plotted (last position on x-axis). Black
horizontal lines, means.

