bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Circuits that encode and predict alcohol associated
preference
Kristin M. Scaplena, Mustafa Talayb, Sarah Salamonc, Kavin M. Nuñezd, Amanda G. Watermana, Sydney
Gange, Sophia L. Songa, Gilad Barneaa, Karla R. Kauna,1
a

Department of Neuroscience, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA
c
Department of Pharmacology, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medical and University Hospital Cologne, Germany
d
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA
e
Department of Biochemistry, Brown University, Providence, RI 02912, USA
1
Corresponding author: karla_kaun@brown.edu
b

Abstract
Substance use disorders are chronic relapsing disorders often impelled by enduring memories and persistent cravings. Alcohol, as
well as other addictive substances, remolds neural circuits important for memory to establish obstinate preference despite
aversive consequences. How pertinent circuits are selected and shaped to result in these unchanging, inflexible memories is
unclear. Using neurogenetic tools available in Drosophila melanogaster we define how circuits required for alcohol associated
preference shift from population level dopaminergic activation to select dopamine neurons that predict behavioral choice. During
memory expression, these dopamine neurons directly, and indirectly via the mushroom body (MB), modulate the activity of
interconnected glutamatergic and cholinergic output neurons. Transsynaptic tracing of these output neurons revealed at least two
regions of convergence: 1) a center of memory consolidation within the MB implicated in arousal, and 2) a structure outside the
MB implicated in integration of naïve and learned responses. These findings provide a circuit framework through which
dopamine neuron activation shifts from reward delivery to cue onset, and provides insight into the inflexible, maladaptive nature
of alcohol associated memories.
Keywords: Mushroom Body, Alcohol, Memory, Addiction, Dopamine
Introduction
An organism’s behavior is guided by memories of past experiences and
their associated positive or negative outcomes. The accuracy of these
associations is vital to the organism’s survival. In a changing
environment, however, successful associations should be dynamic and
malleable, providing opportunities for updating associations based on
new information. In substance use disorders (SUD) this flexibility is
often absent or difficult to achieve (Font and Cunningham 2012,
Torregrossa and Taylor 2013). Preference and cravings for drugs of
abuse, including alcohol, persist in the face of aversive consequences
leading to maladaptive drug seeking behaviors and a devastating
economic and social impact on individuals, communities, and society as
a whole. Understanding the circuitry mechanisms that underlie how
these memories are encoded and retrieved is critical to understanding
why these memories are so resistant to change.
Systems memory consolidation suggests that individual brain regions
have a time limited role in the recall of memories as they are slowly
reorganized and transferred to anatomically distinct regions in the brain.
More recent work has suggested that even within a brain region, such as
the hippocampal formation, circuits important for encoding and
retrieval are distinct (Roy, Kitamura et al. 2017, Cembrowski, Phillips
et al. 2018). Strikingly, drugs of abuse, such as alcohol disrupt these
memory systems resulting in enduring preferences, attentional bias for
associated cues (Field and Cox 2008, Fadardi, Cox et al. 2016), and
habitual behaviors. The neuronal genetic, morphologic, and physiologic
diversity that exists within the brain, however, has precluded

mammalian animal models from accessing the level of spatial resolution
in a temporally specific manner required to identify and investigate
microcircuits important for alcohol associated behaviors. We sought to
address how drugs of abuse can shift memory from being flexible to
inflexible by using a combination of behavioral, thermogenetic, in vivo
calcium imaging, and transsynaptic tracing techniques in Drosophila
melanogaster.
The neural circuitry underlying the Drosophila reward response is
complex and remarkably similar to mammals (Scaplen and Kaun 2016).
Drosophila exhibit sophisticated behaviors in response to changes in
their environment, including formation of appetitive memories for food
associated with environmental cues (Waddell 2010, Kahsai and Zars
2011, Schleyer, Saumweber et al. 2011, Herrero 2012, Fernandez and
Kravitz 2013, Heisenberg 2015, Owald, Lin et al. 2015). Drosophila
also form appetitive memories for the pharmacological properties of
alcohol (Kaun, Azanchi et al. 2011, Nuñez, Azanchi et al. 2018). These
alcohol memories are persistent and impel flies to walk over a 120V
electric shock in the presence of associated cues. This type of goal
directed behavior, in the face of aversive consequences, suggest that
alcohol associated memories are more inflexible than memories for
natural reward like sucrose (Kaun et al, 2011). Drosophila provides an
ideal model to investigate these differences as the neurogenetic tools
available in this species permits dissection of memory circuits with
unprecedented temporal and spatial resolution.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

In Drosophila the establishment of alcohol preference requires an
associative central brain structure called the mushroom bodies (MB)
and dopamine (DA) (Kaun, Azanchi et al. 2011). We show that circuits
required for formation of alcohol preference shift from population-level
dopaminergic encoding to two microcircuits comprising of
interconnected dopaminergic, glutamatergic, and cholinergic neurons.
These circuits converge onto the fan-shaped body (FSB), a higherorder brain center implicated in arousal and modulating behavioral
response (Liu, Seiler et al. 2006, Weir, Schnell et al. 2014, Weir and
Dickinson 2015, Pimentel, Donlea et al. 2016, Qian, Cao et al. 2017,
Donlea, Pimentel et al. 2018, Hu, Peng et al. 2018, Troup, Yap et al.
2018). Our results, therefore, provide an in vivo circuit framework for
how drugs of abuse temporally regulate acquisition and expression of
sensory memories, which ultimately results in a shift in behavioral
response from malleable to inflexible.
Results
Dopamine neurons innervating the mushroom body are required for
alcohol reward associations
Dopamine has a long-standing role in addiction and a defined role in
reward-related behavioral learning that spans across species
(Yoshimoto, McBride et al. 1992, Robbins and Everitt 2002, Hyman,
Malenka et al. 2006, Wanat, Willuhn et al. 2009, Kaun, Azanchi et al.
2011, Torregrossa, Corlett et al. 2011, Scaplen and Kaun 2016). In
mammals, midbrain ventral tegmental area (VTA) and substantia nigra
pars compacta (SNc) structures are primary sources of dopamine
responsible for modulating synaptic plasticity within the brain.
However, the neuronal heterogeneity that exists within these structures,
and lack of necessary spatial and temporal resolution to parse apart
subpopulations or isolate individual neurons in behaving animals, have
precluded the field from gaining a complete understanding of how
dopaminergic neurons engage and augment underlying neural activity
both in normal learning and addiction.
We first sought to identify which dopaminergic neurons within the
Drosophila brain are necessary for alcohol associated preference. In
Drosophila a discrete population of protocerebral anterior medial
(PAM) dopamine neurons have an identified role in detecting and
processing natural rewards. PAM neurons are required for the
acquisition of sucrose memory (Liu, Placais et al. 2012, Huetteroth,
Perisse et al. 2015, Yamagata, Ichinose et al. 2015), and known to be
activated by sucrose administration (Liu, Placais et al. 2012, Harris,
Kallman et al. 2015). We first tested the requirement of activity of PAM
dopamine neurons in alcohol associative preference (Figure 1a). For
selective manipulations of these neurons, we expressed the dominant
negative temperature sensitive shibire (shits1) using R58E02-GAL4
(Figure 1b). To establish temporal requirements, we temporarily and
reversibly inactivated neurotransmission by raising the temperature to
restricted levels (30°C) during acquisition, the overnight consolidation
period, or retrieval (Figure 1a). Acquisition was defined as the time
during which an odor was presented in isolation (unpaired odor) and a
second odor was paired with an intoxicating dose of vaporized ethanol
(paired odor). During acquisition, reciprocally trained flies received
three of these spaced cue (odor) and overlapping cue sessions (odor +
ethanol). Post-acquisition, flies were given a choice 24 hours later
between the unpaired and paired odor in a Y maze (Figure 1a).
Retrieval was defined as the time during which the flies chose between
the unpaired and paired odors 24 hours post acquisition.
Previous work established that flies show preference for the cues
associated with ethanol intoxication 24 hour later, regardless of odor

2

identity (Kaun et al 2011). We found inactivating neurotransmission in
PAM dopaminergic neurons during acquisition or retrieval, but not
during the overnight consolidation, significantly reduced preference for
cues associated with ethanol (Figure 1c). Strikingly, despite dopamine’s
established role in modulating locomotor and motor responses (Romo
and Schultz 1990, Lima and Miesenbock 2005, Schultz 2007, Dodson,
Dreyer et al. 2016, Howe and Dombeck 2016, Syed, Grima et al. 2016,
da Silva, Tecuapetla et al. 2018), inactivating PAM dopaminergic
neurons did not affect ethanol induced activity (Supplementary Figure
1). Together, these results suggest that neurons required for encoding
preference are not required for the locomotor response to the acute
stimulatory properties of ethanol. Formation of alcohol memories,
instead, occurs within the circuit framework defined by memories for
natural reward.
Dopaminergic encoding of alcohol memory acquisition occurs at the
population level
To determine how alcohol influenced activity of PAM dopaminergic
neurons to shift memories from malleable to inflexible, we first used a
dopamine staining protocol to label dopamine within the brain
following 10 minutes of air or alcohol. As expected there was a
significant amount of dopamine labeled within the mushroom body and
the majority of fluorescence was limited to the horizontal lobes (Figure
1d). We hypothesized that dopamine fluorescence would increase
within the horizontal lobes of the mushroom body in response to
alcohol, however, quantification of fluorescence did not provide
significant differences (Supplementary Figure 2). We reasoned that
dopamine staining likely could not distinguish between dopamine in the
presynaptic terminals and dopamine in the synaptic cleft, and thus
turned to 2-photon functional calcium imaging to monitor circuitry
dynamics of PAM dopaminergic activity in the context of intoxicating
alcohol. We used R58E02-Gal4 to express GCaMP6m (Chen, Wardill
et al. 2013) and recorded from the PAM presynaptic terminals at the
MB while naïve flies were presented with 10 minutes of odor, followed
by 10 minutes of odor plus intoxicating doses of alcohol (Figure 1e).
Interestingly, early in the respective recording sessions (odor vs odor +
alcohol), changes in calcium dynamics was greater in the odor only
group (Figure 1e, 1f), however with prolonged alcohol exposure, greater
calcium dynamics started to emerge from the population of dopamine
neurons in the odor + alcohol group (Figure 1f). This suggests that the
pharmacological properties of alcohol increase dopaminergic neuronal
activity in vivo, nicely complementing in vitro physiology in VTA
slices that demonstrate VTA activity is increased by moderate alcohol
doses (Brodie and Appel 1998, Morikawa and Morrisett 2010) and
micro dialysis studies that report increased dopamine in the nucleus
accumbens (Di Chiara and Imperato 1985, Imperato and Di Chiara
1986, Yoshimoto, McBride et al. 1992, Di Chiara, Tanda et al. 1996,
Bassareo, De Luca et al. 2003, Howard, Schier et al. 2008), central
amygdala (Yoshimoto, Ueda et al. 2000), and medial prefrontal cortex
(Ding, Oster et al. 2011). However, the complexity of mammalian VTA
circuits has obscured our understanding of whether increased dopamine
release in downstream regions is due to more firing of discrete
populations of VTA dopamine neurons, or recruitment of the larger
population of VTA dopamine neurons.
To address whether specific subsets of dopamine neurons within the
PAM neuron population are necessary for alcohol associated
preference, we blocked transmission in subsets of these neurons using
18 highly specific split-Gal4 lines during both acquisition and retrieval.
We found that preference was disrupted when neurotransmission was
blocked in DA neurons projecting to the medial aspect of horizontal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

MB (Supplementary Figure 3). We therefore selected split-Gal4 lines
that targeted the medial aspect of the horizontal lobe and determined
their role specifically in acquisition of alcohol associated preference.
Surprisingly, unlike long-term sucrose memory (Ichinose, Aso et al.
2015, Yamagata, Ichinose et al. 2015), thermogenetic inactivation of

specific subsets of dopamine neurons innervating compartments of the
medial horizontal lobe during acquisition did not disrupt 24-hour
alcohol associated preference (Figure 2a-h, Supplementary Figure 4a).
Cell counts of the broadest split-GAL4 lines (40B and 42B), HL9 and

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv
Fig. 1. PAM dopaminergic neurons are necessary for encoding alcohol associated preference. (a) Schematic illustrating odor condition preference
paradigm. Vials of 30 flies are presented with three sessions of 10 minutes of an unpaired odor, followed by 10 minutes of a paired odor plus intoxicating
vaporized ethanol. To control for odor identity, reciprocal controls were used. (b) PAM dopaminergic neurons innervate the horizontal lobe of MB.
Confocal stack illustrates innervation pattern using R58E02>MCD-GFP. Dashed line outlines MB region. MB schematic illustrates MB compartments
innervated by PAM neurons. Lower schematic highlights mechanisms of thermogenetics using shibirets1. Temperature is used to inactivate
neurotransmission at restrictive temperatures (30°C), but not at permissive temperatures (20°C). (c) PAM dopaminergic neurons activity is necessary
during acquisition and retrieval, but not consolidation. Bar graphs illustrate mean +/- standard error of the mean. Raw data are overlaid on bar graphs.
Each dot is an n of 1, which equals approximately 60 flies (30 per odor pairing). One-way ANOVA with Tukey Posthoc was used to compare mean and
variance. *p<0.05 (d) Example confocal stack labeling dopamine within the brain. Dopamine labeling is concentrated around the MB. (e) Schematic of
calcium imaging protocol. Flies are exposed to odor followed by odor plus intoxicating vaporized ethanol while resting or walking on a ball. We used the
same odor for both conditions so we could better compare circuit dynamics in response to ethanol and control for odor identity. Fluorescence was
captured for 61sec recording epochs that were equally spaced by 2 minutes. Example maximum intensity fluorescent stacks are shown for each epoch.
(f) Average traces recorded during the odor and odor plus ethanol epochs. Middle panels illustrate the binned DF/F0 and highlights a change in calcium
dynamics as a consequence of ethanol exposure. Lower panels illustrate the average DF/F0 for each fly in each condition at each epoch. Within Subject
Repeated Measures ANOVA with a Bonferroni Posthoc was used to compare mean and variance across condition and time. Scale bar = 50 µm *p<0.05
**p<0.01

R58E02 driver lines revealed that despite targeting nearly all of the
horizontal lobes of the MB, 40B, 42B, and HL9 expressed in
significantly fewer cells (Supplementary Table 1). Together these data
suggest that unlike long-term sucrose memory, subsets of dopamine
neurons are not responsible for the acquisition of alcohol associated
preference, and disruption of this process requires the disruption of
population level dopaminergic activity. Thus, we speculate that alcohol
memories are enduring and less adaptive than sucrose memories
because alcohol engages a larger number of dopamine neurons during
memory acquisition (Figure 2i).
Memory expression is dependent on a sparse subset of dopamine
neurons
A hallmark of reward-encoding dopamine neurons is the gradual
transfer of neural activation from reward delivery to cue onset during
associative learning. During learning, dopaminergic activity shifts from
responding to a reward during acquisition to the cue that predicts a
reward during expression of the associated memory (Keiflin and Janak
2015, Schultz 2015, Schultz 2016). However, the circuit mechanisms
underlying this shift and knowledge about whether all dopamine
neurons do this, or whether a selective subset of dopamine neurons
respond to the cue are unknown. It’s critical to understand this if we
want to understand how drugs of abuse (alcohol) influence these circuits
to result in such long-lasting, inflexible memories.
We therefore used a thermogenetic approach, as previously described,
to temporarily inactivate neurotransmission in subsets of dopamine
input neurons during retrieval, but not during acquisition or
consolidation using a set of highly specific split-Gal4 lines. Strikingly,
only inactivating dopaminergic neurons innervating b`2a compartment
of the MB, using split-Gal4 line 109B, significantly reduced alcohol
associated preference suggesting that these neurons are important for
the expression of alcohol associated preference during retrieval (Figure
3). This suggests population encoding during acquisition shifts to sparse
representation during memory expression.
A dopamine-glutamate circuit regulates memory expression
Systems memory consolidation suggests that there are different circuits
for memory acquisition and expression. Indeed, work in both fly and
mammalian models suggest brain regions have a time limited role in
systems consolidation. For example, recent work shows evidence of
distinct acquisition and retrieval hippocampal circuits for contextually
based fear memory (Roy et al 2017). Our next goal was to map the
circuits through which the dopamine signal during retrieval drives the
behavioral decision to move towards the paired cue.

4

To determine the circuit mechanisms that regulate a shift from
dopaminergic population encoding during acquisition to sparse
representation during retrieval, we tested the requirement of MB output
neurons (MBONs) that aligned with the b’2a dopamine neurons
required for memory expression. Inactivating the output of
glutamatergic MBONs innervating similar compartments during
acquisition, using 4 different split-Gal4 lines, did not significantly
reduce alcohol associated preference (Figure 4A-D). However, similar
inactivation during retrieval identified a single b2 b`2a glutamatergic
MBON important for the expression of alcohol associated preference
(Figure 4E-H).
Thus far, we have defined a putative microcircuit that consists of a
single subset of 8-10 dopamine neurons innervating the b`2a MB
compartment and a single glutamatergic MBON that also innervates the
b`2a MB compartment (b2 b`2a) that are important for the expression
of alcohol associated preference (Figure 4m). Previous work suggested
that b`2a dopaminergic neurons were anatomically connected with
b`2amp MBONs at the level of the MB, however, it was unclear which
MBON b`2a dopaminergic neurons were synaptically connected (Lewis
et al 2015). To confirm connectivity between b`2a dopaminergic
neurons and b2 b`2a MBONs we used the recently developed
anterograde transsynaptic labeling method trans-Tango to label the
postsynaptic targets of the b`2a dopaminergic neurons (Talay, Richman
et al. 2017 Figure 5a). Crossing split-Gal4 line MB109B with transTango flies revealed a`b` MB neurons as postsynaptic to b`2a
dopaminergic neurons (Figure 5a). Interestingly, b`2mp MBON, and
not b2 b`2a MBON were labeled as post synaptic to b`2a dopaminergic
neurons suggesting that connections between b`2a dopaminergic
neurons and b2 b`2a glutamatergic MBONs are not direct, but likely
interact via intrinsic cholinergic MB neurons (Barnstedt, Owald et al.
2016).
To exclude the possibility of a false negative result, we confirmed the
lack of functional connectivity between dopaminergic neurons
and b2 b`2a using dopamine receptor RNAi (Supplementary Figure 5).
RNAi against D1-like receptors or D2Rs in b2 b`2a neurons did not
disrupt alcohol associated preference (Figure 4j-l). Combined, these
data suggest the functional connectivity between b`2a dopaminergic
neurons and the b2b’2a is not required for alcohol associated
preference, but that expression of alcohol memories is occurring
through a circuit consisting of MB cholinergic neurons, b’2a dopamine
neurons and b2b’2a glutamate output neurons. Indeed, previous work
from our lab reported the requirement of D2Rs in MB neurons for
alcohol associated preference (Petruccelli, Feyder et al. 2018). A similar

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

A separate dopamine-glutamate circuit regulates memory
consolidation
Our transsynaptic tracing method suggests a putative direct synaptic
connection between b’2a dopamine neurons and b’2mp glutamatergic
output neurons in regulating alcohol associated preference. We
functionally validated the connection between b`2a dopamine neurons
and b`2mp glutamatergic neurons using dopamine receptor RNAi lines
(Figure 5b). Interestingly, decreasing levels of D2R, but not D1Rs,
reduced alcohol associated preference (Fig 5b), suggesting a D2Rdependent pathway in MB that regulates alcohol memory.
Similar circuit motifs whereby dopamine directly synapses on
glutamatergic neurons in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) have been reported
in mammals and importantly, are altered by alcohol (TranthamDavidson and Chandler 2015). These connections might support
memory flexibility; however, it is unclear the mechanism by which this
works. We hypothesized that neurons important for memory
consolidation in our Drosophila MB circuit might modulate expression
of memory, thereby influencing flexibility of memory. Previous work in
Drosophila reported that activating b`2mp glutamatergic neurons
promoted arousal (Sitaraman et al 2015). Thus, we reasoned that
inactivating these neurons while flies normally sleep would further
decrease arousal and facilitate memory consolidation. To confirm this
hypothesis, we tested how activity of MB074C neurons affected alcohol
memory as this line, which expresses highly in b`2mp, as well as
b2 b`2a, and to a much less extent, g5 b`2a (Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)
aligns with the predicted b’2mp postsynaptic cells. Inactivating these
subsets of glutamatergic neurons during acquisition or retrieval did not
disrupt alcohol associated preference (Figure 5c, d). However, when
these neurons were inactivated during the overnight consolidation,
alcohol associated preference was enhanced relative to controls (Figure
5e). Together these data suggest that dopamine via b`2a neurons inhibit
the b`2mp glutamatergic neuron via D2R receptors which leads to the
expression of alcohol associated preference. In the absence of dopamine
(Figure 3f) or D2R receptors (Figure 5b), preference is disrupted.
Convergent microcircuits encode alcohol reward expression

Fig. 2. Subsets of PAM dopaminergic neurons are dispensable for
encoding alcohol associated preference. (a-h) Using thermogenetics
to inactivate neurotransmission during acquisition in dopaminergic
neurons with varying expression patterns did not disrupt alcohol
associated preference. Split-Gal4 lines tested are ordered by MB
innervation patterns. Bar graphs illustrate mean +/- standard error of the
mean. Raw data are overlaid on bar graphs. Each dot is an n of 1, which
equals approximately 60 flies (30 per odor pairing). One-way ANOVA
was used to compare mean and variance. (i) Model comparing encoding
of alcohol reward memory and sucrose reward memory. Encoding
alcohol reward memory requires population level PAM dopaminergic
activity whereas sucrose reward memory is supported by subsets of
PAM dopaminergic neurons during acquisition (Ichinose, Aso et al. 2015,
Yamagata, Ichinose et al. 2015). The number of dopamine neurons
recruited during acquisition may underlie why alcohol reward memories
are persistent.

circuit motif was recently described in mice where dopamine regulated
the release of acetylcholine from striatal tonically active interneurons on
to glutamatergic neurons resulting in chronic decreases in corticostriatal
activity during amphetamine withdrawal (Wang, Darvas et al. 2013).
This suggests our findings describe a general circuit motif for exploring
circuitry mechanisms of reward and motivation.

The central role for the b’2mp in consolidation and memory
malleability suggests that this region may integrate information from
several circuits required for memory expression. Indeed, there is a
wealth of examples in the literature of the systems balancing input from
integrating neural circuits to drive goal directed behavior (Knudsen
2007, Buschman and Miller 2014, Hoke, Hebets et al. 2017). Previous
anatomical studies predicted that b`2mp glutamatergic MBON and a`2
cholinergic MBON were synaptically connected (Aso, Hattori et al.
2014). trans-Tango confirmed that the b`2mp MBON is a postsynaptic
target of the a`2 MBON (Figure 6a).
We previously showed that inactivating the a`2 cholinergic output
throughout both memory acquisition and expression decreased alcohol
associated preference (Aso, Sitaraman et al. 2014). To establish the
specific temporal requirements of a `2 MBON and determine whether
its corresponding a 2 a `2 dopaminergic input is necessary for alcohol
associated
preference,
we
thermogenetically
inactivated
neurotransmission during either acquisition or retrieval. Inactivating
a`2 cholinergic MBONs or its corresponding a2 a`2 dopaminergic
neurons during expression, but not acquisition of alcohol memory,
significantly reduced alcohol associated preference (Figure 6b-e). The
involvement of a2 a`2 dopaminergic neurons is particularly interesting
because it part of a separate population of dopamine

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Fig 3. Memory expression during
retrieval is dependent on a sparse
population of dopamine neurons. (ah) Thermogenetic were used to
inactivate neurotransmission during
retrieval, but not acquisition, in PAM
dopaminergic neurons with varying
expression patterns. (f) Inactivating b`2a
dopamine neurons during retrieval
significantly reduced preference for
alcohol associated cues. Bar graphs
illustrate mean +/- standard error of the
mean. Raw data are overlaid on bar
graphs. Each dot is an n of 1, which
equals approximately 60 flies (30 per
odor pairing). One-way ANOVA with
Tukey Posthoc was used to compare
mean and variance. *p<0.01 (i) Model of
circuits responsible for encoding alcohol
associated
preference
during
acquisition and circuits responsible for
the expression of alcohol associated
preference during retrieval. This model
highlights the importance of population
level dopaminergic activity during
acquisition, whereas sparse subsets of
dopaminergic activity are important
during retrieval for the expression of
alcohol associated preference.

Fig 4. Memory expression during
retrieval, but not acquisition, is
dependent on a sparse population of
glutamatergic
MBONs.
(a-d)
Thermogenetic
inactivation
of
glutamatergic
MBONs
innervating
similar compartments to b`2a PAM
dopaminergic
neurons
during
acquisition did not disrupt encoding of
alcohol associated preference. (e-h)
However,
inactivating
neurotransmission
during
retrieval
revealed the specific importance of
MBON b2b`2a glutamatergic neuron for
the expression of alcohol associated
preference.
(i-l)
Knockdown
of
dopamine receptors in MBON b2b`2a
did not disrupt alcohol associated
preference suggesting that dopamine
and MBON glutamate neurons interact
indirectly via the MB. Bar graphs
illustrate mean +/- standard error of the
mean. Raw data are overlaid on bar
graphs. Each dot is an n of 1, which
equals approximately 60 flies (30 per
odor pairing). One-way ANOVA with
Tukey Posthoc was used to compare
mean and variance. *p<0.01 (m)
Updated model of circuits responsible
for
encoding
alcohol
associated
preference during acquisition and
circuits responsible for the expression of
alcohol associated preference during
retrieval. Retrieval circuits require
specific subsets of dopaminergic
neurons
and
a
single
MBON
glutamatergic neuron innervating the
b2`a compartment.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

neurons, the paired posterior lateral 1 (PPL1) population, which is
responsible for assigning negative valences to associated cues (Aso,
Herb et al. 2012, Waddell 2013). This suggests that a second
microcircuit in the vertical lobe, which converges onto the b’2mp
neuron, is important for alcohol associated preference.
Interestingly, trans-Tango did not identify the a`2 cholinergic MBON
as a postsynaptic target of a2 a`2 dopaminergic neuron. Similarly,
RNAi against D1-like receptors or D2-like receptors did not disrupt
alcohol associated preference (Figure 6f-h), suggesting that either these
subsets of neurons are not directly connected or their direct connectivity
is not required for alcohol associated preference. This type of
connectivity is striking because it suggests that microcircuits important
for the expression of memory converge on a neuron whose activity
regulates consolidation, which might underlie memory flexibility.
Future studies should address how the relative activity of b`2mp can
augment memory expression.

Alcohol memory expression circuits converge on a higher-order
integration center
Thus far we have identified two MB microcircuits, one in the horizontal
lobe that consists of PAM dopaminergic neurons and glutamatergic
MBONs and one in the vertical lobe that consists of PPL1 dopaminergic
neurons and cholinergic MBONs. Interestingly these two microcircuits
converge on to a separate glutamatergic MBON (b`2mp) that is
important for arousal and when inactivated, facilitates consolidation
(Figure 6i). This suggests a circuit framework through which alcohol
could shift memory from flexible to inflexible. However, it is still
unclear how the MB and MBON activity drive goal directed behavior in
the fly. Emerging models in the MB field suggest that MBON activity is
pooled across compartments and that learning shifts the balance of
activity to favor approach or avoidance (Owald and Waddell 2015). It
remains unclear where this MBON activity converges.
In order to identify potential regions that integrated MBON activity, we
used trans-Tango to map postsynaptic partners of a`2, b`2mp, and

Fig. 5. MBON b`2mp glutamatergic neuron is postsynaptic to b`2a PAM dopaminergic neuron and important for memory consolidation. (a)
Schematic of trans-Tango (Talay, Richman et al. 2017). The GAL4/UAS system is used to express GFP and a transmembrane-tethered form of human
glucagon localized to the presynaptic terminal via Neurexin1. All neurons have the potential to provide a read out of synaptic connectivity with the
expression of a modified human glucagon receptor that has a TEV cleavage site and tethered QF. Postsynaptic neurons are genetically identified when
glucagon activates its receptor, thereby recruiting Arrestin with a fused TEV protease to the receptor releasing QF to translocate into the nucleus and
initiate mtdTomato expression from QUAS. Representative maximum projection confocal stacks reveal the a`/b` MB lobe and MBON b`2mp neurons as
postsynaptic to b`2a dopaminergic neurons. (b) Knockdown of D2Ri within MBON b2b`2a significantly reduced alcohol associated preference relative to
UAS controls, but not GAL4 controls. (c-d) Thermogenetic inactivation of neurotransmission during acquisition or retrieval did not affect the expression of
alcohol reward preference. (e)Thermogenetic inactivation during consolidation significantly increased alcohol reward preference relative to UAS controls,
but not GAL4 controls. One-way ANOVA with Tukey Posthoc was used to compare mean and variance. Bar graphs illustrate mean +/- standard error of
the mean. * p<0.05 **p<0.01 (f) Updated model of circuits responsible for encoding alcohol associated preference during acquisition and circuits
responsible for the expression of alcohol associated preference during retrieval. Scale bar = 50 µm

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

b2 b`2a MBONs. As mentioned previously, a`2 MBON labeled with
MB018B-split-GAL4 identified b`2mp as a postsynaptic target. In a
number of flies, g5 b`2a was also identified as a target, however, this
was less consistent. Interestingly, the dorsal regions of the FSB,
specifically layers 4/5 or layer 6, were consistently identified as
postsynaptic target of a`2 (Figure 7a, c). Strikingly both b`2mp and
b2 b`2a also have synaptic connectivity with the dorsal regions of the
FSB (Figure 7b, d). Together these data reveal the dorsal FSB as an
intriguing convergent region downstream of the MB whose role in
alcohol associated preference should be investigated further (Figure 7e).
Discussion
A classic hallmark of addiction is the enduring propensity to relapse
despite prolonged abstinence. Often relapse is driven by drug associated
cues that evoke powerful and pervasive memories. Here we address the
mechanisms underlying this persistence by investigating how these
memories are encoded and expressed using a combination of
behavioral, thermogenetic, in vivo calcium imaging and genetic
transsynaptic tracing approaches in the fruit fly, Drosophila
melanogaster.
Alcohol is a unique stimulus, because unlike natural rewards or
punishers, it has both aversive and appetitive properties and yet the
long-standing memories of intoxicating experiences are enduringly
appetitive. Strikingly, the expression of this preference is not
immediate. When flies are presented with a choice between the

unpaired odor and the paired odor 30 minutes following acquisition of
alcohol memory, flies avoid the paired odor and instead show a
preference for cues not associated with alcohol (Kaun, Azanchi et al.
2011). Interestingly, cue associated avoidance switches to an enduring
preference 24 hours later. The temporal nature of this valence switch
suggests that, like mammals, the neural circuitry underlying the
acquisition and expression of cue associated preference in flies is both
anatomically complex, temporally distinct, and involves long-lasting
changes to the circuitry mechanism.
Here we show that contrary to adaptive aversive or appetitive memories
in flies (Liu, Placais et al. 2012, Masek, Worden et al. 2015, Yamagata,
Ichinose et al. 2015, Yamagata, Hiroi et al. 2016), encoding alcohol
associated preference is not dependent on a single subset of dopamine
neurons or output neurons projecting from the MB, but a population of
dopamine neurons whose activity emerges over the course of exposure
to intoxicated doses of alcohol. We postulate that an increased
requirement of dopamine neurons contributes to the stability of alcohol
memory. Similarly, increasing the number of DA neurons that encode
an aversive stimulus enhances how long memory lasts in Drosophila
(Aso and Rubin 2016). This suggests a general rule where stability of
memory is encoded by the number of dopamine neurons involved
during acquisition. Most drugs of abuse initially increase dopamine
levels beyond what is experienced during natural reward (Nutt,
Lingford-Hughes et al. 2015, Volkow and Morales 2015, Kegeles,
Horga et al. 2018). Our data suggests that this likely occurs, at least in
part, via recruitment of additional dopamine neurons. Understanding the
mechanism by which dopamine neurons are recruited may provide

Fig. 6. A microcircuit within the vertical lobe is important for alcohol associated preference. (a) trans-Tango experiments confirms that b`2mp
glutamatergic MBON is postsynaptic to a`2 cholinergic neuron. (b-c) Thermogenetic inactivation of a`2 cholinergic neurons during acquisition did not
affect the expression of alcohol associated preference, however, inactivation during retrieval significantly reduced preference. (d-e) Similarly,
thermogenetic inactivation of a2a`2 dopaminergic neurons during acquisition did not affect the expression of alcohol associated preference, however,
inactivation during retrieval significantly reduced preference. (f) trans-Tango experiments reveal that a2a`2 dopaminergic neurons are not synaptically
connected to a`2 cholinergic MBON. (g-i) Knockdown of either D2R receptors or D1R receptors did not affect alcohol associated preference. (j) Updated
model of circuits responsible for encoding alcohol associated preference during acquisition and circuits responsible for the expression of alcohol
associated preference during retrieval. Scale bar = 50 µm

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Fig 7. Circuits important for memory expression at
retrieval converge on the dorsal FSB. (a)
Schematic of fly brain with FSB and its layers
highlighted. The FSB is a 9-layer structure (Wolff,
Iyer et al. 2015), of which layers 4, 5, and 6 are
targets. (b) Confocal stack of FSB highlighting the
postsynaptic signal of b2b`2a MBON in the FSB.
This MBON predominately targets layers 4, and 6.
(c) Confocal stack of FSB highlighting the
postsynaptic signal of a`2 MBON in the FSB. This
MBON predominately targets layer 6. (d) Confocal
stack of FSB highlighting the postsynaptic signal
of b`2mp MBON in the FSB. This MBON
predominately targets layer 4 and 5. (e) Updated
model of circuits responsible for encoding alcohol
associated preference during acquisition and
circuits responsible for the expression of alcohol
associated preference during retrieval. Model
highlights the interconnectivity of the vertical and
horizontal microcircuits and layers within the
dorsal FSB where MBONs converge. Scale bar =
50 µm

powerful insight into why memories for an intoxicating experience are
so persistent.
In order to understand the mechanism of memory persistence, it is
necessary to understand how dopamine encodes memories for cues
associated with reward. In both primates and rodents, studies report a
distinctive response profile whereby dopamine neuronal activity shifts
its response from the presentation of a reward during learning to the
presentation of a reward-predictive cue during expression (Keiflin and
Janak 2015, Schultz 2016). However, given the heterogeneity of
neurons in the VTA and the fact that these responses are typically
observed using extracellular recordings, it is unclear how many and
which dopamine neurons within the VTA and SNc exhibit this
distinctive response to reward-predictive cues. Our intersectional
genetic approach in Drosophila provided the temporal and spatial
resolution to address this question. We found responses to rewardpredictive cues were restricted to a small subset of dopamine neurons
that were active during the initial alcohol presentation. These data
suggest that cue responses are sparsely represented within a discrete
subset of dopamine neurons found within the larger population of
reward encoding dopamine neurons. Having identified a subset of
alcohol associated cue-responsive dopamine neurons, we are now
poised to further examine how the activity pattern of these neurons
change with time and experience in vivo.
Additionally, we found cue-responsive dopamine neurons make direct
connections with a glutamatergic neuron implicated in arousal
(Sitaraman, Aso et al. 2015). Blocking this b`2mp neuron when flies
normally sleep enhanced memory in a D2R-dependent manner. We
propose that b`2a dopamine neurons inhibit b’2mp glutamate neuronal
activity, thus permitting consolidation of alcohol associated preference.
Strikingly, b`2a dopaminergic neurons were previously reported to

inhibit the output of b`2amp MBONs to promote approach behaviors
when flies were presented with conflicting aversive and appetitive odor
cues (Lewis, Siju et al. 2015). Like other animals, flies find CO2
aversive, however, in the context of decaying fruit, flies often approach
appetitive food odor cues despite the innately aversive CO2 odor cues.
Lewis et al (2015) demonstrated b`2a dopaminergic neurons activity
was required to overcome the innately aversive properties of CO2 and
exhibit preference for these combined odor cues. The effects of b`2a
dopamine neuronal inhibition, however, were not long lasting and thus
responses to CO2 remained flexible outside the context of appetitive
food odors. Here, the appetitive food odor, and consequently the
activity of b`2a dopaminergic neurons, appears to act as an occasion
setter, or a discriminatory stimulus that augments an animal’s response
to a cue, thereby changing fly’s typical response to CO2 (Lewis, Siju et
al. 2015). We speculate this neuron also resets the response to a cue
associated with alcohol, which may be critical for overcoming the initial
aversive properties of alcohol. We postulate that repeated intoxicating
experiences change the dynamics of b’2a dopamine neurons during
acquisition or consolidation in a way that create long term changes to
the responsivity of the b`2mp MBON. This ultimately results in an
inflexible memory circuit that supports alcohol associated preference.
Once acquired, distinct processes regulate consolidation and expression
of enduring preferences for cues associated with alcohol intoxication.
We found this process relies on a complex multilevel neural circuit that
extends across brain regions to integrate information and consist of two
converging microcircuits, each with its own subset of dopaminergic
neurons and MBONs. These microcircuits emerge with time, are not
necessary for the acquisition of these long-lasting preference
associations, and converge on the b’2mp glutamate neuron (Figure 8).
The b’2a dopamine neurons, which innervate the b’2mp glutamate
neuron, make indirect connections through odor-coding MB Kenyon

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Fig 8. Proposed circuit important for the
expression of alcohol associated preference
at retrieval. The proposed circuit comprises
two separate microcircuits, one in the
vertical lobe and one in the horizontal lobe
that converge on b`2mp MBON as well as
layers with the dorsal FSB. The vertical lobe
microcircuit includes a PPL1 a`2a2
dopaminergic neuron that have indirect
connections with an a`2 cholinergic MBON
via the MB. The horizontal lobe microcircuit
includes a subset of PAM dopaminergic
neurons (b`2a) that have direct connections
with the b`2mp glutamatergic MBON and
indirect connections with the b2b`2a
glutamatergic MBON. Vertical and horizontal
microcircuits converge on the b`2mp
glutamatergic MBON which is important for
arousal (Sitaraman, Aso et al. 2015) and
layers 4, 5, and 6 of the FSB.

cells to the b2b’2a glutamate neurons. Similarly, the a2a’2 dopamine
neurons make indirect connections with the a’2 cholinergic neuron,
which also innervates the b’2mp neuron. The requirement for dopamine
neurons implicated in encoding both reward and punishment in the
expression of alcohol memory speaks to how seemingly conflicting
events are integrated to produce an appropriate behavioral response.
Our data suggest that activity of these b’2a and a’2 dopamine-MBON
microcircuits is required for expression of alcohol associated
preference. Unlike sucrose or shock memory formation where
dopamine neurons inhibit the response of MBONs to elicit an
appropriate behavioral response following training (Perisse, Yin et al.
2013, Aso, Sitaraman et al. 2014, Hige, Aso et al. 2015, Owald,
Felsenberg et al. 2015, Aso and Rubin 2016, Cognigni, Felsenberg et al.
2018), our data suggest that activation of both the dopamine and output
neurons in b’2a and b’2 compartment are required to initiate an alcohol
seeking behavioral response. Because the b’2mp neuron is not required
for expression of memory, it is likely that its output is integrated
elsewhere in the brain to drive goal directed behaviors.

that appetitive response for alcohol is encoded within a population of
dopamine neurons, and expressed through microcircuits defined by
subsets of these dopamine neurons. These microcircuits converge at
several points; one through a neuron that regulates consolidation, and
another at a downstream target implicated in integration of naïve and
learned responses. This provides a new framework for how drugs of
abuse regulate acquisition and expression of sensory memories, which
ultimately results in a shift in behavioral response from malleable to
inflexible.
Materials and Methods
Fly Strains
All Drosophila melanogaster lines were raised on standard cornmeal-agar
media with tegosept anti-fungal agent and maintained at either 18°C or
21°C. For a list of fly lines used in the study, see Table 1. All Drosophila
melanogaster lines used for trans-Tango were raised and maintained at
18°C in humidity-controlled chambers under 14/10 hr light/dark cycles on
standard cornmeal-agar media with tegosept anti-fungal agent.

Behavioral Experiments
Further investigation of downstream targets of these microcircuits
identified an additional convergent region: the dorsal layers of the FSB,
specifically layers 4, 5, and 6. The identification of the FSB as a
convergence region of MBONs is notable because a popular model
proposes that learned behavioral responses in the fly are a consequence
of pooled activity of mushroom body output neurons, which shifts the
gain to either approach or avoidance behavior (Owald and Waddell
2015). Here we have identified one such structure that is an anatomical
candidate for pooling MB output activity to drive learned behaviors.
Interestingly, although the FSB has an established role in arousal and
sleep, more recent work has defined its role in innate and learned
nociceptive avoidance further supporting its role in integrating MB
output activity (Hu, Peng et al. 2018). We hypothesize that output
signals from the b2b`2a and a’2 neurons are integrated at the FSB to
shift naïve response to cue-directed learned response. Compellingly, the
b’2mp neuron also sends projections the FSB, presenting a circuit
framework through which flexibility of memory could influence
memory expression.
Together, these results provide valuable insight to the dynamic qualities
of memory and how the long-lasting reward memories for alcohol
intoxication are acquired, maintained, and expressed. We demonstrate

10

Odor Preference Conditioning: For behavior experiments, male flies were
collected 1-2 days post eclosion and were shifted from 21°C to 18°C,
65% humidity and placed on a 14/10 hr light/dark cycle. Odor
conditioning was performed similar to Kaun et al. 2011. In short, groups
of 30 males were trained in perforated 14ml culture vials filled with 1ml of
1% agar and covered with mesh lids. Training rooms were temperature
and humidity controlled (65%). Training was performed in the dark with
minimal red-light illumination and was preceded by a 20- minute
habituation to the training chambers. Training chambers were
constructed out of PlexiGlas (30 x 15 x 15 cm) (for details please refer to
(Nuñez, Azanchi et al. 2018)). During habitation, humidified air (flow rate:
130) was streamed into the chambers. A single training session consisted
of a 10 minute presentation of odor 1 (flow rate: 130), followed by a 10
minute presentation of odor 2 (flow rate 130) with 60% ethanol (flow rate
90: ethanol 60:air). Reciprocal training was performed simultaneously to
ensure that inherent preference for either odor did not affect conditioning
scores. For the majority of experiments odors used were 1:36 isoamyl
alcohol and 1:36 isoamyl acetate in mineral oil, however, screen
behavioral experiments used 1:36 isoamyl alcohol and 1:36 ethyl acetate
in mineral oil. Vials of flies from Group 1 and Group 2 were age matched
and paired according to placement in the training chamber. Pairs were
tested simultaneously 24 hours later in the Y maze by streaming odor 1
and odor 2 (flow rate 10) in separate arms and allowing flies to walk up
vials to choose between the two arms. A preference index was calculated
by # flies in the Paired Odor Vial- # flies in the Unpaired Odor Vial)/ total
# of flies that climbed. A conditioned preference index (CPI) was
calculated by the averaging preference indexes from reciprocal groups.
All data are reported as CPI. All plots were generated in RStudio.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Odor Sensitivity: Odor sensitivity was evaluated at restrictive
temperatures (30°C). Odors used were 1:36 iso-amyl alcohol in mineral
oil and 1:36 is-amyl acetate in mineral oil. Groups of 30 naïve males were
presented with either an odor (flow rate 10) or air streamed through
mineral oil in opposite arms of the Y. Preference index was calculated by
# flies in odor vial- # flies in air vial)/ total # flies that climbed for each
individual odor.
Ethanol Sensitivity: Ethanol sensitivity was evaluated in the recently
developed flyGrAM assay (Scaplen and Mei et al 2019). Briefly, for
thermogenetic inactivation, 10 flies were placed into arena chambers and
placed in a 30°C incubator for 20 minutes prior to testing. The arena was
then transferred to a preheated (30°C) light sealed box and connected to
a vaporized ethanol/humidified air delivery system. Flies were given an
additional 15 minutes to acclimate to the box before recordings began.
Group activity was recorded (33 frames/sec) for five minutes of baseline,
followed by 10 minutes of ethanol administration and five minutes of
following ethanol exposure. Activity was binned by 10 seconds and
averaged within each genotype. Mean group activity is plotted as a line
across time with standard error of the mean overlaid. All activity plots
were generated in RStudio.

trans-Tango Immunohistochemistry and Microscopy
Experiments were performed according to the published FlyLight
protocols with minor modifications. Briefly, either adult flies that are 15-20
days old were cold anaesthetized on ice, de-waxed in 70% ethanol
dissected in cold Schneider’s Insect Medium (S2). Within 20 minutes of
dissection, tissue was incubated in 2% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in S2 at
room temperature for 55 minutes. After fixation, samples were rinsed with
phosphate buffered saline with 0.5% Triton X-100 (PBT) and washed 4
times for 15 minutes at room temperature. Following PBT washes, PBT
was removed and samples were incubated in SNAP substrate diluted in
PBT (SNAP-Surface649, NEB S9159S; 1:1000) for 1 hour at room
temperature. Samples were then rinsed and washed 3 times for 10
minutes at room temperature and then blocked in 5% heat-inactivated
goat serum in PBT for 90 minutes at room temperature and incubated
with primary antibodies (Rabbit α-GFP Polyclonal (1:1000), Life Tech
#A11122, Rat α-HA Monoclonal (1:100), Roche #11867423001) for two
overnights at 4°C. Subsequently, samples were rinsed and washed 4
times for 15 minutes in 0.5% PBT and incubated in secondary antibodies
(Goat α-Rabbit AF488 (1:400), Life Tech #A11034, Goat α-Rat AF568
(1:400), Life Tech #A11077) diluted in 5% goat serum in PBT for 2-3
overnights at 4°C. Samples were then rinsed and washed 4 times for 15
minutes in 0.5% PBT at room temperature and prepared for DPX
mounting. Briefly, samples were fixed a second time in 4% PFA in PBS
for 4 hours at room temperature and then washed 4 times in PBT at room
temperature. Samples were rinsed for 10 minutes in PBS, placed on PLLdipped cover glass, and dehydrated in successive baths of ethanol for 10
minutes each. Samples were then soaked 3 times in xylene for 5 minutes
each and mounted using DPX. Confocal images were obtained using a
Zeiss, LSM800 with ZEN software (Zeiss, version 2.1) with auto Z
brightness correction to generate a homogeneous signal where it seemed
necessary, and were formatted using Fiji software (http://fiji.sc).

Dopamine Immunohistochemistry and Microscopy
Groups of flies were exposed to either 10 minutes of air or 10 minutes of
ethanol and dissected within 15 minutes of exposure on ice.
Immunohistochemistry was performed according to (Cichewicz, Garren et
al. 2017). With 15 minutes of dissection, tissue was transferred to fix
(1.25% glutaraldehyde in 1% PM) for 3-4 hours at 4°C. Tissue was
subsequently washed 3 times for 20 minutes in PM and reduced in 1%
sodium borohydride. Then the tissue was washed 2 times for 20 minutes
before a final wash in PMBT. Tissue was blocked in 1% goat serum in
PMBT overnight at 4°C and incubated in primary antibody (Mouse antidopamine (1:40) Millipore Inc, #MAB5300) for 48 hours at 4°C. Following
primary antibody incubation, tissue was washed 3 times in PBT for 20
minutes at room temperature and incubated in secondary antibody (Goat
anti mouse 488 (1:200 in PBT) Thermo #A11029) for 24 hours at 4°C.
The following day tissue was washed 2 times for 20 minutes in PBT and
then overnight in fresh PBT. Tissue was rinsed quickly in PBS, cleared in
FocusClear and mounted in MountClear (Cell Explorer Labs). Confocal
images were obtained using a Zeiss, LSM800 with ZEN software (Zeiss,
version 2.1). Microscope settings were established using ethanol tissue
before imaging air and ethanol samples.

Dopamine fluorescence analysis
Fluorescence was quantified in Fiji (Schindelin, Arganda-Carreras et al.
2012) using Segmentation Editor and 3D Manager (Ollion, Cochennec et
al. 2013). In segmentation editor ROIs were defined using the selection

tool brush to outline the MB in each slice and also outside a background
region immediately ventral to MB that lacked defined fluorescent
processes. 3D ROIs of the MB and control region were created by
interpolating across slices. Geometric and intensity measurements were
calculated for each ROI in 3D Manager and exported to CSV files.
Integrated density for each ROI was normalized by the integrated density
of control regions. Average integrated density for air and ethanol
exposures are reported. All fluorescence quantifications were performed
by a blinded experimenter.

Calcium Imaging Protocol and Analysis
To express GCaMP6m in PAM neurons, UAS-GCaMP6m virgin female
flies were crossed to male flies containing the R58E02-GAL4 driver. As
previously mentioned, all flies were raised on standard cornmeal agar
food media with tegosept anti-fungal agent and maintained on a 14/10hour light/dark cycle at 24°C and 65% humidity.
Fly Preparation. Male flies were selected for imaging six days posteclosion. Flies were briefly anesthetized on ice to transfer and fix to an
experimental holder made out of heavy-duty aluminum foil. The fly was
placed into an H-shaped hold cut out of the foil and glued in place using
epoxy (5-min Epoxy, Devcon). The head was tilted about 70° to remove
the cuticle from the back of the fly head. All legs were free to move, the
proboscis and antenna remained intact and unglued. Once the epoxy
was dry, the holder was filled with Drosophila Adult Hemolymph-Like
Saline (AHLS). The cuticle was removed using a tungsten wire (Roboz
Surgical Instruments Tungsten Dissecting Needle, .125 mm, Ultra Fine
(Pk 10)) and forceps #5. The prepared fly in its holder was positioned on
a customized stand underneath the two-photon scope. The position of the
ball and the stream delivery tubes were manually adjusted to the fly’s
position in the holder.
Imaging paradigm. Calcium imaging recordings were performed with a
two-photon resonance microscope (Scientifica). Fluorescence was
recorded from the PAM neurons innervating the mushroom body for a
total duration of 80 to 95 minutes. The first 10 minutes the fly was
presented an air stream, followed by 10 minutes of isoamyl alcohol. The
fly was then presented with 10-minutes of isoamyl alcohol paired with
ethanol followed by 50 minutes of streaming air. To avoid bleaching
effects and to match the higher resolution imaging properties, the
recording was not throughout the entire paradigm but spaced with
imaging intervals of 61.4 seconds. Recordings were performed using
SciScan Resonance Software (Scientifica). The laser was operated at
930 nm wavelength at an intensity of 7.5-8mW. Images were acquired at
512 x 512-pixel resolution with an average of 30.9 frames per second.
Recordings lasted 1900 frames which equals 61.5 seconds. Recordings
were performed at 18.5°C room temperature and 59% humidity.
Imaging analysis. Data were registered, processed, and extracted using
a custom matlab GUI (Chris Deister github.com/cdesiter). Calcium image
files (.tiff) comprising of 1900 frames taken at 30.94 frames per second
rate (61.4 seconds), were initially averaged every 5 frames to downsize
the .tiff image files to 380 frames. Image files were then aligned and
registered in X-Y using a 15-50 frame average as a template. ROIs were
constructed over the MB lobes using non-negative matrix factorization to
identify active regions and then subsequently segmented to create the
ROIs. Fluorescence values were extracted from identified ROIs and
∆F/Fo measurements were created using a moving-average of 75 frames
to calculate the baseline fluorescence (Fo). Average fluorescence traces
across flies (n = 6) were visualized using ggplot in R studio. Fiji
(Schindelin, Arganda-Carreras et al. 2012) was used to construct heatmaps visualizing calcium activity. Calcium image files were summated
across 1900 frames to create Z-projections. A heat gradient was used to
visualize calcium activity magnitude.

qRT-PCR
qRT-PCR methods have been described previously (Petruccelli, Feyder
et al. 2018). In brief, total RNA was extracted from approximately 100
heads using Trizol (Ambion, Life Technologies) and treated with DNase
(Ambion DNA-Free Kit). Equal amounts of RNA (1 µg) were reversetranscribed into cDNA (Applied Biosystems) for each of the samples.
Then, Biological (R3) and technical (R2) replicates were analyzed with
Sybr Green Real-Time PCR (BioRad, ABI PRISM 7700 Sequence
Detection System) performed using the following PCR conditions: 15 s
95°C, 1 min 55°C, 40x. Primer sequences can be found in
Supplementary Table 4. Across all samples and targets, Ct threshold and
amplification start/stop was set to 0.6 and manually adjusted,
respectively. All target genes were initially normalized to CG13646
expression for comparative DCt method analysis, then compared to
control genotype to assess fold enrichment (DD Ct method).

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
This article contains supporting information online.

Chen, T. W., T. J. Wardill, Y. Sun, S. R. Pulver, S. L. Renninger, A.
Baohan, E. R. Schreiter, R. A. Kerr, M. B. Orger, V. Jayaraman, L.
L. Looger, K. Svoboda and D. S. Kim (2013). "Ultrasensitive
fluorescent proteins for imaging neuronal activity." Nature
499(7458): 295-300.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Smith Family Award Program for
Excellence in Biomedical Research, United States, the Israel Binational
Science Foundation Start Up Grant 2015005, the Carney Institute for
Brain Science Center for Biomedical Research Excellence “Center for
Nervous System Function” (NIGMS P20GM103645), NIAAA
(R01AA024434), and the Rhode Island Foundation Medical Research
Fund 20144133. We thank all of the Kaun lab members for fruitful
discussions and feedback on earlier versions of this manuscript. We also
thank the Drosophila community, particularly Yoshinori Aso and Gerry
Rubin, the Bloomington Stock Center, and the Vienna Drosophila
RNAi Center for sharing fly stocks. Yoshinori Aso also provided
confocal stacks of MB042B and MB040B used for cell counting. We
thank Thomas Boudier and Stefan Helfrich for helpful software advice,
Jay Hirsh for reagents and advice, and Christopher Diester and other
members of the Moore lab for calcium analysis guidance. Finally, we
thank John McGeary, Tara White, and Daniel Dombeck for helpful
comments on earlier version of this manuscript. BioRxiv Template from
the Finkelstein Lab was used for formatting this manuscript
(https://github.com/finkelsteinlab/BioRxiv-Template).

Cichewicz, K., E. J. Garren, C. Adiele, Y. Aso, Z. Wang, M. Wu, S.
Birman, G. M. Rubin and J. Hirsh (2017). "A new brain dopaminedeficient Drosophila and its pharmacological and genetic rescue."
Genes Brain Behav 16(3): 394-403.

References
Aso, Y., D. Hattori, Y. Yu, R. M. Johnston, N. A. Iyer, T. T. Ngo, H.
Dionne, L. F. Abbott, R. Axel, H. Tanimoto and G. M. Rubin (2014).
"The neuronal architecture of the mushroom body provides a logic
for associative learning." Elife 3: e04577.
Aso, Y., A. Herb, M. Ogueta, I. Siwanowicz, T. Templier, A. B. Friedrich,
K. Ito, H. Scholz and H. Tanimoto (2012). "Three dopamine
pathways induce aversive odor memories with different stability."
PLoS Genet 8(7): e1002768.
Aso, Y. and G. M. Rubin (2016). "Dopaminergic neurons write and update
memories with cell-type-specific rules." Elife 5.
Aso, Y., D. Sitaraman, T. Ichinose, K. R. Kaun, K. Vogt, G. BelliartGuerin, P. Y. Placais, A. A. Robie, N. Yamagata, C. Schnaitmann,
W. J. Rowell, R. M. Johnston, T. T. Ngo, N. Chen, W. Korff, M. N.
Nitabach, U. Heberlein, T. Preat, K. M. Branson, H. Tanimoto and G.
M. Rubin (2014). "Mushroom body output neurons encode valence
and guide memory-based action selection in Drosophila." Elife 3:
e04580.
Barnstedt, O., D. Owald, J. Felsenberg, R. Brain, J. P. Moszynski, C. B.
Talbot, P. N. Perrat and S. Waddell (2016). "Memory-Relevant
Mushroom Body Output Synapses Are Cholinergic." Neuron 89(6):
1237-1247.
Bassareo, V., M. A. De Luca, M. Aresu, A. Aste, T. Ariu and G. Di Chiara
(2003). "Differential adaptive properties of accumbens shell
dopamine responses to ethanol as a drug and as a motivational
stimulus." Eur J Neurosci 17(7): 1465-1472.

Claridge-Chang, A., R. D. Roorda, E. Vrontou, L. Sjulson, H. Li, J. Hirsh
and G. Miesenbock (2009). "Writing memories with lightaddressable reinforcement circuitry." Cell 139(2): 405-415.
Cognigni, P., J. Felsenberg and S. Waddell (2018). "Do the right thing:
neural network mechanisms of memory formation, expression and
update in Drosophila." Curr Opin Neurobiol 49: 51-58.
da Silva, J. A., F. Tecuapetla, V. Paixao and R. M. Costa (2018).
"Dopamine neuron activity before action initiation gates and
invigorates future movements." Nature 554(7691): 244-248.
Di Chiara, G. and A. Imperato (1985). "Ethanol preferentially stimulates
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of freely moving rats."
Eur J Pharmacol 115(1): 131-132.
Di Chiara, G., G. Tanda and E. Carboni (1996). "Estimation of in-vivo
neurotransmitter release by brain microdialysis: the issue of validity."
Behav Pharmacol 7(7): 640-657.
Dietzl, G., D. Chen, F. Schnorrer, K. C. Su, Y. Barinova, M. Fellner, B.
Gasser, K. Kinsey, S. Oppel, S. Scheiblauer, A. Couto, V. Marra, K.
Keleman and B. J. Dickson (2007). "A genome-wide transgenic
RNAi library for conditional gene inactivation in Drosophila." Nature
448(7150): 151-156.
Ding, Z. M., S. M. Oster, S. R. Hall, E. A. Engleman, S. R. Hauser, W. J.
McBride and Z. A. Rodd (2011). "The stimulating effects of ethanol
on ventral tegmental area dopamine neurons projecting to the
ventral pallidum and medial prefrontal cortex in female Wistar rats:
regional difference and involvement of serotonin-3 receptors."
Psychopharmacology (Berl) 216(2): 245-255.
Dodson, P. D., J. K. Dreyer, K. A. Jennings, E. C. Syed, R. WadeMartins, S. J. Cragg, J. P. Bolam and P. J. Magill (2016).
"Representation of spontaneous movement by dopaminergic
neurons is cell-type selective and disrupted in parkinsonism." Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 113(15): E2180-2188.
Donlea, J. M., D. Pimentel, C. B. Talbot, A. Kempf, J. J. Omoto, V.
Hartenstein and G. Miesenbock (2018). "Recurrent Circuitry for
Balancing Sleep Need and Sleep." Neuron 97(2): 378-389 e374.
Fadardi, J. S., W. M. Cox and A. Rahmani (2016). "Neuroscience of
attentional processes for addiction medicine: from brain
mechanisms to practical considerations." Prog Brain Res 223: 7789.
Fernandez, M. P. and E. A. Kravitz (2013). "Aggression and courtship in
Drosophila: pheromonal communication and sex recognition." J
Comp Physiol A Neuroethol Sens Neural Behav Physiol 199(11):
1065-1076.
Field, M. and W. M. Cox (2008). "Attentional bias in addictive behaviors:
a review of its development, causes, and consequences." Drug
Alcohol Depend 97(1-2): 1-20.

Brodie, M. S. and S. B. Appel (1998). "The effects of ethanol on
dopaminergic neurons of the ventral tegmental area studied with
intracellular recording in brain slices." Alcohol Clin Exp Res 22(1):
236-244.

Font, L. and C. L. Cunningham (2012). "Post-retrieval propranolol
treatment does not modulate reconsolidation or extinction of
ethanol-induced conditioned place preference." Pharmacol Biochem
Behav 101(2): 222-230.

Buschman, T. J. and E. K. Miller (2014). "Goal-direction and top-down
control." Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 369(1655).

Harris, D. T., B. R. Kallman, B. C. Mullaney and K. Scott (2015).
"Representations of Taste Modality in the Drosophila Brain." Neuron
86(6): 1449-1460.

Cembrowski, M. S., M. G. Phillips, S. F. DiLisio, B. C. Shields, J.
Winnubst, J. Chandrashekar, E. Bas and N. Spruston (2018).
"Dissociable Structural and Functional Hippocampal Outputs via
Distinct Subiculum Cell Classes." Cell 173(5): 1280-1292 e1218.

12

Heisenberg, M. (2015). "Outcome learning, outcome expectations, and
intentionality in Drosophila." Learn Mem 22(6): 294-298.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Herrero, P. (2012). "Fruit fly behavior in response to chemosensory
signals." Peptides 38(2): 228-237.

subset of dopamine neurons signals reward for odour memory in
Drosophila." Nature 488(7412): 512-516.

Hige, T., Y. Aso, M. N. Modi, G. M. Rubin and G. C. Turner (2015).
"Heterosynaptic Plasticity Underlies Aversive Olfactory Learning in
Drosophila." Neuron 88(5): 985-998.

Liu, G., H. Seiler, A. Wen, T. Zars, K. Ito, R. Wolf, M. Heisenberg and L.
Liu (2006). "Distinct memory traces for two visual features in the
Drosophila brain." Nature 439(7076): 551-556.

Hoke, K. L., E. A. Hebets and D. Shizuka (2017). "Neural Circuitry for
Target Selection and Action Selection in Animal Behavior." Integr
Comp Biol 57(4): 808-819.

Masek, P., K. Worden, Y. Aso, G. M. Rubin and A. C. Keene (2015). "A
dopamine-modulated neural circuit regulating aversive taste memory
in Drosophila." Curr Biol 25(11): 1535-1541.

Howard, E. C., C. J. Schier, J. S. Wetzel, C. L. Duvauchelle and R. A.
Gonzales (2008). "The shell of the nucleus accumbens has a higher
dopamine response compared with the core after non-contingent
intravenous ethanol administration." Neuroscience 154(3): 10421053.

Morikawa, H. and R. A. Morrisett (2010). "Ethanol action on dopaminergic
neurons in the ventral tegmental area: interaction with intrinsic ion
channels and neurotransmitter inputs." Int Rev Neurobiol 91: 235288.

Howe, M. W. and D. A. Dombeck (2016). "Rapid signalling in distinct
dopaminergic axons during locomotion and reward." Nature
535(7613): 505-510.
Hu, W., Y. Peng, J. Sun, F. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Li and Y.
Zhong (2018). "Fan-Shaped Body Neurons in the Drosophila Brain
Regulate Both Innate and Conditioned Nociceptive Avoidance." Cell
Rep 24(6): 1573-1584.
Huetteroth, W., E. Perisse, S. Lin, M. Klappenbach, C. Burke and S.
Waddell (2015). "Sweet taste and nutrient value subdivide rewarding
dopaminergic neurons in Drosophila." Curr Biol 25(6): 751-758.
Hyman, S. E., R. C. Malenka and E. J. Nestler (2006). "Neural
mechanisms of addiction: the role of reward-related learning and
memory." Annu Rev Neurosci 29: 565-598.
Ichinose, T., Y. Aso, N. Yamagata, A. Abe, G. M. Rubin and H. Tanimoto
(2015). "Reward signal in a recurrent circuit drives appetitive longterm memory formation." Elife 4: e10719.
Imperato, A. and G. Di Chiara (1986). "Preferential stimulation of
dopamine release in the nucleus accumbens of freely moving rats
by ethanol." J Pharmacol Exp Ther 239(1): 219-228.
Kahsai, L. and T. Zars (2011). "Learning and memory in Drosophila:
behavior, genetics, and neural systems." Int Rev Neurobiol 99: 139167.

Nuñez, K. M., R. Azanchi and K. R. Kaun (2018). "Cue-Induced Ethanol
Seeking in Drosophila melanogaster Is Dose-Dependent." Front
Physiol 9: 438.
Nutt, D. J., A. Lingford-Hughes, D. Erritzoe and P. R. Stokes (2015). "The
dopamine theory of addiction: 40 years of highs and lows." Nat Rev
Neurosci 16(5): 305-312.
Ollion, J., J. Cochennec, F. Loll, C. Escude and T. Boudier (2013).
"TANGO: a generic tool for high-throughput 3D image analysis for
studying nuclear organization." Bioinformatics 29(14): 1840-1841.
Owald, D., J. Felsenberg, C. B. Talbot, G. Das, E. Perisse, W. Huetteroth
and S. Waddell (2015). "Activity of defined mushroom body output
neurons underlies learned olfactory behavior in Drosophila." Neuron
86(2): 417-427.
Owald, D., S. Lin and S. Waddell (2015). "Light, heat, action: neural
control of fruit fly behaviour." Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci
370(1677): 20140211.
Owald, D. and S. Waddell (2015). "Olfactory learning skews mushroom
body output pathways to steer behavioral choice in Drosophila." Curr
Opin Neurobiol 35: 178-184.
Perisse, E., Y. Yin, A. C. Lin, S. Lin, W. Huetteroth and S. Waddell
(2013). "Different kenyon cell populations drive learned approach
and avoidance in Drosophila." Neuron 79(5): 945-956.

Kaun, K. R., R. Azanchi, Z. Maung, J. Hirsh and U. Heberlein (2011). "A
Drosophila model for alcohol reward." Nat Neurosci 14(5): 612-619.

Petruccelli, E., M. Feyder, N. Ledru, Y. Jaques, E. Anderson and K. R.
Kaun (2018). "Alcohol Activates Scabrous-Notch to Influence
Associated Memories." Neuron 100(5): 1209-1223 e1204.

Kegeles, L. S., G. Horga, R. Ghazzaoui, R. Rosengard, N. Ojeil, X. Xu,
M. Slifstein, I. Petrakis, S. S. O'Malley, J. H. Krystal and A. AbiDargham (2018). "Enhanced Striatal Dopamine Release to
Expectation of Alcohol: A Potential Risk Factor for Alcohol Use
Disorder." Biol Psychiatry Cogn Neurosci Neuroimaging 3(7): 591598.

Pfeiffer, B. D., A. Jenett, A. S. Hammonds, T. T. Ngo, S. Misra, C.
Murphy, A. Scully, J. W. Carlson, K. H. Wan, T. R. Laverty, C.
Mungall, R. Svirskas, J. T. Kadonaga, C. Q. Doe, M. B. Eisen, S. E.
Celniker and G. M. Rubin (2008). "Tools for neuroanatomy and
neurogenetics in Drosophila." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105(28):
9715-9720.

Keiflin, R. and P. H. Janak (2015). "Dopamine Prediction Errors in
Reward Learning and Addiction: From Theory to Neural Circuitry."
Neuron 88(2): 247-263.

Pfeiffer, B. D., J. W. Truman and G. M. Rubin (2012). "Using translational
enhancers to increase transgene expression in Drosophila." Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 109(17): 6626-6631.

Keleman, K., T. Micheler and V. p. members (2009.8.5). "RNAi-phiC31
construct and insertion data submitted by the Vienna Drosophila
RNAi Center ".

Pimentel, D., J. M. Donlea, C. B. Talbot, S. M. Song, A. J. F. Thurston
and G. Miesenbock (2016). "Operation of a homeostatic sleep
switch." Nature 536(7616): 333-337.

Knudsen, E. I. (2007). "Fundamental components of attention." Annu Rev
Neurosci 30: 57-78.

Qian, Y., Y. Cao, B. Deng, G. Yang, J. Li, R. Xu, D. Zhang, J. Huang and
Y. Rao (2017). "Sleep homeostasis regulated by 5HT2b receptor in
a small subset of neurons in the dorsal fan-shaped body of
drosophila." Elife 6.

Kohl, J., J. Ng, S. Cachero, E. Ciabatti, M. J. Dolan, B. Sutcliffe, A. Tozer,
S. Ruehle, D. Krueger, S. Frechter, T. Branco, M. Tripodi and G. S.
Jefferis (2014). "Ultrafast tissue staining with chemical tags." Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 111(36): E3805-3814.
Lewis, L. P., K. P. Siju, Y. Aso, A. B. Friedrich, A. J. Bulteel, G. M. Rubin
and I. C. Grunwald Kadow (2015). "A Higher Brain Circuit for
Immediate Integration of Conflicting Sensory Information in
Drosophila." Curr Biol 25(17): 2203-2214.
Lima, S. Q. and G. Miesenbock (2005). "Remote control of behavior
through genetically targeted photostimulation of neurons." Cell
121(1): 141-152.

Robbins, T. W. and B. J. Everitt (2002). "Limbic-striatal memory systems
and drug addiction." Neurobiol Learn Mem 78(3): 625-636.
Romo, R. and W. Schultz (1990). "Dopamine neurons of the monkey
midbrain: contingencies of responses to active touch during selfinitiated arm movements." J Neurophysiol 63(3): 592-606.
Roy, D. S., T. Kitamura, T. Okuyama, S. K. Ogawa, C. Sun, Y. Obata, A.
Yoshiki and S. Tonegawa (2017). "Distinct Neural Circuits for the
Formation and Retrieval of Episodic Memories." Cell 170(5): 10001012 e1019.

Liu, C., P. Y. Placais, N. Yamagata, B. D. Pfeiffer, Y. Aso, A. B. Friedrich,
I. Siwanowicz, G. M. Rubin, T. Preat and H. Tanimoto (2012). "A

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Scaplen, K. M. and K. R. Kaun (2016). "Reward from bugs to bipeds: a
comparative approach to understanding how reward circuits
function." J Neurogenet 30(2): 133-148.

Weir, P. T. and M. H. Dickinson (2015). "Functional divisions for visual
processing in the central brain of flying Drosophila." Proc Natl Acad
Sci U S A 112(40): E5523-5532.

Scaplen, K. M., N. J. Mei, H. A. Bounds, S. L. Song, R. Azanchi and K. R.
Kaun (2019). "Automated real-time quantification of group locomotor
activity in Drosophila melanogaster." Scientific Reports 9(4427): 116.

Weir, P. T., B. Schnell and M. H. Dickinson (2014). "Central complex
neurons exhibit behaviorally gated responses to visual motion in
Drosophila." J Neurophysiol 111(1): 62-71.

Schindelin, J., I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T.
Pietzsch, S. Preibisch, C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J. Y.
Tinevez, D. J. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P. Tomancak and A.
Cardona (2012). "Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image
analysis." Nat Methods 9(7): 676-682.
Schleyer, M., T. Saumweber, W. Nahrendorf, B. Fischer, D. von Alpen, D.
Pauls, A. Thum and B. Gerber (2011). "A behavior-based circuit
model of how outcome expectations organize learned behavior in
larval Drosophila." Learn Mem 18(10): 639-653.
Schultz, W. (2007). "Multiple dopamine functions at different time
courses." Annu Rev Neurosci 30: 259-288.
Schultz, W. (2015). "Neuronal Reward and Decision Signals: From
Theories to Data." Physiol Rev 95(3): 853-951.
Schultz, W. (2016). "Dopamine reward prediction error coding." Dialogues
Clin Neurosci 18(1): 23-32.
Sitaraman, D., Y. Aso, X. Jin, N. Chen, M. Felix, G. M. Rubin and M. N.
Nitabach (2015). "Propagation of Homeostatic Sleep Signals by
Segregated Synaptic Microcircuits of the Drosophila Mushroom
Body." Curr Biol 25(22): 2915-2927.
Syed, E. C., L. L. Grima, P. J. Magill, R. Bogacz, P. Brown and M. E.
Walton (2016). "Action initiation shapes mesolimbic dopamine
encoding of future rewards." Nat Neurosci 19(1): 34-36.
Talay, M., E. B. Richman, N. J. Snell, G. G. Hartmann, J. D. Fisher, A.
Sorkac, J. F. Santoyo, C. Chou-Freed, N. Nair, M. Johnson, J. R.
Szymanski and G. Barnea (2017). "Transsynaptic Mapping of
Second-Order Taste Neurons in Flies by trans-Tango." Neuron
96(4): 783-795 e784.
Torregrossa, M. M., P. R. Corlett and J. R. Taylor (2011). "Aberrant
learning and memory in addiction." Neurobiol Learn Mem 96(4):
609-623.
Torregrossa, M. M. and J. R. Taylor (2013). "Learning to forget:
manipulating extinction and reconsolidation processes to treat
addiction." Psychopharmacology (Berl) 226(4): 659-672.
Trantham-Davidson, H. and L. J. Chandler (2015). "Alcohol-induced
alterations in dopamine modulation of prefrontal activity." Alcohol
49(8): 773-779.
Troup, M., M. H. Yap, C. Rohrscheib, M. J. Grabowska, D. Ertekin, R.
Randeniya, B. Kottler, A. Larkin, K. Munro, P. J. Shaw and B. van
Swinderen (2018). "Acute control of the sleep switch in Drosophila
reveals a role for gap junctions in regulating behavioral
responsiveness." Elife 7.
Volkow, N. D. and M. Morales (2015). "The Brain on Drugs: From Reward
to Addiction." Cell 162(4): 712-725.
Waddell, S. (2010). "Dopamine reveals neural circuit mechanisms of fly
memory." Trends Neurosci 33(10): 457-464.
Waddell, S. (2013). "Reinforcement signalling in Drosophila; dopamine
does it all after all." Curr Opin Neurobiol 23(3): 324-329.
Wanat, M. J., I. Willuhn, J. J. Clark and P. E. Phillips (2009). "Phasic
dopamine release in appetitive behaviors and drug addiction." Curr
Drug Abuse Rev 2(2): 195-213.
Wang, W., M. Darvas, G. P. Storey, I. J. Bamford, J. T. Gibbs, R. D.
Palmiter and N. S. Bamford (2013). "Acetylcholine encodes longlasting presynaptic plasticity at glutamatergic synapses in the dorsal
striatum after repeated amphetamine exposure." J Neurosci 33(25):
10405-10426.

14

Wolff, T., N. A. Iyer and G. M. Rubin (2015). "Neuroarchitecture and
neuroanatomy of the Drosophila central complex: A GAL4-based
dissection of protocerebral bridge neurons and circuits." J Comp
Neurol 523(7): 997-1037.
Yamagata, N., M. Hiroi, S. Kondo, A. Abe and H. Tanimoto (2016).
"Suppression of Dopamine Neurons Mediates Reward." PLoS Biol
14(12): e1002586.
Yamagata, N., T. Ichinose, Y. Aso, P. Y. Placais, A. B. Friedrich, R. J.
Sima, T. Preat, G. M. Rubin and H. Tanimoto (2015). "Distinct
dopamine neurons mediate reward signals for short- and long-term
memories." Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112(2): 578-583.
Yoshimoto, K., W. J. McBride, L. Lumeng and T. K. Li (1992). "Alcohol
stimulates the release of dopamine and serotonin in the nucleus
accumbens." Alcohol 9(1): 17-22.
Yoshimoto, K., S. Ueda, B. Kato, Y. Takeuchi, Y. Kawai, K. Noritake and
M. Yasuhara (2000). "Alcohol enhances characteristic releases of
dopamine and serotonin in the central nucleus of the amygdala."
Neurochem Int 37(4): 369-376.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/578401; this version posted March 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Scaplen et al., 15 Mar 2019 – preprint copy - BioRxiv

Drosophila Strain
yw
shibirets1
GCaMP6m
UAS-Dop2R-RNAi
UAS-Dop1R1-RNAi

Expression Pattern
N/A
N/A
N/A
dsRNA-GD11471
dsRNA-KK107258

Source
(Pfeiffer, Jenett et al. 2008)
(Pfeiffer, Truman et al. 2012)

UAS-Dop1R2-RNAi

dsRNA-GD3391

(Dietzl, Chen et al. 2007)

trans-Tango:
UASmyrGFP,
QUASmtdTomato (3xHA);
brp-SNAP
R58E02-Gal4

N/A

(Kohl, Ng et al. 2014, Talay,
Richman et al. 2017)

PAM dopamine
neurons
R58E02; mcD8::GFP
PAM dopamine
neurons
HL9-Gal4
PAM dopamine
neurons
MB058B-split-Gal4
PPL1 -a2a`2 (5)
MB109B-split-Gal4
PAM b`2a (5), g5 (1)
PAM b`2a(5), g5(1)
MB040B-split-Gal4
PAM-a1(2), b`1ap(1),
b`1m(1),
b`2a(1), b`2m(2),
b`2p(1), b`1(1), b2(3),
g3(3), g4(3), g5(3)
MB042B-split-Gal4
PAM-a1(1), b`1ap(1),
b`1m(1), b`2m(2),
b`2p(1), b`1(1), g3(3),
g4(3), g5<g1g2(1), g5(3)
MB188B-split-Gal4
PAM-b`1ap(5),
b`1m(5), g3(3), g4(2)
MB032B-split-Gal4
PAM-b`2m(4), b`2p(1),
b2b`2a(1), g3(1)
MB087C-split-Gal4
PAM-b`2a(1)
MB301B-split-Gal4
PAM-b`2m(1),
b2b`2a(3)
MB002B-split-Gal4
MBON-b`2mp (4),
g5b`2a (2)
MB011B- split-Gal4
MBON-g5b`2a (4),
b`2mp (3),
b`2mp_bilateral (3)
MB-210B-split-Gal4
MBON-g5b`2a (5),
b`2mp (4),
b`2mp_bilateral (1)
MB018B-split-Gal4
MBON-a`2 (4)
MB399B-split-Gal4
MBON-b2b`2a (2)
MB074C-split-Gal4
MBON--g5b`2a (1),
b`2mp (4), b2b`2a (3)
Table 1. Fly Strains used in this manuscript.

(Dietzl, Chen et al. 2007)
(Keleman, Micheler et
2009.8.5)

Identifier

al.

(Liu, Placais et al. 2012)

(Claridge-Chang, Roorda et al.
2009)
(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)
(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

BDSC_42750
VDRC ID: 11471
VDRC ID: 107258
(currently unavailable)
Flybase: FBsf0000090794
VDRC ID: 3391
(no longer available)
Flybase: FBsf0000073893

BDSC_41347
BDSC_79626,
BDSC_41347
Flybase: FBtp0073020
FlyLight Robot ID: 2135107
FlyLight Robot ID: 2135157

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

N/A

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID: 2135092

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID: 2135236

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID: 2135083

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)
(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID: 2135135
FlyLight Robot ID: 2135349

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID:2135053

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID:2135062

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID: 2135258

(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)
(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)
(Aso, Hattori et al. 2014)

FlyLight Robot ID: 2135069
FlyLight Robot ID: 2501738
FlyLight Robot ID: 2135112

15

