bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Multi-glomerular projection of single olfactory receptor neurons
is conserved among amphibians
Lukas Weiss1,5,*, Lucas D. Jungblut2, Andrea G. Pozzi2, Barbara S. Zielinski3, Lauren A. O'Connell4,
Thomas Hassenklöver¹ and Ivan Manzini1,*
1 Department of Animal Physiology and Molecular Biomedicine, University of Giessen, 35392 Giessen, Germany
2 Departamento de Biodiversidad y Biología Experimental, IBBEA-CONICET, Universidad de Buenos Aires, C1428EGA Buenos Aires,
Argentina
3 Department of Integrative Biology, University of Windsor, N9B 3P4 Windsor, Ontario, Canada
4 Department of Biology, Stanford University, 94305 Stanford, California, USA
5 Lead Contact
* Correspondence: lukas.weiss@physzool.bio.uni-giessen.de (L.W.), ivan.manzini@physzool.bio.uni-giessen.de (I.M.)

single glomeruli. Contrastingly, axonal projections
of the axolotl (salamander) branch extensively
before entering up to six distinct glomeruli.
Receptor neuron axons labeled in frog species
(Pipidae, Bufonidae, Hylidae and Dendrobatidae)
predominantly bifurcate before entering a
glomerulus and 59% and 50% connect to multiple
glomeruli in larval and post-metamorphotic
animals,
respectively.
Independent
of
developmental stage, lifestyle and adaptations to
specific habitats, it seems to be a common feature
of amphibian olfactory receptor neuron axons to
frequently bifurcate and connect to multiple
glomeruli. Our study challenges the unbranched
axon concept as a universal vertebrate feature and
it is conceivable that also later diverging
vertebrates deviate from it. We propose that this
unusual wiring logic evolved around the divergence
of the terrestrial tetrapod lineage from its aquatic
ancestors and could be the basis of an alternative
way of odor processing.

Individual receptor neurons in the peripheral
olfactory organ extend long axons into the
olfactory bulb forming synapses with projection
neurons in spherical neuropil regions, called
glomeruli. Generally, odor map formation and odor
processing in all vertebrates is based on the
assumption that receptor neuron axons exclusively
connect to a single glomerulus without any axonal
branching. We comparatively tested this hypothesis
in multiple fish and amphibian species by applying
sparse cell electroporation to trace single olfactory
receptor neuron axons. Sea lamprey (jawless fish)
and zebrafish (bony fish) support the unbranched
axon concept, with 94% of axons terminating in

Keywords: olfaction, glomeruli, axonal wiring,
evolution, sensory system, fish, frog, salamander

Introduction
Vertebrates are equipped with a sophisticated
olfactory system to detect relevant chemical
information about their environment. Throughout
vertebrate evolution, a progressive segregation
into parallel olfactory pathways takes place [1–3].
While the peripheral olfactory organ of fishes
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

consists of a single olfactory surface [4–6, but see
7], the mammalian system is segregated into
several anatomically and functionally distinct
subsystems [2,8]. A first bipartition of the
olfactory periphery into a main olfactory
epithelium (MOE) and a vomeronasal organ
(VNO) coincides with the evolution of the first
tetrapods, the amphibians [9]. However,
primordial structures that could potentially be
homologous to the VNO have been identified in
earlier diverging vertebrates like lungfish [10] and
lamprey [7].

many animals have long been known to extend
multiple dendrites into spatially distinct glomeruli
[23]. However, it is still widely unclear whether
the synaptic input that a single PN in the AOB
receives from multiple glomeruli contains the
information conveyed by different or by the same
type of vomeronasal receptor [24,25].
The basic olfactory wiring principles have long
been assumed to be uniform among vertebrates.
The first vertebrate species that has been found to
violate the rule of an unbranched ORN axon
innervating a single glomerulus in the main OB
was the African clawed frog Xenopus laevis [26].
The majority of examined axons were shown to
be connecting to more than one glomerulus in
larval animals [26] and this alternative pattern
was retained after metamorphosis [27]. It remains
elusive whether this multi-glomerular wiring is a
specific adaptation of the secondarily aquatic
Xenopus or if it is a more conserved evolutionary
feature also present in other vertebrate lineages.

Chemical detection in the various sensory
epithelia is relying on the expression of olfactory
receptor proteins in the dendritic cilia or
microvilli of olfactory receptor neurons (ORNs)
[11], with the two major receptor gene families
being the OR-type olfactory receptor genes and
the vomeronasal receptor genes [12,13]. In the
main olfactory system of rodents, each ORN
expresses a single OR-type olfactory receptor
[14,15] and sends a single, unbranched axon to
the olfactory bulb (OB) via the olfactory nerve
(ON). In the main OB, an axon terminally
branches in the confines of a single dense
neuropil structure, a glomerulus. All axons of
ORNs equipped with the same olfactory receptor
type coalesce onto one or very few glomeruli [16–
18]. Each glomerulus in the main OB is thus
believed to relay the information of a single ORtype olfactory receptor to the postsynaptic
projection neurons (PNs), distinguished as mitral
and tufted cells in rodents [1]. This constitutes the
idea of the chemotopic organization of the rodent
main OB [19]. While mammalian PNs extend
their single primary dendrite into one sole
glomerulus, PNs in fish, amphibians and reptiles
often bear several primary dendrites connecting to
multiple glomeruli [for review see 20].

Here, we report that bifurcating ORN axons and
multi-glomerular innervation are not a particular
adaptation of Xenopus laevis, but a conserved
feature throughout the order Anura (frogs and
toads). ORN axon tracings in four ecologically
diverse frog species in pre- and postmetamorphotic animals showed that this
alternative
olfactory
wiring
scheme
is
independent of developmental stage and of
habitat. We could also show that multi-glomerular
innervation of single ORN axons are the
predominant pattern in the axolotl salamander,
which suggests that this feature might be present
in all amphibians. Contrastingly, both the main
olfactory system of the sea lamprey (jawless fish)
as well as the olfactory system of zebrafish
(teleost fish) follow the unbranched ORN axon
paradigm with a single ORN axon only arborizing
within the confines of a single glomerulus. We
propose that the unusual wiring logic found in
amphibians evolved around the divergence of the
terrestrial tetrapod lineage from its aquatic
ancestors and forms the basis of an alternative
way of odor processing.

In contrast to the wiring logic employed by the
main olfactory system, all vomeronasal receptor
neurons (VRN) in the VNO expressing the same
type of vomeronasal receptor converge onto ~1530 glomeruli in the mammalian accessory
olfactory bulb (AOB) [21,22]. PNs in the AOB of
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

common in the olfactory system of other aquatic
vertebrates. We traced single ORNs from the
olfactory epithelium of the fully aquatic postlarval sea lamprey (P. marinus, jawless fish), the
zebrafish (D. rerio, bony fish), the axolotl (A.
mexicanum, urodela) and the larval clawed frog
(X. tropicalis, anura; phylogenetic overview in
Figure 1B) to their axon terminals in the
glomeruli of the OB. No experiments were
conducted in the accessory olfactory system.

Results
ORN axons in fish have less branching points
than amphibian axons
The morphology of an ORN axon in vertebrates is
generally described as an unbranched projection
terminating in fine arborizations within a single
glomerulus of the OB [28]. It was already
reported that this principle does not apply to the
wiring scheme in the secondarily aquatic African
clawed frog [26,27]. We investigated whether this
alternative projection pattern could be more

Axon tracings of the four species differed
substantially in their general branching structure

Figure 1: ORN axons in the OB of different aquatic vertebrates.
A) Single ORN axons of the juvenile sea lamprey (P. marinus; grey), zebrafish (D. rerio; blue), axolotl (A. mexicanum;
magenta) and larval clawed frog (X. tropicalis; green) show different levels of branching complexity. Sea lamprey and
zebrafish axons are unbranched until they reach their terminals and only have a limited number of subbranches. Axolotl and
frog axons branch in proximity to the ON and exhibit more subbranches. Axon tracings are shown from the transition between
ON and OB until their terminals (upper panel). Dotted white line indicates the outline of the OB. The lower panel shows
representative 3D reconstructions of two axons for each species. The first reconstruction of each species depicts the ORN
axon shown in the upper panel. B) The four examined species cover a broad evolutionary period from the divergence of the
jawed vertebrates from their jawless ancestors to the emergence of the first tetrapods. All four species lead a fully aquatic
lifestyle. OB olfactory bulb, ON, olfactory nerve, ORN olfactory receptor neuron, P posterior, A anterior, L lateral, M medial.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

(Figure 1A). ORN axons in the OB of the sea
lamprey and the zebrafish showed similarity with
the pattern reported for rodents [28]. A long,
unbranched axon projects towards the glomerular
layer of the OB where it terminally arborizes.
While both species follow this common feature,

the zebrafish axons have even shorter and fewer
terminal arborizations than the lamprey axons. In
contrast, the ORN axons of the two amphibian
species bifurcate shortly after entering the OB,
projecting several sub-branches into the
glomerular layer, where each sub-branch

Figure 2: Number of axonal branching points and relative position of the first axonal bifurcation differ in fishes and
amphibians.
A) Branching points of individual ORN axons and their relative position between the transition from ON to OB (0%) and their
most distal axon terminal in the glomerular layer of the OB (100%) are shown. All dots on a vertical line depict the positions of
all branching points of a single reconstructed axon. ORN axons of sea lamprey (n = 6; grey), zebrafish (n = 10; blue), axolotl (n =
10, magenta) and of the clawed frog (n = 10; green) are shown. B) Quantitative comparison of the total amount of ORN axonal
branching points in each species. Each dot represents a single ORN axon. The black line indicates the median, the white dotted
line the mean amount of branching points for axons of each species. Axolotl ORN axons have significantly more branching points
than lamprey (p = 0.0058) and zebrafish axons (p = 0.00001). The ORN axons of the western clawed frog are significantly more
branched than the zebrafish axons (p = 0.0013). C) Species comparison of the first axonal bifurcation of ORN axons. The relative
position of the first bifurcation between the transition from ON to OB (0%) and their most distal axon terminal (100%) are
shown. The relative position of the first branching point is closer to the axon terminals in the glomerular layer in the OB of both
fish species. The axolotl axons branch in immediate proximity of the ON, significantly different from the fish axons (lamprey, p =
0.014 and zebrafish p = 0.000001). Frog axons also branch closer to the ON, significantly different from the zebrafish (p = 0.014).
A representative axonal reconstruction is shown for each species. Statistical significance was tested using Kruskal-Wallis rank
sum test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison post-hoc test with Holm-Bonferroni correction. OB olfactory bulb, ON
olfactory nerve, ORN olfactory receptor neuron, GLOM glomerular layer.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

arborizes again. Quantifying the bifurcations of
each single axon along the distance from its entry
point in the OB to the axon terminals, we found
significant differences between fishes and
amphibians (Figure 2A and B). Sea lamprey
axons have on average 6.5 ± 4.5 terminal
arborizations (n = 6). This pattern is not
significantly different from the zebrafish axons
that show even fewer arborizations (3 ± 1.4, n =
10). Zebrafish axons were found to have the least
complex structure, with the highest amount of
arborizations for a single axon being five. The
axolotl displays a significantly different pattern
from both the lamprey and zebrafish axons (p =
0.0058 and 0.00001 respectively, Figure 2B), the
ten examined axons bifurcate 29.7 ± 7.7 times on
average, with one axon even branching 42 times.
Axonal tracings obtained from the tadpoles of the
clawed frog (23 ± 8.1, n = 10) also showed a
significantly higher degree of branching when
compared to the zebrafish (p = 0.0013). They did
not show significantly different branching points
than lamprey (p = 0.08) or axolotl axons.

from the ones in lamprey or axolotl axons, but
different from zebrafish (p = 0.014, Figure 2C).
There are substantial differences in the general
ORN axon architecture between the four
examined species. Our results clearly indicate that
ORN axon bifurcations before reaching the
glomerular layer cannot be attributed to an aquatic
habitat, since this feature is absent both in the sea
lamprey and the zebrafish. In contrast, our
tracings suggest that this alternative branching
pattern of bifurcations rostral to the glomerular
layer could be linked more specifically to the
amphibian lineage, since it was found to be
present in both a salamander and a frog species.
Multi-glomerular ORN axons are present only
in amphibians
While it was reported for the rodent main
olfactory system that single ORN axons project
into a single glomerulus [17,18], 86% of ORNs in
the main OB of larval X. laevis were connected to
more than one glomerulus [26]. So far,
comparative data of other vertebrate species on
this matter are missing. To classify uni- and multiglomerular ORN axons in the various animal
species, we used an algorithm identifying
glomerular clusters based on the spatial density of
branching and endpoints of the reconstructed
axonal structures.

In addition to the amount, also the spatial
distribution of branching points seems to be
differently organized in fishes and amphibians
(Figure 2C). The point of origin for distance
measurements was set as the transition between
ON and OB. While most fish ORN axonal
projections only arborize close to their terminals
in the glomerular layer, amphibian axons start to
bifurcate much closer to the ON and in the nerve
layer (Figure 2C). The first lamprey axon
bifurcation happens around 359 ± 139 µm after
entering the OB, which measures 61 ± 12% of the
distance from the origin to the furthest terminal
point. The average unbranched axon segment of
the zebrafish tracings was 184 ± 39 µm (81 ±
12%), axolotl axons first branch at 85 ± 33 µm
(18 ± 5%) and the larval clawed frog axons at 94
± 40 µm (45 ± 18%). There is a significant
difference between the relative position of the
first bifurcation in axolotl axons and axons of
both fish species (lamprey: p = 0.014, zebrafish: p
= 0.000001). The position of the first bifurcations
in Xenopus axons are not statistically different

We found that out of all fish axons (lamprey: n =
6, zebrafish: n = 10), only one zebrafish axon was
classified as multi-glomerular, while the
remaining axons projected into a single target
structure and are thus considered uni-glomerular
(Figure 3A and B). Only three fish axons (one
lamprey axon and two zebrafish axons) had a
single extra-glomerular branching point (average
extra-glomerular branching points lamprey: 0.2 ±
0.4, zebrafish: 0.2 ± 0.4), while all other axons
only started to arborize within the target
glomerular cluster (Figure 3C). The average
distance from the transition between ON and OB
to the glomeruli measured 401 ± 111 µm in sea
lamprey and 194 ± 41 µm in zebrafish axons. In
the axolotl, all except for one axon (n = 10)
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: Lamprey and zebrafish
ORN axons connect to a single
glomerulus, amphibian ORN axons
are multi-glomerular.
A) The representative ORN axonal
reconstructions of the lamprey (grey)
and the zebrafish (blue) both connect
to a single glomerulus (dotted circle)
and have no bifurcations prior to
entering
the
glomerulus.
The
representative axolotl ORN axon
(magenta) branches four times (black
stars) before connecting to three
glomeruli, the frog axon (green) has a
single extra-glomerular branching
point and innervates two separate
glomeruli. B) Population analysis of
all examined axons, each stacked bar
represents the percentual share of uniand multi-glomerular axons (two to
six glomeruli) of one of the four
species. All lamprey ORN axons (n =
6) and 90% (n = 10) of zebrafish
axons were classified as uniglomerular
by
the
DBSCAN
algorithm. On the contrary, most
amphibian axons were classified as
multi-glomerular
(axolotl
90%,
clawed frog 70%), with a varying
number of innervated glomeruli. C)
Quantitative comparison of the
amount of extra-glomerular branching
points of all axons of each species.
Each dot represents a single ORN
axon. The black line indicates the
median, the white dotted line the
mean amount of extra-glomerular
branching points. Axolotl axons have
a significantly higher amount of extraglomerular branching points than lamprey (p = 0.0002) and zebrafish (p = 0.00001). Statistical significance was tested
using Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test followed by Dunn’s multiple comparison post-hoc test with Holm-Bonferroni correction.
OB olfactory bulb, ON, olfactory nerve, ORN olfactory receptor neuron.

followed a multi-glomerular output pattern
(Figure 3A and B), with four axons even
innervating six distinct glomerular structures. The
average axonal distance from the entry point in
the OB to the glomeruli was 336 ± 109 µm.
Axolotl axons bifurcate 5.1 ± 1.9 times on
average before reaching their target glomeruli
(Figure 3C), which is significantly different from
both lamprey and zebrafish (p = 0.0002 and
0.00001 respectively).

The anuran olfactory system (represented by the
clawed frog), showed a more heterogeneous
wiring pattern. Three out of ten tracings were
classified as uni-glomerular, while seven axons
were multi-glomerular. In comparison with the
axolotl, Xenopus axons projected into maximally
three glomeruli, while the majority (n = 6)
displayed a bi-glomerular wiring pattern (Figure
3A and B). The mean axonal distance from the
nerve to the glomeruli was 162 ± 43 µm, the
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

structures branched 1.6 ± 1.0 times before ending
in glomerular clusters (Figure 3C). The branching
density inside a single glomerular cluster was not
significantly different between lamprey (6.3 ±
4.7), zebrafish (2.6 ± 1.1) and axolotl (8.5 ± 7.5).
Xenopus glomeruli were more densely packed
with sub-branches (12.8 ± 4.8) compared to
zebrafish (p = 0.00009), which displayed the
lowest bifurcation density, often with only one
branching point within a glomerulus. Our results
support the hypothesis that multi-glomerular
innervation of single ORN axons is not a wiring
feature exclusive to X. laevis but seems to be
common among other aquatic amphibian species
of both salamanders and frogs. On the other hand,
uni-glomerular wiring is the prevalent - almost
exclusive - pattern in fishes, which strongly
resembles the rodent wiring logic.

tracing experiments in anurans with more or less
water-independent adult lifestyles to test whether
the alternative olfactory wiring is an olfactory
adaptation of aquatic frogs and tadpoles or habitat
independent. To account for the diverse ecology
of the anurans, we examined the following
species in addition to the aquatic X. tropicalis.
Larval Rhinella arenarum are vegetarian grazers
and adults are terrestrial. Both Scinax granulatus
and
Ranitomeya
imitator
have
carnivorous/omnivorous tadpoles, their adults are
arboreal and terrestrial, respectively. The major
difference between these two species is that
Ranitomeya provides extensive parental care and
the number of tadpoles per parent pair is much
lower than in Scinax, Rhinella and Xenopus
(Figure 4) [29].
The tracings of ORN axons in R. arenarum, S.
granulatus and R. imitator tadpoles showed
similar wiring and branching properties to those
found in X. tropicalis tadpoles. In Figure 5A two
representative axonal reconstructions per species
are shown. White stars indicate extra-glomerular
bifurcations and white dotted circles highlight
glomerular clusters. The number of branching
points prior to entering the glomeruli was similar
in all four species (X. tropicalis: 1.6 ± 1.0, n = 10,
R. arenarum: 2.4 ± 1.8, n = 8, S. granulatus: 1.4 ±

The alternative wiring pattern in anurans is
independent of developmental stage and
ecology
The alternative wiring pattern of multi-glomerular
ORN axons has so far only been described in
amphibians that live a water-bound lifestyle [27].
While all amphibian larvae are dependent on an
aquatic habitat, most adult frogs leave the water
after metamorphosis [29]. We conducted ORN

Figure 4: Overview about ecology
and phylogeny of the four anuran
species examined in this study.
The clawed frog Xenopus tropicalis
belongs to the Pipidae family and is
classified as a Mesobatrachian, an
evolutionarily more basal frog species.
The other three species belong to the
evolutionarily more 'modern' frogs, the
Neobatrachians, and to the families of
Bufonidae, Hylidae and Dendrobatidae.
The diverse ecology of both the adult
frogs (above) and their larval offspring
(below) are summarized next to the
drawings. The tree is pruned from the
anuran tree in [48], which originally
included 3309 species.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5: Comparison of the ORN axon morphologies in different larval and juvenile frog species with different
lifestyles.
A) Two representative ORN axon reconstructions are shown for tadpoles of each of the anuran species X. tropicalis, R.
arenarum, R. imitator and S. granulatus. Each axon was reconstructed starting from the transition between ON and main OB
to the most distal axon terminal. Multiple axonal branches innervate one or two glomeruli (white dotted circles), and
generally have one or two extra-glomerular branching sites (white stars). B) Two representative ORN axon reconstructions
are shown for post-metamorphotic terrestrial juveniles of R. arenarum and arboreal S. granulatus. Axonal structures are
comparable to their larval counterparts shown in A, one or two glomeruli are innervated by two or more axonal subbranches.
C) ORN axons were classified into five branching types (A and B uni-glomerular, C - E multi-glomerular). Types are
schematically shown below, black stars indicate extra-glomerular branching points. The number of axons belonging to each

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

branching type is shown in the stacked bar plot above. We included all ORN axons of tadpoles (X. tropicalis, green, n = 10;
S. granulatus, light yellow, n = 8; R. arenarum, light brown, n = 8; R. imitator, red, n = 6) and juveniles (S. granulatus,
dark yellow, n = 7; R. arenarum, dark brown, n = 5). The counts of axons per type for each species and developmental stage
are marked according to the color legend below. D) Relative length of the longer and the shorter branch of individual ORN
axons innervating the same glomerulus (left plot) or two different glomeruli (right plot). Each pair of dots refers to a single
axon, where branch 1 is the longer branch and branch 2 is the shorter one. The thick black line visualizes the mean length
relation between the two branches. In uni-glomerular axons, the shorter branch measures 76% of the length of the longer
branch (n = 27, ORN axons of all species and developmental stages included). In multi-glomerular axons, the shorter
branch measures on average 53% the length of the longer branch innervating a different glomerulus (n = 25, ORN axons of
all species and developmental stages included). MOB main olfactory bulb, ON, olfactory nerve, ORN olfactory receptor
neuron.

1.2, n = 8, R. imitator: 1.5 ± 1.6, n = 6), as was
the distance of the first branching point relative to
the entire length of the axon from the transition
ON-OB to the glomeruli (X. tropicalis: 45 ± 18%,
R. arenarum: 43 ± 26%, S. granulatus: 41 ± 28%,
R. imitator: 45 ± 19).

and classified them into five categories (type A to
E; Figure 5C and D). Among the uni-glomerular
axons, we distinguished two main types. Type A is
characterized by a single, unbranched axon
terminating in a single glomerular cluster. This is
the prevailing type reported in rodents and also
found in the fish species we examined here. Type
B also terminates in a single glomerulus, but has
at least two separate branches projecting into the
same glomerular structure. Of all the axons
reconstructed from larval and juvenile anurans (n
= 44), only 11% belonged to Type A. Type B was
more frequent, amounting to 32% of the axons.
57% of the axons were classified as multiglomerular, with 50% of all axons innervating two
glomeruli and only three axons (7%) innervating
more than two glomerular end-structures (Type
E). In 23% of all axons two glomerular clusters
were innervated by a single branch each (Type C),
in 27 % of the tracings, at least one of the two
glomeruli was innervated by more than one subbranch (Type D, Figure 5C). Among the axons
traced in the various species, all species displayed
at least four out of the five different types.

To exclude that the alternative multi-glomerular
wiring pattern is linked to the larval stages and/or
their aquatic lifestyle, we conducted sparse cell
electroporation in juveniles of the terrestrial R.
arenarum and the arboreal S. granulatus. Figure
5B shows reconstructions of single ORN axons of
juveniles of the two species. Their morphology
does not significantly differ from the morphology
of conspecific tadpoles nor from the other larval
axons examined. Before reaching the glomeruli,
axons of juvenile R. arenarum and S. granulatus
bifurcate 2.2 ± 1.5 (n = 5) and 1.6 ± 1.1 (n = 7),
respectively. The first bifurcations occur at 48 ±
29% (R. arenarum) and 28 ± 16% (S. granulatus)
of the total distance between the ON-OB
transition and the axon terminals. The only
parameter that slightly differs from axons of their
larval conspecifics (other than an approx. 1.5-fold
increase in total axonal length from tadpoles to
juveniles) is the amount of branching points
inside the glomerular clusters (R. arenarum:
larval 5.7 ± 1.4, juvenile 3.8 ± 0.9, S. granulatus:
larval 11.7 ± 3.1, juvenile 5.5 ± 4).

We additionally measured the differences in the
length of branches entering the same or different
glomeruli of a single axonal structures for all the
anuran species. We found 27 cases (20 in larvae, 7
in juveniles) where a single glomerulus was
innervated by at least two separate axonal
branches (Figure 5D, left plot). By subtracting the
shortest innervating branch from the longest, we
measured a branch length difference of 46 ± 71
µm in tadpoles and 56 ± 27 µm in juveniles. On
average, the shortest branch had 76 ± 16% the
length of the longer one. This value was

All four anuran species and ontogenetic stages
were heterogeneous with regard to the number of
glomerular clusters that are innervated by a single
axon and the proportion between uni- and multiglomerular axons. We categorized the axonal
structures based on recurring branching patterns
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

consistent between tadpoles (75 ± 16%) and
juveniles (80 ± 12%). In all multi-glomerular
axons (n = 25, larvae 19, juveniles 6), we
measured the branch length difference between
the branches innervating the nearest and the
furthest glomerulus (Figure 5D, right plot). In
larval anurans, the difference was 58 ± 46 µm, in
juveniles 154 ± 214 µm. The distance to the
glomerulus closer to the nerve layer was 53 ± 30
% of the distance to the glomerulus most distant
from the nerve layer (tadpoles: 48 ± 31%;
juveniles: 67 ± 25%).

Emergence of the bifurcation of ORN axon
coincides with the first tetrapods
In an attempt to put our findings into an
evolutionary context, we compared the wiring
properties of the fishes and urodela to the anuran
juveniles, to give an overview about the
presumably mature system of the animals. Since
the axolotl is a neotenic salamander, the main
olfactory system of the one to two month old
larva is assumed to be a mostly developed system
that does not undergo drastic changes until sexual
maturity is reached. The majority of the fish
axons (75%) are uni-glomerular and unbranched
prior to entering the glomeruli (Figure 6, blue
bars), which is in accordance with the prevailing
vertebrate wiring principle. The juvenile anurans
are the most heterogeneous group. Only the
minority of axons follow the unbranched axon
principle (8%). Most axons branch at least once
before terminating in one or more glomeruli. 42%
of the axons innervate one glomerulus with more

The collected data indicates that ORN axonal
projections in larval and juvenile amphibians are
much more heterogeneous than what has been
reported in rodents and what we found in fishes.
In amphibians, multi-glomerular innervation is
retained throughout their developmental stages
and does not seem to be linked to a specific
lifestyle or habitat.

Figure 6: Multi-glomerular innervation
pattern is a conserved feature of
amphibians and could have emerged
with the evolution of the first tetrapods.
A) ORN axons of fish species (lamprey
and zebrafish, blue bars, n = 16), juvenile
frogs (R. arenarum and S. granulatus,
yellow bars, n = 12) and the axolotl
salamander (magenta bars, n = 10) were
classified into five branching types, (A
and B uni-glomerular, C-E multiglomerular). Types are schematically
shown, black stars indicate extraglomerular branching points, dotted
circles indicate glomeruli. The relative
number of axons belonging to each
branching type for each group is shown in
the bar plots. The majority of fish axons
follow the unbranched axon pattern (type
A) and the majority of salamander ORN
axons innervate three or more glomeruli
(type E). Frog axons are more heterogeneous with the most represented types being bi-glomerular (type C) and uniglomerular with at least one extra-glomerular branching point (type B). B) One possible evolutionary scenario for the
emergence of the multi-glomerular ORN projections could be that the unbranched, uni-glomerular ORN axon is a basic
vertebrate trait (*1) and has secondarily evolved into a multi-glomerular alternative wiring logic in the amphibian lineage
(*2) and independently also in the accessory system of mammals (*3). C) In a second scenario, the basic unbranched ORN
wiring logic (*4) changed to the alternative bifurcating axon logic in vertebrates at the transition from an aquatic to a
terrestrial habitat (*5). In mammals, this alternative logic then segregated to the accessory system, while the main olfactory
system again followed the unbranched axon wiring logic (*6). The phylogenetic tree was modified from [9].

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

than two separate branches, 50% innervate more
than two glomeruli (Figure 6, yellow bars). Of the
salamander axons, 80% innervate more than three
glomerular structures (Figure 6, magenta bars).
None of the axolotl axons followed the
unbranched one axon-one glomerulus principle.

between ORN axons and PN dendrites within the
glomeruli is established and whether there are
extensive pruning mechanisms taking place
during development. Experiments in newborn
rabbits [30] and mice [31,32] have shown that
exuberant ORN axon growth in the main OB
during early development is subsequently pruned.
Contrastingly, other studies conducted in neonatal
rats [28] and zebrafish embryos [33] show that
ORN axons arborize to their final morphology
without erroneous targeting. Tenne-Brown and
colleagues demonstrate the occurrence (15% of
all axons) of extra-glomerular bifurcations and
multi-glomerular connections of single ORN
axons in neonatal mice, but only until two weeks
after birth [32]. Of the above mentioned studies,
only Klenoff and colleagues report the occurrence
of axons arborizing in two multiple glomeruli in
rats after the initial pruning phase is over, yet only
as a very rare exceptions (<0.1% of axons) [28].

Our results strongly imply an alternative principle
of odor processing on the level of the OB and that
the emergence of this principle coincides with the
divergence of the first terrestrial tetrapods from
their aquatic ancestors. Even though data from the
smallest order of modern amphibians (Caecilians)
is still elusive, axonal bifurcations and multiglomerular innervation seem to be conserved in
all amphibians regardless of their developmental
stage and habitat.

Discussion
Multi-glomerular innervation is absent in
fishes and present in all developmental stages
of amphibians

In contrast, we found that multi-glomerular
wiring is preserved even after metamorphosis is
finished in all examined amphibians. 50% of the
axons analyzed in juveniles of R. arenarum and S.
granulatus innervated more than one glomerulus
and 92% of the axons bifurcated before entering
the glomerular structures. A study conducted in
the main OB and the AOB of larval and postmetamorphotic Xenopus laevis [27] has yielded
very similar results, showing that neither preglomerular bifurcations nor multi-glomerular
innervation can be solely attributed to the larval
stages. However, in accordance with the results
shown by Marcucci and colleagues [31], we
noticed a reduction of the total number of
branching points from larval to postmetamorphotic animals. Even though the number
of extra-glomerular bifurcations (larval 1.7 ± 1.4,
n = 32; juvenile 1.8 ± 1.3, n = 12) remained
constant, the arborizations inside a single
glomerulus decreased in the juveniles (larval 10.1
± 5.1; juvenile 4.8 ± 3.1). While the reduction of
branches inside a glomerulus can be explained by
pruning mechanisms during development, multiglomerular innervation in the amphibian main OB
is not strictly linked to an immature larval stage.

The consensual hypothesis regarding olfactory
wiring in the vertebrate main olfactory system is
established on the idea that all ORNs expressing
one allele of the olfactory receptor gene repertoire
transmit information into only one or two
glomeruli in the main OB via an unbranched
axon. This leads to the formation of a precise
odotopic map, where each glomerulus is part of a
unique olfactory unit that encodes the information
detected by a specific receptor type [16–18]. In
this study we show that ORN axons of post-larval
sea lamprey and zebrafish clearly follow the
unbranched axon principle postulated for all
vertebrates [16–18]. Fish axons solely arborize
within their target-glomerulus and only one axon
out of 16 has been found to innervate two distinct
glomeruli in the zebrafish. In contrast, 57% of
ORN axons labeled in anurans show connections
to multiple glomeruli (90% in the salamander
species examined).
It is still under debate how the precise wiring
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

The alternative wiring logic in amphibians has
parallels to the rodent AOB

VNO is expressing more recently diverging V2R
genes [1,35,36].

In the rodent accessory olfactory system, the
axons of VRNs expressing the same vomeronasal
receptor type converge onto ~15-30 glomeruli,
constituting a more vague spatial code than in the
main OB [13,21,22]. In contrast to the main
system, the postsynaptic partners of the ORN
axons, the PNs, extend several dendrites into
multiple glomeruli. It is still unclear whether they
integrate between input of VRNs expressing
different or the same vomeronasal receptors
[21,22,24,25]. Several attempts have been made
to unravel the AOB wiring logic from VRN axons
to PN dendrites in rodents. A study investigating
genetically labeled receptor neurons expressing a
single type of V1R or V2R in mice gives evidence
for a homotypic connectivity model. In this
model, a single PN extends its dendrites into
multiple glomeruli innervated exclusively by the
same vomeronasal receptor type [24]. Another
study supported a selective heterotypic
connectivity model in which a single PN receives
information from glomeruli that get sensory input
not from a single vomeronasal receptor type, but
from closely related receptors within a receptor
subfamily [25].

In line with this heterogeneous receptor gene
expression in the amphibian MOE, we found
quite a heterogeneity in ORN axon branching
patterns. Different branching types could be
connected to different receptors. The mix of ORs
and VRs in the MOE of amphibians could explain
the heterogeneity of branching patterns, while in
the more segregated rodent system, axonal
bifurcations and a more vague spatial glomerular
code are only found in the accessory system. It
has already been shown that olfactory receptors
are involved in axon guidance and the formation
of the glomerular map [19,37]. Still, the
expression of vomeronasal receptors in the MOE
of amphibians is unlikely to be the only cause for
axonal bifurcations and the alternative wiring
pattern. V1Rs and V2Rs are already expressed in
the sensory epithelium of fishes, but we could
show that ORN axon bifurcations are absent in
both lampreys and zebrafish. It is more plausible
that the mechanisms by which the receptors
influence axonal guidance could have changed
over evolutionary time and that the new wiring
principle has only emerged after the divergence of
the first tetrapods from the aquatic ancestors.

The discrepancies between the wiring principles
in the rodent main OB and AOB suggest that
there might be different aspects of odor
information extracted by the respective
subsystems. It has additionally been reported that
approx. 10% of single VRN axons in the nerve
layer of the AOB split into several sub-branches,
reaching out to multiple glomeruli [34]. The
wiring pattern of amphibians described in our
study therefore resembles the rodent accessory
system rather than the main system. While the
rodent system shows a clear separation into the
OR-type receptor expressing MOE and the V1R
and V2R expressing VNO, this segregation is
incomplete in amphibians. Among the OR-type
receptors and other receptor gene families, the
MOE of Xenopus was shown to express V1Rs as
well as early diverging V2Rs, while the Xenopus

Multi-glomerular
ORN
innervation
is
mirrored by PN morphology in vertebrates
and invertebrates
Just like the PNs in the rodent AOB, PNs in the
main OB of amphibians and reptiles extend
multiple dendrites into multiple glomeruli, where
they terminate in dendritic tufts [20]. In the case
of amphibians, the multi-glomerular PN
morphology seems to be mirroring the multiglomerular ORN axons described in this study. In
the sea lamprey, the morphology of the single
ORN axons we found show a net like branching
structure within single glomeruli. This
morphology is also mirrored in the uni-glomerular
arborizations of the lamprey PNs [38]. In many
teleost fish species, it is known that PNs extend
many primary dendrites into multiple glomeruli.
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

However, this was only shown to be the minority
in zebrafish [39]. In accordance with these results,
we also show that single zebrafish ORN axons
mostly (90%) terminate in a single glomerulus. It
is intriguing to speculate, whether teleost fishes
equipped with multi-glomerular PNs also display
multi-glomerular ORN wiring.

is also present in the axolotl salamander and in
anuran tadpoles of four ecologically distinct
families (Pipidae, Bufonidae, Hylidae and
Dendrobatidae) as well as terrestrial postmetamorphotic frogs. From our results, we can
conclude that the multi-glomerular ORN wiring
pattern is independent of tadpole or adult ecology
and seems to be a feature derived from the
common ancestor between frogs and salamanders,
since it is also present in axolotl. In both the
jawless and bony fish species we examined, we
could not find any clear signs of the presence of
this alternative wiring principle.

A similar mirror image in the connectivity pattern
between ORN axon and postsynaptic PNs occurs
in the evolution of the antennal lobe in
orthopteran insects [40]. It was shown that in
more basal orthopterans (e.g. the great green bush
cricket), single receptor neuron axons are
innervating a single glomerulus and a single PN
extends its dendrite into one sole glomerulus,
resembling the mammalian main system.
Contrastingly, in later diverging orthopterans
(locusts and grasshoppers) both single receptor
neurons as well as PNs connect to multiple
glomeruli – a pattern similar to amphibians [40–
42]. The multi-glomerular pattern in locusts is
linked to the formation of a high number of
microglomeruli (~2500 glomeruli), while the oneto-one pattern in basal orthopterans is linked to
fewer number of bigger glomeruli (~40) [41]. A
similar evolution towards microglomeruli could
have taken place among vertebrates: the sea
lamprey has very large but few glomeruli (41-65)
[43], the zebrafish has approx. 140 quite
differently sized glomeruli [44] and Xenopus
laevis has a larger number of smaller glomeruli,
~350 in the main OB [45] and ~340 in the AOB
[46]. The concept of the branched and multiglomerular ORN axon has thus developed at least
twice independently, however its putative
functional implications remain elusive.
Different evolutionary scenarios for
emergence of the alternative wiring logic

From an evolutionary perspective, our results
suggest several plausible scenarios, two of which
will be discussed here. First, the axonal
bifurcations of ORNs could have developed
independently in amphibians (*2, Fig 6B), and in
the VNO of mammals (*3, Fig 5B), with the
ancestral vertebrate trait being the one-to-one
wiring logic (*1, Fig 5B). The presence of multiglomerular wiring structures in the orthoptera
supports the idea that this alternative wiring could
have a functional advantage in odor processing
and has thus evolved independently multiple
times [40]. In the second scenario, the multiglomerular pattern could have evolved around the
divergence of the terrestrial tetrapod lineage from
its aquatic ancestors (*5, Fig 5B), coinciding with
the first occurrence of the VNO [9] and a huge
expansion and reshaping of the OR-type gene
family [1,47]. Given that the odorant receptor is
directly influencing axon targeting and the
formation of glomeruli [16,37], it could
potentially also have an impact on axonal
branching. Newly emerging receptors or axon
branching principles after the tetrapod divergence
could be responsible for this alternative wiring
and be more widespread in the MOE and VNO of
earlier diverging tetrapods (i.e. amphibians), and
more focally expressed in the VNO of mammals
(*6, Fig 5B).

the

Branched receptor neuron axons with multiglomerular innervation have been shown in about
10% of VRNs in the mouse AOB [34] and as a
predominant type in the main OB [26] and the
AOB of Xenopus laevis tadpoles, as well as adults
[27]. In this study we show that this wiring logic

Taken together, our results show that the
prevailing idea of an unbranched ORN axon
arborizing only in a single glomerulus cannot be
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

generalized for vertebrates any longer. While
jawless and bony fishes display the one-to-one
wiring logic that is shown for the rodent main
olfactory system, our results indicate that
bifurcating ORN axons and multi-glomerular
wiring are a general feature of the amphibian
olfactory system. This alternative wiring scheme
is neither linked to larval stages, nor to a specific
habitat or lifestyle of amphibians. It cannot be
excluded that this feature is even more common
amongst vertebrates and that it constitutes the
basis of an alternative way for odor processing.

Experimental Procedures
1. Animals
Fish species:
All sea lampreys (Petromyzon marinus) used in
this study were post-larval transformer stages
(metamorphic stage seven, both sexes) from the
Connecticut River, Turner Falls, MA. Animals
were captured and supplied by United States
Geological Survey Conte Anadromous Fish
Research Laboratory. They were kept in 420 l
tanks at 6°C ± 1°C under static renewal
conditions until used. Zebrafish (Danio rerio,
both sexes) were kept in oxygenated water tanks
at room temperature.

Acknowledgements
We thank all the present and past members of the
Manzini laboratory for fruitful discussion and
input, especially Thomas Offner and Sara Joy
Hawkins. We thank Anja Schnecko for dedicated
animal care and Gianfranco Grande and Eva
Fischer for support to set up experiments. L.W.
was granted a travel fellowship (JEBTF-180809)
by the company of Biologists Limited and the
Journal of Experimental Biology to visit the
O'Connell lab. This work was supported by DFG
Grant 4113/4-1 and in part, by Award Number
S10RR02557401 from the National Center for
Research Resources (NCRR). Its contents are
solely the responsibility of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official views of the
NCRR or the National Institutes of Health.

Amphibian species:
Albino larvae of axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum)
were obtained from the Ambystoma Genetic
Stock Center at the University of Kentucky, USA.
They were kept in oxygenated water tanks (20°C)
and fed with red mosquito larvae. Animals used
for this study were both sexes, 5-6 weeks of age.
Wild type Xenopus tropicalis larvae were bred
and reared at the Institute of Animal Physiology,
University of Giessen. They were kept in water
tanks at a water temperature of 25°C and fed with
algae. Animals used for this study were stages 4952 after Niewkoop and Faber [49].
Ranitomeya imitator tadpoles of stages 28-31
after Gosner [50] were bred in the laboratory
colony at the Biology Department of Stanford
University, Palo Alto, CA, USA. Individual
tadpoles were kept separately after hatching at a
water temperature of 25°C.
Rhinella arenarum larvae (Gosner stages 29-31)
and juvenile animals were obtained by in vitro
fertilization from a colony at the Faculdad de
Ciencias Exactas y Naturales of the University of
Buenos Aires. Scinax granulatus larvae (Gosner
stages 31-35) and juveniles were collected from
the wild (semi- temporary ponds formed in the
surroundings of the Campus of the University of
Buenos Aires). All larval animals were kept in
tanks of dechlorinated water at a temperature of

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, L.W., T.H. and I.M.;
Investigation, Formal Analysis, Visualization and
Writing – Original Draft, L.W.; Writing – Review
& Editing, L.W., L.D.J., A.G.P., B.S.Z., L.A.O.,
T.H. and I.M.; Funding Acquisition and
Resources, L.D.J., A.G.P., B.S.Z., L.A.O., T.H.
and I.M.; Supervision, T.H. and I.M.

Declaration of Interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

22°C and fed ad libitum with chard leaves.
Juvenile animals were kept in glass terraria and
fed with flies.

brainstem. The whole olfactory bulbs were
dissected out of the tissue. Samples were
immediately imaged in Ringer's solution or fixed
in 4% PFA in PBS for one hour and imaged later.

All experiments performed followed the
guidelines of Laboratory animal research of the
Institutional Care and Use Committee of the
University of Windsor (AUPP 14-05), University
of Buenos Aires (CD: 316/12, Protocol #22), the
University
of
Göttingen
(33.9-42502-0412/0779), University of Gießen, (GI 15/7,
932_GP) and Stanford University (APLAC33016).

4. Image acquisition and processing
Multi-channel image stacks (z-resolution of 1 µm)
were acquired using multi-photon microscopy at
an excitation laser-wavelength of 780 nm (upright
Nikon A1R-MP and upright Leica SP5
multiphoton microscopes). Brightness and
contrast of the stacks were adjusted using ImageJ
[52]. Since there was no dye introduced into the
tissue with a blue-wavelength emission, we used
the blue-wavelength detector (400 – 492 nm) to
image tissue auto-fluorescence. Pigmentation
derived autofluorescence was mathematically
subtracted from the other emission channels using
the image-calculator function implemented in
ImageJ. Image data are presented as maximum
intensity projections along the z-axis of the virtual
image stacks.

2. Sparse cell electroporation
Animals were anesthetized using 0.02% MS-222
(ethyl 3-aminobenzoate methanesulfonate; SigmaAldrich) in tap water until completely
unresponsive and placed on a wet tissue paper
under a stereomicroscope. ORNs were stained
using micropipettes pulled from borosilicate glass
capillaries (Warner instruments, resistance 10-15
MΩ) filled with fluorophore-coupled dextrans
(Alexa dextran 488 and 594, 10 kDa, Life
Technologies) diluted at a concentration of 3mM
in saline Ringer (Amphibian Ringer (mM): 98
NaCl, 2 KCl, 1 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 5 glucose, 5 Napyruvate, 10 Hepes, pH 7.8; Lamprey Ringer
(mM): 130 NaCl, 2.1 KCl, 2.6 CaCl 2, 1.8 MgCl2,
4 Hepes, 4 dextrose, 1 NaHCO3, pH 7.4,
Zebrafish Ringer (mM): 131 NaCl, 2 KCl, 20
NaHCO3, 1.25 KH2PO4, 2.5 CaCl2, 2 MgSO4, 10
dextrose, 5 Na-pyruvate, 10 Hepes, pH 7.2). The
pipettes were mounted on the electrode bearing
headstage of an Axoporator 800A (Axon
instruments, Molecular Devices) and inserted into
the main nasal cavity of the animals. A 500 ms
train of square voltage pulses (50 V, single pulses
300 µs at 200–300 Hz) was triggered to stain
neurons [27,51]. This protocol was repeated at
different positions inside the main nasal epithelia.
The animals were left to recover.

5. Axonal reconstructions
Individual
neuronal
morphology
was
reconstructed semi-automatically by defining
branching and endpoints of the axonal structure
from the acquired image stacks in Vaa3D [53].
Only ORN axons that could be traced from the
beginning of the nerve layer in the olfactory bulb
until their terminals in the glomerular layer were
reconstructed. The reconstructed neuron-trees
were sorted by the sort_swc algorithm
implemented in Vaa3D to define the root of the
axon as first node of the structure.
6. Structural analysis and identification of
glomeruli
Axonal reconstructions were analyzed and
quantified using custom written Python scripts in
Jupyter notebook. Spatial distribution of
branching points and length of branches and subbranches were assessed based on the
reconstructions. All data presented in regard to
branch length is measured in distances along the
axonal structure (in µm) or displayed as lengthratio in %.

3. Olfactory bulb whole mount preparation
Animals were anesthetized again (as described
above) three days after electroporation and killed
by severing the spinal cord at the level of the
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

The number of glomeruli innervated by an axonal
structure was determined using the DBSCAN
algorithm (Density-Based Spatial Clustering of
Applications with Noise) implemented in the
sklearn machine learning package written for
Python [54]. The algorithm clusters together
points that are in close spatial proximity to a lot of
neighboring points (glomerular cluster) while it
marks points far away from its closest neighbors
as low-density noise. All branching- and
endpoints of a neuron-tree structure from the root
to the terminals of the axons were used as input
points. Based on the algorithm, an axon terminal
was considered a glomerular cluster if at least
three points were in close spatial proximity. Blunt
axonal endings without terminal bifurcations were
marked as noise outliers. To account for the
different glomerular size between the various
animals used for this study, the minimal distance
for points to be considered a cluster was chosen

separately for each species and ontogenic stage
(in µm: P. marinus 90, D. rerio 20, A. mexicanum
20, X. tropicalis 11, R. arenarum premetamorphotic 10, post-metamorphotic 15, S.
granulatus
pre-metamorphotic
14,
postmetamorphotic 16, R. imitator 10). These values
were chosen based on previously reported
glomerular size (P. marinus: [55]; D. rerio:
[44] or our own glomerular tracing experiments
(all amphibian species).
7. Statistical Analysis
Averaged data are presented as mean ± standard
deviation. Statistical significance was determined
by Kruskal-Wallis rank sum test followed by
Dunn’s multiple comparison post-hoc test, unless
otherwise stated. To control familywise error rate
for multiple comparisons, a Holm-Bonferroni
correction was applied.

References
1.

Bear, D.M., Lassance, J.-M., Hoekstra, H.E., and
Datta, S.R. (2016). The evolving neural and genetic
architecture of vertebrate olfaction. Curr. Biol. 26,
R1039–R1049.

2.

Munger, S.D., Leinders-Zufall, T., and Zufall, F.
(2009). Subsystem organization of the mammalian
sense of smell. Annu. Rev. Physiol. 71, 115–140.

3.

Eisthen, H.L. (1997). Evolution of vertebrate
olfactory systems. Brain. Behav. Evol. 50, 222–233.

4.

Hansen, A., and Zeiske, E. (1998). The peripheral
olfactory organ of the zebrafish, Danio rerio: an
ultrastructural study. Chem. Senses 23, 39–48.

5.

Sato, Y. (2005). Mutually exclusive glomerular
innervation by two distinct types of olfactory
sensory neurons revealed in transgenic zebrafish. J.
Neurosci. 25, 4889–4897.

8.

Breer, H., Fleischer, J., and Strotmann, J. (2006).
The sense of smell: Multiple olfactory subsystems.
Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 63, 1465–1475.

9.

Eisthen, H.L. (1992). Phylogeny of the vomeronasal
system and of receptor cell types in the olfactory
and vomeronasal epithelia of vertebrates. Microsc.
Res. Tech. 23, 1–21.

10.

González, A. (2010). Lungfishes, like tetrapods,
possess a vomeronasal system. Front. Neuroanat. 4,
130.

11.

Mombaerts, P. (1999). Seven-transmembrane
proteins as odorant and chemosensory receptors.
Science 286, 707–711.

12.

Buck, L., and Axel, R. (1991). A novel multigene
family may encode odorant receptors: A molecular
basis for odor recognition. Cell 65, 175–187.

6.

Hamdani, E.H., and Døving, K.B. (2007). The
functional organization of the fish olfactory system.
Prog. Neurobiol. 82, 80–86.

13.

Dulac, C., and Axel, R. (1995). A novel family of
genes encoding putative pheromone receptors in
mammals. Cell 83, 195–206.

7.

Ren, X., Chang, S., Laframboise, A., Green, W.,
Dubuc, R., and Zielinski, B. (2009). Projections
from the accessory olfactory organ into the medial
region of the olfactory bulb in the sea lamprey
(Petromyzon marinus): A novel vertebrate sensory
structure? J. Comp. Neurol. 516, 105–116.

14.

Malnic, B., Hirono, J., Sato, T., and Buck, L.B.
(1999). Combinatorial receptor codes for odors.
Cell 96, 713–723.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

15.

16.

Chess, A., Simon, I., Cedar, H., and Axel, R. (1994).
Allelic inactivation regulates olfactory receptor
gene expression. Cell 78, 823–834.

28.

Mombaerts, P. (2006). Axonal wiring in the mouse
olfactory system. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol. 22,
713–737.

Klenoff, J.R., and Greer, C.A. (1998). Postnatal
development of olfactory receptor cell axonal
arbors. J. Comp. Neurol. 390, 256–267.

29.

Wells, K.D. (2007). The ecology and behavior of
amphibians (University of Chicago Press).

30.

Yilmazer-Hanke, D.M., Hudson, R., and Distel, H.
(2000). Morphology of developing olfactory axons
in the olfactory bulb of the rabbit (Oryctolagus
cuniculus): A Golgi study. J. Comp. Neurol. 426,
68–80.

31.

Marcucci, F., Maier-Balough, E., Zou, D.-J., and
Firestein, S. (2011). Exuberant growth and synapse
formation of olfactory sensory neuron axonal
arborizations. J. Comp. Neurol. 519, 3713–3726.

32.

Tenne-Brown, J., and Key, B. (1999). Errors in
lamina growth of primary olfactory axons in the rat
and mouse olfactory bulb. J. Comp. Neurol. 410,
20–30.

33.

Dynes, J.L., and Ngai, J. (1998). Pathfinding of
olfactory neuron axons to stereotyped glomerular
targets revealed by dynamic imaging in living
zebrafish embryos. Neuron 20, 1081–1091.

34.

Larriva-Sahd, J. (2008). The accessory olfactory
bulb in the adult rat: A cytological study of its cell
types, neuropil, neuronal modules, and interactions
with the main olfactory system. J. Comp. Neurol.
510, 309–350.

35.

Date-Ito, A., Ohara, H., Ichikawa, M., Mori, Y., and
Hagino-Yamagishi, K. (2008). Xenopus V1R
vomeronasal receptor family is expressed in the
main olfactory system. Chem. Senses 33, 339–346.

36.

Syed, A.S., Sansone, A., Nadler, W., Manzini, I.,
and Korsching, S.I. (2013). Ancestral amphibian
v2rs are expressed in the main olfactory epithelium.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 7714–7719.

37.

Feinstein, P., and Mombaerts, P. (2004). A
contextual model for axonal sorting into glomeruli
in the mouse olfactory system. Cell 117, 817–831.

38.

Green, W.W., Basilious, A., Dubuc, R., and
Zielinski, B.S. (2013). The neuroanatomical
organization of projection neurons associated with
different olfactory bulb pathways in the sea
lamprey, Petromyzon marinus. PLoS One 8,
e69525.

39.

Fuller, C.L., Yettaw, H.K., and Byrd, C.A. (2006).
Mitral cells in the olfactory bulb of adult zebrafish
(Danio rerio): morphology and distribution. J.
Comp. Neurol. 499, 218–230.

17.

Ressler, K.J., Sullivan, S.L., and Buck, L.B. (1994).
Information coding in the olfactory system:
Evidence for a stereotyped and highly organized
epitope map in the olfactory bulb. Cell 79, 1245–
1255.

18.

Vassar, R., Chao, S.K., Sitcheran, R., Nuñez, J.M.,
Vosshall, L.B., and Axel, R. (1994). Topographic
organization of sensory projections to the olfactory
bulb. Cell 79, 981–991.

19.

Mombaerts, P., Wang, F., Dulac, C., Chao, S.K.,
Nemes, A., Mendelsohn, M., Edmondson, J., and
Axel, R. (1996). Visualizing an olfactory sensory
map. Cell 87, 675–686.

20.

Dryer, L., and Graziadei, P.P.C. (1994). Mitral cell
dendrites: a comparative approach. Anat. Embryol.
(Berl). 189, 91–106.

21.

Belluscio, L., Koentges, G., Axel, R., and Dulac, C.
(1999). A map of pheromone receptor activation in
the mammalian brain. Cell 97, 209–220.

22.

Rodriguez, I., Feinstein, P., and Mombaerts, P.
(1999). Variable patterns of axonal projections of
sensory neurons in the mouse vomeronasal system.
Cell 97, 199–208.

23.

Ramón y Cajal, S. (1911). Histologie du systeme
nerveux de l’homme et des vertebres, Vol. 2.
Maloine, Paris, 887–890.

24.

Del Punta, K., Puche, A., Adams, N.C., Rodriguez,
I., and Mombaerts, P. (2002). A divergent pattern of
sensory axonal projections is rendered convergent
by second-order neurons in the accessory olfactory
bulb. Neuron 35, 1057–1066.

25.

Wagner, S., Gresser, A.L., Torello, A.T., and Dulac,
C. (2006). A multireceptor genetic approach
uncovers an ordered integration of VNO sensory
inputs in the accessory olfactory bulb. Neuron 50,
697–709.

26.

Nezlin, L.P., and Schild, D. (2005). Individual
olfactory sensory neurons project into more than
one glomerulus in Xenopus laevis tadpole olfactory
bulb. J. Comp. Neurol. 481, 233–239.

27.

Hassenklöver, T., and Manzini, I. (2013). Olfactory
wiring logic in amphibians challenges the basic
assumptions of the unbranched axon concept. J.

Neurosci. 33, 17247–17252.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/788133; this version posted October 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

40.

Hansson, B.S., and Stensmyr, M.C. (2011).
Evolution of insect olfaction. Neuron 72, 698–711.

41.

Ignell, R., Anton, S., and Hansson, B.S. (2001). The
antennal lobe of orthoptera - Anatomy and
evolution. Brain. Behav. Evol. 57, 1–17.

49.

Nieuwkoop, D.P., and Faber., J. (1994). Normal
Table of Xenopus laevis (Daudin). Garland, New
York.

42.

Ernst, K.D., Boeckh, J., and Boeckh, V. (1977). A
neuroanatomical study on the organization of the
central antennal pathways in insects - II.
Deutocerebral connections in Locusta migratoria
and Periplaneta americana. Cell Tissue Res. 176,
285–308.

50.

Gosner, K.L. (1960). A simplified table for staging
anuran embryos and larvae with notes on
identification. Herpetologica 16, 183–190.

51.

Haas, K., Sin, W.C., Javaherian, A., Li, Z., and
Cline, H.T. (2001). Single-cell electroporation for
gene transfer in vivo. Neuron 29, 583–591.

52.

Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E.,
Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., Preibisch, S.,
Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012).
Fiji: an open source platform for biological image
analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682.

53.

Peng, H., Ruan, Z., Long, F., Simpson, J.H., and
Myers, E.W. (2010). V3D enables real-time 3D
visualization and quantitative analysis of large-scale
biological image data sets. Nat. Biotechnol. 28,
348–353.

54.

Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., Michel,
V., Thirion, B., Grisel, O., Blondel, M.,
Prettenhofer, P., Weiss, R., Dubourg, V., et al.
(2011). Scikit-learn: Machine Learning in Python. J.
Mach. Learn. Res. 12, 2825–2830.

55.

Green, W.W., Boyes, K., Mcfadden, C., Daghfous,
G., Auclair, F., Zhang, H., Li, W., Dubuc, R., and
Zielinski, B.S. (2017). Odorant organization in the
olfactory bulb of the sea lamprey. J. Exp. Biol. 220,
1350–1359.

43.

Frontini, A., Zaidi, A.U., Hua, H., Wolak, T.P.,
Greer, C.A., Kafitz, K.W., Li, W., and Zielinski,
B.S. (2003). Glomerular territories in the olfactory
bulb from the larval stage of the sea lamprey
Petromyzon marinus. J. Comp. Neurol. 465, 27–37.

44.

Braubach, O.R., Fine, A., and Croll, R.P. (2012).
Distribution and functional organization of
glomeruli in the olfactory bulbs of zebrafish (Danio
rerio). J. Comp. Neurol. 520, 2317–2339.

45.

Manzini, I., Heermann, S., Czesnik, D., Brase, C.,
Schild, D., and Rössler, W. (2007). Presynaptic
protein distribution and odour mapping in glomeruli
of the olfactory bulb of Xenopus laevis tadpoles.
Eur. J. Neurosci. 26, 925–934.

46.

ancient continental vicariance and recent oceanic
dispersal in amphibians. Syst. Biol. 63, 779–797.

Nezlin, L.P., and Schild, D. (2000). Structure of the
olfactory bulb in tadpoles of Xenopus laevis. Cell
Tissue Res. 302, 21–29.

47.

Niimura, Y., and Nei, M. (2006). Evolutionary
dynamics of olfactory and other chemosensory
receptor genes in vertebrates. J. Hum. Genet. 51,
505–517.

48.

Pyron, R.A. (2014). Biogeographic analysis reveals

18

