bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Does variation in glucocorticoid regulation predict fitness? A phylogenetic meta-analysis.

1

2

3

Laura A. Schoenle , Cedric Zimmer , and Eliot T. Miller , Maren N. Vitousek

2,3

Affiliations:
1. Office of Undergraduate Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA
2. Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, 14853,
USA
3. Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca NY 14850, USA

Corresponding author: Laura Schoenle, las86@cornell.edu, Cornell University, Office of
Undergraduate Biology, Ithaca, NY, 14853, USA

ABSTRACT

Glucocorticoid hormones (GCs) are central mediators of metabolism and the response to
challenges. Because circulating levels of GCs increase in response to challenges, withinpopulation variation in GCs could reflect individual variation in condition or experience. At the
same time, individual variation in the degree to which GCs increase in response to challenges
(which is relatively consistent within individuals over time) could have causal effects on stress
coping capacity, and the ability to survive and reproduce. Although a number of studies in
vertebrates have tested whether within-population variation in GCs predicts components of
fitness, it is not clear whether there are consistent patterns across taxa. Here we present the
first phylogenetic meta-analysis testing whether within-population variation in GCs is
associated with components of fitness across vertebrates. At the same time, we introduce and
test predictions about an overlooked but potentially important mediator of GC-fitness
relationships: life history context. We suggest that strong context-dependence in the fitness
benefit of maintaining elevated GCs could obscure consistent patterns between GCs and fitness
across taxa. Meta-analyses revealed that across vertebrates, baseline and stress-induced GCs
were consistently negatively correlated with reproductive success. This relationship did not

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

differ depending on life history context. In contrast, the relationships between GCs and survival
were highly context dependent, differing according to life history strategy. Both baseline and
stress-induced GCs were more strongly negatively associated with survival in longer-lived
populations and species. Stress-induced GCs were also more negatively associated with survival
in organisms that engage in relatively more valuable reproductive attempts. Fecal GCs did not
predict survival or reproductive success. We also used a meta-analytic approach to test
whether experimental increases in GCs had consistent causal effects on fitness. Experimental
increases in GCs reduced both survival and reproductive success, although the latter
relationship was not significant when accounting for phylogeny. Overall, these results support
the prediction that GC-fitness relationships can be strongly context dependent, and suggest
that incorporating life history may be particularly important for understanding GC-survival
relationships. Future studies that explore the role of other aspects of context (e.g., the nature
and frequency of stressors, environmental variation) within and across species could provide
important insights how and when variation in GC regulation predicts fitness.

: glucocorticoid, fitness, stress, reproduction, survival, meta-analysis

Key words

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

CONTENTS

I.

Introduction
(1) GCs and fitness
(2) Context-dependence in GC-fitness relationships: a role for life history
(3) Hormone manipulations and fitness
(4) GC-fitness meta-analyses

II.

Methods
(1) Literature search
(2) Inclusion/exclusion criteria
(3) Data extraction and effect size calculations
(4) Building the phylogeny
(5) Meta-analysis
(6) Moderator analyses
(7) Tests for publication bias

III.

Results
(1) GC-fitness dataset
(2) Baseline GCs and survival
(3) Baseline GCs and reproductive success
(4) Stress-induced GCs and survival
(5) Stress-induced GCs and reproductive success
(6) Fecal GCs and fitness
(7) Experimentally elevated GCs and fitness
(8) Tests for publication bias

IV.

Discussion
(1) Plasma GCs and survival
(2) Plasma GCs and reproductive success
(3) Fecal GCs and fitness
(4) Experimentally elevated GCs and fitness

V.

Conclusions

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

I.

INTRODUCTION

In vertebrates, glucocorticoid (GC) hormones play a critical role in mediating the phenotypic
plasticity required to live in a dynamic environment. When an individual detects a challenge in
the environment, corresponding changes in GCs enable the coordination of a suite of
physiological and behavioral traits to match current conditions. GCs support responses to
energetically expensive challenges that are predictable (e.g., feeding offspring: (Bonier et al.,
2009b)) or unpredictable in nature (e.g., winter storms or predation risk: (Boonstra, 2012;
Ramenofsky & Wingfield, 2017)). GCs also coordinate life history trade-offs and transitions
among life history stages (Wada, 2008; Crespi et al., 2013). These presumably adaptive
functions of GCs are highly conserved across vertebrates, but maintaining high GC
concentrations in order to cope with challenges can also impose costs. GCs can accelerate
senescence, increase disease risk, and damage tissues, such as the brain, that are integral to
organismal function (McEwen, 2008; Haussmann & Marchetto, 2010; Angelier et al., 2018). As a
result, the way individuals regulate GC concentrations influences not only their ability to
navigate challenges in the short term, but also fitness.
What is the optimal GC-response to challenges? How should GCs be regulated to best
match phenotype to the environment while also minimizing the costs of elevated GC
concentrations? Answering these questions requires understanding how GC regulation relates
to two components of fitness: survival and reproductive success. Describing these relationships
has proved challenging in part because of differences in the way GCs shape different
components of fitness. A recent meta-analysis in seabirds demonstrated that the relationship
between baseline GCs measured in plasma and fitness varied widely depending on the specific
metric used to estimate fitness (Sorenson et al., 2017). Overall, baseline GCs were negatively
associated with reproductive success and food availability, but were not associated with other
measures often thought to be indicative of survival ability, such as body condition and foraging
effort or reproductive success, including parental care behaviors (Sorenson et al., 2017). When
considering the numerous empirical studies addressing these relationships using similar fitness
measures, variation in environmental conditions as well as individuals’ physiological conditions,
life history strategy and evolutionary history have made it challenging to draw generalizable

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

conclusions. Previous qualitative reviews of GC-fitness relationships (Breuner, Patterson, &
Hahn, 2008; Bonier et al., 2009a; Crespi et al., 2013; Schoenle, Zimmer, & Vitousek, 2018a)
suggest that the relationships between GCs and both survival and reproductive success are not
consistent and vary across these contexts. However, we know of no comparative studies to
date that have investigated how context affects GC-fitness relationships.
Here we use a phylogenetic meta-analysis approach to test: 1) whether GC levels are
consistently related to reproductive success and survival across vertebrates, and 2) whether
these GC-fitness relationships vary with life history traits. We first test the relationships
between natural variation in baseline, stress-induced, and fecal measures of GCs and fitness
metrics. Next, we determine whether GC manipulations have consistent impacts on survival
and reproduction across species. Then, we use species- and population-level life history data to
test for a role of life history in influencing GC-fitness relationships. We identify how GC-fitness
relationships vary with three components of life history: sex, longevity, and the value of a
reproductive bout. A large number of studies addressed the relationship between natural
variation in baseline GCs and reproductive success among avian species (Table 1), and thus, we
also evaluate how GC-fitness relationships differ across two life history sub-stages of breeding
birds: incubation of eggs and chick-rearing.

(1) GCs and fitness

The mechanisms of GC action are important to understanding the relationships between
GCs and fitness in vertebrates. At baseline levels, GCs reflect the overall energetic demands
facing an animal, fluctuate with daily and seasonal rhythms, and change across life history
stages (Landys, Ramenofsky, & Wingfield, 2006). When an individual perceives a challenge, the
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal/interrenal (HPA/HPI) axis initiates a hormonal cascade that
leads to the secretion of GCs. If the challenge is an immediate threat – such as a predator attack
– GC concentrations increase rapidly, and are subsequently downregulated via negative
feedback (Sapolsky, Romero, & Munck, 2000; Myers, Mcklveen, & Herman, 2012; Cockrem,
2013). GC regulation is often assessed by measuring plasma GC levels as either baseline
(circulating concentrations in the absence of an acute challenge) or stress-induced (circulating

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

concentrations after a standardized restraint stress). GC levels can also be measured in other
tissues or matrices, including fecal and feather GCs (which are assumed to reflect GCs over
longer time periods).
Baseline GC concentrations tend to mediate aspects of behavior and physiology related to
maintaining energetic balance, including foraging behavior, body mass, and metabolism. The
link between GCs and energetic challenges led to the hypothesis that individuals with higher
baseline GCs are facing more challenging conditions, and thus, will have lower reproductive
success and survival rates (reviewed in Bonier et al., 2009a). However, because GCs mediate
behaviors and physiological functions that can help individuals overcome challenges, higher
baseline GCs could also increase reproductive success or survival rates depending on the nature
of the challenge(s) individuals face (Bonier et al., 2009a; Schoenle et al., 2018). For example, in
some avian species, higher baseline GCs predict greater reproductive success during the
energetically expensive life history stage in which parents are feeding their offspring,
presumably because GCs help mediate the physiological and behavioral phenotypes needed to
care for young (Bonier et al., 2009b; Burtka, Lovern, & Grindstaff, 2016; Henderson et al.,
2017).
Stress-induced GC concentrations have long been thought to mediate the central life history
trade-off between survival and reproduction in favor of immediate survival (Wingfield &
Romero, 2001). At the time of the last comprehensive review (Breuner et al., 2008) there were
few empirical tests of the relationship between stress-induced plasma GCs and either survival
or reproductive success. The prevailing theory has remained that stress-induced GCs promote
survival to the detriment of non-essential activities such as reproduction (Schoenle et al., 2018).
However, whether or not stress-induced GCs will promote survival could depend on the nature
of the challenge(s) and the frequency or intensity of the challenge(s) (Schoenle et al., 2018).
GC-mediated changes in phenotype will not improve chances of survival if the challenge cannot
be escaped, avoided, or overcome. For example, if individuals are at risk for starvation and no
food is available, the challenge cannot be escaped, and higher GCs will be associated with
starvation risk, and likely mortality (Wingfield et al., 1998; Romero & Wikelski, 2010).
Furthermore, evidence suggests that high GC reactivity in response to stressors generally

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

promotes survival in high risk environments, but might prove costly in low risk environments
(Schoenle et al., 2018). For example, among American redstarts (Setophaga ruticilla)
overwintering in low-quality environments, those with higher stress-induced GC levels are more
likely to survive; however, there is no relationship between stress-induced GCs and survival
among birds overwintering in environments with higher food availability (Angelier, Holberton,
& Marra, 2009).
As stress-induced GCs are assumed to promote survival to the detriment of reproduction,
high stress-induced GC levels are usually associated with reduced reproductive success. For
example, individuals that respond to a standardized stressor with higher stress-induced GC
levels have lower fledging success in female barn swallows (Hirundo rustica erythrogaster)
(Vitousek, Jenkins, & Safran, 2014), and higher rates of nest desertion in male great tits (Parus

major) (Ouyang, Quetting, & Hau, 2012). Therefore, it has been proposed that breeding
individuals should reduce their acute stress response when the value of the current
reproductive bout is high (Bókony et al., 2009). Lapland longspurs (Calcarius lapponicus)
attenuate their stress response when facing a snow storm during the parental stage but not
during the pre-parental stage (Krause et al., 2016). However, if mounting a strong stress
response during breeding allows individuals to cope efficiently with challenges and then resume
breeding activities, high stress-induced GCs can potentially be positively associated with
reproductive success. For example, female tree swallows (Tachycineta bicolor) that show a
strong stress response to a standardized stressor are less likely to abandon their nest during
incubation under challenging conditions – as long as this response is coupled with the ability to
effectively terminate the stress response through negative feedback (Zimmer et al., 2019).
Because the benefit of elevated GCs is expected to vary across contexts, and life history can
influence GC-fitness relationships (described below), we predict that meta-analyses will show
context-dependent rather than consistent relationships between baseline GCs or fecal GCs and
metrics of fitness. Similarly, we predict that analyses that do not incorporate context
dependence will find no consistent relationship between variation in stress-induced GCs and
survival; however, we predict that individuals that maintain higher stress-induced GCs during
reproduction will have consistently lower reproductive success.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(2) Context-dependence in GC-fitness relationships: a role for life history

The fields of evolutionary and behavioral endocrinology have long posited that the
relationships between hormones and fitness depend on context, and in particular, life history
(Breuner, 2010; Williams, 2012). However, few studies have empirically tested how GC-fitness
relationships vary with life history traits. Among those that have, the effects of GCs on survival
and reproduction differ with life history strategy. For example, in both side blotched lizards
(Uta stansburiana) and black-legged kittiwakes (Rissa tridactyla), experimental increases in GCs
reduce reproduction in groups of animals (color morphs in the lizards and populations in
kittiwakes) demonstrating slower paces-of-life (i.e., more K-selected strategies), but not in
individuals with faster paces-of-life (i.e., r-selected strategies) (Lancaster et al., 2008; Schultner

et al., 2013). Large-scale, cross-species analyses will be necessary to understand if these
patterns are generalizable. Here, we test whether life history traits – including longevity and the
value of a single reproductive bout – influence GC-fitness relationships across species. We
include sex as a factor in our analyses, but we do not make explicit predictions for how sex
should shape the GC-fitness relationship, as we predict this will be highly dependent on the
breeding system.
Longevity could shape the relationship between GC concentrations and fitness in several
ways. Because GCs are thought to promote survival in the face of challenges (Sapolsky et al.,
2000; Breuner et al., 2008), we might expect selection to favor individuals with elevated GC
levels. If so, longer-lived species could have elevated GC concentrations (Hau et al., 2010), and
potentially, more positive GC-survival relationships within populations. Alternatively,
maintaining high concentrations of glucocorticoids could impose physiological costs that
accumulate over time (McEwen & Seeman, 2004), and thus longer-lived animals could suffer
greater costs of high GCs than shorter-lived animals (Schoenle et al., 2018). If GCs have
cumulative costs, we predict that longer-lived animals will have more negative GC-fitness
relationships, both in terms of survival and reproduction. While a recent phylogenetic
comparative analysis tested this prediction across species (Vitousek et al., 2019), we know of no

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

studies that have investigated how the relationships between individual variation in GCs and
fitness metrics vary with longevity across species.
The value of a reproductive bout is also a critical life history trait that is connected to paceof-life. Species with faster paces-of-life tend to have fewer reproductive bouts and produce
more offspring each bout than those with slower paces-of-life; thus, on average each
reproductive attempt represents a greater proportion of total lifetime reproductive effort in
these species (higher reproductive value: (Bókony et al., 2009; Vitousek et al., 2019)). Because
acutely elevated GCs often downregulate reproduction in favor of survival, we generally predict
a more negative relationship between stress-induced GCs and reproductive success when
reproductive value is high. However, in species that engage in particularly high value
reproductive attempts, selection could also favor individuals in which acutely elevated GCs do
not downregulate reproduction (Boonstra & Boag, 1992; McConnachie et al., 2012). In these
species, we would expect no relationship between stress-induced GCs and reproductive
success. Because elevated baseline GCs may help to support periods of energetic challenge, we
predict more positive baseline GC-reproductive success relationships in species with higher
reproductive value (Bókony et al., 2009; Schoenle et al., 2017). We do not expect that
relationships between baseline GCs and survival will differ according to reproductive value.
Because of the role of baseline GCs in supporting energetically demanding periods, we also
predict that GC-fitness relationships will differ across life history stages (Bokony et al. 2009). In
birds, we predict less negative relationships between baseline GCs and reproductive success
during the offspring provisioning period than during incubation, because elevated baseline GCs
could help to support this energetically demanding period (Bonier et al., 2009b).

(3) Hormone Manipulations and Fitness

In addition to measuring correlations between natural variation in GCs and fitness measures,
some studies have manipulated GCs to determine whether or not GCs can cause increases or
decreases in survival or reproductive success. Ideally, GC manipulations would confirm the
results from studies of natural GC variation, and predictions for the relationships between
experimental elevations of GCs and fitness metrics would mirror those for natural variation in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

GCs. However, hormone manipulations might not simply produce the same results as natural
variations in concentrations of GCs. Nearly all GC-manipulation studies in wildlife use
techniques such as slow-release implants, topical treatments, food supplementation, or
injection to increase GC concentrations (Sopinka et al., 2015). If GC manipulations can
successfully elevate GCs within the normal physiological range for a species – a common
concern for such studies – most manipulations remain unable to replicate the pulsatile, cyclic
release of endogenous hormones (Fusani, 2008; Dantzer, Westrick, & van Kesteren, 2016).
Therefore, experimental manipulations of GCs could influence not just hormone
concentrations, but the entire HPA axis, including receptor expression and negative feedback,
thus altering GC’s downstream effects (Fusani, 2008). Furthermore, hormone regulation has
been selected over evolutionary time, and as a result, GC manipulations that move individuals’
hormone concentrations away from their natural concentrations could have negative effects on
multiple aspects of fitness (Crossin et al., 2016; Schoenle et al., 2019). Thus, we predict that
experimental increases in GCs will reduce both survival and reproduction.

(4) GC-fitness meta-analyses

To evaluate how GCs relate to reproductive success and survival across vertebrates we
performed eight meta-analyses of the following relationships: 1) baseline GCs and survival, 2)
baseline GCs and reproduction, 3) stress-induced GCs and survival, 4) stress-induced GCs and
reproduction, 5) fecal GC metabolites and survival, 6) fecal GC metabolites and reproduction, 7)
experimentally manipulated GCs and survival, and 8) experimentally manipulated GCs and
reproduction. To test whether GC-fitness relationships vary with context, specifically life
history, we used moderator analyses to test how longevity, the value of a reproductive bout,
and sex relate to relationships between GCs and both survival and reproductive success. We
were further able to test predictions about the role of life history substages in influencing
baseline GC-reproductive success relationships using the large number of effect sizes present in
the avian literature (n = 55). Here we conducted a meta-analysis of baseline GC-reproductive
success within birds alone that included an additional moderator: breeding life history substage

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(incubation or chick-rearing). Finally, we tested for an effect of publication bias on the results of
each analysis.

II.

METHODS

(1) Literature Search

We performed a systematic review of the literature assessing the relationship between
GCs and fitness metrics including both observational studies and hormone manipulation
experiments. We identified relevant research by searching Web of Science using combinations
of the terms “gluc*,” “cort*,” “fitness,” “survival,” and “reproduction,” and searching Google
Scholar (which does not allow for searching with truncations and wildcards), using many
variants of the hormone names (e.g., GC, GCs, glucocorticoids, cortisol). Additionally, we
searched forward and reverse citations of review and synthesis papers addressing the GCfitness relationship including: Breuner et al. 2008, Bonier et al. 2009, Hau et al. 2010, Sorenson
et al. 2017. The search included literature published (including online publication) before
January 2018.

(2) Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria

We included studies that met the following inclusion/exclusion criteria: 1) Studies must
have been conducted in free living vertebrates. 2) Observational studies must have measured
both a fitness metric(s) and GC hormones as either baseline plasma GC concentrations, stressinduced plasma GC concentrations, or fecal GC metabolites. 3) Experimental hormone
manipulations must have both directly altered GC concentrations by administering a hormone
treatment with the goal of increasing GC levels and also assessed fitness metrics posttreatment. Studies that indirectly manipulated GCs (e.g., by food supplementation) were
excluded. 4) Studies assessing survival rates must have evaluated mortality measuring return
rates, re-sightings, or comprehensive tracking that allowed for determination of death. 5)
Studies assessing reproductive success must have measured both GCs and reproductive success
within the same reproductive season (i.e., not carry-over effects). 6) Measures of reproductive

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

success must either have been the number of offspring produced or a binary, definitive
evaluation of success or failure (e.g., abandoned or successfully reared offspring).

(3)

Data extraction and effect size calculations

We collected effect sizes for the relationship between GCs and fitness metrics from
2

2

reported test statistics (e.g., F, χ , z, R , r). We identified whether the fitness metric was
indicative of survival or reproductive success and recorded the specific fitness measure used.
For studies in which GC concentrations were manipulated, we recorded the length of time from
administering the treatment until assessing the fitness metric. We also recorded the sample
size, degrees of freedom (when relevant), and direction of the GC-fitness relationship. We
assigned a positive value for the direction of the relationship when higher GCs were associated
with higher rates of survival or reproduction and a negative value when higher GCs were linked
to lower rates of survival or reproduction. For 9 effect sizes in which the GC-fitness relationship
was not significant, we were unable to identify the direction of the relationship. We ran all
analyses including these studies (meta-analyses for baseline GCs and experimental
manipulations of GCs) by assigning all effect sizes a negative value or all a positive value (as in
Bentz, Becker, & Navara, 2016). The results of the meta-analyses did not differ qualitatively
when these studies were assigned all negative or all positive values. We report the results from
all analyses assuming a positive relationship. In cases where the statistics were not reported
explicitly (often the case in publications using model selection as the primary analytic tool), but
data were available in a repository, we used the raw data to calculate the correlation
coefficient r. Alternatively, if the data were not available in a repository, but were presented in
a scatterplot, we used WebPlotDigitizer version 3.9 (Ankit Rohatgi, Austin, Texas, USA) to
extract data and calculate r. When statistics were not reported and we were unable to access
the data from a repository or graph, we contacted the corresponding author and requested
data or statistics (25 effect sizes from 5 studies were obtained from author inquiries). The
sources for each effect size are included in the supplementary material.
All effect sizes were converted to the correlation coefficient r using formulas from:
Rosenthal & Dimatteo (2001), Nakagawa & Cuthill (2007), and Rosenberg, Rothstein, &

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Gurevitch (2013). There is no widely accepted way to identify degrees of freedom from random
effects models. Thus, we followed a technique used in recent meta-analyses (Bentz et al.,
2016), and when calculating effect sizes from random effects models we converted the p-value
to a normal deviate Z-score and calculated r as

 /√ (Rosenthal & Dimatteo, 2001). If the

p-value was reported as less than a value (e.g. < 0.001), then we used that value to calculate r.
To avoid pseudo-replication, each effect size was assigned a reference ID and a group ID
to be used as random effects in the analyses. Reference IDs were a unique number associated
with each publication such that all effect sizes from a single publication were assigned the same
reference ID. Group IDs indicated if the same individuals were used to calculate multiple effect
sizes (e.g., the relationship was measured across multiple years or seasons using the same
individuals), either within the same publication or across multiple publications.
For observational studies, we recorded whether the hormone measure was baseline,
stress-induced, or from fecal metabolites based on the authors’ classification of the measure.
Although not included in the analyses, we also recorded the latency from capture until
collecting blood to measure baseline GCs and the time after restraint at which stress-induced
GCs were measured. Among studies of baseline GCs, most effect sizes were calculated using
GCs measured in plasma samples collected within 3 minutes after capturing the animal (n = 52).
However, several studies (n = 7) measured GCs over a longer time window (e.g., up to 5
minutes) but either verified that concentrations did not increase from baseline levels within
that selected time period (e.g. Strasser & Heath, 2013)) or collected most samples in less than 3
minutes, but the maximum latency was longer (e.g. Nelson et al., 2015). Although they met all
other requirements for the analysis, we excluded 2 studies that collected blood samples 10
minutes after capture (Beletsky, Orians, & Wingfield, 1989, 1992) and did not justify that
hormone levels could be considered baseline. Latency to sample for baseline GCs was not
recorded for 8 effect sizes, but studies reported collecting the samples immediately after
capture (e.g. Magee, Neff, & Knapp, 2006) or using non-invasive sampling methods, such as
blood-sucking insects (Bauch et al., 2016), and these were retained in the analysis. We also
recorded the length of the standardized period of restraint used prior to collecting a blood
sample for stress-induced GCs. The time between stressor exposure and peak stress-induced

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

GCs varies across species and individuals, and most species peak after 14-60 minutes of
restraint (Breuner et al., 2008; Satterthwaite et al., 2010; Small et al., 2017). We chose to
accept authors’ selected timeframes as an acceptable measure for stress-induced GCs. Fecal
metabolites were considered an integrative measure of hormones and were not associated
with a specific time range.
For each effect size, we collected data on life history variables that could influence the
direction or strength of the GC-fitness relationship. We recorded species, sex (male, female, or
pooled sexes), life history stage in which the sample was collected (breeding, non-breeding, or
year-round). We defined breeding as the periods of time involving preparing for breeding (e.g.,
mate attraction, nest building), mating, and caring for offspring shortly after birth or hatching
(e.g. provisioning young in the nest (birds), lactation (mammals)). Any periods outside of this
window were classified as non-breeding. We categorized studies collecting data across
breeding and non-breeding stages as year-round. All studies of GC-reproductive success
relationships measured GCs during breeding. We also recorded the specific sub-stage of
breeding (e.g., lactation, spawning, incubation, chick-rearing). Among the included studies, nonbreeding periods were distinguished from breeding periods in that they were in a spatially
distinct location, did not involve parental care, or were explicitly identified by the authors as
non-breeding.
We collected species- and population-level life history data to test how life history
shapes GC-fitness relationships. We obtained these life history variables from the extended
HormoneBase dataset (Johnson et al., 2018) including: maximum longevity, litter or clutch size,
and the number of litters/clutches per year. For any species that were not in HormoneBase, we
obtained these life history variables from the Amniote (Myhrvold et al., 2015) and AnAge (De
Magalhaes & Costa, 2009) databases. From these variables, we calculated the expected value of
a single reproductive bout (called “brood value” in the avian literature) following the formula in
Bókony et al. (2009): log10(clutch or litter size/[clutch or litter size x bouts per year x maximum
lifespan])

(4) Building the phylogeny

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We built a phylogeny to incorporate the evolutionary relationships among the study
taxa following an identical pipeline to that described in Johnson et al., (2018). In short, we used
manual taxonomic reconciliation to match every study species to a tip in a recent, large taxonspecific phylogeny: ray- finned fishes (Rabosky et al., 2013), amphibians (Pyron & Wiens, 2011;
Eastman, Harmon, & Tank, 2013), mammals, squamates (Pyron, Burbrink, & Wiens, 2013),
turtles (Jaffe, Slater, & Alfaro, 2011), and birds (Jetz et al., 2012). We then pruned these taxonspecific trees to the manually matched study species, employing tip-row swaps for
phylogenetically equivalent species when necessary (Pennell, FitzJohn, & Cornwell, 2016).
Finally, we bound these taxon-specific trees into a backbone, vertebrate-scale phylogeny
created with the TimeTree of Life (Kumar et al., 2017) such that the final tree was ultrametric
and contained one tip for every species in the study.

(5) Meta-analysis

All analyses were performed in R version 3.5.1 (R Core Team, 2018) and meta-analyses
were performed using the package metafor (Viechtbauer, 2010). Before performing any
analyses, we used the escalc function in metafor to convert the correlation coefficients r to the
standardized, normally distributed effect size Fisher’s Z and to calculate the sampling variance
for each effect size (as described in Holtmann, Lagisz, & Nakagawa, 2016; Taff, Schoenle, &
Vitousek, 2018). Results were back-transformed to r to support easier interpretation.
We performed meta-analyses using linear mixed models using the rma.mv function in

metafor to control for the non-independence of effect sizes collected from the same study,
species, or individuals as well as non-independence associated with phylogenetic relationships.
Thus, we tested for the importance of the random effects in the models following Foo et al.,
(2016). We tested the importance of the reference ID, species, and whenever relevant, group ID
using likelihood ratio tests. We separately tested each random variable for significance within
an intercept-only meta-analysis. Variables that were found to be significant in these individual
analyses were then included in an intercept-only model. We checked which of these random
effects remained significant after accounting for the others, and only retained those random

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

effects in the general models. We report the retained effects in Table 3 and the statistics from
each test in the electronic supplementary material.
We determined the overall effect sizes for the relationships between glucocorticoids
and fitness with restricted maximum likelihood meta-analytic models including the selected
random effects using the rma.mv function. We used a phylogenetic meta-analysis to account
for the expectation of similar trait values among related species by including these relationships
in the form of a phylogenetic correlation matrix random effect. For each meta-analysis, we
2

2

calculated the heterogeneity statistic I using the rma.uni function (reported in Table 3). I is the
percent of variability in the effect sizes (0-100%) that is due to variation in the effects (rather
than sampling error) from an intercept only model with no random effects. This variation in the
GC-fitness relationship might be accounted for by other moderators (e.g. sex, life history stage,
breeding stage, or other factors).

(6) Moderator Analyses

For the meta-analyses including baseline, stress-induced, and manipulated GCs, we
tested three moderators: sex, the value of a reproductive bout, and longevity. We were unable
to test for correlations between sex and fecal GC-fitness relationships because of a lack of
effect sizes for both males and females. We conducted all moderator analyses using
phylogenetically informed meta-analyses with moderators as fixed effects and the previously
selected random effects using the rma.mv function. Because the sample size varied for
different moderator analyses, we performed a separate meta-regression model for each
moderator rather than including all moderators in a single analysis.
The large number of effect sizes from birds allowed us to perform additional moderator
analyses to further explore the role of context in GC-fitness relationships. We first performed a
baseline GC-reproductive success meta-analysis using effect sizes from birds only. Of the 48
effect sizes, 40 were from distinct substages of breeding: incubation and chick-rearing. Thus,
following the main meta-analysis, we were able to run moderator analyses specific to birds,
including not only sex, value of a reproductive bout, and longevity, but we also tested whether
the relationship between GCs and reproductive success varied across life history substages.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We also performed a moderator analysis using the effect sizes from studies

manipulating GC concentrations. We tested whether or not the length of time between the

hormone manipulation and when the fitness metric was assessed influenced the relationship

between GCs and fitness. If the effects of GCs on fitness are limited to the short-term, then as

more time passes between the treatment and assessing fitness measures the effect sizes will

approach 0.

(7) Tests for publication bias
We tested each of the eight meta-analyses for evidence of publication bias in several

ways. We performed Egger’s regression test (Egger

models with the

et al., 1997) using the overall intercept-only

regtest function in metafor. Egger’s test evaluates the relationship between

standardized residuals and study precision. We also conducted a trim-and-fill analysis using the

trimfill function in metafor to test for asymmetry among effect sizes in a funnel plot. Funnel
plot asymmetry can indicate heterogeneity among effect sizes or publication bias in favor of

significant results. Finally, we used a linear regression to evaluate the relationship between

publication year and effect size for time-lag bias. Evidence of time-lag bias occurs when effect

sizes approach zero as time passes because studies with larger effect sizes are published faster

or earlier than those with smaller effect sizes.

III.

Results

(1) GC-fitness dataset
Our dataset included 137 effect sizes from 59 publications (complete dataset provided

in the supplementary material). Table 1 illustrates the distribution of effect sizes from

observational studies by taxa, fitness measure, GC sample type, and the life history stage when

samples were collected. Table 2 shows the distribution of effect sizes from hormone

manipulation studies by taxa and fitness measure. All observational and experimental studies

addressing GC-reproductive success relationships were conducted during breeding (i.e., blood

sample collection and hormone manipulations were conducted during the same breeding

season in that reproductive success was measured). The meta-analyses demonstrated that the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

relationships between GCs and fitness vary with the hormone sample type and the fitness

metric used (Figure 1). The final models for the meta-analysis, including the random effects

2

retained, variance explained by shared evolutionary history, and I

(the percent of variability in

effect sizes due to variation in the effects rather than sampling error), are summarized in Table

3. Details for the tests of significance of random effects are included in the supplementary

material.

(2) Baseline GCs and survival
Higher baseline GCs were associated with lower survival, but the effect was small and

the relationship was not significant when incorporating the expected covariance between

related species due to shared evolutionary history (Figure 1, Table 3). Moderator analyses

revealed that populations and species with slower paces-of-life had more negative baseline GC-

survival relationships. Longer-lived populations and species had more negative baseline GC-

β = -0.01, 95% CI = -0.019 - -0.0014,

survival relationships than their shorter-lived counterparts (

p = 0.02, n = 14, Figure 2a). Similarly, animals with a lower value for a single reproductive bout
tended to show more negative baseline GC-survival relationships, but the effect was not

β = 0.35, 95% CI = -0.02 – 0.64, p = 0.06, n = 14, Figure 2b). Sex was not associated

significant (

with the baseline GC-survival relationship (males relative to females,

– 0.12,

(3)

β = -0.043, 95% CI = -0.21

p = 0.61, n = 10).

Baseline GCs and reproductive success
Overall, higher baseline GC concentrations during reproduction were associated with

lower reproductive success; this relationship was identical for the standard and

phylogenetically-controlled meta-analyses (Figure 1). None of the moderators accounted for

the variation in the relationships between baseline GCs and reproductive success (sex (male):

= 0.076, 95% CI = -0.037 – 0.19,

0.32,

β

p = 0.19, n = 45; reproductive value: β = 0.057, 95% CI = -0.22 –

p = 0.69, n = 53; longevity: β = 0.0012, 95% CI = -0.15 – 0.16, p = 0.99, n = 53).
Meta-analyses within birds alone that included breeding life history stage as an

additional moderator also revealed a significant negative relationship between baseline GCs

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and reproduction for both the standard and phylogenetically informed meta-analyses (for both,

r = -0.12, 95% CI = -0.21 – 0.029,

p = 0.01, n = 48). None of the moderators, including breeding

β

life history substage, explained the heterogeneity in GC-reproduction effect sizes (sex: (male)

= -0.079, 95% CI = -0.045 – 0.20,

95% CI = -0.0044 – 0.24,

p = 0.21, n = 40; breeding substage: (chick-rearing) β = 0.12,

p = 0.059, n = 40; longevity: β = -0.002, 95% CI = -0.012 – 0.0077, p =

0.68, n = 48; value of a reproductive bout:

β = -0.05, 95% CI = -0.40 – 0.31, p = 0.79, n = 48).

(4) Stress-induced GCs and survival
Overall, the correlation between stress-induced GCs and survival was not significant.

Both the phylogenetically informed meta-analysis and the standard meta-analysis produced

qualitatively similar results (Figure 1). Relationships between stress-induced GCs and survival

appeared to be strongly context dependent. Studies conducted in longer-lived animals found

β=-

more negative GC-survival relationships than those conducted in shorter-lived animals (

0.01, 95% CI = -0.02 - -0.002,

p = 0.01, n = 11, Figure 3a). In addition, animals with a higher value

β = 0.28, 95% CI =

for a single reproductive bout had more positive GC-survival relationships (

0.06 – 0.48,

p = 0.01, n = 11, Figure 3b). Sex was not associated with the GC-survival

relationship (males relative to females,

β = 0.023, 95% CI = -0.12 – 0.16, p = 0.74, n = 8).

(5) Stress-induced GCs and reproductive success

Both the phylogenetically informed and standard meta-analyses demonstrate a

significant, negative relationship between stress-induced GCs and reproductive success (Figure

1). Moderators did not explain any of the observed variation in effect sizes (sex (male):

0.086, 95% CI = -0.20 – 0.036,

-0.96 – 0.068,

β=-

p = 0.17, n = 15; value of a reproductive bout: β = -0.014, 95% CI =

p = 0.74, n = 16; longevity: β = 0.0062, 95% CI = -0.0085 – 0.021, p = 0.41, n = 16).

(6) Fecal GCs and fitness
Overall, fecal glucocorticoids were negatively associated with survival, but the

relationship was not significant after incorporating the expected covariance in traits among

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

related species (Figure 1). Because there were no data for females, we were unable to test for

an effect of sex. None of the other moderators (value of a reproductive bout:

-0.57 – 0.85,

β = 0.30, 95% CI =

p = 0.53, n = 10; longevity: β = -0.015, 95% CI = -0.05 – 0.015, p = 0.32, n = 10)

accounted for the remaining heterogeneity in the data.

No relationship was uncovered between fecal GCs and reproductive success with either

the standard or phylogenetically informed meta-analyses (Figure 1). Because there were no

effect sizes for males, we were unable to test for an effect of sex. Although substantial

heterogeneity exists in the data, none of the moderators explained this variation (value of a

reproductive bout:

= -0.26 – 0.48,

β = 0.037, 95% CI = -0.44 – 0.49, p = 0.89, n = 12; longevity: β = 0.13, 95% CI

p = 0.51, n = 12).

(7) Experimentally elevated GCs and fitness
Both the standard and phylogenetically informed meta-analyses showed that

experimentally increasing GCs reduced survival (Figure 1). None of the life history moderators

(sex (M):

β = -0.25, 95% CI = -0.52 – 0.075, p = 0.13, n = 5; value of a reproductive bout: β =

0.46, 95% CI = -0.15 – 0.82,

p = 0.13, n = 6; longevity: β = -0.0098, 95% CI = -0.023 – 0.003, p =

0.13, n =6) explained the remaining heterogeneity in the data; however, this is unsurprising

given the small sample size. The effect of GC manipulation on survival was associated with the

length of time between administering treatment and assessing survival. More time before

assessing survival yielded more negative relationships between GC treatment and survival,

β = -0.0005, 95% CI = -0.0009 – 0.000, p = 0.036, n = 6).

though the effect is very small (

Overall, experimental elevations of GCs reduced reproductive success, but this

relationship was not significant after incorporating the expected covariance among related

species (Figure 1). None of the life history moderators (sex (M):

β = 0.016, 95% CI = -0.45 – 0.47,

p = 0.95, n = 12; value of a reproductive bout: β = 0.46, 95% CI = -0.85 – 0.98, p = 0.58, n = 15;
longevity:

β = -0.016, 95% CI = -0.049 – 0.017, p = 0.34, n = 15) or time from treatment until
β = 0.0002, 95% CI = -0.0011 – 0.0016, p = 0.73, n = 14)

measuring reproductive success (

explained the heterogeneity in effect sizes.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(8) Tests for publication bias
Egger’s test for bias, the trim and fill test for missing data, and an investigation of

patterns in effect sizes across time indicate no evidence for publication bias for the meta-

analyses of baseline GCs and survival, stress-induced GCs and either survival or reproductive

success, fecal GCs and either survival or reproductive success, and GC manipulation and

reproductive success (details in the supplementary material).

We observed evidence for time-lag bias in both the overall (Figure 4) and bird-only

meta-analyses baseline GCs and reproductive success: in both analyses, effect sizes increased

with publication year, generally becoming closer to 0 in more recent years (overall baseline GC-

reproductive success:

β = 0.03, t = 4.28, p < 0.0001; birds-only: β = 0.04, t = 4.39, p < 0.0001).

Neither Egger’s test nor trim and fill analysis provided evidence for bias for the GC-reproductive

success analyses (see supplementary material).

The test for bias in the meta-analysis of the effects of experimental GC elevation on

survival indicated that there is asymmetry in the funnel plot, which can indicate publication

bias. Although the Egger’s test provided no evidence of bias for (z = 0.20,

p = 0.84), the trim and

fill analysis suggested that there is some evidence for publication bias and estimated that 1

effect size was missing. The trim-and-fill test allows for “filling” in the missing effect size and

recalculating the parameters of the meta-analysis. Adjusting for the missing effect size did not

change the overall direction of the relationship between experimentally elevated GCs and

survival, but the effect was no longer significant (r = -0.10, 95% CI = -0.26 – 0.07,

p = 0.24).

Because both the effect size and sample size (n = 6) for this analysis were relatively small, they

are particularly sensitive to adjusting for missing effect sizes. This result suggests that more

data is necessary to draw strong conclusions about the effects of experimental GC elevation on

β = -0.013, t = -1.2,

fitness. There was no relationship between publication year and effect sizes (

p = 0.29). No other test of publication bias indicated a need to re-evaluate results, and the
details of those analyses are described in the supplementary material.

IV.

Discussion

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(1) Plasma GCs and survival
As predicted, neither baseline nor stress-induced GC levels showed consistent directional

relationships with survival. Baseline GC levels tended to negatively predict survival, but this

relationship was not significant when incorporating the expected covariance between related

species Instead, our results support the prediction that life history will influence the nature of

the relationship between GC levels and survival. Among long-lived species, individuals with

higher baseline GC levels had lower survival, a pattern that was not apparent in shorter-lived

species (Figure 2A). Longer-lived species may suffer greater phenotypic costs of elevated GC

levels (including oxidative stress, accelerated telomere shortening, and tissue damage), because

these costs take longer to accumulate (Sapolsky, 1999; Metcalfe & Alonso-Alvarez, 2010;

Gassen

et al., 2017). We also predicted that because elevated baseline GC levels may help to

support energetically demanding life history stages (Moore & Jessop, 2003; Bonier

Crespi

et al., 2009a;

et al., 2013), higher baseline GC levels would be relatively more beneficial to

reproductive success in species investing more in high value reproductive attempts (Bókony

et

al., 2009; Vitousek et al., 2019). Although the data reveal a trend in this direction, the
relationship was not significant (Figure 2B). Thus, baseline GC-survival relationships seem to be

influenced more strongly by lifespan than by reproductive strategy.

The relationship between stress-induced GCs and survival also differed strongly by life

history strategy. Mounting a stronger GC stress response was negatively associated with

survival among longer-lived species, but positively associated with survival among shorter-lived

species (Figure 3A). This is consistent with the idea that responding effectively to stressors by

mounting a strong GC strong response may be relatively more beneficial in organisms facing

greater threats to survival (Angelier

Vitousek, 2018; Vitousek

et al., 2009; Hau et al., 2010; Schoenle, Zimmer, &

et al., 2019), as well as the potential for the cumulative costs of

elevated GC levels to be greater in longer-lived animals (Lupien

et al., 2009; Gassen et al.,

2017). Organisms with higher brood value also showed a more positive relationship between

stress-induced GCs and survival than those with lower brood value (Figure 3B). This relationship

is not one that we predicted, but is consistent with the idea that GCs mediate trade-offs

between investment in survival and reproduction (Wingfield & Romero, 2001; Breuner

et al.,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2008), with a robust GC response conferring a survival benefit among species that invest heavily

in a small number of reproductive attempts. As discussed below, high stress-induced GCs

appear to negatively impact reproductive success across contexts. Taken together, these results

suggest that the GC stress response may be particularly influenced by life history trade-offs in

species with high reproductive value (with stronger GC responses favoring survival at a cost to

reproduction). In contrast, both survival and reproductive success appear to favor lower GC

responders in species that invest less heavily in individual reproductive attempts.

(2) Plasma GCs and reproductive success
Across studies, individuals with higher GC levels (both baseline and stress-induced) had

lower reproductive success. These findings are consistent with the prediction that acute

increases in GCs divert resources away from reproduction and towards immediate survival

(Wingfield & Sapolsky, 2003; Breuner

et al., 2008). As discussed above, life history did not

influence the relationship between stress-induced or baseline GCs and reproductive success.

More surprising was the finding of a consistently negative relationship between baseline GC

levels and reproductive success. Although elevated baseline GCs are often seen in individuals

facing stressors, baseline GCs are also frequently upregulated in advance of energetically

demanding life history stages, and are believed to help organisms mobilize energy to meet

these demands (Romero, Reed, & Wingfield, 2000; Bonier

Vitousek

et al., 2009a; Casagrande et al., 2018;

et al., 2019).

In birds, we expected a different relationship between GCs and reproductive success across

the incubation and chick-rearing life history stages because of their differing energetic demands

(Westerterp & Bryant, 1984; Martin, 1987). Indeed, studies within avian species demonstrate

that the relationships between GCs and reproductive success can change across life history

stages (Bonier

et al., 2009b; Ouyang et al., 2011; Vitousek et al., 2018). Abandoning a

reproductive effort during incubation might be less costly than at later stages, particularly if it is

possible to quickly initiate another breeding attempt (Love

et al., 2004). If renesting is possible

and the current conditions are unlikely to permit birds to successfully fledge chicks, it might be

adaptive for higher baseline GCs during incubation to increase the chances of nest desertion

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(Lothery

et al., 2014). Selection might therefore favor a role for high GCs in mediating brood

abandonment early in breeding, leading to more negative effects of GCs on reproduction during

this period. Alternatively, selection might favor a role for high GCs in mediating successful

fledging during chick-rearing because elevated baseline GCs could help to support this

energetically demanding period (Bonier

et al., 2009b). Our analysis found no consistent

difference in the relationship between baseline GCs and reproductive success across these life

history stages. This could result from variation in the selective pressures facing different species

or populations across life history substages. It is also possible that the time-lag bias caused by

the publication of substantially more negative effect sizes in baseline GC-fitness relationships in

the early 2000s (Figure 4) skewed the results of this analysis, reducing our ability to detect

context-dependence.

(3) Fecal GC-fitness relationships
Observed patterns for fecal GCs and fitnesss can be explained by the expected similarity in

trait values of related species; re-analyzing these patterns in a phylogenetic framework

eliminated the statistical significance of these patterns. Fecal GCs reflect circulating hormone

levels over longer time periods than baseline or peak stress-induced levels. Depending on the

context of the organism, longer-term measurements of hormone levels obtained from feces or

feathers may be more closely associated with either baseline (Good, Khan, & Lynch, 2003;

Cavigelli

et al., 2005; Bortolotti et al., 2008) or stress-induced GCs (Harper & Austad, 2002;

Fairhurst

et al., 2013). Although the relationships between GCs and survival are complex and

context-dependent, we saw a consistently negative relationship between reproductive success

and both baseline and stress-induced GCs. Why then do we not see this relationship in fecal

GCs? One possibility is that the presence of these relationships is obscured by inter-individual

variation in diet, metabolic rate, or hormone metabolite formation (Goymann, 2012). Measured

fecal GC concentrations can also be affected by variation in the time between defecation and

collection/freezing, and by environmental factors such as temperature, precipitation, and

microbial content (Dantzer

et al., 2014).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(4) Experimentally elevated GCs and fitness
Experimentally elevated GC levels were consistently negatively associated with survival.

Individuals with manipulated GC levels tended to have lower reproductive success – a pattern

that mirrors the relationships seen in unmanipulated individuals – but this effect was not

significant in analyses that incorporated phylogenetic relationships. Experimentally altering GC

levels consistently reduced survival, a pattern that is interesting considering that natural

variation in GCs showed variable and context-dependent relationships with survival. This

discrepancy could result from several factors. Hormone manipulations often do not accurately

mimic natural variation in circulating GCs across various temporal scales (Fusani, 2008).

Additionally, because hormone regulation can be adaptively modulated in accordance with the

internal and external context of an individual, it is not surprising that manipulations that move

individuals away from their natural regulatory patterns could negatively impact fitness, even if

similar relationships are not seen in unmanipulated individuals (Crossin

al., 2019).

et al., 2016; Schoenle et

Intriguingly, experimentally altered GC levels were associated with a greater

decrease in survival in studies that measured survival over longer time periods. This is

consistent with the potential for many of the salient costs of GCs to accumulate over longer

timescales. Although most studies assess only the short-term survival impacts of GCs, these

patterns suggest that GC manipulations could be more costly than previously assumed.

V.

CONCLUSIONS

Our results suggest strong context-dependence in glucocorticoid-survival relationships, and

more consistently negative relationships between plasma GCs and reproductive success. Unlike

measurements of plasma GCs, fecal GCs did not show consistent relationships with either

metric of fitness. Our analyses also support the potential for GC elevation to have pathological

effects: experimental GC elevation consistently reduced survival, whereas its effect on

reproductive success was less clear.

Life history context appears to be crucial to understanding the relationships between GCs

and fitness, but as predicted, the role of life history varies across fitness metrics. Although

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

plasma GCs were not consistently associated with survival, the direction of GC-survival

relationships were strongly dependent on life-history. In contrast, plasma GCs were negatively

associated with reproductive success, but life history context was not associated with the

variation in the direction of the relationship. We recommend that moving forward, researchers

aim to explicitly test how the optimal GC response to challenges varies across contexts,

including those not measured in these meta-analyses. Studies manipulating stressors (including

the frequency and intensity of these stressors) and GCs across environmental gradients as well

as life history stages and strategies could provide insight into how different contexts may

influence GC–fitness relationships.

Finally, our search of the literature revealed gaps in our knowledge of GC-fitness

relationships. Nearly all observational studies were conducted during the breeding season, and

more than twice as many of the available effect sizes were from tests of the GC-reproductive

success relationship than of the GC-survival relationship (Table 1). Furthermore, the available

GC-fitness effect sizes are highly biased towards birds, even though it seems like relevant data

should exist for other taxa (Beehner & Bergman, 2017). To develop a more comprehensive

understanding of the relationships between GCs and fitness, we also encourage future studies

to extend beyond the breeding season and to incorporate survival analyses in more diverse

taxa.

Acknowledgments
We thank Dan Becker for providing advice on methods for meta-analyses. We thank the

HormoneBase Consortium and Creagh Breuner for discussions on this topic.

Funding
Funding was provided to M.N.V. by NSF IOS grant 1457151 and the Defense Advanced Research

Projects Agency (DARPA D17AP00033). The views, opinions, and/or findings expressed are

those of the authors and should not be interpreted as representing the official views or policies

of the Department of Defense or the US government. E.T.M. was supported by an Edward

W. Rose Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Cornell Lab of Ornithology.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References

NGELIER, F., COSTANTINI, D., BLÉVIN, P. & CHASTEL, O. (2018) Do glucocorticoids mediate the link

A

between environmental conditions and telomere dynamics in wild vertebrates? A review.

General and Comparative Endocrinology 256, 99–111.

NGELIER, F., HOLBERTON, R.L. & MARRA, P.P. (2009) Does stress response predict return rate in a

A

migratory bird species? A study of American redstarts and their non-breeding habitat.

Proceedings of the Royal Society B 276, 3545–3551.

AUCH, C., RIECHERT, J., VERHULST, S. & BECKER, P.H. (2016) Telomere length reflects reproductive

B

effort indicated by corticosterone levels in a long-lived seabird.

Molecular Ecology 25,

5785–5794.

EEHNER, J.C. & BERGMAN, T.J. (2017) The next step for stress research in primates: To identify

B

relationships between glucocorticoid secretion and fitness.

Hormones and Behavior.

Elsevier Inc.

ELETSKY, L.D., ORIANS, G.H. & WINGFIELD, J.C. (1989) Relationships of steroid hormones and

B

polygyny to territorial status, breeding experience, and reproductive success in male red-

winged blackbirds.

The Auk 106, 107–117.

ELETSKY, L.D., ORIANS, G.H. & WINGFIELD, J.C. (1992) Year-to-year patterns of circulating levels of

B

testosterone and corticosterone in relation to breeding density, experience, and

reproductive success of the polygynous red-winged blackbird.

Hormones and Behavior 26,

420–432.

ENTZ, A.B., BECKER, D.J. & NAVARA, K.J. (2016) Evolutionary implications of interspecific variation

B

in a maternal effect: a meta-analysis of yolk testosterone response to competition.

Society Open Science 3, 160499.

ÓKONY, V., LENDVAI, A.Z., LIKER, A., ANGELIER, F., WINGFIELD, J.C. & CHASTEL, O. (2009) Stress

B

response and the value of reproduction: are birds prudent parents?

Naturalist 173, 589–598.

The American

Royal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ONIER, F., MARTIN, P.R., MOORE, I.T. & WINGFIELD, J.C. (2009a) Do baseline glucocorticoids predict

B

fitness?

Trends in Ecology & Evolution 24, 634–642.

ONIER, F., MOORE, I.T., MARTIN, P.R. & ROBERTSON, R.J. (2009b) The relationship between fitness

B

and baseline glucocorticoids in a passerine bird.

163,

General and Comparative Endocrinology

208–213.

OONSTRA, R. (2012) Reality as the leading cause of stress: rethinking the impact of chronic stress

B

in nature.

Functional Ecology, n/a-n/a.

OONSTRA, R. & BOAG, P.T. (1992) Spring declines in Microtus pennsylvanicus and the role of

B

steroid hormones.

Journal of Animal Ecology 61, 339–352.

ORTOLOTTI, G.R., MARCHANT, T. A., BLAS, J. & GERMAN, T. (2008) Corticosterone in feathers is a

B

long-term, integrated measure of avian stress physiology.

Functional Ecology 22, 494–500.

REUNER, C.W. (2010) Stress and Reproduction in Birds. In Hormone and Reproduction of

B

Vertebrates pp. 129–151.

REUNER, C.W., PATTERSON, S.H. & HAHN, T.P. (2008) In search of relationships between the acute

B

adrenocortical response and fitness.

General and Comparative Endocrinology 157, 288–

295.

URTKA, J.L., LOVERN, M.B. & GRINDSTAFF, J.L. (2016) Baseline hormone levels are linked to

B

reproductive success but not parental care behaviors.

General and Comparative

Endocrinology 229, 92–99. Elsevier Inc.

ASAGRANDE, S., GARAMSZEGI, Z., GOYMANN, W., DONALD, J., FRANCIS, C.D., FUXJAGER, M.J., HUSAK, J.F.,

C

OHNSON, M.A., KIRCHER, B.K., KNAPP, R., MARTIN, L.B., MILLER, E.T., SCHOENLE, L.A., VITOUSEK,

J

ILLIAMS, T.D., ET AL. (2018) Do Seasonal Glucocorticoid Changes Depend on

M.N., W

Reproductive InvestmentP? A Comparative Approach in Birds.

Integrative and Comparative

Biology 58, 739–750.

AVIGELLI, S.A., MONFORT, S.L., WHITNEY, T.K., MECHREF, Y.S., NOVOTNY, M. & MCCLINTOCK, M.K. (2005)

C

Frequent serial fecal corticoid measures from rats reflect circadian and ovarian

corticosterone rhythms.

Journal of Endocrinology 184, 153–163.

OCKREM, J.F. (2013) Individual variation in glucocorticoid stress responses in animals. General

C

and Comparative Endocrinology 181, 45–58. Elsevier Inc.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

RESPI, E.J., WILLIAMS, T.D., JESSOP, T.S. & DELEHANTY, B. (2013) Life history and the ecology of

C

stress: how do glucocorticoid hormones influence life-history variation in animals?

Functional Ecology 27, 93–106.

ROSSIN, G.T., LOVE, O.P., COOKE, S.J. & WILLIAMS, T.D. (2016) Glucocorticoid manipulations in free-

C

living animals: considerations of dose delivery, life-history context, and reproductive state.

Functional Ecology 30, 116–125.

ANTZER, B., FLETCHER, Q.E., BOONSTRA, R. & SHERIFF, M.J. (2014) Measures of physiological stress: a

D

transparent or opaque window into the status, management and conservation of species?

Conservation Physiology 2, 1–18.

ANTZER, B., WESTRICK, S.E. & VAN KESTEREN, F. (2016) Relationships between endocrine traits and

D

life histories in wild animals: insights, problems, and potential pitfalls.

Integrative and

Comparative Biology 56, 185–197.

ASTMAN, J.M., HARMON, L.J. & TANK, D.C. (2013) Congruification: support for time scaling large

E

phylogenetic trees.

Methods in Ecology and Evolution 4, 688–691.

GGER, M., GD, S., SCHNEIDER, M. & C, M. (1997) Bias in meta-analysis detected by a simple,

E

graphical test.

BMJ 315, 629–634.

AIRHURST, G.D., MARCHANT, T. A, SOOS, C., MACHIN, K.L. & CLARK, R.G. (2013) Experimental

F

relationships between levels of corticosterone in plasma and feathers in a free-living bird.

The Journal of experimental biology 216, 4071–4081.

OO, Y.Z., NAKAGAWA, S., RHODES, G. & SIMMONS, L.W. (2016) The effects of sex hormones on

F

immune function: a meta-analysis.

Biological Reviews 92, 551–571.

USANI, L. (2008) Endocrinology in field studies: problems and solutions for the experimental

F

design.

General and comparative endocrinology 157, 249–253.

ASSEN, N.C., CHROUSOS, G.P., BINDER, E.B. & ZANNAS, A.S. (2017) Life stress, glucocorticoid

G

signaling, and the aging epigenome: Implications for aging-related diseases.

Neuroscience

and Biobehavioral Reviews 74, 356–365. Elsevier Ltd.

OOD, T., KHAN, M.Z. & LYNCH, J.W. (2003) Biochemical and physiological validation of a

G

corticosteroid radioimmunoassay for plasma and fecal samples in oldfield mice

(Peromyscus polionotus).

Physiology and Behavior 80, 405–411.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

OYMANN, W. (2012) On the use of non-invasive hormone research in uncontrolled, natural

G

environments: The problem with sex, diet, metabolic rate and the individual.

Methods in

Ecology and Evolution 3, 757–765.

ARPER, J.M. & AUSTAD, S.N. (2002) Fecal glucocorticoids: a noninvasive method of measuring

H

adrenal activity in wild and captive rodents.

Physiological and Biochemical Zoology 73, 12–

22.

AU, M., RICKLEFS, R.E., WIKELSKI, M., LEE, K. A & BRAWN, J.D. (2010) Corticosterone, testosterone

H

and life-history strategies of birds.

Proceedings of the Royal Society B 277, 3203–3212.

AUSSMANN, M.F. & MARCHETTO, N.M. (2010) Telomeres: linking stress and survival, ecology and

H

evolution.

Current Zoology 56, 714–728.

ENDERSON, L.J., EVANS, N.P., HEIDINGER, B.J., HERBORN, K.A. & ARNOLD, K.E. (2017) Do

H

glucocorticoids predict fitness? Linking environmental conditions, corticosterone and

reproductive success in the blue tit, Cyanistes caeruleus.

Royal Society Open Science 4,

170875.

OLTMANN, B., LAGISZ, M. & NAKAGAWA, S. (2016) Metabolic rates, and not hormone levels, are a

H

likely mediator of between-individual differences in behaviour: A meta-analysis.

Functional

Ecology, 685–696.

AFFE, A.L., SLATER, G.J. & ALFARO, M.E. (2011) The evolution of island gigantism and body size

J

variation in tortoises and turtles.

Biology Letters 7, 558–561.

ETZ, W., THOMAS, G.H., JOY, J.B., HARTMANN, K. & MOOERS, A.O. (2012) The global diversity of birds

J

in space and time.

Nature 491, 444–448.

OHNSON, M.A., FRANCIS, C.D., MILLER, E.T., DOWNS, C.J. & VITOUSEK, M.N. (2018) Detecting bias in

J

large-scale comparative analyses: methods for expanding the scope of hypothesis-testing

with HormoneBase.

Integrative and Comparative Biology 58, 720–728.

RAUSE, J.S., PÉREZ, J.H., CHMURA, H.E., MEDDLE, S.L., HUNT, K.E., GOUGH, L., BOELMAN, N. & WINGFIELD,

K

J.C. (2016) The stress response is attenuated during inclement weather in parental, but not

in pre-parental, Lapland longspurs (Calcarius lapponicus) breeding in the Low Arctic.

Hormones and Behavior 83, 68–74.

UMAR, S., STECHER, G., SULESKI, M. & HEDGES, S.B. (2017) TimeTree: a resource for timelines,

K

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

timetrees, and divergence times.

Molecular Biology and Evolution 34, 1812–1819.

ANCASTER, L.T., HAZARD, L.C., CLOBERT, J. & SINERVO, B. (2008) Corticosterone manipulation reveals

L

differences in hierarchical organization of multidimensional reproductive trade-offs in r-

strategist and K-strategist females.

Journal of Evolutionary Biology 21, 556–565.

ANDYS, M.M., RAMENOFSKY, M. & WINGFIELD, J.C. (2006) Actions of glucocorticoids at a seasonal

L

baseline as compared to stress-related levels in the regulation of periodic life processes.

General and Comparative Endocrinology 148, 132–149.

OTHERY, C.J., THOMPSON, C.F., LAWLER, M.L. & SAKALUK, S.K. (2014) Food supplementation fails to

L

reveal a trade-off between incubation and self-maintenance in female house wrens.

PloS

one 9, e106260.

OVE, O.P., BREUNER, C.W., VÉZINA, F. & WILLIAMS, T.D. (2004) Mediation of a corticosterone-

L

induced reproductive conflict.

Hormones and behavior 46, 59–65.

UPIEN, S.J., MCEWEN, B.S., GUNNAR, M.R. & HEIM, C. (2009) Effects of stress throughout the

L

lifespan on the brain, behaviour and cognition.

Nature Reviews: Neuroscience 10, 434–445.

E MAGALHAES, J.P. & COSTA, J. (2009) A database of vertebrate longevity records and their

D

relation to other life-history traits.

Journal of Evolutionary Biology 22, 1770–1774.

AGEE, S.E., NEFF, B.D. & KNAPP, R. (2006) Plasma levels of androgens and cortisol in relation to

M

breeding behavior in parental male bluegill sunfish, Lepomis macrochirus.

Hormones and

behavior 49, 598–609.

ARTIN, T.E. (1987) Food as a limit on breeding birds: a life-history perspective. In Annual Review

M

of Ecology and Systematics p.

C ONNACHIE, S.H., COOK, K. V, PATTERSON, D.A., GILMOUR, K.M., HINCH, S.G., FARRELL, A.P. & COOKE,

M C

S.J. (2012) Consequences of acute stress and cortisol manipulation on the physiology,

behavior, and reproductive outcome of female Paci fi c salmon on spawning grounds.

Hormones and Behavior 62, 67–76. Elsevier Inc.

C WEN, B.S. (2008) Central effects of stress hormones in health and disease: understanding

M E

the protective and damaging effects of stress and stress mediators.

European Journal of

Pharmacology 583, 174–185.

C WEN, B.S. & SEEMAN, T. (2004) Protective and damaging effects of mediators of stress:

M E

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

elaborating and testing the concepts of allostasis and allostatic load.

Annals of the New

York Academy of Sciences, 30–47.

ETCALFE, N.B. & ALONSO-ALVAREZ, C. (2010) Oxidative stress as a life-history constraint: the role

M

of reactive oxygen species in shaping phenotypes from conception to death.

Functional

Ecology 24, 984–996.

OORE, I.T. & JESSOP, T.S. (2003) Stress, reproduction, and adrenocortical modulation in

M

amphibians and reptiles.

Hormones and Behavior 43, 39–47.

YERS, B., MCKLVEEN, J.M. & HERMAN, J.P. (2012) Neural regulation of the stress response: the

M

many faces of feedback.

Meyers , Brent McKlveen, Jessica M Herman, James P 32, 683–

694.

YHRVOLD, N.P., BALDRIDGE, E., CHAN, B., SIVAM, D., FREEMAN, D.L. & ERNEST, S.K.M. (2015) An

M

amniote life-history database to perform comparative analyses with birds, mammals, and

reptiles.

Ecology 96, 3109.

AKAGAWA, S. & CUTHILL, I.C. (2007) Effect size, confidence interval and statistical significance: a

N

practical guide for biologists.

Biological Reviews 82, 591–605.

ELSON, B.F., DAUNT, F., MONAGHAN, P., WANLESS, S., BUTLER, A., HEIDINGER, B.J., NEWELL, M. &

N

AWSON, A. (2015) Protracted treatment with corticosterone reduces breeding success in a

D

long-lived bird.

General and comparative endocrinology 210, 38–45. Elsevier Inc.

UYANG, J.Q., QUETTING, M. & HAU, M. (2012) Corticosterone and brood abandonment in a

O

passerine bird.

Animal Behaviour 84, 261–268.

UYANG, J.Q., SHARP, P.J., DAWSON, A., QUETTING, M. & HAU, M. (2011) Hormone levels predict

O

individual differences in reproductive success in a passerine bird.

Proceedings of the Royal

Society B: Biological Sciences 278, 2537–2545.

ENNELL, M.W., FITZJOHN, R.G. & CORNWELL, W.K. (2016) A simple approach for maximizing the

P

overlap of phylogenetic and comparative data.

Methods in molecular medicine 7, 751–758.

YRON, R.A., BURBRINK, F.T. & WIENS, J.J. (2013) A phylogeny and revised classification of

P

Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards and snakes A phylogeny and revised

classification of Squamata , including 4161 species of lizards and snakes.

Biology 13, 93.

Evolutionary

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

YRON, R.A. & WIENS, J.J. (2011) A large-scale phylogeny of Amphibia including over 2800 species,

P

and a revised classification of extant frogs, salamanders, and caecilians.

Molecular

Phylogenetics and Evolution 61, 543–583. Elsevier Inc.

ORE TEAM (2018) R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R Foundation for

RC

Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria.

R Foundation for Statistical Computing.

Http://www.r-project.org/.

ABOSKY, D.L., SANTINI, F., EASTMAN, J., SMITH, S.A., SIDLAUSKAS, B., CHANG, J. & ALFARO, M.E. (2013)

R

Rates of speciation and morphological evolution are correlated across the largest

vertebrate radiation.

Nature Communications 4, 1958. Nature Publishing Group.

AMENOFSKY, M. & WINGFIELD, J.C. (2017) Regulation of complex behavioural transitions:

R

migration to breeding.

Animal Behaviour 124, 299–306.

OMERO, L.M., REED, J.M. & WINGFIELD, J.C. (2000) Effects of weather on corticosterone responses

R

in wild free-living passerine birds.

General and comparative endocrinology 118, 113–122.

OMERO, L.M. & WIKELSKI, M. (2010) Stress physiology as a predictor of survival in Galapagos

R

marine iguanas.

Proceedings of the Royal Society B 277, 3157–3162.

OSENBERG, M.S., ROTHSTEIN, H.R. & GUREVITCH, J. (2013) Effect sizes: conventional choices and

R

calculations. In

Handbook of meta-analysis in ecology and evolution (eds J. KORICHEVA, J.

UREVITCH & K. MENGERSEN), pp. 61–71. Princeton University Press.

G

OSENTHAL, R. & DIMATTEO, M.R. (2001) Meta-analysis: recent developments in quantitative

R

methods for literature reviews.

Annual Review of Psychology 52, 59–82.

APOLSKY, R.M. (1999) Glucocorticoids, stress, and their adverse neurological effects: relevance

S

to aging.

Experimental Gerontology 34, 721–732.

APOLSKY, R.M., ROMERO, L.M. & MUNCK, A.U. (2000) How do glucocorticoids influence stress

S

responses? Integrating permissive, suppressive, stimulatory, and preparative actions.

Endocrine Reviews 21, 55–89.

ATTERTHWAITE, W.H., KITAYSKY, A.S., HATCH, S.A., PIATT, J.F. & MANGEL, M. (2010) Unifying

S

quantitative life-history theory and field endocrinology to assess prudent parenthood in a

long-lived seabird.

Evolutionary Ecology Research 12, 779–792.

CHOENLE, L.A., DUDEK, A.M., MOORE, I.T. & BONIER, F. (2017) Red-winged blackbirds (Agelaius

S

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

phoeniceus) with higher baseline glucocorticoids also invest less in incubation and clutch

mass.

Hormones and Behavior 90, 1–7. Elsevier Inc.

CHOENLE, L.A., MOORE, I.T., DUDEK, A.M., GARCIA, E.B., MAYS, M., HAUSSMANN, M.F., CIMINI, D. &

S

ONIER, F. (2019) Exogenous glucocorticoids amplify the costs of infection by reducing

B

resistance and tolerance, but effects are mitigated by co-infection.

Proceedings of the

Royal Society B 286, 20182913.

CHOENLE, L.A., ZIMMER, C. & VITOUSEK, M.N. (2018) Understanding context dependence in

S

glucocorticoid–fitness relationships: the role of the nature of the challenge, the intensity

and frequency of stressors , and life history.

Integrative and Comparative Biology 58, 777–

789.

CHULTNER, J., KITAYSKY, A.S., GABRIELSEN, G.W., HATCH, S.A. & BECH, C. (2013) Differential

S

reproductive responses to stress reveal the role of life-history strategies within a species.

Proceedings of the Royal Society B 280, 20132090.

MALL, T.W., BEBUS, S.E., BRIDGE, E.S., ELDERBROCK, E.K., FERGUSON, S.M., JONES, B.C. & SCHOECH, S.J.

S

(2017) Stress responsiveness influences baseline glucocorticoid levels: revisting the under

3 min sampling rule.

S

General and Comparative Endocrinology 247, 152–165. Elsevier Inc.

OPINKA, N.M., PATTERSON, L.D., REDFERN, J.C., PLEIZIER, N.K., BELANGER, C.B., MIDWOOD, J.D., CROSSIN,
OOKE, S.J. (2015) Manipulating glucocorticoids in wild animals: basic and applied

G.T. & C

perspectives.

Conservation Physiology 3, 1–16.

ORENSON, G.H., DEY, C.J., MADLIGER, C.L. & LOVE, O.P. (2017) Effectiveness of baseline

S



corticosterone as a monitoring tool for fitness: a meta

analysis in seabirds.

Oecologia 183,

353–365. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.

TRASSER, E.H. & HEATH, J.A. (2013) Reproductive failure of a human-tolerant species, the

S

American kestrel, is associated with stress and human disturbance.

Journal of Applied

Ecology 50, 912–919.

AFF, C.C., SCHOENLE, L.A. & VITOUSEK, M.N. (2018) The repeatability of glucocorticoids: a review

T

and meta-analysis.

General and Comparative Endocrinology 260, 136–145. Elsevier Inc.

IECHTBAUER, W. (2010) Conducting Meta-Analyses in R with the metafor Package. Journal of

V

Statistical Software 36.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ITOUSEK, M.N., JENKINS, B.R. & SAFRAN, R.J. (2014) Stress and success: individual differences in the

V

glucocorticoid stress response predict behavior and fitness under high predation risk.

Hormones and Behavior 66, 812–819. Elsevier Inc.

ITOUSEK, M.N., JOHNSON, M.A., DOWNS, C.J., MILLER, E.T., MARTIN, L.B., FRANCIS, C.D., DONALD, J.W.,

V

UXJAGER, M.J., GOYMANN, W., HAU, M., HUSAK, J.F., KIRCHER, B.K. & KNAPP, R. (2019)

F

Macroevolutionary patterning in glucocorticoids suggests different selective pressures

shape baseline and stress-induced levels.

American Naturalist 193.

ITOUSEK, M.N., TAFF, C.C., HALLINGER, K.K., ZIMMER, C. & WINKLER, D.W. (2018) Hormones and

V

fitness: evidence for trade-offs in glucocorticoid regulation across contexts.

Frontiers in

Ecology and Evolution 6, 42.

ADA, H. (2008) Glucocorticoids: Mediators of vertebrate ontogenetic transitions. General and

W

Comparative Endocrinology 156, 441–453.

ESTERTERP, K.R. & BRYANT, D.M. (1984) Energetics of free existance in swallows and martins

W

(hirundinidae) during breeding: a comparative study using doubly labeled water.

62,

Oecologia

376–381.

ILLIAMS, T.D. (2012) Hormones, life-history, and phenotypic variation: opportunities in

W

evolutionary avian endocrinology.

General and comparative endocrinology 176, 286–295.

Elsevier Inc.

INGFIELD, J.C., MANEY, D.L., BREUNER, C.W., JACOBS, J.D., RAMENOFSKY, M. & RICHARDSON, R.D. (1998)

W

Ecological bases of hormone-behavior interactions: the ‘emergency life history stage’.

American Zoologist 38, 191–206.

INGFIELD, J.C. & ROMERO, L.M. (2001) Adrenocortical responses to stress and their modulation in

W

free-living vertebrates. In

Handbook of Physiology American Physiological Society, Section

7: The Endocrine System; Volume IV: Coping with the Environment: Neural and Endocrine
Mechanisms (eds B.S. MCEWEN & H.M. GOODMAN), pp. 211–234. Oxford University Press.

INGFIELD, J.C. & SAPOLSKY, R.M. (2003) Reproduction and resistance to stress: when and how.

W

Journal of Neuroendocrinology 15, 711–724.

IMMER, C., TAFF, C.C., ARDIA, D.R., RYAN, T.A., WINKLER, D.W. & VITOUSEK, M.N. (2019) On again, off

Z

again: Acute stress response and negative feedback together predict resilience to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

experimental challenges.

Functional Ecology 33, 619–628.

Table 1. The distribution of effect sizes from observational studies included the meta-analyses

by taxa, fitness measure, and GC sample type.

Sample Type

Life History Stage of Sample

Fitness Measure
Collection

Total

Stress-

Breeding

Non-

Year-

breeding

round

Baseline
Taxa

Effect

Species

Survival

Reproduction

Induced

Fecal

Plasma
Sizes

Plasma

Birds

88

24

22

66

60

25

3

84

4

0

Mammals

19

7

10

9

0

0

19

15

2

2

Reptiles

3

2

2

1

2

1

0

3

0

0

Fish

6

3

1

5

5

1

0

6

0

0

Total

116

36

35

81

67

27

22

108

6

2

Table 2. The distribution of effect sizes from hormone manipulation studies by taxa and fitness

measure.

Fitness Measure

Total

Taxa

Effect

Species

Survival

Reproduction

Sizes

Birds

16

6

2

14

Mammals

0

0

0

0

Reptiles

3

1

3

0

Fish

2

2

1

1

Total

21

9

6

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 3. The sample size, random effects, phylogenetic variance, and I2 for each meta-analysis.

n
Meta-analysis

1

(Effect Sizes)

2

I

2

3

(%)

Shared Evolutionary History

Baseline GCs & Survival

14

None

0.02

30.81

Baseline GCs & Reproduction

53

Group ID

0.000

79.83

48

Group ID

0.000

78.91

Stress-induced GCs & Survival

11

None

0.019

57.96

Stress-induced & Reproduction

16

0.000

59.08

Fecal GCs & Survival

10

Reference ID

0.71

92.35

Fecal GCs & Reproduction

12

Reference ID

0.000

78.92

6

None

0.000

75.43

15

Reference ID

0.13

71.08

Baseline GCs & Reproduction
(birds only)

Experimentally Elevated GCs &
Survival
Experimentally Elevated GCs &
Reproduction
1

σ2) Explained by

Variance (

Random Effects Retained

None

Random effects found to be significant using likelihood ratio tests (statistics reported in the supplementary material). For each

analysis we tested for the importance of reference ID, group ID, and species. 2Variance explained by including a phylogenetic
covariance matrix as a random effect in the meta-analysis. 3The percent of variability in effect sizes due to variation in the
effects (rather than sampling error) from an intercept-only model with no random effects.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Meta-analytic means and phylogenetic meta-analytic means for studies assessing the

relationships between GCs and fitness measures. Means are represented as a point and error

bars represent the 95% confidence interval. Significant effects are bolded.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. The correlation between longevity (A) and the value of a reproductive bout (higher

values indicate a relatively higher value of the current brood) (B) and the relationship between

baseline GCs and survival. Each point represents an effect size and the dashed lines indicate

95% confidence intervals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. The relationship between stress-induced GCs and survival varies according to (A)

longevity and (B) the value of a reproductive bout (higher values indicate a relatively higher

value of the current brood). Each point represents an effect size and the dashed lines indicate

95% confidence intervals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649608; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Effect sizes of the relationships between baseline GCs and fitness increase over time,

approaching 0. The more negative effect sizes observed in earlier publications could be the

result of publication bias favoring more negative GC-fitness relationships.

