bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

SEA: The small RNA Expression Atlas
Raza-Ur Rahman1, Vikas Bansal*1,2, Maksims Fiosins*1,2,3, Anna-Maria Liebhoff*1,
Ashish Rajput*1, Abdul Sattar1, Daniel Sumner Magruder1,3, Sumit Madan4,6, Ting
Sun1,12, Abhivyakti Gautam1, Sven Heins1, Timur Liwinski13, Jörn Bethune1, Claudia
Trenkwalder10,11,, Juliane Fluck4,7,8, Brit Mollenhauer9,10, and Stefan Bonn1,2,$

1Institute

of Medical Systems Biology, Center for Molecular Neurobiology, University Medical Center

Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.
2German

Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tübingen, Germany.

3Genevention

4Fraunhofer

GmbH, Göttingen, Germany.

Institute for Algorithms and Scientific Computing, Schloss Birlinghoven, Sankt Augustin,

Germany.
5University

Medical Center Goettingen

6Rheinische

Friedrich-Wilhelms-Universität Bonn, Bonn 53113, Germany

7German

National Library of Medicine (ZB MED) - Information Centre for Life Sciences, Bonn, Germany

8Institute

of Geodesy and Geoinformation, University of Bonn, Germany

9Department

of Neurology, University Medical Center Goettingen, Robert-Koch Strasse 40, 37075

Germany
10Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik,

11Department

Klinikstraße 16, 34119 Kassel, Germany

of Neurosurgery, University Medical Center Goettingen, Robert-Koch Strasse 40, 37075

Germany
12Department
131st

of Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute of Experimental Medicine, Göttingen, Germany

Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

$Contact:

sbonn@uke.de

*Equal contribution

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
We present the Small RNA Expression Atlas (SEA), a web application that allows for the
interactive querying, visualization, and analysis of known and novel small RNAs across
ten organisms. It contains sRNA and pathogen expression information for over 4,200
published samples with standardized search terms and ontologies. In addition, SEA
allows for the interactive visualization and re-analysis of 879 differential expression and
514 classification comparisons. SEA’s user model enables sRNA researchers to compare
and re-analyze user-specific and published datasets, highlighting common and distinct
sRNA expression patterns.
We provide evidence for SEA’s fidelity by (i) generating a set of 591 tissue specific
miRNAs across 30 tissues, (ii) finding known and novel bacterial and viral infections
across diseases, and (iii) determining a Parkinson’s disease-specific blood biomarker
signature using novel data.
We believe that SEA’s simple semantic search interface, the flexible interactive reports,
and the user model with rich analysis capabilities will enable researchers to better
understand the potential function and diagnostic value of sRNAs or pathogens across
tissues, diseases, and organisms.

Keywords: small RNA, miRNA, differential expression, classification, prediction,
biomarker, virus, bacteria, pathogens, disease, atlas, database, Parkinson’s disease
Availability and Implementation: SEA is implemented in Java, J2EE, spring, Django,
html5, css3, JavaScript, Bootstrap, Vue.js, D3, mongodb and neo4j. It is freely available
at http://sea.ims.bio/.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

1 Background
Small RNAs (sRNAs) are a class of short, non-coding RNAs with important biological
functions in nearly all aspects of organismal development in health and disease.
Especially in diagnostic and therapeutic research, sRNAs such as miRNAs and piRNAs
received recent attention (Witwer, 2015). The increasing number of deep sequencing
sRNA studies (sRNA-seq) is reflecting the importance of sRNAs in biological processes
as well as disease diagnosis and therapy. To harvest the true potential of existing data, it
is important to allow for querying, visualization, and analysis of sRNA-seq data across
organisms, tissues, cell types, and disease states. This would allow researchers, for
example, to search for disease-specific sRNA biomarker signatures across all disease
entities investigated. Data integration and interoperability require (i) a streamlined
analysis workflow to reduce analysis bias between experiments (ii) also necessitates
standardized annotation using ontologies to search and retrieve relevant samples and (iii)
flexible and interactive visualization of the data.
To date, several web-based sRNA-seq expression profile databases are available that
differ in their level of information, portfolio, performance, and user-friendliness. Recent
additions to sRNA web based databases include miRmine (Panwar et al., 2017), provides
expression of a single or multiple miRNAs for a specific tissue, cell-line or disease.
Results are displayed in multiple interactive, graphical and downloadable formats;
DASHR2 (Kuksa et al., 2019) supports sRNA expression profiles across different genome
versions of the same species across tissues and cell types. Results are provided in an
interactive manner, such as sncRNA locus sorting and filtering by biological features. All
annotation and expression information are downloadable and accessible as UCSC
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

genome browser tracks; miratlas (Vitsios et al., 2017) allows for searching miRNA
expression profiles as well as sRNA-seq experiments and provides information on the
miRNA modification analysis; and YM500v3 (Chung et al., 2017) provides interactive web
reports on sRNA expression profiles, sRNA differential expression and miRNA gene
targets.
Although many good web platforms for the sRNA-seq data exist, some important
aspects for storing and searching have yet to be integrated. For example, no current web
application allows for the ontology based search of sRNA-seq experiments. Current tools
lack an important association of miRNAs with disease. miRNA disease associations are
provided by HMDD (Li et al., 2014), but it does not provide miRNA expression information.
Except YM500v3 (Chung et al., 2017), current tools do not provide miRNAs and gene
targets, of note YM500v3 is only limited to cancer miRNome studies. Also, there is
currently no web application that allows for the identification of biomarkers of disease via
machine-learning. The above mentioned web platforms do not provide expression of
novel miRNAs in known disease state or tissues, including the structure and probability
of the novel miRNA prediction. To our knowledge no other tool provides pathogenic
signatures from sRNA-seq data including their differential expression in healthy and
diseased condition. Moreover, in current tools users can only search for the results that
are stored, there is no option for the users to reanalyze data with the samples of their
choice. Finally, current sRNA-seq web services do not allow for the user data upload, a
feature that would greatly facilitate researchers to compare their in-house sRNA-seq
experimental data with the publicly available data. In the end, these functionalities should

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

be paired with a flexible and interactive visualization of the sRNA-seq data supporting
more species and cross study comparisons.
In order to address the above mentioned limitations, we hereby present the small-RNA
Expression Atlas (SEA), a web application that allows for querying, visualization, and
analysis of over 4200 published sRNA-seq expression samples. SEA automatically
downloads and re-analyzes published data using Oasis 2 (Rahman et al., 2018),
semantically annotates relevant meta-information using standardized terms (the
annotations are later checked and corrected manually), synchronizes sRNA information
with other databases, allows for the querying of terms across ontological graphs, and
presents quality curated sRNA expression information as interactive web reports. In
addition, SEA stores sRNA differential expression, sRNA based classification, pathogenic
sRNA signatures from bacteria and viruses and pathogen differential expression. Gene
targets and disease associations for miRNAs are also incorporated into SEA.
One of the most useful features of SEA is to enable users to upload their analysis
results of differential expression and classification from Oasis 2. This allow users to
compare their data to over 4,200 experimental samples across different conditions. Using
SEA’s interactive visualizations, users can upload their data into their own workspace,
select the published datasets to compare to, and define if differential expression or
classification results should be compared. SEA also provides users with an option to
perform on the fly analysis such as overlapping differentially expressed sRNAs or
pathogens across different studies or the most important features (sRNAs) identified with
classification. Lastly, SEA enables end users to re-submit samples from interactive plots
for differential expression or classification, this helps users to choose samples of their

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

choice from an experiment. It currently supports 10 organisms (Table 1) and is
continuously updated with novel published sRNA-seq datasets and relevant sRNA
information from various online resources. A detailed comparison of SEA to other existing
sRNA expression databases (Table 2) highlights that SEA is superior in terms of
supported organism, annotations, diseases, tissues, sRNA based classification,
pathogen k-mer DE, known miRNA disease associations, user specific experimental data
upload, cross study comparisons and re-analysis with selected samples. SEA contains
over 4200 samples in its database, which is considerably less than YM500v3 (Chung et
al., 2017), which hosts over 8000 cancer samples. It is to be noted, however, that the
YM500v3 database only supports cancer datasets and no other disease types (Table 2).
Additionally, SEA also stores in-house data (for a month) from the end users to enable
comparison with the data in SEA.
2 System Design
SEA stores sRNA expression information, sRNA differential expression, sRNA based
classification, pathogenic sRNA signatures from bacteria and viruses, pathogen
differential expression, miRNA gene targets and disease association as well as deep and
standardized metadata on the samples, analysis workflows, and databases used. Metadata information is normalized using ontologies to allow for standardized search and
retrieval across ontological hierarchies (section ‘Semantic data layer’ & supplementary
material). The following sections will detail the system design of SEA (Fig. 1).
2.1 Acquisition and analysis of sRNA datasets
SEA acquires raw published sRNA-seq datasets and their primary annotation from Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) (Barrett et al., 2013) and NCBI's Sequence Reads Archive

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(SRA) repository (Leinonen et al., 2011) (supplementary material). Novel datasets are
downloaded and stored in SEA’s raw data repository while corresponding annotations are
stored in SEA’s annotation database and are manually curated. Raw data is subsequently
processed automatically by SEA’s sRNA analysis workflow using Oasis 2.0 (Rahman et
al., 2018) (http://oasis.ims.bio/) (supplementary material). Subsequently, sRNA counts of
high-quality samples are stored in the sRNA expression database. For all the experiments
with samples from different conditions such as disease, tissue, cell line or cell type; sRNA
differential expression and classification was performed within the experiment using
Oasis 2. All possible comparisons for an experiment were taken into account such as
healthy vs disease stage 1, healthy vs disease stage 2, disease stage 1 vs disease stage
2 as explained in supplementary section 3.4. Additionally, differential expression analysis
of detected pathogens was performed using DESeq2 package (Love et al., 2014). In
order to reduce bias that could be introduced into the data by using different analysis
routines, every sample in SEA has been analyzed by identical analysis workflows using
identical databases and genome versions. SEA additionally stores versioning information
about the software and databases used for analysis. In case of changes in databases or
analysis routines, we completely re-analyze all SEA’ data for consistency.
Additionally, sample annotations are processed automatically with SEA’s annotation
workflow. Processed files and annotations are subsequently semi-automatically curated
(section 2.3 and supplementary section 3).
2.2 Data storage
Once the raw sequencing data is analyzed, the next step is to store the analysis results
to the database for downstream analysis and querying. Most metadata is quite different

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

between experiments. Some experiments may have information such as disease, tissue,
cell line, gender, age of patient while others may completely lack this. Due to this sparse
nature of the biological experimental data, we opted to use NoSQL database
management systems such as MongoDB and Neo4J for hierarchical (connected)
normalized data. A multi-database management system architecture was used to store
different types of data:
In brief, Expression-DB is created to save sRNA expression profiles, sRNA differential
expression, sRNA based classification as well as pathogen detection and pathogen
differential expression. This database stores the identification and description of the
experiment (dataset), information about dataset processing (pipeline information and
parameters), information about samples. Association-DB is used to store genomic
coordinates for sRNAs, miRNA gene targets and miRNA diseases association. It contains
information about sRNA’s and gene’s chromosomal locations, miRNA target genes and
miRNA disease associations. Chromosomal coordinates were obtained from miRBase
version 21 (Kozomara et al., 2014), ensemble version 84 (Zerbino et al., 2018) and piRNA
bank (Sai Lakshmi et al., 2008), miRNA gene targets were obtained from mirTarBase
version 7.0 (Chou et al., 2018) as well as from BELIEF text mining pipeline (Madan et al.,
2016) (material and methods), miRNA disease associations were obtained from HMDD
database version 2.0 (Li et al., 2014). In order to enable search by ontological terms,
Annotation-DB is created using the Neo4J database management system. Neo4J is a
graph database, representing elements as graph nodes or vertices. Annotation-DB
(supplementary Fig. S1) stores the following three node types: (i) Experiments (datasets),
this type of node stores information about the experiment such as description of the

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

experiment, reference to database, experimental design, and any global level information,
which is common amongst all the samples. (ii) Sample node type is used to store
information about individual sample, such as description of a sample, reference to
database, sample-specific processing parameters. (iii) Annotation term node type stores
annotation term information of samples such as organism, disease, tissue, cell type, cell
line, age, gender, condition (treated\untreated) and extracted molecule for sequencing
etc. If the annotation term is normalized, it stores ontology reference (term identifier and
preferred level). The nodes are connected if they have a relation (dataset/sample,
sample/term and term/term) (supplementary Fig. S1). To allow for fast ontological search,
all parents of a term in the ontology are also stored in the database and connected with
their corresponding annotation terms (section ‘Semantic data layer’ & supplementary
material). User-DB stores in-house sRNA-seq data (differential expression and
classification from Oasis) uploaded by the users. This database allows users to compare
their own data to the huge and diverse sRNA-seq published data.
In addition, SEA contains information about the GEO series accession (GSE) and
sample accession (GSM) identifiers along with the sample identifier from the Sequence
Read Archive (SRA) database (SRR). We optimize search and retrieval times by indexing
for the most common queries and most relevant terms.
2.3 Semantic data layer
Given the diversity of the biological data, users of the SEA system are given a possibility
to interpret data independently using common terminologies. In order to enable users to
browse data autonomously using common well-structured terminology, a standardized
semantic layer for data retrieval is developed (Fig. 1). It includes semantic annotations of

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

data and semantic search, linking data with semantic lookup platform (OLS), as well as
storing primary and derived data together with provenance information and references to
secondary data.
One of the most important aspects of semantic layer are ontology-based data
annotations. They enable interoperability of the data, as well as using of standard
terminologies for data retrieval. It is important to standardize annotations using ontologies
and semantic mappings (Schuurman et al., 2008). Ontologies define not only standard
classes, but also the relations between terms, which enables semantic search by term
hierarchies, for example, by parent terms. In SEA, we connect (normalize) annotations
with ontologies in a semi-automatic way, i.e. first automatically extract possible annotation
terms from GEO descriptions and normalize them, and later curate annotations manually
(supplementary section 3). The Ontologies and the number of normalized terms in SEA
are listed in Table 3. To enable the search across ontological hierarchies we integrated
data with the relevant ontologies into the graph database Neo4J (supplementary Fig. S1).
Ontology Lookup Service (OLS) is a service which allows to extract relevant terms from
ontologies together with term information. SEA uses OLS for annotation normalization
and accesses ontologies via the OLS REST interface, which supports complex and
compound queries and query auto-completion (Côté et al., 2010). Details about
annotation criteria, processing and group annotation are described in supplementary
Section 3.2.
Another aspect of the semantic layer is storing of the primary and the derived data
together with provenance information. For SEA, primary data are FASTQ files, retrieved
from the NCBI SRR database. This data is not stored after Oasis analysis, only

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

provenance data about source and analysis details is saved. So for SEA, primary data
are sRNA counts. Based on those counts, DE and classification results are obtained and
are also saved to allow data interpretation. From derived data, the provenance
information allows to retrieve raw counts and check how those results are obtained.
2.4 Querying and visualization
Application programming interfaces (APIs) are developed to access data in SEA
databases (supplementary section 3.5). The APIs help to use the multi-database system
components independently as well as in combination. In brief, we extend the SEA
backend application with RESTful web services, such as Annotation-API, AssociationAPI, Expression-API, User-Expression-API, Predicted miRNA-API to access AnnotationDB, Association-DB, Expression-DB, User-Expression-DB and Oasis-DB respectively.
Additionally the SEA business logic API is created in order to combine all those APIs and
make necessary data transformations between frontend and other APIs. As a result, the
user can make queries to answer biological questions like; what is the expression of hsamiR-488-5p across all human tissues? Is hsa-miR-488-5p expressed higher in
adenocarcinomas as compared to other cancer types? Is a particular sRNA/pathogen
differentially expressed in Alzheimer’s disease? What are common differentially
expressed sRNAs/pathogens or potential sRNA based biomarkers in a particular disease
or tissue? What is the expression of a novel miRNA for known disease states? All API
calls are described in supplementary Section 3.5.
In brief, the SEA system is developed using the modular system design approach (Fig.
1). We build micro services to achieve strong encapsulation and well-defined interfaces
via REST APIs. An object oriented programming approach is used to build the SEA

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

application using the spring framework and Java 8. The SEA user interface (UI) is
developed in Django framework version 2.0, HTML version 5, D3 and CSS 3. SEA
visualizes the results depending on the user query, such as a violin plot for the expression
of sRNAs or pathogens. Upset plots are shown for the overlap of sRNAs or pathogens
(based on DE or classification) across experiments. SEA enables the download of search
results in the form of CSV files. The functionality is tested on all major browsers (Table
4).
3 Applications of SEA
In this section, we describe a few examples that illustrate how SEA can be employed to
answer biological questions and to uncover unappreciated properties of sRNA data
integration with interactive result visualization. First, we took advantage of the diverse
and massive sRNA-seq data in SEA to present the most comprehensive set of tissue
specific miRNAs till date. Second, we utilized the pathogenic reads in sRNA-seq to find
their association to diseases. Finally, we show a use case of SEA by comparing an inhouse Parkinson’s disease (PD) sRNA-ome to other neurodegenerative diseases sRNA
expression profiles available in SEA.
1. miRNA tissue specificity
Several studies have shown tissue specificity for miRNAs. Recently, (Ludwig et al., 2016),
analyzed several human tissue biopsies of different organs from two individuals to define
the distribution of miRNAs using tissue specificity index (TSI) and found several groups
of miRNAs with tissue-specific expression. Similarly, (Lee et al., 2008) provides the
expression of 201 miRNAs across 9 human tissues to find tissue specificity of miRNAs.
miRNAs whose expression is 20-fold or higher in a certain tissue compared with the mean

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

of all the other tissues were characterized as tissue specific. According to (Lee et al.,
2008), skeletal muscle, brain, heart, and pancreas are the tissues expressing the most
specific miRNAs. Moreover, (Guo et al., 2014) manually extracted 116 tissue specific
miRNAs across 12 human tissues. We used Shannon entropy to calculate TSI for each
miRNA across tissues in SEA (material and methods). We used very stringent criteria:
miRNAs with Shannon entropy score more than 0.8 were considered as tissue specific
and less than equal to 0.2 were considered as ubiquitous miRNAs (Fig. 2, Supplementary
Table 1). We were able to provide by far the most comprehensive set of 591 distinct tissue
specific miRNAs across 30 tissues; skin, liver, testes, blood, semen, prefrontal cortex,
peripheral blood, brain, renal cortex, bladder, embryo, colon, placenta, tongue, breast,
tonsils, bone marrow, blood plasma, lymph node, heart, lung, neocortex, blood serum,
serum, cornea, cerebellum, skeletal muscle, kidney, muscle and thyroid gland (Fig. 2,
Supplementary Table 1). In order to compare the TSI for miRNAs in SEA with the existing
findings, we merged the list of miRNAs from the above studies and retained all the 12
tissues. Out of 12 tissues, we did not have sequencing data for four of them: thymus,
pancreas, spleen and bone.
We were able to detect all the three heart specific miRNAs (miR-1, miR-133a, miR302d) from (Lee et al., 2008) study, and 7 out of 10 heart specific miRNAs (hsa-miR-15p, hsa-miR-208a-3p, hsa-miR-208b-5p, hsa-miR-208b-3p, hsa-miR-302d-3p, hsa-miR133b, hsa-miR-302a-3p, hsa-miR-302a-5p, hsa-miR-133a-5p, hsa-miR-302b-3p) from
the manually curated list of (Guo et al., 2014). miR-208 is obtained from an old annotation,
because the latest release of miRBase has more specific annotation like miR-208a-3p,
miR-208b-3/5p. Interestingly we were able to find the whole family of miR-208 as heart

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

specific. We were not able to detect miR-126, miR-302c, miR-367 in heart. Of note, none
of these three is heart specific in the (Lee et al., 2008) study.
Muscle and brain were the only two tissues covered by all the three above mentioned
studies. In muscle, we were able to detect all the three muscle specific miRNAs (miR133b, miR-133a-3p, miR-1-3p) from (Ludwig et al., 2016), 3 out of 4 (miR-95 was not
found to be muscle specific) from (Lee et al., 2008), and 6 out of 10 for (Guo et al., 2014)
compilation. We were not able to detect miR-134, miR-193a, miR-95 and miR-128a. Note
that from the same study miR-134 is mentioned as muscle as well as testis specific and
miR-128a as muscle as well as brain specific. Moreover miR-95 is the only miRNA that is
muscle specific in all of the three studies.
Another tissue covered by all of the three studies is the brain. In total 30 miRNAs were
shown to be brain specific, only 1 out of 30 (miR-7) is common among all the three studies
and only three in two studies (miR-124, miR-9, miR-218) one of which is in the curated
list. In our study, we found 35 miRNAs brain specific but only two from the known ones
(hsa-miR-125b-2-3p, hsa-miR-125b-2-3p).
Tissue with the most number (n= 43) of known specific miRNA was placenta provided
by (Guo et al., 2014). Interestingly, miRNAs associated with placenta were mostly
evolutionary related. We were able to detect these evolutionary related miRNAs to be
placenta specific as well. In short, we detected 517a/b/c, 518a/b/c/d/e/f, 519a/b/c/d/e,
520a/d/e/f/g (not detecting 520b/c/h). Moreover we were also able to detect miR-371,
miR-372, miR-512, miR-522, miR-523, miR-524, miR-525, miR-526b and miR-527. Out
of 43, we detected 35 and did not detected miR-377, miR-526a, miR-184, miR-154, miR381, miR-503, miR-450, and miR-136. We detected only 3 (miR-513c-5p, miR-202-3p,

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

miR-34c-5p) out of 15 for testes. There were two tissues, lung and liver; mentioned only
in one study (Guo et al., 2014), we could not detect the only miRNA miR-126 for lung.
Interestingly this miRNA is also mentioned as heart specific in the same study. We also
did not find the four liver specific miRNAs miR-122, miR-483, miR-92a, miR-192; two
(miR-483, miR-92a) of which are shown as bone specific in the same study. In kidney
we were able to detect only 1 miR-200a out of 8 kidney specific in (Guo et al., 2014). Of
note (Lee et al., 2008), also found only one miRNA miR-204 to be kidney specific and
does not have any evidence for the rest of the seven miRNAs.
As (Ludwig et al., 2016) used only two individual's tissues, (Lee et al., 2008) also
performed own experiments in a control (same laboratory, same protocols) environment
and used different statistical methods compared to ours, we were still able to get a
reasonable overlap with tissue specific miRNAs considering diverse (different
laboratories, different protocols) and massive data. Therefore, we think that this work
provides the most comprehensive set of tissue specific miRNAs till date (n = 591 miRNAs)
(Supplementary Table 1).
2. Known and novel bacterial or viral infections
We validated our approach of pathogen detection using seven datasets with known
infection status. The samples in these datasets are known to be infected with seven
bacterial pathogens and three viral pathogens. Of note, we focused on within-dataset
comparison in order to avoid technical confounders (Supplementary Table 2). For each
sample, k-mer counts were calculated for all infectious species present in Kraken
database (4336 viral and 2784 bacterial/archaeal genomes) and differential abundance
analysis was carried out for those species that have at least 3 counts (baseMean) in a

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

particular comparison. As expected, in all comparisons the known pathogen represented
the best hit (i.e., smallest adjusted p-value) except Vaccinia virus (Fig. 3a). However,
Vaccinia virus has the highest log2 fold change as expected within the dataset
(GSE54235) comparison. It is worthy to note that Chlamydia trachomatis detection is
based on sRNA-seq performed on conjunctival tissue from children with follicular
trachoma and children with healthy conjunctivae, indicating a good performance of our
pathogen detection pipeline from tissues.
Next, we aimed to find novel associations of pathogens with disease. We took all the
comparisons, which has “healthy” and at least a disease state annotation (Supplementary
Table 2). In order to achieve more specificity we took only comparisons that have less
than 6 pathogens significantly up-regulated in disease as compared to healthy (FC > 1
and padj < 0.1). There were a total of 8 comparisons but we removed “GSE69837” as this
was a known case (Chlamydia trachomatis already shown in Fig. 3a). It was interesting
to find viruses and bacteria significantly upregulated in sRNA-seq data in certain disease
compared to healthy patients (Fig. 3b). Some of the most interesting cases are highlighted
in this section below.
Mycobacterium marinum in patients with ileal Crohn’s disease. In the original study,
expression of microRNAs in mucosae of patients with a normal pouch after colectomy for
intractable ulcerative colitis was compared to several control cohorts, among them was a
cohort of patients with Crohn’s disease (CD) of the terminal ileum (Ben-Shachar et al.,
2016). CD patients were previously not exposed to immunosuppression. Compared to
patients with non-inflamed ileal pouch, patients with ileal CD showed an increased
mucosal expression of Mycobacterium marinum. The bacterial genus Mycobacterium

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

causes diverse diseases in humans, of which Tuberculosis is the most serious with
around one-quarter of the world population latently infected and approximately 1.6 million
deaths in 2017 on a global scale. M. marinum is a non-tuberculous (also termed “atypical”)
Mycobacterium species, which is ubiquitously abundant in aquatic environments
(Johnson et al., 2015). Infection of humans is well known, but it is considered a rare event.
It typically occurs after exposure to contaminated water or infected marine animals, and
it is more common in immunosuppressed individuals. The most commonly affected organ
is the skin, in more severe cases involvement of muscles, bones or joints is reported
(Johnson et al., 2015). Opportunistic infection with M. marinum in CD is recognized in
those patients receiving anti-tumour necrosis factor therapy (e. g. infliximab) (Ferreira et
al., 2012). However, to the best of our knowledge, enteric super-infection with M. marinum
has not been reported in the literature so far. Interestingly, due to the resemblance of the
granulomatous intestinal inflammation in CD with enteric infection caused by other
Mycobacteria, it has been hypothesized that Mycobacterial infection is involved in the
pathogenesis of CD, with much focus on M. avium paratuberculosis (McMullen et al.,
2015). However, the aetiological significance of this pathogen in CD remains uncertain.
Hence, the gut mucosal prevalence of M. marinum and its potential pathophysiologic
significance in patients with CD should be further explored.
Methanosphaera stadtmanae in patients with schizophrenia. We detected an
overabundance of Methanosphaera stadtmanae in neurons derived from induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSC) of patients with schizophrenia, compared to healthy controls.
M. stadtmanae is an Archaeal microorganism which is frequently detected in the healthy
human gut microbiota (Dridi et al., 2009). It is involved in intestinal methanogenesis and

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

associated fermentative dynamics. M. stadtmanae is recognised by the innate immune
system, therefore it can induce inflammatory cytokine responses and could have diverse
immunomodulatory functions (Bang et al., 2014). Interestingly, M. stadtmanae was found
with an increased prevalence in faecal samples of patients with inflammatory bowel
diseases (IBD) Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis with antigen-specific IgGresponses (Blais Lecours et al., 2014). Immune system processes have been proposed
to be involved in the pathogenesis of schizophrenia (Pouget, 2018). Regarding the
immune-genetic basis of schizophrenia, genome-wide pleiotropy has been reported
between schizophrenia and CD as well as an increased prevalence of schizophrenia in
patients with IBD (Bernstein et al., 2019). Therefore, the potential immunogenic
importance of M. stadtmanae in schizophrenia should be investigated.
Chimpanzee herpesvirus in Lewy body dementia. We detected an increased
abundance of a viral pathogen identified as chimpanzee herpesvirus (ChHV) in the
cerebral cortex of patients with lewy body dementia (LBD) compared to non-demented
controls (Hébert et al., 2013). ChHV is an alphaherpesvirus closely related to human
herpes simplex virus type 2 (HSV-2) (Severini et al., 2013). LBD is a neurodegenerative
disorder, which underlies 4.2% of all dementia cases, second only to Alzheimer’s
dementia (AD) (Vann Jones et al., 2014). The aetiology of LBD is obscure, but growing
evidence points towards neuro inflammation as a key pathophysiologic factor, analogous
to the pathogenesis of AD (Surendranathan et al., 2015). In AD it is assumed that multiple
pathogens infecting the brain are key triggers of neural dysfunctional protein
accumulation and neuro inflammation in genetically vulnerable individuals (Harris et al.,
2015). Among the pathogens detected in brains of AD patients, multiple lines of evidence

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

point at herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) and HSV-2 as two of the main drivers of AD
neurodegeneration (Harris et al., 2015; Sochocka et al., 2017). Given the close
phylogenetic relationship between ChHV and HSV-2, ChHV might play a role in
inflammatory neurodegenerative processes in LBD similar to the other herpesviruses in
AD. Therefore, the association detected in the present study should be further elaborated.
3. Analyzing in-house data and comparing with SEA data
One of the key features available in SEA is uploading the in-house data and comparing it
with the already integrated data. Mostly, researchers use different analysis pipelines to
carry out differential expression or classification, which makes it very hard to compare the
results with the publicly available data. Therefore, we require a database with interactive
visualizations that has all the publicly available data analyzed using the same pipeline
with same parameters. For SEA, we have analyzed and integrated all the data using
Oasis 2 pipeline. We expect that comparing the in-house data with the data in SEA will
yield disease-specific signatures, in this case a sRNA or group of sRNAs. Note that
uploading to SEA requires the output of Oasis 2 (supplementary material).
In order to test this feature, we uploaded in-house sRNA-seq data from well
characterized 47 Parkinson disease (PD) and 53 frequency-matched healthy controls,
which is a baseline data from the longitudinal de novo Parkinson disease (DeNoPa)
cohort (Supplementary Table 3) and available as “demo user data” in SEA. SEA gives us
a unique opportunity to identify PD-specific biomarkers associated with early-stage PD
that can eventually help us in early diagnosis, therefore, better treatment of the disease.
Below we describe the differential expression and classification results from PD data and

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

an approach in order to identify PD-specific biomarkers that do not overlap with other
neurodegenerative diseases.
We found four significantly differentially expressed (DE) miRNAs with adjusted p-value
less than 0.1. Out of these, two are up-regulated in PD (hsa-miR-502-3p and hsa-miR532-5p) and two are down-regulated in PD (hsa-miR-30d-5p and hsa-miR-22-5p)
(Supplementary Table 3). Next, we overlapped these four DE miRNAs with all the
neurodegenerative disease-related datasets integrated in SEA. We focused on nine
comparisons (from five datasets) in which one of the conditions is a healthy state and the
other is a diseased condition (Alzheimer’s disease (AD), Lewy body dementia, tanglepredominant dementia, Huntington’s disease (HD), Frontotemporal dementia or
Hippocampal sclerosis of aging). Out of the two up-regulated miRNAs in PD, one (hsamiR-502-3p) is up-regulated in Alzheimer's disease and one (hsa-miR-532-5p) is upregulated in both Alzheimer’s and Huntington’s disease (Fig. 4a). In contrast, none of the
down-regulated miRNAs in PD were found to be significantly down in any of these nine
comparisons. Interestingly, it has been shown that the expression of miR-22 is downregulated in a 6-hydroxydopamine-induced cell model of PD using RT-PCR (Yang et al.,
2016). Moreover, Margis et al., found that hsa-miR-22 has reduced expression in the
blood of de novo PD patients (Margis et al., 2011). Furthermore, family members of hsamiR-30d-5p are known to be deregulated in PD (Leggio et al., 2017) and putatively target
the PD-related gene, LRRK2 (PARK8) (Heman-Ackah et al., 2013). These results
confirms, the potential role of hsa-miR-30d-5p and hsa-miR-22-5p in PD. To explore the
mechanism by which these two miRNA are involved in PD, we performed gene ontology
(GO) analysis of the validated and predicted targets using webgestalt (Wang et al., 2017).

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

The top ten terms ranked according to FDR adjusted p-value are shown in the (Fig. 4b).
The top significant hit (FDR < 0.1) is axon development. Recent publications (Bolam et
al., 2012; Pissadaki et al., 2013; Surmeier et al., 2017) have suggested the role of
massive and unmyelinated axonal arbor in PD. In substantia nigra pars compacta (SNc),
the axonal arbor of dopamine neurons is very large as compared to other neuronal types.
This leads to the hypothesis that these dopamine neurons have selective and exceptional
vulnerability in PD, and have a higher energy demand that may play a crucial role in cell
death (Pissadaki et al., 2013).
To further gain insights of unique PD biomarkers, we explored the classification results
integrated in SEA. PD and healthy were classified with an AUC of 0.89 (Fig. 4d).
Interestingly, the classifier used only 18 sRNAs to separate the two states
(Supplementary Table 3). We overlapped these 18 sRNAs with the classification results
from other neurodegenerative diseases integrated in SEA (Fig. 4c). There are only three
sRNA that are also found in AD or HD but they have opposite change of expression. This
suggests the specificity of these sRNAs to PD as compared to other neurodegenerative
diseases. Furthermore, to filter out sRNAs known to be associated with other
neurodegenerative diseases, we used the association database of sRNA-disease
association available in SEA. The results showed that hsa-miR-342-3p has been
associated with other neurodegenerative diseases (Montag et al., 2009; Saba et al.,
2008). Next, we also filtered out sRNAs if the base mean read count is less than 5 and
also, hsa-miR-502-3p that was found to be up-regulated in AD (Fig. 4a). Then we run a
random forest classifier using the normalized counts for the remaining 15 sRNAs and
hsa-miR-22-5p that is down-regulated in our data. (Fig. 4d) shows that using 16 sRNAs

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

to classify PD and controls, yielded 85% area under the curve (AUC) with 83% recall and
77% of precision. Furthermore, to find the relevance of the 13 known miRNAs (out of 16
sRNAs) in PD, we obtained their target genes from SEA (only 10 miRNAs out of 13 have
targets supported by strong evidence) and overlapped with the targets genes of PD
associated miRNAs in SEA. Interestingly, these 10 known miRNAs targets 96 genes,
which are known to be associated with PD (Fig. 4e, Supplementary Table 3). The list
includes TP53 (Alves da Costa et al., 2011) that contributes to the apoptotic deterioration
taking place in PD, PTEN (Ogino et al., 2016) that has been linked to PD via DNA damage
and DNA repair machinery, SMAD1 (Hegarty et al., 2018) is an important regulator
required for neurite growth, EZH2 (Södersten et al., 2014) is a lysine methyltransferase
component of polycomb repressive complex 2 that has been associated with PD and
BCL2 (van der Heide et al., 2013) is required for proper development of the dopaminergic
system and has been implicated in the pathogenesis of PD. To gain further insights into
the 3 novel predicted miRNAs (out of 16 sRNAs) used to classify PD and controls, we
performed gene enrichment analysis on their target genes using webgestalt (Zhang et al.,
2005). The novel miRNAs were p-hsa-miR-113, p-hsa-miR-247, and p-hsa-miR-2351/2/3 (supplementary material). We used miRDB (Wong et al., 2015) to get target genes
for the mature sequences of these predicted miRNAs (material and methods).
Interestingly the GO terms for these miRNAs were neuron differentiation, generation
of neurons, neurogenesis and regulation of intracellular signal transduction (Fig.
4f). All these processes are highly related to PD, and hence we think these novel miRNAs
should further be explored and validated in the laboratory. Predicted structure of these
miRNAs can be found in supplementary material.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

All together, these results make a strong case in favor of using SEA in order to retrieve
disease-specific biomarkers.
Conclusions
SEA is designed for the biological or medical end-user that is interested to define where
and when a sRNA of interest is expressed. Prototypical questions that can be addressed
with SEA are: What is the expression of hsa-miR-488-5p across all human tissues? Is
hsa-miR-488-5p expressed higher in adenocarcinomas as compared to other cancer
types? Is the tissue-specific expression of hsa-miR-488-5p conserved in mice? Its unique
selling points are the deep and standardized annotation of meta-information, the reanalysis of published data with Oasis 2 to reduce analysis bias, a user-friendly search
interface that supports complex queries, and the fast and interactive visualization of
analysis results across 10 organisms (Table 1) and various sRNA-species. SEA also
contains information on the expression of currently 769 high-quality predicted miRNAs,
across organisms and tissues.
In addition, SEA also stores sRNA differential expression, sRNA based classification,
pathogenic sRNA signatures from bacteria and viruses and pathogen differential
expression. Furthermore, SEA can be used to search gene targets or diseases
associated with a miRNA. Moreover, SEA allows end users to upload their analysis
results of differential expression and classification from Oasis 2. This will allow users to
compare their data to over 4200 experimental samples across different conditions. SEA
also provides users with an option to perform on the fly analysis such as overlapping
differentially expressed sRNAs or pathogens across different studies or the most
important features (sRNAs) identified with classification. SEA enables end users to re-

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

submit samples from interactive plots for differential expression or classification, this will
help users to choose samples of their choice from an experiment.
Moreover, SEA is continuously growing and aims to eventually encompass all sRNAseq datasets across all organisms deposited in GEO and other repositories. Genome
versions will be updated with every major release of SEA. SEA will be backwards
compatible in the future by allowing users to choose previous genome versions and
annotations. A detailed comparison of SEA to other existing sRNA expression databases
highlights that SEA is superior in terms of supported organism, annotations, diseases,
tissues, sRNA based classification, pathogen k-mer DE, known miRNA disease
associations, user specific experimental data upload, cross study comparisons and reanalysis with selected samples (Table 2).
As far as we are aware, SEA is the only sRNA-seq database that supports ontologybased queries, supporting single or combined searches for five predefined keys
(organism, tissue, disease, cell type, and cell line) across all datasets. However, the SEA
database system contains additional (meta)-information including age, gender,
developmental stage, genotype as well as technical experimental details such as the
sequencing instrument and protocol details (e.g., library kit, RNA extraction procedure).
We plan to normalize most of this additional information in future versions of SEA. This
will allow users, for example, to query and analyze sRNA expression effects that are
introduced by library kit or sequencing platform differences (both of these features can
introduce large biases in the detection and expression of sRNAs). Other future
developments will include information on sRNA editing, modifications, and mutation
events.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

In summary, SEA supports interactive result visualization on all levels, from querying
and displaying of sRNA expression information to the mapping and quality information for
each of the over 4200 samples. SEA is a fast, flexible, and fully interactive web application
for the investigation of sRNA and pathogen expression across cell lines, tissues,
diseases, organisms, and sRNA-species. As such, SEA should be a valuable addition to
the landscape of sRNA expression databases.
Additionally, we presented the most comprehensive set of tissue specific miRNAs till
date. We were able to provide by far the most complete set of 591 distinct tissue specific
miRNAs across 30 tissues. To our knowledge this is by far the most comprehensive
analysis (set) of tissue specific miRNAs.
In the current work, we also found pathogen signatures from sRNA-seq data. We found
signatures of pathogens in severe diseases like dementia. In brief, we found differential
regulation of mycobacterium marinum in patients with ileal crohn’s disease,
methanosphaera stadtmanae in patients with schizophrenia and chimpanzee herpesvirus
in Lewy body dementia.
From our in house Parkinson’s disease data, we were able to find potential biomarkers
based on differential expression and classification for the early detection of PD. The top
term for the gene ontology (GO) analysis of the two down-regulated miRNAs is axon
development, suggesting their role in PD. Moreover, gene targets of the sRNAs for the
top important features (potential biomarkers) for PD using classification were overlapping
with the targets of the known PD miRNAs. Additionally, GO analysis for the targets of the
three novel miRNAs are neuron differentiation, generation of neurons, neurogenesis and

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

regulation of intracellular signal transduction (Fig. 4f). We think these novel miRNAs
should be further explored and validated in the laboratory.
Lastly, researchers have used massive sRNA data from SEA for other tasks, for
example, it enables to use deep learning for data augmentation problem such as
predicting sex and tissue based on sRNA expression profiles (Fiosina et al., 2019). As
such, SEA should be a valuable addition to the landscape of sRNA-seq web applications.

Material and methods
miRNA tissue specificity : To compute tissue specificity index (TSI) for all the miRNAs
in SEA, we calculated median of reads per million (RPM) for each miRNAs within a
dataset having the same tissue. Healthy and diseased samples were mixed for tissues
within the same dataset. Shannon entropy from BioQC R package was used to calculate
TSI for each miRNA across tissues.
Novel miRNA gene targets : miRDB (Wong et al., 2015) was used to obtain targets of
the novel miRNAs. We restricted the analysis to highly probable gene targets having a
score of 70 or more.
Text mining pipeline: To extract miRNA-gene targets, a dedicated text mining pipeline
that reads unstructured text data and outputs structured data that includes the detected
and normalized genes and miRNAs as well as the relations between them. Named entity
recognition software ProMiner (Hanisch et al., 2005, Fluck et al. 2007) and
MiRNADetector (Bagewadi et al. 2015) are used to detect and normalize genes and
miRNAs, respectively. Both detectors are incorporated in the BELIEF text mining pipeline

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(Madan et al., 2016) that contains machine learning models to detect specific relations
from the complete Medline abstracts.
Gene enrichment analysis: Gene enrichment analysis was performed using webgestalt
R package version 0.3.0.
In house parkinson disease data:
Isolation of total RNA from peripheral blood sample: Peripheral blood samples were
collected into PAXgene Blood RNA tube (PreAnalytiX) from consenting patients and
healthy controls, the tubes were gently inverted for multiple times, incubated for 20-24
hours under room temperature and stored under -80 °C until processing. Total RNA was
isolated using the PAXgene Blood RNA kit (PreAnalytiX) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The purity and concentration of isolated RNA were measured with NanoDrop™
2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The RNA integrity was determined
by Agilent RNA 6000 Nanochip (Agilent Technologies) using the 2100 Bioanalyzer
(Agilent Technologies).
small RNA library preparation: Small RNA libraries were prepared using 1 ug highquality RNA following the protocol of Illumina TrueSeq small RNA library kit (Illumina). In
brief, 3’adapter was denatured for 2 minutes under 70°C, and ligated to the RNA with T4
RNA Ligase 2 deletion mutant for 1 hour at 28°C. Then the reaction was stopped with
stop solution for 15 minutes under 28°C. Subsequently, 5’ adapter was denatured for 2
minutes at 70°C , then added to the RNA with ATP and T4 DNA ligase for 1 hour under
28°C . After adaptors ligation, the RNA was reverse transcribed to complement DNA
(cDNA) by using SuperScript II Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and
dNTPs for 1 hour at 50°C. Then, the cDNA was indexed and amplified with PCR mix and

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

primers supplied in the kit for 12 cycles (denaturing at 98°C for 30 s, annealing at 60°C
for 30 s, extension at 72°C for 15 s, with a final extension at 72°C for 10 min). Amplified
and indexed cDNAs were then pooled together, mixed with DNA loading dye and loaded
on a 5% TBE acrylamide gels (Bio-Rad). After 57 minutes electrophoresis under 145 V,
the gel was stained with Midori Green for 5 minutes and viewed under the UV
transilluminator, fragments between Illumina’s custom ladder 145 bp to 160 bp were cut
out for library preparation. The gel was centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 2 minutes through a
Gel Breaker tube (Bio-Cat). Then cDNA was eluted from the homogenized gel by adding
300ul UltraPure water and shaking under 800 x rpm for 2 hours. Then the gel was
transferred on a 5 um filter tube (Bio-Cat) and centrifuged for 10 seconds under 600 x g
and the gel debris was separated. Afterward, 2ul Glycoblue, 30ul of 3M sodium acetate
and 975ul 100% ethanol (pre-chilled under -20°C) were added and well mixed to the
sample, following an immediate centrifuge at 20,000 x g for 20 minutes under 4°C. After
remove and discard the supernatant, the pellet was washed with 500ul 70% pre-chilled
ethanol. The supernatant was discarded after sample being centrifuged at 20,000 x g for
2 minutes under room temperature, and the pellet was dried in a 37°C heat block for 10
minutes with open lid. Finally, the pellet was resuspended in 10ul 10mM Tris-HCL (pH
8.5) and the sample quality was checked using Agilent High Sensitivity DNA chip (Agilent
Technologies) using the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies). All high quality libraries
were then sequenced on Illumina HiSeq 2000 Sequencer.
List of abbreviations
SRA:

Sequence

Read

Archive

GEO:

Gene

Expression

Omnibus

sRNA: Small RNA miRNA: MicroRNA DB: Database

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Declarations
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Mariah Snyder, Yu Zhao, the ZMNH IT, and all of the SEA users
for helpful suggestions.
Funding
This work was supported by the DFG (BO4224/4–1), the Network of Centres of
Excellence in Neurodegeneration (CoEN) initiative, the Volkswagen Stiftung (Az88705),
iMed – the Helmholtz Initiative on Personalized Medicine, and the BMBF grant Integrative
Data Semantics in Neurodegeneration (031L0029B, IDSN).
Availability of data and materials
SEA is freely available at http://sea.ims.bio/.
Authors' contributions
SB initiated the study and designed the web application as well as analyses together with
RR and VB. RR, AS, AL designed and implemented the expression database. RR and
MF designed and implemented association database. MF, SM, and JF designed and
developed the semantic integration service. RR, AS, AL, MF implemented the APIs. RR
and AG implemented the pipeline to automatically download and submit sRNA-seq data
to Oasis 2. RR and AG implemented the predicted miRNA API. SH designed the
development and deployment system infrastructures. TS annotated the experiments and
samples. DSM and AL developed the interactive user interface. AL, JB, VB and RR made
the user manual and tutorials. VB, RR, AL and TL analyzed the sRNA-seq data
mentioned in the manuscript. AR, CT and BM provided and sequenced the Denopa sRNA

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

samples. SB, RR, VB and TL wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
NA
Consent for publication
N/A
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
REFERENCES
Alves da Costa, C., & Checler, F. (2011). Apoptosis in Parkinson’s disease: is p53 the missing
link between genetic and sporadic Parkinsonism? Cellular Signalling, 23(6), 963–968.
Bang, C., Weidenbach, K., Gutsmann, T., Heine, H., & Schmitz, R. A. (2014). The intestinal
archaea Methanosphaera stadtmanae and Methanobrevibacter smithii activate human
dendritic cells. PloS One, 9(6), e99411.
Barrett, T., Wilhite, S. E., Ledoux, P., Evangelista, C., Kim, I. F., Tomashevsky, M., …
Soboleva, A. (2013). NCBI GEO: archive for functional genomics data sets--update.
Nucleic Acids Research, 41(Database issue), D991-5.
Ben-Shachar, S., Yanai, H., Sherman Horev, H., Elad, H., Baram, L., Issakov, O., … Dotan, I.
(2016). MicroRNAs Expression in the Ileal Pouch of Patients with Ulcerative Colitis Is
Robustly Up-Regulated and Correlates with Disease Phenotypes. PloS One, 11(8),
e0159956.
Bernstein, C. N., Hitchon, C. A., Walld, R., Bolton, J. M., Sareen, J., Walker, J. R., … CIHR
Team in Defining the Burden and Managing the Effects of Psychiatric Comorbidity in
Chronic Immunoinflammatory Disease. (2019). Increased Burden of Psychiatric Disorders
in Inflammatory Bowel Disease. Inflammatory Bowel Diseases, 25(2), 360–368.
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Blais Lecours, P., Marsolais, D., Cormier, Y., Berberi, M., Haché, C., Bourdages, R., &
Duchaine, C. (2014). Increased prevalence of Methanosphaera stadtmanae in inflammatory
bowel diseases. PloS One, 9(2), e87734.
Bolam, J. P., & Pissadaki, E. K. (2012). Living on the edge with too many mouths to feed: why
dopamine neurons die. Movement Disorders : Official Journal of the Movement Disorder
Society, 27(12), 1478–1483.
Chou, C.-H., Shrestha, S., Yang, C.-D., Chang, N.-W., Lin, Y.-L., Liao, K.-W., … Huang, H.-D.
(2018). miRTarBase update 2018: a resource for experimentally validated microRNA-target
interactions. Nucleic Acids Research, 46(D1), D296–D302.
Chung, I.-F., Chang, S.-J., Chen, C.-Y., Liu, S.-H., Li, C.-Y., Chan, C.-H., … Cheng, W.-C.
(2017). YM500v3: a database for small RNA sequencing in human cancer research. Nucleic
Acids Research, 45(D1), D925–D931.
Côté, R., Reisinger, F., Martens, L., Barsnes, H., Vizcaino, J. A., & Hermjakob, H. (2010). The
Ontology Lookup Service: bigger and better. Nucleic Acids Research, 38(Web Server
issue), W155-60.
Dridi, B., Henry, M., El Khéchine, A., Raoult, D., & Drancourt, M. (2009). High prevalence of
Methanobrevibacter smithii and Methanosphaera stadtmanae detected in the human gut
using an improved DNA detection protocol. PloS One, 4(9), e7063.
Ferreira, J., Grochowsky, J., Krakower, D., Zuromskis, P., Baden, R., & Cheifetz, A. S. (2012).
Mycobacterium marinum: an increasingly common opportunistic infection in patients on
infliximab. The American Journal of Gastroenterology, 107(8), 1268–1269.
Guo, Z., Maki, M., Ding, R., Yang, Y., Zhang, B., & Xiong, L. (2014). Genome-wide survey of
tissue-specific microRNA and transcription factor regulatory networks in 12 tissues.
Scientific Reports, 4, 5150.
Hanisch, D., Fundel, K., Mevissen, H.-T., Zimmer, R., & Fluck, J. (2005). ProMiner: rule-based
protein and gene entity recognition. BMC Bioinformatics, 6 Suppl 1, S14.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Harris, S. A., & Harris, E. A. (2015). Herpes Simplex Virus Type 1 and Other Pathogens are Key
Causative Factors in Sporadic Alzheimer’s Disease. Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease : JAD,
48(2), 319–353.
Hébert, S. S., Wang, W.-X., Zhu, Q., & Nelson, P. T. (2013). A study of small RNAs from
cerebral neocortex of pathology-verified Alzheimer’s disease, dementia with lewy bodies,
hippocampal sclerosis, frontotemporal lobar dementia, and non-demented human controls.
Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease : JAD, 35(2), 335–348.
Hegarty, S. V., Sullivan, A. M., & O’Keeffe, G. W. (2018). Inhibition of miR-181a promotes
midbrain neuronal growth through a Smad1/5-dependent mechanism: implications for
Parkinson’s disease. Neuronal Signaling, 2(1), NS20170181.
Heman-Ackah, S. M., Hallegger, M., Rao, M. S., & Wood, M. J. A. (2013). RISC in PD: the
impact of microRNAs in Parkinson’s disease cellular and molecular pathogenesis. Frontiers
in Molecular Neuroscience, 6, 40.
Johnson, M. G., & Stout, J. E. (2015). Twenty-eight cases of Mycobacterium marinum infection:
retrospective case series and literature review. Infection, 43(6), 655–662.
Kozomara, A., & Griffiths-Jones, S. (2014). miRBase: annotating high confidence microRNAs
using deep sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Research, 42(Database issue), D68-73.
Kuksa, P. P., Amlie-Wolf, A., Katanić, Ž., Valladares, O., Wang, L.-S., & Leung, Y. Y. (2019).
DASHR 2.0: integrated database of human small non-coding RNA genes and mature
products. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 35(6), 1033–1039.
Lee, E. J., Baek, M., Gusev, Y., Brackett, D. J., Nuovo, G. J., & Schmittgen, T. D. (2008).
Systematic evaluation of microRNA processing patterns in tissues, cell lines, and tumors.
RNA (New York, N.Y.), 14(1), 35–42.
Leggio, L., Vivarelli, S., L’Episcopo, F., Tirolo, C., Caniglia, S., Testa, N., … Iraci, N. (2017).
microRNAs in Parkinson’s Disease: From Pathogenesis to Novel Diagnostic and
Therapeutic Approaches. International Journal of Molecular Sciences, 18(12).

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Leinonen, R., Sugawara, H., Shumway, M., & International Nucleotide Sequence Database
Collaboration. (2011). The sequence read archive. Nucleic Acids Research, 39(Database
issue), D19-21.
Li, Y., Qiu, C., Tu, J., Geng, B., Yang, J., Jiang, T., & Cui, Q. (2014). HMDD v2.0: a database
for experimentally supported human microRNA and disease associations. Nucleic Acids
Research, 42(Database issue), D1070-4.
Love, M. I., Huber, W., & Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change and
dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biology, 15(12), 550.
Ludwig, N., Leidinger, P., Becker, K., Backes, C., Fehlmann, T., Pallasch, C., … Keller, A.
(2016). Distribution of miRNA expression across human tissues. Nucleic Acids Research,
44(8), 3865–3877.
Madan, S., Hodapp, S., Senger, P., Ansari, S., Szostak, J., Hoeng, J., … Fluck, J. (2016). The
BEL information extraction workflow (BELIEF): evaluation in the BioCreative V BEL and
IAT track. Database : The Journal of Biological Databases and Curation, 2016.
Margis, R., Margis, R., & Rieder, C. R. M. (2011). Identification of blood microRNAs
associated to Parkinsonĭs disease. Journal of Biotechnology, 152(3), 96–101.
McMullen, L., T Leach, S., A Lemberg, D., & S Day, A. (2015). Current roles of specific
bacteria in the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel disease. AIMS Microbiology, 1(1), 82–
91.
Montag, J., Hitt, R., Opitz, L., Schulz-Schaeffer, W. J., Hunsmann, G., & Motzkus, D. (2009).
Upregulation of miRNA hsa-miR-342-3p in experimental and idiopathic prion disease.
Molecular Neurodegeneration, 4, 36.
Ogino, M., Ichimura, M., Nakano, N., Minami, A., Kitagishi, Y., & Matsuda, S. (2016). Roles of
PTEN with DNA Repair in Parkinson’s Disease. International Journal of Molecular
Sciences, 17(6).
Panwar, B., Omenn, G. S., & Guan, Y. (2017). miRmine: a database of human miRNA
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

expression profiles. Bioinformatics (Oxford, England), 33(10), 1554–1560.
Pissadaki, E. K., & Bolam, J. P. (2013). The energy cost of action potential propagation in
dopamine neurons: clues to susceptibility in Parkinson’s disease. Frontiers in
Computational Neuroscience, 7, 13.
Pouget, J. G. (2018). The Emerging Immunogenetic Architecture of Schizophrenia.
Schizophrenia Bulletin, 44(5), 993–1004.
Rahman, R.-U., Gautam, A., Bethune, J., Sattar, A., Fiosins, M., Magruder, D. S., … Bonn, S.
(2018). Oasis 2: improved online analysis of small RNA-seq data. BMC Bioinformatics,
19(1), 54.
Saba, R., Goodman, C. D., Huzarewich, R. L. C. H., Robertson, C., & Booth, S. A. (2008). A
miRNA signature of prion induced neurodegeneration. PloS One, 3(11), e3652.
Sai Lakshmi, S., & Agrawal, S. (2008). piRNABank: a web resource on classified and clustered
Piwi-interacting RNAs. Nucleic Acids Research, 36(Database issue), D173-7.
Schuurman, N., & Leszczynski, A. (2008). Ontologies for bioinformatics. Bioinformatics and
Biology Insights, 2, 187–200. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19812775
Severini, A., Tyler, S. D., Peters, G. A., Black, D., & Eberle, R. (2013). Genome sequence of a
chimpanzee herpesvirus and its relation to other primate alphaherpesviruses. Archives of
Virology, 158(8), 1825–1828.
Sochocka, M., Zwolińska, K., & Leszek, J. (2017). The Infectious Etiology of Alzheimer’s
Disease. Current Neuropharmacology, 15(7), 996–1009.
Södersten, E., Feyder, M., Lerdrup, M., Gomes, A.-L., Kryh, H., Spigolon, G., … Hansen, K.
(2014). Dopamine signaling leads to loss of Polycomb repression and aberrant gene
activation in experimental parkinsonism. PLoS Genetics, 10(9), e1004574.
Surendranathan, A., Rowe, J. B., & O’Brien, J. T. (2015). Neuroinflammation in Lewy body
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

dementia. Parkinsonism & Related Disorders, 21(12), 1398–1406.
Surmeier, D. J., Obeso, J. A., & Halliday, G. M. (2017). Selective neuronal vulnerability in
Parkinson disease. Nature Reviews. Neuroscience, 18(2), 101–113.
van der Heide, L. P., & Smidt, M. P. (2013). The BCL2 code to dopaminergic development and
Parkinson’s disease. Trends in Molecular Medicine, 19(4), 211–216.
Vann Jones, S. A., & O’Brien, J. T. (2014). The prevalence and incidence of dementia with
Lewy bodies: a systematic review of population and clinical studies. Psychological
Medicine, 44(4), 673–683.
Vitsios, D. M., Davis, M. P., van Dongen, S., & Enright, A. J. (2017). Large-scale analysis of
microRNA expression, epi-transcriptomic features and biogenesis. Nucleic Acids Research,
45(3), 1079–1090.
Wang, J., Vasaikar, S., Shi, Z., Greer, M., & Zhang, B. (2017). WebGestalt 2017: a more
comprehensive, powerful, flexible and interactive gene set enrichment analysis toolkit.
Nucleic Acids Research, 45(W1), W130–W137.
Witwer, K. W. (2015). Circulating microRNA biomarker studies: pitfalls and potential solutions.
Clinical Chemistry, 61(1), 56–63.
Wong, N., & Wang, X. (2015). miRDB: an online resource for microRNA target prediction and
functional annotations. Nucleic Acids Research, 43(Database issue), D146-52.
Yang, C. P., Zhang, Z. H., Zhang, L. H., & Rui, H. C. (2016). Neuroprotective Role of
MicroRNA-22 in a 6-Hydroxydopamine-Induced Cell Model of Parkinson’s Disease via
Regulation of Its Target Gene TRPM7. Journal of Molecular Neuroscience : MN, 60(4),
445–452.
Zerbino, D. R., Achuthan, P., Akanni, W., Amode, M. R., Barrell, D., Bhai, J., … Flicek, P.
(2018). Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Research, 46(D1), D754–D761.
Zhang, B., Kirov, S., & Snoddy, J. (2005). WebGestalt: an integrated system for exploring gene
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

sets in various biological contexts. Nucleic Acids Research, 33(Web Server issue), W741-8.

Table 1. Supported SEA organisms and their corresponding genome versions.
Organism

genome-version

genome-date

Bos taurus

UMD3.1

2009-11

Caenorhabditis elegans

WBcel235

2012-12

Danio rerio

GRCz10

2014-09

Drosophila melanogaster

BDGP6

2014-07

Mus musculus

GRCm38

2012-01

Gallus gallus

Galgal4

2011-11

Rattus norvegicus

Rnor_6.0

2014-07

Homo sapiens

GRCh38

2013-12

Sus scrofa

Sscrofa10.2

2011-08

Anopheles gambiae

AgamP4

2006-02

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table 2. Comparison of sRNA expression databases.
SEA

miRmine1

DASHR22

miratlas3

YM500v34

Organisms

10

1

1

2

1

sRNA types

5

1

5

1

5

>4200

304

802

461

>8000*

Feature

Samples
Novel miRNAs

+

Ontology search#

+

sRNA DE

+

sRNA Classification

+

Pathogen k-mer expression

+

Pathogen k-mer DE

+

miRNA targets

+

miRNA disease associations

+

User data upload

+

Cross study comparisons

+

Re-analysis with selected
samples
Dataset search

+

Genome versions
Modification Analysis

+

+

+

+
+
+

This table includes recent sRNA expression databases and a list of features we deem relevant. *Supports
mainly cancer-related datasets. #Use of ontological graphs for the annotation and querying of samples.
1

(Panwar et al., 2017), 2(Kuksa et al., 2019), 3(Vitsios et al., 2017), 4(Chung et al., 2017).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table 3. SEA keys and used ontologies (as of June 2019).
Key

Ontology(s)

# Annotations

# Terms

Organism

NCBI Taxonomy1

4235

126

Tissue

BRENDA tissue / enzyme

3021

190

source2
Disease

Human Disease Ontology3

1951

287

Cell type

Cell Ontology4

732

304

663

132

134

76

Cell line

Cell Line Ontology

5

Experimental Factor Ontology6

Table 4. SEA browser compatibility
Browser

Version

Chrome

61.0.3163.100, 62.0.3202.62

Mozilla Firefox

55.0.3, 56.0 (64-bit), 57.0 (64-bit)

Chromium

62.0.3202.75

Safari

11.0.1

Internet explorer

11

Browsers that are used to test SEA functionalities.

https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy
http://www.brenda-enzymes.info/
3
http://www.disease-ontology.org/
4
http://obofoundry.org/ontology/cl.html
5
http://www.clo-ontology.org/
6
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/efo/
1
2

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. SEA system architecture
SEA system was developed using the modular system design approach (model-view-controller). The system has a presentation
layer for user interface and visualization of search results. Presentation layer is followed by a business layer which transform
complex user queries and distribute particular requests to the data access layer REST API services. There is a semantic data
layer, to store and access primary and derived data together with annotations and links to secondary data. Annotation-DB stores
metadata for experiments, samples, corresponding ontological terms as well as relations between dataset/sample, sample/term
and term/term. Association-DB contains information about sRNAs and genes chromosomal locations, miRNA target genes and
miRNA disease associations. Expression-DB stores sRNA expression profiles, sRNA differential expression; sRNA based
classification as well as pathogen detection and pathogen differential expression. It also store details about dataset processing
pipeline and parameters. Oasis-DB was used to store novel predicted miRNA information. User DB contains in-house data
uploaded by the end users from Oasis 2 pipeline. Semantic data integration layer integrates primary and secondary data into the
mentioned databases. Microservices were implemented in order to achieve strong encapsulation and well-defined interfaces via
REST APIs.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Tissue specific miRNAs

Heatmaps show scaled expression (0-1) for each miRNA across all the tissues. 1 is maximum expression
of a miRNA in that tissue compared to all other tissues. (a) Tissue specific miRNAs. miRNA across all
tissues with TSI > 0.8 (n=591). (b) Ubiquitous miRNAs. miRNA expression across all tissues with TSI
<= 0.2 (n=20). miRNAs names are omitted for simplicity. A complete list can be found in Supplementary
Table 1.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Known and Novel bacterial or viral infections. (a) Known associations. Pathogen detection

using seven datasets known to be infected with seven bacterial and three viral pathogens. Bar represents
pathogen log2fold difference between the uninfected and infected state (Supplementary Table 2). Number
on top of the bar denotes rank of the pathogen compared to all the other DE pathogens within the
comparison (i.e., smallest adjusted p-value). (b) Novel associations. Heatmap shows log2fold difference
of pathogens significantly upregulated in disease as compared to healthy (fold change > 1 and padj < 0.1)
(Supplementary Table 2). Comparisons that have less than 6 pathogens significantly differentially
expressed are selected for specificity. Details about dataset, comparison groups, log2fold and padj for both
(a,b) are provided in (Supplementary Table 2).

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. In-house de novo Parkinson disease (DeNoPa). (a) sRNA DE Overlap. Overlap of

upregulated sRNAs between in-house denopa (blue), AD (purple) and HD (orange). Overall nine
neurodegenerative disease comparisons were considered and overlap was found with these two datasets.
(b) Gene Ontology (GO) terms. Top 10 GO terms associated with the target genes of the two down
regulated sRNAs. (c) sRNA classification Overlap. Overlap of classification features (sRNAs) between
in-house denopa (blue), AD (two datasets) (purple) and HD (orange). (d) DeNoPa classification.
Receiver‐operating characteristic (ROC) curve showing true‐ and false‐positive rates for DeNoPa disease
prediction based on sRNA expression profile using 18 sRNAs in full model (blue) and 16 unique (not
found in other neurodegenerative diseases) sRNAs (red). (e) PD associated genes. Network of PD
associated genes and 13 known miRNAs from the classification. (f) GO terms for novel miRNAs. GO
terms associated with the target genes of the three novel miRNAs from the classification.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary material
1.

Acquisition and analysis of sRNA datasets
SEA acquires raw published sRNA-seq datasets and their primary annotation from Gene
Expression Omnibus (GEO) and NCBI's Sequence Reads Archive (SRA) repository. GEO
makes two databases in SQLite format available for download: GEOmetadb for
annotations and SRAdb for SRA sequences. An automated data acquisition pipeline
searches for new sRNA data bi-weekly, keeping SEA continuously updated. Following the
acquisition of sRNA datasets, the SEA analysis workflow automatically analyzes new files
using the Oasis 2.0 (http://oasis.ims.bio/). The SEA analysis workflow determines data
quality and detects and quantifies sRNAs, including the prediction of novel, high-quality
miRNAs. Low quality files are flagged automatically and subjected to manual curation.
Any files not passing manual curation are removed from SEA. Subsequently, sRNA counts
of high-quality samples are stored in the sRNA expression database while corresponding
quality information is saved in the data quality repository. Pathogenic signatures from
bacteria and viruses, supplying information on potentially infected samples is also
incorporated into SEA. Additionally, SEA stores expression information of high-quality
predicted miRNAs including the ID, organism, chromosomal location, precursor and
mature sequences, structure, read counts, prediction scores, and detailed information on
the software and its versions used to predict the miRNA. SEA’s primary analysis results
including per sample quality and expression information can be examined and

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

downloaded as interactive web reports. Detailed information on the primary analysis of
sRNAs and predicted miRNAs can be found in the Oasis 2 manuscript (Rahman et al.).
2.

Differential expression and Classification
sRNA data differential expression (DE) and classification are obtained by passing obtained
sRNA counts to DE and classification modules of Oasis. As biological conditions for
comparisons, group annotations (Section 2.3) are used. This means that several
comparisons inside of one dataset are possible. The results of DE analysis are mean value,
fold change, p value and p adjusted value for each sRNA. The results of classification
analysis are Gini index decrease for each sRNA.
Those results show importance of the corresponding sRNA in distinguishing between two
biological conditions. SEA stores above mentioned results together with group
information, including annotations of conditions that were compared, list of samples in
each group for provenance as well as DE and classification module version and initial
settings for reproducibility.

3.

Semantic data layer
Given diversity of biological data, the users of the corresponding information systems
should be given a possibility to interpret data independently using common
terminologies. For this purpose we developed a semantic data layer, which provides
unified access to data together with metadata and interpretations. Metadata is
normalized using ontologies, which makes annotations standardized and hierarchically

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

searchable. Data interpretations are represented by DE and classification result,
described in Section 2.
3.1.

Ontologies
In biological research, controlled biological vocabularies such as terminologies,
ontologies, taxonomies play an important role for annotation, integration, and
analysis of biological data. In order to allow for the interoperability of data, one
important step is to standardize annotations using ontologies and semantic
mapping (Schuurman and Leszczynski, 2008). Ontologies define standard terms,
their properties, and the relations between them. Each term in the ontology has
a unique identifier, and annotation terms that are connected to ontologies are
called ‘normalized’. Another advantage of ontology use is a possibility to search
by parent terms. Ontology is a hierarchical structure, where children are more
specific as parents. Usually parents are connected to children using one of the two
relations: “is-a” or “part-of”. “is-a” relation means that a child represents more
specific term as a parent, for example Alzheimer’s disease is a tauopathy,
tauopathy is a neurodegenerative disease. “part-of” relation means that a child is
part of a parent, for example neocortex is part of a cerebral cortex, cerebral cortex
is part of a brain.
In order to enable the search across ontological hierarchies we integrated the
relevant ontologies into the graph database Neo4j. Graph databases are NoSQL
databases which support storage of objects and connections between them, as is
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

the case for ontologies. Following the manual curation, sample annotations are
uploaded to the SEA annotation graph database including all ontological parent
terms (having an ‘is-a’ or ‘part of’ relation to it). This allows search by ontology
terms, as well as by their parents, which are in fact groups of terms (e.g. ‘cancer’
or ‘neurodegenerative disease’). SEA accesses ontologies via the Ontology Lookup
Service using a REST interface, supporting complex and compound queries and
query auto-completion.
3.2.

Annotation Process
SEA’s sRNA annotation workflow maps free-text GEO annotations to standardized
terms in three consecutive steps. In general, GEO data annotations are free text
that can be parsed into key-value pairs. In a first fully automated step the
annotation workflow extracts key-value relations and stores them in the
annotation database. These key-value relations are extracted from an experiment
or sample description text. It is unstructured and contains variety of information:
therefore we opted for a NoSql annotation database with an optimized indexing
for prototypical questions (supplementary section 2.4).

The second fully

automated step normalizes the extracted keys and values using ontologies as
standard dictionaries. SEA has a list of predefined keys, five of which (organism,
tissue, disease, cell type, and cell line) can be currently queried for in SEA. Each
extracted key is compared to predefined keys. For values, the ontologies are used
as standard terminology dictionaries. For each pre-defined key, one or several

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

corresponding ontologies are used. Each extracted value is searched in the
corresponding ontologies and, if the same or a similar term is found, we normalize
the value by it.
Automatic annotation is followed by semi-automatic manual curation. For that
purpose, we developed an internal curation Web interface (Supplementary Fig 1)
using Groovy/Grails7, which allows browsing and editing of annotations from the
annotation database as well as manual normalization of keys and values in
annotations, searching among pre-defined keys and corresponding ontologies.
Thus, curators examine all keys and values for consistency and update missing or
additional information with standardized terms where necessary (e.g. organism,
tissue, cell type, cell line, disease). At the moment, all SEA annotations are
manually curated, a quality standard that we intend to keep for every future SEA
entry.
3.3.

Annotation criteria
Some basic rules for annotation of sRNA-seq samples are discussed below:
1.

Annotations can be defined as experiment-level or sample-level
annotations. Experiment level annotations are exactly the same for all
samples of the dataset. Sample-level annotations differ among the
samples of the dataset.

7

https://grails.org/

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

2.

In exceptional situations, when experiment-level and sample-level
annotations have the same key, the corresponding sample will have two
annotations with that key (local annotation does not override the global
one).

3.

In cases, where alternatives exist for an annotation term, we tried to be as
specific as possible. For example, in case the sample is from breast
fibrosarcoma and the term “breast fibrosarcoma” is available we will try to
annotate it with the same term, although it can be annotated with breast
cancer as well i.e. we choose the term deepest in the ontology tree.

4.

In cases where the relevant term cannot be found in any ontology, we tried
to normalize the terms with synonyms or slightly less specific. The aim was
to annotate as much as possible to have standard terms rather than just
textual information

3.4.

Annotation of groups
Apart from sRNA expression, SEA contains also results of differential expression
and classification between different biological conditions. In order to make these
comparisons automatically possible, biologically meaningful comparisons are also
annotated manually. This annotation belongs to a dataset and we call it “sample
group”. Sample group annotation includes annotation fields, which are important
to define groups to compare. For example:

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

1. In the case an experiment has healthy and diseased patients. The desired
comparison will be to perform differential expression or classification
based on these two groups of samples. In this case, sample group is
annotated as disease. The field disease contains two distinct values –
disease name (for example, Alzheimer’s disease) and “healthy”. And
correspondingly, one comparison will be made.
2. In the case an experiment contains two diseases and healthy controls.
Sample group is annotated as disease. The field disease contains three
values – disease 1 name (for example, Alzheimer’s disease) disease 2 name
(for example, Frontotemporal Dementia) and “healthy”. Correspondingly,
three comparisons will be made: healthy vs. disease 1, healthy vs. disease
2 and disease 1 vs. disease 2.
3. In the case an experiment contains one disease with two stages and
healthy controls. In this case, sample group is annotated as disease +
disease details. Correspondingly, three groups will be created:
disease+stage1,

disease+stage2,

healthy.

Correspondingly,

three

comparisons will be made: healthy vs. disease stage1, healthy vs. disease
stage2 and disease stage1 vs. disease stage2.
3.5.

Querying and visualization
Application programming interfaces (APIs) were developed to access data in SEA
databases. We developed annotation-API to access annotation-DB, association-

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

API to access association-DB, expression-API to access expression-DB,
predictedMirna-API to access Oasis-DB and SEA business logic API to call all these
APIs based on the end user request and then combine their results (responses)
back to the end user. Each API answer particular queries as explained below.
1. Annotation-API to access Annotation-DB, and answer questions like
a. Get all the experiments for term (will return experiments and
samples along with annotation details for term as well as for the
sub-type of term). Term can be disease, tissue, cell line, cell type,
organism or their combination
2. Association-API to access Association-DB, and respond to questions like
a. Get all gene targets for a miRNA.
b. Get all diseases that are associated with a miRNA from literature.
c. Get all miRNAs that are associated with a disease or it’s sub-types.
d. Get genomic coordinates for sRNA or target genes.
3. Expression-API to access Expression-DB and shows
a. Get expression of one or more sRNAs in a particular or all
experiments.
b. Get list of experiments where a particular sRNA is differentially
expressed.
c. Get list of experiments where a particular sRNA is identified as
potential biomarker via classification.
d. Get expression of a pathogen in a particular or all experiments.
51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

e. Get list of all experiments where a particular pathogen is
differentially expressed.
4. PredictedMirna-API to access Oasis-DB (Rahman et al.) and shows
a. Get list of all novel predicted miRNAs from Oasis-DB
b. Get genomic coordinates and sequence for predicted miRNA(s).
5. User-API to access User-DB and gets
a. Get list of all user specific experiments (uploaded by the user).
b. Get list of experiments where a particular sRNA is differentially
expressed in their own uploaded data.
c. Get list of experiments where a particular sRNA is identified as
potential biomarker via classification in their own uploaded data.
6. SEA business logic API: was built in order to put all those APIs together and
make necessary data transformations between frontend and other APIs.
As a result, the user can make queries to answer biological questions like;
a. What is expression of one more sRNAs in specific cell types or
tissues?
b. Is a particular sRNA differentially expressed in Alzheimer’s disease?
c. Compare sRNAs across different studies?
d. What are differentially expressed sRNAs in breast cancer and
healthy women?
e. Common differentially expressed sRNAs or potential sRNAs based
biomarker across particular disease or tissue.
52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

f. Expression of one or more novel miRNAs for known diseased
states.
g. Analysis results with all the quality information for 350 datasets

and over 4200 samples.

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/133199; this version posted July 2, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figures

Supplementary Fig.1. Annotation-DB. Objects in the SEA graph database (Neo4j). A fragment of the
SEA graph database is visualized, where green nodes represent datasets, red nodes represent samples and
blue nodes represent ontology terms. Grey edges represent ‘is a’ relations between the different datasets,
samples, and ontology terms.

54

