bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Natural variants in C. elegans atg-5 3'UTR uncover divergent effects of autophagy on
polyglutamine aggregation in different tissues

Alexander-Floyd J1, Haroon S2, Ying M1, Entezari AA1,3, Jaeger C1,4, Vermulst M2,5, Gidalevitz
T1,#.
1

Biology Department, Drexel University, Philadelphia, PA 19104

2

Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia,

Philadelphia, PA 19104
3

Current address: Department of Pathology, Anatomy and Cell Biology, Thomas Jefferson

University, Philadelphia, PA 19107
4

Current address: Department of Neuroradiology, Technical University of Munich, Munich,

Germany
TUM-Neuroimaging Center, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
5

Current address: Leonard Davis School of Gerontology, University of Southern California, Los

Angeles, CA 90089
#

Corresponding author. Address correspondence to T.G. (tg443@drexel.edu)

Short title: Divergent effects of autophagy on polyglutamine aggregation in different tissues

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Diseases caused by protein misfolding and aggregation, in addition to cell selectivity, often
exhibit variation among individuals in the age of onset, progression, and severity of disease.
Genetic variation has been shown to contribute to such clinical variation. We have previously
found that protein aggregation-related phenotypes in a model organism, C. elegans, can be
modified by destabilizing polymorphisms in the genetic background and by natural genetic
variation. Here, we identified a large modifier locus in a Californian wild strain of C. elegans,
DR1350, that alters the susceptibility of the head muscle cells to polyglutamine (polyQ)
aggregation, and causes an increase in overall aggregation, without changing the basal activity of
the muscle proteostasis pathways known to affect polyQ aggregation. We found that the two
phenotypes were genetically separable, and identified regulatory variants in a gene encoding a
conserved autophagy protein ATG-5 (ATG5 in humans) as being responsible for the overall
increase in aggregation. The atg-5 gene conferred a dosage-dependent enhancement of polyQ
aggregation, with DR1350-derived atg-5 allele behaving as a hypermorph. Examination of
autophagy in animals bearing the modifier locus indicated enhanced response to an autophagyactivating treatment. Because autophagy is known to be required for the clearance of polyQ
aggregates, this result was surprising. Thus, we tested whether directly activating autophagy,
either pharmacologically or genetically, affected the polyQ aggregation in our model. Strikingly,
we found that the effect of autophagy on polyQ aggregation was tissue-dependent, such that
activation of autophagy decreased polyQ aggregation in the intestine, but increased it in the
muscle cells. Our data show that cryptic genetic variants in genes encoding proteostasis
components, although not causing visible phenotypes under normal conditions, can have
profound effects on the behavior of aggregation-prone proteins, and suggest that activation of
autophagy may have divergent effects on the clearance of such proteins in different cell types.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Protein misfolding and aggregation underlie many human diseases, and contribute to tissue
decline during aging (1, 2). In hereditary neurodegeneration, the disease-causing mutations are
often directly responsible for misfolding and aggregation of the mutant protein (3, 4). For
example, expansions of the CAG repeats in several different diseases lead to expanded
polyglutamine (polyQ) tracts in affected proteins, which in turn result in their increased
aggregation propensity (5-7). Such mutations exhibit "toxic gain-of-function" behavior, and thus
a dominant, monogenic inheritance pattern. How misfolding or aggregation of these proteins
cause the gain-of-function toxicity, and why they lead to disease is still incompletely understood.
Two aspects of protein aggregation diseases may contribute to this difficulty. First, the behavior
of mutant proteins appears to depend on the cellular environment: although they are often
expressed broadly or even ubiquitously, only select subsets of cells are affected in each disease
(8). The reasons for such differential susceptibility could lay in specific characteristics of the
susceptible cells, such as for example the possible contribution of dopaminergic pathways in
Parkinson's disease; however, in most cases, the causes are unknown (8, 9). Second, while
monogenic, these diseases show variation in the age of onset, severity, or clinical phenotypes
(10). The variation is thought to result from stochastic and environmental factors, and from
variants present in individual's genetic background that act as modifiers (11-13). These genetic
modifiers can affect proteins and regulatory pathways that either interact with the diseasecausing mutant proteins, or are themselves impacted in disease (14). For example, modifiers of
age of onset act prior to the onset of clinical manifestations and as such are expected to affect
processes involved in the early pathogenic steps. Therefore, identifying natural modifier variants
and their mechanisms can expand our understanding of cellular pathways involved in disease.
Natural variants may also indicate pathways that differ from those found by the traditional
approaches, such as association studies, mutagenesis, or RNAi screens. Importantly, because
such modifiers are a part of natural genetic variation and are present in phenotypically normal
individuals, they may pinpoint therapeutic routes that are less likely to cause detrimental side
effects.
The most informative way to map genetic modifiers of disease is directly in human patients
(13). A number of studies have shown that variants in genes other than the polyQ-expanded
huntingtin (Htt) are capable of modifying the pathogenesis of Huntington's Disease (HD) (12,
15-18). Two recent large studies of modifiers of the age of onset of HD have identified four loci
on Chromosomes 3, 8 and 15 in HD subjects of European ancestry, and a locus on Chromosome

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

7 in a Venezuelan HD cluster (19-21). Pathway analysis implicated DNA repair pathways in
European HD as having modifying effects, possibly via changing the size of the CAG repeat in
somatic tissues, while the modifier locus in Venezuelan HD may act by regulating the bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) signaling. However, the causal genes and mechanisms involved
are still unknown (19-21). The difficulties in using human patients in search for modifiers across
aggregation diseases include the size and complexity of the human genome, the often small size
of affected populations, and the possibility for the complex interactions among multiple
modifiers (10, 13, 22). In addition, human studies may have limited ability to identify modifiers
that are rare, or segregate in families rather than in entire affected populations. Model organisms
offer a genetically tractable alternative due to the evolutionary conservation of the main cellular
pathways. Expression of disease-related proteins in these organisms recapitulate many
characteristics of human diseases that are related to the basic biology of protein misfolding and
aggregation (23). For example, C. elegans and Drosophila models expressing polyQ-expanded
Htt or ataxin-3, or isolated polyglutamine repeats, exhibit similar toxic gain-of-function behavior
and the age- and polyQ-length dependent aggregation and toxicity as those seen in patients and
in mammalian models (24-34). Many candidate modifying pathways identified in model
organisms proved to be conserved, including insulin signaling, the heat-shock response, or
regulators of proteostasis (35). Importantly, as in human disease, polyQ expansions in C. elegans
also exhibit dependence on both the cellular environment (30, 36, 37) and the genetic
background (38), despite their dominant gain-of-function behavior. We have previously shown
that genetic variants coding for marginally stable proteins, although innocuous under normal
conditions, can dramatically change both the aggregation and the associated toxicity of the
aggregation-prone proteins, suggesting that genetic variation may directly impinge on cellular
proteostasis (37, 39). Indeed, introduction of natural variation into the genetic background of
polyQ-expressing animals independently modified several different aspects of polyQ behavior,
including the onset and extent of aggregation, the susceptibility of different types of muscle cells
to aggregation, and the resulting loss of motility and shortened lifespan (38). The polyQ
aggregation in these genetically variable animals showed transgressive segregation, indicating
that multiple additive or interacting alleles in parental backgrounds were acting as modifiers
(38). A recent study has shown that natural variation also modulates the phenotypes and
transcriptional changes caused by expression of α-synuclein transgene in the body-wall muscle
cells of C. elegans (40). Thus, natural genetic variation within C. elegans wild strains can be
used to investigate the mechanisms and pathways controlling the toxic effects of protein

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

misfolding and aggregation.
Here, we dissected the genetic variation causing increased aggregation of the muscleexpressed 40-residue polyQ expansion (Q40::YFP, or Q40) in the background of a Californian
wild strain of C. elegans, DR1350 (38). We identified a large modifier locus on Chromosome I
as being causal for two phenotypes: altered susceptibility of the head muscle cells to aggregation
and increased overall aggregation. These phenotypes were genetically separable, and we
identified regulatory variants in a gene encoding a conserved autophagy protein ATG-5 as being
responsible for the latter phenotype. The atg-5 gene conferred a dosage-dependent enhancement
of polyQ aggregation, with DR1350-derived atg-5 allele behaving as a hypermorph.
Surprisingly, animals bearing the variant atg-5 allele showed enhanced response to an
autophagy-activating drug. Because autophagy is expected to clear polyQ aggregates, we tested
the effect of directly activating autophagy on the polyQ aggregation in our model, and found a
striking tissue-dependence for the effect of autophagy on polyQ aggregation. Our data show that
cryptic genetic variants in genes encoding proteostasis components can have profound effects on
the behavior of aggregation-prone proteins, and suggest that activation of autophagy may have
divergent effects on the clearance of such proteins in different cell types.

Results
DR1350-derived variants increase polyglutamine aggregation
We previously found that introgression of an integrated polyglutamine-encoding
transgene (Q40) from the laboratory Bristol/N2 background (Q40Bristol) into the wild California
isolate DR1350 resulted in strongly accelerated polyglutamine aggregation in the body-wall
muscle cells, and a characteristic increase in the relative susceptibility of the normally resistant
head muscle cells to polyQ aggregation (38). These two phenotypes were also present in 5 out of
21 recombinant inbred lines (RILs) derived from a cross between Q40Bristol and Q40DR1350
strains (38). To isolate the genetic variation that contributed to increased aggregation, we chose
one (RIL2) that exhibited more than 2-fold increase in the number of aggregates relative to the
Q40Bristol parent at the late fourth larval stage (L4) (Fig. 1A). We backcrossed RIL2 animals to
the Q40Bristol parental strain 23 times, selecting for the F2 progeny that inherited RIL2-like
phenotypes after each round of backcrossing (Fig. 1B). This approach ensured that the DR1350derived RIL2 variants that contributed to the polyQ phenotypes were retained in the resulting
23x backcrossed strain, while the majority of its background was derived from the Q40Bristol
parental strain. The backcrossed strain is referred to as drxIR1;Q40 (Fig. 1B). Since the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

increased susceptibility of the head muscles is an easy to detect qualitative phenotype that
behaved in our RIL panel as a recessive trait (38), we used this phenotype during F2 progeny
selection. Interestingly, the drxIR1;Q40 strain also retained the second polyQ phenotype - the
increased overall aggregation (Fig. 1A), suggesting that the two phenotypes result from either
linked or same natural variant(s). Age-matched drxIR1;Q40 animals had a higher number of
polyQ40 aggregates than Q40Bristol until day 2 of adulthood, when polyQ40 aggregation
reached its maximum in both strains (Fig. 1C). Thus, natural variants present in the wild isolate
DR1350 can modify polyglutamine aggregation when introgressed into the Bristol genetic
background.

Fig 1. drxIR1 locus causes increased polyQ40 aggregation.
(A) Late-L4 RIL2 and drxlR1;Q40 animals have increased aggregation compared to
Q40Bristol animals. (B) The scheme for generation of the drxIR1;Q40 strain through rounds
of crossing-selection. RIL2 strain was backcrossed (BC) into the Q40Bristol strain 23 times.
DR1350-derived variants that are retained through the crossing-selection scheme are those
contributing to the RIL2 polyQ phenotype (and their linked variants). (C) The drxIR1;Q40
animals exhibit a faster accumulation of polyQ aggregates compared to Q40Bristol at all
developments stages, until both strains reach maximum at Day 2 of adulthood. L3, L4, YA
and D2 adult indicate 3rd and 4th larval stage, young adult, and day 2 adult stage, respectively.
Data are mean ± SD, 10 to 20 animals per data point. Data were analyzed by ANOVA
followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, ****P<0.0001, ***P=0.0004. Orange:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Q40Bristol background, red: drxIR1;Q40. Same color scheme is used in all figures. (D)
DR1350-derived locus with over 3000 unique SNPs (in the grey-shaded area) to the left of
unc-11 on Chromosome I in drxIR1;Q40 strain.

Polyglutamine aggregation-modifying variants reside in a large interval inherited from the
DR1350 parent
In order to identify the causative variant(s) in the backcrossed drxIR1;Q40 strain, we first
used mapping strains with visible mutations on each Chromosome, and found that increased
aggregation segregated with the left arm of Chromosome I. This location was confirmed
(described further below) using a free duplication sDP2 (41), which covers the left arm of
Chromosome I through dpy-5 (Suppl. Table 1). To precisely map the variant(s), we performed
genome sequencing of both the drxIR1;Q40 and Q40Bristol strains and identified SNPs present
only in the former, using Galaxy pipeline described in (42). We found that the left arm of
Chromosome I in the backcrossed drxIR1;Q40 strain contained an 1.43Mb interval
(ChrI:832,674-2,262,484), with over 4,000 SNPs. Because our previous data showed that
introgression of the Q40 transgene into the commonly used CB4856 (Hawaiian) strain did not
result in the same aggregation phenotypes as in the DR1350 background (38), we further
subtracted the known Hawaiian SNPs (43) and found that the interval still contained over 3,000
SNPs (Fig. 1D). We tested whether this interval was also present in the remaining four highaggregation RILs from the original study, by following several SNPs within the interval (Suppl.
Fig. 1). We found that three of the RILs indeed inherited the entire interval, while the interval in
the fourth one (RIL15) was shorter on the right side, extending through SNP 6 at ChrI:1,850,249
(WBVar00017051), but not through SNP 6b at ChrI:1,972,719 (WBVar00017376) (Suppl. Fig.
1). Thus, four independent RILs with high polyQ aggregation phenotypes, and the 23 times
back-crossed drxIR1;Q40 strain derived from another RIL (RIL2), all contained the parental
interval ChrI:832,674-1,972,719 from the high-aggregation DR1350;Q40 strain. To confirm, we
used a mutation in egl-30 gene located within this interval (Suppl. Fig. 1). We were unable to
find any F2 progeny from 10 F1 heterozygotes from a cross between drxIR1;Q40 and egl30(n686) animals that showed both the RIL2-like polyQ head aggregation phenotype and the egl
phenotype (>1000 F2s), consistent with a close genetic linkage. Furthermore, in subsequent
genetic crosses between drxIR1;Q40 and Q40;Bristol animals, we observed a complete
correlation between F2 progeny inheriting two copies of this interval, as detected by following
SNP 5 (WBVar00016276) (see Methods), and the appearance of the two polyQ phenotypes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(>100 animals). Together, these data indicate that ChrI:832,674-1,972,719 interval is responsible
for increased polyQ aggregation phenotypes.
The remaining part of Chromosome I contained 68 additional SNPs relative to the
Q40Bristol parental strain, and all the other Chromosomes accumulated less than 200 unique
SNPs each (Suppl. Fig. 2), consistent with previous reports (44). The large size of the modifier
interval was unexpected after 23 backcrosses, suggesting that it may contain structural variants
preventing recombination over this region. Alternatively, this locus could contain more than one
SNP responsible for the phenotypes, perhaps distributed over the interval. Of note, the known
Chromosome I zeel-1/peel-1 incompatibility locus (45) was not responsible for the retention of
the modifier interval through the backcrosses, as it lays outside the mapped interval (Suppl. Fig.
1), and does not contain DR1350-derived SNPs in the drxIR1;Q40 strain.

Known regulators of proteostasis are not responsible for increased polyQ aggregation in
drxIR1 animals
Because the identified modifier locus contained a large number of SNPs, we thought to
narrow down the candidate pathway(s) in which the modifier gene(s) acted. We first asked
whether the variants in the drxIR1 locus were increasing polyglutamine aggregation by affecting
either the protein homeostasis of the muscle cells, or the Q40::YFP protein itself. We have
previously tested and excluded the trivial explanation that the increased aggregation in our five
RILs was due to the increased expression of the Q40::YFP protein (38). Nonetheless, we
considered a possibility that drxIR1 locus could cause increased activity of the unc-54 promoter
that was used to drive the polyglutamine transgene. To test this, we introduced an integrated unc54p::GFP::UNC-54 transgene (46) into the drxIR1 background, in the absence of polyQ, and
examined its expression. We found no differences in the fluorescence levels, suggesting normal
unc-54 promoter activity (Fig. 2A). Since assembly of myofilaments is sensitive to both the
levels of UNC-54 myosin heavy chain protein and the activity of molecular chaperones, it
provides an additional measure of the GFP::UNC-54 protein levels and of the folding
environment (47-49). We found normal striated pattern of GFP::UNC-54 protein in both Bristol
and drxIR1 genetic backgrounds (Fig. 2B).
Another reason for increased aggregation could be decreased protein turnover. To address
this, we asked whether basal autophagy or proteasome activity were reduced in the muscle cells
of drxIR1 animals. Using a well-characterized autophagy reporter ubiquitously expressing
GFP::LGG-1 (50), GFP::LGG-1 puncta were counted in the muscle cells of wild type and drxIR1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig 2. Basal protein homeostasis of muscle cells is unaffected in animals carrying the
drxIR1 interval.
(A) Expression of GFP::UNC-54 fusion protein from unc-54 promoter is similar between the
Bristol and drxIR1 L4 animals. Data are mean ± SD of GFP fluorescence intensity, 16-20
muscle cells per genotype, unpaired t-test, two-tailed. (B) Myofilament assembly is normal in
drxIR1 animals. Confocal images of muscle cells. Scale bar: 10 μm. (C) Muscle cells have
very few GFP::LGG-1-positive puncta (arrowheads) in both Bristol and drxIR1 L4 animals.
One muscle quadrant is shown between punctate lines. m: muscle, hyp: hypodermis. An
increased number of GFP::LGG-1-positive puncta is seen in the hypodermis of drxIR1. Scale
bar is 10 μm. Right panel, quantification of GFP::LGG-1 puncta in the muscle cells. Data are
mean ± SD, 30 to 40 cells (8 to 10 animals) per genotype, unpaired t-test, two-tailed; each
symbol represents individual cells. (D) No difference in the average intensity of the
proteasome reporter fluorescence in Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40 animals. Data are mean ±
SD, 4-5 animals, unpaired t-test, two-tailed. (E) The increased aggregation phenotype in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

animals carrying the drxlR1 interval does not depend on DAF-16 or HSF-1. Each symbol
represents an individual animal, 15 mid-L4 animals per genotype. O/E: overexpression.
Means ± SD are overlaid. Data were analyzed by ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple
comparison test, ****P<0.0001.
animals, in the absence of the Q40::YFP protein to avoid spectral overlap. Consistent with
previously published results, the number of GFP-positive puncta in the muscle cells of L4
animals with the Bristol background was low (51, 52), and we detected no difference in basal
autophagy in the muscle cells of drxIR1 animals (Fig. 2C), although increased number of puncta
was noted in their lateral hypodermis. To test whether decreased proteasomal activity could be
responsible for the increased aggregation seen in the drxIR1;Q40 animals, we introduced a
muscle specific UbG76V::Dendra2 reporter (53) into Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40 animals, and
measured its fluorescence. We detected no increase in Dendra2 fluorescence in drxIR1 animals,
indicating that there was no decrease in the proteasome activity (Fig. 2D). To confirm that the
reporter was sensitive to decreased proteasome activity, we reduced expression of the rpn-6.1
subunit of 19S regulatory complex of the proteasome via RNAi (53) and detected an increase in
Dendra2 fluorescence (Suppl. Fig. 3A). These data indicate that increased polyglutamine
aggregation in the muscle cells of drxIR1 animals is not due to the changes in protein
degradation or in polyQ protein levels.
Next, we tested two main transcriptional pathways known to regulate cytosolic protein
homeostasis - insulin signaling and the heat-shock response. Increased activity of DAF16/FOXO, the transcription factor of the insulin signaling pathway, is associated with improved
proteostasis and has been shown to affect polyglutamine aggregation (30, 36). We found that
neither genetic inactivation of daf-16, using daf-16(mu86) mutation (54), nor overexpression of
active DAF-16::GFP protein (55), were able to revert the increased aggregation seen in
drxIR1;Q40 animals (Fig. 2E). HSF-1/HSF1 is the heat shock transcription factor that functions
as a master regulator of molecular chaperones, degradation machinery, and other proteostasis
components in the cytosol, and has also been shown to affect polyQ aggregation in wild type
animals (36). Similarly to DAF-16, neither the hypomorphic hsf-1(sy441) allele, deficient in the
heat-shock response (56), nor HSF-1 overexpression (57), were able to revert the increased
aggregation caused by drxIR1 background (Fig. 2E). Together, these data indicate that the
DR1350-derived variants in drxIR1 are not likely to act by modifying the basal proteostasis of
the muscle cells of C. elegans.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Variants in the introgressed interval do not alter biophysical properties of polyQ40
aggregates
Besides changes in the cellular proteostasis of the muscle cells, the increased aggregation
in drxIR1;Q40 animals could reflect changes in the amyloid-like nature and/or biophysical
properties of polyQ40 aggregates themselves. PolyQ40 is known to form immobile aggregates
that do not recover after photobleaching, and are resistant to treatment with the detergent SDS
(30, 58). Thus, we tested whether the presence of drxIR1 interval altered these properties of
polyQ40 aggregates. As expected, photobleaching foci within Q40Bristol resulted in essentially
no recovery of fluorescence, while soluble Q40::YFP protein rapidly recovered to pre-bleach
levels (Fig. 3A). We found no difference in recovery of Q40::YFP foci between drxIR1;Q40 and
Q40Bristol animals (Fig. 3A), indicating similarly immobile aggregates. To test for SDS
resistance, we extracted aggregates from Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40 animals and treated them
with 5% SDS at room temperature, as described in (39). We found polyQ aggregates to be
similarly SDS resistant in both genetic backgrounds (Fig. 3B). To confirm that our SDS
treatment could dissociate non-amyloid protein assemblies, we tested GFP::UNC-54 protein that
forms myofilaments (as shown in Fig. 2B). Filamentous GFP::UNC-54 protein was efficiently
dissociated by SDS treatment in extracts from both Bristol and drxIR1 backgrounds (Fig. 3B).
recently discovered positive regulator of aggregation, MOAG-4/SERF, which specifically
distinguishes amyloid and non-amyloid aggregation (59, 60), was shown to affect Q40::YFP
protein in C. elegans. Decrease of moag-4 expression via RNAi suppresses aggregation of
polyglutamine, amyloid-beta (Aβ), and α-synuclein, but not of mutant SOD1 (60). To test
whether the variants in the drxIR1 background act through MOAG-4, expression of moag-4 was
knocked down by RNAi in Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40 animals. moag-4 RNAi strongly
decreased polyQ40 aggregation in both backgrounds, confirming the amyloid-like nature of
aggregation in both (Fig. 3C (L4 animals) and Suppl. Fig. 3B (young adults)). However,
drxIR1;Q40;moag-4(RNAi) animals retained higher aggregation relative to Q40Bristol;moag4(RNAi) animals (Fig. 3C), as well as the increased susceptibility of the head muscles (Suppl.
Fig. 3B ), arguing against the drxIR1 interval variants acting through MOAG-4-mediated
mechanism. Together our data suggest that neither decrease in muscle proteostasis nor changes
in the aggregation pathway are responsible for the increased aggregation in drxIR1;Q40 animals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig 3. Variants in drxIR1 interval do not alter the biophysical properties of polyQ
aggregates.
(A) FRAP analysis of fluorescent polyQ40. The soluble Q40::YFP protein recovered rapidly
(triangles), while aggregated protein (circles) in both Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40
backgrounds does not recover. Data are mean ± SD. (B) PolyQ40 aggregates in drxIR1;Q40
remain SDS-resistant. Native extracts containing polyQ aggregates were treated with 5%
SDS for 15 minutes and resolved by native PAGE. Aggregated proteins fail to enter the gel,
remaining in the wells (shown). Native extracts containing the fibrillar GFP::UNC-54 protein
were used as controls. (C) The increased aggregation phenotype in animals carrying the
drxlR1 interval does not depend on the amyloid-specific modifier moag-4. moag-4 RNAi
decreased the total number of aggregates in both backgrounds (YA animals are shown in
Suppl. Fig. 3B), but preserved the increased aggregation in drxIR1;Q40 animals relative to
Q40Bristol. Data are mean ± SD, three independent experiments. Data were analyzed by
ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison test, ****P<0.0001. A total of 38 to
46 mid-L4 animals per condition. (D) Aggregation of a different amyloid protein, Aβ140::CFP, in unaffected by the drxlR1 locus. Shown are confocal stacks, arrows point to
aggregates, asterisks indicate Aβ1-40::CFP accumulating in the nuclei of the muscle cells.
Scale bar: 10μm. (E) The shorter polyQ expansion (Q35::YFP) exhibits both the increased
susceptibility of the head muscle cells and the accelerated overall aggregation in animals

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

carrying the drxlR1 interval. Shown are stereo micrographs, arrows point to some of the
aggregates. D1Ad: day 1 adults.
The increased aggregation is specific to polyglutamine expansions
To determine whether the variants responsible for increasing polyQ40 aggregation in
drxIR1;Q40 animals were acting generically on any amyloid aggregates, we asked if they can
modify an aggregation-prone Aβ peptide. We chose the muscle specific Aβ1-40::CFP transgene
(61) because it exhibits both soluble and aggregated protein early in adulthood, allowing us to
detect the potential increase in aggregation. We found that introduction of the drxIR1 interval did
not increase Aβ aggregation (Fig. 3D). In contrast, when the drxIR1 locus was introduced into
another polyglutamine model, Q35Bristol, we observed both the overall increase in polyQ35
aggregation and the increased susceptibility of the head muscles (Fig. 3E).
These data indicate that the DR1350-derived variants in drxIR1 background act by a
polyglutamine-specific mechanism that is likely distinct from the known aggregation-modifying
mechanisms. In addition, the effect on the Q35::YFP and Q40::YFP but not on Aβ1-40::CFP
transgenic proteins confirms that the novel mechanism acts at the protein level, rather than by
modifying the transgene genomic environment, since all three transgenes were made by the same
approach.

Increased polyQ40 aggregation in the body-wall muscle cells and increased susceptibility of
the head muscles to aggregation are caused by genetically separable mechanisms
Since we were unable to narrow down the candidate genes by identifying affected
pathways, and our data pointed to a potentially novel pathway, we turned to an unbiased
investigation of genes in the interval. As we previously reported (38), the increased susceptibility
of the head muscles to aggregation (RIL2-like phenotype, measured as the ratio of head to body
aggregation) behaves as a recessive trait (Suppl. Table 1, top row), and is fully suppressed in
drxIR1 heterozygous (drxIR1/+;Q40) animals. Thus we asked whether it was caused by a lossof-function of a gene or genes in the interval, by testing whether it can be rescued in the drxIR1
homozygotes by introducing a wild-type copy of the interval. We used a free duplication sDp2
that covers the left arm of Chromosome I, through dpy-5 gene in the center of the Chromosome
(41). Introduction of sDP2 into animals homozygous for the drxIR1 interval and for the known
loss-of-function dpy-5(e61) allele suppressed both the dpy and the RIL2-like head phenotypes to
the same extent (Suppl. Table 2, second row), indicating that the head-muscles susceptibility

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

phenotype in drxIR1 animals is caused by a loss-of-function variant(s), and therefore can
potentially be identified by RNAi approach in Q40Bristol animals.
In contrast, the second polyQ phenotype, the increased overall aggregation (as scored in
the body-wall muscles alone, excluding the head muscles), was not suppressed in animals
heterozygous for the drxIR1 interval (Fig. 4A). Moreover, introduction of the sDP2 duplication,
carrying the wild-type (Bristol) copy of this interval, into either Q40Bristol or drxIR1;Q40
animals resulted in sharply increased aggregation of polyQ40 in the body-wall muscles, relative
to the corresponding strains without the duplication (Fig. 4A). This suggests that the phenotype
of increased aggregation in the body-wall muscles depends on the dosage of a gene or genes
within the boundaries of the modifier interval, and that in drxIR1;Q40 animals this gene carries
hypermorphic variant(s), mimicking increased gene dosage. Thus, the candidate gene may be
identified by RNAi approach in drxIR1;Q40 animals.

Fig 4. Hypermorphic variants in the autophagy gene atg-5 are responsible for the
increased polyQ aggregation in the body-wall muscles.
(A) PolyQ aggregation in the body-wall muscles is sensitive to the dosage of the drxlR1
interval, with DR1350-derived interval acting as a hypermorph relative to the Bristol-derived
interval. Each symbol represents an individual mid-L4 animal; overlaid are means ± SD.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Schematic under the graph represents the genetic composition of Chromosome I: Bristol
background (orange bar), DR1350-derived drxlR1 interval (red arrow), and the free
duplication sDp2 (green bar). (B) RNAi of three candidate genes affects polyQ40
aggregation. atg-5 RNAi suppresses the increased polyQ aggregation in the muscle cells of
drxlR1 but not in Q40Bristol animals. RNAi against YFP downregulates expression of
Q40::YFP protein. Data are mean ± SD, three independent experiments, 9 to 15 animals per
experiment per genotype. Data were analyzed by ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple
comparisons test, ****P<0.0001, **P=0.0029, *P=0.0125. (C) Relative expression of atg-5
mRNA is unaffected by the DR1350-derived drxIR1 interval. Three independent
experiments, statistics as in panel B. (D) atg-5(bp484) loss-of-function allele reverses
increased aggregation caused by one copy of the DR1350-derived drxIR1 interval. Schematic
under the graph as in panel A, star: atg-5 mutation. Animals were scored at mid-L4 as in
panel A, compare drxIR1/+;Q40 animals (red/orange symbols) in panel A with drxIR1/atg5;Q40 animals (red/grey symbols) in panel D. Grey symbols represent animals that were
assumed (but not confirmed) to be heterozygous for the drxIR1 interval, because they did not
show the RIL2-like phenotype head muscle phenotype and because atg-5/atg-5 animals
exhibit strong developmental delay. Heterozygosity of drxIR1/atg-5;Q40 animals (red/grey
symbols) was confirmed by singling them out and scoring segregation of the RIL2-like
phenotype among their progeny. Each symbol represents an individual animals, overlaid are
means ± SD.
Autophagy-related gene 5 (ATG-5) is responsible for increased aggregation
To decrease the number of genes that were to be tested by RNAi, we were able to further
narrow the large drxIR1 interval to approximately 326 Kb (ChrI:1,647,221-1,972,719) by
additionally backcrossing the drxIR1;Q40 animals and using the SNPs in the interval to detect
recombination. The smaller 326 Kb interval contained 57 total genes including 25 candidate
protein-coding genes with potentially functionally-significant SNPs (based on SnpEff
annotations (62), see Methods), with 24 candidate genes remaining after exclusion of egl-30
(Suppl. Table 2 and Data File 1). Each of the candidate genes was knocked down by feeding
RNAi in both Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40 animals, followed by quantification of polyQ
aggregation.
None of the RNAi clones affected the increased susceptibility of the head muscles to
polyQ aggregation (measured as a ratio of head to body aggregation) in either background. This
may potentially indicate that more than one gene in the interval was responsible for the switch in
the head muscle susceptibility, or that it depends on SNPs in non-coding RNAs, intergenic
regions, or genes with SNPs that were not selected as potentially functionally significant;
alternatively, this failure could be due to an inefficient knock-down. On the other hand, RNAi of
several genes modified the second phenotype – the overall aggregation of polyQ40 in the body-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

wall muscle cells. Decreasing expression of two genes, Y71G12B.23 and C53H9.3 caused an
increase in the number of aggregates in the Q40Bristol animals, with no change in the
drxIR1;Q40 animals, while knocking down expression of atg-5 caused a large decrease in
aggregation in the drxIR1;Q40 strain, with no effect in the Q40Bristol background (Fig. 4B).
Because reversal of increased aggregation specifically in drxIR1;Q40 animals by RNAi is
consistent with our genetic analysis for this phenotype in Fig. 4A, which suggested that the
causative variant in drxIR1 background will be hypermorphic, this points to atg-5 as a candidate
gene. In agreement, our genome sequencing of drxIR1;Q40 strain uncovered two unique SNPs in
the 3’UTR of atg-5 (Data File 1).
Because a hypermorphic effect can be caused by increased expression of the affected
gene or protein, and because the SNPs are localized in the regulatory region of atg-5, we first
measured atg-5 transcripts. qPCR data revealed no differences in atg-5 transcript levels in
drxIR1 or drxIR1;Q40 animals compared to their respective Bristol strains (Fig. 4C). Thus, we
asked whether decreasing the protein expression via a targeted deletion of atg-5 could reverse the
increased polyQ aggregation in drxIR1;Q40 animals, as expected if the variants were
hypermorphic. We used atg-5(bp484) allele, which has a mutation in a splice donor site of exon
1 disrupting the protein’s expression or function (63, 64). We found that unlike animals that
carried one DR1350-derived and one wild-type (Bristol) copy of the interval (drxIR1/+;Q40),
which we found previously to still exhibit increased aggregation (Fig. 4A), drxIR1 heterozygous
animals carrying the atg-5 mutation in the wild-type interval (drxIR1/atg-5;Q40) completely lost
the increased aggregation phenotype (Fig. 4D). Together, our data suggest that increased levels
or activity of ATG-5 protein cause increased polyglutamine aggregation in the body-wall muscle
cells.

Activation of autophagy has divergent effects on polyQ aggregation in different tissues
ATG-5 is an ortholog of the autophagic budding yeast protein ATG5, and of human
ATG5. ATG-5 contributes to the initiation of autophagy by forming a complex with LGG3/ATG12 and ATG-16/ATG16L1, which is recruited to the membrane of the elongating
phagophore (65-67), and is required for the lipidation of LGG-1/LC3. Thus, upregulation or
activation of ATG-5 by the hypermorphic allele could cause either overactivation or an
imbalance in autophagy. Interestingly, ATG5 in mammalian cells can also contribute to the
progression of apoptosis, independent of its role in autophagy (68).
Although we saw no increase in the number of GFP::LGG-1 puncta in the muscle cells of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

drxIR1 animals under basal conditions (Fig. 2A), we did observe more puncta in the hypodermal
cells, where autophagy is often scored (69). Thus, we asked whether autophagy the muscle cells
was different in drxIR1 and wild-type (Bristol) animals under activation conditions. We used an
autophagy inducer drug, ABT-737, that acts as a BH3-mimetic, inhibiting the antagonistic
effects of Bcl-2 (CED-9 in worms) on Beclin-1 (BEC-1) and thus relieving the inhibition of
autophagy (70). Treatment with 10µM of ABT-737 indeed induced GFP::LGG-1 puncta in the
muscle cells of the wild type (Bristol) animals (Fig. 5A). Surprisingly, animals carrying the
drxIR1 interval exhibited an increase in punctate appearance of GFP::LGG-1 protein in the bodywall muscle cells already in response to the DMSO control. Although not previously reported to
activate autophagy, low concentrations of DMSO have been reported to extend the lifespan of C.
elegans and decrease the paralysis associated with Aβ1-42 aggregation, when grown in liquid (71,
72). Importantly, ABT-737 resulted in a larger increase in GFP-positive puncta in
drxIR1;GFP::LGG-1 animals compared to the Bristol background (Fig. 5A). These data suggest
that drxIR1 interval increases accumulation of LGG-1/LC31-positive autophagosome structures
in response to an activating treatment.

Fig 5. Activation of autophagy has divergent effects on polyQ40 aggregates clearance in
different tissues.
(A) Animals carrying the drxIR1 interval accumulate more GFP::LGG-1-positive puncta
(arrowheads) in the body-wall muscle cells upon treatment with autophagy-activating drug

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ABT-737. Animals were treated with 0.1% DMSO (vehicle control) or 10 µM ABT-737 for
24hr. Shown are confocal projections; one muscle quadrant (m) is indicated between
punctate lines. Scale bar: 10μm. (B) Autophagy-activating drug ABT-737 increases polyQ40
aggregation in the body-wall muscle cells in the wild-type background (Q40Bristol).
Aggregation was scored in adult animals, 1 day post L4 (see Methods). Aggregation in the
drxIR1;Q40 animals is already at maximum under these conditions. Each symbol indicates an
individual animal; overlaid are means ± SD. Data were analyzed by ANOVA followed by
Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test, ***P=0.0006. (C) Activation of autophagy with
mlst-8 RNAi increases aggregation in the body-wall muscles of Q40Bristol mid- or late-L4
animals, and of drxIR1;Q40 mid-L4 animals. Aggregation in drxIR1;Q40 late-L4 animals is
already at maximum. Data are mean ± SD, three independent experiments, 9 to 13 animals
per experiment per treatment. Control RNAi was mec-4. Data were analyzed by ANOVA
followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test, ***P=0.0007, **P=0.0082. (D)
Introduction of the daf-2(e1370) allele increases polyQ40 aggregation in the body-wall
muscles in both Q40Bristol and drxIR1;Q40 animals. Aggregation was scored at mid-L4.
Each symbol indicates an individual animal; overlaid are means ± SD. Data were analyzed
by ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test, ****P<0.0001. (E) Activation of
autophagy with mlst-8 RNAi strongly suppresses polyQ aggregation in the intestinal cells.
Percent of animals with Q44::YFP aggregates in the intestine of day 4 adult were scored, as
in refs(73, 74), for each indicated RNAi treatment. Control RNAi was mec-4. Data are mean
± SD. Data were analyzed by ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test,
***P=0.0003.
The larger increase in LGG-1 puncta in drxIR1;GFP::LGG-1 animals could indicate that
atg-5 hypermorphic allele causes either a stronger activation of autophagy, or slower lysosomal
degradation. Because autophagy is known to promote clearance of polyglutamine aggregates
(75), the increased aggregation in drxIR1 background appeared consistent with slower
degradation, while activation of autophagy would have been expected to decrease aggregation
(76). To confirm this, we asked whether activation of autophagy with ABT-737 indeed decreased
polyQ aggregation in the wild type (Bristol) background. Surprisingly, treatment of Q40Bristol
animals with this autophagy activator resulted in a large increase, rather than decrease, of
polyQ40 aggregation in the body-wall muscles, with ABT-737-treated animals exhibiting a 44%
increase in the number of aggregates (Fig. 5B). These data suggest that, counter to expectations,
activation of autophagy may enhance polyglutamine aggregation. We did not detect a further
increase in aggregation in drxIR1 background, since the drug treatment protocol dictated scoring
aggregates in young adult animals (see materials and methods), when aggregation in drxIR1;Q40
is already close to maximal.
Because this effect of autophagy was unexpected, and because the drug treatment may

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

not be reliable in C. elegans, we tested two different genetic approaches known to activate
autophagy to confirm these findings. Each of the two approaches activates autophagy via
mechanisms distinct from that of ABT-737. First common approach is inactivation of mTOR
(77). In C. elegans, inactivation of LET-363/mTOR indeed activates autophagy, as shown by
increase in GFP::LGG-1 puncta (78). However, inactivation of LET-363 also causes larval arrest
(79), which itself will affect polyQ aggregation. To overcome this, we targeted mTOR
interacting protein MLST-8/mLST8, which is required for the kinase activity of mTOR (80), but
can be downregulated in C. elegans without causing larval arrest (81). RNAi knock-down of
mlst-8 resulted in a 1.6-fold increase in polyQ40 aggregation in Q40Bristol animals (Fig. 5C,
late-L4). Similar to the results of the drug treatment, mlst-8 RNAi had no significant effect in
drxIR1;Q40 animals. We asked whether the apparent lack of effect on the drxIR1;Q40 animals
was indeed due to the already high aggregate numbers at this developmental stage, by repeating
the RNAi in younger animals, and observed an even stronger, 3-fold, increase in polyQ40
aggregation in Q40Bristol animals, and a 1.5-fold increase in drxIR1;Q40 animals (Fig. 5C, midL4).
As a second genetic approach, we tested the effect of decreased activity of insulin/IGFlike signaling pathway, since reduction of function of the sole C. elegans orthologue of
insulin/IGF receptor, DAF-2, is known to cause activation of autophagy, including in the bodywall muscle cells (52, 82). Introduction of the hypomorphic daf-2(e1370) allele caused a 5.1-fold
increase in aggregates in the Q40Bristol background, and 2.3-fold further increase in drxIR1;Q40
animals (Fig. 5D). The increase in polyQ aggregation in daf-2(e1370) background is consistent
with previous reports (83). Together, these pharmacological, RNAi, and genetic data suggest that
aggregation of polyQ40 in the body-wall muscle cells is paradoxically increased by activation of
autophagy.
Previous studies indicate that autophagy levels, both basally and in response to a trigger,
can be different in different C. elegans and mammalian tissues (51, 84). Intriguingly, in these
reports, mouse slow-twitching muscles showed nearly no basal autophagy and only low to
moderate induction in response to starvation (84), and C. elegans body-wall muscle cells also
showed low basal autophagy compared to other tissues (51, 52), consistent with our observation
of the low numbers of LGG-1-positive puncta in the muscle cells in Fig. 2C. Thus, we asked
whether activation of autophagy may have a different effect on polyQ aggregation in muscles
than in a different tissue. In addition to the muscle-expressed polyQs, the neuronal and intestinal
fluorescent polyQ models have been described in C. elegans (73, 85). Since aggregation of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

moderate polyQ40 expansions in neurons is only detectable by FRAP, we chose to examine the
intestinal polyQ44 model. We found that unlike in the muscle-expressed polyQ model, activation
of autophagy via RNAi knock-down of mlst-8 resulted in a large (3.5-fold) decrease in the
percentage of animals exhibiting polyglutamine aggregation in intestine (Fig. 5E). Thus,
depending on the tissue, activation of autophagy can either clear polyglutamine aggregates or
cause their accumulation.

Discussion
Using natural genetic variation, we identified an unexpected divergence in how activation
of autophagy in different tissues impacts the behavior of aggregation-prone polyglutamine
expansions. It is broadly appreciated that autophagy can be both protective and detrimental to
cells and organisms (86). For example, ER stress-induced autophagy is protective in cancer cells
but contributes to apoptosis in non-transformed cells (87), while starvation-triggered autophagy
in C. elegans pharyngeal muscle can switch from protective to pro-death, depending on its level
of activation (50). However, with respect to the clearance of misfolded aggregated proteins,
activation of autophagy is generally considered to be a positive, protective response (88, 89).
Therefore, activation of autophagy has been thought of as a nearly universal therapeutic
approach to neurodegenerative diseases caused by protein aggregation (90). While we did not
test the neuronal polyQ models, the divergence in how polyQ expansions in intestinal and
muscle cells respond to activation of autophagy suggests that interplay between autophagy and
protein aggregation depends on the cellular context. We find that both the natural variants in atg5, and the more traditional genetic and pharmacological ways of activating autophagy, increased
rather than decreased polyQ aggregation in the muscle cells of C. elegans. This represents a
striking departure from the current paradigm. On the other hand, polyQ aggregation in the
intestinal cells, as expected, was decreased by the same treatment. Considering the significant
involvement of skeletal muscle and non-neuronal tissues in HD and other polyglutamine
diseases, including the induction of the muscle catabolic phenotype and muscle wasting (91-95),
a more nuanced understanding of integration of autophagy with cellular physiology is needed.
The use of natural variation was instrumental in uncovering this unexpected cell-specific
effect of autophagy on protein aggregation. The DR1350-derived variants that we identified as
being responsible for the increased aggregation of polyQ40 in the muscle cells are in the
regulatory 3'UTR region of the atg-5 gene. Our genetic analysis points to the gain of expression
as the mechanism of atg-5 variants. Based on the ability of one additional copy of the wild-type,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Bristol-derived atg-5 to mimic the effect of these natural variants (Fig. 4A), and because deletion
of one copy of atg-5 reverses the effect of the variants in the remaining copy (Fig. 4D), we
estimate that the variants increase the expression of ATG-5 protein by less than 2-fold.
Strikingly, introduction of one additional Bristol-derived copy of atg-5 into the animals already
carrying two DR1350-derived hypermorphic alleles, increases the polyQ aggregation even
further, to about 6-fold above normal. This indicates a quantitative relationship between the
levels of ATG-5 protein and increased polyQ aggregation in the muscle. Although we are
currently unable to directly modulate autophagy in C. elegans in a graded manner, the ability of
three distinct methods of activating autophagy to mimic the effect of the variants argues that the
increase in ATG-5 affects the polyQ aggregation by increasing autophagy, rather than for
example by causing stoichiometric imbalance and autophagy inhibition (76), or coupling to
apoptosis pathway (68). The precise mechanistic basis of this quantitative relationship will need
to be investigated further.
One important aspect of our findings is the cryptic nature of the modifier variants in atg5. Cryptic variation typically does not cause phenotypic changes on its own, but becomes
phenotypically "exposed" when challenged with a stressful environment, thus contributing to
disease susceptibility (96-98). Polyglutamine expansions may mimic cellular stress, for example
by destabilizing the folding environment (37) or disrupting transcriptional control (99). Indeed,
the atg-5 variants identified here as modifiers are derived from a phenotypically normal wild
strain DR1350, and we did not detect significant alterations in the basal autophagy in the muscles
of drxIR1 animals unless they were challenged with the aggregation-prone polyQ40, or with
autophagy-activating drug ABT-737.
In addition to being exposed by stress, the phenotypic expression of cryptic modifier
variants may reflect their more direct interactions with the disease-causing mutation. For
example, in humans, analysis of HD modifier loci on Chromosomes 8 and 15 showed that these
variants influence certain clinical readouts in subjects with expanded polyQ tracts, prior to the
appearance of disease symptoms, while they have no major effects in control individuals without
expansions (18). The suspected culprit for the modifying effect of the Chromosome 15 locus, the
DNA endo/exonuclease FAN1, may be changing the disease phenotypes or age of onset by
directly affecting the stability of the polyQ-encoding repeat in somatic tissues (18, 100).
Interestingly, the HD disease progression study (18) suggested that the modifiers could
have distinct modifying effects in different cell populations. In our study, the cryptic nature of
the atg-5 variants allowed detection of the unusual cell-specificity in autophagy - aggregation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

relationship, because non-cryptic genetic variants that ectopically activate autophagy already
under basal conditions have additional strong phenotypes that can mask the effects of activated
autophagy on polyQ aggregation. For example, loss of function of C. elegans mTOR leads to
larval arrest (79); hypomorphic mutations in insulin/IGF signaling pathway, in addition to
activating autophagy, trigger numerous other developmental, stress responsive, and metabolic
pathways (101-103) that can have their own effects on the aggregation-prone protein; and even
non-genetic means such as activation of autophagy by nutrient deprivation are accompanied by
the metabolic and protein expression changes (104) that can mask the more specific effect on the
polyQ behavior. Natural variation may thus indeed identify the candidate modifier pathways and
mechanistic relationships in aggregation diseases that are distinct from those identified by the
traditional approaches.
The reasons the muscle cells are differentially sensitive to autophagy with respect to
protein aggregation, or why this is not true for other aggregation-prone proteins, are not yet
known. The selectivity of aggregation effects of autophagy towards the polyglutamine
expansions would argue against a global dysregulation of protein homeostasis in the muscle cells
of drxIR1animals, which is supported by our data. It is possible however, that ectopic activation
of autophagy disrupts select proteostasis processes that impinge on the polyQ aggregation or
clearance in these cells. Another possibility is that autophagic degradation of polyQ expansions
requires a specific "signal" or adaptor, which may be competed away during generic increase in
autophagy in the muscle cells, but remains sufficient in the intestine. The polyQ-expanded
huntingtin protein (Htt) indeed requires specific adaptors, such as Tollip, to be cleared by
autophagy (105), although whether this is also true for polyQ expansions outside the Htt context
is not clear. Yet another possibility is that polyQ expansions themselves interfere with
autophagy. For example, polyQ-expanded Htt have been suggested to interfere with the delivery
of cargoes to autophagic vacuoles (106), and shown to co-aggregate with the autophagy adaptor
Tollip, potentially disrupting other functions of this multi-tasking protein (105). If so, the low
basal levels of autophagy may render the proteostasis of the muscle cells to be more sensitive to
the polyQ expansions.
Muscle cells may also have a different regulation of or dependence on autophagy because
autophagy of the muscle is an adaptive response of many metazoans to starvation (107). While
basal autophagy is important for muscle maintenance, not only deficiency in autophagy but also
its over-activation can lead to muscle atrophy (108-110). Indeed, in C. elegans, body-wall
muscles in young animals have low basal levels of autophagy relative to other tissues (51, 52),

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

while in mice, the slow-twitching (soleus) muscles exhibited little induction of autophagy after
24 hours of starvation, as defined by the autophagosome counts, distinct from the fast-twitching
(extensor digitorum longus) muscles that had significant induction (84). Moreover, the
distribution of autophagosomes was different between the fast- and slow-twitching muscle types,
supporting the idea of differential autophagy regulation in different cells or tissues.
In addition to the traditional mouse models, the genetic model systems such as worm, fly
and yeast, in which natural variation can be readily combined with modeling the gain-of-function
mutations by transgenesis, offer new opportunities to identify the cryptic modifier pathways for
neurodegeneration and protein misfolding and aggregation (10, 111-115). Examples of this
approach include a recent study in C. elegans that showed that the ability of α-synuclein to cause
transcriptional and phenotypic changes is substantially modified by the genetic background (40),
and a study using a Drosophila Genetic Reference Panel (116), that uncovered an unexpected
role of heparin sulfate protein modifications in modifying the toxic effects of the misfolded
mutant of human insulin, a cause of permanent neonatal diabetes (117). The important feature of
the cryptic modifier pathways that can be identified by these approaches is that they harbor
natural variants shaped by selection, and thus will pinpoint the naturally plastic potential genes
and networks (14), amenable to pharmacological manipulation without negative effects on the
organism.

Materials and Methods
Nematode strains and growth conditions
Nematodes were grown at 20°C on nematode growth medium (NGM) plates, seeded with
E. coli OP50 (118). Animals were synchronized by picking gastrula stage embryos onto fresh
plates, unless otherwise noted.
The following stains were obtained from Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC):
AM141 [rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], AM140 [rmIs132(punc-54::Q35::YFP) I], CF1038 [daf16(mu86) I], TJ356 [zIs356(pdaf-16::daf-16a/b::GFP;pRF4(rol-6(su1006)) IV], PS3551 [hsf1(sy441) I], DA2123 [adIs2122(plgg-1::GFP::lgg-1 + rol-6(su1006))], KR1108 [unc-11(e47)
dpy-5(e61) I], KR292 [him-1(h55) dpy-5(e61) unc-13(e450) I; sDp2 (I;f)], MT1434 [egl30(n686) I], and CB1370 [daf-2(e1370) III]. TGF205 [xzEx3(punc-54::UbG76V::Dendra2)] was
made by crossing out glp-1(e2141) from AGD1033.
The AS408 [punc-54::GFP::UNC-54], AM583 [rmIs249(plet-858::hsf-1;pmyo-2::GFP)],
AM738 [rmIs297(pvha-6::Q44::YFP;rol-6(su1006))], and AM930 [rmIs335(punc-54::Aβ(1-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

40)::CFP)] strains were kindly provided by the Morimoto lab, and the HZ1732 [atg-5(bp484)
I;him-5] strain by the Colón-Ramos lab. The Q40DR1350 and recombinant inbred lines (RILs)
2, 12, 12(2) and 15 were described in (38).
The drxIR1(I, DR1350>Bristol) locus and/or the Q40 locus were introduced by genetic
crosses into the following strains: TGF134 [drxIR1;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF130
[drxIR1;punc-54::GFP::UNC-54], TGF353 [drxIR1;adIs2122(plgg-1::GFP::lgg-1 + rol6(su1006))], TGF208 [xzEx3(punc-54::UbG76V::Dendra2);rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)],
TGF207 [drxIR1;xzEx3(punc-54::UbG76V::Dendra2);rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF088
[daf-16(mu86) I; rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF188 [drxIR1;daf-16(mu86)
I;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF086 [zIs356(pdaf-16::daf-16a/b::GFP;pRF4(rol6(su1006)) IV;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF190 [drxIR1;zIs356(pdaf-16::daf16a/b::GFP;pRF4(rol-6(su1006)) IV;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF187 [hsf-1(sy441)
I;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF170 [drxIR1;hsf-1(sy441) I;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)],
TGF036 [rmIs249(plet-858::hsf-1;pmyo-2::GFP);rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF189
[drxIR1; rmIs249(plet-858::hsf-1;pmyo-2::GFP);rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)], TGF203
[drxIR1;rmIs335(punc-54::Aβ(1-40)::CFP)], TGF342 [drxIR1;rmIs132(punc-54::Q35::YFP) I],
TGF261 [rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP);him-1(h55) dpy-5(e61) unc-13(e450) I; sDp2 (I;f)]
TGF275 [drxIR1;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP);him-1(h55) dpy-5(e61) unc-13(e450) I; sDp2
(I;f)], TGF089 [daf-2(e1370) III;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)]; TGF127 [drxIR1;daf-2(e1370)
III;rmIs333(punc-54::Q40::YFP)].
The drxIR1;Q40 strain was made by the following scheme: Q40Bristol males were mated
to RIL2 hermaphrodites, and 5-10 F1 hermaphrodite progeny, identified by the lack of RIL2-like
increased head aggregation phenotype, were picked onto fresh plates. F2 generation was
examined for the expected 1:3 segregation of the increased head aggregation phenotype, and 710 F2 hermaphrodites with this phenotype were further mated with Q40Bristol males. This
mating-selection cycle was repeated 23 times. The resulting strain was named drxIR1;Q40.
The introduction of drxIR1 locus by genetic crosses was confirmed by detecting the
presence of the SNP 5 (WBVar00016276) (Suppl. Fig. 1): a 743bp fragment containing the
variant was amplified using the drxIR1 primers (Suppl. Table 3), at an annealing temperature of
60°C, to produce an amplicon of 743bp, and the PCR product was digested with SalI. The SalI
site is present in the Bristol background, producing 432bp and 311bp products after the digest,
but is absent in the DR1350 background.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Genome sequencing
Genomic DNA from drxIR1;Q40 and Q40Bristol was extracted from flash frozen pellets
of a mixed populations, using phenol:chloroform (Sigma, USA). DNA was sequenced using the
NextSeq 500 System (Illumina, USA) at the Wistar Institute (Philadelphia PA, USA).
Sequencing data was analyzed using the Galaxy (119) CloudMap pipeline as described in (42),
and WS220 genome assembly. The CloudMap SnpEff tool was utilized to annotate the genetic
variants and predict their functional effects on genes and proteins (62). SNPs with the following
annotations were considered as potentially functionally-significant: non-synonymous coding,
start gained or lost, stop gained or lost, splice site donor/acceptor, frameshift, and 5' or 3' UTR.

Quantification of polyQ40 aggregation
Aggregation was scored by counting fluorescent foci in images collected from animals
immobilized with 20 mM NaN3, using a Leica M205FA stereoscope with a digital camera
(Hamamatsu Orca R2). For synchronization, 15-20 well-fed L4 animals from non-crowded
plates were transferred to new plates, gastrula stage embryos were picked 2-3 days later, and
hatched animals were allowed to develop for specified time or to specified developmental stage.
Aggregation was scored in late-L4 animals, unless otherwise indicated. The developmental larval
stage was confirmed based on the germline development, or by days since L4 (for older adults).
For data expressed as means, the number of animals for each data point is indicated in the figure
legends.

Microscopy
For confocal images, animals were immobilized on 2% agar pads with 20 mM NaN3 and
imaged with Zeiss LSM700 microscope at Cell Imaging Center, Drexel University. Z-stacks
were acquired at 0.4 µm intervals as 12-bit images, using 63x 1.4NA objective, and analyzed
with ImageJ. For the quantification of autophagic vesicles, Z-stacks were collapsed as maximum
intensity projections, the muscle cells were outlined, and the GFP::LGG-1-positive puncta within
the outlined cells were counted. 30 to 40 cells from 8 to 10 L4 animals were analyzed per
genotype. To compare GFP::UNC-54 protein levels, GFP fluorescence was measured within the
same size area (~9µm2) in the center of each analyzed muscle cell, over the myofilaments. 16-20
cells from 4-5 animals per genotype were measured. An identical size area measured away from
the myofilaments was used for background subtraction.
Fluorescent recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) was performed on day 2 adults (for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

aggregated Q40) and L4 larvae (for soluble Q40) animals, as in (85), using the Zeiss LSM700
confocal microscope. Photobleaching was performed with 488 nm laser, by 100 iterations at
100% laser power. Imaging during recovery was at 0.2% power. Relative fluorescence intensity
(RFI) was determined with the following equation: RFI = (Tt/Ct)/(T0/C0), with T0 representing the
total intensity of the region of interest before photobleaching and Tt the intensity in the same are
at any time after. We normalized against an unbleached area in the same cell, where C0 is a
control area before bleaching and Ct represents any time after bleaching (85). 7-18 aggregates
from 3 animals each were measured per strain for aggregated Q40, and 5 cells from 2 animals
each were measured per strain for the soluble Q40 controls.
For stereo images, animals were immobilized on NGM plates in a drop of 20 mM NaN3.
Imaging was performed using a Leica M205FA stereo microscope with an Orca R2 digital
camera (Hamamatsu). The magnification and the intensity of fluorescent sources (Chroma
PhotoFluor 2) were kept constant within experiments. UbG76V::Dendra2 animals were imaged
with a narrow-bandpass CFP filter (Chroma), to avoid the spectral overlap with the Q40::YFP
protein.

Native protein extracts
To prepare native protein extracts, synchronized embryos were prepared by hypochlorite
treatments and larvae were collected once they reached the L3 stage. The worm pellets were
mechanically disrupted and lysed in 0.5% Triton-X 100 buffer as described in (39). For SDS
solubility, native protein extracts were incubated in 5% SDS for 15 min at room temperature
prior to running on a 5% continuous native-PAGE, at 25 mg of total protein per lane. Gels were
imaged on a Typhoon FLA7000 scanner (General Electric, USA) with ImageQuant TL software
to quantify YFP fluorescence. All experiments were performed three times.

qPCR
~50µl pellets of L4 stage worms were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and RNA extraction
was performed using TRIzol (Life Technologies, USA) and chloroform (Sigma, USA) reagents.
The samples were treated with DNase (DNA-free, Life Technologies, USA) to remove any
genomic DNA, and iScript cDNA synthesis kit (Bio-Rad, USA) was used to reverse transcribe 12 µg of RNA per sample. The expression of selected genes was measured using iTaq Universal
SYBR Green Supermix (company) and the ViiA detector (Applied Biosystems). Each biological
replicate was run in triplicate, and data analyzed using the ΔΔCT method (120). Three

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

biological replicates were used to assess statistical significance. Tubulin (tbg-1) was used as the
internal control, as it was stable between the drxIR1 and the Bristol strains. tbg-1 primers were
obtained from (121). Primer sequences are listed in Suppl. Table 3.

RNAi experiments and constructs
For RNAi experiments, NGM plates containing 100 µg/ml ampicillin and 0.4 mM IPTG
were seeded with control (L4440 empty vector, unless otherwise noted) or experimental
overnight RNAi bacterial cultures and incubated at room temperature for 2 days prior to plating
worms. Nematodes were cultured on the RNAi plates from gastrula stage embryos for two
generations. RNAi strains were from the Ahringer library (J. Ahringer, University of Cambridge,
Cambridge, U.K.), except for those corresponding to mab-20, Y71G12B.18, Y71G12B.33,
Y71G12B.23, Y71G12B.35, drag-1, Y71G12B.31, ubc-3, tln-1, Y71G12B.25, pghm-1, C53H9.3,
tag-96, tub-2, Y51F10.4, and spe-48; these were made by cloning a unique 0.8 to 1.2 Kb
fragment from each gene into the L4440 plasmid and transforming into the E. coli strain HT115.
Primer sequences are listed in Suppl. Table 4. All experiments were repeated three times, the
total (combined) number of animals is indicated in figure legends.

ABT-737 treatment
20-40 gastrula stage embryos were grown on OP50 bacteria for two days at 20°C,
nematodes collected, washed, and exposed to either 0.1% DMSO (Sigma, USA) as solvent
control, or 10 µM ABT-737 (ApexBio, Taiwan). Earlier exposure to ABT-737 resulted in larval
arrest. Animals were incubated in the drug solution with shaking for 24 hours, pipetted onto
plates, and either scored for aggregation or imaged.

Statistical analyses
ANOVA and t-test analyses were performed with Prism software (GraphPad, USA),
using α value of 0.5. ANOVA was followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons post-test. All
p-values and significance levels are indicated in the figures and figure legends.

Acknowledgements
We thank the Colón-Ramos lab at Yale School of Medicine and the Morimoto lab at
Northwestern University for contributing worm strains. Some strains were provided by the
Caenorhabditis Genetics Center (CGC) at the University of Minnesota, which is funded by NIH

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Office of Research Infrastructure Programs (P40OD010440). We would like to thank Anna
Lysenko for experimental assistance.

Supplemental Files
Suppl. Fig 1. Schematic of the drxlR1interval and SNPs used for mapping.
Red: the 1.4Mb genomic region on Chromosome I containing the DR1350-derived intervals in
the RIL2-derived drxlR1;Q40 strain and the four remaining high aggregation RILs (RIL12,
RIL12(2), RIL18 and RIL15); orange: the Bristol background. Punctate lines delineate the
narrowed 326 Kb interval containing the candidate genes tested by RNAi. Diamonds: SNPs used
to confirm the presence of the interval; SNP 6b (ChrI:1,972,719 (WBVar00017376)) is Bristolderived in drxIR1;Q40 and RIL15 animals. Locations of egl-30, moag-4 and the incompatibility
locus zeel-1/peel-1are also indicated. The coordinates here correspond to the WormBase release
WS270 (122).

Suppl. Fig 2. Cumulative distribution of unique SNPs across remaining Chromosomes.
Chromosomes II through X in the drxlR1;Q40 strain accumulated up to 160 unique SNPs each.
Shown are SNPs remaining after subtraction of the variants present in the parental Q40Bristol
strain and the known Hawaii SNPs.

Suppl. Fig 3. Controls for basal proteostasis effects of the drxIR1 locus
(A) The UbG76V::Dendra2 proteasome reporter is sensitive to decreased proteasome levels.
Knockdown of a proteasome subunit rpn-6.1, via RNAi, increased the average intensity of the
Dendra2 compared to control treatment. Images were taken and quantified as in Fig. 2D. Data
are mean ± SD. Data were analyzed by unpaired t-test, two-tailed, *P=0.0244. (B)
Stereomicrographs of young adult animals after treatment with control or moag-4 RNAi. moag4 RNAi decreased aggregation in both backgrounds, but preserved the increased aggregation
drxIR1;Q40 animals relative to Q40Bristol.

Suppl. Table 1. Loss-of-function analysis for the RIL2-like head aggregation phenotype.
sDP2 free duplication covers most of the left arm of Chromosome I, extending through dpy-5
marker but not through unc-13. drxIR1;Q40 animals were crossed with KR292 [him-1(h55);dpy-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

5(e61);unc-13(e450)I; sDp2(I;f)], F1 progeny that either did (based on segregation of unc nondpy phenotype among their progeny) or did not inherit the sDp2 duplication were singled, and
their F2 progeny scored for the increased ratio of head to body aggregation (RIL2-like) and the
dumpy phenotypes. The RIL2-like phenotype behaved genetically as did the known loss-offunction dpy-5(e61) allele.

Suppl. Table 2. Candidate genes tested by RNAi.
24 candidate genes present in the target 326 Kb of drxIR1 interval (between SNPs 5 and 6b
(Suppl. Fig. 1)) are indicated in color. Genes were defined as candidates based on the SnpEff
annotations (see Methods and Data File 1). egl-30 was excluded based on genetic crosses. Genes
in purple were targeted by clones from the Ahringer RNAi library. RNAi targeting constructs
for genes in red were prepared in this work.

Suppl. Table 3. Primers used for genotyping the drxIR1 locus and for qPCR analysis of atg5 expression.

Suppl. Table 4. Primers used for generating RNAi clones.

Data File 1. List of genes with potentially significant SNPs generated by the SnpEff tool.
The nucleotide positions correspond to the N2(Bristol) genome assembly from WormBase
release WS220 (122), available in the UCSC Genome Browser as ce10. The presence of human
orthologs is according to (123).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.

13.
14.
15.
16.
17.

18.
19.
20.
21.

Ross CA & Poirier MA (2004) Protein aggregation and neurodegenerative disease.
Nature medicine 10 Suppl:S10-17.
David DC, et al. (2010) Widespread protein aggregation as an inherent part of aging in C.
elegans. PLoS biology 8(8):e1000450.
Carrell RW & Lomas DA (1997) Conformational disease. Lancet 350(9071):134-138.
Bucciantini M, et al. (2002) Inherent toxicity of aggregates implies a common
mechanism for protein misfolding diseases. Nature 416(6880):507-511.
Zoghbi HY & Orr HT (2000) Glutamine repeats and neurodegeneration. Annual review
of neuroscience 23:217-247.
Chen S, Ferrone FA, & Wetzel R (2002) Huntington's disease age-of-onset linked to
polyglutamine aggregation nucleation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 99(18):11884-11889.
Shao J & Diamond MI (2007) Polyglutamine diseases: emerging concepts in
pathogenesis and therapy. Human molecular genetics 16 Spec No. 2:R115-123.
Fu H, Hardy J, & Duff KE (2018) Selective vulnerability in neurodegenerative diseases.
Nature neuroscience 21(10):1350-1358.
Brichta L & Greengard P (2014) Molecular determinants of selective dopaminergic
vulnerability in Parkinson's disease: an update. Frontiers in neuroanatomy 8:152.
Wang YA, Kammenga JE, & Harvey SC (2017) Genetic variation in neurodegenerative
diseases and its accessibility in the model organism Caenorhabditis elegans. Human
genomics 11(1):12.
Figueroa KP, et al. (2017) Genetic analysis of age at onset variation in spinocerebellar
ataxia type 2. Neurology. Genetics 3(3):e155.
Wexler NS, et al. (2004) Venezuelan kindreds reveal that genetic and environmental
factors modulate Huntington's disease age of onset. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 101(10):3498-3503.
Gusella JF & MacDonald ME (2009) Huntington's disease: the case for genetic
modifiers. Genome medicine 1(8):80.
Hamilton BA & Yu BD (2012) Modifier genes and the plasticity of genetic networks in
mice. PLoS genetics 8(4):e1002644.
Li JL, et al. (2003) A genome scan for modifiers of age at onset in Huntington disease:
The HD MAPS study. American journal of human genetics 73(3):682-687.
Li JL, et al. (2006) Genome-wide significance for a modifier of age at neurological onset
in Huntington's disease at 6q23-24: the HD MAPS study. BMC medical genetics 7:71.
Gayan J, et al. (2008) Genomewide linkage scan reveals novel loci modifying age of
onset of Huntington's disease in the Venezuelan HD kindreds. Genetic epidemiology
32(5):445-453.
Long JD, et al. (2018) Genetic Modification of Huntington Disease Acts Early in the
Prediagnosis Phase. American journal of human genetics 103(3):349-357.
Genetic Modifiers of Huntington's Disease C (2015) Identification of Genetic Factors that
Modify Clinical Onset of Huntington's Disease. Cell 162(3):516-526.
Lee JM, et al. (2017) A modifier of Huntington's disease onset at the MLH1 locus.
Human molecular genetics 26(19):3859-3867.
Chao MJ, et al. (2018) Population-specific genetic modification of Huntington's disease
in Venezuela. PLoS genetics 14(5):e1007274.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

22.
23.

24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.

30.

31.

32.
33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.

39.

Haider NB, Ikeda A, Naggert JK, & Nishina PM (2002) Genetic modifiers of vision and
hearing. Human molecular genetics 11(10):1195-1206.
Marsh JL, Lukacsovich T, & Thompson LM (2009) Animal models of polyglutamine
diseases and therapeutic approaches. The Journal of biological chemistry 284(12):74317435.
Jackson GR, et al. (1998) Polyglutamine-expanded human huntingtin transgenes induce
degeneration of Drosophila photoreceptor neurons. Neuron 21(3):633-642.
Warrick JM, et al. (1998) Expanded polyglutamine protein forms nuclear inclusions and
causes neural degeneration in Drosophila. Cell 93(6):939-949.
Faber PW, Alter JR, MacDonald ME, & Hart AC (1999) Polyglutamine-mediated
dysfunction and apoptotic death of a Caenorhabditis elegans sensory neuron. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 96(1):179-184.
Marsh JL, et al. (2000) Expanded polyglutamine peptides alone are intrinsically cytotoxic
and cause neurodegeneration in Drosophila. Human molecular genetics 9(1):13-25.
Kazemi-Esfarjani P & Benzer S (2000) Genetic suppression of polyglutamine toxicity in
Drosophila. Science 287(5459):1837-1840.
Parker JA, et al. (2001) Expanded polyglutamines in Caenorhabditis elegans cause
axonal abnormalities and severe dysfunction of PLM mechanosensory neurons without
cell death. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 98(23):13318-13323.
Morley JF, Brignull HR, Weyers JJ, & Morimoto RI (2002) The threshold for
polyglutamine-expansion protein aggregation and cellular toxicity is dynamic and
influenced by aging in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 99(16):10417-10422.
Satyal SH, et al. (2000) Polyglutamine aggregates alter protein folding homeostasis in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 97(11):5750-5755.
Christie NT, Lee AL, Fay HG, Gray AA, & Kikis EA (2014) Novel polyglutamine model
uncouples proteotoxicity from aging. PloS one 9(5):e96835.
Fardghassemi Y, Tauffenberger A, Gosselin S, & Parker JA (2017) Rescue of ATXN3
neuronal toxicity in Caenorhabditiselegans by chemical modification of endoplasmic
reticulum stress. Disease models & mechanisms 10(12):1465-1480.
Teixeira-Castro A, et al. (2011) Neuron-specific proteotoxicity of mutant ataxin-3 in C.
elegans: rescue by the DAF-16 and HSF-1 pathways. Human molecular genetics
20(15):2996-3009.
Kikis EA, Gidalevitz T, & Morimoto RI (2010) Protein homeostasis in models of aging
and age-related conformational disease. Advances in experimental medicine and biology
694:138-159.
Hsu AL, Murphy CT, & Kenyon C (2003) Regulation of aging and age-related disease by
DAF-16 and heat-shock factor. Science 300(5622):1142-1145.
Gidalevitz T, Ben-Zvi A, Ho KH, Brignull HR, & Morimoto RI (2006) Progressive
disruption of cellular protein folding in models of polyglutamine diseases. Science
311(5766):1471-1474.
Gidalevitz T, Wang N, Deravaj T, Alexander-Floyd J, & Morimoto RI (2013) Natural
genetic variation determines susceptibility to aggregation or toxicity in a C. elegans
model for polyglutamine disease. BMC biology 11:100.
Gidalevitz T, Krupinski T, Garcia S, & Morimoto RI (2009) Destabilizing protein
polymorphisms in the genetic background direct phenotypic expression of mutant SOD1
toxicity. PLoS genetics 5(3):e1000399.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

40.
41.

42.
43.

44.
45.
46.

47.
48.

49.

50.
51.
52.
53.
54.

55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

Wang YA, et al. (2019) Genetic background modifies phenotypic and transcriptional
responses in a C. elegans model of alpha-synuclein toxicity. BMC genomics 20(1):232.
Rose AM, Baillie DL, & Curran J (1984) Meiotic pairing behavior of two free
duplications of linkage group I in Caenorhabditis elegans. Molecular & general genetics
: MGG 195(1-2):52-56.
Minevich G, Park DS, Blankenberg D, Poole RJ, & Hobert O (2012) CloudMap: a cloudbased pipeline for analysis of mutant genome sequences. Genetics 192(4):1249-1269.
Koch R, van Luenen HG, van der Horst M, Thijssen KL, & Plasterk RH (2000) Single
nucleotide polymorphisms in wild isolates of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome research
10(11):1690-1696.
Sarin S, et al. (2010) Analysis of multiple ethyl methanesulfonate-mutagenized
Caenorhabditis elegans strains by whole-genome sequencing. Genetics 185(2):417-430.
Seidel HS, Rockman MV, & Kruglyak L (2008) Widespread genetic incompatibility in
C. elegans maintained by balancing selection. Science 319(5863):589-594.
Sassi HE, Renihan S, Spence AM, & Cooperstock RL (2005) Gene CATCHR--gene
cloning and tagging for Caenorhabditis elegans using yeast homologous recombination: a
novel approach for the analysis of gene expression. Nucleic Acids Res 33(18):e163.
Bejsovec A & Anderson P (1988) Myosin heavy-chain mutations that disrupt
Caenorhabditis elegans thick filament assembly. Genes & development 2(10):1307-1317.
Barral JM, Hutagalung AH, Brinker A, Hartl FU, & Epstein HF (2002) Role of the
myosin assembly protein UNC-45 as a molecular chaperone for myosin. Science
295(5555):669-671.
Landsverk ML, et al. (2007) The UNC-45 chaperone mediates sarcomere assembly
through myosin degradation in Caenorhabditis elegans. The Journal of cell biology
177(2):205-210.
Kang C, You YJ, & Avery L (2007) Dual roles of autophagy in the survival of
Caenorhabditis elegans during starvation. Genes & development 21(17):2161-2171.
Chapin HC, Okada M, Merz AJ, & Miller DL (2015) Tissue-specific autophagy
responses to aging and stress in C. elegans. Aging 7(6):419-434.
Chang JT, Kumsta C, Hellman AB, Adams LM, & Hansen M (2017) Spatiotemporal
regulation of autophagy during Caenorhabditis elegans aging. eLife 6.
Vilchez D, et al. (2012) RPN-6 determines C. elegans longevity under proteotoxic stress
conditions. Nature 489(7415):263-268.
Lin K, Dorman JB, Rodan A, & Kenyon C (1997) daf-16: An HNF-3/forkhead family
member that can function to double the life-span of Caenorhabditis elegans. Science
278(5341):1319-1322.
Henderson ST & Johnson TE (2001) daf-16 integrates developmental and environmental
inputs to mediate aging in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Current biology : CB
11(24):1975-1980.
Hajdu-Cronin YM, Chen WJ, & Sternberg PW (2004) The L-type cyclin CYL-1 and the
heat-shock-factor HSF-1 are required for heat-shock-induced protein expression in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 168(4):1937-1949.
Ben-Zvi A, Miller EA, & Morimoto RI (2009) Collapse of proteostasis represents an
early molecular event in Caenorhabditis elegans aging. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106(35):14914-14919.
Scherzinger E, et al. (1997) Huntingtin-encoded polyglutamine expansions form
amyloid-like protein aggregates in vitro and in vivo. Cell 90(3):549-558.
Falsone SF, et al. (2012) SERF protein is a direct modifier of amyloid fiber assembly.
Cell reports 2(2):358-371.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

60.
61.
62.

63.
64.

65.
66.

67.
68.
69.
70.
71.

72.
73.

74.

75.

76.
77.
78.
79.

van Ham TJ, et al. (2010) Identification of MOAG-4/SERF as a regulator of age-related
proteotoxicity. Cell 142(4):601-612.
Roth DM, et al. (2014) Modulation of the maladaptive stress response to manage diseases
of protein folding. PLoS biology 12(11):e1001998.
Cingolani P, et al. (2012) A program for annotating and predicting the effects of single
nucleotide polymorphisms, SnpEff: SNPs in the genome of Drosophila melanogaster
strain w1118; iso-2; iso-3. Fly 6(2):80-92.
Zhang H, et al. (2013) The two C. elegans ATG-16 homologs have partially redundant
functions in the basal autophagy pathway. Autophagy 9(12):1965-1974.
Stavoe AK, Hill SE, Hall DH, & Colon-Ramos DA (2016) KIF1A/UNC-104 Transports
ATG-9 to Regulate Neurodevelopment and Autophagy at Synapses. Developmental cell
38(2):171-185.
Mizushima N, et al. (1998) A protein conjugation system essential for autophagy. Nature
395(6700):395-398.
Mizushima N, Noda T, & Ohsumi Y (1999) Apg16p is required for the function of the
Apg12p-Apg5p conjugate in the yeast autophagy pathway. The EMBO journal
18(14):3888-3896.
Melendez A & Levine B (2009) Autophagy in C. elegans. WormBook : the online review
of C. elegans biology:1-26.
Yousefi S, et al. (2006) Calpain-mediated cleavage of Atg5 switches autophagy to
apoptosis. Nature cell biology 8(10):1124-1132.
Zhang H, et al. (2015) Guidelines for monitoring autophagy in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Autophagy 11(1):9-27.
Maiuri MC, et al. (2007) Functional and physical interaction between Bcl-X(L) and a
BH3-like domain in Beclin-1. The EMBO journal 26(10):2527-2539.
Wang X, Wang X, Li L, & Wang D (2010) Lifespan extension in Caenorhabditis elegans
by DMSO is dependent on sir-2.1 and daf-16. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications 400(4):613-618.
Frankowski H, et al. (2013) Dimethyl sulfoxide and dimethyl formamide increase
lifespan of C. elegans in liquid. Mechanisms of ageing and development 134(3-4):69-78.
Mohri-Shiomi A & Garsin DA (2008) Insulin signaling and the heat shock response
modulate protein homeostasis in the Caenorhabditis elegans intestine during infection.
The Journal of biological chemistry 283(1):194-201.
Prahlad V & Morimoto RI (2011) Neuronal circuitry regulates the response of
Caenorhabditis elegans to misfolded proteins. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 108(34):14204-14209.
Ravikumar B, Duden R, & Rubinsztein DC (2002) Aggregate-prone proteins with
polyglutamine and polyalanine expansions are degraded by autophagy. Human molecular
genetics 11(9):1107-1117.
Jia K, Hart AC, & Levine B (2007) Autophagy genes protect against disease caused by
polyglutamine expansion proteins in Caenorhabditis elegans. Autophagy 3(1):21-25.
Saxton RA & Sabatini DM (2017) mTOR Signaling in Growth, Metabolism, and
Disease. Cell 168(6):960-976.
Hansen M, et al. (2008) A role for autophagy in the extension of lifespan by dietary
restriction in C. elegans. PLoS genetics 4(2):e24.
Long X, et al. (2002) TOR deficiency in C. elegans causes developmental arrest and
intestinal atrophy by inhibition of mRNA translation. Current biology : CB 12(17):14481461.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

80.

81.

82.
83.
84.

85.

86.
87.
88.
89.

90.
91.
92.
93.

94.

95.
96.
97.
98.
99.

Kim DH, et al. (2003) GbetaL, a positive regulator of the rapamycin-sensitive pathway
required for the nutrient-sensitive interaction between raptor and mTOR. Molecular cell
11(4):895-904.
Jones KT, Greer ER, Pearce D, & Ashrafi K (2009) Rictor/TORC2 regulates
Caenorhabditis elegans fat storage, body size, and development through sgk-1. PLoS
biology 7(3):e60.
Melendez A, et al. (2003) Autophagy genes are essential for dauer development and lifespan extension in C. elegans. Science 301(5638):1387-1391.
Cohen E, Bieschke J, Perciavalle RM, Kelly JW, & Dillin A (2006) Opposing activities
protect against age-onset proteotoxicity. Science 313(5793):1604-1610.
Mizushima N, Yamamoto A, Matsui M, Yoshimori T, & Ohsumi Y (2004) In vivo
analysis of autophagy in response to nutrient starvation using transgenic mice expressing
a fluorescent autophagosome marker. Molecular biology of the cell 15(3):1101-1111.
Brignull HR, Moore FE, Tang SJ, & Morimoto RI (2006) Polyglutamine proteins at the
pathogenic threshold display neuron-specific aggregation in a pan-neuronal
Caenorhabditis elegans model. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the
Society for Neuroscience 26(29):7597-7606.
Nikoletopoulou V, Markaki M, Palikaras K, & Tavernarakis N (2013) Crosstalk between
apoptosis, necrosis and autophagy. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1833(12):3448-3459.
Ding WX, et al. (2007) Differential effects of endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced
autophagy on cell survival. The Journal of biological chemistry 282(7):4702-4710.
Nixon RA (2013) The role of autophagy in neurodegenerative disease. Nature medicine
19(8):983-997.
Ciechanover A & Kwon YT (2015) Degradation of misfolded proteins in
neurodegenerative diseases: therapeutic targets and strategies. Experimental & molecular
medicine 47:e147.
Menzies FM, et al. (2017) Autophagy and Neurodegeneration: Pathogenic Mechanisms
and Therapeutic Opportunities. Neuron 93(5):1015-1034.
Zielonka D, Piotrowska I, Marcinkowski JT, & Mielcarek M (2014) Skeletal muscle
pathology in Huntington's disease. Frontiers in physiology 5:380.
Huang S, et al. (2015) Large Polyglutamine Repeats Cause Muscle Degeneration in
SCA17 Mice. Cell reports 13(1):196-208.
Luthi-Carter R, et al. (2002) Dysregulation of gene expression in the R6/2 model of
polyglutamine disease: parallel changes in muscle and brain. Human molecular genetics
11(17):1911-1926.
Moffitt H, McPhail GD, Woodman B, Hobbs C, & Bates GP (2009) Formation of
polyglutamine inclusions in a wide range of non-CNS tissues in the HdhQ150 knock-in
mouse model of Huntington's disease. PloS one 4(11):e8025.
She P, et al. (2011) Molecular characterization of skeletal muscle atrophy in the R6/2
mouse model of Huntington's disease. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 301(1):E49-61.
Rutherford SL & Lindquist S (1998) Hsp90 as a capacitor for morphological evolution.
Nature 396(6709):336-342.
Gibson G (2009) Decanalization and the origin of complex disease. Nature reviews.
Genetics 10(2):134-140.
Paaby AB & Rockman MV (2014) Cryptic genetic variation: evolution's hidden
substrate. Nature reviews. Genetics 15(4):247-258.
Luthi-Carter R, et al. (2002) Polyglutamine and transcription: gene expression changes
shared by DRPLA and Huntington's disease mouse models reveal context-independent
effects. Human molecular genetics 11(17):1927-1937.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

100.
101.
102.
103.

104.
105.
106.
107.
108.
109.

110.
111.

112.
113.

114.

115.

116.
117.
118.
119.
120.

Goold R, et al. (2019) FAN1 modifies Huntington's disease progression by stabilizing the
expanded HTT CAG repeat. Human molecular genetics 28(4):650-661.
Walker DW, McColl G, Jenkins NL, Harris J, & Lithgow GJ (2000) Evolution of lifespan
in C. elegans. Nature 405(6784):296-297.
Jenkins NL, McColl G, & Lithgow GJ (2004) Fitness cost of extended lifespan in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Proceedings. Biological sciences 271(1556):2523-2526.
Chen J, et al. (2007) A demographic analysis of the fitness cost of extended longevity in
Caenorhabditis elegans. The journals of gerontology. Series A, Biological sciences and
medical sciences 62(2):126-135.
Altman BJ & Rathmell JC (2012) Metabolic stress in autophagy and cell death pathways.
Cold Spring Harbor perspectives in biology 4(9):a008763.
Lu K, Psakhye I, & Jentsch S (2014) Autophagic clearance of polyQ proteins mediated
by ubiquitin-Atg8 adaptors of the conserved CUET protein family. Cell 158(3):549-563.
Martinez-Vicente M, et al. (2010) Cargo recognition failure is responsible for inefficient
autophagy in Huntington's disease. Nature neuroscience 13(5):567-576.
Schiaffino S, Dyar KA, Ciciliot S, Blaauw B, & Sandri M (2013) Mechanisms regulating
skeletal muscle growth and atrophy. The FEBS journal 280(17):4294-4314.
Mammucari C, et al. (2007) FoxO3 controls autophagy in skeletal muscle in vivo. Cell
metabolism 6(6):458-471.
Zhao J, et al. (2007) FoxO3 coordinately activates protein degradation by the
autophagic/lysosomal and proteasomal pathways in atrophying muscle cells. Cell
metabolism 6(6):472-483.
Masiero E, et al. (2009) Autophagy is required to maintain muscle mass. Cell metabolism
10(6):507-515.
Heiman-Patterson TD, et al. (2011) Effect of genetic background on phenotype
variability in transgenic mouse models of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: a window of
opportunity in the search for genetic modifiers. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis : official
publication of the World Federation of Neurology Research Group on Motor Neuron
Diseases 12(2):79-86.
Peters TW, et al. (2018) Natural Genetic Variation in Yeast Reveals That NEDD4 Is a
Conserved Modifier of Mutant Polyglutamine Aggregation. G3 8(11):3421-3431.
Lloret A, et al. (2006) Genetic background modifies nuclear mutant huntingtin
accumulation and HD CAG repeat instability in Huntington's disease knock-in mice.
Human molecular genetics 15(12):2015-2024.
Van Raamsdonk JM, et al. (2007) Phenotypic abnormalities in the YAC128 mouse model
of Huntington disease are penetrant on multiple genetic backgrounds and modulated by
strain. Neurobiol Dis 26(1):189-200.
Chow CY, Wolfner MF, & Clark AG (2013) Using natural variation in Drosophila to
discover previously unknown endoplasmic reticulum stress genes. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 110(22):9013-9018.
Mackay TF, et al. (2012) The Drosophila melanogaster Genetic Reference Panel. Nature
482(7384):173-178.
He BZ, et al. (2014) Effect of genetic variation in a Drosophila model of diabetesassociated misfolded human proinsulin. Genetics 196(2):557-567.
Brenner S (1974) The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics 77(1):71-94.
Afgan E, et al. (2016) The Galaxy platform for accessible, reproducible and collaborative
biomedical analyses: 2016 update. Nucleic Acids Res 44(W1):W3-W10.
Livak KJ & Schmittgen TD (2001) Analysis of relative gene expression data using realtime quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 25(4):402-408.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/670042; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

121.

122.
123.

Lascarez-Lagunas LI, Silva-Garcia CG, Dinkova TD, & Navarro RE (2014) LIN-35/Rb
causes starvation-induced germ cell apoptosis via CED-9/Bcl2 downregulation in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Mol Cell Biol 34(13):2499-2516.
Lee RYN, et al. (2018) WormBase 2017: molting into a new stage. Nucleic Acids Res
46(D1):D869-D874.
Shaye DD & Greenwald I (2011) OrthoList: a compendium of C. elegans genes with
human orthologs. PloS one 6(5):e20085.

Supplemental Figure 1
RIL12
RIL12(2)
RIL18
RIL15
drxIR1;Q40
SNP

1 2

600,000

800,000

3

4

5

egl-30
moag-4
6 6b 7

1,000,000 1,200,000 1,400,000 1,600,000 1,800,000 2,000,000 2,200,000 2,400,000

Chromosome I location (bp)

SNP
1
2
3
4
5
6
6b
7
8

zeel-1/peel-1
8

Variation name
WBVar00004591
WBVar01529903
WBVar01529977
WBVar00014396
WBVar00016276
WBVar00017051
WBVar00017376
WBVar00017401
WBVar00023136

Location (bp)
832,671
846,351
944,150
1,176,473
1,647,221
1,850,249
1,972,719
1,981,603
2,222,271

Supplemental Figure 2

Supplemental Figure 3
A
drxIR1;UbG76V::Dendra2;Q40

average intensity (a.u.)

50

*

40
30
20
10
0

control

rpn-6.1
RNAi:

Q40Bristol

B
control

moag-4

drxIR1;Q40

control

moag-4

young adults

Suppl. Table 1 Loss of function analysis for the increased susceptibility of head muscles to aggregation
F1 animals that did not inherit sDp2
# of F1 animals

# of F2 animals
scored

# RIL2-like
F2 animals

# dpy
F2 animals

% RIL2-like
F2 animals

% dpy
F2 animals

22

4533

1041

1109

23

24.5

F1 animals that did inherit sDp2
# of F1 animals

# of F2 animals
scored

# of RIL2-like
F2 animals

# of dpy
F2 animals

%RIL2-like
F2 animals

% dpy
F2 animals

5

707

91

91

12.8

12.8

Suppl. Table 2 Genes located in the 350Kb interval on the left arm of Chromosome I of drxIR1
animals
Gene

Candidate

Function/homology/phenotype

mab-20

+

Semaphorin-2A ortholog; is required for proper epidermal morphogenesis and
axon guidance

Y71G12B.18

+

Y71G12B.33

+

Y71G12B.17

+

Y71G12B.23

+

Y71G12B.35

+

drag-1

+

Y71G12B.31

+

ubc-3

+

atg-5

+

tln-1

+

mppa-1

+

lin-65

+

Y71G12B.25

+

Y71G12B.5

+

pghm-1

+

Peptidylglycine alpha-hydroxylating monooxygenase

chaf-2

+

Chromatin assembly factor

C53H9.3

+

egl-30

-

tag-96

+

An ortholog of the heterotrimeric G protein alpha subunit Gq; affects viability,
locomotion, egg laying, synaptic transmission, and pharyngeal pumping
A galactokinase that is a member of the GHMP family of kinases

tub-2

+

Tubby-related

Y71G12A.4

+

An ortholog of human ABHD17A and ABHD17C

trpp-10

+

Transport protein particle

Y51F10.4

+

An ortholog of human SLC38A10

spe-48

+

Spermatogenesis defective

An ortholog of human PITPNB and PITPNA; may have phospholipid
transporter activity
An ortholog of human MMD and MMD2; may have heme-copper terminal
oxidase activity
A membrane associated protein that functions as a co-receptor in the the
Sma/Mab pathway
An ortholog of human PTPN7; may have protein tyrosine phosphatase activity
E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme
An ortholog of the autophagic budding yeast protein Atg5p, and of human
ATG5
Talin; a cytoskeleton protein
Mitochondrial processing peptidase alpha
Acts with B class SynMuv genes to repress vulval induction, and is required
for fertility. Component of the mitochondrial unfolded protein response
An ortholog of human MFSD10

Suppl. Table 3 Primers used for genotyping the drxIR1 locus and for qPCR analysis
of atg-5 expression
Primer name

Primer sequence 5’-3’

drxIR1 fwd.

AAGCCCCGCCGAGTTAAAACCG

drxIR1 rev.

TGGCGACCGAGTGTAGCATCGTG

atg-5 fwd.

CTGGCGGAACTCACGGAG

atg-5 rev.

CGCTTGATCGTAGATCAC

tbg-1 fwd.

CCTGTTGTCGATCCAAATGA

tbg-1 rev.

AACCCGAGAAGCAGTTGAAA

Suppl. Table 4 Primers used for generating RNAi clones
Primer name

Primer sequence 5’-3’

mab-20_HindIII Up

GACGAAGCTTAACTCGGCCACCTATTGAAC

mab-20_NcoI Down

AGTACCATGGAGCAACTGAGAATTGGGAGAC

Y71G12B.18_HindIII Up

GACGAAGCTTGGTAGCGGATGACTGATGTTAG

Y71G12B.18_NcoI Down

ACTTCCATGGAGCTCCTTTACAAACAGGTAGG

Y71G12B.33_NcoI fwd.

AGTACCATGGACGCTTGCCATTCGAAATAAAC

Y71G12B.33_HindIII rev.

TCATAAGCTTCATGCCTCCTCCCATTCATC

Y71G12B.23_HindIII Up

ACTGAAGCTTGATCGGTATAGGACCCACAATTC

Y71G12B.23_NcoI Down

GACTCCATGGGCCGCAATGAACAGGTAAATG

Y71G12B.35_NcoI fwd.

TAGTCCATGGTTGAGTCGAAGGAGCCAAAG

Y71G12B.35_HindIII rev.

TACGAAGCTTTCAAACGGAGCAAATTGAGAAAG

drag-1_HindIII Up

CGTCAAGCTTCTGGAACAGAATAAGTTG

drag-1_NcoI Down

AGCACCATGGCCCATCACATCGTGTCGT

Y71G12B.31_NcoI fwd.

TACTCCATGGCTACTTCTTCTGATGGTAGTTCCTC

Y71G12B.31_HindIII rev.

TACTAAGCCTTCCGTACTGGTGTGTTCATCTG

ubc-3_NcoI fwd.

TACTCCATGGCAGGTGGAAGAGTCGAAGAAAG

ubc-3_HindIII rev.

TACTAAGCTTCGTCATAGTCACACCCGAAATC

tln-1_AB_SalI Up

GCATGTCGACCGTCTCGAACAAGACTGTACTC

tln-1_AB_BglII Down

ACTGAGATCTAGTAGAGCGCGTTTGTATGG

Y71G12B.25_NcoI fwd.

ACTACCATGGCAAGGCAATTTGAGTGTTGGAG

Y71G12B.25_HindIII rev.

TACTAAGCTTTCAATGGTCCAATGGCTCAC

pghm-1_NcoI fwd.

TACTCCATGGAAACAGGAACCCGATGAGAC

pghm-1_HindIII rev.

ATGCAAGCTTGGCTTCACAAACAGATCAACAG

C53H9.3_NcoI fwd.

ATCTCCATGGCAATCCCTTAATTCTTTCCAGA

C53H9.3_HindIII rev.

ATCTAAGCTTCTTGATCCTTACAACGGGTAG

M01D7.4_BglII fwd. (tag-96 fwd.)

TACTAGATCTTCGCCTCAAAGAAATTCAAACC

M01D7.4_SalI rev. (tag-96 rev.)

TGATGTCGACTGCGATGACTCTCGTTCATTAG

Suppl. Table 4 (continued)
Primer name

Primer sequence 5’-3’

Y71G12A.3_NcoI fwd. (tub-2 fwd.)

ATCACCATGGGTTTGTTAAGCACTGCCCTAT

Y71G12A.3_HindIII rev. (tub-2 rev.)

TACTAAGCTTTGGCTACTGAAGCGCTAGTG

Y51F10.4_BglII fwd.

TACTAGATCTAGGAGAGGCAGCATCAGAAG

Y51F10.4_SalI rev.

TACTGTCGACGCTTAAAGCATTTCTGGCAAC

Y51F10.10_NcoI fwd. (spe-48 fwd.)

TACTCCATGGCGTTCAGTAGACACAAAGGAAGAC

Y51F10.10_HindIII rev. (spe-48 rev.) TACTAAGCTTGATGAAACGTTGCCGTTCTTG

Data File 1
# Chr Position Reference Change Type

Homoz Quality Coverage Gene_name Bio_type

Effect
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

V/L

Gtc/Ctc

0

I/V

Atc/Gtc

0

I

1647223 C

G

SNP

Hom

80.72

3

mab-20

I

1648246 T

C

SNP

Hom

404.04

11

mab-20

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

I

1649294 A

C

SNP

Hom

174.42

7

mab-20

UTR_3_PRIME: 41 bases from CDS

I

1649298 C

T

SNP

Hom

214.39

8

mab-20

UTR_3_PRIME: 37 bases from CDS

I

1649399 A

G

SNP

Hom

77.6

3

mab-20

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

F/S

tTt/tCt

0

I

1653522 C

A

SNP

Hom

486.38

13

Y71G12B.18 protein_coding

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

H/Q

caC/caA

1

I

1660980 A

T

SNP

Hom

446.38

12

Y71G12B.33 protein_coding

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

L/M

Ttg/Atg

1

I

1667646 T

C

SNP

Hom

443.35

12

Y71G12B.17 protein_coding

UTR_5_PRIME: 84 bases from TSS

I

1670189 *

INS

Hom

124.21

8

Y71G12B.23 protein_coding

UTR_3_PRIME: 21 bases from CDS

I

1673156 C

SNP

Hom

348.73

11

Y71G12B.35 protein_coding

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
UTR_5_PRIME: 268 bases from TSS

A

Semaphorin

old/new Old/New Codon Human
AA
codon Degen orthologs

gGa/gTa

0

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

Y/H

Tat/Cat

0

R/K

aGa/aAa

0

I

1680477 G

A

SNP

Hom

420.86

12

drag-1

1682968 T

C

SNP

Hom

324.04

9

drag-1

I

1687806 C

T

SNP

Hom

287.08

8

Y71G12B.31 protein_coding

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

I

1698160 C

T

SNP

Hom

247.11

7

ubc-3

UTR_5_PRIME: 193 bases from TSS

I

1701041 *

INS

Hom

406.03

15

ubc-3

I

1715498 G

SNP

Hom

324.04

9

atg-5

I

1715525 *

DEL

Hom

268.22

11

atg-5

I

1731010 A

I

1740691 *

I
I
I

1763076 G
1766320 *
1771464 *

I

1771511 *

I
I
I
I
I
I

1801557
1801727
1802798
1803484
1803485
1803997

C
A
A
A
A
G

T

T

T
+C

A
G
G
G
G
T

Sma/Mab
regulator

E2

+
G/V

I

+

+
+

+

UTR_3_PRIME: 252 bases from CDS
autophagy
t i

UTR_3_PRIME: 101 bases from CDS

+

UTR_3_PRIME: 128 bases from CDS

SNP

Hom

117.15

4

tln-1, unc-35 talin

INS

Hom

197.16

8

mppa-1

SNP
INS
DEL

Hom
Hom
Hom

195.35
356.8
141.44

6
10
7

Mito Processing UTR_3_PRIME: 74 bases from CDS
Peptidase Alpha
SynMuvB proline NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
lin-65
rich
lin-65
UTR_3_PRIME: 289 bases from CDS
Y71G12B.25 protein_coding UTR_3_PRIME: 80 bases from CDS

INS

Hom

244.19

14

Y71G12B.25

SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP

Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom

142.91
415.92
183.84
322.47
322.47
272.24

6
12
7
12
12
8

Y71G12B.5
Y71G12B.5
Y71G12B.5
Y71G12B.5
Y71G12B.5
Y71G12B.5

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

N/I

aAc/aTc

0

+
A/S

Gct/Tct

0

P/T
S/G
I/V
I/M
M/V
R/L

Cct/Act
Agt/Ggt
Att/Gtt
atA/atG
Atg/Gtg
cGg/cTg

0
0
0
2
0
0

UTR_3_PRIME: 33 bases from CDS
protein_coding

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING

+

I
I
I

1804164 A
1811285 G
1823449 C

I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I

1825924
1832531
1841231
1841245
1846453
1850251
1850423
1874807
1879747
1894681
1910488
1917998
1941145
1941368
1945085
1950653

I
I

1953467 T
1958466 C

*
G
C
T
T
C
*
T
A
C
T
A
A
A
*
*

G
A
A

A
T
C
C
G
G
G
T
G
C
C
G

C
T

SNP
SNP
SNP

Hom
Hom
Hom

438.38
285.65
445.64

12
8
12

Y71G12B.5
pghm-1
chaf-2

DEL
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
INS
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
SNP
DEL
DEL

Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom
Hom

347.6
401.01
155.25
194.5
167.29
350.74
151.46
205.74
194.91
144.86
38.39
482.79
164.26
189.28
114.12
305.02

11
11
6
7
5
10
8
6
6
6
2
13
5
6
9
18

Y71G12B.1
C53H9.3
egl-30
egl-30
tag-96
tag-96
tag-96
tub-2
tub-2
Y71G12A.4
trpp-10
trpp-10
Y51F10.4
Y51F10.4
Y51F10.4
spe-48

SNP
SNP

Hom
Hom

228.43
434.73

7
13

spe-48
spe-48

NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
extented lifespan NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
chromatin
UTR_5_PRIME: 7 bases from TSS
assembly
UTR_3_PRIME: 17 bases from CDS
protein_coding UTR_5_PRIME: 51 bases from TSS
G protein alpha UTR_3_PRIME: 341 bases from CDS
UTR_3_PRIME: 355 bases from CDS
subunit
protein_coding NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
galactokinase
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
UTR_3_PRIME: 19 bases from CDS
Tubby-related
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
protein_coding NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
protein_coding NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
protein_coding NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
UTR_3_PRIME: 51 bases from CDS
ubiquitinUTR_3_PRIME: 122 bases from CDS
associated protein NON_SYNONYMOUS_CODING
UTR_5_PRIME: 10 bases from TSS

T/A
V/I

Acc/Gcc
Gtc/Atc

0
0
+
+
+

F/S
D/E

tTc/tCc
gaC/gaG

0
1

+

V/G
T/A
G/E
F/L
Q/H
T/P
E/G

gTt/gGt
Act/Gct
gGg/gAg
ttT/ttG
caA/caC
Acg/Ccg
gAa/gGa

0
0
0
1
1
0
0

+

K/E

Aaa/Gaa

0

+
+

