bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Vesicle-associated Pseudomonas aeruginosa leucine aminopeptidase modulates bacterial
biofilms grown on host cellular substrates

Caitlin N. Esoda1 and Meta J. Kuehn1,2*

1

Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology; 2Department of Biochemistry, Duke

University, Durham NC 27710

* Corresponding author
kuehn@duke.edu

Keywords: extracellular membrane vesicle, M28 metalloprotease, OMV, Gram-negative
bacteria, microbial pathogenesis, lung biofilm, cystic fibrosis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa, known as one of the leading causes of morbidity and mortality in
cystic fibrosis (CF) patients, secretes a variety of virulence-associated proteases. These
enzymes have been shown to contribute significantly to P. aeruginosa pathogenesis and biofilm
formation in the chronic colonization of CF patient lungs, as well as playing a role in infections of
the cornea, burn wounds and chronic wounds. Our lab has previously characterized a secreted
P. aeruginosa peptidase, PaAP, that is highly expressed in chronic CF isolates. This leucine
aminopeptidase is not only secreted solubly, it also associates with bacterial outer membrane
vesicles (OMVs), structures known for their contribution to virulence mechanisms in a variety of
Gram-negative species and one of the major components of the biofilm matrix. With this in
mind, we hypothesized that PaAP may play a role in P. aeruginosa biofilm formation. Using a
lung epithelial cell/bacterial biofilm coculture model, we show that PaAP deletion in a clinical P.
aeruginosa background leads to increased early biofilm formation. We additionally found that
only native vesicle-bound PaAP, as opposed to its soluble forms, could reconstitute the original
PaAP-mediated inhibition phenotype, and that the PaAP-containing vesicles could disperse preformed biofilm microcolonies of Klebsiella pneumoniae, another lung pathogen. These data
provide the basis for future work into the mechanism behind PaAP-OMV mediated bacterial
microcolony dispersal and the application of these findings to clinical anti-biofilm research.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
The Gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa is a prominent opportunistic
pathogen capable of causing both acute and chronic disease in a variety of compromised hosts.
P. aeruginosa is most well known as a leading cause of morbidity and mortality in cystic fibrosis
(CF) patients1. In these individuals, the pathogen establishes chronic, biofilm-based infections
that may persist for decades in the unique, mucous-rich environment of the CF lung. In addition
to lung tissue, P. aeruginosa forms biofilms on a wide range of substrates relevant to human
infection, including corneal and skin tissue, as well as soil and water reservoirs and hospital
surfaces, which can contribute to infection initiation and spread2.
P. aeruginosa is considered a model organism for the study of biofilm formation, and
many of the cellular and matrix components contributing to this mode of growth have been
studied previously3–5. The process of forming biofilm communities has also been characterized,
revealing distinct growth phases. First the bacteria settle and attach onto a suitable host tissue
or abiotic surface, then they begin to form stationary microcolonies and secrete extrapolymeric
substance (EPS) to form a dense matrix. This matrix contains a variety of polysaccharides, as
well as proteins, lipids, OMVs, and eDNA4,6; however, the mechanisms by which many of these
secreted bacterial components specifically affect microcolony growth and development remain
unclear.
As with other extracellular pathogens, P. aeruginosa secretes many of its virulence
determinants into the extracellular milieu to affect interactions with the host, including those in
the biofilm matrix. Interestingly, many of the virulence factors secreted specifically by P.
aeruginosa demonstrate proteolytic activities7–9. These enzymes, including elastase, protease
IV, and alkaline protease, act on both bacterial and host proteins to directly impact hostpathogen interactions. For example, purified elastase has been found to cleave fibrin, laminin,
various immunoglobulins, and components of the complement system10. This activity not only
interferes with host defense mechanisms but may also impact host epithelial junctions, allowing

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the bacteria entrance to otherwise inaccessible tissues. These proteases can additionally aid in
biofilm formation and antibiotic resistance11. Based on the importance of known virulenceassociated, secreted proteases in P. aeruginosa biofilm formation, it follows that other proteases
in the secretome, many of which have not been fully characterized, may also play a role in these
processes.
With the goal of identifying factors that may contribute to chronic infections, our lab
compared secretome protein expression profiles of clinical P. aeruginosa isolates from
chronically infected CF patients to those of highly passaged laboratory and environmental
strains. Several proteins were identified as being more highly expressed in all the clinical
strains, indicating their potential involvement in virulence and chronic infection mechanisms.
Among the proteins identified was aminopeptidase PA2939, known as PaAP (Pseudomonas
aeruginosa aminopeptidase)12.
Cahan et al. first described the proteolytic activity of PaAP in P. aeruginosa supernatants
and classified it as a leucine aminopeptidase and a member of the M28 family of
metalloproteases9. PaAP expression is regulated through quorum sensing (QS) mechanisms,
and the protein is secreted via the Pseudomonas type II Xcp secretion pathway13. Initially, PaAP
enters the extracellular environment as a 536 amino acid proenzyme. It is then processed by a
variety of extracellular proteases at the C terminus to activate its enzymatic activity, and finally
undergoes auto-processing at its N-terminus to create a 56 kDa, enzymatically active product14.
It can be further processed extracellularly into several smaller, active products ranging from 55
kDa to 26 kDa. Outside of the cell, PaAP is found both soluble in the extracellular environment
and as an abundant component of outer membrane vesicles (OMVs)12.
OMVs are formed from the envelope of Gram-negative bacteria and are small, discrete
extracellular structures containing distinct membrane protein, lipid, and soluble periplasmic
content15. They are known to interact with the external environment, including host tissues16.
Vesicles produced by many Gram-negative pathogens, including P. aeruginosa, can elicit host

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

immune responses, and many also serve as delivery mechanisms for bacterial virulence
factors16. Of particular importance to our studies, OMVs have been implicated in the process of
biofilm formation6,15,17. Schooling et al. demonstrated that OMVs are present in P. aeruginosa
biofilm matrix and that bacteria in biofilms exhibit higher OMV production rates as compared to
planktonic cells18. When these biofilm-derived vesicles were analyzed, PaAP was found to be
one of the most abundant proteins 19.
Bacterial density, as communicated through quorum sensing, is known to be an
important regulatory facet of biofilm development20. Not only is PaAP expression regulated by
quorum sensing, the XCP type II secretion system that secretes PaAP is also QS-regulated13. In
addition, when P. aeruginosa was cultured on host epithelial cells, PaAP expression was found
to increase significantly21 suggesting that PaAP may play a role in biofilm formation on the host
cells. Together, these data suggest PaAP’s potential role in fine-tuned pathogenesis processes,
including biofilm formation and infection.
In this study, we report on the role of the secreted P. aeruginosa leucine aminopeptidase
on biofilms formed on both abiotic and host cellular substrates. Using a coculture model in
which single-species bacterial biofilms are formed on a confluent layer of host cells, we show
that PaAP expression inhibits the formation of early biofilms on lung epithelial cells. Additionally,
we characterize microcolony architecture and the vesicular components required for PaAP’s
inhibitory activity against coculture biofilms. Finally, we investigate the broad impact of the
PaAP-containing OMVs on biofilm development by non-self bacteria. These data provide novel
insight into how the P. aeruginosa aminopeptidase can modulate clinically-relevant bacterial
biofilms.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials and Methods

Bacterial strains and cell culture methods
P. aeruginosa strains used include the laboratory strain PAO1 (Pf1 phage-cured from our lab
collection) and minimally passaged, non-mucoid cystic fibrosis clinical isolates CF2, CF3, and
S470 as well as the previously-described isogenic mutants12,22. To generate fluorescent strains,
we transformed bacteria with the dTomato expression plasmid, p67T123. Klebsiella pneumoniae
strain 43816 was obtained from ATCC. A549 human lung epithelia carcinoma cells (ATCC CCL185)

were

grown

in

F-12K

media

containing

10%

fetal

bovine

serum

plus

penicillin/streptomycin/fungizone. Unless specifically mentioned, all reagents were obtained
from Sigma-Aldrich.

Abiotic biofilm quantitation
Bacterial cultures were grown overnight in LB (Luria Broth (MILLER), Millipore-Sigma) (37°C,
200 rpm) with antibiotics if appropriate. The cultures were vortexed for 15 sec and diluted
1:1000 in M63 minimal media (supplemented with 1 mM magnesium sulfate, 0.2% glucose, and
0.5% casamino acids as outlined previously24) with no antibiotics. Aliquots of the diluted culture
(100 mL/well) were incubated in five 96-well flat bottom polystyrene dishes (VWR) for 0, 2, 6,
10, or 24 h at 37°C with no shaking and evaluated using a static biofilm quantitation assay24.
Briefly, at the incubation endpoint, the plate was washed out using distilled water (dH20). After
three washes, 150 mL of 1% aqueous Crystal Violet solution was added to each well and the
samples were incubated for 10 min at room temperature. The stained wells were washed three
times using dH20, 200 mL of 30% aqueous acetic acid was added to solubilize the dye, and the
OD495 was measured.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abiotic biofilm imaging
Glass coverslips were placed in 12-well polystyrene dishes (VWR) at an angle and sterilized
with a UV light for 20 min. Bacterial cultures were grown (overnight, shaking, 37°C) in LB
containing the appropriate antibiotics. Cultures were vortexed for 15 sec and diluted 1:1000 in
M63 minimal media with no antibiotics. A portion (1 mL) was added to each well of the 12-well
dish containing the coverslips, and the cultures were incubated for 5 or 24 h, without shaking at
37°C. The coverslips were removed from the cultures and briefly rinsed in dH20. The coverslips
were then mounted on glass slides and the biofilm structures examined using a Zeiss 780
inverted confocal microscope. Biomass was calculated using Comstat 2.1.

qRT-PCR
Abiotic or coculture biofilms were grown for the indicated times as described. For coculture
biofilms, supernatants were removed and 1 mL of Trizol was added to each sample to lyse both
bacterial and A549 cells. For abiotic biofilms, 3 mL/well of cultures incubated in 6-well
polystyrene dishes (VWR) were used to obtain sufficient biofilm material for analysis over the
given time course. These samples were pipetted extensively to partially homogenize them and
transferred to 15 mL conical tubes, in which the bacteria were pelleted. Trizol (1 mL, Invitrogen)
was used to lyse each sample. A standard Trizol extraction was performed as described by the
Invitrogen protocol, and RNA was extracted from the aqueous phase. The RNA was
reprecipitated using 3 M sodium acetate for further purification and resuspended in dH20. RNA
samples were then DNase treated and reverse transcribed using the Applied Biosystems HighCapacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit protocol. Applied Biosystems Power Sybr Green PCR
Master Mix was used to prepare the samples, and they were analyzed on a StepOne Plus realtime PCR machine (Applied Biosystems). ∆CT values were calculated relative to proC as a
housekeeping control. Planktonic S470 ∆PaAP samples were used as a negative control, and
relative expression was calculated against planktonic S470 WT samples, with samples prepared

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

as for abiotic biofilm RNA from 5 mL overnight cultures in LB. Forward (F) and Reverse (R)
primers

used

in

this

study:

ATCACCACGTTGTTCGGGTT,

PaAP-F:

proC-F:

GTGGTACGCAAGAAGACCGA,

CAGGCCGGGCAGTTGCTGTC

,

PaAP-R:
proC-R:

GGTCAGGCGCGAGGCTGTCT25.

Coculture assay
A549 cells were grown in MatTek glass bottom 3.5 mm tissue culture treated dishes for 10 days
at 37°C in 5% CO2, with media changes every two days. Bacterial cultures were grown
overnight in LB with the appropriate antibiotics, 1 mL of the culture was pelleted and
resuspended in 1 mL sterile PBS (137 mM NaCl; 2.7 mM KCl; 10 mM Na2HPO4; 2 mM KH2PO4;
pH 7.4). To fully resuspend the bacterial samples and reduce aggregation, each was passed
through a 1 inch, 26-1/2G needle tip, 10 times. The OD600 was measured and conversion values
were calculated to determine the number of cells/OD600 for each strain. For all following
experiments, the OD600 was used to determine cell counts and multiplicity of infection (MOI).
The bacterial samples were diluted in F-12K media (without antibiotic/antimycotic) and added to
the A549-containing wells at MOI 30. The cocultures were incubated for 1h (37°C, 5% CO2) to
allow the bacteria to attach to the cell surface. The cocultures were then washed three times
with sterile PBS, and the media was replaced with F-12K containing 0.4% L-arginine. The
cultures were incubated for an additional 4 h at 37°C and the media was replaced with
microscopy-grade media (Sigma DMEM without Phenol Red, supplemented with 0.4%
arginine). Images were taken on a Zeiss 780 inverted confocal microscope. Biomass
calculations were completed using Comstat 2.1, and 3D colony models were created using the
3D viewer plugin for Image J. This protocol was adapted from previously published work26.

Congo Red staining

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To stain the biofilm extrapolymeric substance, a 100X Congo Red solution was made at 5
mg/mL in sterile PBS. The solution was sterile-filtered through a 0.22 mm PVDF syringe filter
(VWR). Media on the biofilm cocultures to be stained was replaced with 1 mL of microscopygrade media (Sigma DMEM without Phenol Red, supplemented with 0.4% arginine), and the
Congo Red solution was added to a final concentration of 50 mg/mL. The samples were
incubated at 37°C for 10 min, the staining media was removed, the samples were washed twice
with PBS, and the media was replaced with fresh microscopy-grade DMEM (Sigma DMEM
without Phenol Red, supplemented with 0.4% arginine). Microscopy images were then taken on
a Zeiss 780 inverted confocal microscope. Biomass calculations were completed using Comstat
2.1.

OMV isolation and supernatant fractionation
Bacterial cultures were grown overnight in LB at 37°C, diluted 1:100 into 1.5 L LB, and grown
(37°C, shaking) to OD600 0.9-1.1. Cells were pelleted (10,000xg for 15 min 4°C), and
supernatants were collected and concentrated to 100 mL using tangential flow with a 10 kDa
MWCO filter (Pall). The retentate was then filtered (0.22 mm, Pall) to generate cell-free
supernatant (CFS). For detection of PaAP in CFS by immunoblotting, 1 mL of CFS was
precipitated with 250 µL trichloroacetic acid (TCA), incubated at on ice for 1 hr, pelleted by
centrifugation (12,500 x g), washed with 1 mL acetone, re-pelleted (12,500 x g) and
resuspended in 0.75 M Tris-Cl, pH 8.8, and 1x SDS-PAGE sample buffer (1% βmercaptoethanol, 0.004% bromophenol blue, 6% glycerol, 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 50
mM Tris-Cl, pH 6.8), prior to SDS-PAGE on BioRad 4-20% Tris-HCl gels. For anti-PaAP
immunoblotting, gels were transferred to Amersham Hybond 0.45 µm polyvinyldifluoride (PVDF)
membranes (GE Healthcare), blocked with 1% non-fat dry milk in TBS (50 mM Tris-Cl, pH
7.6; 150 mM NaCl), and then incubated (4°C, overnight) with anti-PaAP antibody14 diluted
1:1000 in TBS with 0.1% Tween (TBST). Blots were washed three times with TBST, incubated

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(room temperature, 1 h) with goat anti-rabbit Li-Cor secondary antibody (Odyssey) diluted
1:40,000 TBST + milk, washed, and analyzed using an Li-Cor Odyssey CLx imaging system
with Li-Cor Image Studio software. ImageJ was used to quantify the anti-PaAP reactive bands.
To concentrate soluble proteins and OMVs from the CFS, ammonium sulfate was added to a
final concentration of 90%, dithiothreitol added to 0.1 M, and the samples incubated overnight at
4°C with stirring. The precipitate was pelleted (15,000xg, 15 min, 4°C) and resuspended in 10
mL 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0 (HEPES). The samples were then dialyzed in a ThermoFisher G2
cassette (10,000 MWCO) against HEPES, overnight at 4°C. The samples were further
concentrated using Millipore 10,000 MWCO centrifugal filters, and the soluble proteins were
separated from the OMVs using an iodixanol (Optiprep, Sigma) density gradient. Concentrated
proteins and OMVs were adjusted to 50% Optiprep/HEPES in 2 mL, and applied to the bottom
of the gradient tube, and subsequently layered with 2 mL of 40%, 2 mL of 35%, 4 mL of 30%,
and 2 mL of 25% Optiprep/HEPES. The gradient was centrifuged overnight at 40,000xg, 4°C in
an ultracentrifuge (SW 40 Ti swing bucket rotor, Beckman Coulter). Gradient fractions were
removed from the top in 1 mL aliquots, and the lipid and protein content for each fraction were
identified using FM4-64 and Bradford assays as described previously27. The OMV-containing
fractions (typically 1-5) and soluble protein fractions (typically 7-12) were pooled and diluted with
HEPES, then centrifuged at 40,000xg for 2 h to pellet OMVs and proteins and to remove
Optiprep. Protein and OMV pellets were resuspended in HEPES, and sterile-filtered (0.4 mm
PVDF, VWR).
rPaAP purification
rPaAP expression, purification, and refolding were carried out as described previously14, and the
refolded protein was concentrated using 10,000 MWCO Amicon filter units (Millipore-Sigma).
The concentrated material was then dialyzed using the same method described above, applied
to a S200 Sephadex ion exchange column, eluted with a gradient of 0-2 M NaCl, pH 7.6, at a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

flow rate of 0.02 mL/min, and 18- 2 mL fractions were collected. Fractions were assayed for
leucine aminopeptidase activity as described28, and analyzed by SDS-PAGE and Ruby staining
as described above. Fractions containing pure rPaAP were pooled and concentrated using
Amicon 10,000 MWCO filter units to ~0.5 mg/mL.

Complementation and dispersion experiments
For biofilm complementation assays, CFS, OMV fractions, soluble fractions, and rPaAP
samples were prepared as described above, total protein was measured by Bradford assay, and
aminopeptidase activity was measured as described above. For standard complementation
experiments, samples were added to cocultures with new media at 1 hpi. 50 ng total protein was
used for CFS samples, and 25 ng total protein was used for OMVs, soluble fractions, and
rPaAP samples. For co-addition experiments, 25 ng of PaAP- OMVs were incubated with 25 ng
of sPaAP or rPaAP for 10 min at room temperature prior to coculture treatment. In dispersion
experiments, 25 ng of OMV samples were added to cocultures at 4.5 hpi. For OMV
pretreatment of A549 cell layers, 25 ng of OMV samples were added to A549 cells for 15 min
prior to inoculation. For experiments matched by PaAP activity, samples were standardized to
the aminopeptidase activity found in 25 ng (by total protein) of PaAP+ OMVs.

Statistics
For all experiments, statistics were completed using GraphPad Prism t-tests unless otherwise
indicated. For microscopy images and imaging quantifications, representative results are
shown.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Leucine aminopeptidase expression does not affect biofilm formation on abiotic
substrates
Based on previous reports describing the high expression of the P. aeruginosa
aminopeptidase PaAP in both late-log phase and biofilm cultures, as well as the involvement of
OMVs in the biofilm matrix, we wanted to determine whether the presence of PaAP was critical
to biofilm formation. Several stages are observed during the process of P. aeruginosa biofilm
growth and development. Bacteria initially attach to the substrate, then a variety of matrix
components, including polysaccharides, proteins and eDNA, interconnect the microcolony
structure, generating protection from environmental and immune stresses. As the microcolonies
mature, bacterial cells disengage from the structure, to disperse and colonize in new
environments29. When grown in liquid media, P. aeruginosa forms biofilm communities called
pellicles at the air-liquid interface. As the bacteria attach to the culture container, this abiotic
biofilm development can be quantitatively assessed using a Crystal Violet stain24.
To examine the effect of PaAP on P. aeruginosa pellicle growth, we compared a clinical
isolate (S470 WT) that our lab previously found to exhibit high constitutive levels of PaAP
expression, with the previously described isogenic knockout strain (S470 ∆PaAP) that contains
a disruption of PA2939, the gene encoding PaAP22. Cultures of both strains were grown
statically in 96-well dishes, and biofilm density was determined at various time points. We
monitored growth up to 24 h when the biomass decreased, consistent with other static biofilm
models of P. aeruginosa24. No significant differences were seen in the biofilms at any of the time
points (Fig 1A) suggesting PaAP does not play a role in pellicle formation or stability.
Because the Crystal Violet assay only measures cell density and not differences in
biofilm structure, microcolony biomass and organization were also assessed by microscopy of
pellicle biofilms using S470 WT and S470 ∆PaAP strains expressing the cytoplasmic fluorescent

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

protein dTomato. These strains were grown in 12-well dishes containing glass coverslips
inserted at an angle. Biofilms formed at the air-liquid interface attached to the coverslips and
were examined using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM). Qualitative examination of
the microscopy images showed no differences between the strains with regards to the overall
structure of the biofilms or organization of the microcolonies (Fig 1C). Total biovolumes for each
image stack were calculated and the data confirmed that there were no significant differences
between the wild type and PaAP-deficient strains (Fig 1D).
To confirm that the lack of a difference in biofilm phenotype observed in the above
assays was not simply due to a lack of PaAP expression, PaAP RNA levels were measured in
the static cultures of S470 WT and S470 ∆PaAP at 6 h and 24 h post infection (hpi) using qRTPCR. As expected, the WT strains showed PaAP expression in the biofilms (Fig 1B), while the
∆PaAP S470 negative control did not (data not shown). Together, these data suggest that PaAP
deletion does not impact the bacteria’s ability to develop a biofilm on abiotic substrates or at the
air-liquid interface under our experimental conditions.

P. aeruginosa early biofilm growth and microcolony organization on host epithelial cells
is inhibited by PaAP expression
While PaAP did not affect the formation or architecture of P. aeruginosa biofilms on
abiotic surfaces, we wanted to investigate whether PaAP affects biofilm formation on a live host
cellular substrate as would be seen during P. aeruginosa acute or chronic respiratory infections.
When P. aeruginosa was cultured on host epithelial cells, in addition to a variety of virulenceassociated proteins, PaAP expression was found to increase significantly27, suggesting that
PaAP may play a role in pathogenesis or biofilm formation on host cells. To assess differences
in biotic biofilms, we adapted a previously developed biofilm coculture assay for use with A549
lung carcinoma cells26. When grown over the course of several days, these cells form fully
confluent cell layers that partially model the polarized epithelial monolayers that the bacteria

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

colonize during infection. Once grown to confluency they can be inoculated with bacteria and
bacterial biofilm formation can be assessed by CLSM.
When confluent A549 cells were inoculated with the fluorescent S470 strain and
incubated for up to 6 h, we noted significant damage to the A549 cells by 5 h, leading to breaks
in the cell layer. This was consistent with the previously described toxicity of P. aeruginosa
clinical strains to host cells30 and established time courses for static coculture biofilm models26.
Once these cytotoxic bacteria infiltrated the host cell layer, the microcolony structure also broke
down, as the bacteria were able to colonize the underlying tissue culture dish and migrate to the
air-liquid interface. Thus, this cellular substrate could be used to investigate clinical P.
aeruginosa strain biofilm development only through the early stages (up to 5 h post bacterial
infection) of microcolony formation.
We quantitatively compared coculture biofilms of fluorescent S470 WT and S470 ∆PaAP
strains at 5 hpi, and we observed significant differences between the two biotic biofilms.
Surprisingly, the PaAP mutant strain formed biofilms with substantially greater cellular biomass
compared to the WT strain (Fig 2A,B). Not only were these differences statistically significant,
they were also clearly visible by qualitative examination of the fluorescent biofilms. These data
provided the first evidence that PaAP modulates early biofilm growth under conditions
mimicking host infection.
To gain further insight into PaAP’s effect on biofilms, we examined S470 WT and ∆PaAP
microcolony morphologies (Fig 2D, E). In addition to their greater quantitative biomass, S470
∆PaAP colonies appeared to display greater cellular organization. Even at this early point in
biofilm development, characteristic mushroom-shaped colony structures were observed for the
PaAP mutant. The S470 WT microcolonies, by comparison, showed very little cellular
organization and were packed less densely. Based on these data, we can conclude that the lack
of PaAP not only increases cellular biomass, but also cellular organization at the microcolony
level during early coculture biofilm development.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To confirm this PaAP-dependent phenotype in a different strain background, we
compared the biofilm characteristics of PAO1, a laboratory P. aeruginosa strain commonly
studied in vitro, and the isogenic PAO1 ∆PaAP strain that harbors a transposon insertion in
PA2939. We note that our lab previously showed that OMVs isolated from PAO1 cultures show
very low aminopeptidase levels compared to S470 and other clinical P. aeruginosa isolates12.
Nevertheless, as with the clinical strain phenotype, PAO1 ∆PaAP formed significantly more
biomass as compared to the WT counterpart (Fig 2A, C). Our observations indicate that PaAP
is important to biofilm development, even in strains with low endogenous PaAP expression, and
that its role may be relevant to a broad range of P. aeruginosa strains.

Increased biofilm cellular density induced by PaAP deletion coincides with PaAP
expression and increased EPS production
The results from the coculture assay in Fig 2 revealed significant density and structural
differences between the biofilms formed by WT and ∆PaAP P. aeruginosa strains based on
bacterial fluorescence, and we were interested if PaAP also affected the overall extracellular,
biofilm matrix. The P. aeruginosa matrix is composed of polysaccharides, proteins, DNA, and
vesicles secreted by cells in the microcolony. Traditional imaging for biofilm matrices, such as
eDNA staining methods, could not be used in our coculture system due to background staining
of the underlying A549 cell layer. Instead, we adapted a Congo Red-based biofilm staining
protocol to specifically label amyloid fibers and negatively charged extracellular polysaccharides
in the P. aeruginosa matrix31. As shown in Fig 3 A and B, significantly higher levels of EPS
staining were observed for S470 ∆PaAP cocultures than for the S470 WT counterpart. No
staining was seen in the A549 cell-only controls. These data display the same trends observed
for the S470 WT and ∆PaAP cellular biomass quantifications, supporting the discovery that
PaAP expression prevents the formation of robust early biofilm structures.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

There are several mechanisms through which PaAP may be able to affect the formation
of early biofilms, including preventing efficient attachment of bacteria to the host cellular
substrate and affecting colony growth post-attachment. To detail the time course of the PaAPdependent phenotype, we imaged the cocultures at hourly intervals post infection. Directly
following the wash step at 1 hpi and up to 3 hpi, we observed a similar level of biomass from the
S470 WT and ∆PaAP strains. A significant phenotype did not develop until 4 hpi (Fig 3C),
suggesting that the aminopeptidase functions to limit microcolony growth and development,
rather than the initial steps of colonization and attachment.
Based on this timeline, it is expected that the observed phenotype developed in parallel
with the level of aminopeptidase expression. Indeed, previous reports found PaAP to be
regulated by the las quorum sensing system13,32, and thus PaAP expression would be expected
to increase as bacterial density increases in our experimental system. Using qRT-PCR, we
examined the expression of PaAP in S470 WT biofilms over time under the coculture assay
conditions. Consistent with quorum sensing density-dependent expression, our results show
expression of PaAP mRNA at 1 hpi, increasing steadily over the next several hours (Fig 3D).
Based on these data, it appears that the biofilm inhibition phenotype may depend on either a
threshold level of aminopeptidase or a specific microcolony developmental phase.

Addition of PaAP-containing outer membrane vesicles, but not purified aminopeptidase,
inhibits biofilm development by the PaAP deletion mutant
Based on its tightly-controlled, quorum sensing-regulated expression and secretion
pathways, PA2939 complementation using plasmid-based expression has proven to be
challenging and unfeasible; therefore, we performed biochemical complementation experiments.
Complementation was first tested using cell-free supernatants from mid-log phase cultures of
S470 WT and S470 ∆PaAP. We confirmed the presence and activity of PaAP in the S470 WT
supernatant and its absence in the S470 ∆PaAP supernatant by Western blot (Fig 4A) and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

aminopeptidase activity assays (data not shown). Equivalent amounts (by total protein) of the
sterile supernatants, from S470 WT and ∆PaAP cultures were added to the cocultures of S470
∆PaAP and A549 cells after the 1 hpi wash step, and incubated until the 5 hpi final imaging time
point. Addition of the PaAP-containing S470 WT supernatant significantly decreased the
bacterial biovolume in the coculture (Fig 4B), while the S470 ∆PaAP supernatant had only
minor qualitative effects on colony size and shape. These results provide strong evidence that
secreted aminopeptidase is responsible for PaAP-dependent biofilm inhibition.
The addition of WT cell-free supernatant to the ∆PaAP coculture mimics the effect of
endogenously expressed and secreted PaAP; however, WT P. aeruginosa supernatants contain
both secreted soluble and OMV-bound forms of the aminopeptidase12. To identify which form of
PaAP in the S470 WT supernatant was responsible for the observed decrease in S470 ∆PaAP
biofilm development, soluble proteins and OMV-bound factors were separated using iodixanol
density gradients. Light density fractions from these gradients are enriched in OMVs, whereas
more dense fractions are enriched in soluble proteins28. Also consistent with our previous
reports, aminopeptidase activity was detected in both the light and heavy fractions, representing
the OMV-bound (PaAP+ OMVs) and soluble forms of PaAP (sPaAP), respectively. The ability of
equivalent amounts (by total protein) of the light and heavy density fractions to inhibit S470
∆PaAP biofilms was assessed. Intriguingly, while the OMV-containing S470 WT fractions were
able to significantly inhibit biofilm development by S470 ∆PaAP, the heavier, soluble
aminopeptidase-containing fractions had no noticeable effect on biomass (Fig 4C). Experiments
using the different density fractions matched to aminopeptidase activity levels found in PaAP+
OMVs yielded similar results (data not shown), confirming that, regardless of enzymatic activity,
the soluble material was unable to inhibit biofilm growth. These data suggest that PaAPcontaining OMVs, but not soluble secreted aminopeptidase, inhibit early stages of biofilm
development.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To further corroborate our finding that soluble forms of PaAP cannot prevent
microcolony development, we purified and refolded recombinant P. aeruginosa aminopeptidase
(rPaAP) expressed in E. coli14. The specific activity of this preparation was similar to, though
slightly lower than, that of the native soluble enzyme purified from culture supernatants.
Equivalent amounts (by activity) of rPaAP and PaAP+ OMVs were added to the S470 ∆PaAP
cocultures to test their ability to modulate biofilm formation. Consistent with the results using
sPaAP, purified rPaAP was also incapable of disrupting the formation of robust biofilms by the
∆PaAP strain (Fig 4D).
We then hypothesized that addition of rPaAP or sPaAP may reconstitute the biofilm
inhibitory activity of the OMVs isolated from ∆PaAP cultures (PaAP- OMVs). These
rPaAP/PaAP- OMV and sPaAP/PaAP- OMV preparations had demonstrable aminopeptidase
activity (data not shown), but the co-additions failed to inhibit biotic biofilm development by the
S470 ∆PaAP strain (Fig 4D). It may be that interactions between the aminopeptidase and the
PaAP- OMVs were not natively reconstituted in our co-incubated preparations, as characteristics
of rPaAP and sPaAP possibly prevent their interactions with OMVs. Nevertheless, these data
suggest that native secretion and/or association with OMVs is critical for PaAP-dependent
biofilm inhibition.
To explore which components of the vesicles were critical to PaAP+ OMV-mediated
biofilm inhibition, OMVs were treated to disrupt the native vesicle structure. These results are
summarized in Table 1. Treatment with Triton X-100 is expected to disrupt the lipid membrane
structure and effectively liberate OMV cargo. Unexpectedly, detergent treatment significantly
increased overall biofilm formation in both the S470 WT and ∆PaAP OMV-treated samples. It is
unclear what caused this, as both soluble and insoluble factors could be liberated by detergent;
however, it prohibited us from assessing the effect of PaAP in a “burst vesicle” model.
To investigate if externally-localized protein is necessary for PaAP+ OMV-mediated
biofilm inhibition, we treated samples with a membrane impermeable enzyme, Proteinase K. We

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

found that Proteinase K addition increased the leucine aminopeptidase activity of the vesicle
samples. We note that this was not due to an off-target effect of Proteinase K on the
aminopeptidase assay substrate, as an increase in cleaved substrate was not seen in any
control samples, and sPaAP samples were fully degraded as expected (data not shown). Based
on the mechanism of PaAP’s extracellular processing and activation by other proteases14, it
follows that increased aminopeptidase activity may be caused by partial Proteinase K cleavage
of PaAP, leading to PaAP activation rather than expected degradation. This suggests that
Proteinase K has partial access to the aminopeptidase to cause activation, leading us to
conclude that it is not fully protected by the vesicle membrane. However, PaAP is protected
from full degradation by its association with the vesicle, and anti-biofilm activity was not affected
by the treatment.
In an attempt to eliminate full aminopeptidase and anti-biofilm activity from PaAP+
OMVs, the vesicles were boiled at 95°C for 15 minutes. This treatment is expected to degrade
all vesicular structures, membranes, and proteins; however, nearly one third of aminopeptidase
activity and some anti-biofilm activity remained. A combination of boiling and Proteinase K
further decreased aminopeptidase and anti-biofilm activity in the samples, but full degradation
was not observed until the OMVs were treated with boiling, Triton X-100, and Proteinase K,
which effectively liberated the aminopeptidase from any protective elements, allowing digestion.
The highly resistant nature of the aminopeptidase-vesicle association strengthens our
conclusion that PaAP anti-biofilm activity is innately linked to native packaging into outer
membrane vesicles. Additionally, the anti-biofilm activity of these particles directly paralleled
their aminopeptidase activity, providing further evidence that PaAP mediates OMV anti-biofilm
activity.

PaAP+ OMVs disperse early P. aeruginosa and K. pneumoniae biofilms

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Having determined that PaAP-containing OMVs are able to inhibit coculture biofilm
formation, we were curious at what point in microcolony development these particles act. To
investigate this, OMVs were added to cocultures either before inoculation (pre-treatment), at 1
hpi, or 0.5 h before the final imaging time point. Table 2 summarizes the findings of these
experiments. The results using A549 cell layers pretreated with OMVs prior to bacterial addition
allowed us to determine whether the vesicles interact with the host cells to prevent efficient
bacterial attachment to the host surface. Differences between the PaAP+ and PaAP- OMV pretreated cocultures did not develop until late time points, providing evidence that the PaAP+
OMVs did not influence the ability of bacteria to attach to the host cell surface. Consistent with
an effect on microcolony development rather than attachment, PaAP+ OMV treatments 1 h after
S470 ∆PaAP bacterial inoculation resulted in substantially reduced microcolony structures at the
3 h and 5 h post-infection time points.
To test directly whether PaAP-containing vesicles can act to disrupt preformed
microcolony structures, OMVs were added to the A549/S470 ∆PaAP cocultures at 4.5 h postinfection, 30 minutes before the final imaging time point. As seen in Fig 5A, the PaAPcontaining OMVs not only complemented the knockout phenotype, but the cellular biomass was
virtually non-existent in these samples. To demonstrate that this phenotype was not specific to
S470-derived vesicles, it was recapitulated with PAO1-derived OMV treatment of A549/S470
∆PaAP cocultures. This treatment also led to biofilm dispersion; however, consistent with lower
aminopeptidase expression by the PAO1 strain, PAO1 WT OMVs dispersed S470 ∆PaAP
biofilms to a much lesser extent (Fig 5A). Taken together, these experiments provide evidence
that OMV-associated PaAP is able to disrupt microcolonies already formed on biotic substrates
in addition to inhibiting their formation.
To further characterize the biofilm modulatory capabilities of PaAP-containing OMVs, we
also tested their ability to inhibit or disperse biofilms grown on abiotic substrates in multi-well
dishes. Equal amounts (by protein) of S470 WT and ∆PaAP OMV preparations were added to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

S470 ∆PaAP strains either during inoculation of the static cultures or 0.5 h prior to staining. At 2,
6, and 24 hpi, biofilm formation was assessed using a Crystal Violet stain. As shown in Fig 5B,
no significant difference was seen between the untreated controls and the vesicle-treated
biofilms in either the inhibition or dispersion Crystal Violet experiments. It should be noted that
these results were not surprising, considering the lack of phenotypic differences between the
wild type and the PaAP mutant using the abiotic biofilm assay.
During infections, such as occur in the lungs of CF patients, biofilms are often found as
polymicrobial communities. As such, components secreted by one species can impact the
microcolonies of other strains or species in nearby environments. Thus far, we have shown that
PaAP+ OMVs prevent and disperse biofilms of P. aeruginosa. To test if they could also exhibit
cross-species effects, A549 cell layers were inoculated with K. pneumoniae, a bacterium which
is often found with P. aeruginosa in cases of ventilator-associated pneumonia33. S470 WT or
∆PaAP OMVs were added at 4.5 h post-infection, and the cocultures were stained at 5 h with
Congo Red to examine both cellular and matrix biomass. As seen in Fig 5C, S470 WT vesicles
significantly reduced K. pneumoniae total biomass, while ∆PaAP OMVs had very little effect.
These data suggest that the OMV-associated P. aeruginosa aminopeptidase not only acts to
disrupt a process that is critical to the development of coculture biofilms by P. aeruginosa, but
also that it has the ability to impact the growth and development of another clinically relevant
pathogen.

Discussion
We set out to investigate the role of the PaAP leucine aminopeptidase in biofilm
development, as PaAP is one of the most abundant proteins in the P. aeruginosa biofilm
extracellular matrix and one of the major protein components of OMVs from clinical P.
aeruginosa isolates12,19. In this study, we have shown that deletion of the PaAP-encoding gene
did not affect the ability of clinical or laboratory P. aeruginosa strains to form biofilms on a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

polystyrene surface. However, when the bacteria were grown on a host cellular substrate, the
absence of PaAP significantly increased cellular and matrix biomass, as well as microcolony
density and organization. We discovered that the addition of the OMV-containing fractions of
wild type bacterial culture supernatants could reduce biofilm formation by the mutant bacteria.
Further, we showed that purified OMVs from PaAP-expressing strains not only were able to
inhibit the formation of early biofilms of PaAP-deficient P. aeruginosa, but they could also
disperse biofilms that had reached early levels of maturity. Their inhibitory activity was highly
resistant to degradation, and neither high density fractions containing native soluble active
aminopeptidase, nor purified active recombinant PaAP, nor a mixture of aminopeptidase with
PaAP- OMVs exhibited these inhibition and dispersion properties. These results suggest that not
only PaAP, but also the native vesicle context of PaAP, is critical to exert this behavior. Finally,
we provided evidence that PaAP-containing OMVs could disperse coculture biofilms of
heterologous bacterial species, specifically, pre-formed K. pneumoniae biofilm microcolonies.
Our work supports a hypothetical mechanism in which the aminopeptidase and the native
vesicle structure function synergistically to target bacterial microcolonies forming on host cells,
aiding in biofilm inhibition and dispersion.
A quite distinct role for PaAP in P. aeruginosa biofilm development has been reported
recently. Zhao et al. published data showing that deletion of PaAP resulted in abiotic biofilm
phenotypes: an increase in early PAO1 abiotic biofilm growth (up to 6 h post inoculation) and a
reduction at later time points (36-48 h)34. Consideration of their experimental design shows why
our results, which did not include an abiotic phenotype, and the mechanistic roles for PaAP
revealed in our two studies differ substantially. First, the bacteria in our experimental assays
had access to more complex carbon sources than the cultures used by Zhao et al., and second,
our assays were performed at 37°C instead of 30°C. Zhao et al. used Jensen’s media (a
bacterial growth media designed to increase P. aeruginosa elastase expression35). For the data
presented in this report, biofilms were grown in M63 minimal media supplemented with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

casamino acids and glucose; however, we note that we also compared abiotic biofilms of WT
and mutant strains grown in LB, LB/glycerol, and A549 cell culture media, with no observed
differences in phenotype (data not shown). Combined with the difference in growth temperature,
these nutritional differences would substantially impact the metabolic profile of the biofilm
bacteria and reveal the distinct role of PaAP under Zhao’s experimental conditions. In those
assays, PaAP’s activity is likely required for bacterial growth due to its ability to generate amino
acid-based carbon sources. Indeed, they discovered that during late growth phases, the
absence of PaAP led to death and lysis of P. aeruginosa.

Consequent to lysis, the cells

released a periplasmic enzyme, PslG, that enabled biofilm matrix digestion, a mechanism that is
likely used in the environment to liberate bacteria so that they can reach a more nutrient-rich
niche. By contrast, in our assay conditions the growth and death phases of WT and ∆PaAP
cultures were indistinguishable (Fig 1A). In sum, the mechanistic role for PaAP in P. aeruginosa
biofilm modulation described in these two studies appear to be substantially different: in one,
PaAP activity prevents starvation during nutrient deprivation and prevents the otherwise deathdependent release of an abiotic biofilm-degrading intracellular enzyme, and in the other, a form
of the secreted aminopeptidase has a biotic biofilm inhibiting and degrading activity.
Since PaAP was known to exist in two enzymatically active secreted states, OMV-bound
and soluble, we were curious whether one or both were active in dispersing biofilms. The light
density OMV-containing fraction, but not the heavier sPaAP-containing fraction of the cell free
supernatant of WT P. aeruginosa was found to harbor the early biofilm inhibitory activity. In
addition, the combination of rPaAP to ∆PaAP OMVs failed to inhibit or disperse S470 ∆PaAP
biofilms. These data suggested that subtleties of native vesicle packaging were critical,
potentially by impacting PaAP orientation or association within the vesicle and vesicle-mediated
delivery to the biofilm matrix. While future work will be required to determine PaAP’s localization
with regard to the vesicle structure, preliminary data from our lab, along with the fact that PaAP

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

is known to be secreted through the OM, suggest that during OMV biogenesis the
aminopeptidase localizes to the surface of OMVs22.
The inability of PaAP+ OMVs to affect biofilms grown under our abiotic experimental
conditions while dispersing partially maturing coculture biofilms of both pseudomonads and nonpseudomonads generated some further insight into the dispersal mechanism. The data do not
favor the possibility that the differences in biofilms generated by the wild type and mutant
bacteria are dependent on differences in host-derived biofilm factors secreted differentlially in
response to the two bacterial strains. First, there is no significant difference in cytokine
expression responses elicited for incubations with the S470 WT and ∆PaAP bacteria (data not
shown), and second, the WT OMVs are active towards pre-initiated ∆PaAP mutant bacterial
biofilms. Further, as we also observed activity against non-pseudomonas biofilms, it appears
that the factor targeted by the PaAP+ OMVs is a generally conserved feature of bacterial biotic
biofilms. Together, these data lead us to favor a model whereby PaAP+ OMV-mediated biofilm
dispersal relies on targeting a factor (or factors) governing biofilm integrity that is either
conserved and host cell-derived or conserved and host cell-elicited, but bacterially-derived,
which would be consistent with the activity of many anti-biofilm enzymes against the biofilm
matrix36.
Our data addressing the timing of PaAP+ OMV-mediated biofilm dispersal support the
following model, which outlines OMV interactions during the microcolony development stages
observed in our coculture experiments (Fig 6). The structural differences between these phases
directly impact the mechanism by which PaAP+ OMVs can access and disperse biofilms.
Pretreatment of the A549 host cell layer did not affect initial bacterial attachment, suggesting
that direct PaAP+ OMV-host cell interactions likely are not responsible for the observed
dispersal phenotype. Rather, PaAP+ OMVs demonstrated anti-biofilm activity at late stages of
coculture infection, at which point they likely have decreased access to the host cells and act to
disperse a developing matrix structure and multi-cellular architecture. PaAP+ OMV production

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

induced by quorum sensing inside the biofilm by WT P. aeruginosa would exhibit biofilm
inhibiting activity at this point. Further, based on the ability of exogenously added PaAP+ OMVs
to disperse pre-formed P. aeruginosa and K. pneumoniae microcolonies, we note that released
PaAP+ vesicles can target and dissociate developing biotic microcolonies that they encounter in
the environment. It is widely appreciated that OMVs can serve as vehicles to deliver bacterial
toxins and effectors to host cells, and that adhesins localized to the surface of these OMVs may
help target effector activity to specific host tissues37. Similarly, vesicles, which are known to be
located within mature biofilm matrices, may help to direct the bioactive OMV cargo to these
conserved microcolony and EPS structures.
Our data support the concept that increased PaAP expression observed in the clinical
CF isolates is functionally similar to decreased virulence factor expression, as it limits biofilms at
early microcolony formation stages, possibly to promote a less acutely toxic, long-term biofilm
infection. In addition, aminopeptidase expression and secretion would allow biofilm-restricted
cells to disperse and inhabit new, and perhaps more attractive, environmental niches. Typically,
proteins enriched in bacterial clinical isolates contribute positively to pathogenesis mechanisms
and biofilms are known to contribute to resistant infections, so PaAP’s ability to inhibit biofilm
formation appears to deviate from this expectation. However, bacterial factors have been
identified that can contribute to human disease in a counterintuitive fashion. Longitudinal studies
that follow the progression of P. aeruginosa strains from early colonization through chronic
infection have shown that the bacteria quickly evolve and adapt to the conditions found in the
CF lung, and that many of the genetic changes seen in chronic P. aeruginosa strains function to
decrease

overall

bacterial

pathogenicity32–34.

For

example,

mucA

mutations,

which

downregulate the expression of virulence-associated type III secretion systems, are frequently
observed35,36. Additionally, researchers have found mutations that decrease quorum sensing
and, notably for this discussion, biofilm formation32,33. The attenuation of virulence mechanisms

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

during infection allows pathogens such as P. aeruginosa the ability to thrive in the host by
reducing the possibility of an overactive immune response or host cell death.
In summary, the data presented here demonstrate that deletion of the P. aeruginosa
leucine aminopeptidase enhances early biofilm formation and microcolony development under
infection-like conditions. We have also shown that this process is mediated by naturally
secreted OMVs, and that exogenous addition of PaAP-containing OMVs is able to inhibit biofilm
growth and disperse previously formed biofilm structures formed by both self and non-self
bacterial species. Future studies will seek to determine not only the mechanism behind this
activity, but also its potential clinical relevance.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
We thank David FitzGerald (National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD) for anti-PaAP antibody
and rPaAP constructs, and acknowledge the contribution of the dTomato plasmid by Carol Kim
(University of Maine, Orno ME). We acknowledge funding from NIGMS: R01GM099471-01A1,
Duke University, and the NIH Cell and Molecular Biology Training Grant.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1. Gellatly, S. L. & Hancock, R. E. Pseudomonas aeruginosa: new insights into pathogenesis
and host defenses. Pathogens and disease 67, 159–73 (2013).
2. Moradali, M., Ghods, S. & Rehm, B. H. Pseudomonas aeruginosa Lifestyle: A Paradigm for
Adaptation, Survival, and Persistence. Frontiers in cellular and infection microbiology 7, 39
(2017).
3. Davey, M. & O’toole, G. Microbial biofilms: from ecology to molecular genetics. Microbiology
and molecular biology reviews  : MMBR 64, 847–67 (2000).
4. Mann, E. E. & Wozniak, D. J. Pseudomonas biofilm matrix composition and niche biology.
Fems Microbiol Rev 36, 893–916 (2012).
5. Laverty, G., Gorman, S. P. & Gilmore, B. F. Biomolecular Mechanisms of Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and Escherichia coli Biofilm Formation. Pathogens (Basel, Switzerland) 3, 596–632
(2014).
6. Wang, W., Chanda, W. & Zhong, M. The relationship between biofilm and outer membrane
vesicles: a novel therapy overview. FEMS microbiology letters 362, fnv117 (2015).
7. Hoge, R., Pelzer, A., Rosenau, F. & Wilhelm, S. Weapons of a pathogen: proteases and their
role in virulence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Current research, technology and education
topics in applied microbiology and microbial biotechnology 2, 383–95 (2010).
8. Suleman, L. Extracellular Bacterial Proteases in Chronic Wounds: A Potential Therapeutic
Target? Advances in wound care 5, 455–463 (2016).
9. Cahan, R., Axelrad, I., frin, Ohman, D. & Kessler, E. A secreted aminopeptidase of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Identification, primary structure, and relationship to other
aminopeptidases. The Journal of biological chemistry 276, 43645–52 (2001).
10. Galloway, D. Pseudomonas aeruginosa elastase and elastolysis revisited: recent
developments. Molecular microbiology 5, 2315–21 (1991).
11. Tielen, P. et al. Extracellular enzymes affect biofilm formation of mucoid Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Microbiology (Reading, England) 156, 2239–52 (2010).
12. Bauman, S. J. & Kuehn, M. J. Purification of outer membrane vesicles from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa and their activation of an IL-8 response. Microbes and infection 8, 2400–8 (2006).
13. Michel, G. P., Durand, E. & Filloux, A. XphA/XqhA, a novel GspCD subunit for type II
secretion in Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Journal of bacteriology 189, 3776–83 (2007).
14. Sarnovsky, R. et al. Proteolytic cleavage of a C-terminal prosequence, leading to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

autoprocessing at the N Terminus, activates leucine aminopeptidase from Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. The Journal of biological chemistry 284, 10243–53 (2009).
15. Orench-Rivera, N. & Kuehn, M. J. Environmentally controlled bacterial vesicle-mediated
export. Cellular microbiology 18, 1525–1536 (2016).
16. Kuehn, M. J. & Kesty, N. C. Bacterial outer membrane vesicles and the host–pathogen
interaction. Genes & Development 19, 2645–2655 (2005).
17. Cecil, J. D., Sirisaengtaksin, N., O’Brien-Simpson, N. M. & Krachler, A. M. Outer Membrane
Vesicle-Host Cell Interactions. Microbiology spectrum 7, (2019).
18. Schooling, S. R. & Beveridge, T. J. Membrane vesicles: an overlooked component of the
matrices of biofilms. Journal of bacteriology 188, 5945–57 (2006).
19. Toyofuku, M., Roschitzki, B., Riedel, K. & Eberl, L. Identification of proteins associated with
the Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilm extracellular matrix. Journal of proteome research 11,
4906–15 (2012).
20. Kievit, D. T., Gillis, R., Marx, S., Brown, C. & Iglewski, B. Quorum-sensing genes in
Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms: their role and expression patterns. Applied and
environmental microbiology 67, 1865–73 (2001).
21. Chugani, S. & Greenberg, E. The influence of human respiratory epithelia on Pseudomonas
aeruginosa gene expression. Microbial pathogenesis 42, 29–35 (2007).
22. Bauman, S. J. & Kuehn, M. J. Pseudomonas aeruginosa vesicles associate with and are
internalized by human lung epithelial cells. BMC Microbiol. 9, 26 (2009).
23. Singer, J. T. et al. Broad-host-range plasmids for red fluorescent protein labeling of gramnegative bacteria for use in the zebrafish model system. Applied and environmental
microbiology 76, 3467–74 (2010).
24. O’Toole, G. A. Microtiter dish biofilm formation assay. Journal of visualized experiments  :
JoVE (2011). doi:10.3791/2437
25. Savli, H. et al. Expression stability of six housekeeping genes: A proposal for resistance
gene quantification studies of Pseudomonas aeruginosa by real-time quantitative RT-PCR.
Journal of medical microbiology 52, 403–8 (2003).
26. Moreau-Marquis, S., Redelman, C. V., Stanton, B. A. & Anderson, G. G. Co-culture models
of Pseudomonas aeruginosa biofilms grown on live human airway cells. Journal of visualized
experiments  : JoVE (2010). doi:10.3791/2186
27. MacDonald, I. A. & Kuehn, M. J. Stress-Induced Outer Membrane Vesicle Production by
Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Journal of Bacteriology 195, 2971–2981 (2013).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

28. Ellis, T. N., Leiman, S. A. & Kuehn, M. J. Naturally produced outer membrane vesicles from
Pseudomonas aeruginosa elicit a potent innate immune response via combined sensing of both
lipopolysaccharide and protein components. Infection and immunity 78, 3822–31 (2010).
29. Monds, R. D. & O’Toole, G. A. The developmental model of microbial biofilms: ten years of a
paradigm up for review. Trends in microbiology 17, 73–87 (2009).
30. Finck-Barbançon, V. et al. ExoU expression by Pseudomonas aeruginosa correlates with
acute cytotoxicity and epithelial injury. Molecular microbiology 25, 547–57 (1997).
31. Larsen, P. et al. Amyloid adhesins are abundant in natural biofilms. Environmental
microbiology 9, 3077–90 (2007).
32. Nouwens, A. S. et al. Proteome analysis of extracellular proteins regulated by the las and rhl
quorum sensing systems in Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1. Microbiology (Reading, England)
149, 1311–22 (2003).
33. Riquelme, S. A., Ahn, D. & Prince, A. Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Klebsiella pneumoniae
Adaptation to Innate Immune Clearance Mechanisms in the Lung. Journal of innate immunity
10, 442–454 (2018).
34. Zhao, T. et al. Extracellular aminopeptidase modulates biofilm development of
Pseudomonas aeruginosa by affecting matrix exopolysaccharide and bacterial cell death.
Environmental Microbiology Reports 10, 583–593 (2018).
35. Jensen, S., Fecycz, I. & Campbell, J. Nutritional factors controlling exocellular protease
production by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Journal of bacteriology 144, 844–7 (1980).
36. Sharahi, J. Y. et al. Advanced strategies for combating bacterial biofilms. Journal of cellular
physiology (2019). doi:10.1002/jcp.28225
37. Ellis, T. N. & Kuehn, M. J. Virulence and immunomodulatory roles of bacterial outer
membrane vesicles. Microbiology and molecular biology reviews  : MMBR 74, 81–94 (2010).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1: OMV-bound PaAP enzymatic activity and biofilm inhibition phenotypes are resistant to
most physical and protease treatments

1

S470 WT and ∆PaAP OMVs were treated, as indicated, with combinations of 0.1% Triton X-100, 100
µg/mL Proteinase K, or boiling for 15 min at 95°C. Proteinase K and Triton X-100 treated samples were
incubated at for 1 h at 37°C. Combinatory treatments were done in the indicated order.
2

Aminopeptidase activity levels (±SD) were measured post-treatment, and values were normalized to
S470 WT OMV aminopeptidase activity.
3

OMV samples were added to S470 ∆PaAP biofilm cocultures 1 hpi and biomass was quantified 5 hpi.
Biomass was calculated relative to untreated S470 ∆PaAP cocultures (=: no significant increase; +:
significant increase; -: significant decrease). The number of +/- quantifies the relative biomass differences
(+/-: 5-25%; ++/- -: 26-50%; +++/- - -: >50%).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

+

Table 2: PaAP OMVs inhibit microcolony development and disperse pre-formed microcolonies

1

S470 ∆PaAP cocultures were treated with the indicated OMVs at the indicated times. For pre-treatment,
A549 cells were incubated with vesicles for 0.5 h before bacterial inoculation.
2
3

Samples were imaged at the indicated times and assessed for biomass.

Biomass is represented relative to the untreated S470 ∆PaAP controls for each experiment (=: no
significant difference; +: significant increase; -: significant decrease). The number of +/- quantifies the
relative biomass differences (+/-: 5-25%; ++/- -: 25-50%; +++/- - -: >50%).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1: Deletion of the PaAP aminopeptidase had no effect on the structure or biomass of
abiotic biofilms
(A) P. aeruginosa strains were grown in multi-well dishes for the indicated times and abiotic biofilms were
quantified by Crystal Violet staining (OD495). (S470 WT: light gray; S470 ∆PaAP: dark gray) (B) Relative
mRNA expression in S470 WT biofilms grown for the indicated times was calculated from qRT-PCR data
using the ∆∆CT method, with normalization to PaAP levels in planktonic S470 WT cultures. Pellicles
formed by S470 WT or ∆PaAP (as indicated) on glass coverslips after 6 h of growth were imaged by
confocal microscopy (C) and their biomass measured (D). For all experiments, n=3. *p<0.05; ns, not
significant. Scale bars: 200 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2: Deletion of the PaAP aminopeptidase increased the density, biomass, and organization
of bacterial biofilms on host cells
Biofilms were grown on A549 confluent cell layers in glass bottom dishes. The protocol was adapted from
27
a previous publication . (A) S470 and PAO1 WT and ∆PaAP strains were inoculated onto cell layers,
and images were taken at 10X magnification, 5 hpi and (B, C) the images were quantified. (D) For
cocultures as described for A, images of microcolonies were taken using 100X magnification at 5 hpi and
(E) quantified. For all experiments, n=3. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ****p<.0001. Scale bars: 200 µm, unless
otherwise specified.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: PaAP expression and the biofilm deletion phenotype develop coincidentally during the
observed time course
Bacterial biofilms were cocultured on A549 cells for 5 h, stained with Congo Red, imaged by confocal
microscopy (A) and total biomass was calculated (B). (C) Bacterial biofilms cocultured on A549 cells were
imaged by confocal microscopy at indicated time points. (S470 WT: dark gray, S470 ∆PaAP: light gray).
(D) For cocultured biofilms of S470 WT, PaAP mRNA expression was measured at the indicated time
points using qRT-PCR and calculated using the ∆∆CT method, with normalization to PaAP levels in
planktonic S470 WT cultures. For all experiments, n=3. *p<0.05, ***p<0.001, ****p<0.0001. Scale bars:
200 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

+

Figure 4: Addition of PaAP OMVs inhibited formation of P. aeruginosa coculture biofilms

∆PaAP CFS

B

60

Biomass (4m3/4m2)

50 kDa

+ Ctrl

Ladder

A

WT CFS

(A) Cell free supernatants from S470 WT (WT CFS) and S470 ∆PaAP (∆PaAP CFS) were TCAprecipitated, and aminopeptidase was detected by immunoblotting after separation of samples by SDSPAGE. A lane with rPaAP was run as a positive control (+Ctrl), and the migration of the 50 kDa molecular
weight standard is shown. (B) S470 ∆PaAP (∆PaAP) biofilms cocultured with A549 cells were treated with
CFS S470 WT or ∆PaAP at 1 hpi and the biomass of these samples and the S470 WT untreated control
were quantified. (C) S470 ∆PaAP biofilms cocultured on A549 cells were treated at 1 hpi with pooled
Optiprep fractions containing either OMVs or soluble products from S470 WT or S470 ∆PaAP CFS as
indicated. (D) S470 ∆PaAP cocultures were treated at 1 hpi with combinations of rPaAP, PaAP soluble
fractions, and/or PaAP OMV fractions from S470 ∆PaAP CFS as indicated. For all experiments, n=3.
**p<0.01, ****p<0.0001. Scale bars: 200 µm.

**
40

20

0

C

D

****

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5: PaAP-bound OMVs disperse pre-formed biofilms from both pseudomonads and nonpseudomonads
(A) Top row: OMVs from S470 WT or ∆PaAP cultures were added to S470 ∆PaAP biofilm cocultures at
4.5 hpi, 30 minutes prior to imaging. Bottom row: OMVs from PAO1 WT or ∆PaAP cultures were added to
S470 ∆PaAP biofilm cocultures at 4.5 hpi, 30 minutes prior to imaging. (B) S470 WT or ∆PaAP OMVs
were added to P. aeruginosa cultures in polystyrene dishes 4.5 hpi. CV staining was used to assess
biofilm formation. (S470 WT untreated: black bars; S470 ∆PaAP untreated: dark gray bars; S470 ∆PaAP
+ WT OMVs: light gray bars; S470 ∆PaAP + ∆PaAP OMVs: white bars). (C) K. pneumoniae cocultures
were treated with S470 WT or ∆PaAP vesicles at 4.5 hpi and biofilm formation was assessed by Congo
Red staining at 5 hpi. For all experiments, n=3. p-values were not significant. Scale bars: 200 µm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/587279; this version posted March 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6: Model of PaAP+ OMV interaction with bacterial microcolonies and host cell
substrate during biofilm coculture development stages
General stages of microcolony development are represented from left to right from time points
observed in our coculture experiments (hpi: hours post infection). PaAP+ OMVs from the
environment and those produced inside microcolonies access a conserved feature governing
bacterial microcolony attachment to and development on host cells. Orange boxes: lung
epithelial cells; Green ovals: P. aeruginosa; Red dots: OMVs; Green haze: biofilm matrix. The
increasing microcolony dispersal activity of PaAP+ OMVs during the time course of microcolony
development is depicted as an increase in red intensity below the figure.

