bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Osmolyte homeostasis controls single-cell
growth rate and maximum cell size of
Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Tom Altenburg1,* , Björn Goldenbogen1,* , Jannis Uhlendorf1 , and Edda Klipp1,
1

Theoretical Biophysics, Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin
*
These authors contributed equally to this work

Cell growth is well described at the population level, but precisely how nutrient and water uptake and cell wall expansion
drive the growth of single cells is poorly understood. Supported
by measurements of single-cell growth trajectories and cell wall
elasticity, we present a single-cell growth model for yeast. The
model links the thermodynamic quantities turgor pressure, osmolarity, cell wall elasto-plasticity, and cell size, using concepts
from rheology and thin shell theory. It reproduces cell size dynamics during single-cell growth, budding, and hyper- or hypoosmotic stress. We find that single-cell growth rate and final size
are primarily governed by osmolyte uptake and consumption,
while bud expansion depends additionally on different cell wall
extensibilities of mother and bud. Based on first principles the
model provides a more accurate description of size dynamics
than previous attempts and its analytical simplification allows
for easy combination with models for other cell processes.
S. cerevisiae | mathematical modelling | single-cell growth | AFM
Correspondence: edda.klipp@rz.hu-berlin.de

Introduction
Cells are exposed to hydrostatic pressure driven by the difference between inner and outer osmolarity. At the boundaries
of tissues in higher eukaryotes, cells often encounter a wide
range of osmotic changes due to cytokines, hormones etc.
Similarly, unicellular organisms such as the eukaryotic model
organism Saccharomyces cerevisiae or yeast, proliferate under a wide range of osmotic conditions, caused for example
by periods of rain or drought. In the presence of these changing conditions yeast has evolved strategies to maintain cellular integrity, ranging from regulating intracellular osmolarity
to constructing elastic scaffolds such as the cytoskeleton or
the cell wall. Water flow over the cell membrane tends to
equilibrate osmotic and hydrostatic pressure differences (1)
and, therefore, impacts cell size, depending on cellular deformability. Therefore, while on the one hand yeast has to
adapt its internal osmotic pressure to external conditions (2–
4) to prevent bursting, as well as critical shrinking, it also
has to regulate growth rate, depending on nutrient uptake and
subsequent metabolization. Nutrient uptake not only provides building blocks and energy for the synthesis of new cell
material, but also increases internal osmolarity and thereby
drives inward water flux, which in turn leads to an increase
in cell size. In walled cells, such as bakers yeast or plant
cells, the difference between internal and external osmotic

pressure is counteracted by turgor pressure arising from elastic expansion of cell wall material. Turgor pressure prevents
exaggerated swelling and maintains cell shape. Although reported values of turgor pressure in yeast range from 0.1 MPa
to 1 MPa (5, 6), more recent single-cell measurements suggested a value of 0.2 MPa (7).
While various studies have attempted to address aspects of
the impacts of osmo-regulation on single cell growth these
issues remain poorly understood. In a previous model, thermodynamic descriptions of volume and pressure changes
were integrated within the osmotic stress response system,
i.e. the high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) signaling pathway,
metabolism and gene expression (3). This integrative model
permitted predictions regarding the effect of several geneknockouts on volume dynamics. Another model integrated
further published data with biophysical and mechanical properties of yeast to describe the loss in volume immediately after osmotic stress (4). Both models explain volume regulation
following a hyperosmotic shock, but are not designed to describe the small and steady volume variations during normal
growth.
Even though various volume regulation models have been
proposed, a unified understanding of the interplay between
cell mechanics, turgor, volume, and metabolism during
growth and perturbations, e.g. osmotic shocks, is still missing. Existing approaches addressing these issues focus solely
on animal cells, where cellular integrity is maintained by the
cytoskeleton (8, 9). However, mammalian cells also face high
osmotic pressure changes and cell integrity of certain species
is supported by external structures such as matrix, mucus or
wax, which fulfill the same function as a cell wall.
Here, we present a single-cell growth model (SCGM), which
focuses on the interplay of three thermodynamic quantities:
cell volume, osmolarity and turgor pressure, and which covers growth and budding of single yeast cells as well as the
response to external osmotic variations. We further tested the
model against single-cell growth data from brightfield microscopy images and used atomic force microscopy (AFM)
to gain information on the cell wall elasticity during budding.
The model combines different concepts, such as cell wall mechanics in yeast (10–13) (14, 15), rheology, a subfield of continuum mechanics and broadly used in plant physiology (16–
19) and applied to fungi (20, 21), thin shell theory (22–24),
water homeostasis and dynamics (1, 25) and osmoregulation

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(in general or exemplified by HOG) (3, 26, 27). The SCGM is
capable of describing both drastic volume variations caused
by hyper- or hypoosmotic shocks, as well as relatively small
but steady gains in cell size due to growth. To demonstrate
that the SCGM can be combined with models for cellular
signaling and metabolism, we introduced the HOG signaling cascade model (27) as an exemplary pathway that plays a
major role in yeast osmoregulation (2).

to the cell volume. Additionally, volume expansion must
lead to a dilution of osmolytes, hence to a decrease in ci .
kuptake and kconsumption are the respective proportionality or
rate constants. Combined, we obtain the following simplified
description of osmolyte dynamics within the cell:
1
(kuptake G − kconsumption V − ci V̇ )
V
This basic description can be extended if a more detailed
metabolism model is at hand, as we exemplify below for
osmotic stress response by including the HOG pathway and
glycerol accumulation.
Having derived descriptions for volume and inner osmolarity, we can describe turgor pressure in the following (for details see Supplementary information). Given that turgor pressure equals hydrostatic pressure acting on the cell wall, the
main structural element of the yeast cell, the cell wall and its
mechanical properties must be considered in our description.
Note, for simplification, we assumed the cell wall to be a
thin spherical shell with radius r. The cell wall expands elastically or plastically depending inner pressure forces. While
an elastically expanded volume relaxes to its initial size when
pressure vanishes, plastic expansion is irreversible. Taking a
constant wall thickness into account the irreversible expansion can also been interpreted as cell growth, where new cell
wall material has to be provided by the cell wall synthesis
machinery. The Hookean element represents the elastic response, while the Bingham element represents the plastic response. Assuming a linear constitutive relationship for elasticity, the deformation of the cell volume, i.e. strain εHook ,
scales linearly with turgor pressure in a purely elastic cell
wall
ċi =

Results
The single-cell growth model combines formalisms for
turgor pressure, osmo-regulation and cell wall mechanics. Cellular volume varies according to material ac-

cumulation and water flux across the cell membrane, which
follows the osmotic and hydrostatic pressure gradient. For
volume flux and the conversion from osmolarity to osmotic
pressure we considered established formalisms described by
Kedem-Katchalsky and Boyle van’t Hoff (1, 3, 25, 27). To
this end, we defined total cell size Vt = Vos + Vb as the sum
of osmotic volume Vos , which is sensitive to changes in osmotic or hydrostatic pressures, and solid volume Vb , which
is not affected by water dynamics (predominantly macromolecules and organelles contribute to Vb ), see Fig. 1A. In
a confined system, such as a cell, the outward-directed water flux over the boundary, the cytoplasmic membrane, must
equal the negative change in volume of this system over time:
V̇os := −Jw
According to Kedem-Katchalsky, water flux Jw across the
membrane is proportional to the causative force, i.e. pressure
differences, and is thus defined as:

1 − ν Πt r
.
E 2d
Here E is Young’s modulus representing the elasticity of the
cell wall, ν is Poisson’s ratio, and d is thickness of the cell
wall. Consequently, water influx will lead to higher stress in
the cell wall and directly to larger strains. Note that cell wall
thickness is assumed to be constant and therefore depended
neither on the radius r nor on the time t.
In contrast to elastic deformation, plastic deformation, was
assumed to occur only above the critical turgor pressure Πtc
and instead of the strain, the strain rate is proportional to the
acting pressure with a factor φ. Whereby φ represents the
extensibility of the cell wall. The Bingham strain rate reads:
εHook =

Jw := Lp G(Πt + Πe − Πi ),
where Lp denotes the hydraulic conductivity of the membrane per unit area, G is the area of the cell surface, Πt is
the turgor pressure and Πe and Πi are the external and internal osmotic pressures. Turgor pressure is normally calculated under a quasi-steady state assumption of negligible
water fluxes (Jw = 0) and, hence, equals the difference between external and internal osmotic pressure. To capture the
dynamics of volume variation, we went a step further by neither constraining Jw nor the total number of particles in the
system, thereby establishing distinct mathematical descriptions for the three main quantities: volume, turgor pressure,
and osmolarity. Uptake and dilution of the osmotically active
compounds, such as nutrients and ions, determine the internal and external osmotic pressures according to Boyle van’t
Hoff’s equation:

ε̇Bingham =

φr
fm (Πt , Πtc ),
2d

(
Πt − Πtc
where fm (Πt , Πtc ) =
0

Πi = ci RT and Πe = ce RT
where ci and ce are the internal and external osmolyte concentrations, R is the gas constant and T the temperature. Osmolyte uptake ċi was assumed to be proportional to the cell
surface, over which osmolytes must be transported, while
consumption of osmolytes was assumed to be proportional

if Πt ≥ Πtc
.
else

To reflect elastic and plastic behavior of the cell wall, we
used a mechanical model of the cell wall in which a Hookean
and a Bingham element are coupled in series Fig. 1 A. Here,
total strain is the sum of individual strains of each element
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 1. The single-cell growth model (SCGM) predicts non-linear growth behavoir. A SCGM sketch. B and C Volume trajectory for an individual yeast cell. B The
SCGM (blue line) shows different volume trajectories compared to linear (green dotted line) or exponential (orange dotted line) growth. C Varying uptake and consumption
equally (ku/c = const.), leaves final cell size Vfinal (t → ∞) unaffected, but changes growth rate (green lines). Alterations of ratio ku/c affects final cell size Vfinal with Vfinal =
12π(ku/c )3 . SCGM is, as antimony model, available under: https://github.com/tbphu/volume_model/blob/master/volume_reference_radius.txt

dε = drHook/r + drBingham/r. Taking the time derivative ε̇ of the
total strain enabled us to combine descriptions for both mechanical elements. Solving the resulting equation (see Supplementary Material) for the change in turgor pressure over
time Π̇t we derived the following ODE for turgor pressure:
Π̇t =

Cell expansion is therefore mainly influenced by two processes: first, the control of internal osmolarity ci by uptake,
dilution and consumption of osmolytes, which together with
turgor pressure Πt drive water influx and outflux Jw and
hence determine water volume in the cell (Vos ), and second,
elasto-plastic deformation of the cell wall due to turgor pressure. The water influx Jw < 0 expands the cell wall elastically and thereby increases turgor pressure. When turgor
pressure exceeds the critical value Πtc , the cell wall starts
to yield, e.g. the cell wall expands irreversibly and the cell
grows. Yielding leads to relaxation of stress in the cell wall
and in turn to a decrease in turgor pressure, facilitating further influx of water. Hence, growth typically proceeds close
to, but not at steady state (Jw = 0) where water and osmolyte
influxes are balanced by turgor dynamics.

ṙ
Eφ
2 E d ṙ
− Πt −
fm (Πt , Πtc ).
2
1−ν r
r (1 − ν)

Models that share two of the three terms of this equation have
already been applied in other turgor-related models of (16,
17, 19, 28). In a comparison with the previously proposed
description of turgor in plant physiology (17) showed that
the additional term resulted from geometric description of the
cell as a thin spherical shell, in particular when calculating
the time derivative of the elastic element (see Supplementary
Material).

Summarizing, the basic SCGM comprises three coupled
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ODE’s for volume, turgor pressure and internal osmolarity.
Key parameters and initial values for simulation or analytic
solution are listed in Tab. 1. The temperature was set to
T = 303 K, i.e. the optimal growth temperature for yeast and
our experimental standard condition. The external osmolyte
concentration ce was set to 240 mM, the mean value for our
standard growth medium.
Considering a cell growing without any osmotic perturbations, the SCGM can be reduced to a simpler description of
cell size development. Simulations revealed that without osmotic stress, internal osmolarity ci and turgor pressure Πt
approach steady states. In this case the SCGM can be solved
analytically (Fig. 1A, Fig. S7). We obtained an implicit differential equation F comprising the time derivative of the radius ṙ(t), the time-dependent function of cellular radius r(t),
steady states and time:

is only valid for yeast cells in G1 phase (single cell without a bud). In other cell cycle phases, cells are combined
of two spherical compartments (mother and bud) with different growth rates (31), and are connected by a neck allowing
free exchange of osmolytes and water. Therefore, we coupled two SCGMs, one each for mother and bud (Fig. 2A), in
which both start with the same small initial volume, but with
a time delay tbudstart for the bud, leaving time for the mother
to grow. Hence, tbudstart represents characteristic cell cycle
length, e.g. the time between two successive bud formations.
The instances were coupled by allowing water flux according
to pressure differences and diffusion of ci between the compartments. The coefficients for both fluxes were arbitrarily
chosen such that water and osmolyte gradients vanish in the
considered time scale. Except for mechanical cell wall properties and initial geometry, both instances were similar with
equal kuptake and kconsumption . The assumption of similar mechanical properties of the cell wall for both compartments is
very unlikely, since alterations of the cell wall structure during budding were reported (32). In particular, chitin incorporation into the lateral cell wall is delayed in buds until after
septation. As potentially discriminating cell wall property,
we considered either the Young’s modulus E or the extensibility φ. Systematic analysis of the impact of varying E or φ
on bud growth revealed that only a strongly decreased Ebud
compared to Emother led to bud growth (Fig. S9), though at
the expense of mother growth. In contrast, when varying φ,
both compartments continued to grow (Fig. 2B), as long as
φbud was at least 101.5 times higher than φmother . Note that
we focused here on biophysical principles, instead of on the
complex biochemical processes governing cell division, such
as cell polarization and subsequent bud emergence.

SS
F (ṙ, cSS
i (r(t)), Πt = Πtc , t) = 0,

where cSS
is a quasi-steady state for internal osmolarity
i
(quasi-, because still depends on r(t)) and ΠSS
the steady
t
state for turgor pressure, which equals critical turgor pressure
Πtc during growth. Solving F (see Supplementary Material),
we first, identified a limes of cellular radius for long times
scales:
rfinal := lim r(t) = 3
t→∞

kuptake
kconsumption

.

and second, obtained an analytical solution for r(t). The
resulting expression for r(t) is rather complex (see Supplementary Material). Therefore, we approximated r(t) ≈ r̃(t),
yielding a function for the radius of a growing cell:
−kuptake RT

r̃(t) = rfinal − (rfinal − r0 ) e rfinal (Πtc +Πe )

(t−t0 )

Measurements of local cell wall elasticity of mother
and bud reveal a distinct difference between two
asymmetric growth processes in yeast, budding and
shmooing. As discussed above, a significantly lower elas-

,

where rf inal is the final cellular radius for long time scales t,
r0 is the initial radius at time t0 . The solution points out
that external osmotic pressure, critical turgor pressure and
internal osmotic pressure, as well as kuptake and kconsumption ,
dictate the trajectory of cell growth. For our solution it was
crucial to include the quasi-steady state cSS
i (r(t)). In this
way, the influences of kuptake and kconsumption on the quasisteady state of internal osmolarity could be propagated to
the radius description r̃(t). As shown in Fig. 1C, our model
suggests that final cell size depends exclusively on the ratio
ku/c = kuptake /kconsumption , but not on cell wall-related quantities. Scaling both rate constants equally while keeping ratio ku/c constant, scales growth rate, but keeps final cell size
constant. The growth dynamics r̃(t) depends additionally on
critical turgor pressure and external osmolarity. For hyperosmotic shock response, we derived another analytical solution
for turgor dynamics, which is related to the Merritt-Weinhaus
equation (30), i.e. the pressure-to-size relation of an ideal
elastic thin shell (Fig. S8).

tic modulus at the bud cell wall could drive bud expansion
in the model. Earlier, we reported that such localized softening of cell wall material occurs during sexual conjugation
in S. cerevisiae (7). To test whether both processes, budding and sexual conjugation, follow similar underlying principles, we applied multi-parametric atomic force microscopy
(AFM) on living yeast cells as depicted in Fig. 3A. From
the force-response curves of nano-indentation measurements
(Fig. 3B), we obtained the local Young’s modulus E. To compare mother and bud, we selected regions of equal size at
each compartment (Fig. 3C,D). We avoided strongly tilted
regions, compared to the scanning plane, and regions of previous budding events, so-called bud scars, which contain a
higher amount of chitin and are reported to be stiffer (33).
Intriguingly, bud cell walls appeared to be stiffer, not softer,
than their mothers’ cell walls (Fig. 3). From a linear fit, we
estimated a 1.3 ± 0.1-fold increase in the Young’s modulus
from mother to bud (Fig. S11). Although the apparent stiffness at the bud cell wall could be biased by different surface curvatures, a significant cell wall softening at the bud,
as measured for sexual conjugation, can be rejected. This

Coupled SCGM permits the description of combined
growth of mother and bud. Above, we have provided a

description of growth dynamics for an individual cell, which
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 2. Bud expansion driven by cell wall anisotropy and a possible protection mechanism against two-bud growing malfunction. A Two volume model instances
were interconnected via water and osmolytes fluxes. The coupled model accounts for different cell wall extensibilities φ between bud and mother. B Volume dynamics are
shown for mother and bud for three different extensibility ratios q = φbud /φmother . Bud expansion is possible only at q > 10. C To investigate two-bud growing mutants,
two bud instances linked to a mother cell were initialized with equal bud sizes. Both buds have identical volume dynamics. D Effect of unequal initial bud sizes: differences
are amplified and only the larger bud grows. The coupled SCGM is available as antimony model under: https://github.com/tbphu/volume_model/blob/SCGM/

volume_mother_and_bud.txt

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Table 1. Parameters and initial values.

parameter
rb0
0
ros
c0i
ce
Π0t
R
T
Lp
Πtc
d
φ
ν
E
kuptake
kconsumption

value
0.3
0.1
319.17
240.0
2.0×105
8.314
303.0
1.19×10−6
2.0×105
0.115
1.0×10−3
0.5
2.58×106
2.0×10−16
2.0×10−16

unit

description

source

µm
µm
mM
mM
Pa

init. radius (non-osmolytic volume)
init. radius (osmolytic volume)
osmolyte concentration (internal)
osmolyte concentration (external)
initial turgor pressure
ideal gas constant
temperature
membrane water permeability
critical turgor pressure
cell wall thickness
extensibility
Poisson’s ratio
Young’s modulus (3D)
osmolyte uptake rate constant
osmolyte consumption rate const.

assumption
assumption
calculated from turgor pressure
measured
(7)

J
molK

K

µm
sP a

Pa
µm
1
sP a

–
Pa
mmol
µm2 s
mmol
µm3 s

(3)
(7)
(29)
initial assumption, fit in Fig. 4
(7)
initial assumption, fit in Fig. 4
initial assumption, fit in Fig. 4

tensibility, we estimated a value of 0.57 ± 0.34 kP a−1 s−1
for the mother φmother and found that φbud needs to be at least
100 times higher. We could not determine a precise value
for the extensibility ratio φbud /φmother . However, profile likelihood and sensitivity analysis (Fig. S13) revealed that variation of φbud /φmother has no significant impact on other parameters.
For the ∆cdc42 mutant a probability for the emergence of
two buds was reported. Our model suggests that this probability (occurrence of multiple buds) is not only influenced
biochemically (e.g. by Cdc42p) but also by the the passive
dynamics in cell size described above. Therefore, the constellation of two small volumes connected to a main volume
establishes an additional layer of filtering out stunted buds.

reveals a distinct difference between two of the asymmetric
growth processes in yeast, budding and sexual conjugation.
Consequently, we focused on the extensibility as distinguishing feature between mother and bud cell wall.
Verification of the model against volume data from
light microscopy. To test whether the coupled SCGM cor-

rectly describes the growth of single yeast cells and to estimate otherwise inaccessible parameters, we measured the
growth trajectories of single yeast cells and used these to constrain model parameters. Cells were grown as monolayer in a
microfluidic device, allowing observation of individual cells
for long time periods (> 15 h). We tracked single cells in
microscopic bright field images using the software CellStar
(34) and manually determined the first bud emergence for
each cell (Fig. 4A). A bud neck marker (Cdc10-mKate2) was
used to identify pairs of mothers and corresponding buds and
to reconstruct the lineage (see Methods section). Knowing
the lineage enabled us to collect 21 coupled volume traces
for mother and bud. Since the time between first appearance of a cell and its first budding event varied greatly, we
did not fit the model to mean growth data, but to different
single cell traces instead . Fig. 4B and Fig. S12 show that
the coupled SCGM is able to describe the growth pattern
of single cells growing at different rates. For both traces,
mother and bud, six independent parameters (mean ± sd)
have been determined, presented in Fig. 4C. In addition to
the individual parameters initial radius r0 and time of bud
appearance, tbudstart , we considered two global parameters,
kuptake and ku/c and two compartment-dependent parameters
φmother and q=φbud /φmother . r0 was the fitted radius belonging to the initial osmotic volume of the later mother. With
t̄budstart = 117 ± 33 min the estimated mean cell cycle length
differed remarkably from the time when a new bud was
clearly recognizable for the first time (first green data point).
When analyzing estimated rates constants for osmolyte uptake and consumption, we found that the growth rate determining kuptake showed some variation between single cells
(1.59 × 10−16 ± 0.72 × 10−16 mmol µm−2 s−1 ). In contrast ku/c , which limits the maximum volume, showed very
little variation (0.82 ± 0.07 µm−1 ). Focusing on cell wall ex-

Analysis of volume trajectories from Garmendia-Torres et al. (35). So far the analysis of growth parameters was

based on 21 volume-trajectory pairs, which provided valuable information on the dimension of each parameter. However, for the extensibility ratio φbud /φmother only a lower
boundary could be determined and the relative small sample
size did not allow for decisive statements on the parameter
distribution. To increase the sample size and further challenge the cSCGM we searched for single-cell data with time
resolved volume information for mother and bud and found a
recent study by Garmendia-Torres et al. (35).
They reported a new microscopy-based method to investigate
yeast cell-cycle and cell-size progression in parallel, by monitoring volume and histone levels of individual yeast cells.
Using an automatized experimental setup they followed up
to 15.000 cell cycles for each of the investigated 22 cellcycle related mutants. This innovative approach of tracking the fluorescence of fast maturating HTB2-sfGFP fusion
proteins over time and assigning its intensity to distinct cell
cycle phases, allowed them to relate the volumes of mother
and bud at certain cell cycle stages to the time spend in each
phase. Although this analytic approach revealed intriguing
relations between cell cycle and cell size, it simplifies the dynamics of the cell size progression in the data. In particular,
they assumed linear growth during the budded and unbudded
phase. To shed light on this cell-size dynamics and to further
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 3. Local Young’s modulus of the cell wall is slightly higher for bud than for mother. A Experimental setup: entrapped haploid S. cerevisiae cells were scanned
using atomic force microscopy, whereby at each image position the force response to nano-indentation was measured. B Exemplary approach curve for one pixel along with
a Sneddon fit (blue). Obtained spatial information is shown for cell wall elasticity C and height D of a budding mother cell. For further analyses, the mean cell wall elasticities
from the least curved region of mother and bud ([M] and [B]) were used, avoiding regions of former budding events, bud-scars. E Mean local E at buds compared to mean
local E at mothers for 30 measurements on seven cells (same cells, same color). Dashed line: equal cell wall elasticities of bud and mother.

was followed at the same sampling frequency (every 3 min)
using bright-field and fluorescence microscopy and volumes
were calculated from cell contours, assuming ellipsoidal geometry. In contrast to our approach they used a super-folding
GFP fused to one of the histone 2B loci (HTB2-sfGFP) instead of a bud-neck marker to monitor the cell cycle stage and
to discriminate between buds and new born daughter cells.
Additionally using a self-developed MATLAB software Autotrack for automatized cell segmentation and linage tracking, enabled them to track and analyze thousands of cells.
The cSCGM was fitted to the provided volume trajectories
pairs of WT yeast cells, in the same manner as described
above. For better comparison with data 1 the data set was
limited to the first cell cycle of new born daughter cells

challenge the cSCGM, the model was fitted to the experimental data (hereinafter also referred to as data 2) provided by
Gilles Charvin. This allowed the comparison between completely independent data sets from different laboratories and
the analysis of data with a drastically increased the sample
size.
Data and data selection. The advantage of this data set, be-

sides its dimension, is the resemblance of the used experimental and analytic approach to the approach we used.
In particular, yeast strain background and culture medium,
BY4741 and synthetic medium supplemented by amino acids
and glucose, were similar. Furthermore, the proliferation of
single cells, confined to a plane using a microfluidic device,
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 4. Growth parameter estimation from time series of bright field microscopy images. A Cross-sectional areas of 21 single yeast cells were automatically detected
from transmission microscopy images and followed over time. Estimated volume increases of mother and bud were used to fit the model parameters: import rate of osmolytes
kuptake , import and degradation ratio of osmolytes ku/c , cell wall extensibility of the mother φmother , and the extensibility ratio of bud and mother φbud /φmother . Time of bud
start tbudstart and initial osmotic radius r0 were used as free initial conditions. Three exemplary sets of data and corresponding fits are shown in B (for the complete sets see
Fig. S12). Histograms of the resulting parameter values are shown in C. Except for φbud /φmother we could assign all of the parameters with low variability, despite the high
variability in the volume development in these data.

(N= 6079), i.e. cells with a replicative age of 0. Cells, defined
as outliers in the data set, were also neglected for further analysis. In contrast to data 1, was tbudstart no fitting parameter
but provided by the dataset. For 97 %of the 6079 cells, parameter sets were found for which χ2 was sufficiently small
(Fig. S15 ). Exemplary volume trajectories, representing data
and model fits, are shown in Fig. 5(c) and Fig. S14. Further
analysis was restricted to a reduced data set (N=4680), discarding all failed optimization runs, which yield ku/c < 1 and
χ2 < 50. The resulting distribution of the fitting parameters
and χ2 is shown in Fig. 5.

ues for plant cells (~ 1 × 10−10 /(Pa s))(17, 36). For each
maximum of φmother a group of parameter sets was selected,
for which φmother was close to these maximums, and examined for differences (Fig. S18). Nevertheless no difference
in parameter distribution could be observed. Furthermore,
screening of volume trajectories for which the estimated
φmother was either close to max(φmother |1) or max(φmother |2)
(Fig. S19, Fig. S20) revealed no common pattern for the two
groups. Whether the bimodal distribution of φmother results
from numerical issues of the optimization algorithm or reflects two distinct population could not yet be finally clarified.

Parameter distributions. Except for φmother the free fit param-

Interstingly, the ratio φbud /φmother (median (IQR)) was
comparable between data 2 (220 (150–300)) and data 1
(230 (130–8.1 × 105 )), underscoring that φbud needs to be
at least 100 times higher φmother , regardless the magnitude of φ, to facilitate bud expansion. Osmolyte uptake rate kuptake and ratio kc/u estimated from data 2
were slightly higher than estimates from data 1, with
kuptake = 3.0 (1.9–4.2) 10−16 mmol/(µm s) and kc/u =
1.4 (1.3–1.5) 1/µm, indicating a higher single-cell growth
rate and maximal volume for data 2.

eter showed a unimodal, though partially skewed, distribution
and their medians as well as their interquartile range (IQR)
are listed in Tab. 2, together with parameter estimates from
data 1. Although tbudstart was not fitted for data 2, as it was
provided by the data, the parameter is listed in Tab. 2 for
comparison.
The extensibility φ, which reflects the capability of the
cell for plastic cell wall expansion and readjustment of
the turgor pressure in the SCGM, varied drastically between data 1 and data 2. While φmother values obtained from data 2 followed a clear bimodal-distribution,
values obtained from data 1 showed no indication of a
multimodal-distribution. Both maxima, max(φmother |1) =
9.6 × 10−8 /(Pa s) and max(φmother |2) = 7.8 × 10−7 /(Pa s)
were at least two magnitudes smaller compared to estimates
from data 1 and thereby closer to reported extensibility val-

The initial volume of the new born daughter, i.e. a mother
with replicative age 0, is represent by its radius r0 . With
r0,1 = 1.2 (1.0–1.3) µm this radius was slightly smaller for
data 1 than for data 2, where r0,2 = 1.4 (1.3–1.5) µm. There
are several possible reasons for the discrepancy between the
r0,1 , r0,2 : differences in the genome of investigated strains,
experimental setup or the initial growth phase of the popu8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 5. cSCGM fitted reported volume trajectories (35) For 97% of the reported volume data for first-time mothers (N=6079) a parameter set for the cSCGM could be
identified. a) Histograms of fitted parameter, excluding parameter sets where ku/c < 1 µm or χ2 > 50 (N=4680, histograms of complete and reduced parameter set shown
in Fig. S15). b) Pearson’s correlation of best fitting parameters (ku/c < 1 µm, χ2 > 50) and measured maximal volume of mother and bud, presented as correlogram. max
Vmother and max Vbud where taken from the data. In c), two exemplary sets of measured and simulated volume trajectories are shown (additional 24 exemplary trajectories
are shown in Fig. S14).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Table 2. Estimated fit parameters of both data sets. tbudstart of data 2 was provided by the data. φmother showed bimodal distribution and was neglected in this table.

parameter

unit

kuptake
kc/u
φmother
φbud /φmother
r0
tbudstart

mmol
µm s
1
µm
1
Pa s

µm
min

median (IQR)

factor
10

−16

10−4
102
101

data 1 (N=21)

data 2 (N=4680)

1.4 (1.0–1.9)
1.21 (1.18–1.27)
5.5 (3.1–6.8)
2.3 (1.3–8.1 × 103 )
1.2 (1.0–1.3)
9.3 (9.3–14.3)

3.0 (1.9–4.2)
1.4 (1.3–1.5)
–
2.2 (1.5–3.0)
1.4 (1.3–1.5)
5.6 (4.1–7.4)

crease in volume and turgor and a drastic increase in ci (see
Supplementary Material for the ci trajectory), but the following trajectories diverge. The active response of the HOG cascade leads to production and accumulation of glycerol, which
contributes to fast reestablishment of former turgor pressure
and cell size (blue line). Without HOG cascade, cells still
manage to adapt volume and turgor, but much slower. A systematic analysis of the effects of strength and timing of osmotic shock is provided in Supplementary Material Fig. S24
and Fig. S23.
The SCGM with HOG can reproduce previous measurements of growing yeast cells that undergo a hyperosmotic
shock. In (26), cellular volume versus Hog1 localization
as a shock response was measured over time for individual yeast cells, resulting in a phase plot that is reproduced
by our model simulations (Fig. 6E). In particular, the characteristics throughout the four different phases that are reflected correctly by our approach, validate that not only the
HOG response model or our volume model are functional
by themselves but, more importantly, that interplay of both
models is captured properly. Further, we tested whether the
model also copes with hypoosmotic (low external osmolarity) shock (Fig. 6C). Again model integrity is restored following a first hyperosmotic shock and, thus, regains osmolarity and volume after a second, now hypoosmotic, shock.
Obviously, hypoosmotic shock results in a short overshoot
of cell size (Fig. 6C), as previously reported in (37). Hyperosmotic shock exclusively leads to elastic deformation, while
hypoosmotic shock leads to negligibly small plastic deformation. Both types of osmotic shock induce elastic behavior of
the cell wall, hence the modeled cell would not grow effectively through step-like osmotic changes of the environment.
The reference volume (Fig. 6F and Supplementary Material
for detailed definition) quantifies growth as it integrates plastic deformation of the cell wall under normal conditions reflecting a elasto-plastic behavior (EP) (Fig. 6F, white area).
In contrast, a hyperosmotic shock induces immediate cell
shrinkage and stops growth, as indicated by the reference
volume. The reference volume remains constant, since the
elasto-plastic regime is left and the model behaves idealelastically (E) (Fig. 6F, grey area).

lation. In contrast to the initial volume, the time until bud
emergence tbudstart was increased for data 1 compared to
data 2, with tbudstart,1 = 93 (93–143) min and tbudstart,2 =
56 (41–74) min. Between all fit parameters and the volume
maximas of mother and bud (maxVmother maxVbud ), the Pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated and displayed in
a correlogram (Fig. 5(b)). The correlation coefficients can
vary by definition between −1 and 1, indicating a negative
or positive correlation, whereby a values close to zero represent no correlation. Except for a small correlation (0.19)
for kc/u and kuptake the fit parameter, displayed in the upper
left quadrant, were uncorrelated, in contrast to experimental
volume measures and r0 (lower right quadrant), which were
all positive correlated. The only correlation between volume
measures and fitting parameters, was found for kc/u . Thereby
kc/u correlated negatively to all volume measures, though the
correlation was much stronger for maxVmother (−0.55) than
for maxVbud (−0.27) and even less for r0 (−0.12). This can
be explained by the cSCGM, since kc/u defines the maximal
volume of the cell compartment, which is not reached for the
bud until after cell separation.
Comparing active and passive osmotic shock response. Adaptation to changing osmotic conditions is vi-

tal for cells. In S. cerevisiae, adaptation to high osmolarity is mainly achieved via increased production and retention of the small osmolyte glycerol, coordinated by the
high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) pathway, through transcriptional and post-translational regulation of metabolism. We
extended the SCGM by a reported description of this HOG
cascade, comprising signaling dynamics and the activation of
osmolyte production via Hog1 (27). Kinetics in the HOG cascade model were scaled according to the recently measured
lower turgor pressure (7). Additionally, we chose r0 to be
at least 1.2µm to avoid artificially low Hog1 concentrations.
The combined implementation of HOG pathway model and
SCGM can be found in the Supplementary Material. Utilizing the augmented model we compared the response of the
SCGM to hyperosmotic shock with (Fig. 6, blue lines) and
without (Fig. 6, orange lines) active shock response mechanisms mediated by HOG signaling.
When unperturbed (in Fig. 6, dashed lines), both SCGM and
SCGM with HOG establish steady states for internal osmolarity and turgor pressure while sharing comparable growth
rates. However, if we simulate a hyperosmotic shock as depicted in Fig. 6A, the models show an identically fast de-

Discussion
Knowledge of single-cell growth dynamics is crucial for the
understanding of comprehensive biological systems, particu10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. 6. Description is on the next page.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
Fig. 6. Growing single cell exposed to osmotic shocks. Simulation of our SCGM with a HOG response model reproduces Hog1 signaling behavior in growing
yeast cells. We compared SCGM dynamics upon hyper- and hypo-osmotic shock with and without active response mechanism.
A Shock scenarios: no shock (black dashed line), single hyperosmotic shock (external osmolarity raised to 500 mM at 70 minutes, green line), and combination of hyper- and
hypo-osmotic shock (external osmolarity is raised to 500 mM at 70 minutes and reduced to 325 mM at 100 minutes, red line).
(B-D) Shock response (B, D - only hyperosmotic, C hyper- and hypo-osmotic) with (blue lines) and without (orange lines) active HOG response. B shows turgor pressure,
which drops and re-adapts with and without signaling, but faster with signaling. C, D show cell size, which also adapts faster to stress in case of active HOG response.
E Short- and long-term response of the model with HOG response to the same hyperosmotic shock as in B, D showing Hog1 nuclear enrichment versus cell size trajectory
as four distinct phases of response behavior after shock (indicated as phase zero) as proposed by (26): (1) passive but fast shrinkage and turgor loss, (2) activation of Hog1
signaling, (3) restoration of cell size and turgor pressure, and finally (4) resuming cellular growth. Our model reflects these phases and combines the fast timescale in (1)
(volume loss within a few seconds) and steady growth either without a shock or due to adaption after shock as in the last phase.
F Comparison of cell size to reference volume (shock as in B and D). The reference volume reflects the distinct cell wall mechanic regimes of our model: elasto-plastic
behavior (EP) during growth, ideal elastic behavior (E, grey area) in response to hyperosmotic shock, and growth resumption (EP) after restoring former size and turgor
pressure (see turgor trajectory in B).

larly for model systems such as S. cerevisiae. Here, we introduced and justified a volume model of yeast by integrating
different theoretical concepts of cell mechanics, integrity and
osmolyte dynamics in combination with experimental data
on single cell growth and cell wall elasticity. The model
applies to several scenarios, where cell size variation plays
a role: from growth of an individual bud connected to the
mother cell, the case of a two-bud growing mutant of yeast,
and the direct and long-term volume response after hypertonic osmotic shock.
In previous studies, two modes of single-cell growth were
considered for yeast, linear and exponential (38–41). Based
on our model we proposed a more complex picture of the
specific growth pattern of a single yeast cell (a comparative
plot of the three modes of single-cell growth can be seen in
Fig. 1B). We derived an exact analytic solution for the radius
trajectory depending on time r(t) for a single cell growing
undisturbed. Prospectively, this solution may support future
work as it relates relevant parameters, which originate from
formerly distinct concepts such as cell wall mechanics, water homeostasis and osmoregulation in the form of a single
expression describing the growth of an individual cell overall. Such an expression allows us to deduce properties of the
described system in a closed form. Specifically, we exemplified such a deduction by calculating the limes of the radius
for long time spans rt→∞ . The approach revealed that the
maximal cell size is determined by the ratio ku/c of osmolyte
or nutrient uptake and consumption, but is independent of
mechanical cell wall properties, such as Young’s modulus or
extensibility. The SCGM works fully without a connection
to the cell cycle machinery comprising the action of cyclins,
CDKs and CK1. Nevertheless, the coupled SCGM is not independent of cell cycle, since the characteristic length of first
cell cycle is integrated via tbudstart . Parameterizing the SCGM
with measured volume trajectories we found that this characteristic cell cycle length varied significantly between individual cells.
Yeast cells proliferate by budding, a process in which a larger
mother and a smaller bud grow simultaneously but with different growth rates. To describe this coordinated growth, two
instances of the SCGM with different initial volumes were
coupled by allowing water and osmolyte fluxes between the
instances. For simplicity, we neglected the specific bud localization at the mother, which would include the complex
polarization process (42, 43). This coupled SCGM can be interpreted as an augmented model compared to a previous de-

scription of interconnected soap bubbles or balloons (30, 44).
However, those models lack the exchange of matter with their
environment which is crucial for biological applications. In
the coupled SCGM we allowed fluxes inbetween the cavities
and between cavities and medium such that our model operates near equilibrium instead of being at equilibrium. Plastic
and elastic cell wall expansion depends on the lateral stresses,
which scales with radius and acting pressure. To allow expansion of the smaller of the two volumes, the cell wall of that
volume must be either more elastic (E) or more extendable
(φ).
Utilizing atomic force microscopy, we could reject the hypothesis that elasticity is the distinguishing cell wall property between mother and bud. The measured local Young’s
modulus at the bud was not lower but similar or even slightly
higher compared to the mother. Therefore, we inferred from
the SCGM that φ must be significantly higher at the bud to
facilitate bud expansion. Fitting the coupled SCGM to the
growth data suggests that φmother is three orders of magnitude higher than reported values for plants (45, 46) and φbud
needs to be at least two magnitudes higher than at mother
cell wall. Furthermore, we have shown that significantly increased φbud compared to φmother can explain the observed
higher growth rates of buds (31). The higher extensibility of
the bud cell wall might be caused by incorporation of new
more expandable material, which maturates over time or by
subsequent alterations of the already formed cell wall. Plant
enzymes are reported to alter mechanical cell wall properties
(47, 48), thereby influencing growth and cell shape (49) and
reports also suggest that cell wall plasticity in fungi is controlled by hydrolytic enzymes, like chitinases or glucanases
(5, 50–52).
Fitting the coupled model to single-cell volume trajectories
from two completely independent data sets enabled us to estimate crucial growth parameters, such as the global osmolyte
uptake rate kuptake and the ratio ku/c . Both parameters appeared to be very sensitive, as kuptake had the strongest impact on individual growth rate and ku/c on the maximum cell
volume. From the comparison of both data sets two main observations can be stated: First, cell expansion of S. cerevisiae,
under non-limiting conditions, requires a total osmolyte uptake rate of 1.0 to 4.0 mmol/(µm2 s) and a consumption rate
which is 1.2 to 1.5 µm−1 times higher. Second, the extensibility of the bud cell wall has to be at least 100 higher than
the mother’s, to facilitate bud expansion.
Intriguingly, the estimated osmolyte uptake rates kuptake were
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

only two to five times higher than the average glucose uptake rate per surface area under aerobic conditions reported
by (53) (see supplementary note 5). Under these conditions
glucose would therefore account for 30 % to 60 % of the osmolytes taken up by the cell, revealing a new angle on the
impact of glucose onto cellular growth: So far the impact of
glucose onto cell growth based exclusively on the fact that
glucose is a main nutrient source, providing chemical energy
and building blocks for macromolecules, and hence can be regarded as fuel of the cell. While this study indicates, that additionally to those aspects, the massive glucose import could
drive water influx and hence contribute significantly to cell
expansion.

prove such models and, hence, increase our understanding of
population growth dynamics.

Methods and Materials
Yeast strains. For the microfluidic growth analysis we

used a Saccharomyces cerevisiae strain based on BY4742
(MATαhis3∆1 leu2∆0 lys2∆0 ura3∆0) (56), in which the
bud neck marker Cdc10 has been genomically labeled with
mKate2. The sequence of mKate2 was cloned into the
plasmid pUG72 (Euroscarf) and Cdc10 was labeled using
PCR-based homologous recombination. The necessary Ura3
marker cassette has been removed using the Cre-loxP recombination system (57). In the nano-indentation experiments
we used the strain BY4741 (56).

In general, the cSCGM described very well the volume expansion of different single-cell trajectories, which have been
measured in microfluidic growth experiments. Using the
cSCGM, we could also recapitulate earlier experimental data
presented by (41) and the resulting relations between division
time and ratio of volumes at division and birth (Fig. S10), despite different interpretation for the growth dynamics of single cells.

Yeast cell culture. For the microfluidic growth experiments,

cells were grown at 30 °C overnight in synthetic medium
(SD; 0.17% yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 0.5%
ammonium sulfate, 2% glucose, 55 mg/L adenine, 55 mg/L
l-tyrosine, 55 mg/L uracil, 20 mg/L l-arginine, 10 mg/L lhistidine, 60 mg/L l-isoleucine, 60 mg/L l-leucine, 40 mg/L
l-lysine, 10 mg/L l-methionine, 60 mg/L phenylalanine, 50
mg/L l-threonine and 40 mg/L l-tryptophan). Medium osmolarity was measured with an osmometer (gonotec, Berlin,
Germany). Before the experiment, 500 µL of overnight culture were diluted in 5 ml SD medium and grown for 2.5 hours
at 30 °C.

By integrating the osmotic stress response, specifically the
HOG signaling pathway and metabolic adaptation from (27),
in the SCGM, we could compare the passive volume adaptation with the active response arising from the HOG pathway. This model was able to capture the different time scales
ranging from steady growth to the drastic shrinkage of cell
size followed by an osmotic shock. To our knowledge, this
is the first time that the joint-dynamics of Hog1 enrichment
versus volume following a hyperosmotic shock (26) could
be reproduced and explained by a mathematical model. Additionally, our model can describe the response to hypoosmotic shock similarly to previous reports (37). The simulations illustrate the functionality of the coupled model over
a wide range of cell sizes. However, validity of the combined model is limited in cases of tiny initial volume (e.g.
1 fL), since the Zi-model assumes fixed numbers of Hog1
molecules. During growth, increasing volume results in dilution of all species within the HOG model and, hence, would
lead to non-physiologically small concentrations for tiny initial volumes. To overcome such limiting effects, production
rates for all species of the HOG model need to be introduced
and parameterized to counteract the dilution process. Instead,
we chose a simplistic implementation of coupling both models, in order to preserve their original properties.

Microfluidic growth experiments. We used the CellASIC

ONIX microfluidic platform (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt,
Germany) with the haploid yeast plates (Y04C) for growth
analysis. Plates were primed with SD medium and cells were
loaded as described in the ONIX yeast protocol. Flow control pressure was set to 2 psi. Cells were observed using a
Visitron Visiscope inverted spinning disc laser confocal microscope (Visitron, Puchheim, Germany). The temperature
of the microfluidic plate was controlled to 30 °C using a
temperature control chamber (OL IX73/83 cellVivo, PeCon
GmbH, Erbach, Germany). We used a 150X oil immersion objective (Olympus UPlanSApo 150X/1.47, Oil, TIRM)
and the Photometrics Evolve 512 EMCCD camera (Photometrics, Tuscon, USA). Fluorescent illumination was provided by a 561 nm diode laser and a multibad dichroic filter (405/488/559/635 nm ) together with a 600/50 nm emission filter for detection. A brightfield image was taken every
3 minutes, while a fluorescent image was only taken every
12 minutes, to minimize fluorescent exposure of cells. Each
image was acquired as a z-stack (6 z-positions, 0.5 µm distance).

In this study, we focused on the single-cell growth of newly
budded yeast cells and described their volume development.
Extending the cSCGM to cover several cell cycles with several consecutive budding events and test it against experimental data might help to understand the interplay of morphogenesis and aging of S. cerevisiae. An other step would be
the combination of the SCGM with models focusing on cell
cycle regulation or polarization into larger models to investigate the interplay between regulatory networks and growth.
Mathematical models for growth dynamics at the population
level are often based on greatly simplified single cell volume
models (54, 55). The presented SCGM might help to im-

Image analysis. For each z-stack, the sharpest plane was

determined using the ImageJ plugin “Find focused slices” by
Quingzong Tseng. Brigthfield images were segmented and
cells were tracked with the CellProfiler (58) plugin Cellstar
(34). Tracking was manually checked, and mis-tracked cells
were removed from the analysis. For each cell, bud appearance time was manually defined as the time when a bud was
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

first visible in the brightfield image. The lineage was manually determined using the fluorescent images of the bud neck
marker Cdc10-mKate2. Cell area was converted to volume
by assuming a spherical cell shape.

16.
17.
18.

Cell wall nano-indentation. In brief, log-phase yeast cells

were mechanically trapped in porous polycarbonate membrane, with pore size of 5 µm (59). The cell-containing
membrane was subsequently immobilized on the bottom of
a liquid chamber and probed with an AFM (Nanowizard III,
JPK, Germany). All AFM measurements were conducted in
liquid solution of synthetic media using MLCT-E cantilever
(Bruker). Prior to all experiments, the spring constant was
determined via thermal noise method. Multiparametric imaging of cells was done using the provided QI-Mode, whereby
maximal applied force was set to 1 nN, corresponding to an
indentation depth of ∼35 nm. For further analysis we used
JPK data processing software the Python packages numpy,
scipy (60) or pandas (61). For a more detailed description
see (7).

19.

20.

21.

22.
23.
24.
25.
26.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) through
Collaborative Research Center (SFB740, to EK) and by project "Osmotic stress
regulation" (UH 279/1-1, to JU).

27.

28.

Bibliography

29.

1. O Kedem and A Katchalsky. Thermodynamic analysis of the permeability of biological
membranes to non-electrolytes. Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta, 27:229–246, 1958. ISSN
00063002. doi: 10.1016/0006-3002(58)90330-5.
2. Stefan Hohmann. Osmotic adaptation in yeast–control of the yeast osmolyte system.
International review of cytology, 215:149–87, 2002. ISSN 0074-7696. doi: 10.1016/
S0074-7696(02)15008-X.
3. Edda Klipp, Bodil Nordlander, Roland Krüger, Peter Gennemark, and Stefan Hohmann.
Integrative model of the response of yeast to osmotic shock. Nature biotechnology, 23(8):
975–982, aug 2005. ISSN 1087-0156. doi: 10.1038/nbt1114.
4. Jörg Schaber, Miquel Angel Adrover, Emma Eriksson, Serge Pelet, Elzbieta PetelenzKurdziel, Dagmara Klein, Francesc Posas, Mattias Goksör, Mathias Peter, Stefan Hohmann,
and Edda Klipp. Biophysical properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and their relationship
with HOG pathway activation. European biophysics journal : EBJ, 39(11):1547–56, oct
2010. ISSN 1432-1017. doi: 10.1007/s00249-010-0612-0.
5. FM Klis and Pieternella Mol. Dynamics of cell wall structure in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
FEMS microbiology Revies, 26(3):239–256, 2002.
6. Stephen a Proctor, Nicolas Minc, Arezki Boudaoud, and Fred Chang. Contributions of turgor
pressure, the contractile ring, and septum assembly to forces in cytokinesis in fission yeast.
Current biology : CB, 22(17):1601–1608, sep 2012. ISSN 1879-0445. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.
2012.06.042.
7. Björn Goldenbogen, Wolfgang Giese, Marie Hemmen, Jannis Uhlendorf, Andreas Herrmann, and Edda Klipp. Dynamics of cell wall elasticity pattern shapes the cell during
yeast mating morphogenesis. Open Biology, 6(9):160136, sep 2016. ISSN 2046-2441. doi:
10.1098/rsob.160136.
8. Hongyuan Jiang and Sean X. Sun. Cellular Pressure and Volume Regulation and Implications for Cell Mechanics. Biophysical Journal, 105(3):609–619, aug 2013. ISSN 00063495.
doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2013.06.021.
9. Jiaxiang Tao and Sean X. Sun. Active Biochemical Regulation of Cell Volume and a Simple
Model of Cell Tension Response. Biophysical Journal, 109(8):1541–1550, oct 2015. ISSN
00063495. doi: 10.1016/j.bpj.2015.08.025.
10. a.E. Smith, K.E. Moxham, and a.P.J. Middelberg. On uniquely determining cell–wall material
properties with the compression experiment. Chemical Engineering Science, 53(23):3913–
3922, 1998. ISSN 00092509. doi: 10.1016/S0009-2509(98)00198-5.
11. A E Smith, Z Zhang, C R Thomas, K E Moxham, and a P Middelberg. The mechanical
properties of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America, 97(18):9871–4, aug 2000. ISSN 0027-8424.
12. a. E. Smith, Z. Zhang, and C. R. Thomas. Wall material properties of yeast cells: Part 1.
Cell measurements and compression experiments. Chemical Engineering Science, 55(11):
2031–2041, 2000. ISSN 00092509. doi: 10.1016/S0009-2509(99)00500-X.
13. A. E. Smith, K. E. Moxham, and A. P J Middelberg. Wall material properties of yeast cells.
Part II. Analysis. Chemical Engineering Science, 55(11):2043–2053, 2000. ISSN 00092509.
doi: 10.1016/S0009-2509(99)00501-1.
14. J D Stenson, C R Thomas, and P Hartley. Modelling the mechanical properties of yeast
cells. Chemical engineering science, 64(8):1892–1903, 2009. ISSN 00092509. doi: 10.
1016/j.ces.2009.01.016.
15. John D Stenson, Peter Hartley, Changxiang Wang, and Colin R Thomas. Determining the

30.
31.

32.

33.

34.

35.

36.
37.

38.
39.

40.

41.

14

mechanical properties of yeast cell walls. Biotechnology progress, 27(2):505–12, 2011.
ISSN 1520-6033. doi: 10.1002/btpr.554.
DJ Cosgrove. Analysis of the dynamic and steady-state responses of growth rate and turgor
pressure to changes in cell parameters. Plant Physiology, 68:1439–1446, 1981.
J K Ortega. Augmented growth equation for cell wall expansion. Plant physiology, 79(1):
318–20, sep 1985. ISSN 0032-0889.
Jacques Dumais, Sidney L Shaw, Charles R Steele, Sharon R Long, and Peter M Ray. An
anisotropic-viscoplastic model of plant cell morphogenesis by tip growth. The International
journal of developmental biology, 50(2-3):209–22, jan 2006. ISSN 0214-6282. doi: 10.1387/
ijdb.052066jd.
J.K.E. Ortega and S.W.J. Welch. Mathematical Models for Expansive Growth of Cells with
Walls. Mathematical Modelling of Natural Phenomena, 8(4):35–61, jul 2013. ISSN 09735348. doi: 10.1051/mmnp/20138404.
Joseph K.E. Ortega, Edwin G. Zehr, and Russell G. Keanini. In vivo creep and stress
relaxation experiments to determine the wall extensibility and yield threshold for the sporangiophores of phycomyces. Biophysical Journal, 56(3):465–475, 1989. ISSN 00063495. doi:
10.1016/S0006-3495(89)82694-3.
Joseph K E Ortega, Martin E Smith, Ada J Erazo, Mark a Espinosa, Scott a Bell, and
Edwin G Zehr. A comparison of cell-wall-yielding properties for two developmental stages
of Phycomyces sporangiophores Determination by in-vivo creep experiments. Planta, 183
(4):613–619, 1991.
Arezki Boudaoud. Growth of Walled Cells: From Shells to Vesicles. Physical Review Letters,
91(1):018104, jul 2003. ISSN 0031-9007. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.91.018104.
C. Ross and A. Chilver. Thin shells under internal pressure. In Strength of materials and
structures, pages pp. 152 –168. Butterworth-Heinemann, 1999.
Fred Chang and Kerwyn Huang. How and why cells grow as rods. BMC Biology, 12(1):54,
2014. ISSN 1741-7007. doi: 10.1186/s12915-014-0054-8.
Kevin Strange. Cellular volume homeostasis. Advances in physiology education, 28(1-4):
155–9, dec 2004. ISSN 1043-4046. doi: 10.1152/advan.00034.2004.
Dale Muzzey, Carlos A. Gómez-Uribe, Jerome T. Mettetal, and Alexander van Oudenaarden. A Systems-Level Analysis of Perfect Adaptation in Yeast Osmoregulation. Cell, 138
(1):160–171, jul 2009. ISSN 00928674. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2009.04.047.
Zhike Zi, Wolfram Liebermeister, and Edda Klipp. A Quantitative Study of the Hog1 MAPK
Response to Fluctuating Osmotic Stress in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS ONE, 5(3):
e9522, mar 2010. ISSN 1932-6203. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009522.
Anja Geitmann and Joseph K E Ortega. Mechanics and modeling of plant cell growth.
Trends in plant science, 14(9):467–78, sep 2009. ISSN 1878-4372. doi: 10.1016/j.tplants.
2009.07.006.
Vincent Dupres, YF Dufrêne, and JJ Heinisch. Measuring cell wall thickness in living yeast
cells using single molecular rulers. ACS nano, 4(9):5498–5504, 2010.
D. R. Merritt and F. Weinhaus. The pressure curve for a rubber balloon. American Journal
of Physics, 46(10):976–977, oct 1978. ISSN 0002-9505. doi: 10.1119/1.11486.
Francisco Ferrezuelo, Neus Colomina, Alida Palmisano, Eloi Garí, Carme Gallego, Attila
Csikász-Nagy, and Martí Aldea. The critical size is set at a single-cell level by growth rate
to attain homeostasis and adaptation. Nature Communications, 3:1012, aug 2012. ISSN
2041-1723. doi: 10.1038/ncomms2015.
E Cabib, D H Roh, M Schmidt, L B Crotti, and a Varma. The yeast cell wall and septum as
paradigms of cell growth and morphogenesis. The Journal of biological chemistry, 276(23):
19679–82, jun 2001. ISSN 0021-9258. doi: 10.1074/jbc.R000031200.
Ahmed Touhami, Barbara Hoffmann, Andrea Vasella, Frédéric A. Denis, and Yves F.
Dufrêne. Aggregation of yeast cells: Direct measurement of discrete lectin-carbohydrate
interactions. Microbiology, 149(10):2873–2878, 2003. ISSN 13500872. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.
26431-0.
C Versari, S Stoma, K Batmanov, A Llamosi, F Mroz, A Kaczmarek, M Deyell, C Lhoussaine,
P Hersen, and G Batt. Long-term tracking of budding yeast cells in brightfield microscopy:
CellStar and the Evaluation Platform. J R Soc Interface, 14(127), 2017. ISSN 17425662.
doi: 10.1098/rsif.2016.0705.
Cecilia Garmendia-Torres, Olivier Tassy, Audrey Matifas, Nacho Molina, and Gilles Charvin.
Multiple inputs ensure yeast cell size homeostasis during cell cycle progression. eLife, 7:
e34025, 2018. ISSN 2050-084X. doi: 10.7554/eLife.34025.
Daniel J Cosgrove. Cell Wall Yield Properties of Growing Tissue. Plant Physiology, 78:
347–356, 1985.
Soheil Rastgou Talemi, Carl-Fredrik Tiger, Mikael Andersson, Roja Babazadeh, Niek
Welkenhuysen, Edda Klipp, Stefan Hohmann, Jörg Schaber, J. Schaber, J. Schaber,
E. Klipp, E. Klipp, B. Nordlander, R. Kruger, P. Gennemark, S. Hohmann, S. Hohmann,
D. E. Levin, E. Petelenz-Kurdziel, S. E. Beese, T. Negishi, D. E. Levin, J. Lee, P. Hersen,
M. N. McClean, L. Mahadevan, S. Ramanathan, J. T. Mettetal, D. Muzzey, C. Gomez-Uribe,
A. van Oudenaarden, D. Muzzey, C. A. Gomez-Uribe, J. T. Mettetal, A. van Oudenaarden,
Z. Zi, W. Liebermeister, E. Klipp, J. Schaber, R. Baltanas, A. Bush, E. Klipp, A. ColmanLerner, J. M. Rodriguez-Pena, R. Garcia, C. Nombela, J. Arroyo, R. Baltanas, J. Schaber,
B. Kofahl, A. Kowald, E. Klipp, S. Vaga, C. F. Tiger, C. Bermejo, R. Garcia, J. M. RodriguezPena, C. Bermejo, C. Nombela, J. Arroyo, M. J. Tamas, L. J. Garcia-Rodriguez, R. Valle,
A. Duran, C. Roncero, T. Ketela, R. Green, H. Bussey, A. Muir, F. M. Roelants, G. Timmons,
K. L. Leskoske, J. Thorner, R. Babazadeh, T. Furukawa, S. Hohmann, K. Furukawa, J. Schaber, A. Lapytsko, D. Flockerzi, J. Macia, N. Le Novere, E. Eriksson, R. Babazadeh, and
S. Frey. Systems Level Analysis of the Yeast Osmo-Stat. Scientific Reports, 6(June):30950,
2016. ISSN 2045-2322. doi: 10.1038/srep30950.
J.M. Mitchison. The growth of single cells. Experimental Cell Research, 15(1):214–221,
aug 1958. ISSN 00144827. doi: 10.1016/0014-4827(58)90077-6.
Jonathan J. Turner, Jennifer C. Ewald, and Jan M. Skotheim. Cell Size Control in Yeast.
Current Biology, 22(9):R350–R359, may 2012. ISSN 09609822. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2012.02.
041.
John J Tyson and Kenneth B Hannsgen. Global asymptotic stability of the size distribution in
probabilistic models of the cell cycle. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 22(1):61–68, 1985.
ISSN 1432-1416. doi: 10.1007/BF00276546.
Ilya Soifer, Lydia Robert, and Ariel Amir. Single-cell analysis of growth in budding yeast and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/586479; this version posted March 28, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.
49.
50.
51.
52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.

59.

60.

61.
62.

bacteria reveals a common size regulation strategy. Current Biology, 26(3):356–361, 2016.
ISSN 09609822. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2015.11.067.
Wolfgang Giese, Martin Eigel, Sebastian Westerheide, Christian Engwer, and Edda Klipp.
Influence of cell shape, inhomogeneities and diffusion barriers in cell polarization models.
Physical Biology, 12(6):066014, nov 2015. ISSN 1478-3975. doi: 10.1088/1478-3975/12/6/
066014.
Jian-geng Chiou, Mohan K. Balasubramanian, and Daniel J. Lew. Cell Polarity in Yeast.
Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology, 33:77–101, 2017. ISSN 15308995. doi:
https://dx.doi.org/10.1146/annurev.cellbio.15.1.365.
F Weinhaus and W Barker. On the equilibrium states of interconnected bubbles or balloons.
American Journal of Physics, 46(10):978–982, oct 1978. ISSN 0002-9505. doi: 10.1119/1.
11487.
J.K.E. Ortega. Dimensionless number is central to stress relaxation and expansive
growth of the cell wall. Scientific Reports, 7(1):1–16, 2017. ISSN 20452322. doi:
10.1038/s41598-017-03002-6.
L Taiz. Plant Cell Expansion: Regulation of Cell Wall Mechanical Properties. Annual Review
of Plant Physiology, 35(1):585–657, 1984. ISSN 0066-4294. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pp.35.
060184.003101.
D J Cosgrove. Enzymes and other agents that enhance cell wall extensibility. Annual review
of plant physiology and plant molecular biology, 50:391–417, jan 1999. ISSN 1040-2519.
doi: 10.1146/annurev.arplant.50.1.391.
DJ Cosgrove. Loosening of plant cell walls by expansins. Nature, 407(6802):321–326,
2000.
A Okamoto-Nakazato. Distribution of yieldin, a regulatory protein of the cell wall yield threshold, in etiolated cowpea seedlings. Plant and Cell Physiol., 42(9):952–958, 2001.
David J Adams. Fungal cell wall chitinases and glucanases. Microbiology (Reading, England), 150(Pt 7):2029–35, jul 2004. ISSN 1350-0872. doi: 10.1099/mic.0.26980-0.
Li Duo-Chuan. Review of fungal chitinases. Mycopathologia, 161(6):345–60, jun 2006.
ISSN 0301-486X. doi: 10.1007/s11046-006-0024-y.
Frans M Klis, Andre Boorsma, and Piet W J De Groot. Cell wall construction in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Yeast (Chichester, England), 23(3):185–202, feb 2006. ISSN 0749503X. doi: 10.1002/yea.1349.
Paula Jouhten, Eija Rintala, Anne Huuskonen, Anu Tamminen, Mervi Toivari, Marilyn Wiebe,
Laura Ruohonen, Merja Penttilä, and Hannu Maaheimo. Oxygen dependence of metabolic
fluxes and energy generation of Saccharomyces cerevisiae CEN.PK113-1A. BMC Systems
Biology, 2008. ISSN 17520509. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-2-60.
Thomas W. Spiesser, Christiane Müller, Gabriele Schreiber, Marcus Krantz, and Edda Klipp.
Size homeostasis can be intrinsic to growing cell populations and explained without size
sensing or signalling. FEBS Journal, 279(22):4213–4230, nov 2012. ISSN 1742464X. doi:
10.1111/febs.12014.
Thomas W. Spiesser, Clemens Kühn, Marcus Krantz, and Edda Klipp. Bud-Localization of
CLB2 mRNA Can Constitute a Growth Rate Dependent Daughter Sizer. PLoS Computational Biology, 2015. ISSN 15537358. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004223.
Carrie Baker Brachmann, Adrian Davies, Gregory J. Cost, Emerita Caputo, Joachim Li,
Philip Hieter, and Jef D. Boeke. Designer deletion strains derived from Saccharomyces
cerevisiae S288C: A useful set of strains and plasmids for PCR-mediated gene disruption
and other applications. Yeast, 14(2):115–132, 1998. ISSN 0749503X. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)
1097-0061(19980130)14:2<115::AID-YEA204>3.0.CO;2-2.
Johannes H. Hegemann and Sven Boris Heick. Delete and repeat: A comprehensive toolkit for sequential gene knockout in the budding yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Methods in Molecular Biology, 765(June 2014):189–206, 2011. ISSN 10643745. doi:
10.1007/978-1-61779-197-0{\_}12.
Anne E Carpenter, Thouis R Jones, Michael R Lamprecht, Colin Clarke, In Han Kang,
Ola Friman, David a Guertin, Joo Han Chang, Robert a Lindquist, Jason Moffat, Polina
Golland, and David M Sabatini. CellProfiler: image analysis software for identifying and
quantifying cell phenotypes. Genome biology, 7(10):R100, 2006. ISSN 1465-6914. doi:
10.1186/gb-2006-7-10-r100.
S Kasas and A Ikai. A method for anchoring round shaped cells for atomic force microscope
imaging. Biophysical Journal, 68(5):1678 – 1680, 1995. ISSN 0006-3495. doi: http://dx.doi.
org/10.1016/S0006-3495(95)80344-9.
Stéfan van der Walt, S Chris Colbert, and Gaël Varoquaux. The NumPy Array: A Structure
for Efficient Numerical Computation. Computing in Science & Engineering, 13(2):22–30,
2011. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2011.37.
Wes Mckinney. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. PROC. OF THE 9th
PYTHON IN SCIENCE CONF, 2010.
Frans M Klis, Chris G de Koster, and Stanley Brul. Cell wall-related bionumbers and bioestimates of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Candida albicans. Eukaryotic cell, 13(1):2–9, jan
2014. ISSN 1535-9786. doi: 10.1128/EC.00250-13.

15

