bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TRESK K+ Channel Activity Regulates Trigeminal Nociception and Headache

Zhaohua Guo1, Chang-Shen Qiu1, Xinhua Jiang1, 2, Jintao Zhang1, Fengxian Li3,
Qin Liu3, Ajay Dhaka4 and Yu-Qing Cao1, *

1

Washington University Pain Center and Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University

School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA
3

Department of Anesthesiology and Center for the Study of Itch, Washington University School

of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
4

Department of Biological Structure, Neurobiology and Behavior Graduate Program, University

of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA

Present Address:
2

Department of Anesthesiology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 87 Xiangya Rd,

Changsha, Hunan, China, 410008

*

Correspondence: caoy@anest.wustl.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Although dominant-negative mutations of TRESK background K+ channel have been reported in
migraine patients, whether TRESK activity controls the generation of trigeminal pain, especially
headache, is not established. We found that loss of TRESK in all trigeminal ganglia (TG)
neurons preferentially increased the intrinsic excitability of small-diameter TG nociceptors that
express neuropeptide CGRP or TRPM8 channels. Surprisingly, loss of TRESK increased the
number of TG neurons expressing TRPV1 channels. In dorsal root ganglia neurons, neither the
persistent outward current nor the intrinsic excitability was affected by the loss of TRESK.
Compared with wild-type controls, TRESK knockout mice exhibited more robust trigeminal
pain, especially headache-like behaviors; but displayed normal body and visceral pain responses.
Our findings indicate that endogenous TRESK activity is required for trigeminal pain regulation.
A substantial reduction of TRESK activity may selectively affect the functions of TG
nociceptors, thereby increasing the susceptibility to migraine headache in humans.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The TWIK-related spinal cord K+ (TRESK) channel belongs to the two-pore domain K+ (K2P)
family of background K+ channels and is encoded by a single gene KCNK18 (Enyedi & Czirjak,
2015; Kang et al., 2004; Sano et al., 2003). Of all 15 mammalian K2P channels, TRESK is the
only one that is abundantly expressed in primary afferent neurons (PANs) in trigeminal ganglia
(TG) and dorsal root ganglia (DRG) but at a negligible level in other tissues, suggesting that its
main physiological function is to control somatosensation via regulating PAN excitability
(Czirjak et al., 2004; Dobler et al., 2007; Kollert et al., 2015; Lafreniere et al., 2010; Yoo et al.,
2009). Indeed, previous studies indicate that TRESK is one of the major background K+ channels
in DRG neurons (Kang & Kim, 2006; Marsh et al., 2012). It is well established that endogenous
TRESK activity regulates the excitability of DRG neurons and controls the transmission of body
pain under both normal and chronic pain conditions. Both chronic nerve injury and tissue
inflammation reduce the level of TRESK mRNA in rat DRG (Marsh et al., 2012; Tulleuda et al.,
2011). Inhibition of TRESK and other K2P channels by sanshool robustly increases the firing of
DRG mechanoreceptors (Bautista et al., 2008; Lennertz et al., 2010). Reducing DRG TRESK
activity elicits nocifensive behavior and increases mechanical sensitivity on the hindpaw
(Tulleuda et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2016). Over-expression of TRESK in rat DRG neurons
inhibits neuropeptide release and attenuates neuropathic pain (Zhou et al., 2013; Zhou et al.,
2012).
Much less is known about the function of TRESK channels in controlling trigeminal pain
transmission, especially the trigeminovascular pathway subserving headache generation.
Dominant-negative TRESK mutations are identified in patients with migraine but not with other
chronic pain (Lafreniere et al., 2010), suggesting that genetic TRESK dysfunction differentially
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

affects the generation of trigeminal pain and body pain. However, a recent study suggests that
TRESK mutations increase TG neuronal excitability not through reducing TRESK current per
se, but though inhibition of other K2P channels TREK1/2 (Royal et al., 2018), calling into
question the role of endogenous TRESK activity in controlling headache and other trigeminal
pain. Many outstanding questions remain unanswered. Does endogenous TRESK activity
regulate the excitability of dural afferent neurons, the PANs in the trigeminovascular pathway?
Does TRESK dysfunction enhance trigeminal nociception, especially headache generation, at the
behavioral level? In contrast to injury-induced reduction of TRESK activity in adults, can DRG
neurons tolerate genetic TRESK dysfunction and maintain normal intrinsic excitability? If so,
does this result in normal responses to stimuli that evoke body pain?
Here, we used TRESK knockout (KO) mice to investigate how endogenous TRESK
activity regulates trigeminal nociception; whether genetic loss of TRESK differentially affects
the generation of trigeminal and body pain. We found that ubiquitous loss of TRESK in all KO
TG and DRG neurons preferentially increases the intrinsic excitability of small-diameter TG
nociceptors that express calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) or transient receptor potential
channel melastatin 8 (TRPM8). Unexpectedly, the percentage of neurons expressing transient
receptor potential cation channel subfamily V member 1 (TRPV1) channels, a sensor for a
variety of noxious stimuli, is significantly increased in the TG but not DRG of KO mice.
Compared with wild-type (WT) mice, TRESK KO mice exhibit more robust behavioral
responses in various models of trigeminal pain, including headache. But their responses in body
pain or visceral pain models are similar to those of WT mice. Our finding is the first
demonstration that TG neurons are more vulnerable to TRESK dysfunction than DRG neurons;
and genetic loss of TRESK preferentially enhances trigeminal pain.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
TRESK protein is ubiquitously expressed in PANs.
TRESK KO mice (Figure 1A) were grossly normal. Progenies from heterozygous (HET)
crossing had the expected Mendelian frequency. Both male and female KO mice gained weight
normally and were fertile, with normal litter size and maternal behavior. First, we examined the
distribution of TRESK protein in TG and DRG tissues. Previous studies using in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry approaches indicated that TRESK is widely expressed
in PANs (Dobler et al., 2007; Guo & Cao, 2014; Kollert et al., 2015; Lafreniere et al., 2010; Yoo
et al., 2009); whereas single cell RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) studies reported a more restricted
TRESK mRNA expression in subpopulations of PANs (Chiu et al., 2014; Li et al., 2016;
Usoskin et al., 2015). We stained TG and DRG sections from adult WT and KO mice with an
antibody that recognizes mouse TRESK protein (Guo & Cao, 2014; Liu et al., 2013). TRESKimmunoreactivity (TRESK-ir) was completely absent in tissues from KO mice (Figure 1B),
validating the specificity of the antibody. In TG and DRG sections from WT mice, we used an
βIII tubulin antibody to label all neurons (Golden et al., 2010) and found that TRESK-ir
overlapped with βIII tubulin signal in almost all neurons (Figure 1B), indicating that TRESK
protein is ubiquitously expressed in mouse PANs but not in non-neuronal cells. It is possible that
the level of TRESK mRNA is low in individual neurons, and single-cell RNA-seq may
underestimate the number of neurons that express TRESK proteins.
Next, we asked whether loss of TRESK affects the gross development of TG in mice.
The total number of TG neurons containing βIII tubulin-immunoreactivity (βIII tubulin-ir) did
not differ between adult WT and TRESK KO mice (Figure 1C), suggesting that TRESK is not
required for the survival of PANs. The abundance of TG neurons that binds to the plant isolectin
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B4 (IB4) was also comparable between cultured TG neurons from adult WT and KO mice
(Figure 1D).
In a mouse model of familial hemiplegic migraine type 1, the number of macrophages
was significantly increased in TG, which may contribute to the headache pathophysiology
(Franceschini et al., 2013). We stained macrophages in adult WT and KO TG with an antibody
recognizing ionized calcium binding adaptor molecule 1 (Iba1). Both the density and the area of
macrophages were similar between wild-type and KO TG (Figures 1E-G). We next focused on
investigating how loss of TRESK affects the functions of PANs and the behavioral responses to
noxious stimuli.

Ubiquitous loss of TRESK currents in PANs preferentially increases the excitability of
small-diameter TG nociceptors that do not bind to IB4 (IB4−).
In previous studies, we used the sensitivity to lamotrigine to dissect currents through TRESK
channels (Guo & Cao, 2014; Guo et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2013). Bath application of 30 µM
lamotrigine blocked 20-30% of persistent outward currents in every adult WT TG neurons that
we recorded, regardless of soma size (Figures 2A-C, D, F). The same concentration of
lamotrigine did not significantly reduce the outward currents in TG neurons from TRESK KO
mice (Figures 2B-C, D, F), indicating that the majority of lamotrigine-sensitive current in TG
neurons are mediate through TRESK channels under our recording conditions. The size of total
persistent outward current was also significantly reduced in KO TG neurons (Figures 2E, G). TG
neurons from HET mice showed intermediate levels of lamotrigine-sensitive TRESK current and
total persistent outward current (Figures 2C-E).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We proceeded to investigate how loss of TRESK affects TG neuronal excitability. The
mean resting membrane potential (Vrest) was comparable between adult WT, HET and TRESK
KO TG neurons (Table 1), consistent with previous studies suggesting that endogenous TRESK
activity does not regulate Vrest in PANs (Dobler et al., 2007; Guo et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2013).
To test how ubiquitous loss of TRESK current affects the excitability of TG neurons, we divided
TG neurons into three subpopulations and used current-clamp recording to compare the passive
and active electrophysiological properties of WT, HET and TRESK KO neurons within each
group. Neurons were first sorted by soma diameter into small- (< 25 µm) and medium-sized (25–
40 µm) groups. The majority of small TG neurons are nociceptors (Harper & Lawson, 1985a,
1985b), with a small subset representing the C-low threshold mechanorecepetors (C-LTMRs)
that transmit innocuous touch sensation (Lawson et al., 1997; Seal et al., 2009). Most of the
medium-sized TG neurons are low-threshold mechanoreceptors with myelinated Aβ fibers (Bae
et al., 2015; Goldstein et al., 1991; Perry et al., 1991). Small TG neurons were further divided
into IB4-positive (IB4+) and IB4-negative (IB4−) groups, based on their ability to bind to
fluorescently labeled IB4. It is well established that the small IB4+ and IB4− PANs exhibit
distinct neurochemical, anatomical, and electrophysiological properties and encode different pain
modalities (Cavanaugh et al., 2009; Choi et al., 2007; Fang et al., 2006; Scherrer et al., 2009;
Snider & McMahon, 1998; Stucky & Lewin, 1999). Indeed, both the rheobase value and the
spike frequency were significantly different between small IB4−, small IB4+ and medium-sized
TG neurons from WT mice (Figures 3A, G, H).
First, we investigated whether loss of TRESK affects the excitability of small IB4− TG
neurons, as the majority of these neurons express CGRP, the neuropeptide that plays an
important role in migraine pathophysiology (Ho et al., 2010; Price & Flores, 2007; Tao et al.,
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2012). Compared with WT neurons, small IB4− TG neurons from KO mice exhibited a
significantly higher input resistant (Rin) and consequently a more than 50% reduction of rheobase
for action potential (AP) generation (Figures 3A-C). The values of AP threshold, amplitude, halfwidth, or the amplitude of afterhyperpolarization (AHP) were not affected by the loss of TRESK
(Table 1), suggesting that TRESK current plays a negligible role in shaping the AP waveforms.
In both WT and KO small IB4− TG neurons, the number of APs initially increased almost
linearly in response to incremental depolarizing current injection and plateaued upon further
depolarization (Figure 3D). The slope of the input-output curve (between 25 pA and 125 pA
current injections) was significantly steeper in the KO group (Figure 3D inset), and the same
amount of depolarizing current evoked more APs in KO neurons than in WT (Figure 3D). We
conclude that the endogenous TRESK currents control the onset and the frequency of APs in
small IB4− TG neurons.
Next, we compared the excitability of small IB4+ TG neurons from WT and KO mice.
Loss of TRESK also resulted in higher Rin and lower rheobase in this TG subgroup (Figures 3AC). In WT TG culture, the input-output curve of IB4+ neurons was much flatter than that of small
IB4− neurons (Figure 3H). Loss of TRESK did not significantly increase the spike frequency in
small IB4+ TG neurons (Figure 3E), indicating that the endogenous TRESK activity regulates AP
initiation but not AP frequency in this TG subpopulation.
Among the three subtypes of WT TG neurons, the medium-sized neurons had the lowest
Rin, highest rheobase and the majority of them generated a single spike in response to both
threshold and supra-threshold current injections (Figures 3B-C, G-H, (Ratte et al., 2014)).
Surprisingly, loss of TRESK did not alter Rin, rheobase or spike frequency in medium-sized TG
neurons at all (Figures 3A-C, F), despite the significant reduction of total persistent outward
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

current at -25mV (Figure 2F). Of note, injection of depolarizing currents induced similar
membrane potential changes between – 60 mV and -35 mV in WT and KO medium-sized TG
neurons (Figure 3I), suggesting that there is little endogenous TRESK activity around Vrest to
oppose the membrane depolarization in WT medium-sized TG neurons.
Of all the WT TG neurons we recorded (n = 214), none showed spontaneous APs at Vrest.
On the contrary, 11 TRESK KO TG neurons exhibited spontaneous APs at Vrest, all of which
belonged to the small IB4− subpopulation. This accounted for 5.6% (11 of 197) of the total KO
TG neurons and 9.8% (11 of 112) of KO small IB4− TG neurons that we recorded for this study
(Figure 4A); again indicating that loss of TRESK preferentially increases the intrinsic
excitability of small IB4− TG neurons. Compared with WT small IB4− TG neurons, KO neurons
with spontaneous APs had a similar Vrest (-48 ± 2 mV) but a considerably lower AP threshold
(Figure 4B).
We also tested whether TG neuronal excitability was altered in TRESK HET mice.
Despite the reduction of both TRESK and total persistent outward currents (Figures 2B-D),
neither small IB4− nor IB4+ TG neurons from HET mice exhibited any changes of the measured
passive and active electrophysiological properties (Figures 3B-E, Table 1). This is consistent
with our previous finding that only a substantial reduction of the endogenous TRESK activity
results in hyper-excitation of TG neurons; and a moderate decrease of TRESK current is well
tolerated (Guo et al., 2014).
In addition to neurons that express CGRP, the small IB4− TG subpopulation also consists
of neurons that express the cold sensor TRPM8 channels and C-LTMRs that express vesicular
glutamate transporter 3 (VGLUT3), respectively (Le Pichon & Chesler, 2014; Usoskin et al.,

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2015). These neurons were likely under-sampled when we recorded from small IB4− TG
neurons, as they each accounted for less than 20% of small IB4− TG neurons. To identify these
neurons in TG culture, we generated WT and TRESK KO mice that express enhanced green
fluorescent protein (EGFP) from one TRPM8 locus (WT_TRPM8EGFP and KO_TRPM8EGFP
mice, (Dhaka et al., 2008)) as well as mice that contain a transgenic allele that expresses EGFP
under the control of the genomic sequences that regulate the expression of endogenous VGLUT3
(WT_VGLUT3EGFP and KO_VGLUT3EGFP mice, (Seal et al., 2009)). Compared to their WT
counterparts, the EGFP-positive (EGFP+), TRPM8-expressing TG neurons from TRESK KO
mice showed a 70% reduction of rheobase and a much higher spike frequency in response to
supra-threshold current injection (Figures 4C, D). On the contrary, loss of TRESK had no effect
on the excitability of EGFP+, VGLUT3-expressing C-LTMRs (Figures 4E, F). We also
quantified the abundance of CGRP- and TRPM8-expressing TG neurons under our culture
conditions. Only 11% (268 of 2365 neurons from 5 WT_TRPM8EGFP mice) of small IB4− TG
neurons were EGFP+; whereas 73% (459 of 626 neurons from 3 WT mice) of them contained
CGRP-immunoreactivity. This indicates that the results obtained from small IB4− TG neurons
largely reflected changes consistent with how loss of TRESK affects the excitability of CGRPexpressing (CGRP+) PANs.
Having characterized how loss of TRESK affects TG neuronal excitability, we proceeded
to investigate whether loss of TRESK affects the excitability of small-diameter DRG neurons. As
in TG neurons, 30 µM lamotrigine blocked 20-30% of persistent outward currents in every adult
WT DRG neurons that we recorded but had no significant effect on currents in KO DRG neurons
(Figure 5A). Surprisingly, the size of total persistent outward current remained comparable
between WT and KO DRG neurons (Figure 5B), suggesting that loss of endogenous TRESK
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

current is fully compensated in DRG neurons. Consequently, in either small IB4− or small IB4+
DRG subpopulation, WT and KO neurons exhibit similar Rin, rheobase, spike frequency as well
as other passive and active electrophysiological properties (Figures 5C-F, Table 2). Our findings
are inconsistent with a previous study reporting a reduction of total persistent outward currents
and AP rheobase in DRG neurons from mice expressing non-functional TRESK channels
(Dobler et al., 2007). More work is needed to resolve the discrepancy. It is possible that results
differ based on the duration of time neurons are maintained in vitro after dissociation. Here, we
recorded DRG neurons between 2-4 days in vitro (DIV), whereas in earlier work neurons were
recorded between 11-14 DIV. It has been reported that WT DRG neurons cultured for 5 DIV
exhibited altered K+ channel expression and excitability (Dawes et al., 2018; Martinez-Espinosa
et al., 2015).
Taken together, we conclude that ubiquitous loss of TRESK in all TG and DRG neurons
preferentially increases the intrinsic excitability of small IB4− TG nociceptors that express CGRP
and/or TRPM8, suggesting that the contribution of endogenous TRESK channel to PAN
excitability is cell-type specific and is not determined by its expression pattern.

Loss of TRESK selectively increases the number of capsaicin-responsive (Cap+) neurons in
the IB4− TG subpopulation.
Here, we investigated whether loss of TRESK affect the responses of TG neurons to noxious
stimuli, for example, exposure to capsaicin that selectively activates TRPV1 channels. We
applied capsaicin (100 nM) to small-diameter TG neurons in culture and recorded their responses
under current-clamp. In TG culture from adult WT mice, capsaicin elicited depolarization in 9 of

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

25 (36%) of neurons, 6 of which also exhibited multiple spikes (Figures 6A, B black). The
percentage of small TG neurons that responded to capsaicin was significantly higher in culture
from KO mice (67%, 24 of 36). In 18 of 36 KO TG neurons, capsaicin evoked both
depolarization and multiple spikes. An additional 6 (17%) KO neurons exhibited capsaicininduced depolarization only (Figure 6B red). The higher percentage of KO neurons with
capsaicin-evoked spikes likely results from the increase in intrinsic excitability. However, that
capsaicin depolarized more KO neurons than WT suggests that loss of TRESK may also increase
the number of TG neurons exhibiting functional TRPV1 channels.
To test this possibility, we used the ratiometric Ca2+ indicator fura-2 to measure
capsaicin-induced Ca2+ influx in TG neurons from WT and TRESK KO mice. This allows us to
compare the responses to capsaicin in large numbers of neurons (Figure 6C). Consistent with the
electrophysiology data, the percentage of KO neurons that responded to capsaicin (0.1 to 1 µM,
> 20% increase from baseline) was significantly higher than that of the WT group (Figures 6CD). To test whether this results from prolonged exposure of TG neurons to nerve growth factor
(NGF) and/or glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) in vitro, we repeated the
experiment in WT and KO TG neurons maintained in media without NGF and GDNF within 24
hours after dissociation. Once again, the fraction of Cap+ KO TG neurons was significantly
higher than that of the WT group (Figure 6E). In contrast, the percentage of Cap+ neurons was
similar in DRG cultures from WT and KO mice (Figure 6F), indicating that genetic loss of
TRESK selectively increases the number of Cap+ neurons in TG.
In another control experiment, we measured capsaicin-induced Ca2+ influx with 1 mM
lidocaine in the extracellular solution. This served two purposes. First, this allowed us to
measure Ca2+ influx exclusively through TRPV1 channels, as lidocaine blocks all voltage-gated
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Na+ channels, thereby eliminating capsaicin-evoked APs and the subsequent AP-induced Ca2+
influx through voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. Second, lidocaine at this concentration blocks more
than 70% of currents through mouse TRESK channels without affecting TRPV1 currents
(Keshavaprasad et al., 2005; Leffler et al., 2008; Sano et al., 2003), allowing us to test whether
transient reduction of TRESK activity affects capsaicin-induced Ca2+ influx in TG neurons. After
eliminating AP-induced Ca2+ influx, the percentage of Cap+ neurons was still higher in TG
culture from TRESK KO mice (Figure 6D). Of note, the fraction of Cap+ neurons in WT TG
culture was not altered by lidocaine (Figure 6D), suggesting that genetic loss of TRESK, but not
transient reduction of TRESK activity, increases the number of TG neurons exhibiting functional
TRPV1 channels.
We also compared basal and capsaicin-evoked Ca2+ influx in individual TG neurons.
Basal Ca2+ level was similar between WT and KO neurons (Figure 7A), indicating that loss of
TRESK does not affect resting Ca2+ concentration. The magnitude of peak capsaicin-evoked
Ca2+ influx was also comparable between WT and KO TG neurons (Figure 7B). Taken together,
these results suggest that genetic loss of TRESK results in the expression of functional TRPV1
channels in a subpopulation of TG neurons that normally do not respond to capsaicin. However,
loss of TRESK does not further enhance TRPV1 activity in TG neurons that normally respond to
capsaicin.
We next investigated whether TRESK KO TG neurons are more responsive to other
chemical stimuli than WT neurons. The percentage of neurons that exhibited Ca2+ influx in
response to 100 µM mustard oil (MO+), menthol (Men+) and histamine (His+) were comparable
between WT and KO TG culture (Figure 7C), indicating that loss of TRESK preferentially
enlarges the Cap+ TG population. We also sequentially measured Ca2+ influx evoked by
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

capsaicin and other chemical stimuli in individual TG neurons. The percentage of TG neurons
that were Cap+MO+, Cap+Men+ and Cap+His+ were similar in WT and KO TG cultures (Figure
7C). Approximately 90% of MO+, 60% of Men+ and 50% of His+ TG neurons were Cap+ in both
WT and KO TG culture (Figure 7D), suggesting that loss of TRESK increases functional TRPV1
channels in TG neurons that are not activated by mustard oil, menthol or histamine.
Does the increase in functional TRPV1 occur in IB4+ or IB4– KO TG neurons? The
percentage of IB4+ neurons was comparable between WT and KO TG cultures (Figure 1D).
Approximately 15% of TG neurons were Cap+IB4+ in both WT and KO culture (Figure 7E). On
the contrary, the percentage of Cap+IB4– TG neurons was significantly higher in TRESK KO
culture than in WT culture (Figure 7E), indicating that genetic loss of TRESK preferentially
increases the number of IB4− TG neurons that express functional TRPV1 channels.
Lastly, we compared the level of TRPV1 mRNA in WT and KO TG tissues by
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR). The relative level of TRPV1 mRNA was
significantly higher in TRESK KO TG than in WT, an almost 2-fold increase (Figure 7F),
indicating that genetic loss of TRESK results in upregulation of TRPV1 gene transcription in TG
neurons.
TRPV1 protein expression is increased in subpopulations of TG neurons in TRESK KO
mice.
We stained TG sections from WT and TRPV1 KO mice with the TRPV1 antibody. TRPV1immunoreactivity (TRPV1-ir) was present in many small-diameter neurons in WT TG but was
completely absent in TG sections from TRPV1 KO mice (Figure 8A), validating the specificity
of the antibody. On average, the abundance of TRPV1-expressing (TRPV1+) neurons was 30%
higher in TRESK KO TGs than in WT controls (Figures 8B, C), indicating that the increase in
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cap+ neurons KO TG results from a larger population of TG neurons expressing TRPV1
proteins. The size distributions of TRPV1+ TG neurons in WT and KO mice were similar (Figure
8E, F), the majority (> 80%) of them had a cross-sectional area smaller than 500 μm2 and
belonged to small-diameter (< 25 µm) PANs.
We went on to identify the TG subpopulation(s) in which TRPV1 expression was
upregulated in KO mice. Since the increase in Cap+ neurons mainly occurs in the IB4– KO TG
neurons (Figure 7E), we co-stained TG sections for TRPV1-ir and markers that subdivide the
IB4– PANs (Usoskin et al., 2015). First, we examined TRPV1-ir in TG neurons expressing
neuropeptide CGRP. The abundance of CGRP+ and TRPV1+CGRP+ neurons were both
significantly increased in TRESK KO TG compared to WT (Figures 8B, C). The soma sizes of
TRPV1+CGRP+ neurons in KO TG were slightly larger than those in WT (Figure 8D), but the
majority (> 80%) of them still had a cross-sectional area smaller than 500 μm2 (Figures 8D-F).
Secondly, we quantified the overlap between TRPV1-ir and neurofilament 200immunoreactivity (NF200-ir), a marker for myelinated PANs. In both WT and KO TG, about
35% neurons contained NF200-ir (NF200+), with similar soma size distributions (Figures 9A, B,
E, F). Only 3.4 ± 0.3% of TG neurons were TRPV1+NF200+ in WT mice, whereas the number of
TRPV1+NF200+ neurons was doubled in KO TG (7.2 ± 0.2%, Figure 9B). This accounted for
about 50% of the expansion of TRPV1+ population in KO TG. The percentage of TRPV1+
neurons in NF200+ population and the percentage of NF200+ neurons in the TRPV1+ population
were both significantly increased in KO TG (Figure 9D). The number of TRPV1+ neurons was
increased in both small- and medium-sized (cross sectional area > 500 µm2) NF200+ TG
populations in KO mice (Figures 9E, F). Overall, the soma sizes of TRPV1+NF200+ neurons in
KO TG were slightly smaller than those in WT (Figure 9C).
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We also compared TRPV1 expression in unmyelinated C-LTMRs in WT_VGLUT3EGFP
and KO_VGLUT3EGFP mice. The percentage of EGFP+, VGLUT3-expressing neurons was
comparable between WT and KO TG (Figure 10B). There was little overlap between the
TRPV1+ and EGFP+ populations in either WT or KO TG (Figures 10A, B), indicating that loss
of TRESK does not increase TRPV1 expression in TG C-LTMRs.
Lastly, we investigated whether loss of TRESK leads to expansion of TRPV1 expression
in TG neurons expressing TRPM8 channels. In sections from WT_TRPM8EGFP and
KO_TRPM8EGFP mice, we found that the percentage of EGFP+, TRPM8-expressing neurons was
similar between WT and KO TGs (Figure 10C). The abundance of TPPV1+EGFP+ populations
was significantly increased in KO TG compared to WT (Figure 10C). The percentage of
TRPV1+ neurons in EGFP+ population was doubled in KO TG (Figure 10D). Taken together, in
the absence of TRESK, TRPV1 channel is expressed in more IB4– TG neurons that express
CGRP, NF200 and/or TRPM8 but not VGLUT3, suggesting that genetic loss of TRESK may
convert some mechano- or cold-sensitive TG neurons to polymodal nociceptors.

Loss of TRESK preferentially enhances trigeminal nociception.
TRESK KO mice were grossly normal. Both male and female KO mice gained weight normally.
The performance of WT and KO mice did not differ in open field and rotarod tests (Figures 11AG), indicating that loss of TRESK does not affect general locomotion, coordination or the level
of anxiety in mice. This allowed us to compare the nociceptive responses of WT and TRESK KO
mice in a battery of pain models.
First, we investigated whether genetic loss of TRESK affects the responses to noxious

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

stimuli on the hindpaw and in visceral tissues. Previous studies reported that TRESK KO mice
exhibited shorter response latency on a hot plate and a reduction of hindpaw mechanical
threshold when housed individually (Castellanos et al., 2017; Chae et al., 2010). On the contrary,
we found no difference between WT and KO mice in their responses to thermal and cooling
stimuli to the hindpaw, regardless of sex (Figures 11H-J). The 50% withdrawal threshold to von
Frey filaments on the hindpaw was also comparable between WT and KO mice (Figure 11K).
This result was verified by another experimenter in a separate cohort of WT and KO littermates
(data not shown). The discrepancy between the current and previous studies may arise from
differences between genetic background (C57BL/6J versus C57BL/6N, plus the genetic drift in
individual colonies), housing conditions (group housed to avoid social isolation stress versus
individually housed) and diet composition. WT and KO mice also showed similar duration of
licking in response to hindpaw injection of capsaicin (Figure 11L). Lastly, we tested the mice in
a model of acute inflammatory visceral pain. The number of abdominal stretches evoked by
intraperitoneal (i.p.) injections of dilute acetic acid did not differ in the WT and KO mice (Figure
11M). We conclude that genetic loss of TRESK preferentially enhances trigeminal pain across
various modalities but does not alter the transmission and production of body pain, regardless of
stimulus modality, target tissue and the sex of mice. This is consistent with the finding that
ubiquitous loss of TRESK in PANs preferentially increases the intrinsic excitability and the
responsiveness to capsaicin in TG neurons.
Secondly, we investigated whether endogenous TRESK activity contributes to trigeminal
pain. We used an operant assay to assess the responses to noxious heat stimuli on facial skin.
Mice needed to press their cheeks onto the Peltier bars set at various temperatures in the
Orofacial Pain Assessment Device (OPAD) in order to lick the sweetened milk (the reward). In

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

WT mice of either sex, both the total number of reward licking and the number of licks per facial
contact (the L/F ratio) were greatly reduced when the bar temperature was increased from 33oC
to 50oC (Figures 12A-B, black bars). TRESK KO mice responded similarly to WT mice at 33oC
(Figures 12A-B, red bars), indicating they were not impaired in learning and performing the
operant assay. However, the total number of licks and the L/F ratio at 50oC were significantly
lower in both male and female KO mice relative to WT controls (Figures 12A-B), indicating that
loss of TRESK increases the sensitivity and/or reduces the tolerance to noxious heat stimuli on
facial skin. Interestingly, in female but not male TRESK KO mice, the number hot air (55oC)evoked eye blinks was significantly higher than WT controls (Figure 12C).
To test cold sensitivity, we reduced the facial skin temperature by applying acetone to the
mouse cheek. The duration of wiping the treated area was significantly prolonged in KO mice
than in WT (Figure 12D), indicating a hyper-responsiveness to acetone evaporation-induced
cooling. To measure facial responses to chemical stimuli, we injected capsaicin intradermally
into the mouse cheek and found that the number of cheek wiping was significantly increased in
both male and female KO mice compared with WT controls (Figure 12E). Regarding facial
mechanical sensitivity, we measured the threshold for evoking a withdrawal reflex to the
application of von Frey filaments on mouse forehead skin. The 50% withdrawal threshold of
TRESK KO mice was significantly lower than that of WT mice (Figure 12F, left). Notably, the
withdrawal threshold of female KO mice was even lower than that of male KO, although WT
mice did not show sex difference in mechanical thresholds (p = 0.32, Figure 12F, left). TRPV1
activation has been shown to contribute to mechanical allodynia in disease states (Shepherd et
al., 2018; Yin et al., 2013). However, TRPV1 antagonist AMG9810 did not alter the facial
mechanical withdrawal thresholds in WT or KO mice (Figure 12F, right), indicating that loss of

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TRESK is sufficient to increase the sensitivity to facial mechanical stimuli. Together, these
results indicate that endogenous TRESK activity inhibits the transmission and production of
facial pain evoked by thermal, cold, chemical and punctate mechanical stimuli.

Dural afferent neurons from TRESK KO mice show higher intrinsic excitability and
capsaicin responsiveness.
Does genetic loss of TRESK affect the excitability of dural afferent neurons, the primary sensory
neurons in the trigeminovascular pathway subserving headache? We used Fluoro-Gold (FG) to
retrogradely label dural afferent neurons in adult mice and found that the size distribution of FGlabeled (FG+) dural afferent neurons was similar between WT and TRESK KO mice (Figure
13H). First, we compared the intrinsic excitability of WT and KO dural afferent neurons.
Compared with WT small IB4− dural afferent neurons, the mean rheobase was 50% lower in KO
neurons and the average Rin was significantly higher (Figure 13A and Table 3). The number of
APs evoked by depolarizing current injections was significantly increased in KO neurons relative
to the WT group (Figure 13B). On the contrary, the rheobase, Rin and spike frequency were
similar in small IB4+ dural afferent neurons from WT and KO mice (Figures 13A, C). The values
of Vrest, AP threshold, amplitude, half-width, and AHP amplitude were all comparable between
WT and KO FG+ neurons (Table 3).
Secondly, we recorded the responses of WT and KO dural afferent neurons to capsaicin
under current-clamp. Bath application of 100 nM capsaicin evoked membrane depolarization
and, in some cases, multiple spikes in 33% (10 of 30) WT neurons (Figure 13D black pie).
Conversely, 46% (13 of 28) KO dural afferent neurons exhibited capsaicin-induced multiple
spikes and an additional 18% (5 of 28) were depolarized by capsaicin (Figure 13D red pie). We
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

also compared the expression of TRPV1 and CGRP between WT and KO dural afferent neurons.
Consistent with a previous report (Huang et al., 2012), the abundance of TRPV1+ and CGRP+
neurons were lower in FG+ dural afferent neurons than in the total TG population in WT mice
(Figures 8C, 13F). The percentage of TRPV1+ dural afferent neurons was significantly higher in
KO mice than that in WT controls (Figures 13E, F), a more than 40% increase on average. The
soma sizes of TRPV1+ dural afferent neurons in TRESK KO mice were slightly smaller than
those in WT mice (Figure 13G). Conversely, the abundance of CGRP+ dural afferent neurons
was comparable between WT and KO mice (Figure 13F). We conclude that loss of TRESK
activity results in hyper-excitation of small IB4− dural afferent neurons as well as an expansion
of TRPV1 channel expression in dural afferents.

TRESK KO mice are hyper-responsive to stimuli that generate headache-related behavior.
Here, we investigated whether endogenous TRESK activity regulates the generation of
headache-related behaviors in mice (Huang et al., 2016). After recovery from craniectomy for 7
days, both WT and TRESK KO mice exhibited some spontaneous forepaw wiping and hindpaw
scratching behavior within the trigeminal V1 dermatome during a 2-hour observation period in
the home cage (Figures 14A-D, baseline groups). Dural application of 20 µl vehicle did not
increase V1-directed behavior above the basal level in either WT or KO mice (Figures 14A-D,
vehicle groups). In WT mice, dural application of 20 µl IScap, which contained capsaicin and a
mixture of inflammatory mediators, elicited more robust V1-directed wiping and scratching than
vehicle treatment (Figures 14A-D, black bars). Our previous study suggests that dural IScapinduced behavior are mechanistically related to the ongoing headache in humans, as they can be
reduced to the control level by pretreatment of mice with anti-migraine drugs (Huang et al.,
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2016). Both the number (Figures 14A-B) and the duration (Figures 14C-D) of V1-directed
behaviors were significantly higher in TRESK KO mice than in WT mice regardless of sex,
indicating that loss of TRESK renders both male and female mice hyper-responsive to stimuli
that evoke headache-related behaviors.
We went on to ask whether loss of TRESK alters the likelihood to manifest headacherelated behaviors in mice. To increase statistical power, we combined data from male and female
mice and normalized the duration of vehicle- or IScap-induced behavior to the baseline values in
individual mice (Figure 14E). Since WT and KO mice responded similarly to vehicle
application, we used all vehicle-treated mice as the reference population to calculate the Z score
(the number of standard deviations [SDs] from the mean of all vehicle-treated mice) of each
IScap-treated mice (Figure 14F). When we used z > 2 as the threshold, only less than 40% (8 of
22) of WT mice met the criteria as IScap responders; whereas more than 80% (15 of 18) TRESK
KO mice were responders (Figure 14G). Using a less stringent criteria (Z > 1), all KO mice
responded to dural IScap but less than 60% of WT mice could be classified as responders
(Figures 14G). Collectively, these data suggest that loss of TRESK increases both the likelihood
and the magnitude of headache-related behavior in response to IScap-evoked activation of the
trigeminovascular pathway.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
Although mutations of TRESK channels have been reported in migraine patients, whether
TRESK activity controls the generation of trigeminal pain, especially headache, is still debated.
The lack of specific blocker presents a major roadblock for deciphering the contribution of
TRESK to sensory processing. To this end, we have used WT and TRESK KO mice to
systematically investigate the impact of genetic loss of TRESK on trigeminal and body pain
transmission.

Cell type-specific effect of TRESK dysfunction on intrinsic excitability
Consistent with previous work (Dobler et al., 2007; Guo & Cao, 2014; Kollert et al., 2015;
Lafreniere et al., 2010; Yoo et al., 2009), we found that TRESK-ir and lamotrigine-sensitive
TRESK currents are present in every WT TG and DRG neuron. Loss of TRESK results in a
significant reduction of total persistent outward current in all TG neurons. In small IB4− TG
neurons that express CGRP and/or TRPM8, this leads to a significant increase in Rin, a decrease
of rheobase, and an increase in spike frequency in response to depolarizing current injections,
indicating that endogenous TRESK is activated around Vrest and during the weak depolarizations
prior to AP initiation to reduce the membrane resistance and increase outward currents, thereby
serving as a brake to oppose membrane depolarization and limit AP firing. Of note, TRESK is
the only K2P channel that can be activated by intracellular Ca2+ (Enyedi & Czirjak, 2015). In
response to noxious stimuli, TRESK activity can be enhanced by the elevation of intracellular
Ca2+, further counterbalancing the generator potential provided by excitatory inputs. In addition,
Ca2+ influx through voltage-gated Ca2+ channel during AP repolarization also increases
endogenous TRESK current, thereby reducing neuron’s ability to generate multiple APs.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Importantly, we observed spontaneous APs at Vrest in ~10% of the small IB4− TG
neurons from TRESK KO mice but not in any of the WT TG neurons. What distinguishes these
neurons from those without spontaneous APs was the lower AP threshold, suggesting that
endogenous TRESK activity prevents spontaneous APs through delay of the activation of
voltage-gated Na+ channels in some WT small IB4− TG neurons. Numerous studies indicate that
ongoing activity of PANs maintains the ongoing (“spontaneous”) pain under tissue- and nerveinjury conditions (Baron et al., 2013; Gracely et al., 1992; Haroutounian et al., 2014). Our
findings may shed light on one of the mechanisms through which ongoing activity is generated
in C-fibers, especially the small IB4− TG neurons under pathological conditions.
Despite a similar increase in Rin, small IB4+ TG neurons from TRESK KO mice only
exhibited a 30% reduction of rheobase, with no changes in spike frequency and no occurrence of
spontaneous APs at Vrest, indicating a limited role of endogenous TRESK in regulating the
excitability of this TG subpopulation. This is in line with earlier studies identifying another K2P
channel TREK2 as well as Ca2+- and Na+-modulated K+ channels as key regulators of the Vrest
and intrinsic excitability of small IB4+ PANs (Acosta et al., 2014; Martinez-Espinosa et al.,
2015; Zhang et al., 2010). Interestingly, although functional TRESK channels are clearly present
in medium-sized TG neurons, there is little TRESK activity when the membrane potential is
below -35 mV. This may explain why loss of TRESK did not affect the passive membrane
properties or the excitability of medium-sized TG neurons at all. Whether the gating of TRESK
channel is different in medium- and small-diameter TG neurons requires further investigation.
In contrast to what we observed in TG neurons, loss of TRESK did not reduce total
persistent outward current or alter the intrinsic excitability of DRG neurons. Upregulation of
other K+ channels that are active at Vrest (e.g. other K2P family of channels) likely compensates
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

for the loss of endogenous TRESK. Further study is needed to determine which channel(s) are
upregulated in response to genetic loss of TRESK in DRG, how long it takes to restore
background K+ current and, importantly, why this adaptive change does not occur in TG
neurons. A comparison of the transcriptomes from mouse TG and DRG neurons reveals that,
despite being overwhelmingly similar, 15 members of the Hox family of transcription factors are
exclusively expressed in adult DRG neurons (Lopes et al., 2017). This provides a possible
molecular basis for the differential adaptive changes of DRG and TG neurons in response to the
loss of TRESK.
Collectively, our present data delineated a cell type-specific role of TRESK channels in
controlling TG neuronal excitability. Despite the ubiquitous presence of TRESK activity in all
PANs, genetic loss of TRESK preferentially increases the excitability of small IB4− TG
nociceptors expressing CGRP and/or TRPM8. Notably, a moderate reduction of TRESK and
total persistent outward currents had no effect on the intrinsic excitability of heterozygous TG
neurons, indicating that 50% of endogenous TRESK activity is sufficient to maintain normal
intrinsic excitability and to prevent spontaneous APs. A more profound reduction of TRESK
activity would be required to cause prolonged hyper-excitation of subpopulations of TG neurons
during migraine and other chronic trigeminal pain conditions. In a recent study, transient
reduction of TRESK current with a dominant-negative subunit does not alter the excitability of
small TG neurons (Royal et al., 2018). However, it is not clear to what extent the TRESK and
total persistent outward currents are affected by the mutant subunit. More importantly, including
all small TG neurons into one group would likely mask the effects of the mutant subunit on the
excitability of subpopulations of TG neurons, as indicated by our results.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Novel function of TRESK in regulating TRPV1 expression
Previous studies of K2P channel functions have focused on their contributions to neuronal
excitability. Loss of other K2P channels such as TRAAK, TREK1, TREK2 and/or TASK3
increases the percentage of DRG neurons that respond to capsaicin, menthol as well as
temperature changes through attenuating the brake for excitability (Morenilla-Palao et al., 2014;
Noel et al., 2009; Pereira et al., 2014). In the present study, loss of TRESK nearly doubled the
number of Cap+ TG neurons as the result of an increase in the number of neurons that express
TRPV1 mRNA and protein. Our findings revealed for the first time a function of TRESK beyond
its role in regulating neuronal excitability.
The expression of TRPV1 occurs in a wide range of PANs in early development and
gradually become more restricted to a subset of PANs in adult mice (Cavanaugh et al., 2011; Luo
et al., 2007; Mishra et al., 2011; Takashima et al., 2010). Although the developmental onset of
TRESK expression in TG neurons is not well defined, the density of TRESK current in neonatal
TG neurons is already comparable to that of adult TG neurons (Guo & Cao, 2014); whereas the
refinement of TRPV1 expression does not complete till postnatal day 15 (Cavanaugh et al.,
2011). Loss of TRESK may perturb this process, resulting in TRPV1 expression in a larger
fraction of TG neurons. Alternatively, the expansion of TRPV1 expression may be activitydependent, resulting from prolonged hyper-excitation of small IB4− TG neurons without TRESK.
Future research is warranted to investigate these non-mutually exclusive possibilities. Whether
TRESK dysfunction contributes to the upregulation of TRPV1 in adult PANs under some
chronic condition also merits further study. All in all, our experiments provide a starting point
for further elucidating the potential role of TRESK channels in regulating gene expression in
addition to serving as the brake for AP generation.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The present results also firmly establish that the small IB4− TG neurons are the PANs that
are most vulnerable to TRESK dysfunction, undergoing maladaptive changes to increase the
intrinsic excitability and to express more sensor proteins to detect noxious stimuli. It is well
recognized that TRPV1 can be activated by a variety of endogenous and exogenous stimuli
(Caterina & Julius, 2001). The expansion of TRPV1+ neurons mainly occurs in KO TG neurons
that express NF200, CGRP and/or TRPM8, suggesting that some mechano- or cold-sensitive TG
neurons are converted to polymodal nociceptors in the absence of TRESK. This likely would
enhance the ability of individual PANs in detection and integration of noxious stimuli of various
modalities in both normal and chronic pain states.

Implication of TRESK dysfunction for trigeminal pain, especially migraine headache
Both our in vitro experiments and the behavioral tests reveal no difference between WT and
TRESK KO mice in their responses to noxious stimuli on the hindpaw and in viscera. This does
not imply that TRESK activity is irrelevant to body and/or visceral pain in adults, but rather it
supports the view that DRG neurons may in some way compensate for the genetic loss of
TRESK. Earlier studies have provided clear evidence that reduction of TRESK activity in adult
mice increases the sensitivity to mechanical stimuli on the hindpaw (Bautista et al., 2008;
Lennertz et al., 2010; Tulleuda et al., 2011; Zhou et al., 2016). Future studies will be required to
assess whether mature DRG neurons can restore the level of TRESK current long after the initial
injury and whether this contributes to the resolution of pain.
We made several key in vivo observations that endogenous TRESK activity regulates
trigeminal nociception across various modalities in both male and female mice. First, TRESK
KO mice showed enhanced responses to noxious stimuli on facial skin but not on hindpaw skin,
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

suggesting that loss of TRESK differentially affects the excitability of TG and DRG neurons that
innervate cutaneous tissues. Thus, it seems unlikely that the selective increase in TG neuronal
excitability in KO mice results from the unique target tissues (e.g. dura, eyes and tooth pulps)
that some TG neurons innervate. Secondly, both the hyper-excitation of small IB4− TG neurons,
especially the CGRP+ neurons, and the increase in TRPV1 channel expression account for the
hyper-sensitivity of TRESK KO mice to facial thermal and chemical stimuli (McCoy et al.,
2013). It is well established that injury induces thermo-hypersensitivity through enhancing
TRPV1 activity and/or expression (Caterina & Julius, 2001). In addition, injury-induced decrease
of TRESK expression in PANs may increase the intrinsic excitability, thereby allowing heatsensing neurons to respond to warm temperature (Yarmolinsky et al., 2016). Thirdly, loss of
TRESK increases facial mechanical sensitivity independent of TRPV1 activation. Under normal
condition, punctate mechanical sensation in mice is mediated by the non-peptidergic PANs that
do not express TRPV1 (Cavanaugh et al., 2011). It is likely that a mild reduction of rheobase in
small IB4+ TG neurons is sufficient to increase facial mechanical sensitivity in KO mice.
Notably, loss of TRESK results in a more profound reduction of withdrawal threshold in female
mice, and hot air-evoked eye blink was enhanced in female but not male KO mice, suggesting
that TRESK dysfunction affect some aspects of trigeminal pain processing more severely in
females than males. Lastly, the response to acetone-induced cooling of facial skin is more robust
in TRESK KO mice, likely resulting from the hyper-excitation of TRPM8-expressing TG
neurons. This indicates that endogenous TRESK, probably along with other K+ channels
including TREK1, TREK2 and TASK3 (Madrid et al., 2009; Morenilla-Palao et al., 2014; Noel
et al., 2009; Pereira et al., 2014; Vetter et al., 2013; Viana et al., 2002), acts as an excitability
brake in TRPM8-expressing neurons to modulate the sensitivity to cold stimuli. Future

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

experiments are necessary to determine whether the decrease of TRESK expression contributes
to injury-induced cold-hypersensitivity by weakening the excitability brake.
Most importantly, we found that loss of TRESK selectively increases the intrinsic
excitability and TRPV1 expression in small IB4− dural afferent neurons. This was sufficient to
increase the percentage of mice responsive to the dural application of IScap as well as to increase
the magnitude of headache-related behaviors. These results indicate that the endogenous TRESK
activity in small IB4− dural afferent neurons negatively regulates the activation of the
trigeminovascular pathway, thereby preventing the initiation of the headache episodes. Of note,
many of the small IB4− dural afferent neurons express CGRP and/or its receptors (Burstein et al.,
2015; Ho et al., 2010). In response to migraine triggers, dural afferent neurons release CGRP and
many other neurotransmitters/modulators in both meninges and medullary dorsal horn. CGRP
can in turn activate more dural afferent neurons by signaling downstream of CGRP receptors
(Burstein et al., 2015; Ho et al., 2010). In future studies, it will be necessary to investigate
whether exposure to common migraine triggers causes a substantial reduction of endogenous
TRESK activity in small IB4− dural afferent neurons from WT mice. If this is the case, hyperexcitation of these neurons will not only enhance the release of CGRP but also amplify the
effects of CGRP receptor signaling, thereby strengthening this local feedforward loop and
leading to the initiation and maintenance of headache in patients with common forms of
migraine.
TRESK mRNA is highly expressed in human TG neurons and dominant-negative
TRESK mutations have been identified in migraine patients (Andres-Enguix et al., 2012; Flegel
et al., 2015; Lafreniere et al., 2010; LaPaglia et al., 2018; Rainero et al., 2014). However, the
causal relationship between TRESK function and migraine susceptibility has not been
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

established. A recent study suggests that dysfunction of TREK1/2 channels, and not of TRESK
alone, contributes to the increase TG neuronal excitability and alter the pain processing in
migraine patients with frameshift TRESK mutations (Royal et al., 2018). We also found that a
50% reduction of endogenous TRESK activity does not alter the intrinsic excitability of TG
neurons. That said, what we have observed in TRESK KO mice strongly suggest that a profound
reduction of endogenous TRESK activity will significantly increase the excitability of small IB4−
dural afferent neurons and enhance the activation of the trigeminovascular pathway, leading to a
higher susceptibility to headache episodes. Future research is warranted to test whether migraine
triggers can profoundly reduce TRESK activity in dural afferent neurons, and whether this can
precipitate headache episodes in common forms of migraine.
In humans, TRESK mutations are associated with migraine but not body pain or visceral
pain. Similarly, TRESK KO mice exhibit behaviors indicative of enhanced trigeminal pain,
including headache, but normal body pain and visceral pain; whereas genetic loss of TREK1 or
TREK2 lead to hyper-sensitivity to noxious thermal, mechanical and chemical stimuli on the
hindpaw, indicating enhance body pain responses (Alloui et al., 2006; Pereira et al., 2014).
Under our housing and experimental conditions, TRESK KO mice better recapitulate the
symptoms caused by human TRESK mutations than TREK1/2 KO mice. Admittedly, our
findings using the global TRESK KO mice do not exclude a role for TRESK outside PANs.
Future studies using tissue-specific KO mice will unequivocally demonstrate the contributions of
PAN TRESK activity to chronic pain, especially migraine headache.
In conclusion, our study highlights some exquisite differences between TG and DRG
neurons in response to ion channel dysfunction. We provide evidence that ubiquitous loss of
TRESK during development preferentially increases the intrinsic excitability of TG nociceptors
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expressing CGRP or TRPM8 as well as expands the expression of TRPV1 proteins in small IB4−
TG neurons. Consequently, TRESK dysfunction selectively enhances trigeminal pain and, in
particular, the generation of headache. Our findings support a causal relationship between
TRESK function and migraine susceptibility and establish a foundation for further elucidating
the unique molecular and cellular basis of trigeminal pain, especially migraine headache.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and Methods
Mice
All procedures were carried out in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for
the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health and the guidelines
of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Washington University in St. Louis. To
avoid social isolation stress, all mice (except for the ones that underwent craniectomy) were
group housed (2-5 per cage, same sex) in the animal facility of Washington University in St
Louis on a 12-hour light–dark cycle with constant temperature (23-24°C), humidity (45-50%),
and food and water ad libitum. All mice were maintained on C57BL/6J background (backcrossed
for at least 7 generations). Young adult mice (5-7 weeks old) or neonatal mice (postnatal day 12) were used in the electrophysiology and Ca2+ imaging experiments. Adult male and female
littermates (8-20 weeks old) were used in the behavioral tests and immunohistochemistry (IHC)
experiments.
WT and TRESK KO mice were generated by crossing heterozygous breeders
(Kcnk18tm1(KOMP)Vlcg, KOMP repository). We also crossed heterozygous TRESK breeders with
heterozygous TRPM8EGFP and VGLUT3EGFP mice. The double heterozygous breeders were then
crossed with TRESK heterozygotes to generate WT/KO_TRPM8EGFP and
WT/KO_VGLUT3EGFP mice, respectively. Genotypes were determined by PCR of tail DNA as
described (Dhaka et al., 2008; Seal et al., 2009; Valenzuela et al., 2003). For TRESK allele
genotyping, the WT allele was amplified with primers TUF (5’GAGGAGAACCCTGAGTTGAAGAAG-3’) and TUR (5’-GCACCTCCGAGGCAGTAAC-3’),
producing a 103-bp fragment. The targeted allele was amplified with primers NeoInF (5’TTCGGCTATGACTGGGCACAACAG-3’) and NeoInR (5’31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TACTTTCTCGGCAGGAGCAAGGTG-3’), producing a 282-bp fragment. The PCR conditions
were 96oC for 30 seconds (s), 50oC for 30 s and 72oC for 30 s for 40 cycles.
Primary culture of mouse TG and DRG neurons
TG and lumbar DRG (L3-L5) tissues were collected from 5-6 weeks old WT and TRESK KO
mice of either sex and were treated with 2.5 mg/ml collagenase IV followed by 2.5 mg/ml
trypsin at 37oC for 15 minutes (min), respectively. Cells were dissociated by triturating with firepolished glass pipettes and were centrifuged through a 15% BSA gradient to remove debris and
non-neuronal cells. Neurons were resuspended in MEM-based culture medium containing 5%
fetal bovine serum, 25 ng/ml NGF, 10 ng/ml GDNF and were seeded on Matrigel-coated
coverslips. Ca2+ imaging and electrophysiology recordings were performed in neurons 2-4 DIV.
For Ca2+ imaging experiments, the BSA gradient was omitted to increase the yield of neurons. In
some cases, neurons were cultured in the absence of NGF and GDNF and were used within 24
hours after plating. Each set of experiment contains neurons from at least 3 batches of culture.
Ca2+ Imaging
Coverslips containing cultured TG or DRG neurons were incubated with HBSS/Hepes solution
containing 2.5 µM fura-2 AM and 0.1% Pluronic F-127 (all from Molecular Probe) at 37oC for
30 min to load the ratiometric Ca2+ indicator. De-esterification of the dye was carried out by
washing the coverslips 3 times with HBSS/Hepes solution and incubating the coverslips in
HBSS/Hepes solution in the dark for an additional 30 min at 37oC. Neurons were used for Ca2+
imaging experiments within 3 hours after Fura-2 loading.
Coverslips with fura-2 loaded neurons were placed in a flow chamber mounted on a
Nikon TE2000S inverted epifluorescent microscope and were perfused with room temperature

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(RT) Tyrode’s solution (1 ml/min) containing (in mM): 130 NaCl, 2 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 25
Hepes, 30 glucose, pH 7.3 with NaOH, and 310 mosmol/kgH2O. A differential interference
contrast (DIC) image of neurons in the field was captured to calculate soma diameters from
cross-sectional areas off-line. Healthy neurons were chosen based on their morphology under
DIC microscopy. In a pilot test, all selected neurons (> 100) exhibited robust Ca2+ influx in
response to a depolarization stimulus (extracellular solution containing 50 mM KCl). Fura-2 was
alternately excited by 340 and 380 nm light (Sutter Lambda LS) and the emission was detected at
510 ± 20 nm by a UV-transmitting 20x objective (N.A. 0.75) and a CoolSnapHQ2 camera
(Photometrics). The frame capture period was 50 milliseconds (ms) at 1.5 s interval. SimplePCI
software (Hamamatsu) was used for controlling and synchronizing the devices as well as image
acquisition and analysis. Regions of interest (ROIs) encompassing individual neurons were
defined a priori. The ratio of fluorescence excited by 340 nm divided by fluorescence excited by
380 nm (R340/380) was determined on a pixel-by-pixel basis and was averaged for each ROI. An
additional background area was recorded in each field for off-line subtraction of background
fluorescence.
To measure capsaicin-induced Ca2+ influx, Tyrode’s solutions containing 100 nM or 1
µM capsaicin were prepared from a 50 µM capsaicin stock solution (in 100% ethanol) before
each experiment. After a 3 min baseline measurement in Tyrode’s solution, neurons were
perfused with 100 nM capsaicin at 5 ml/min for 1 min followed by washing with Tyrode’s for 5
min and perfusion with 1 µM capsaicin for 1 min. To measure the responsiveness to multiple
chemical stimuli in individual neurons, we used a protocol consisted of a 3 min baseline
measurement followed by 1 min perfusion of 1 µM capsaicin, 5 min Tyrode’s wash, 1 min
perfusion of 100 µM histamine or 100 µM menthol, 5 min of Tyrode’s wash and 1 min perfusion

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of 100 µM mustard oil (all from Sigma). At the end of each experiment, neurons were incubated
with 3 µg/ml Fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated IB4 (Sigma) for 5 min. The FITC
fluorescence on soma membrane was detected after 10 min perfusion with Tyrode’s solution to
wash off unbound IB4.
Peak responses were determined by calculating the absolute increase in R340/380 above
baseline (the average R340/380 during the 3 min baseline measurement). A > 20% change from
baseline was set as the threshold for a response. Since R340/380 is directly related to intracellular
Ca2+ concentration (Grynkiewicz et al., 1985), we used the average fold change of peak
R340/380 values ([peak_R340/380 – basal_R340/380] / basal_R340/380) to compare the
magnitude of Ca2+ transients.
Electrophysiology
Whole cell patch-clamp recordings were performed at RT with a MultiClamp 700B amplifier
(Molecular Devices). The recording chamber was perfused with Tyrode’s solution (0.5 ml/min).
The pipette solution contained the following (in mM): 130 K-gluconate, 7 KCl, 2 NaCl, 0.4
EGTA, 1 MgCl2, 4 ATP-Mg, 0.3 GTP-Na, 10 HEPES, 10 Tris-phosphocreatine, 10 U/ml
creatine phosphokinase, pH 7.3 with KOH, and 290 mosmol/kgH2O. Recording pipettes had <
4.5 MΩ resistance. pClamp 10 (Molecular Devices) was used to acquire and analyze data. Cell
capacitance and series resistance were constantly monitored throughout the recording. Data were
analyzed with the Clampfit (Molecular Devices) and Origin (OriginLab) software.
Neurons were recorded between 2-4 DIV. Longer culture time did not alter the number or
the thickness of the processes but significantly increased the length and the branches of
individual processes. The processes of cultured neurons would contribute to the space-clamp
error. We did not find significant differences in the size of persistent outward current or neuronal
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

excitability between early (2 DIV) and late (4 DIV) recordings within individual experimental
groups. Thus the space clamp issue was not exacerbated by the prolonged culture time.
Voltage-clamp experiments. Series resistance (< 15 MΩ, average 12 ± 1 MΩ) was compensated
by 80%. Current traces were not leak subtracted. Signals were filtered at 2 kHz and digitized at
20 kHz. Total background K+ current and current through TRESK channels in neurons were
recorded as described previously (Guo & Cao, 2014). Briefly, the extracellular solution
contained 1 µM tetrodotoxin (TTX) to block TTX-sensitive Na+ current. To minimize other
transient voltage-gaged Na+, K+ and Ca2+ currents, we held neurons at -60 mV and depolarized
them to -25 mV for 150 ms, and then ramped the potential to -135 mV at 0.37 mV/ms every 10 s.
The outward current at the end of the -25 mV depolarizing step was measured as the total
background K+ current. To further dissect background K+ currents through TRESK channels, we
bath-applied 30 µM lamotrigine (Sigma) while evoking whole cell currents using this pulse
protocol (Guo & Cao, 2014).
Current-clamp experiments. Series resistance (< 15 MΩ) was not compensated. Signals were
filtered at 10 kHz and digitized at 100 kHz. After whole cell access was established, membrane
capacitance was determined with amplifier circuitry. The amplifier was then switched to currentclamp mode to measure Vrest. Rin was calculated by measuring the membrane potential change in
response to a 20 pA hyperpolarizing current injection from Vrest. Neurons were excluded from
analysis if the Vrest was higher than -40 mV or Rin was smaller than 200 MΩ.
To test neuronal excitability, neurons at Vrest were injected with 1 s depolarizing currents
in 5 or 25 pA incremental steps. The rheobase was defined as the minimum amount of current
required to elicit at least 1 AP. The first AP elicited using this paradigm was used to measure AP
threshold (the membrane potential at which dV/dt exceeds 10 V/s), amplitude, and half-width.
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The AHP amplitude was measured from the single AP elicited by injecting a 1 ms depolarizing
current in 200 pA incremental steps from the Vrest.
DIC images of neurons were captured before the recording to calculate soma diameters
from cross-sectional areas off-line. At the end of electrophysiological recording, neurons were
stained with FITC-conjugated IB4 (3 µg/ml). The recording pipette remained attached to the
neurons during IB4 staining and washing. The Vrest, Rin, capacitance, series resistance, and leak
currents were not significantly altered during the process.
RNA Extraction, Reverse Transcription and qPCR
We followed the procedures described in a previous study (C. Yang et al., 2011). Briefly, TG
tissues were collected from naive adult mice and total RNA was isolated using the RNeasy Plus
Mini Kit (Qiagen). Two micrograms of total RNA from each sample was used for first-strand
cDNA synthesis using the Retroscript Kit (Applied Biosystems, ABI). The reverse transcriptase
was omitted in the negative control groups for qPCR.
The qPCR reactions were performed with samples in triplicate on an ABI 7500 fast realtime PCR system using power SYBR green PCR master mix (ABI). The mouse TRPV1 cDNA
was amplified with primers 5’-TTCCTGCAGAAGAGCAAGAAGC-3’ and 5’CCCATTGTGCAGATTGAGCAT-3’ (Albers et al., 2006). The mouse β-actin cDNA was
amplified with primers 5’-TGGAGAAGAGCTATGAGCTGCCTG-3’ and 5’GTAGTTTCATGGATGCCACAGGAT-3’ (C. Yang et al., 2011). The PCR condition was 95oC
for 15 s and 60oC for 30 s for 40 cycles. The specificity of qPCR was verified by dissociationcurve analysis in both experimental and negative control groups. Primer efficiency was validated
as described (C. T. Yang et al., 2009). The TRPV1 and β-actin primers exhibit similar

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

efficiencies (94% and 90%, respectively). The threshold cycle (Ct) values were measured from
the point where the linear range of the amplification curve intersects the amplification detection
threshold line. Abundance of TRPV1 mRNA in each sample was calculated from 2−dCt, with dCt
= Ct(TRPV1) − Ct(β-actin). Ct(TRPV1) and Ct(β-actin) represented the mean values of the
triplicate reactions. The fold change in TRPV1 mRNA expression in individual TGs was
calculated with the 2-ddCt method (Livak & Schmittgen, 2001), with ddCt = dCt (each TG) –
mean dCt of WT TGs.
Retrograde labeling of TG neurons innervating the dura
We used FG (2% in saline, Fluorochrome) to label the dural afferent neurons in WT and TRESK
KO mice as described in a previous study (Huang et al., 2012). Briefly, adult mice were
anesthetized with 3-4% isoflurane in an induction chamber until losing the righting reflex and
were mounted on a Stoelting stereotaxic apparatus. Anesthesia was maintained by 1.5-2%
isoflurane through a nose cone. Body temperature was maintained by placing mice on a 37oC
circulating water warming pad. The eyes were covered by a small amount of eye drops to
prevent the corneas from drying. A longitudinal skin incision was made to expose the cranium.
The muscle and periosteal sheath were removed. Lidocaine hydrochloride jelly (2%) was applied
on the skin and the skull for 5 min before the incision and the muscle/sheath removal to prevent
the activation and/or sensitization of the primary afferent fibers. A craniectomy (~2.5 mm
diameter) was made with a surgical blade in the area overlying the superior sagittal sinus (SSS)
between the bregma and lambda, leaving the underlying dura exposed but intact. To prevent
spreading of the tracer to other peripheral sites, a sterile polypropylene ring was sealed to the
skull surrounding the exposed dura using a mixture of dental cement powder (Stoelting 51459)
and superglue adhesive. After waiting 5–10 min for the mixture to solidify, we applied 20 μl FG
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

onto the exposed dura. Subsequently, a sterile polypropylene cap was secured over the ring with
the dental cement/superglue mix to cover the exposed dura. The skin incision was closed with 50 suture. After recovery from anesthesia, mice were housed individually in the animal facility to
allow the transportation of FG to the somata of dural afferent neurons in TG. For
electrophysiology experiments, craniectomy and FG application was done in 6 weeks old mice
and TG tissues were collected 7 days later for primary culture. For IHC experiments, mice were
perfused 14 days after the dural application of FG to collect TG tissues.
Tissue Preparation, IHC, and Image Analysis
Adult WT and TRESK KO mice were euthanized with i.p. injection of barbiturate (200 mg/kg)
and were transcardiacally perfused with 0.1 M phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, pH 7.2) followed
by 4% formaldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB, pH 7.2) for fixation. TGs and DRGs were
dissected out, post-fixed for 4 hours, and protected overnight at 4oC in 0.1 M PB with 30%
sucrose. The entire TG or DRG was then frozen in Optimal Cutting Temperature compound,
sectioned at 15 µm in the transverse plane using a cryostat, collected on Superfrost Plus glass
slides in sequence and stored at -20°C.
One in every 3 TG sections was processed for each IHC experiment. The sections were
dried at RT, washed 3 times in 0.01 M PBS, and incubated in blocking buffer consisting 0.01 M
PBS, 10% normal goat serum (NGS), and 0.3% triton X-100 for 1 hour at RT. Sections were
then incubated overnight with primary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer in a humidity
chamber at 4°C. After 6 washes (5 min each) in washing buffer containing 0.01 M PBS with 1%
NGS and 0.3% triton and 1 hour incubation in blocking buffer, sections were incubated with
secondary antibodies (1:1000 dilution in blocking buffer) at RT for 1 hour, washed 6 times with
washing buffer and rinsed 3 times in 0.01 M PBS. Sections were then cover-slipped using
38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fluoromount-G Slide Mounting Medium (Electron Microscopy), sealed with nail polish, and
stored at 4 °C.
To count total TG neurons, sections were stained with the rabbit anti-βIII tubulin
antibody (Covance, 1:1000) and AlexaFluor 568-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody.
Images of the entire TG section were captured using an Olympus NanoZoomer Whole-Slide
Imaging System at the Alafi neuroimaging core facility at Washington University Medical
School. All neurons on each section were counted and the total number of βIII tubulin-positive
neurons was multiplied by 3 to obtain the total number of TG neurons for each mouse (Golden et
al., 2010).
Other primary antibodies used in IHC were: rabbit anti-Iba1 (Wako, 1:1000), rabbit antiTRPV1 (Neuromics, 1:1000), guinea pig anti-CGRP (Peninsula laboratories, 1:1000), mouse
anti-NF200 (Sigma, 1:1000), chicken anti-EGFP (AVES Lab, 1:1000); and mouse anti-TRESK
(1:1000, (Guo & Cao, 2014; Liu et al., 2013)). AlexaFluor 568- and 488-conjugated secondary
antibodies (Invitrogen) were used at 1:1000 dilution.
High-power images of the TG sections were captured through a 20x objective on a Nikon
TE2000S inverted epifluorescence microscope equipped with a CoolSnapHQ2 camera
(Photometrics). Cross-sectional somatic area was measured using the SimplePCI software
(Hamamatsu). Representative images were adjusted for contrast and brightness using the same
parameter within individual experiments. No other manipulations were made to the images.
Behavioral Tests
WT and TRESK KO mice were generated by crossing heterozygous breeders on C57BL/6J
background. Adult male and female littermates (8-20 weeks old) were used in the behavioral

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tests. The experimenters were blinded to the genotype of mice and the treatments mice received.
General motor function tests
Open field test. Mice were habituated in the testing room for 1 hour in their home cages and then
tested one at a time. Each mouse was placed in the center of the illuminated, sound-attenuated
VersaMax Open Field box (42 x 42 cm, AccuScan Instruments) for 1 hour while the
experimenter left the room. Horizontal movement and center entries (14 x 14 cm) were recorded
and analyzed by the VersaMax software.
Rotarod test. Mice were habituated in the testing room for 1 hour in their home cages and then
underwent 5 training sessions on the Rotarod (Ugo Basile, Model 7650) at 4 revolutions/min
(rpm) for 5 min. Mice that stayed on the rod for at least 2 min / session were tested on the
accelerating rod (4 to 40 rpm over 5.5 min). The latency to fall from the rod was averaged over 5
trials in individual mice.
Responses to noxious stimuli on the hindpaw. Each mouse was acclimatized in the test
apparatus for 1-2 hours before the application of stimuli.
Mechanical stimuli. A series of calibrated von Frey filaments was used to apply mechanical
stimuli to the plantar surface of the hindpaw. We used the up-down paradigm to determine the
50% withdrawal threshold (Chaplan et al., 1994).
Thermal and cold stimuli. We recorded the latency to lick the hindpaw and/or to jump on a 55oC
hot plate. The cut-off time was 20 s. We also measured the paw withdrawal latencies to radiant
heat stimuli applied to the plantar surface of the hindpaw (Hargreaves et al., 1988). The cold
plantar assay was used to compare the response latencies of WT and TRESK KO mice to cold
stimuli on the plantar surface of the hindpaw (Brenner et al., 2012).
40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Chemical stimuli. Mice were injected with 0.3 µg capsaicin (in 10 µl saline with 1% DMSO) in
the plantar surface of one hindpaw. We quantified the time spent licking the treated paw within 5
min after the injection.
Visceral pain test. We counted the number of abdominal stretches that occurred within 30 min
after i.p. injection of 5.0 ml/kg 0.6% acetic acid, a stimulus that produces visceral pain with
inflammation (Cao et al., 1998).
Responses to facial noxious stimuli.
Eye blink responses to thermal stimuli. Mice were well-habituated to the test apparatus and
extensively handled by the experimenter for a week before testing. On the test day, the
experimenter gently held the mouse on the palm and delivered the thermal stimulus by blowing
air to one eye at 0.5 liter/min for 10 s. The number of eye blinks was recorded by a video camera
and quantified off-line. The distance between the air outlet (6.35 mm diameter) and the eye was
2-3 mm. The air was heated to various temperatures (20-55oC) by passing through plastic tubing
submerged in heated water bath. The air temperature was measured by a thermal probe at the
outlet. Mice were tested every 3 days. Each eye was tested twice per day, first with RT air and 12 hour later with air at a higher temperature. Results from left and right eyes were averaged for
individual mice.
Cheek acetone test. We measured the acute nocifensive responses to acetone-evoked evaporative
cooling on mouse cheek (Constandil et al., 2012; Trevisan et al., 2016). Mice were habituated
individually in clear plexiglass boxes (11 x 11 x 15 cm) situated in front of three angled mirrors
for at least 1 hour for 3 consecutive days and were extensively handled by the experimenter. The
day before testing, both cheeks were shaved (6.5 x 12 mm) under brief anesthesia (2% isoflurane
in 100% oxygen). On the test day, mice were habituated for 1 hour before the assay. We applied
41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

acetone (15 µl) to the shaved cheeks and immediately returned mice to the boxes. Time spent
wiping the treated area was recorded by a video camera and quantified off-line. For individual
mice, acetone was applied alternatingly to both cheeks at > 10 min interval, and the duration of
behavior was averaged from 4 applications.
Cheek capsaicin injection. Mice were acclimated and shaved as in the facial acetone test. On the
test day, we habituated mice in the clean boxes for 1 hour and then injected 1 µg capsaicin (in 20
µl saline with 1% DMSO) or vehicle intradermally in one cheek (Akiyama et al., 2010; Shimada
& LaMotte, 2008). Mice were immediately returned to the boxes and recorded by video cameras
for 40 min. Total numbers of forepaw wiping of the injected cheek were quantified off-line.
Operant behavioral responses to thermal stimuli. Responses to facial thermal stimuli were
tested in the OPAD (Stoelting), which uses a reward-conflict paradigm that allows a mouse to
choose between receiving a reward (sweetened condensed milk diluted 1:2 with water) and
escaping an aversive stimulus (50oC thermal stimuli on the cheeks), thereby controlling the
amount of pain it feels. First, mice underwent 4 training sessions in two weeks. The day before
each session, mice were food deprived for 16 hours and both cheeks were shaved. The next day,
individual mice were trained in the OPAD for 20 min to learn to voluntarily press the cheeks
onto the Peltier bars set at 33˚C in order to drink sweetened milk (Anderson et al., 2013). Mice
that consistently licked more than 600 times / per session were used to test facial thermal
responses. Trained mice underwent 2 test sessions 3 days apart. During each test session, the
thermode temperature varied every 3 min as follows: 33oC–50oC– 33oC–50oC–33oC. The
number of licks and the number of thermode contacts at each temperature were recorded and
averaged in individual mice.
Withdrawal responses to facial mechanical stimuli. Mice were well-habituated to the test room
42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and extensively handled by the experimenter for at least two weeks before testing. The hair on
the forehead (above and between two eyes) was shaved the day before testing. On the test day,
the experimenter gently held the mouse on the palm with minimal restraint and applied the
calibrated von Frey filament perpendicularly to the shaved skin, causing the filament to bend for
5 seconds. A positive response was determined by the following criteria as previously described:
mouse vigorously stroked its face with the forepaw, head withdrawal from the stimulus, or head
shaking (Elliott et al., 2012). We used the up-down paradigm to determine the 50% withdrawal
threshold (Chaplan et al., 1994). The responses of female WT and KO mice to von Frey
filaments were measured before and 0.5-1 hour after the i.p. injection of TRPV1 antagonist
AMG9810 (Sigma, 10 mg/kg in 1% DMSO). This dose of AMG9810 effectively inhibited cheek
wiping induced by intradermal injection of 1 µg capsaicin (data not shown).
Mouse model of episodic migraine. Craniectomy was performed on 9-15 weeks old WT and
TRESK KO mice as described in a previous study (Huang et al., 2016) and in the section of
retrogradely labeling of dural afferent neurons above. We applied 20 µl of sterile saline to the
dura and let mice recover from surgery for 7 days. Mice were housed individually in the animal
facility and were transported to the testing room for acclimation and handling every day. On the
test day, mice in their home cages were habituated in the testing room for 1 hour and were
briefly anesthetized with isoflurane. The polypropylene cap was removed without disturbing the
skin suture and 20 µl of vehicle (saline with 2% DMSO) or IScap solution (see below) was
applied onto the exposed dura. Subsequently, a new sterile polypropylene cap was secured over
the ring with bone wax to cover the dura. After recovery from anesthesia, mice were returned to
the home cages placed in front of a 3-way mirror to ensure that the head-directed behavior be
recorded at all body positions. Home cage behaviors were recorded 0.5-2.5 hours after the dural

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

application. Mice were recorded one at a time in the absence of the experimenter and other mice.
Digital video files were quantified off-line by experimenters blinded to the genotypes of mice or
the treatments that mice received. The entire 2-hour video was watched and scored. The total
number and the duration of forepaw wiping and hindpaw scratching within the mouse V1
dermatome (including the scalp and periorbital area) were quantified.
The IScap solution contained 0.5 mM capsaicin, 1 mM bradykinin, 1 mM histamine, 1
mM serotonin (5-HT), and 0.1 mM prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) in saline with 2% DMSO. All
chemicals were purchased from Sigma, dissolved in H2O (bradykinin, histamine, and 5-HT) or
DMSO (capsaicin and PGE2) at 100x concentrations and stored at -80oC in aliquots. IScap
solution was freshly prepared from the stock solutions on the test day.
Statistical analysis
For in vitro experiments, data from each group contained neurons from at least 3 independent
cultures using at least 2 mice each time. For behavioral experiments, power analysis is conducted
to estimate sample size with > 80% power to reach a significance level of 0.05. For IHC
experiments, sample sizes were estimated based on our prior experience.
All data are reported as mean ± standard error of the mean. The Shapiro–Wilk test was
used to check data normality. Statistical significance between experimental groups was assessed
by Fisher’s exact test, χ2 test, two-tailed t-test, analysis of variance (ANOVA) (1-way or 2-way,
with or without repeated-measures [RM]) with the post hoc Bonferroni test where appropriate,
using Origin and Statistica (from OriginLab and StatSoft, respectively). The non-parametric
Mann–Whitney U test or the Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA was used where appropriate to analyze the
differences in the soma size distribution and the withdrawal threshold to mechanical stimuli.
Differences with p < 0.05 were considered statistically significant.
44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Daizong Li for the generation of the TRESK antibody; Drs. Hongzhen Hu,
Jing Feng, Jin Hua, Ms. Megan E Cloud, Katherine Tsay, and Alicia Liu for technical assistance;
as well as Drs. Christopher J Lingle and Joe Henry Steinbach for valuable comments on the
manuscript. We also thank the Alafi Neuroimaging laboratory and the Pain Center Animal
Behavior Core at Washington University. This work was supported by National Institutes of
Health grants NS083698, NS087321 and NS103350 (to YQC), and a Xiangya Scholarship Fund
(to XHJ).

Author Contributions
Conceptualization, Y.Q.C. and Z.H.G.; Methodology, Z.H.G., C.S.Q., J.T.Z, F.X.L., and Q.L.;
Investigation, Z.H.G., C.S.Q., J.X.H. and J.T.Z; Resources, A.D.; Writing – Original Draft,
Y.Q.C. and Z.H.G.; Writing – Review & Editing, Y.Q.C., Z.H.G., Q.L., and A.D.; Supervision,
Y.Q.C. and Z.H.G.; Funding Acquisition, Y.Q.C.

Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Acosta, C., Djouhri, L., Watkins, R., Berry, C., Bromage, K., & Lawson, S. N. (2014). TREK2
expressed selectively in IB4-binding C-fiber nociceptors hyperpolarizes their membrane
potentials and limits spontaneous pain. J Neurosci, 34(4), 1494-1509. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4528-13.2014
Akiyama, T., Carstens, M. I., & Carstens, E. (2010). Differential itch- and pain-related
behavioral responses and micro-opoid modulation in mice. Acta Derm Venereol, 90(6), 575-581.
doi: 10.2340/00015555-0962
Albers, K. M., Woodbury, C. J., Ritter, A. M., Davis, B. M., & Koerber, H. R. (2006). Glial cellline-derived neurotrophic factor expression in skin alters the mechanical sensitivity of cutaneous
nociceptors. J Neurosci, 26(11), 2981-2990. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4863-05.2006
Alloui, A., Zimmermann, K., Mamet, J., Duprat, F., Noel, J., Chemin, J., Guy, N., Blondeau, N.,
Voilley, N., Rubat-Coudert, C., Borsotto, M., Romey, G., Heurteaux, C., Reeh, P., Eschalier, A.,
& Lazdunski, M. (2006). TREK-1, a K+ channel involved in polymodal pain perception. EMBO
J, 25(11), 2368-2376. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601116
Anderson, E. M., Mills, R., Nolan, T. A., Jenkins, A. C., Mustafa, G., Lloyd, C., Caudle, R. M.,
& Neubert, J. K. (2013). Use of the Operant Orofacial Pain Assessment Device (OPAD) to
measure changes in nociceptive behavior. J Vis Exp(76), e50336. doi: 10.3791/50336
Andres-Enguix, I., Shang, L., Stansfeld, P. J., Morahan, J. M., Sansom, M. S., Lafreniere, R. G.,
Roy, B., Griffiths, L. R., Rouleau, G. A., Ebers, G. C., Cader, Z. M., & Tucker, S. J. (2012).
Functional analysis of missense variants in the TRESK (KCNK18) K channel. Sci Rep, 2, 237.
doi: 10.1038/srep00237
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bae, J. Y., Kim, J. H., Cho, Y. S., Mah, W., & Bae, Y. C. (2015). Quantitative analysis of
afferents expressing substance P, calcitonin gene-related peptide, isolectin B4, neurofilament
200, and Peripherin in the sensory root of the rat trigeminal ganglion. J Comp Neurol, 523(1),
126-138. doi: 10.1002/cne.23672
Baron, R., Hans, G., & Dickenson, A. H. (2013). Peripheral input and its importance for central
sensitization. Ann Neurol, 74(5), 630-636. doi: 10.1002/ana.24017
Bautista, D. M., Sigal, Y. M., Milstein, A. D., Garrison, J. L., Zorn, J. A., Tsuruda, P. R., Nicoll,
R. A., & Julius, D. (2008). Pungent agents from Szechuan peppers excite sensory neurons by
inhibiting two-pore potassium channels. Nat Neurosci, 11(7), 772-779.
Brenner, D. S., Golden, J. P., & Gereau, R. W. th. (2012). A novel behavioral assay for
measuring cold sensation in mice. PLoS One, 7(6), e39765. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0039765
Burstein, R., Noseda, R., & Borsook, D. (2015). Migraine: multiple processes, complex
pathophysiology. J Neurosci, 35(17), 6619-6629. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0373-15.2015
Cao, Y. Q., Mantyh, P. W., Carlson, E. J., Gillespie, A. M., Epstein, C. J., & Basbaum, A. I.
(1998). Primary afferent tachykinins are required to experience moderate to intense pain. Nature,
392(6674), 390-394. doi: 10.1038/32897
Castellanos, A., Andres, A., Bernal, L., Callejo, G., Comes, N., Gual, A., Giblin, J. P., Roza, C.,
& Gasull, X. (2017). Pyrethroids inhibit K2P channels and activate sensory neurons: basis of
insecticide-induced paraesthesias. Pain. doi: 10.1097/j.pain.0000000000001068
Caterina, M. J., & Julius, D. (2001). The vanilloid receptor: a molecular gateway to the pain
pathway. Annu Rev Neurosci, 24, 487-517.
Cavanaugh, D. J., Chesler, A. T., Braz, J. M., Shah, N. M., Julius, D., & Basbaum, A. I. (2011).
47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Restriction of transient receptor potential vanilloid-1 to the peptidergic subset of primary afferent
neurons follows its developmental downregulation in nonpeptidergic neurons. J Neurosci,
31(28), 10119-10127. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1299-11.2011
Cavanaugh, D. J., Lee, H., Lo, L., Shields, S. D., Zylka, M. J., Basbaum, A. I., & Anderson, D. J.
(2009). Distinct subsets of unmyelinated primary sensory fibers mediate behavioral responses to
noxious thermal and mechanical stimuli. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 106(22), 9075-9080.
Chae, Y. J., Zhang, J., Au, P., Sabbadini, M., Xie, G. X., & Yost, C. S. (2010). Discrete change
in volatile anesthetic sensitivity in mice with inactivated tandem pore potassium ion channel
TRESK. Anesthesiology, 113(6), 1326-1337. doi: 10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181f90ca5
Chaplan, S. R., Bach, F. W., Pogrel, J. W., Chung, J. M., & Yaksh, T. L. (1994). Quantitative
assessment of tactile allodynia in the rat paw. J Neurosci Methods, 53(1), 55-63.
Chiu, I. M., Barrett, L. B., Williams, E. K., Strochlic, D. E., Lee, S., Weyer, A. D., Lou, S.,
Bryman, G. S., Roberson, D. P., Ghasemlou, N., Piccoli, C., Ahat, E., Wang, V., Cobos, E. J.,
Stucky, C. L., Ma, Q., Liberles, S. D., & Woolf, C. J. (2014). Transcriptional profiling at whole
population and single cell levels reveals somatosensory neuron molecular diversity. Elife, 3. doi:
10.7554/eLife.04660
Choi, J. S., Dib-Hajj, S. D., & Waxman, S. G. (2007). Differential slow inactivation and usedependent inhibition of Nav1.8 channels contribute to distinct firing properties in IB4+ and IB4DRG neurons. J Neurophysiol, 97(2), 1258-1265.
Constandil, L., Goich, M., Hernandez, A., Bourgeais, L., Cazorla, M., Hamon, M., Villanueva,
L., & Pelissier, T. (2012). Cyclotraxin-B, a new TrkB antagonist, and glial blockade by
propentofylline, equally prevent and reverse cold allodynia induced by BDNF or partial
48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

infraorbital nerve constriction in mice. J Pain, 13(6), 579-589. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2012.03.008
Czirjak, G., Toth, Z. E., & Enyedi, P. (2004). The two-pore domain K+ channel, TRESK, is
activated by the cytoplasmic calcium signal through calcineurin. J Biol Chem, 279(18), 1855018558.
Dawes, J. M., Weir, G. A., Middleton, S. J., Patel, R., Chisholm, K. I., Pettingill, P., Peck, L. J.,
Sheridan, J., Shakir, A., Jacobson, L., Gutierrez-Mecinas, M., Galino, J., Walcher, J.,
Kuhnemund, J., Kuehn, H., Sanna, M. D., Lang, B., Clark, A. J., Themistocleous, A. C.,
Iwagaki, N., West, S. J., Werynska, K., Carroll, L., Trendafilova, T., Menassa, D. A.,
Giannoccaro, M. P., Coutinho, E., Cervellini, I., Tewari, D., Buckley, C., Leite, M. I., Wildner,
H., Zeilhofer, H. U., Peles, E., Todd, A. J., McMahon, S. B., Dickenson, A. H., Lewin, G. R.,
Vincent, A., & Bennett, D. L. (2018). Immune or Genetic-Mediated Disruption of CASPR2
Causes Pain Hypersensitivity Due to Enhanced Primary Afferent Excitability. Neuron, 97(4),
806-822 e810. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.01.033
Dhaka, A., Earley, T. J., Watson, J., & Patapoutian, A. (2008). Visualizing cold spots: TRPM8expressing sensory neurons and their projections. J Neurosci, 28(3), 566-575.
Dobler, T., Springauf, A., Tovornik, S., Weber, M., Schmitt, A., Sedlmeier, R., Wischmeyer, E.,
& Doring, F. (2007). TRESK two-pore-domain K+ channels constitute a significant component
of background potassium currents in murine dorsal root ganglion neurones. J Physiol, 585(Pt 3),
867-879.
Elliott, M. B., Oshinsky, M. L., Amenta, P. S., Awe, O. O., & Jallo, J. I. (2012). Nociceptive
neuropeptide increases and periorbital allodynia in a model of traumatic brain injury. Headache,
52(6), 966-984. doi: 10.1111/j.1526-4610.2012.02160.x

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Enyedi, P., & Czirjak, G. (2015). Properties, regulation, pharmacology, and functions of the
K(2)p channel, TRESK. Pflugers Arch, 467(5), 945-958. doi: 10.1007/s00424-014-1634-8
Fang, X., Djouhri, L., McMullan, S., Berry, C., Waxman, S. G., Okuse, K., & Lawson, S. N.
(2006). Intense isolectin-B4 binding in rat dorsal root ganglion neurons distinguishes C-fiber
nociceptors with broad action potentials and high Nav1.9 expression. J Neurosci, 26(27), 72817292. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1072-06.2006
Flegel, C., Schobel, N., Altmuller, J., Becker, C., Tannapfel, A., Hatt, H., & Gisselmann, G.
(2015). RNA-Seq Analysis of Human Trigeminal and Dorsal Root Ganglia with a Focus on
Chemoreceptors. PLoS One, 10(6), e0128951. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128951
Franceschini, A., Vilotti, S., Ferrari, M. D., van den Maagdenberg, A. M., Nistri, A., & Fabbretti,
E. (2013). TNFalpha levels and macrophages expression reflect an inflammatory potential of
trigeminal ganglia in a mouse model of familial hemiplegic migraine. PLoS One, 8(1), e52394.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052394
Golden, J. P., Hoshi, M., Nassar, M. A., Enomoto, H., Wood, J. N., Milbrandt, J., Gereau, R. W.
th, Johnson, E. M., Jr., & Jain, S. (2010). RET signaling is required for survival and normal
function of nonpeptidergic nociceptors. J Neurosci, 30(11), 3983-3994. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5930-09.2010
Goldstein, M. E., House, S. B., & Gainer, H. (1991). NF-L and peripherin immunoreactivities
define distinct classes of rat sensory ganglion cells. J Neurosci Res, 30(1), 92-104. doi:
10.1002/jnr.490300111
Gracely, R. H., Lynch, S. A., & Bennett, G. J. (1992). Painful neuropathy: altered central
processing maintained dynamically by peripheral input. Pain, 51(2), 175-194.
50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Grynkiewicz, G., Poenie, M., & Tsien, R. Y. (1985). A new generation of Ca2+ indicators with
greatly improved fluorescence properties. J Biol Chem, 260(6), 3440-3450.
Guo, Z., & Cao, Y. Q. (2014). Over-expression of TRESK K(+) channels reduces the excitability
of trigeminal ganglion nociceptors. PLoS One, 9(1), e87029. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0087029
Guo, Z., Liu, P., Ren, F., & Cao, Y. Q. (2014). Non-migraine associated TRESK K+ channel
variant C110R does not increase the excitability of trigeminal ganglion neurons. J Neurophysiol.
doi: 10.1152/jn.00267.2014
Hargreaves, K., Dubner, R., Brown, F., Flores, C., & Joris, J. (1988). A new and sensitive
method for measuring thermal nociception in cutaneous hyperalgesia. Pain, 32(1), 77-88.
Haroutounian, S., Nikolajsen, L., Bendtsen, T. F., Finnerup, N. B., Kristensen, A. D.,
Hasselstrom, J. B., & Jensen, T. S. (2014). Primary afferent input critical for maintaining
spontaneous pain in peripheral neuropathy. Pain, 155(7), 1272-1279. doi:
10.1016/j.pain.2014.03.022
Harper, A. A., & Lawson, S. N. (1985a). Conduction velocity is related to morphological cell
type in rat dorsal root ganglion neurones. J Physiol, 359, 31-46.
Harper, A. A., & Lawson, S. N. (1985b). Electrical properties of rat dorsal root ganglion
neurones with different peripheral nerve conduction velocities. J Physiol, 359, 47-63.
Ho, T. W., Edvinsson, L., & Goadsby, P. J. (2010). CGRP and its receptors provide new insights
into migraine pathophysiology. Nat Rev Neurol, 6(10), 573-582.
Huang, D., Li, S. Y., Dhaka, A., Story, G. M., & Cao, Y. Q. (2012). Expression of the transient
receptor potential channels TRPV1, TRPA1 and TRPM8 in mouse trigeminal primary afferent
neurons innervating the dura. Mol Pain, 8, 66.
51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Huang, D., Ren, L., Qiu, C. S., Liu, P., Peterson, J., Yanagawa, Y., & Cao, Y. Q. (2016).
Characterization of a mouse model of headache. Pain, 157(8), 1744-1760. doi:
10.1097/j.pain.0000000000000578
Kang, D., & Kim, D. (2006). TREK-2 (K2P10.1) and TRESK (K2P18.1) are major background
K+ channels in dorsal root ganglion neurons. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol, 291(1), C138-146.
Kang, D., Mariash, E., & Kim, D. (2004). Functional expression of TRESK-2, a new member of
the tandem-pore K+ channel family. J Biol Chem, 279(27), 28063-28070.
Keshavaprasad, B., Liu, C., Au, J. D., Kindler, C. H., Cotten, J. F., & Yost, C. S. (2005).
Species-specific differences in response to anesthetics and other modulators by the K2P channel
TRESK. Anesth Analg, 101(4), 1042-1049, table of contents. doi:
10.1213/01.ane.0000168447.87557.5a
Kollert, S., Dombert, B., Doring, F., & Wischmeyer, E. (2015). Activation of TRESK channels
by the inflammatory mediator lysophosphatidic acid balances nociceptive signalling. Sci Rep, 5,
12548. doi: 10.1038/srep12548
Lafreniere, R. G., Cader, M. Z., Poulin, J. F., Andres-Enguix, I., Simoneau, M., Gupta, N.,
Boisvert, K., Lafreniere, F., McLaughlan, S., Dube, M. P., Marcinkiewicz, M. M., Ramagopalan,
S., Ansorge, O., Brais, B., Sequeiros, J., Pereira-Monteiro, J. M., Griffiths, L. R., Tucker, S. J.,
Ebers, G., & Rouleau, G. A. (2010). A dominant-negative mutation in the TRESK potassium
channel is linked to familial migraine with aura. Nat Med, 16(10), 1157-1160.
LaPaglia, D. M., Sapio, M. R., Burbelo, P. D., Thierry-Mieg, J., Thierry-Mieg, D., Raithel, S. J.,
Ramsden, C. E., Iadarola, M. J., & Mannes, A. J. (2018). RNA-Seq investigations of human
post-mortem trigeminal ganglia. Cephalalgia, 38(5), 912-932. doi: 10.1177/0333102417720216
52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lawson, S. N., Crepps, B. A., & Perl, E. R. (1997). Relationship of substance P to afferent
characteristics of dorsal root ganglion neurones in guinea-pig. J Physiol, 505 ( Pt 1), 177-191.
Le Pichon, C. E., & Chesler, A. T. (2014). The functional and anatomical dissection of
somatosensory subpopulations using mouse genetics. Front Neuroanat, 8, 21. doi:
10.3389/fnana.2014.00021
Leffler, A., Fischer, M. J., Rehner, D., Kienel, S., Kistner, K., Sauer, S. K., Gavva, N. R., Reeh,
P. W., & Nau, C. (2008). The vanilloid receptor TRPV1 is activated and sensitized by local
anesthetics in rodent sensory neurons. J Clin Invest, 118(2), 763-776. doi: 10.1172/JCI32751
Lennertz, R. C., Tsunozaki, M., Bautista, D. M., & Stucky, C. L. (2010). Physiological basis of
tingling paresthesia evoked by hydroxy-alpha-sanshool. J Neurosci, 30(12), 4353-4361.
Li, C. L., Li, K. C., Wu, D., Chen, Y., Luo, H., Zhao, J. R., Wang, S. S., Sun, M. M., Lu, Y. J.,
Zhong, Y. Q., Hu, X. Y., Hou, R., Zhou, B. B., Bao, L., Xiao, H. S., & Zhang, X. (2016).
Somatosensory neuron types identified by high-coverage single-cell RNA-sequencing and
functional heterogeneity. Cell Res, 26(1), 83-102. doi: 10.1038/cr.2015.149
Liu, P., Xiao, Z., Ren, F., Guo, Z., Chen, Z., Zhao, H., & Cao, Y. Q. (2013). Functional Analysis
of a Migraine-Associated TRESK K+ Channel Mutation. J Neurosci, 33(31), 12810-12824.
Livak, K. J., & Schmittgen, T. D. (2001). Analysis of relative gene expression data using realtime quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods, 25(4), 402-408. doi:
10.1006/meth.2001.1262
Lopes, D. M., Denk, F., & McMahon, S. B. (2017). The Molecular Fingerprint of Dorsal Root
and Trigeminal Ganglion Neurons. Front Mol Neurosci, 10, 304. doi: 10.3389/fnmol.2017.00304
Luo, W., Wickramasinghe, S. R., Savitt, J. M., Griffin, J. W., Dawson, T. M., & Ginty, D. D.
53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(2007). A hierarchical NGF signaling cascade controls Ret-dependent and Ret-independent
events during development of nonpeptidergic DRG neurons. Neuron, 54(5), 739-754. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2007.04.027
Madrid, R., de la Pena, E., Donovan-Rodriguez, T., Belmonte, C., & Viana, F. (2009). Variable
threshold of trigeminal cold-thermosensitive neurons is determined by a balance between
TRPM8 and Kv1 potassium channels. J Neurosci, 29(10), 3120-3131. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4778-08.2009
Marsh, B., Acosta, C., Djouhri, L., & Lawson, S. N. (2012). Leak K(+) channel mRNAs in
dorsal root ganglia: relation to inflammation and spontaneous pain behaviour. Mol Cell Neurosci,
49(3), 375-386.
Martinez-Espinosa, P. L., Wu, J., Yang, C., Gonzalez-Perez, V., Zhou, H., Liang, H., Xia, X. M.,
& Lingle, C. J. (2015). Knockout of Slo2.2 enhances itch, abolishes KNa current, and increases
action potential firing frequency in DRG neurons. Elife, 4. doi: 10.7554/eLife.10013
McCoy, E. S., Taylor-Blake, B., Street, S. E., Pribisko, A. L., Zheng, J., & Zylka, M. J. (2013).
Peptidergic CGRPalpha primary sensory neurons encode heat and itch and tonically suppress
sensitivity to cold. Neuron, 78(1), 138-151. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2013.01.030
Mishra, S. K., Tisel, S. M., Orestes, P., Bhangoo, S. K., & Hoon, M. A. (2011). TRPV1-lineage
neurons are required for thermal sensation. EMBO J, 30(3), 582-593. doi:
10.1038/emboj.2010.325
Morenilla-Palao, C., Luis, E., Fernandez-Pena, C., Quintero, E., Weaver, J. L., Bayliss, D. A., &
Viana, F. (2014). Ion channel profile of TRPM8 cold receptors reveals a role of TASK-3
potassium channels in thermosensation. Cell Rep, 8(5), 1571-1582. doi:
54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.003
Noel, J., Zimmermann, K., Busserolles, J., Deval, E., Alloui, A., Diochot, S., Guy, N., Borsotto,
M., Reeh, P., Eschalier, A., & Lazdunski, M. (2009). The mechano-activated K+ channels
TRAAK and TREK-1 control both warm and cold perception. EMBO J, 28(9), 1308-1318. doi:
10.1038/emboj.2009.57
Pereira, V., Busserolles, J., Christin, M., Devilliers, M., Poupon, L., Legha, W., Alloui, A.,
Aissouni, Y., Bourinet, E., Lesage, F., Eschalier, A., Lazdunski, M., & Noel, J. (2014). Role of
the TREK2 potassium channel in cold and warm thermosensation and in pain perception. Pain,
155(12), 2534-2544. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2014.09.013
Perry, M. J., Lawson, S. N., & Robertson, J. (1991). Neurofilament immunoreactivity in
populations of rat primary afferent neurons: a quantitative study of phosphorylated and nonphosphorylated subunits. J Neurocytol, 20(9), 746-758.
Price, T. J., & Flores, C. M. (2007). Critical evaluation of the colocalization between calcitonin
gene-related peptide, substance P, transient receptor potential vanilloid subfamily type 1
immunoreactivities, and isolectin B4 binding in primary afferent neurons of the rat and mouse. J
Pain, 8(3), 263-272. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2006.09.005
Rainero, I., Rubino, E., Gallone, S., Zavarise, P., Carli, D., Boschi, S., Fenoglio, P., Savi, L.,
Gentile, S., Benna, P., Pinessi, L., & Dalla Volta, G. (2014). KCNK18 (TRESK) genetic variants
in Italian patients with migraine. Headache, 54(9), 1515-1522. doi: 10.1111/head.12439
Ratte, S., Zhu, Y., Lee, K. Y., & Prescott, S. A. (2014). Criticality and degeneracy in injuryinduced changes in primary afferent excitability and the implications for neuropathic pain. Elife,
3, e02370. doi: 10.7554/eLife.02370
55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Royal, P., Andres-Bilbe, A., Avalos Prado, P., Verkest, C., Wdziekonski, B., Schaub, S., Baron,
A., Lesage, F., Gasull, X., Levitz, J., & Sandoz, G. (2018). Migraine-Associated TRESK
Mutations Increase Neuronal Excitability through Alternative Translation Initiation and
Inhibition of TREK. Neuron. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2018.11.039
Sano, Y., Inamura, K., Miyake, A., Mochizuki, S., Kitada, C., Yokoi, H., Nozawa, K., Okada,
H., Matsushime, H., & Furuichi, K. (2003). A novel two-pore domain K+ channel, TRESK, is
localized in the spinal cord. J Biol Chem, 278(30), 27406-27412.
Scherrer, G., Imamachi, N., Cao, Y. Q., Contet, C., Mennicken, F., O'Donnell, D., Kieffer, B. L.,
& Basbaum, A. I. (2009). Dissociation of the opioid receptor mechanisms that control
mechanical and heat pain. Cell, 137(6), 1148-1159.
Seal, R. P., Wang, X., Guan, Y., Raja, S. N., Woodbury, C. J., Basbaum, A. I., & Edwards, R. H.
(2009). Injury-induced mechanical hypersensitivity requires C-low threshold mechanoreceptors.
Nature, 462(7273), 651-655. doi: 10.1038/nature08505
Shepherd, A. J., Mickle, A. D., Kadunganattil, S., Hu, H., & Mohapatra, D. P. (2018).
Parathyroid Hormone-Related Peptide Elicits Peripheral TRPV1-dependent Mechanical
Hypersensitivity. Front Cell Neurosci, 12, 38. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2018.00038
Shimada, S. G., & LaMotte, R. H. (2008). Behavioral differentiation between itch and pain in
mouse. Pain, 139(3), 681-687.
Snider, W. D., & McMahon, S. B. (1998). Tackling pain at the source: new ideas about
nociceptors. Neuron, 20(4), 629-632.
Stucky, C. L., & Lewin, G. R. (1999). Isolectin B(4)-positive and -negative nociceptors are
functionally distinct. J Neurosci, 19(15), 6497-6505.
56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Takashima, Y., Ma, L., & McKemy, D. D. (2010). The development of peripheral cold neural
circuits based on TRPM8 expression. Neuroscience, 169(2), 828-842. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.05.039
Tao, J., Liu, P., Xiao, Z., Zhao, H., Gerber, B. R., & Cao, Y. Q. (2012). Effects of familial
hemiplegic migraine type 1 mutation T666M on voltage-gated calcium channel activities in
trigeminal ganglion neurons. J Neurophysiol, 107(6), 1666-1680. doi: 10.1152/jn.00551.2011
Trevisan, G., Benemei, S., Materazzi, S., De Logu, F., De Siena, G., Fusi, C., Fortes Rossato,
M., Coppi, E., Marone, I. M., Ferreira, J., Geppetti, P., & Nassini, R. (2016). TRPA1 mediates
trigeminal neuropathic pain in mice downstream of monocytes/macrophages and oxidative
stress. Brain, 139(Pt 5), 1361-1377. doi: 10.1093/brain/aww038
Tulleuda, A., Cokic, B., Callejo, G., Saiani, B., Serra, J., & Gasull, X. (2011). TRESK channel
contribution to nociceptive sensory neurons excitability: modulation by nerve injury. Mol Pain,
7, 30.
Usoskin, D., Furlan, A., Islam, S., Abdo, H., Lonnerberg, P., Lou, D., Hjerling-Leffler, J.,
Haeggstrom, J., Kharchenko, O., Kharchenko, P. V., Linnarsson, S., & Ernfors, P. (2015).
Unbiased classification of sensory neuron types by large-scale single-cell RNA sequencing. Nat
Neurosci, 18(1), 145-153. doi: 10.1038/nn.3881
Valenzuela, D. M., Murphy, A. J., Frendewey, D., Gale, N. W., Economides, A. N., Auerbach,
W., Poueymirou, W. T., Adams, N. C., Rojas, J., Yasenchak, J., Chernomorsky, R., Boucher, M.,
Elsasser, A. L., Esau, L., Zheng, J., Griffiths, J. A., Wang, X., Su, H., Xue, Y., Dominguez, M.
G., Noguera, I., Torres, R., Macdonald, L. E., Stewart, A. F., DeChiara, T. M., & Yancopoulos,
G. D. (2003). High-throughput engineering of the mouse genome coupled with high-resolution

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expression analysis. Nat Biotechnol, 21(6), 652-659. doi: 10.1038/nbt822
Vetter, I., Hein, A., Sattler, S., Hessler, S., Touska, F., Bressan, E., Parra, A., Hager, U., Leffler,
A., Boukalova, S., Nissen, M., Lewis, R. J., Belmonte, C., Alzheimer, C., Huth, T., Vlachova,
V., Reeh, P. W., & Zimmermann, K. (2013). Amplified cold transduction in native nociceptors
by M-channel inhibition. J Neurosci, 33(42), 16627-16641. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.147313.2013
Viana, F., de la Pena, E., & Belmonte, C. (2002). Specificity of cold thermotransduction is
determined by differential ionic channel expression. Nat Neurosci, 5(3), 254-260. doi:
10.1038/nn809
Yang, C. T., Zeng, X. H., Xia, X. M., & Lingle, C. J. (2009). Interactions between beta subunits
of the KCNMB family and Slo3: beta4 selectively modulates Slo3 expression and function. PLoS
One, 4(7), e6135. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006135
Yang, C., Zeng, X. H., Zhou, Y., Xia, X. M., & Lingle, C. J. (2011). LRRC52 (leucine-richrepeat-containing protein 52), a testis-specific auxiliary subunit of the alkalization-activated Slo3
channel. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 108(48), 19419-19424. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1111104108
Yarmolinsky, D. A., Peng, Y., Pogorzala, L. A., Rutlin, M., Hoon, M. A., & Zuker, C. S. (2016).
Coding and Plasticity in the Mammalian Thermosensory System. Neuron, 92(5), 1079-1092. doi:
10.1016/j.neuron.2016.10.021
Yin, S., Luo, J., Qian, A., Du, J., Yang, Q., Zhou, S., Yu, W., Du, G., Clark, R. B., Walters, E.
T., Carlton, S. M., & Hu, H. (2013). Retinoids activate the irritant receptor TRPV1 and produce
sensory hypersensitivity. J Clin Invest, 123(9), 3941-3951. doi: 10.1172/JCI66413
Yoo, S., Liu, J., Sabbadini, M., Au, P., Xie, G. X., & Yost, C. S. (2009). Regional expression of
58

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the anesthetic-activated potassium channel TRESK in the rat nervous system. Neurosci Lett,
465(1), 79-84.
Zhang, X. L., Mok, L. P., Katz, E. J., & Gold, M. S. (2010). BKCa currents are enriched in a
subpopulation of adult rat cutaneous nociceptive dorsal root ganglion neurons. Eur J Neurosci,
31(3), 450-462. doi: 10.1111/j.1460-9568.2009.07060.x
Zhou, J., Lin, W., Chen, H., Fan, Y., & Yang, C. (2016). TRESK contributes to pain threshold
changes by mediating apoptosis via MAPK pathway in the spinal cord. Neuroscience, 339, 622633. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2016.10.039
Zhou, J., Yang, C. X., Zhong, J. Y., & Wang, H. B. (2013). Intrathecal TRESK gene
recombinant adenovirus attenuates spared nerve injury-induced neuropathic pain in rats.
Neuroreport, 24(3), 131-136.
Zhou, J., Yao, S. L., Yang, C. X., Zhong, J. Y., Wang, H. B., & Zhang, Y. (2012). TRESK gene
recombinant adenovirus vector inhibits capsaicin-mediated substance P release from cultured rat
dorsal root ganglion neurons. Mol Med Rep, 5(4), 1049-1052.

59

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. Functional TRESK channels are present in all TG and DRG neurons
(A) Schematics of WT mouse TRESK/Kcnk18 allele and the targeted allele. After homologous
recombination, the lacZ-loxP-hubiP-neo-loxP cassette replaces most of the TRESK coding
region.
(B) Representative images of TG and DRG sections from adult WT and TRESK KO mice
double stained with antibodies against TRESK and βIII tubulin. βIII tubulin-ir is present in all
neurons. TRESK-ir is present in almost all neurons in the WT sections. There is no TRESK-ir in
the KO sections.
(C) Total number of TG neurons in WT and TRESK KO mice (n = 3 mice in each group).
(D) The percentage of IB4+ and IB4– neurons in WT and KO TG culture (1010 WT and 940 KO
TG neurons from 10 separate primary cultures were counted).
(E) The density of Iba1-positive (Iba1+) macrophages in WT and KO TG (n = 3 mice in each
group).
(F) The mean area of individual Iba1+ macrophages in WT and KO TG (same mice as in E).
(G) The area of Iba1+ macrophages per mm2 TG in WT and KO mice (same mice as in D).

Figure 2. Total persistent outward currents and lamotrigine-sensitive K+ currents in TG
neurons from WT, HET and TRESK KO mice
(A) The voltage protocol used to record persistent outward currents and to minimize transient
voltage-gated K+, Na+ and Ca2+ currents.
60

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(B) Representative current traces from medium-sized (25–40 µm diameter) WT and KO TG
neurons before and after the application of 30 µM lamotrigine.
(C) Representative current traces from small-diameter (< 25 µm) WT, HET and KO TG neurons
before and after the application of 30 µM lamotrigine (or Tyrode’s solution), respectively.
(D-E) The percentage of lamotrigine-sensitive persistent K+ currents (D) and the total persistent
outward current density (E) in small-diameter TG neurons (n = 14–20 neurons in each group, all
measured at the end of the step to -25 mV). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; one-way ANOVA
with post hoc Bonferroni test, compared with the WT group; ###p< 0.001; compared with the
HET group. NS: no statistically significant difference.
(F-G) The percentage of lamotrigine-sensitive persistent K+ currents (F) and the total persistent
K+ current density (G) in medium-sized TG neurons from WT and KO mice (n = 15 and 21
neurons, respectively). *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001; two-tailed t-test.

Figure 3. Ubiquitous loss of TRESK currents preferentially increases the excitability of
small IB4− TG neurons
(A) Representative traces of APs generated by incremental depolarizing current injections in TG
neurons from WT and TRESK KO mice. The values of Vrest and the current amplitude are
indicated. The dotted lines indicate membrane potential at 0 mV.
(B, C) Mean rheobase (B, the minimum amount of current required to elicit at least 1 AP) and
Rin (C) of subpopulations of TG neurons from TRESK WT, HET and KO mice (n = 14–28
neurons in each group, see Table 1 for details of the intrinsic properties of TG neurons). *p <
0.05; **p < 0.01; one-way ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test, compared with the
61

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

corresponding WT group; #p< 0.05; ##p < 0.01; compared with the corresponding HET group.
(D-F) Input-output plots of the spike frequency in response to incremental depolarizing current
injections in small IB4− (D), small IB4+ (E) and medium-sized (F) TG neurons from TRESK
WT, HET and KO mice (same neurons as in B). &p < 0.05; two-way RM ANOVA; TRESK KO
neurons versus WT and HET groups. **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; one-way ANOVA with post hoc
Bonferroni test, compared with the corresponding WT group; ##p < 0.01; compared with the
corresponding HET group. Inset: the slope (spikes/sec/nA) of the input-output relationships
between 25 pA and 125 pA current injections. *p < 0.05; #p < 0.05; one-way ANOVA with post
hoc Bonferroni test, compared with the WT and HET groups, respectively.
(G) Mean rheobase of small IB4−, small IB4+ and medium-sized TG neurons from WT mice
(same neurons as in B WT groups). *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; one-way ANOVA with
post hoc Bonferroni test.
(H) Input-output plots of the spike frequency in response to incremental depolarizing current
injections in subpopulations of WT TG neurons (same WT neurons as in B WT groups). *p <
0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; two-way RM ANOVA.
(I) The plot of steady-state membrane potential versus injected current in medium-sized TG
neurons from WT and KO mice (same neurons as in B medium-sized groups).

Figure 4. Loss of TRESK increases the excitability of small IB4− TG neurons expressing
TRPM8 but not those expressing VGLUT3
(A) The percentage of neurons with spontaneous APs (sAPs) in all TG neurons and in small IB4−
TG neurons from WT and TRESK KO mice, respectively. ***p < 0.001, Fisher’s exact test
62

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

between the corresponding WT and KO groups. The dashed line indicates 0%.
(B) The AP threshold of WT and KO small IB4− TG neurons without spontaneous APs (w/o
sAPs, same neurons as in Figure 3B) as well as KO TG neurons with spontaneous APs (w sAPs,
n = 11). **p < 0.01, one-way ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test.
(C) Mean rheobase of EGFP+ TG neurons from WT_TRPM8EGFP and KO_TRPM8EGFP mice (n
= 14 and 18 neurons, respectively). **p < 0.01; two-tailed t-test.
(D) The spike frequency in response to incremental depolarizing current injections in EGFP+ TG
neurons from WT_TRPM8EGFP and KO_TRPM8EGFP mice (same neurons as in C). #p < 0.05;
two-way RM ANOVA. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT
and KO groups.
(E-F) Mean rheobase and spike frequency of EGFP+ TG neurons from WT_VGLUT3EGFP and
KO_VGLUT3EGFP mice (n = 19 and 27 neurons, respectively).

Figure 5. Loss of TRESK does not alter the excitability of small lumbar DRG neurons
(A-B) The percentage of lamotrigine-sensitive persistent K+ currents (A) and the total persistent
outward current density (B) in small-diameter DRG neurons from adult WT and TRESK KO
mice (n = 14–20 neurons in each group). ***p < 0.001; one-way ANOVA with post hoc
Bonferroni test, compared with the WT group. NS: no statistically significant difference.
(C-D) Mean rheobase (C) and Rin (D) of small IB4− and IB4+ DRG neurons from WT and
TRESK KO mice (n = 16–19 neurons in each group, see Table 2 for details of the intrinsic
properties of DRG neurons).

63

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(E-F) Input-output plots of the spike frequency in response to incremental depolarizing current
injections in small IB4− (E) and small IB4+ (F) DRG neurons from WT and KO mice (same
neurons as in C).

Figure 6. The number of Cap+ neurons is increased in cultured TG but not DRG neurons
from TRESK KO mice
(A) Representative current-clamp traces of 3 small-diameter WT TG neurons in response to 100
nM capsaicin. The values of Vrest are indicated.
(B) The percentage of WT and KO TG neurons that exhibit depolarization, burst of spikes or no
response to 100 nM capsaicin (n = 25 WT and 36 KO neurons). p < 0.05; χ2 test between WT
and KO groups.
(C) Representative Fura-2 images of cultured TG neurons from WT and KO mice before and
after applications of 100 nM and 1 µM capsaicin, respectively. The blue to green color transition
reflects increase in intracellular Ca2+. The arrowheads indicate neurons that respond to capsaicin.
(D) The percentage of WT and KO TG neurons that responds to 100 nM and 1 µM capsaicin
(cap, n = 146 WT and 117 KO TG neurons from 3 experiments), respectively. In another set of
experiment, the extracellular solutions contained 1 mM lidocaine (n = 111 WT and 138 KO
neurons). *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001; Fisher’s exact test between the corresponding WT and KO
groups.
(E) The percentage of Cap+ neurons in acutely dissociated WT and KO TG neurons without
NGF and GDNF exposure (n = 131 WT and 153 KO neurons from 3 experiments).
(F) The percentage of WT and KO DRG neurons that responds to 100 nM and 1 µM capsaicin (n
64

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

= 628 WT and 490 KO DRG neurons from 3 experiments), respectively.

Figure 7. The percentage of Cap+ neurons is selectively increased in the small IB4− TG
subpopulation from TRESK KO mice
(A) Basal R340/380 values of WT and KO TG neurons (n = 146 WT and 117 KO neurons from 3
experiments).
(B) Average fold change of peak R340/380 values ([peak_R340/380 – basal_R340/380] / basal_R340/380)
in WT and KO TG neurons that respond to 100 nM capsaicin (n = 58 WT and 72 KO neurons
from 3 experiments).
(C) The percentage of WT and KO TG neurons that responds to 1 µM capsaicin (Cap+), 100 µM
mustard oil (MO+), 100 µM menthol (Men+), 100 µM histamine (His+) as well as neurons that
are Cap+MO+, Cap+Men+ and Cap+His+, respectively (n = 1010 WT and 940 KO TG neurons
from 10 experiments). ***p < 0.001; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO
groups.
(D) The percentage of Cap+ neurons in MO+, Men+ and His+ TG subpopulations in WT
and KO culture, respectively (same neurons as in C).
(E) The percentage of WT and KO TG neurons that are Cap+IB4+ and Cap+IB4–, respectively
(same neurons as in C). *p < 0.05, two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO
groups.
(F) Relative TRPV1 mRNA expression levels in WT and KO TG (n = 10 WT and 9 KO mice).
The abundance of TRPV1 mRNA was normalized to that of β-actin in individual samples. *p <

65

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.05, two-tailed t-test.

Figure 8. Loss of TRESK increases the number of TG neurons expressing CGRP and
TRPV1
(A) Representative images of TRPV1-ir in TG sections from WT and TRPV1 KO mice. TRPV1ir is present in some small TG neurons in the WT section. There is no staining in the TRPV1 KO
TG section, validating the specificity of the TRPV1 antibody.
(B) Representative images of TG sections from WT and TRESK KO mice double stained with
antibodies against TRPV1 and CGRP. Arrowheads indicate neurons that are both TRPV1+ and
CGRP+.
(C) The percentage of TRPV1+, CGRP+, and TRPV1+CGRP+ TG neurons in WT and KO mice
(n = 3 mice in each group; on average, 7629 TG neurons/mouse were counted). *p < 0.05; **p <
0.01; ***p < 0.001; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(D) Cumulative distributions of the cross-sectional areas of WT and KO TRPV1+CGRP+ TG
neurons. p < 0.001; Mann–Whitney U test.
(E) Cumulative distributions of the cross-sectional areas of TRPV1+, CGRP+, and
TRPV1+CGRP+ neurons in WT TG (n = 3395, 3760, and 1808 neurons pooled from 3 mice,
respectively, same as in C). p < 0.001 between CGRP+ neurons and the other groups, KruskalWallis ANOVA with Dunn’s post hoc test.
(F) Cumulative distributions of the cross-sectional areas of TRPV1+, CGRP+, and
TRPV1+CGRP+ neurons in KO TG (n = 3175, 2685, and 1498 neurons pooled from 3 mice,
respectively, same as in C). p < 0.001 between CGRP+ neurons and the other groups.
66

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 9. Overlap between TRPV1+ and NF200+ neurons in WT and KO TG
(A) Representative images of WT and TRESK KO TG sections double stained with antibodies
against TRPV1 and NF200. Arrowheads indicate neurons that are both TRPV1+ and NF200+.
(B) The percentage of TRPV1+, NF200+, and TRPV1+NF200+ TG neurons in WT and KO mice
(n = 3 mice in each group; on average, 9630 TG neurons/mouse were counted). ***p < 0.001,
two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(C) Cumulative distributions of the cross-sectional areas of WT and KO TRPV1+NF200+ TG
neurons. p < 0.001; Mann–Whitney U test.
(D) The percentage of TRPV1+ neurons in NF200+ TG population and the percentage of NF200+
neurons in TRPV1+ TG population in WT and KO mice (same mice as in B). **p < 0.01; twotailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(E) Histogram of soma size distributions of TRPV1+, NF200+, and TRPV1+NF200+ neurons in
WT TG (n = 8081, 10789, and 1068 neurons pooled from 3 mice, respectively, same mice as in
B). p < 0.001 between individual groups, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA with Dunn’s post hoc test.
(F) Histogram of soma size distributions of TRPV1+, NF200+, and TRPV1+NF200+ neurons in
KO TG (n = 7663, 8174, and 1723 neurons pooled from 3 mice, respectively, same mice as B).
p < 0.001 between individual groups, Kruskal-Wallis ANOVA with Dunn’s post hoc test.

Figure 10. TRPV1+ neurons are increased in KO TG neurons expressing TRPM8 but not
those expressing VGLUT3
(A) Representative images of TG sections from WT_VGLUT3EGFP, KO_VGLUT3EGFP,
WT_TRPM8EGFP and KO_TRPM8EGFP mice double stained with antibodies against TRPV1 and
67

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

EGFP. Arrowheads indicate neurons that are both TRPV1+ and EGFP+.
(B) The percentage of TRPV1+, EGFP+, and TRPV1+EGFP+ TG neurons in WT_VGLUT3EGFP
and KO_VGLUT3EGFP mice (n = 3 mice in each group; on average, 6845 TG neurons/mouse
were counted). **p < 0.01; two-tailed t-test.
(C) The percentage of TRPV1+, EGFP+, and TRPV1+EGFP+ TG neurons in WT_TRPM8EGFP
and KO_TRPM8EGFP mice (n = 4 mice in each group; on average, 12027 TG neurons/mouse
were counted). *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001; two-tailed t-test.
(D) The percentage of TRPV1+ neurons in EGFP+ TG population and the percentage of EGFP+
neurons in TRPV1+ TG population in WT_TRPM8EGFP and KO_TRPM8EGFP (same mice as in
C). *p < 0.05; two-tailed t-test.

Figure 11. Both male and female TRESK KO mice show normal responses to stimuli on the
hindpaw and in visceral tissues
(A) Distance traveled in the open field in 5-minute bins (n = 5 adult female and 5 adult male
mice in each group).
(B-E) Total number of horizontal beam breaks (B), total duration of movement (C), total number
of entries into the center square (D) and total time spent in the center square (E) during the 60minute testing period (same mice as in A).
(F) Latency to fall from the accelerating rotarod in 5 consecutive trials (n = 5 adult female and 5
adult male mice in each group).
(G) The latency to fall from the accelerating rotarod was averaged from the 5 trials in individual

68

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mice (same mice as in F).
(H) Licking/jump latency on the 55oC hot plate (n = 5–6 mice in each group).
(I) Withdrawal latency to radiant heat stimuli on the hindpaw (n = 5–6 mice in each group).
(J) Withdrawal latency to cold stimuli on the hindpaw (n = 5–12 mice in each group).
(K) Withdrawal threshold of a mechanical stimulus on the hindpaw (von Frey hair; n = 5–6 mice
in each group). The results were verified by another experimenter in a separate cohort of WT and
KO littermates.
(L) Duration of licking the hindpaw after intraplantar injection of 10 µl vehicle (saline with 1%
DMSO) or 0.3 µg capsaicin (n = 5–6 mice in each group).
(M) The number of abdominal stretches produced by intraperitoneal injection of 0.6% acetic acid
(n = 6–8 mice in each group).

Figure 12. Loss of TRESK preferentially enhances trigeminal nociception.
(A) Average number of reward licks with cheeks pressing the Peltier bars set at 33oC or 50oC
during a 3-minute testing period in the OPAD assay (n = 7–11 mice in each group). *p < 0.05;
two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(B) Average L/F ratio (the number of reward licks per cheek contact) during a 3-minute testing
period in the OPAD assay (same mice as in A).
(E) The number of eye blinks evoked by blowing 55oC air to the eye for 10 seconds (n = 6–8
mice in each group).
(C) The number of eye blinks evoked by blowing air at various temperatures to the eye for 10
69

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

seconds (n = 6–8 mice in each group). *p < 0.05; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT
and KO groups. ##p < 0.01; ###p < 0.001; one-way RM ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test,
compared with the corresponding RT groups.
(D) Time spent wiping the treated area after application of 15 µl acetone to the cheek (n = 10–12
mice in each group). Baseline activity was recorded for 1 min in individual mice before acetone
application. *p < 0.05; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(E) The number of forepaw wiping of the treated area after intradermal injection of 20 µl vehicle
(saline with 1% DMSO) or capsaicin (1 µg in 20 µl vehicle) to the cheek (n = 7–13 mice in each
group). *p < 0.05; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(F) Left: the 50% withdrawal thresholds to punctate mechanical stimuli on forehead skin (n = 6–
8 mice in each group). Right: the 50% withdrawal thresholds in female mice (n = 8) before and
after i.p. injection of TRPV1 antagonist AMG9810. *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; Kruskal-Wallis
ANOVA and Mann-Whitney U post hoc test with Bonferroni correction, between the
corresponding WT and KO groups; ##p < 0.01, between male and female KO groups.

Figure 13. Dural afferent neurons from TRESK KO mice show higher intrinsic excitability
and capsaicin responsiveness
(A) Mean rheobase of FG+ small IB4− and IB4+ dural afferent neurons from WT and KO mice (n
= 13–20 neurons in each group, see Table 3 for details of the intrinsic properties of dural afferent
neurons). ***p < 0.001; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.
(B-C) Input-output plots of the spike frequency in response to incremental depolarizing current
injections in small IB4− (B) and small IB4+ (C) dural afferent neurons from WT and KO mice
70

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(same neurons as in A). ##p < 0.01; two-way RM ANOVA; **p < 0.01 between the corresponding
WT and KO groups.
(D) The percentage of WT and KO dural afferent neurons that exhibit depolarization, burst of
spikes or no response to 100 nM capsaicin (n = 30 WT and 28 KO neurons). p < 0.01; χ2 test
between WT and TRESK KO groups.
(E) Representative images of WT and KO TG sections that contain FG+ dural afferent neurons
and TRPV1+ neurons. Arrowheads indicate neurons that are both FG+ and TRPV1+.
(F) The abundance of TRPV1+ and CGRP+ dural afferent neurons in WT and KO mice (n = 3–4
mice in each group; on average, 708 FG+ neurons/mouse were counted). *p < 0.05, two-tailed ttest between the corresponding WT and TRESK KO groups.
(G) Cumulative distributions of the cross-sectional areas of WT and KO FG+TRPV1+ dural
afferent neurons (n = 387 and 581 neurons pooled from 4 WT and 4 KO mice, respectively, same
mice as in F). p < 0.05; Mann–Whitney U test.
(H) Cumulative distributions of the cross-sectional areas of FG+ dural afferent neurons in wildtype and TRESK KO mice (n = 3627 and 3332 FG+ neurons pooled from 4 WT and 4 KO mice,
respectively, same mice as in F).

Figure 14. TRESK KO mice are hyper-responsive to dural application of IScap
(A) The number of V1-directed forepaw wiping and hindpaw scratching within the 2-hour
recording period in male mice. Baseline behaviors were recorded in all mice 7 days post-surgery.
The next day, mice received dural application of vehicle (n = 5 WT and 4 KO mice) or IScap (n
= 10 WT and 8 KO mice). The behaviors were recorded 0.5 – 2.5 hours after the dural
71

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

application. **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; two-way ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test.
(B) The number of V1-directed behaviors in female mice (n = 5 WT and 4 KO mice in the
vehicle groups; n = 12 WT and 10 KO mice in the IScap groups).
(C-D) The duration of V1-directed forepaw wiping and hindpaw scratching within the 2-hour
recording period in male (C) and female (D) mice (same mice as in A and B).
(E) Scatter plots of the duration of V1-directed behavior (normalized to the baseline value in
individual mice) in response to dural application of vehicle or IScap. Data from the male and
female mice are combined. Data from vehicle-treated mice are pooled together (open black
square and red circle indicate WT and KO mice, respectively).
(F) The Z score of individual IScap-treated mice, calculated as Z = (value – mean) / SD. Value is
the normalized duration of individual IScap-treated mice. Mean and SD are calculated from the
normalized duration of all vehicle-treated mice.
(G) The percentage of WT and KO mice that respond to dural application of IScap, using Z > 1
and Z > 2 (> mean duration + 1*SD or + 2*SD of vehicle-treated mice) as the threshold
respectively. **p < 0.01, Fisher’s exact test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.

72

A

exon 1

exon 2

exon 3

TRESK WT
TRESK KO

lacZ

hubiP-neo
loxP

B

TRESK-ir

loxP

βIII tubulin-ir

Merge

WT TG

KO TG

25 µm

WT DRG

KO DRG
25 µm

% TG neurons

60

10

5

800

WT
KO

600

50
40

20

WT KO

Figure 1

0

IB4-

0

200

p= 0.3

100

200

IB4+

F

150

400

30

10
0

p= 0.08

Iba1+ cells / mm2 TG

Number of TG neurons (x103)

70

WT KO

50
0

G
10

Iba1+ cell area
(μm2 /mm2 TG x104)

E

D
15

Iba1+ cell area (μm2/cell)

C

WT KO

p= 0.73

5

0

WT KO

A

B medium-sized TG

before () & after () lamotrigine
WT

KO

-25 mV

-60 mV
500 pA

-135 mV

100 ms

C small-diameter TG
WT

HET

KO

KO+Tyrode’s ()

200 pA

E small TG

30

*

20

NS
###

10
0

###

*** ***
WT HET KO

Figure 2

KO

Lamotrigine Tyrode’s

NS

*

15

**

10
5
0

WT

F medium TG

G medium TG
30

40

20

Current density (pA/pF)

% current inhibition

40

Current density (pA/pF)

D small TG

% current inhibition

100 ms

HET

KO

30
20
10
0

***
WT

KO

20

*

10

0

WT

KO

A

small IB4-

WT
-53 mV

0 pA

small IB4+

KO
-52 mV

0 pA

WT
-52 mV

medium-sized

KO
-52 mV

0 pA

25 pA

50 pA

100 pA

50 pA

100 pA

200 pA

100 pA

200 pA

300 pA

C

300

WT
HET
KO

200
150
#

*

100
##

50
0

small IB4-

#

150

15

&

##

**

slope

20

10

*

1500
1000
500
0

small IB4-

small IB4+ medium-sized

E small IB4+

F medium-sized

20

20

WT
HET
KO

15

50

10

10

0

5

5

WT
KO

15

##

***

5

0

0
50

100

Current (pA)

***

350
300

150

H
**

250

50

100 150 200 250

*

150
100
50

**
**
*
*

5

Figure 3

0

50

100

150

Current (pA)

-35

0

small small mediumIB4- IB4+ sized

100 200 300 400 500

I

small IB4small IB4+
medium-sized

15

0

Current (pA)

10

200

0

0

Spikes / second

0

Rheobase (pA)

#

*

100

0

G

2000

small IB4+ medium-sized

small IB4-

Spikes / second

D

**

#

*

200

current (pA)

250

Voltage (mV)

Rheobase (pA)

250

KO
-53 mV

25 mv
500 ms

2500

Input Resistance (MΩ)

B

WT
-53 mV

-40
-45
-50
-55
-60

WT
KO
0

25

50

75

current (pA)

100

125

10

B

***

WT
KO

KO
w/o sAPs w sAPs

0

***

5

WT

AP threshold (mV)

% neurons with sAPs

A

0

in all TG in small IB4
neurons TG neurons

-5
-10
-15
-20
-25

-

C

D

75

**

-30
35

25

**
0

WT

Spikes / second

Rheobase (pA)

50

25
#

20
15
10
WT_TRPM8EGFP
KO_TRPM8EGFP

5
0

KO

0

50

TRPM8EGFP

E

F

75

35

Spikes / second

Rheobase (pA)

25

0

Figure 4

WT

KO

VGLUT3

EGFP

100

150

200

250

200

250

Current (pA)

WT_VGLUT3EGFP
KO_VGLUT3EGFP

30
50

* ** **

*

30

25
20
15
10
5
0
0

50

100

150

Current (pA)

A

B

20
NS

***

10

0

WT

***

20
15
10
5
0

KO

KO

25

Current density (pA/pF)

% current Inhibition

30

WT

KO

Lamotrigine Tyrode’s
1200

NS

50

NS

NS

600
300
0

small IB4- small IB4+

small IB4- small IB4+

F

small IB4-

WT
KO

900

small IB4+
10

WT
KO
NS

5

0

Spikes / second

Rheobase (pA)

100

10

Spikes / second

NS

150

0

E

D

200

Input Resistance (MΩ)

C

5

0
0

Figure 5

50

100

150

200

Current (pA)

250

0

50

100

150

200

Current (pA)

250

A

Time (sec)
0
10

B
20

30

40

capsaicin

150

KO

WT

200

12%

washout

64%

-54 mV

33%

24%

20 mV

50%

17%

-53 mV
Noneresponsive

-56 mV

C

Tyrode’s

Depolarization
& spikes

Depolarization

100 nM cap

1 μM cap

WT

KO

25 µm

E

TG neurons

***

60

*
% TG neurons

***
% TG neurons

60

40

20

0

100 nM
cap

Figure 6

1 µM
cap

1 µM cap
1 mM lidocaine

TG neurons
acutely dissociated
w/o NGF/GDNF

*

*

40

20

0

100 nM
cap

1 µM
cap

F

DRG neurons
60

% DRG neurons

D

WT
KO

40

20

0

100 nM
cap

1 µM
cap

B Ca2+ peak
4

Basal R340/380

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1

2
1

40
30
20
10
0

WT KO
100 nM cap

D

E
WT
KO

80

% TG neurons

% Cap+ neurons

100

60
40
20
0

Figure 7

MO+

Men+

WT
KO

***

50

3

0

WT KO

60

% TG neurons

R340/380 fold-increase

0.5

0.0

C

His+

Cap+

40

MO+

Men+

His+

F
*

30
20
10
0

Cap+ Cap+ Cap+
MO+ Men+ His+

Cap+/IB4+ Cap+/IB4-

Fold-change in TRPV1 mRNA

A basal Ca2+

3

*
2

1

0

WT

KO

C

A TRPV1-ir

% total TG neurons

25 µm

B

WT

**

40

TRPV1 KO

WT

***

KO

30
20

*

10

KO

0

TRPV1-ir

TRPV1+
Cumulative % of neurons

D

CGRP-ir

E

CGRP+ TRPV1+CGRP+

100
80

p < 0.001

60
40

WT
KO

20
0

0

500

F

WT

Figure 8

Cumulative % of neurons

25 µm

1000

1500

Cross-sectional Area (µm2)

100

Merge

WT

KO

100
p < 0.001

p < 0.001
50

50
TRPV1+
CGRP+
TRPV1+CGRP+

0
0

500 1000 1500

TRPV1+
CGRP+
TRPV1+CGRP+

0
0

500 1000 1500

Cross-sectional Area (µm2)

A

NF200-ir

TRPV1-ir

Merge

WT

KO
25 µm

C
WT

***

20
10

***

0

TRPV1

60

p < 0.001

40
20
0

WT
KO
0

F

WT
TRPV1+
NF200+
TRPV1+NF200+

1000
500
0

2500

**

**

20
15
10
5
0

1500

Cross-sectional Area (µm )

1500

TRPV1+
NF200+
in NF200+ in TRPV1+

KO
TRPV1++
NF200
TRPV1+NF200+

2000
1500
1000
500

00

00

Cross-sectional Area (µm2)

18

00

16

00

14

00

12

0

0

80

0

0

0

60

40

10

Cross-sectional Area (µm2)

18
0

0

0

16
0

0

14
0

0

12
0

0

10
0

0

80

0

60

40

0

0
20

0

1000

25

2

2000

Figure 9

500

0

2500

NF200

TRPV1+
NF200+

+

80

20

number of neurons

E

+

100

number of neurons

30

KO

D
% of TG neurons

40

Cumulative % of neurons

% total TG neurons

B

A

TRPV1-ir

EGFP-ir

Merge

WT_VGLUT3EGFP

KO_VGLUT3EGFP

WT_TRPM8EGFP

KO_TRPM8EGFP
25 µm

WT_VGLUT3
KO_VGLUT3EGFP

EGFP

**

30
20
10
0

TRPV1

Figure 10

+

EGFP

+

TRPV1+
EGFP+

40

D
WT_TRPM8

***

EGFP

KO_TRPM8EGFP

30
20
10

*
0

TRPV1

+

EGFP

+

TRPV1+
EGFP+

% of TG neurons

C

40

% total TG neurons

% total TG neurons

B

25
20

*

15
10
5
0

TRPV1+
EGFP+
in EGFP+ in TRPV1+

0 10 20 30 40 50 60

0

Time (min)

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

G

300
250
200
150
100
WT

50
0

WT KO

KO
0

1

Hargreaves test

12

WT
KO

8

4

0

male
150
120

2

3

female

4

Trial number

J

10

5

200
0

WT

0

male

hindpaw intraplantar injections
WT
KO

30

male

female

vehicle

male
female
0.3 µg capsaicin

KO

H

300
250
200
150
100
50
0

200
150
100
50
0

WT

KO

55oC hot plate test
12

WT

KO

K

5

60

Figure 11

400

cold plantar assay

90

0

600

female

M
Number of stretches

Duration of licking (sec)

L

KO

350

Latency to withdrawal (sec)

Latency to withdrawal (sec)

I

F

700

Latency to fall (sec)

Duration at the center (sec)

E

WT

Latency to fall (sec)

0

5

Number of center entries

400

10

D

Latency to lick/jump (sec)

800

C

15

50% withdrawal threshold (g)

1200

B

Novement duratin (sec)

WT
KO

Number of horizontal
beam breaks (x1000)

1600

Distance traveled (cm)

A

50

1.0

8
4
0

WT KO
male

WT KO
female

von Frey filaments

0.5

0.0

male

female

i.p. 0.6% acetic acid

40
30
20
10
0

male

female

A OPAD lick number
300

150

200

100

100
20
15
10
5
0

7.5
5.0
2.5
0.0

*
33oC

50oC

male

33oC

50oC

12

15

10
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

10

C eye blink to air blow at various temperatures
male

10

WT
KO

##

8
6

###

4

##

2
0
-2

RT

45

50

Temperature (oC)

55

RT

45

100
80

WT
KO

60

*
*

20

male female
vehicle

Figure 12

55

50oC

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

*
33oC

50oC

D acetone-induced cheek cooling
15

*

WT
KO

*

10
5
0

male female
baseline

male female
acetone

F facial mechanical stimuli - von Frey filaments

40

0

50

Temperature (oC)

E cheek injection of capsaicin
Number of wiping

33oC

##

male
female
capsaicin

50% withdrawal
threshold (g)

Number of eye blinks

12

*

*

female

WT
KO

20

14

*

female

25

16

Duration of wiping (sec)

Number of licks

200

B OPAD L/F ratio

female

L/F ratio

male

0.2

0.1

0

0.2

*
male

##

0.1

**
female

0

**

**

baseline AMG9810

WT
KO

150
100

***

50
0

10

C

small IB4-

10

* *

**
5

Spikes / second

B
WT
KO

Spikes / second

200

Rheobase (pA)

A

##

***
*

0

small IB4

D

-

small IB4

50

100

5

0

150

Current (pA)

FG+ WT

50 100 150 200 250 300

Current (pA)

FG+ KO

10%

Non-responsive

36%

23%

67%

Depolarization

46%

Depolarization & spikes

18%

E

WT
KO

0
0

+

small IB4+

TRPV1

FG

Merge

WT

KO

25 µm

Figure 13

80
60
40
20

00

16

00

14

00

12

0

0

80

0

60

0

40

20

0

0

00

WT
KO

10

cross-sectional area (µm2)

100

Cumulative % of
FG+ neurons

00

00

14

12

0

10

00

0
0

CGRP+

80

TRPV1+

WT
KO

20

0

0

40

60

10

p < 0.05

60

0

20

80

40

WT
KO

0

*

H

100

20

G

30

Cumulative % of
FG+TRPV1+ neurons

% of FG+ neurons

F

cross-sectional area (µm2)

700

**

500
400
300
200
100
0

baseline

vehicle

IScap

male mice

**

200

**

150
100
50

baseline

vehicle

F

700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

IScap

vehicle

Figure 14

WT
IScap

KO
IScap

600

**

***

500
400
300
200
100
0

baseline

vehicle

IScap

female mice

***

200

**

***

150
100
50
0

baseline

G

11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

WT

***

700

KO

vehicle

100

% of IScap rssponders

0

female mice

D

***

Wiping/scraching duration (sec)

Wiping/scraching duration (sec)
Duration (% baseline value)

**

WT
KO

600

C

E

B

***

Number of wiping/scraching

male mice

Z-score

Number of wiping/scraching

A

IScap

**
**

80
60
40
20
0

Z >1

Z>2

WT
KO

Diameter

Capacitance

Resistance

(m)

(pF)

Rin (M)

Vrest (mV)

AHP

Rheobase

threshold

amplitude

half width

amplitude

cell

(pA)

(mV)

(mV)

(ms)

(mV)

number

Small IB4-negative neurons
WT

18.3 ± 0.6

18.0 ± 1.6

1249 ± 126

-50.8 ± 1.1

47 ± 10

-14.7 ± 1.9

104.5 ± 3.0

5.3 ± 0.6

-19.6 ± 0.9

28

HET

18.6 ± 0.5

16.8 ± 1.8

1172 ± 74

-52.8 ± 1.1

45 ± 9

-16.4 ± 1.4

105.6 ± 1.5

3.5 ± 0.4

-17.3 ± 1.0

16

KO#

18.1 ± 0.6

17.3 ± 1.7

1849 ± 262*

-50.1 ± 1.3

18 ± 4**

-18.5 ± 1.7

98.9 ± 2.7

4.7 ± 0.5

-17.5 ± 1.8

17

Small IB4-positive neurons
WT

19.2 ± 0.5

20.0 ± 1.2

997 ± 99

-53.3 ± 1.6

103 ± 12

-10.7 ± 2.6

110.2 ± 4.1

5.4 ± 0.8

-19.8 ± 0.9

14

HET

22.5 ± 0.7

20.6 ± 1.6

1080 ± 149

-54.7 ± 2.0

99 ± 11

-16.1 ± 1.9

112.2 ± 2.8

5.7 ± 0.7

-17.2 ± 1.0

17

KO

20.1 ± 1.0

22.8 ± 2.9

1507 ± 205*

-53.4 ± 1.4

70 ± 10*

-13.6 ± 1.4

107.8 ± 3.8

6.9 ± 0.7

-18.2 ± 2.2

14

Medium-sized neurons

WT

30.8 ± 0.2

40.6 ± 2.5

593 ± 110

-57.8 ± 0.9

243 ± 46

-15.0 ± 2.5

119.5 ± 3.0

4.9 ± 0.5

-16.6 ± 0.2

16

KO

29.3 ± 0.1

40.2 ± 2.7

754 ± 108

-56.3 ± 1.1

207 ± 30

-14.7 ± 1.8

113.5 ± 3.5

5.0 ± 0.7

-17.6 ± 0.3

21

*
#

p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; one-way ANOVA with post hoc Bonferroni test, compared with the corresponding WT and HET groups.
Neurons that exhibit spontaneous APs at Vrest are not included.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1. Intrinsic properties of TG neurons from adult WT, HET and TRESK KO mice
Input
AP
AP
AP

Input
Diameter

Capacitance

Resistance

(m)

(pF)

Rin (M)

Vrest (mV)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2. Intrinsic properties of small-diameter DRG neurons from adult WT and TRESK KO mice

AP

AP

AP

AHP

Rheobase

threshold

amplitude

half width

amplitude

cell

(pA)

(mV)

(mV)

(ms)

(mV)

number

Small IB4-negative neurons
WT

21.3 ± 0.5

22.0 ± 0.9

882 ± 135

-56.7 ± 1.2

61 ± 9

-15.8 ± 1.7

111.9 ± 3.0

4.7 ± 0.4

-18.4 ± 1.5

16

KO

20.5 ± 0.5

19.6 ± 1.1

761 ± 83

-55.9 ± 1.5

47 ± 6

-17.9 ± 2.0

115.2 ± 2.0

4.2 ± 0.4

-20.0 ± 1.2

18

Small IB4-positive neurons
WT

21.3 ± 0.7

21.9 ± 1.2

575 ± 86

-57.7 ± 1.5

149 ± 19

-14.3 ± 2.0

115.4 ± 2.2

5.9 ± 0.6

-19.1 ± 1.2

17

KO

21.8 ± 0.7

24.3 ± 1.7

627 ± 81

-54.7 ± 1.1

128 ± 17

-11.4 ± 2.4

114.8 ± 2.9

5.7 ± 0.4

-21.9 ± 1.5

19

Input

AP

AP

AP

AHP

Diameter

Capacitance

Resistance

Vrest

Rheobase

threshold

amplitude

half width

amplitude

cell

(m)

(pF)

Rin (M)

(mV)

(pA)

(mV)

(mV)

(ms)

(mV)

number

Small IB4-negative dural afferent neurons
WT

19.2 ± 0.5

20.9 ± 1.1

586 ± 84

-55.6 ± 1.2

73 ± 9

-16.7 ± 1.6

113.0 ± 2.7

3.3 ± 0.4

-16.9 ± 1.3

15

KO

18.2 ± 1.3

20.3 ± 1.1

1058 ± 60***

-55.5 ± 1.6

38 ± 4***

-14.6 ± 1.1

111.5 ± 1.7

4.0 ± 0.3

-18.6 ± 1.4

20

Small IB4-positive dural afferent neurons
WT

20.4 ± 0.7

21.7 ± 1.5

565 ± 71

-54.4 ± 1.0

150 ± 14

-14.9 ± 1.3

115.9 ± 2.9

4.6 ± 0.5

-17.1 ± 1.4

13

KO

17.7 ± 1.0

21.2 ± 1.3

757 ± 89

-55.3 ± 1.5

138 ± 11

-15.3 ± 1.7

113.4 ± 4.6

4.9 ± 0.5

-18.6 ± 1.6

20

***

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/679530; this version posted June 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3. Intrinsic properties of FG-labeled dural afferent neurons from adult WT and TRESK KO mice

p < 0.001; two-tailed t-test between the corresponding WT and KO groups.

