bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Putatively cancer-specific alternative splicing is shared across patients and present in
developmental and other non-cancer cells
AUTHORS
Julianne K. David (1, 2), Sean K. Maden# (1, 2), Benjamin R. Weeder# (1, 2), Reid F. Thompson* (1, 2, 3, 4, 5),
and Abhinav Nellore*⧫ (1, 2, 8)
AFFILIATIONS
1. Computational Biology Program; Oregon Health & Science University; Portland, OR, 97239; USA
2. Department of Biomedical Engineering; Oregon Health & Science University; Portland, OR, 97239; USA
3. Department of Radiation Medicine; Oregon Health & Science University; Portland, OR, 97239; USA
4. Portland VA Research Foundation; Portland, OR, 97239; USA
5. Department of Medical Informatics and Clinical Epidemiology; Oregon Health & Science University; Portland, OR,
97239; USA
6. Division of Hospital and Specialty Medicine; VA Portland Healthcare System; Portland, OR, 97239; USA
7. Cancer Early Detection Advanced Research Center; Oregon Health & Science University; Portland, OR, 97239; USA
8. Department of Surgery; Oregon Health & Science University; Portland, OR, 97239; USA

⧫ lead contact
* co-corresponding authors [thompsre@ohsu.edu, nellore@ohsu.edu]
#
these authors contributed equally
ABSTRACT
We compared cancer and non-cancer RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) data from The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA), the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) Project, and the Sequence Read Archive (SRA). We found
that: 1) averaging across cancer types, 80.6% of exon-exon junctions thought to be cancer-specific based on
comparison with tissue-matched samples are in fact present in other adult non-cancer tissues throughout the
body; 2) 30.8% of junctions not present in any GTEx or TCGA normal tissues are shared by multiple samples
within at least one cancer type cohort, and 87.4% of these distinguish between different cancer types; and 3)
many of these junctions not found in GTEx or TCGA normal tissues (15.4% on average) are also found in
embryological and other developmentally associated cells. This study probes the distribution of putatively
cancer-specific junctions across a broad set of publicly available non-cancer human RNA-seq datasets.
Overall, we identify a subset of shared cancer-specific junctions that could represent novel sources of cancer
neoantigens. We further describe a framework for characterizing possible origins of these junctions, including
potential developmental and embryological sources, as well as cell type-specific markers particularly related to
cell types of cancer origin. These findings refine the meaning of RNA splicing event novelty, particularly with
respect to the human neoepitope repertoire. Ultimately, cancer-specific exon-exon junctions may affect the
anti-cancer immune response and may have a substantial causal relationship with the biology of disease.
KEYWORDS
Alternative splicing, RNA-seq, cancer, immunotherapy, exon-exon junctions

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
Aberrant RNA splicing is increasingly recognized as a feature of malignancy (Climente-González et al., 2017;
Sebestyén et al., 2015; Srebrow and Kornblihtt, 2006; Sveen et al., 2016; Xiong et al., 2015), with potential
prognostic significance across many cancer types including non-small cell lung cancer, ovarian cancer, breast
cancer, colorectal cancer, uveal melanoma, and glioblastoma (Bjørklund et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Marcelino
Meliso et al., 2017; Robertson et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018; Zong et al., 2018). Due to its potential for
generating novel peptide sequences, aberrant RNA splicing is also interesting as a potential source of
neoantigens for cancer immunotherapy targeting. For instance, retained intronic sequences can give rise to
numerous potential antigens among patients with melanoma, although they are not a significant predictor of
cancer immunotherapy response (Smart et al., 2018), and a patient-specific neoantigen arising from a gene
fusion has been shown to lead to complete response from immune checkpoint blockade (Yang et al., 2019).
Novel cancer-specific exon-exon junctions have also been shown to be a source of peptide antigens (Kahles et
al., 2018), and represent compelling potential targets for personalized anti-cancer vaccines (Slansky and
Spellman, 2019).
However, the ability of the adaptive immune system to target a given antigen as “foreign” depends on a
complex prior tolerogenic education, and in particular on whether or not a given antigen has been previously
“seen” by the immune system in a healthy context (Klein et al., 2014). Therefore, prediction of cancer-specific
antigens depends explicitly on their sequence novelty, and thus requires a comparison with non-cancer cells.
Choosing a “normal” tissue standard for comparison is difficult in the context of RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)
data analysis, given the presence of alternative splicing throughout normal and cancerous biological processes
(Norris and Calarco, 2012; Sveen et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2016). Previously, cancer-specific aberrant splicing
has been detected by comparing tumor RNA-seq data against a single reference annotation (Tang and
Madhavan, 2017) or a limited “panel of normals” (Smart et al., 2018). More recently, a TCGA network paper
(Kahles et al., 2018) used the large publicly available datasets of The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (Cancer
Genome Atlas Research Network et al., 2013) and the Genotype Tissue Expression project (GTEx) (Cancer
Genome Atlas Research Network et al., 2013; GTEx Consortium, 2015) to identify and validate thousands of
novel splicing events including exon-exon junctions present in a specific TCGA cancer type but not in the
corresponding normal adult tissue in GTEx. This study also predicted alternative splicing neoepitopes (ASNs)
via this comparison, and validated several ASNs shared between multiple patients with the intracellular
proteomics data available for select ovarian and breast cancer TCGA donors in the Clinical Proteomic Tumor
Analysis Consortium dataset (Kahles et al., 2018).
RESULTS
Cancers harbor many novel shared exon-exon junctions not present in adult non-cancer tissues or
cells
While cancer-specific exon-exon junctions identified using tissue-matched normal samples have the potential
to give rise to neoantigens (Kahles et al., 2018), we reasoned that they could be expressed in other normal
tissues due to variability in patterns of transcription and alternative splicing among different tissues (Saha et
al., 2017). In such cases, these junctions might not yield bona fide neoantigens due to the prior tolerogenic
education of the immune system. We therefore re-evaluated the incidence of cancer-specific junctions using
RNA-seq data from TCGA and the large compendium of adult tissues from GTEx. We found that on average,
across cancer types, 80.6% of junctions thought to be cancer-specific based on comparison only with tissuematched samples are in fact present in other adult non-cancer tissues and cell types throughout the body.
Across cancer types, an average of 90.2% of all junctions found in cancer samples are also present in one or
more adult normal samples from GTEx or TCGA [“core normals”] (Figure 1A). The overall number of these
novel junctions varies both within and across different cancer types, with ovarian carcinoma and uveal
melanoma having the highest and lowest average number of junctions per sample, respectively (Figure 1B,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S1), although we find that the set of junctions defined as “novel” is highly sensitive to the filtering criteria
used (see Figure S1A, Table S2, and “Selection of cancer-specific junctions” in Methods). We use lack of
occurrence of a junction in core normals as a baseline definition of cancer specificity.
We next assessed the extent to which a given junction not found in core normals might be shared among
multiple samples of the same cancer type. We observed that over half (52.8%) of these junctions are confined
to individual samples, although a small but significant subset (0.41%) is shared across at least 5% of samples
in at least one cancer-type cohort (Figure S1B). We also noted that 40.6% of novel junctions are shared
between multiple cancer types, with a total of 1,609 junctions present in at least 5% of samples each across
two or more TCGA cancer cohorts (Figure S1C). Sharedness was significantly higher among junctions that
were also present in normal tissues (Figures 1C and 1D). We observed that the number of junctions not found
in core normals per patient was comparable for patients with and without splicing factor-associated mutations
across all cancer types, with the exception of breast adenocarcinoma (Figures S1E and S1F). We also
observed that splicing-associated mutations had minimal effect on the sharedness within a cancer-type cohort
of junctions not found in core normals (Figure S1G and S1H).
We finally assessed whether these junctions were also shared among independent cancer cohorts, using
publicly available RNA-seq data in the SRA. Many TCGA cancer junctions not found in core normals were
found to occur in cancer-type matched SRA samples: 11 of 14 cancer types had more than 50 junctions in
common between the matched cohorts. Moreover, we found that junctions also present in matched SRA
cancer cohorts were associated with significantly higher levels of sharedness in the TCGA cohort (H statistic =
3.85-2,803 and p = <0.0001-0.0495; Figure S1I).
(A)

(B)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(C)

Figure 1: Distribution of exon-exon junctions across and within
TCGA cancer cohorts
(A) Log-scale bar charts describing the percentage of all junctions of a
given cancer-type cohort present in three sub-cohorts. Blue (left) bars
give the percentage of cohort junctions found in GTEx or TCGA tissuematched normal samples (Table S1); green (center) bars give the
percentage of the remaining junctions that are found in other core
normals; and yellow (right) bars give the percentage of cohort junctions
found in no core normals; cancer types are ordered by relative
abundance of junctions in this last set. Cancer types with no blue (left)
bar have no tissue-matched normal samples (Table S1).
(B) Log-scale sorted strip plots representing the number of non-core
normals junctions per sample for each of 33 TCGA cancer types. Each
point represents a single TCGA tumor sample and the width of each strip
is proportional to the size of the cancer type cohort (Kahles et al., 2018).
Figure S1A shows analogous data with additional filters applied.
(C) Log-scale box plots representing the prevalences within each cancertype cohort of junctions occurring in at least 1% of cancer-type samples,
summarized across all TCGA cancer types. Junction prevalences are
shown in blue (left) for those found in GTEx or TCGA tissue-matched
normal samples (Table S1); junctions not present in tissue-matched
normals but found in other core normals are shown in green (center);
and junctions found in no core normals are shown in yellow (right). Note
that any junction found in multiple cancer types is represented by
multiple data points, one for each cancer type in which it is found. A
detailed breakdown by TCGA cancer type is available in Figure S1D.

Shared novel junctions in cancer distinguish cancer identity and subtype
We hypothesized that a high level of exon-exon junction sharedness across samples is likely to be reflective of
underlying conserved biological processes (e.g. among normal tissues). We therefore investigated the
sharedness of novel junctions present in different cancer types. Interestingly, these novel junctions can readily
distinguish disparate cancer types and show similarities among cancer types with shared biology, such as
cutaneous and uveal melanomas (Figure 2A). These novel junctions also reflect shared biology among
additional cancer types with similar anatomic origins: colon and rectal adenocarcinoma, clear cell,
chromophobe, and papillary renal cell carcinomas, low and high grade gliomas, and stomach and esophageal
adenocarcinomas (Figure 2A). Shared junctions from several cancer types also demonstrate similarities by
histological subtype despite their differing anatomical origins, for instance squamous cell carcinomas of the
lung, cervix, and head and neck (Figure 2A, Figure S2A), consistent with previously published work (Lin et al.,
2017). Moreover, shared novel junctions are readily able to distinguish distinct histological subtypes of
sarcoma and cervical cancer, among other diseases (Figure 2B). Using non-cancer cell types from the
Sequence Read Archive (SRA) (Leinonen et al., 2011) we found that “novel” junctions from cancers arising
from cell and tissue types poorly represented in GTEx normal tissue samples (e.g. melanocytes), or not
present in GTEx at all (e.g. thymus tissue), can be found in many samples of the corresponding cell or tissue
types of origin (Figure 2C, Table S1). Sample-to-sample comparisons of all junctions from these rare-cell type
cancers also show more similarity with cell type-matched normal samples from the SRA than with bulk tissue
from GTEx (Figure S2B).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(A)

(B)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(C)

Figure 2: Clustering by cohort prevalence of shared novel junctions not found in core normal samples
(A) Heatmap showing junction prevalences across every TCGA cohort for each cancer type’s top 200 shared junctions
that are at least 1% prevalent in that cancer type and are not found in any core normal samples.
(B) Heatmap showing shared junction prevalences across selected TCGA cancer types and their assigned histological
subtypes for each subtype’s top 200 shared junctions that are at least 1% prevalent in that subtype and are not found in
any core normal samples. See Table S1 for TCGA subtype abbreviations.
(C) Heatmap showing shared junction prevalences across selected TCGA cancer types and a set of their matched SRA
tissue and cell types of origin, for each cancer type’s top 200 shared junctions that are at least 1% prevalent in that cancer
cohort and are not found in any core normal samples. See Table S3 for SRA sample type abbreviations.

Novel junctions in cancer are found among developmental and known cancer-related pathways
As many cancers are thought to recapitulate normal developmental pathways (Borczuk et al., 2003; Huang et
al., 2009; Naxerova et al., 2008), we further hypothesized that a subset of cancer-specific junctions may reflect
embryological and developmental splicing patterns. We therefore compared cancer junctions not found in core
normals with those from SRA samples pertaining to zygotic, placental, embryological, and fetal developmental
processes (see Methods). On average, per cancer type, 15.4% of these junctions occur in SRA developmental
cell or tissue samples, and 26.5% and 2.7% occur in samples from selected SRA normal adult tissues and cell
types and SRA normal stem cell samples, respectively (Figures 3A and S3A). The remaining significant
majority of these cancer junctions not found in core normals were also not present in any non-cancer SRA
tissue or cell type studied (64.9% on average per cancer type cohort, Figures 3A and S3A). Many of these
novel “unexplained” junctions still exhibit high levels of sharedness both within (Figures S3B and S3C) and
between (Figure S3D) different cancer types. At the upper end, 16 of these shared junctions were found in
more than 10% of samples in each of two or more cancer types (Table S4).
We note that the liberal set inclusion criterion we employed may reduce our ability to identify robust cancerspecific biology among unexplained junctions. For instance, the well-described deletion causing a splicing of
exons 1 and 8 (EGFRvIII) occurs in 29.4% of TCGA patients with glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) and in no
core normals, but is also present in a single read from a single human epithelial cell line sample on SRA, and
therefore is classified not as an unexplained cancer-specific junction but as “adult non-cancer.” However, this

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

set inclusion condition does allow for the identification of some cancer-specific biology of interest. For instance,
rarer alternative EGFR splicing events were detected in the unexplained set, such as EGFRvIII with an
alternate exon 1 joined to exon 8 (chr7:55161631-55172981), detected in 2 patients with GBM and 1 patient
with low grade glioma; the same alternate exon 1 joined with two alternate exon 16s (chr7:5516163155168521 and chr7:55161631-55170305) (detected in 1 and 2 GBM patients, respectively); and the same
alternate exon 1 joined with exon 20 (chr7:55161631-55191717) in 2 GBM patients. An alternative filtering
approach that instead requires two samples per SRA category to define junction set membership yields a
greater number of unexplained junctions (Table S1D and Figures S3E and S3F).
We observed a number of unexplained junctions shared by unusually large proportions of ovarian cancer (OV)
samples in TCGA, including one cancer-specific junction (chr16:766903-768491 on the minus strand) present
in the highest proportion of samples in any TCGA cohort (81.3%, or 350 of 430 samples in OV). This junction
occurs in an antisense transcript of MSLN, which codes for a protein known to bind to the well-known ovarian
cancer biomarker MUC16 (CA125) (Felder et al., 2014; Kaneko et al., 2009). Another unexplained junction
(chr19:8865972-8876532 on the minus strand) is in the MUC16 region itself and is present in 42.8%, or 184 of
430 samples in OV. In all, we identified 34 cancer-specific junctions present in >40% of OV samples. We
further identified several novel pan-cancer splice variants (chr16:11851406 with chr16:11820297,
chr16:11821755, and chr16:11828391, each present across up to 8 different cancers) in RSL1D1 and its
neighboring BCAR4, a long noncoding RNA known to promote breast cancer progression (Godinho et al.,
2011; Li et al., 2016).
Among all otherwise unexplained junctions, an average of 4.78% across cancer types are associated with
known cancer-predisposing or cancer-relevant loci. Further, an elevated proportion of otherwise unexplained
junctions (on average, 40.9%) occur in likely antisense transcripts and may therefore be of reduced interest as
candidate neoantigens, but sustained interest in terms of cancer biology (Figure 3B, Table S5).
(A)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(B)
Figure 3: Junction set assignments and antisense junction
prevalence in additional normal tissue and cell type categories
from the Sequence Read Archive, across cancers.
(A) Upset-style plot with bar plots showing junction abundances across
major sets (left) and set overlaps (top) across 33 cancers (error bars).
Shown junctions are absent from all core normals. Unexplained
junctions (red highlights) comprise junctions not present in any set
categories studied (see also expanded set assignments in Figure S3A).
The developmental set comprises human development-related
junctions not present in the category placenta. Scale is log10 of
percent of junctions not found in core normals, calculated for each
cancer.
(B) Box plots showing the ratio of antisense-gene junctions to all
junctions for (green) junctions found in core normals; (aqua) junctions
not found in core normals but found in other selected non-cancer adult
tissue and cell samples from the SRA; (lavender) junctions not found in
core normals or SRA non-cancer adult samples but found in selected
developmental samples on the SRA; (apricot) junctions not found in
core normals or SRA non-cancer adult samples but found in selected
stem cell samples on the SRA; and (red) junctions not found in core
normals or selected non-cancer adult, developmental, or stem cell
samples from the SRA.

Discussion
Previous studies have established the importance of alternative and aberrant splicing in cancer prognosis
(Bjørklund et al., 2017; Li et al., 2017; Marcelino Meliso et al., 2017; Robertson et al., 2018; Zhu et al., 2018;
Zong et al., 2018) and have begun to explore its potential relevance in cancer immunotherapy (Kahles et al.,
2018; Wood et al., 2019). In this study, we explore “novel” exon-exon junction use among cancers with respect
to a broad collection of normal tissues and cells. This is the largest such study to-date, integrating RNA-seq
data from 10,549 tumor samples across 33 TCGA cancer types, 788 paired normal samples across 25 TCGA
cancer types, 9,555 normal samples across 30 GTEx tissue types, and 12,231 human samples from the SRA
(10,827 samples from 33 normal tissue and cell types and 1,404 samples from 14 cancer types) (Tables S1
and S2). To the best of our knowledge, this is also the first study to examine the novelty of cancer junctions
from the perspective of immune tolerance, considering all adult normal tissue types as potential sources of
tolerogenic peptides rather than only the closest matched normal tissues. Moreover, this is the first study to
quantitatively interrogate the sharedness of novel exon-exon junctions both within and across cancer types,
demonstrating that these junctions can distinguish cancers and their subtypes. We finally demonstrate that
there is no one-size-fits-all definition of “novel” splicing, noting that purportedly cancer-specific junctions may in
fact be present among, and perhaps biologically consistent with, a repertoire of embryological,
developmentally-associated, and other cell types.
This study also has several limitations. We focus on the importance of exon-exon junctions as the predominant
metric of alternative splicing. However, there are other sources of RNA variation (e.g. intron retention events
(Smart et al., 2018) and RNA editing) that we do not explicitly study here, but which could be equally good
sources of novel, cancer-specific protein sequence for immunotherapeutic and other applications. Additionally,
there is substantial variability among analytical methods for identifying these exon-exon junctions. We note
significant discordance between results of analyses of the same data using different junction filtering methods.
While the same phenomena and general results appear to hold true independent of analytical technique, the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

identity and relative novelty of individual “cancer-specific” junctions vary between our results and those
previously published (Kahles et al., 2018). We also acknowledge that GTEx and the SRA combined do not
account for all sources of normal tissue(s) in the human body, and further acknowledge that the sample
metadata used to search the SRA may be an imperfect surrogate for actual tissue/sample identities. Our
assessment of embryological and developmentally-associated junctions is also limited by a relatively small
number of relevant RNA-seq samples available on the SRA. Finally, due to the short-read nature of these
RNA-seq data, we make no attempt to predict putative neoepitopes from cancer-specific junctions as we
cannot confidently recapitulate reading frame or broader sequence context from isolated exon-exon junctions.
While cancer-specific exon-exon junctions may indeed be a source of neoepitopes, their sharedness across
individuals and occurrence in cancer-relevant loci (e.g. EGFR, MUC16) are suggestive of underlying but as-ofyet unexplored biology. This sharedness does not appear to be related to variants in splicing factor or splicingassociated proteins, and is not wholly explained by recapitulation of embryological/developmental
transcriptional profiles. As such, we see this work as opening a broad area of future research into the role and
relevance of these novel recurring exon-exon junctions.
Acknowledgements
We thank Paul Spellman for helpful discussions and Chris Wilks for facilitating Snaptron queries. We thank
Mary Wood for her critical reading of the manuscript. The results published here are in part based upon data
generated by the TCGA Research Network: https://www.cancer.gov/tcga. The Genotype-Tissue Expression
(GTEx) Project was supported by the Common Fund of the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of
Health, and by NCI, NHGRI, NHLBI, NIDA, NIMH, and NINDS.
Disclaimers
The contents do not represent the views of the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs or the United States
Government.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, J.K.D., R.F.T., and A.N.; Methodology, J.K.D., R.F.T., and A.N.; Software, J.K.D., B.R.W.,
S.K.M., and A.N.; Validation, J.K.D. and A.N.; Formal Analysis, J.K.D., B.R.W., S.K.M., and A.N.; Investigation,
J.K.D., B.R.W., S.K.M., and A.N.; Resources, R.F.T. and A.N.; Data Curation, J.K.D. and B.R.W.; Writing –
Original Draft, J.K.D., B.R.W., R.F.T., and A.N.; Writing – Review & Editing, J.K.D., B.R.W., S.K.M., R.F.T.,
and A.N.; Visualization, J.K.D., B.R.W., and S.K.M.; Supervision, R.F.T. and A.N.; Project Administration,
R.F.T. and A.N.; Funding Acquisition, R.F.T. and A.N.
Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
References
Bernstein, M.N., Doan, A., and Dewey, C.N. (2017). MetaSRA: normalized human sample-specific metadata
for the Sequence Read Archive. Bioinformatics 33, 2914–2923.
Bjørklund, S.S., Panda, A., Kumar, S., Seiler, M., Robinson, D., Gheeya, J., Yao, M., Alnæs, G.I.G.,
Toppmeyer, D., Riis, M., et al. (2017). Widespread alternative exon usage in clinically distinct subtypes of
Invasive Ductal Carcinoma. Sci. Rep. 7, 5568.
Borczuk, A.C., Gorenstein, L., Walter, K.L., Assaad, A.A., Wang, L., and Powell, C.A. (2003). Non-small-cell
lung cancer molecular signatures recapitulate lung developmental pathways. Am. J. Pathol. 163, 1949–1960.
Broad Institute TCGA Genome Data Analysis Center (2016). Firehose stddata run. doi: 10.7908/C11G0KM9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, Weinstein, J.N., Collisson, E.A., Mills, G.B., Shaw, K.R.M.,
Ozenberger, B.A., Ellrott, K., Shmulevich, I., Sander, C., and Stuart, J.M. (2013). The Cancer Genome Atlas
Pan-Cancer analysis project. Nat. Genet. 45, 1113–1120.
Chakravarty, D., Gao, J., Phillips, S.M., Kundra, R., Zhang, H., Wang, J., Rudolph, J.E., Yaeger, R., Soumerai,
T., Nissan, M.H., et al. (2017). OncoKB: A Precision Oncology Knowledge Base. JCO Precis Oncol 2017.
Climente-González, H., Porta-Pardo, E., Godzik, A., and Eyras, E. (2017). The Functional Impact of Alternative
Splicing in Cancer. Cell Rep. 20, 2215–2226.
Collado-Torres, L., Nellore, A., and Jaffe, A.E. (2017). recount workflow: Accessing over 70,000 human RNAseq samples with Bioconductor. F1000Res. 6, 1558.
Felder, M., Kapur, A., Gonzalez-Bosquet, J., Horibata, S., Heintz, J., Albrecht, R., Fass, L., Kaur, J., Hu, K.,
Shojaei, H., et al. (2014). MUC16 (CA125): tumor biomarker to cancer therapy, a work in progress. Mol.
Cancer 13, 129.
Frankish, A., Diekhans, M., Ferreira, A.-M., Johnson, R., Jungreis, I., Loveland, J., Mudge, J.M., Sisu, C.,
Wright, J., Armstrong, J., et al. (2019). GENCODE reference annotation for the human and mouse genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D766–D773.
Godinho, M., Meijer, D., Setyono-Han, B., Dorssers, L.C.J., and van Agthoven, T. (2011). Characterization of
BCAR4, a novel oncogene causing endocrine resistance in human breast cancer cells. J. Cell. Physiol. 226,
1741–1749.
GTEx Consortium (2015). Human genomics. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot analysis:
multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science 348, 648–660.
Huang, S., Ernberg, I., and Kauffman, S. (2009). Cancer attractors: a systems view of tumors from a gene
network dynamics and developmental perspective. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 20, 869–876.
Kahles, A., Lehmann, K.-V., Toussaint, N.C., Hüser, M., Stark, S.G., Sachsenberg, T., Stegle, O., Kohlbacher,
O., Sander, C., Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, et al. (2018). Comprehensive Analysis of Alternative
Splicing Across Tumors from 8,705 Patients. Cancer Cell 34, 211–224.e6.
Kaneko, O., Gong, L., Zhang, J., Hansen, J.K., Hassan, R., Lee, B., and Ho, M. (2009). A binding domain on
mesothelin for CA125/MUC16. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 3739–3749.
Klein, L., Kyewski, B., Allen, P.M., and Hogquist, K.A. (2014). Positive and negative selection of the T cell
repertoire: what thymocytes see (and don’t see). Nature Reviews Immunology 14, 377–391.
Leinonen, R., Sugawara, H., Shumway, M., and on behalf of the International Nucleotide Sequence Database
Collaboration (2011). The Sequence Read Archive. Nucleic Acids Research 39, D19–D21.
Li, X.-P., Jiao, J.U., Lu, L.I., Zou, Q., Zhu, S., and Zhang, Y. (2016). Overexpression of ribosomal L1 domain
containing 1 is associated with an aggressive phenotype and a poor prognosis in patients with prostate cancer.
Oncology Letters 11, 2839–2844.
Li, Y., Sun, N., Lu, Z., Sun, S., Huang, J., Chen, Z., and He, J. (2017). Prognostic alternative mRNA splicing
signature in non-small cell lung cancer. Cancer Lett. 393, 40–51.
Lin, E.W., Karakasheva, T.A., Lee, D.-J., Lee, J.-S., Long, Q., Bass, A.J., Wong, K.K., and Rustgi, A.K. (2017).
Comparative transcriptomes of adenocarcinomas and squamous cell carcinomas reveal molecular similarities
that span classical anatomic boundaries. PLoS Genet. 13, e1006938.
Marcelino Meliso, F., Hubert, C.G., Favoretto Galante, P.A., and Penalva, L.O. (2017). RNA processing as an
alternative route to attack glioblastoma. Hum. Genet. 136, 1129–1141.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Naxerova, K., Bult, C.J., Peaston, A., Fancher, K., Knowles, B.B., Kasif, S., and Kohane, I.S. (2008). Analysis
of gene expression in a developmental context emphasizes distinct biological leitmotifs in human cancers.
Genome Biology 9, R108.
Norris, A.D., and Calarco, J.A. (2012). Emerging Roles of Alternative Pre-mRNA Splicing Regulation in
Neuronal Development and Function. Frontiers in Neuroscience 6.
Robertson, A.G., Shih, J., Yau, C., Gibb, E.A., Oba, J., Mungall, K.L., Hess, J.M., Uzunangelov, V., Walter, V.,
Danilova, L., et al. (2018). Integrative Analysis Identifies Four Molecular and Clinical Subsets in Uveal
Melanoma. Cancer Cell 33, 151.
Saha, A., Kim, Y., Gewirtz, A.D.H., Jo, B., Gao, C., McDowell, I.C., GTEx Consortium, Engelhardt, B.E., and
Battle, A. (2017). Co-expression networks reveal the tissue-specific regulation of transcription and splicing.
Genome Res. 27, 1843–1858.
Sebestyén, E., Zawisza, M., and Eyras, E. (2015). Detection of recurrent alternative splicing switches in tumor
samples reveals novel signatures of cancer. Nucleic Acids Res. 43, 1345–1356.
Slansky, J.E., and Spellman, P.T. (2019). Alternative Splicing in Tumors - A Path to Immunogenicity? N. Engl.
J. Med. 380, 877–880.
Smart, A.C., Margolis, C.A., Pimentel, H., He, M.X., Miao, D., Adeegbe, D., Fugmann, T., Wong, K.-K., and
Van Allen, E.M. (2018). Intron retention is a source of neoepitopes in cancer. Nat. Biotechnol. 36, 1056–1058.
Sondka, Z., Bamford, S., Cole, C.G., Ward, S.A., Dunham, I., and Forbes, S.A. (2018). The COSMIC Cancer
Gene Census: describing genetic dysfunction across all human cancers. Nat. Rev. Cancer 18, 696–705.
Srebrow, A., and Kornblihtt, A.R. (2006). The connection between splicing and cancer. Journal of Cell Science
119, 2635–2641.
Sveen, A., Kilpinen, S., Ruusulehto, A., Lothe, R.A., and Skotheim, R.I. (2016). Aberrant RNA splicing in
cancer; expression changes and driver mutations of splicing factor genes. Oncogene 35, 2413–2427.
Tang, S., and Madhavan, S. (2017). neoantigenR: An annotation based pipeline for tumor neoantigen
identification from sequencing data. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/171843
UniProt Consortium (2019). UniProt: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic Acids Res. 47, D506–
D515.
Wilks, C., Gaddipati, P., Nellore, A., and Langmead, B. (2018). Snaptron: querying splicing patterns across
tens of thousands of RNA-seq samples. Bioinformatics 34, 114–116.
Wood, M.A., Weeder, B.R., David, J.K., Nellore, A., and Thompson, R.F. (2019). Burden of tumor mutations,
neoepitopes, and other variants are cautionary predictors of cancer immunotherapy response and overall
survival. doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/665026
Xiong, H.Y., Alipanahi, B., Lee, L.J., Bretschneider, H., Merico, D., Yuen, R.K.C., Hua, Y., Gueroussov, S.,
Najafabadi, H.S., Hughes, T.R., et al. (2015). RNA splicing. The human splicing code reveals new insights into
the genetic determinants of disease. Science 347, 1254806.
Yang, W., Lee, K.-W., Srivastava, R.M., Kuo, F., Krishna, C., Chowell, D., Makarov, V., Hoen, D., Dalin, M.G.,
Wexler, L., et al. (2019). Immunogenic neoantigens derived from gene fusions stimulate T cell responses. Nat.
Med. 25, 767–775.
Yang, X., Coulombe-Huntington, J., Kang, S., Sheynkman, G.M., Hao, T., Richardson, A., Sun, S., Yang, F.,
Shen, Y.A., Murray, R.R., et al. (2016). Widespread Expansion of Protein Interaction Capabilities by Alternative
Splicing. Cell 164, 805–817.
Zhu, J., Chen, Z., and Yong, L. (2018). Systematic profiling of alternative splicing signature reveals prognostic
predictor for ovarian cancer. Gynecologic Oncology 148, 368–374.
Zong, Z., Li, H., Yi, C., Ying, H., Zhu, Z., and Wang, H. (2018). Genome-Wide Profiling of Prognostic
Alternative Splicing Signature in Colorectal Cancer. Frontiers in Oncology 8.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the
Lead Contact, Abhinav Nellore (nellore@ohsu.edu).
METHOD DETAILS
Data Download
Previously called exon-exon junction data including phenotype table, bed and coverage files for both TCGA
and GTEx v6 were downloaded from the recount2 service at https://jhubiostatistics.shinyapps.io/recount/
(Collado-Torres et al., 2017). The metaSRA (Bernstein et al., 2017) web query form at
http://metasra.biostat.wisc.edu/ was queried for experiment accession numbers for 1) non-cancer cell and
tissue type samples (see Table S1 for cancer-matched samples and Table S3 for non-cancer samples, and
“Selection of SRA tissue and cell types” for a description of how these samples were chosen) and 2) TCGAmatched cancer types (see Table S1). For the non-cancer samples, the term “cancer” was explicitly added as
an excluded ontology term in the query, and the resulting files were filtered to remove any samples with
“tumor” in the sample_name field. The resulting accession numbers were queried against the Snaptron
junction database using the query snaptron tool (Wilks et al., 2018), yielding junctions for the tissue and cell
types of interest that were downloaded. Patient somatic mutation calls were downloaded from the GDAC
firehose (Broad Institute TCGA Genome Data Analysis Center, 2016), while a list of human splicing-associated
gene mutations (keyword search “mRNA splicing [KW-0508]”) was downloaded from the UniProt database
(UniProt Consortium, 2019). Two lists of cancer-associated genes were downloaded: the COSMIC cancer
gene census cancer gene list from https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census (Sondka et al., 2018), and the OncoKB
cancer gene list from https://oncokb.org/cancerGenes (Chakravarty et al., 2017).
Indexing of GTEx and TCGA junctions
The GENCODE gene transfer format (.gtf) file was parsed to collect full coordinates and left and right splice
sites of junctions from annotated transcripts and a searchable tree of protein-coding gene boundaries. The
GTEx phenotype file was parsed to collect tissue of origin information and donor gender; bone marrow
samples derived from leukemia cell line cells were eliminated. The TCGA phenotype file was parsed to collect
information on cancer type, cancer stage at diagnosis, patient gender, vital status, and sample type (primary
tumor, matched normal sample, recurrent tumor, or metastatic tumor). Cancer subtype classifications were
collected for five cancer types beyond their TCGA designations (Figure 2B, Table S1): cervical squamous cell
carcinoma and endocervical adenocarcinoma was separated into cervical squamous cell carcinoma,
endocervical adenocarcinoma, and cervical adenosquamous; esophageal carcinoma was separated into
esophagus adenocarcinoma and esophagus squamous cell carcinoma; brain lower grade glioma was
separated into astrocytoma, oligoastrocytoma, and oligodendroglioma; sarcoma was separated into
leiomyosarcoma, myxofibrosarcoma, malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, desmoid tumors,
dedifferentiated liposarcoma, synovial sarcoma, and undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma; and
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma were separated. A new SQLite3 database was created to index all
GTEx and TCGA junctions, with linked tables containing 1) sample ids and associated junction ids; 2) sample
ids and phenotype information for each sample; and 3) junction ids and junction information including 0-based
closed junction coordinates, GENCODE annotation status, and location within protein coding gene boundaries.
SQL indexes were created on junction ID and sample ID columns for fast and flexible querying.
Selection of cancer-specific junctions
For all analyses we apply a light filter, requiring a junction to have at least a two-read coverage across GTEx,
TCGA, and the selected cancer and non-cancer SRA samples, to exclude false positive junctions but allow for
the existence of splicing noise. To characterize junction novelty in cancer with respect to normal cells, we
defined a hierarchical filter that specifies inclusion and exclusion of junctions in different RNA-seq datasets
(Table 1). In order from most to least permissive, these filters are: 1) junctions not found in tissue-matched

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

GTEx or TCGA normal samples, 2) junctions not found in any GTEx or TCGA normal (“core normal”) samples,
and 3) junctions not found in any core normal samples or in selected SRA tissue and cell type non-cancer
samples. For our analyses, we do not explicitly filter on whether a junction is annotated in GENCODE. We do
not set a limit on presence in the core normal sample cohorts: any junction present at any coverage level in
only one sample is counted as “in” these cohorts. This yields a more stringent filter on normality than that used
by the TCGA splicing paper, which uses the term “neojunctions” to refer to junctions not found in tissuematched GTEx or TCGA normal samples, with a 10-read coverage requirement in TCGA, and allowing through
the filter lowly expressed junctions in GTEx tissue-matched samples (Kahles et al., 2018).
We queried the junction database to extract junctions of interest, specifically 1) all junctions for all tumor
samples of each cancer type and 2) all junctions not present in any core normal samples for each cancer type
cohort, with their cohort prevalence levels. All junctions are presented in a 0-based closed coordinate system.
Protein coding region presence was determined for all junctions, with location assessment as follows: the
junction is categorized as protein-coding if it is present in a protein-coding gene region (with at least one
junction splice site within the gene boundaries) and antisense if it is present on the reverse strand of a proteincoding gene region, based on gene regions described in GENCODE v.28 (Frankish et al., 2019). Cancerassociated genes were collected from the OncoKB and the COSMIC cancer gene census; any gene listed in
one or both lists was categorized as a cancer-associated gene. Any junction assigned to a protein-coding gene
region corresponding to one of these genes was categorized as associated with cancer-relevant loci.
For comparison between cancer-sample junctions found vs. not found in core normal samples, we performed a
Kruskal-Wallis H-test to determine the significance of the decreased sharedness levels, since the junction
prevalence data is not normally distributed and there are many fewer cancer-specific junctions than junctions
found in core normal samples.
Table 1: Junction novelty specification
Junction novelty stage

Definition

0

All junctions

1+

Junctions not found in tissue-matched GTEx or TCGA normal samples

2+

Junctions not found in any GTEx or TCGA normal (“core normal”) samples

3+

Junctions not found in any core normal samples or in selected SRA non-cancer samples

Comparison with SRA tissue and cell types
Non-cancer sample types from the SRA were chosen via manual curation informed by a clustering of junctions
according to ontology term prevalence, with commonly occurring terms that do not meaningfully distinguish
junctions eliminated. The selected sample types in Table S3 comprise all non-cancer data from the SRA
analyzed. All junctions for samples associated with these cell and tissue types but not with “cancer” were
downloaded via Snaptron, translated to a 0-based closed coordinate system, and compared with those found
in TCGA cancer samples. Junctions present in a TCGA cancer-type cohort and SRA samples from a specific
assigned category determined set assignments, which were used for subsequent data analysis. To exclude
false positive junctions but allow for the existence of splicing noise, only junctions with at least two reads
across GTEx, TCGA, and the selected cancer and non-cancer SRA samples are considered true junctions. All
SRA junctions not found in TCGA cancer samples were ignored. For the supplementary 2-sample minimum
filter analysis, we retained all junctions that are present in only 1 SRA sample, but required at least two
samples across the broad SRA category (adult, developmental, or stem cell) for inclusion in that set. (For

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

developmental subsets, only one sample within a subset category was required, as long as the 2-sample
criterion across the full developmental category was met.)
For comparison between TCGA cancer-sample junctions not found in core normal samples with SRA junctions
from matched cancer type samples, we performed a Kruskal-Wallis H-test to determine the significance of the
increased sharedness levels, since the junction prevalence data is not normally distributed and the difference
in junction counts between the two cohorts (TCGA junctions in or not-in the SRA matched cohort) is large.
Splicing Factor Mutation Analysis
Patient somatic mutation call files were downloaded from the GDAC firehose (http://gdac.broadinstitute.org/)
and all silent mutations were removed. Using the remaining mutation calls, patients were classified based on
two-different separation criteria: 1) whether or not they had at least one mutation in a gene that codes for a
protein annotated as involved in mRNA splicing, based on the UniProt protein annotation database, and 2)
whether or not they had at least 1 mutation in a gene previously identified as sQTL associated (U2AF1,
SF3B1, TADA1, PPP2R1A, and/or IDH1) in the TCGA cohort by the TCGA splicing paper (Kahles et al., 2018).
For each cancer type, and each stratification method, the number of cancer-specific junctions per patient was
compared for patients with and without at least one mutation in the defined set (Figures S1E and S1F).
Differences in the number of novel junctions across cancer types and stratification groups was assessed via
two-way ANOVA with a Benjamini-Hochberg p-value correction.
In addition to comparing the levels of cancer specific junctions between patients with and without splicing
associated mutations, we also compared junction sharedness based on the same two stratification criteria
used above. For each cancer type, all junctions identified in two or more patients were selected. For each, the
number of junction occurrences in patients with mutations in splicing associated genes was calculated and
compared to the overall number of occurrences in the corresponding cancer cohort, using a Fisher’s exact test
(Figures S1G and S1H).
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
All data is publicly available and accessible online. Python code and corresponding descriptors for the
implementation of methods as described is publicly available on GitHub
(https://github.com/JulianneDavid/shared-cancer-splicing).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Information
(A)

(B)

(C)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(D)

(E)

(F)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(G)

(H)

(I)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S1: Distribution and prevalences TCGA cancer sample junctions
(A) Log-scale sorted strip plots representing the number of high-support junctions per sample for each of 33 TCGA cancer
types where each point is a single TCGA tumor sample and the width of each strip is proportional to the size of the cancer
type cohort (Kahles et al., 2018). High support requires junction coverage within a sample to be equivalent to at least 5
out of 100 million 100-base pair reads. The upper panel counts junctions not found in GENCODE annotation or in tissuematched normal GTEx or TCGA samples (Table S1); the lower panel counts junctions not found in GENCODE annotation
or in any core normal samples, differing from Figure 1B in that here, GENCODE-annotated junctions are also removed
and the coverage filter is applied. The gray bars highlight TCGA cancer types with no or few tissue-matched normal
samples (Table S1); note that there are orders of magnitude fewer GENCODE-annotated junctions than junctions found in
tissue-matched normal samples, partially explaining the high values for THYM, CESC, UVM, and DLBC in the upper
panel.
(B) Log-scale scatter plot showing, for 33 TCGA cancer types, the number of junctions shared within each cancer-type
cohort at each prevalence level, counting only junctions not found in any core normal samples. TCGA cancer type colors
are as specified in Figures 1B, 2A, and S1A. Of interest with significant intra-cohort junction sharedness are, among
others, ovarian carcinoma (tan), leukemia (pink), testicular germ cell tumors (red), and uveal melanoma (dark green).
(C) Log-scale histogram showing inter-cancer sharedness of junctions not found in core normal samples. Most junctions
occur in only one cancer type, but many are shared between 2 or more.
(D) Log-scale box plots representing, for all TCGA cancer types individually, the prevalences within each cancer-type
cohort of junctions occurring in at least 1% of cancer-type samples, separated into prevalences for (blue, left) junctions
found in GTEx or TCGA tissue-matched normal samples (Table S1); (green, center) junctions not found in tissue-matched
normals but found in other core normal samples; and (yellow, right) junctions found in no core normal samples. Any
junction found in multiple cancer types is represented by multiple data points, one for each cancer type in which it is
found. Figure 1C condenses all data from this figure into one pan-cancer set.
(E) Cancer specific splicing junctions in patients with and without splicing associated gene mutations: log count of
junctions not found in any core normal samples for each patient are plotted (top) across each cancer type in TCGA. Within
each cancer, boxplots represent either patients with mutations in UniProt annotated splicing-related genes (left) or
patients without any related mutations (right). Overall prevalence of relevant mutations in splicing-related for each cancer
type are plotted below.
(F) Presents data in the same manner as E, but with comparison between patients with mutations only in genes described
in the TCGA splicing paper (Kahles et al., 2018) vs all other patients.
(G) Analysis of junction sharedness for patients within mutational cohorts: for each cancer, junctions not found in core
normal samples are plotted based on sharedness across all patients in the cancer cohort (Y-axis) compared to deviation
from expected shareness (estimated odds ratio (log scale) based on Fisher’s exact test) for only patients with mutations in
UniProt annotated splicing-related genes (x-axis).
(H) Presents data in the same manner as G, but with deviation from expected sharedness calculated only for patients with
mutations in genes described in the TCGA splicing paper (Kahles et al., 2018). We found that no specific junctions show
significantly enriched sharedness in patients carrying relevant mutations (Fisher’s exact test FDR > 0.05 for all in both A
and B), however there is a consistent shift towards higher than expected sharedness across the majority of cancers for
patients carrying at least one of the mutations defined by the TCGA splicing paper (Kahles et al., 2018).
(I) Comparison of TCGA-cohort prevalence of junctions occurring vs. not occurring in SRA cancer samples: log-scale box
plots representing, for selected TCGA cancer types, the prevalences within each cancer-type cohort of junctions occurring
in at least 1% of cancer-type samples, separated into prevalences for junctions (orange, left) found or (blue, right) not
found in type-matched cancer sample(s) from the SRA. Selected TCGA cancer types are those for which cancer-matched
SRA sample junctions are available from Snaptron (Wilks et al., 2018) and at least 50 TCGA cancer junctions not found in
core normal samples are present in the cancer-type matched SRA samples. Most junctions are TCGA-specific, but
junctions that are also found in an type-matched SRA cancer cohort have on average higher TCGA-cohort prevalences.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(A)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(B)

Figure S2: Similarity of TCGA junctions and non-cancer SRA junctions
(A) Clustering by cohort prevalence of junctions not found in core normal samples: heatmap showing shared junction
prevalences across all TCGA cancer type and associated histological subtypes with at least 20 samples. The clustered
junctions are the 200 most prevalent junctions of each cancer type or subtype that are at least 1% prevalent in that
subtype and are not found in any core normal samples but are found in at least one of the 22 non-cancer tissue and cell
type SRA samples. Each heatmap row represents a junction’s prevalence in each of the TCGA and SRA sample-type
cohorts. The colorbar beneath the plot shows SRA tissue and cell types colored according to their assigned categories
(Table S3), where white represents adult normal samples, light gray represents stem cell saamples, and darker gray
represents developmental samples.
(B) Samplewise comparison of junctions from TCGA melanoma samples and select normal samples: boxplots showing
the percent of junctions shared for every pairwise combination of TCGA melanoma tumor samples with (brown) TCGA
melanoma tumor samples, (grass green) the single TCGA melanoma paired normal sample, (pink) SRA normal
melanocyte samples (see Tables S1 and S3), and (blue) GTEx normal skin samples. The percent of junctions shared
between two samples is given by % 𝑠ℎ𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑑 = (𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝐴 & 𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝐵) / 𝑚𝑖𝑛(𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝐴), 𝑙𝑒𝑛(𝑠𝑒𝑡 𝐵)), where a set comprises all
junctions identified in the single cancer or normal sample. TCGA melanoma cancer samples have on average a greater
similarity of junctions to SRA normal melanocyte samples than to GTEx or TCGA bulk skin normal samples.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(A)

(B)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(C)

(D)

(E)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(F)

Figure S3: Distribution of junctions not found in core normal samples and unexplained junctions
(A) Expanded junction set assignments in normal tissue and cell type categories from the Sequence Read Archive, across
cancers: upset-style plot with bar plots showing junction abundances across major sets and subsets (left) and set
overlaps (top) across 33 cancers (error bars). Shown junctions are absent from all core normals. Unexplained junctions
(red highlights) comprise junctions not present in any set categories studied (see also Figure 3A). The developmental set
comprises human development-related junctions not present in the category placenta. Scale is log10 of percent of
junctions not found in core normals, calculated for each cancer.
(B) Analysis of inter- and intra-cancer sharedness of stage-3+ “unexplained” junctions: log-scale box plots as in Figure S1I
but including only stage-3+ unexplained junctions not found in core normal samples or selected SRA normal adult,
developmental, or stem cell samples (Table 1). Plots are presented for TCGA cancer types for which cancer-matched
SRA sample junctions are available from Snaptron (Wilks et al., 2018) and at least 30 unexplained junctions are present
in the cancer-type matched SRA samples. Prevalences are given within each cancer-type cohort of junctions occurring in
at least 0.5% of cancer-type samples, separated into prevalences for junctions (orange, left) found or (blue, right) not
found in type-matched cancer sample(s) from the SRA. For all cancer types except DLBC, most junctions are TCGAspecific, but junctions that are also found in a type-matched SRA cancer cohort have on average higher TCGA-cohort
prevalences.
(C) Log-scale scatter plot showing, for 33 TCGA cancer types, the number of level-3+ unexplained junctions shared within
each cancer-type cohort at each prevalence level as in figure S1B. TCGA cancer type colors are as specified in Figures
1B, 2A, and S1A. Again, among others, ovarian carcinoma (tan), leukemia (pink), testicular germ cell tumors (red), and
uveal melanoma (dark green) have significant intra-cohort junction sharedness.
(D) Log-scale histogram showing inter-cancer sharedness of stage-3+ unexplained junctions as in Figure S1C. Again,
most junctions occur in only one cancer type, but many are shared between 2 or more.
(E) Upset-style plot with bar plots showing junction abundances across major sets (left) and set overlaps (top) across 33
cancers (error bars); similar to Figure 3A, but presence in 2 samples across the SRA sample-type category is required for
inclusion in a set. Shown junctions are absent from all core normals. Unexplained junctions (red highlights) comprise
junctions not present in any set categories studied. The developmental set comprises human development-related
junctions not present in the category placenta. Scale is log10 of percent of junctions not found in core normals, calculated
for each cancer.
(F) Upset-style plot with bar plots showing junction abundances across major sets and subsets (left) and set overlaps
(top) across 33 cancers (error bars); similar to Figure 3A, but presence in 2 samples across the SRA sample-type
category is required for inclusion in a set. Shown junctions are absent from all core normals. Unexplained junctions (red
highlights) comprise junctions not present in any set categories studied. The developmental set comprises human
development-related junctions not present in the category placenta. Scale is log10 of percent of junctions not found in
core normals, calculated for each cancer.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S1: Sources and counts of tumor and tissue-matched normal samples
TCGA cancer
type
(Abbreviation: #
tumor samples)

# of TCGA
paired
normal
samples

GTEx
matched
tissue(s) (#
of normal
samples)

# TCGA tumor
sample
junctions not
in tissuematched
normal (avg
#/sample)

# unique TCGA
cancer-type
junctions not in
tissue-matched
normals

Additional
matched
normals
used: SRA
cell type of
origin
(abbreviati
on: # of
samples)

Histological subtypes
(Abbreviation: # of
tumor samples)

SRA matched cancer:
# of SRA samples

Acute Myeloid
Leukemia (LAML:
126)

0

Blood (595)

2,836,278
(22,510/sampl
e)

2,264,159

NA

NA

Acute myeloid
leukemia: 725

Bladder
Urothelial
Carcinoma
(BLCA: 414)

19

Bladder
(11)

5,627,108
(13,592/sampl
e)

2,227,034

NA

NA

NA

Brain Lower
Grade Glioma
(LGG: 532)

48

Brain
(1409)

1,608,421
(3,023/sample
)

1,266,167

NA

Astrocytoma (AC:
196);
Oligoastrocytoma
(OAC: 135);
Oligodendroglioma
(ODG: 200)

NA

Breast Invasive
Carcinoma
(BRCA: 1134)

112

Breast
(218)

6,287,963
(5,545/sample
)

3,480,255

NA

NA

NA

Cervical
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma &
Endocervical
Adenocarcinoma
(CESC: 306)

3

Cervix Uteri
(11)

14,086,434
(46,034
/sample)

2,263,326

NA

Cervical
Adenosquamous
(CASC: 6); Cervical
squamous cell
carcinoma (CSC:
253); Endocervical
adenocarcinoma
(ECAD: 47)

Cervical Carcinoma:
23

Colon
Adenocarcinoma
(COAD: 505)

41

Colon (376)

1,754,895
(3,475/sample
)

1,268,454

NA

NA

NA

Esophageal
Carcinoma
(ESCA: 185)

13

Esophagus
(788)

6,588,463
(35,613/sampl
e)

4,827,828

NA

Esophagus
Adenocarcinoma
(ESAD: 89);
Esophagus
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma (ESSC:
96)

NA

Glioblastoma
Multiforme (GBM:
175)

5

Brain
(1409)

922,811
(5,428/sample
)

796,026

NA

NA

Glioblastoma
multiforme: 20

Kidney
Chromophobe
(KICH: 66)

25

Kidney (36)

667,651
(10,116/sampl
e)

471,050

NA

NA

NA

Kidney Renal
Clear Cell
Carcinoma
(KIRC: 544)

72

Kidney (36)

4,593,062
(8,443/sample
)

2,452,391

NA

NA

Renal Cell
Carcinoma: 110

Kidney Renal
Papillary Cell

32

Kidney (36)

2,066,360
(7,102/sample

1,272,647

NA

NA

NA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Carcinoma
(KIRP: 291)

)

Liver
Hepatocellular
Carcinoma
(LIHC: 374)

50

Liver (136)

1,968,456
(5,263/sample
)

1,187,750

Hepatocyt
e cell line
(hep_cl:
7);
Hepatocyt
e primary
cells
(hep_pc:
77)

NA

Hepatocellular
carcinoma: 115

Lung
Adenocarcinoma
(LUAD: 542)

59

Lung (374)

2,827,233
(5,216/sample
)

1,885,643

NA

NA

Lung
adenocarcinoma: 35

Lung Squamous
Cell Carcinoma
(LUSC: 504)

51

Lung (374)

3,575,668
(7,095/sample
)

1,888,833

NA

NA

NA

Ovarian Serous
Cystadenocarcin
oma (OV: 430)

0

Ovary
(108),
Fallopian
Tube (7)

30,141,239
(70,096/sampl
e)

11,483,211

NA

NA

NA

Pancreatic
Adenocarcinoma
(PAAD: 179)

4

Pancreas
(197)

1,315,090
(7,347/sample
)

830,468

NA

NA

NA

Prostate
Adenocarcinoma
(PRAD: 506)

52

Prostate
(119)

2,476,764
(4,895/sample
)

1,643,727

NA

NA

Prostate
adenocarcinoma: 51

Skin Cutaneous
Melanoma
(SKCM: 472)

1

Skin (972)

1,935,123
(4,100/sample
)

1,198,791

NA

NA

NA

Rectum
Adenocarcinoma
(READ: 167)

10

Colon (376)

625,914
(3,748/sample
)

496,129

NA

NA

NA

Stomach
Adenocarcinoma
(STAD: 416)

37

Stomach
(203)

12,378,838
(29,757/sampl
e)

7,764,375

NA

NA

NA

Testicular Germ
Cell Tumors
(TGCT: 156)

0

Testis (203)

935,595
(5,997/sample
)

573,824

NA

NA

Testicular cancer: 9

Thyroid
Carcinoma
(THCA: 513)

59

Thyroid
(361)

1,783,492
(3,477/sample
)

1,296,521

NA

NA

Thyroid carcinoma: 52

Uterine
Carcinosarcoma
(UCS: 57)

0

Uterus (90)

593,740
(10,416/sampl
e)

413,469

NA

NA

NA

Uterine Corpus
Endometrial
Carcinoma
(UCEC: 554)

35

Uterus (90)

3,542,334
(6,394/sample
)

1,968,191

NA

NA

NA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Sarcoma (SARC:
263)

2

Adipose
Tissue
(620),
Muscle
(475)

1,739,153
(6,613/sample
)

1,069,549

NA

Desmoid Tumor (DT:
2); Leiomyosarcoma
(LMS: 106); Malignant
Peripheral Nerve
Sheath Tumors
(MPNT: 10);
Myxofibrosarcoma
(MFS: 25); Synovial
Sarcoma (SYNS: 10);
Undifferentiated
Pleomorphic Sarcoma
(UPLS: 52)

Sarcoma: 84

Pheochromocyto
ma &
Paraganglioma
(PCPG: 184)

3

Adrenal
Gland
(159),
Nerve (335)

1,168,368
(6,350/sample
)

662,442

NA

Pheochromocytoma
(PCHC: 151);
Paraganglioma (PGG:
33)

NA

Adrenocortical
Carcinoma (ACC:
79)

0

Adrenal
Gland (159)

12,703,775
(160,807
/sample)

1,013,102

NA

NA

NA

Mesothelioma
(MESO: 87)

0

Lung (374)

399,050
(4,587/sample
)

317,630

NA

NA

NA

Head and Neck
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma
(HNSC: 504)

44

Skin (972)

1,780,841
(3,533/sample
)

1,262,383

NA

NA

NA

Cholangiocarcino
ma (CHOL: 36)

9

Liver (136)

281,418
(7,817/sample
)

220,929

NA

NA

Cholangiocarcinoma:
7

Thymoma
(THYM: 120)

2

NA

4,228,476
(35,237
/sample)

1,206,043

Thymus
primary
cell
(thym_pc:
20);
Thymus
tissue
(thym_tis:
119)

NA

Thymoma: 15

Lymphoid
Neoplasm
Diffuse Large Bcell
Lymphoma(DLB
C: 48)

0

NA

No match:
7,722,928
(160,894
/sample)

849,592

NA

NA

Diffuse Large B-cell
Lymphoma: 2

Uveal Melanoma
(UVM: 80)

0

NA

No match:
13,315,153
(166,439/sam
ple)

899,967

Melanocyt
e cell line
(mel_cl:
22);
Melanocyt
e primary
cell
(mel_pc:
8)

NA

Uveal Melanoma: 5

NA

NA

Heart (489)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
NA

NA

Pituitary
(124)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Salivary
Gland (70)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Small
Intestine
(104)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Spleen
(118)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Vagina (97)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

Blood
vessel
(750)

NA

NA

NA

NA

NA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S2: Percent of junctions not found in core normal samples, averaged across cancer types
Adult

Developmental

Stem Cells

Unexplained

1

26.5%

15.4%

2.7%

64.9%

2

19.6%

5.92%

2.2%

76.4%

SRA category:
Number of samples per
SRA category required for
set membership

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S3: Selection of additional normal tissue and cell types analyzed
SRA cell or tissue type

Sample types (abbreviation: #
of samples)

Assigned category > subcategory
(if applicable)

Aorta

tissue (aor_tis: 266)

adult

Astrocyte

cell line (ast_cl: 4), primary
cells (ast_pc: 83)

adult

Biliary Tree

combined group of tissue (4
samples) and stem cells (3
samples) (bt_all: 7)

adult

Bone

cell line (bone_cl: 20), tissue
(bone_tis: 58)

adult

Ectoderm

cell line (ect_cl: 17)

developmental > embryonic

Embryo

cell line (emb_cl: 929), primary
cells (emb_pc: 904),
stem cells (emb_sc: 34), tissue
(emb_tis: 989)

developmental > embryonic

Epithelial Cell

cell line (ec_cl: 853), primary
cell (ec_pc: 621)

adult

stem cells (ec_sc: 57)

stem cells

Eye

cell line (eye_cl: 42), primary
cell (eye_pc: 4), tissue (eye_tis:
53)

adult

Fallopian Tube

tissue (ft_tis: 13)

adult

Fibroblast

cell line (fb_cl: 1660), primary
cell (fb_pc: 351)

adult

stem cells (fb_sc: 9)

stem cells

Glial Cell

cell line (gc_cl: 10), primary
cells (gc_pc: 136)

adult

Hematopoietic Cell

cell line (hpc_cl: 603), primary
cell ( hpc_pc: 2679)

adult

stem cells (hpc_sc: 18)

stem cells

Hepatocyte

cell line (hep_cl: 7), primary cell
(hep_pc: 77)

adult

Induced Pluripotent Stem Cell

cell line (ips_cl: 139)

stem cells

Islet of Langerhans

cell line (ilh_cl: 3), primary cell
(ilh_pc: 285)

adult

Leukocyte

cell line (lk_cl: 370), primary
cell (lk_pc: 2178)

adult

Lymphocyte

cell line (lym_cl: 255), primary

adult

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

cell (lym_pc: 1073)
Macrophage

cell line (mph_cl: 19), primary
cell (mph_pc: 130)

adult

Melanocyte

cell line (mel_cl: 22), primary
cell (mel_pc: 8)

adult

Mesenchymal Stem Cell

stem cells (msc_sc: 65)

stem cells

Mesenchyme

stem cells (mes_sc: 19)

stem cells

Mesothelium

cell line (mes_cl: 4)

adult

Myeloid Cell

cell line (myl_cl: 29), primary
cell (myl_pc: 794)

adult

Myoblast

cell line (myo_cl: 7), primary
cell (myo_pc: 402)

developmental > embryonic

Neonate

cell line (nn_cl: 250), primary
cell (nn_pc: 105), tissue
(nn_tis: 21)

developmental > fetal

Oligodendrocyte

primary cell (odg_pc: 37)

adult

Oocyte

primary cell (ooc_pc: 11)

developmental > oocyte

Placenta

tissue (plc_tis: 264)

developmental > placental

Platelet

primary cell (plt_pc: 6)

adult

Pluripotent Stem Cell

cell line (pps_cl: 139), stem
cells (pps_sc: 6)

stem cells

Somatic Stem Cell

stem cells (ssc_sc: 86)

stem cells

Thymus

primary cell (thym_pc: 20),
tissue (thym_tis: 119)

adult

Zygote

primary cell (zyg_pc: 27)

developmental > zygote

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S4: Unexplained junctions occurring in >10% of samples of multiple TCGA cancer types
Unexplained stage 3+ junction
(chr; left splice site; right splice
site; strand)

Cancer
count Cancer type: % of cancer-type samples containing the junction

chr18;49501731;49524503;-

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 21.0811%;
Head_and_Neck_Squamous_Cell_Carcinoma: 28.7698%;
3 Lung_Squamous_Cell_Carcinoma: 13.0952%

chr19;58392528;58393026;+

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 11.3514%;
Ovarian_Serous_Cystadenocarcinoma: 19.3023%;
3 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 12.9808%

chr11;2129478;2395551;+

Adrenocortical_Carcinoma: 13.9241%;
2 Uterine_Carcinosarcoma: 10.5263%

chr11;22900551;23057663;-

Skin_Cutaneous_Melanoma: 11.4407%;
2 Uveal_Melanoma: 12.5%

chr12;15569284;15578851;+

Colon_Adenocarcinoma: 15.4455%;
2 Rectum_Adenocarcinoma: 16.1677%

chr12;15579385;15580037;+

Colon_Adenocarcinoma: 16.6337%;
2 Rectum_Adenocarcinoma: 16.7665%

chr14;100376176;100734652;+

Adrenocortical_Carcinoma: 17.7215%;
2 Pheochromocytoma_and_Paraganglioma: 22.2826%

chr18;49524635;49578176;-

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 15.6757%;
2 Head_and_Neck_Squamous_Cell_Carcinoma: 18.6508%

chr19;3976571;3982811;-

Acute_Myeloid_Leukemia: 13.4921%;
2 Ovarian_Serous_Cystadenocarcinoma: 10.4651%

chr19;41683816;41771127;-

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 14.5946%;
2 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 15.8654%

chr19;41709948;41718251;+

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 11.3514%;
2 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 10.8173%

chr21;16971056;16971076;+

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 13.5135%;
2 Ovarian_Serous_Cystadenocarcinoma: 18.1395%

chr6;116004903;116119064;+

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 11.8919%;
2 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 11.2981%

chr6;116004910;116119071;+

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 11.8919%;
2 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 11.2981%

chr6;31944795;31944981;+

Ovarian_Serous_Cystadenocarcinoma: 19.5349%;
2 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 11.7788%

chrX;4542633;4895036;+

Esophageal_Carcinoma: 10.8108%;
2 Stomach_Adenocarcinoma: 11.0577%

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S5: Junction counts and proportion of antisense junctions for all TCGA cancer types
Core normals

Other adult non-cancer

antisense junction
prevalence count

Stem cell

antisense junction
prevalence count

Unexplained

TCGA cancer type

junction
count

Acute Myeloid
Leukemia

1,745,361

27%

183,003

46%

46,261

48%

4,580

45%

427,768

47%

Adrenocortical
Carcinoma

941,404

20%

7,830

39%

2,369

38%

326

33%

22,053

44%

Bladder Urothelial
Carcinoma

2,401,749

24%

58,874

35%

17,652

31%

3,348

26%

155,124

42%

Brain Lower Grade
Glioma

2,847,326

26%

64,093

40%

19,716

38%

3,129

32%

165,091

41%

Breast Invasive
Carcinoma

4,013,058

27%

170,106

36%

44,855

36%

7,520

30%

441,104

37%

Cervical Squamous
Cell Carcinoma and
Endocervical
Adenocarcinoma

2,148,683

24%

45,625

36%

12,353

35%

2,361

27%

111,091

42%

754,166

15%

3,790

33%

900

33%

168

24%

8,399

37%

Colon
Adenocarcinoma

2,228,830

25%

64,988

37%

19,894

31%

2,841

32%

155,589

42%

Esophageal
Carcinoma

3,939,154

29%

349,351

43%

113,466

45%

13,813

38% 1,039,014

46%

Glioblastoma
Multiforme

2,368,563

25%

35,154

36%

12,209

35%

2,024

26%

75,111

37%

Head and Neck
Squamous Cell
Carcinoma

2,571,867

24%

72,107

35%

19,318

34%

4,210

27%

177,027

40%

Kidney
Chromophobe

1,042,201

22%

10,778

42%

3,081

37%

490

26%

28,961

42%

Kidney Renal Clear
Cell Carcinoma

2,925,458

26%

93,435

38%

21,535

38%

3,160

32%

197,822

40%

Kidney Renal
Papillary Cell
Carcinoma

1,896,671

25%

33,239

39%

8,380

38%

1,255

33%

85,284

41%

Liver Hepatocellular
Carcinoma

1,889,979

23%

43,871

36%

9,302

33%

1,486

27%

91,086

40%

Lung
Adenocarcinoma

2,890,617

26%

95,291

37%

23,848

35%

4,387

30%

229,442

40%

Lung Squamous Cell
Carcinoma
3,018,232

24%

92,301

33%

27,381

30%

5,604

22%

212,501

36%

Lymphoid Neoplasm
Diffuse Large B cell
Lymphoma

Cholangiocarcinoma

antisense junction
prevalence count

Developmental

antisense junction
prevalence count

antisense
ratio

793,306

18%

9,851

30%

1,806

32%

277

30%

16,201

36%

1,150,647

20%

11,387

38%

3,060

39%

594

29%

27,214

43%

Ovarian Serous
Cystadenocarcinoma 5,092,658

32%

542,738

46%

242,074

48%

24,032

41% 2,739,236

49%

Pancreatic
Adenocarcinoma

1,593,779

22%

20,854

39%

5,087

41%

876

33%

49,429

44%

Pheochromocytoma
and Paraganglioma

1,480,083

23%

19,085

40%

6,003

40%

832

35%

53,453

43%

Prostate
Adenocarcinoma

2,423,109

26%

55,616

40%

15,372

40%

2,257

35%

159,220

43%

Rectum
Adenocarcinoma

1,381,622

22%

21,823

37%

6,693

33%

945

28%

42,408

42%

Mesothelioma

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/754044; this version posted September 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
Sarcoma

1,985,824

23%

31,671

35%

10,306

33%

1,699

28%

77,762

39%

Skin Cutaneous
Melanoma

2,493,051

24%

62,444

36%

17,376

34%

2,973

27%

148,206

38%

Stomach
Adenocarcinoma

4,844,395

31%

494,846

44%

172,922

46%

19,099

40% 1,787,745

47%

Testicular Germ Cell
Tumors

1,627,329

19%

26,027

26%

12,435

23%

5,054

17%

49,836

31%

Thymoma

1,364,454

21%

19,938

32%

4,892

31%

1,057

26%

40,450

37%

Thyroid Carcinoma

2,501,295

27%

54,285

42%

14,124

42%

2,217

37%

147,977

44%

993,014

18%

8,062

35%

3,328

30%

601

29%

22,474

39%

2,499,341

26%

70,746

36%

20,596

35%

3,226

31%

155,889

41%

849,072

20%

7,281

40%

1,799

42%

276

35%

16,284

42%

Uterine
Carcinosarcoma
Uterine Corpus
Endometrial
Carcinoma
Uveal Melanoma

