bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Resting-state cross-frequency coupling networks in human
electrophysiological recordings

Short title: Resting-state cross-frequency coupling networks

Felix Siebenhühner1,2,3, Sheng H Wang1,2, Gabriele Arnulfo1,4, Lino Nobili5,6, J. Matias Palva1,7,*,
Satu Palva1,7,*
1

Neuroscience Center, HiLife (Helsinki Institute of Life Science), University of Helsinki, Finland

2

Doctoral Program Brain & Mind, University of Helsinki, Finland

3

BioMag Laboratory, HUS Medical Imaging Center, Helsinki, Finland

4

Dept. of Informatics, Bioengineering, Robotics and System engineering, University of Genoa,

Genoa, Italy
5

Child Neuropsychiatry Unit, IRCCS, Istituto G. Gaslini, Department of Neuroscience (DINOGMI),

University of Genoa, Italy
6“

Claudio Munari” Epilepsy Surgery Centre, Niguarda Hospital, Italy

7

Centre for Cognitive Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroscience & Psychology, University of

Glasgow, United Kingdom

* to whom correspondence should be addressed:
satu.palva@helsinki.fi or matias.palva@helsinki.fi

JMP and SP contributed equally.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract

Neuronal oscillations underlie temporal coordination of neuronal processing and their synchronization
enables neuronal communication across distributed brain areas to serve a variety of sensory, motor, and
cognitive functions. The regulation and integration of neuronal processing between oscillating
assemblies at distinct frequencies, and thereby the coordination of distinct computational functions, is
thought to be achieved via cross-frequency coupling (CFC). Although many studies have observed CFC
locally within a brain region during cognitive processing, the large-scale networks of CFC have
remained largely uncharted. Critically, also the validity of prior CFC observations and the presence of
true neuronal CFC has been recently questioned because non-sinusoidal or non-zero-mean waveforms
that are commonplace in electrophysiological data cause filtering artefacts that lead to false positive
CFC findings. We used a unique dataset of stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG) and sourcereconstructed magnetoencephalography (MEG) data to chart whole-brain CFC networks from human
resting-state brain dynamics. Using a novel graph theoretical method to distinguish true inter-areal CFC
from potentially false positive CFC, we show that the resting state is characterized by two separable
forms of true inter-areal CFC: phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) and n:m-cross-frequency phase
synchrony (CFS). PAC and CFS large-scale networks coupled prefrontal, visual and sensorimotor
cortices, but with opposing anatomical architectures. Crucially also directionalities between low- and
high-frequency oscillations were opposite between CFS and PAC. We also found CFC to decay as a
function of distance and to be stronger in the superficial than deep layers of the cortex. In conclusion,
these results provide conclusive evidence for the presence of two forms of genuine inter-areal CFC and
elucidate the large-scale organization of CFC resting-state networks.

Keywords: Cross-frequency synchrony, MEG, SEEG, oscillations, phase synchrony, spurious connections

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction

Human electrophysiological activity is characterized by neuronal oscillations, i.e., rhythmic excitability
fluctuations at wide range of frequencies from 0.01 to over 100 Hz. Synchronization of these oscillations across
brain areas coordinates provides a mechanism for regulating anatomically distributed neuronal processing (13). In humans, large-scale oscillatory networks of phase synchrony (PS) characterize magnetoencephalography
(MEG) and stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG) data during resting state (RS) activity (4-7) and in many
cognitive functions (4,7-15) at several frequencies. Oscillatory electrophysiological resting-state networks
(RSNs) recorded with MEG are organized partially in a similar fashion as the RSNs observed with fMRI (1618), these correlations being largest in the alpha (8-15 Hz,  and beta (15-30 Hz, ) (18,19) bands. During
task performance,  and  oscillations are thought to regulate through inter-areal synchronization the top-down
or feed-back modulation of bottom-up sensory processing achieved in the gamma-band (, 30100Hz) rhythms
(20-24).
The interplay and coordination between multiple neuronal oscillations at distinct frequencies is thought to be
regulated via cross-frequency coupling (CFC): phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) (25-34) and cross-frequency
phase synchrony (CFS) (4,35-39), also known as n:m-phase synchrony (35). PAC indicates the correlation
between the amplitude envelope of a faster oscillation and the phase of a slower oscillation, whereas CFS is a
form of phase synchronization defined by a stable phase-difference between oscillations having an integer n:m
frequency ratio (Figure 1a). PAC is thought to reflect the regulation of sensory information processing
achieved in -frequencies by excitability fluctuations imposed by  and  oscillations (40-47). On other hand,
CFS can be exploited to achieve temporally precise coordination of processing and to establish spike-timing
relationships among functionally distinct oscillations and networks (43,47,48). A large number of studies have
identified local PAC, i.e., PAC observed between different frequencies of the same signal, between the phases
of ,  and  oscillations and the amplitude of gamma oscillations in local field potentials (LFPs) in rats (4955) and in human intracranial EEG (27,28,34,56,57) and MEG data (33,46,58). Similarly to PAC, local CFS
has been observed in human MEG and EEG data during rest (4,8,37,59) and attentional and working memory
(WM) tasks (4,36,60,61) as well as in LFPs in the rat hippocampus (52,54,62).
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Despite extensive literature on local CFC, only a few studies have identified inter-areal PAC or CFS in M/EEG
data between sensors (4,36,63) or between brain regions in source-reconstructed data (31,32,39,64) or
intracranial recordings (38,65). Overall, the large-scale organization of CFC networks has remained largely
uncharted and the roles that CFC play in linking within-frequency phase-coupled or amplitude-correlated
networks have remained unknown. Furthermore, several lines of recent research have raised concerns over the
possibility that estimates of CFC may be inflated by false positive couplings. Such spurious observations are
readily caused by the higher-frequency filter artefacts arising from non-sinusoidal signal components (66-72)
as well as by amplitude fluctuations of oscillations with non-zero-mean waveforms that lead to artificial lowerfrequency oscillations during filtering (73). Both non-sinusoidal and non-zero-mean waveforms are ubiquitous
in electrophysiological signals and thus the artificially generated high- and low-frequency, respectively, signal
components constitute a significant confounder to CFS and PAC estimation. Hence, the validity of prior CFC
observations has been questioned and therefore it is not established whether neuronal activity is characterized
by true neuronal CFC rather than by spurious CFC connections. Since CFC is thought to be a central
mechanism of coordinating processing across oscillations at distinct frequencies specifically during cognitive
tasks and behaviors, it is crucial to establish if true neuronal CFC can be observed in neuronal activity.
In this study, we used both human SEEG and source-reconstructed MEG data to characterize the large-scale
CFC networks during RS. To this end, we estimated the whole-brain connectomes of CFS and PAC and
mapped their anatomical and topological structures as well as the laminar structure from SEEG data. To
remove the putatively false positive CFC connections, we advanced a novel graph-theory based approach. The
core tenet of CFC is that it indicates an interaction between two distinct neuronal processes. Conversely,
analyses of non-sinusoidal signal properties rely on the assumption that a single underlying process generates
the signal. Filter-artefact-caused spurious cross-frequency coupling cannot be dissociated from true crossfrequency coupling of two neuronal processes by an inspection or analysis of the waveform shape of any single
signal in isolation (8), which essentially excludes the usage of local CFC estimates in this research. However,
CFC is necessarily true when there is evidence for two processes, such as when CFC is found between two
separable sources and the contributions of local CFC can be excluded. Building on this notion, we developed
a conservative test for whether CFC is true, which is based on connection-by-connection testing of whether
CFC can unambiguously be attributed to two separable processes.
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Using this approach, we identified the fractions of true inter-areal CFS and PAC observable in human restingstate activity in SEEG and source-reconstructed MEG data and assessed the large-scale structures of these
true-CFC connectomes. We found that two distinct forms of true inter-areal CFC, CFS and PAC characterize
the human RS. CFS and PAC RSNs showed similarities to resting-state PS networks, and directional coupling
in large-scale networks of the prefrontal, medial, visual and sensorimotor cortices, but crucially with distinct
spectral profiles and opposing directionalities. These results support the assumptions that CFS and PAC are
distinct processes for the integration of neuronal oscillatory activity across frequencies.

Results
True neuronal CFS and PAC characterize resting-activity in SEEG and MEG
Our objectives were to assess the presence of CFC in human resting-state brain activity and to characterize the
putative large-scale CFC networks measured at meso-scale resolution with SEEG and at macro-scale with
source-reconstructed MEG data. Large-scale CFC networks were derived from contact-to-contact (SEEG) or
parcel-to-parcel (MEG) connectivity matrices where the pairwise CFC was estimated between the lowfrequency (LF) time series from the one contact/parcel and the high-frequency time series from the other.
In order to systematically address the possibility that observations of CFC might be spuriously caused by
filtering artefacts stemming from non-sinusoidal or non-zero-mean waveforms, we advance here a new method
to control for the spurious connections. The core assumption behind CFC is that the interaction is observed
between two distinct processes whereas spurious CFC is a property of a single signal with signal components
distributed to the two studied frequency bands as filter-artefacts from non-sinusoidal or non-zero-mean signal
properties. We set out to dissociate the two-separable-signals vs. one-signal hypotheses through a conservative
network-motif test that assesses whether the two CF-coupled signals are also coupled via local CFC and interareal within-frequency coupling. The presence of such a “secondary connection” implies the possibility of the
inter-areal CFC being spurious while a lack of such a connection indicates that the CFC cannot be attributable
to a single source and is hence true.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. Schematics of true and spurious observations of inter-areal cross-frequency coupling
a) Schematic illustration of phase synchrony (PS), n:m cross-frequency phase synchrony (CFS) and phase-amplitude
coupling (PAC). In PS, two spatially distant processes oscillating at the same frequency exhibit a constant phase
relationship. In CFS, a constant n:m phase relationship exists between two processes at frequencies f1, f2 where f1: = m:n.
These processes can either take place in the same region (local CFS) or in distinct regions (inter-areal CFS). In PAC, the
amplitude of the high-frequency signal is correlated with the phase of the low-frequency signal. Like CFS, PAC can be
either local or inter-areal. b) Observations of local cross-frequency coupling (CFC) can be either true or spurious. A
measured signal from a single sensor or electrode can either be the sum of two sinusoidal processes oscillating at distinct
frequencies or a single non-sinusoidal process. Local CFC can be observed either when there is a true coupling between
two sinusoidal processes, or from a single non-sinusoidal signal.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

c) True inter-areal CFC between two spatially distant sinusoidal processes A and B. d) Example of spurious observation
of inter-areal CFC. Process A is sinusoidal, but B is non-sinusoidal and spurious local CFC will be observed at location
B, as shown in b). If A and B are connected by low-frequency PS, also spurious inter-areal CFC will be observed between
A and B. e) Example of spurious observation of inter-areal CFC. Process B is sinusoidal, but A is non-zero-mean and
spurious local CFC will be observed at location A. If A and B are connected by high-frequency PS, also spurious interareal CFC will be observed between A and B. f) Possible observations of inter-areal CFC between A and B leading to the
observation of true or spurious inter-areal CFC. In cases where inter-areal CFC is not part of a full triangle motif, it is
unambiguously true (green box). In cases where inter-areal CFC is spurious (red box), it is part of a full triangle motif of
PS, local CFC and inter-areal CFC. However, there may also be ambiguous cases where inter-areal CFC is true, but still
a full triangle motif exists (purple box).

Figure 1 shows schematically the generation of true and spurious observations of CFC as well as our approach
for identifying the true and for discarding the putatively spurious observations. For local CFC, that is measured
between different frequency components at one location, it is impossible to distinguish between true and
spurious observations (Figure 1b), whereas this is possible for inter-areal CFC that is true if it is found between
signals that unambiguously originate from separable neuronal processes (Figure 1c). We thus begin with all
observations of inter-areal CFC and to safeguard against indirect leakage of local CFC into the estimates of
inter-areal CFC, we exclude observations of inter-areal CFC between sources that are also connected by both
local CFC and inter-areal 1:1 PS (or amplitude correlation in the case of the high-frequency signal in PAC)
(see Figure 1d, e). It is notable that true neuronal CFS might also be present under these conditions (see Figure
1f, purple box) but cannot be distinguished from actual spurious CFS connections (Figure 1f, red box). Thus,
the proposed method gives a conservative estimate of the presence of true neuronal CFS (Figure 1f, green
box).
We mapped the connectomes of CFC and used this approach to identify and discard all putatively spurious
CFC observations. We estimated the local and inter-areal cross-frequency coupling (CFC), as well as interareal 1:1 phase synchrony (PS) and amplitude envelope correlations (AC) using eyes-open resting-state MEG
recordings (10 min) from 23 healthy controls and eyes-closed resting-state SEEG recordings (10 min) from 59
epileptic patients (see S1 Figure and S2 Figure for the analysis workflow). During preprocessing, we excluded
artefacts and SEEG electrode contacts located in the epileptic zone, and filtered broadband time series into
narrow frequency bands from 1 to 315 Hz (see Methods I-IV). MEG data were source-reconstructed (see
Methods V-VI) and collapsed onto 200 cortical parcels of a parcellation based on the Destrieux atlas (74), of
which the least reliably parcels and connections were excluded (see Methods VII-VIII). Visual inspection of

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

raw ongoing SEEG and MEG data between regions and frequencies that showed high coupling on average
over the whole time period revealed intermittent periods of strong interareal CFS (S3 Figure) and PAC (S4
Figure) between signals that were not significantly 1:1 coupled and did not exhibit local CFS.
Inter-areal CFC for low frequencies 195 Hz and ratios 1:21:7, as well as PS and AC were estimated pairwise between electrode contacts or parcels (see Methods IX-XI).
In order to first quantify the prevalence of these connections in the present data, for both SEEG and MEG, we
compared the estimates of CFC, PS, and AC against surrogate data to evaluate their statistical significance (see
Methods XII). The proportion of significant (p < 0.01) CFS, PS, and AC connections from all possible
connections was denoted as the connection density, K, and plotted with 95% confidence limits estimated by
bootstrapping over the cohort. We observed inter-areal CFS in both SEEG data (Fig. 2a,b) and in MEG data
(Fig. 2c,d) at small CF ratios (1:2 and 1:3) with a LF peak in the alpha (8-12 Hz,  band, which indicates the
presence of robust alpha-beta ( and alpha-gamma ( CFS. In SEEG data, the LF peak was found in the
range 7–12 Hz while in MEG data the peak frequency was slightly higher, in the range 8–15 Hz. We also
observed -band peaks in the corresponding frequencies in analyses of inter-areal PS (S5 Figure) and of local
CFS (S6 Figure), as well as when the strength per se of inter-areal CFS was estimated (S7 Figure). In SEEG
data, we also observed another LF peak in the - (delta-theta, 2–5 Hz) band at CFS ratios 1:2 and 1:3
indicating the presence of and  coupling. Notably, no - peak was found in PS analyses (S5 Figure).
In MEG data, interestingly, we found CFS also among  and high- (H) bands (between LF = 30–100 Hz and
HF = 60–315Hz) at ratios 1:2 and 1:3 in a number of subjects, although the wide confidence limits indicate
large inter-individual variability (Figure 2c). In SEEG data, small :H and :H peaks were found in higher
ratios in individual subjects but not in group-averaged data (Figure 2a). Finally, in both MEG and SEEG, local
CFS had a much greater connection density than inter-areal CFS (S6 Figure).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Inter-areal CFS and PAC are reduced but not abolished by removing spurious connections.
a) Connection density (K) i.e. the proportion of significant connections of all possible connections, of inter-areal CFS in
SEEG data before (left) and after correcting for possible spurious connections (Kcorr, right) for ratio 1:2 (top row) and
ratios 1:21:7 (bottom row). The x-axis shows the low frequency f1. K and Kcorr are plotted with 95% confidence limits.
b) The same data as in A), but with each frequency ratio presented as a rectangle in a matrix of the whole spectral
connectome. K is presented before (left) and after removal of possibly spurious connections (right). c-d) Inter-areal CFS
in MEG data before and after removing possibly spurious connections. Both in SEEG and in MEG data, K is reduced by
removing the putatively spurious edges but 1:2  and 1:3  CFS remain significantly above confidence limits. e-f)
Inter-areal PAC in SEEG data and g-h) in MEG data before and after removing spurious connections. K for PAC is
reduced by removing putatively spurious connections but remains significant for the coupling of -oscillations with
 oscillations across ratios.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To remove all potentially spurious connections that could have been generated by only one signal, we discarded
observations of inter-areal CFC between any two signals that were also connected by both inter-areal 1:1 PS
(or AC for PAC) and local CFC at one or both of the locations (see Methods XIII).
After controlling for spurious connections this way, in both MEG and SEEG, the K values remained
significantly different from zero (as indicated by the 95% confidence limits) for all observed major peaks. In
MEG, the corrected K was a larger fraction (>50%) of the uncorrected K than in SEEG data (<50%). A
particularly large reduction, essentially to zero-coupling levels, was observed for the :H CFS in MEG, which
suggests that this phenomenon was overall spurious, which in turn is in line with the notion of signals in this
frequency range are readily contaminated by muscle artefacts (75). One possible limitation in these results so
far was that for measuring 1:1 PS, we used the weighted phase lag index (wPLI) (76) that is not inflated by the
linear mixing caused by signal leakage but also is insensitive to true zero-lag neuronal couplings, and may thus
underestimate the true extent of PS. To eliminate this confounder, we also performed the spurious-CFC
correction using the phase-locking value (PLV) as PS metric. PLV is not markedly sensitive to variation in
phase difference (77) but it is inflated by linear mixing, and to account for this, we excluded the signal-leakagedominated short-range connections from analyses of MEG data by thresholding for cross-patch PLV (see
Methods VIII). Even with this limitation to medium- and long-range connectivity, we found a much greater
connection density for PS measured with PLV than with wPLI in MEG (S5 Figure). Correspondingly, the
correction led to a greater reduction of K in MEG CFS (S8 Figure) but, importantly, the main peaks of CFS
remained significantly different from zero. In SEEG data, K values for PS were more similar across metrics,
in line with the fact that in properly referenced SEEG, volume conduction is well controlled (7). In SEEG, the
corrected K values for CFS obtained using PLV were very similar to those where wPLI was used (S8 Figure).
Thus, regardless of the choice of the connectivity metric for PS estimation, true CFS was robust in restingstate brain activity.
We next assessed inter-areal phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) and found it highly significant in both SEEG
(Fig. 2e,f) and MEG data (Fig. 2g,h). Similarly to CFS, LF peaks characterized SEEG PAC in the 5–12 Hz
range and MEG PAC in the 7–15Hz range. Unlike in CFS, however, these peaks were found at all frequency
ratios in SEEG data and at ratios 1:2–1:4 in MEG data. Interestingly, the peak LF in SEEG decreased with
increasing ratio, although the effect was significant only before spurious CFC correction (r = –0.91, p = 0.013
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

for uncorrected and r = –0.58, p = 0.23 for corrected data; Pearson’s correlation test on interpolated data, see
Methods XIV). We also found PAC among and high- bands in MEG, as for CFS. Similarly to CFS, local
PAC exhibited higher K values than inter-areal PAC (S6 Figure). Notably, in inter-areal PAC, we found no LF
peak in the  band indicating that the observed  coupling in SEEG was specific to CFS. We also applied
our correction method to PAC, with the notable difference that for possible triangle motifs HF interactions
were estimated as correlations of amplitude envelopes, instead of PS (see Methods XIII). In SEEG, these
correlations were most pronounced at very high frequencies (>200 Hz) with no preference for a specific
modulation frequency (S9 Figure), at low frequencies (<10 Hz) with a preference for high modulation ratios,
and at beta and low-gamma frequencies (15-40Hz) modulated by theta and low alpha frequencies (5-10Hz) of
which the peak decreased similarly to LF peak in PAC (r = -0.98, p < 0.001, Pearson's test on interpolated
data). Similarly trends were observable in MEG, but less pronounced, with overall larger K values than in
SEEG. After applying the correction method, the K values again remained significantly above zero, this time
also for the:HPAC. Similar results were obtained using PLV as PS metric (S8 Figure). Together, these
results show that true inter-areal CFS and PAC between separable sources can be observed in both SEEG and
MEG data.

Inter-areal CFC is dependent on distance and cortical layer
By using a conservative approach to remove all putative false positive CFC connections, our results so far
strongly supported the existence of true inter-areal CFC in resting-state brain dynamics. We next set out to
investigate whether, similarly to PS, CFC was dependent on the distance between the two sources and their
depth along the cortical laminae in SEEG data. We divided the electrode pairs in SEEG and parcel pairs in
MEG into three distance bins containing equal numbers of connections each and computed mean 1:2 and 1:3
CFS and PAC in each of these bins (see Methods XV). In both SEEG and MEG data, CFS and PAC were
observed in all distance bins (Figure 3) and the greatest PLV and K values were found for the shortest distances
(blue lines) and smallest values for the longest distances (green lines) both before and after removing possibly

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

spurious connections (Wilcoxon test, p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons with Benjamini-Hochberg,

Figure 3. Inter-areal CFS and PAC decrease as a function of distance
a) Mean strength of n:m CFS (PLV, left), K (middle), and Kcorr (right) of inter-areal CFS in SEEG data estimated
separately in three distance bins containing equal numbers of connections for 1:2 (top row) and 1:3 (bottom row) interareal CFS. All values are plotted with 95% confidence limits as shades. Grey bars and stars indicate where the 1 st and 3rd
bin had been found to be significantly different from each other (Wilcoxon test, p = 0.05, corrected). b) Mean strength
(left), K (middle), and Kcorr (right) of inter-areal PAC in SEEG data in three distance bins. c-d) Mean strength, K, and
Kcorr of inter-areal CFS and PAC in MEG data. All measures, strength, K and Kcorr were larger for the shortest than the
longest distance bins for 1:2 CFS and for 1:2 and 1:3 PAC in both SEEG and in MEG data across most of the frequency
spectrum.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

exact values in S1 Table). For 1:2 CFS and 1:2 PAC, the coupling at shortest and longest distance was
significantly different for almost all LFs in both uncorrected and corrected data. In 1:3 CFS, significant
differences were sparser, mostly found at the main LF peaks in uncorrected data, and not present in corrected
data except for two single frequencies in MEG data. In 1:3 PAC, differences were significant for LFs up to
50Hz in SEEG, and for the whole frequency range in MEG both before and after K correction. Similar profiles
were also found for PS (S5 Figure).

We then investigated whether inter-areal 1:2 and 1:3 CFS and PAC in SEEG data would vary with the location
of the electrodes in superficial or deep cortical layers (see Methods XVI), as has earlier been found for PS (7).
Both CFS and PAC were more prominent between electrodes in superficial layers (red lines) than between
those in deep layers (blue lines) at the main LF peaks in uncorrected data (Figure 4). Values for CFS
connections between electrodes in superficial and deep layers (green and purple lines) lay between those
located to either deep or superficial layers. We then tested whether CFC between electrodes both located in
superficial layers was statistically significantly different from CFC between electrodes both in deep layers,
which was confirmed for 1:2 CFS and both 1:2 and 1:3 PAC (Wilcoxon test, p < 0.05, corrected for multiple
comparisons, exact values in S2 Table). After correction for possibly spurious connections however, these
differences were less pronounced and not significant. In fact, in PAC, connections with the LF electrode in a
deep and the HF electrode in a superficial layer were now strongest and those with the inverse relationship
weakest. This difference was significant (Wilcoxon test, p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons, exact
values in S2 Table) for a number of frequencies, mainly in the  range. Thus, while CFC showed a clear
consistent relationship with distance between signal sources, further research is needed to clarify the
localization of CFC in cortical layers and its dependence on inter-areal PS and local CFC in the correction
approach.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. CFS and PAC differ between cortical layers in SEEG data
a) The mean n:m CFS strength (PLV, left), K (middle), and Kcorr (right) of inter-areal 1:2 (top row) and 1:3 (bottom row)
CFS in SEEG data. CFS connections are shown among electrode pairs that were either both in superficial layers (red),
both in deep layers (blue), where the low-frequency (LF, f1) electrode was in a superficial layer and the high-frequency
(HF, f2) electrode in a deep layer (green) and where LF electrode was in a deep layer and HF electrode in a superficial
layer (purple). Grey bars and stars indicate where the strongest and weakest values (red and blue in left and middle column
and purple and green in right column were significantly different (Wilcoxon test, p = 0.05, corrected) in consecutive or
single frequencies. b) The same as in (a) for the inter-areal PAC in SEEG data. In both CFS and PAC, strength and K are
stronger for connections which are within superficial than within deep layers while the CFS and PAC between deep and
superficial layers have intermediate strengths.

Low- and high-frequency hubs differ between CFS and PAC
Lastly, we identified the anatomical-topological architectures of CFS and PAC connectomes. We first used a
conventional in- and out-degree-based graph theoretical approach (78) to estimate LF and HF “hubness” (see
Methods XVII). We estimated, for each frequency pair of the main peaks, for each of the 148 parcels, the
relative directed degree as a measure of whether the parcel was predominantly a HF or LF hub. For CFS
networks, in both SEEG and MEG data, for 1:2  and 1:3 CFS, HF hubs (red) were observed in
somatomotor (SM) regions, posterior parietal cortex (PPC), and temporal cortex (Figure 5). LF hubs (blue)
were localized to regions lateral prefrontal cortex (lPFC) and medial parietal cortex (MPC) in both SEEG and
MEG, that belong to default mode, control and salience networks in the functional parcellation (see S10 Figure)

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

based on fMRI BOLD signal fluctuations (79) and also in occipital cortex in 1:2 in MEG. However, for
PAC, we observed the opposite localization of LF and HF hubs in most cortical regions except the occipital
pole. We found the LF hubs for 1:2  and 1:3  PAC to be consistently localized in SM, PPC and occipitotemporal regions in both SEEG and MEG, and the HF hubs mainly localized in frontal regions and MPC. In
1:2 and 1:3 CFS, which were specific to SEEG, patterns were similar to 1:2  and 1:3 CFS. In
order to confirm the similarity between SEEG and MEG data and the dissimilarity between CFS and PAC, we
computed the correlation of relative directed degree values across parcels using Spearman’s test. A significant
(p < 0.05) positive correlation between SEEG and MEG was found for PAC, and a non-significant one for 1:2
CFS (Table 1). We found values for CFS and PAC to be significantly anti-correlated (p < 0.05) for 1:2 and 1:3
SEEG and 1:2 MEG, and non-significantly anti-correlated for 1:3 MEG (Table 2).
Secondly, we estimated the directionality of CFC connections between parcels, i.e. if some parcels would be
involved in CFC connections as predominantly the site of either the LF or HF oscillation. We estimated the
low-vs.-high directionality for each parcel pair and each frequency pair of the main peaks across subjects (see
Methods XVIII). Significant directionality between the two parcels was established if the absolute value of
directionality was higher than in 95% of permutations. We then averaged for each parcel the significant
directionality values, again yielding a positive value for parcels that can be interpreted as HF hubs and a
negative value for parcels that can be interpreted as LF hubs. Results were remarkably similar to those of the
degree-based hubness analysis, showing the same dissociation between CFS and PAC (Figure 6). Taken
together, these results provide strong evidence that the anatomy and structure of CFS and PAC connectomes
are distinct, demonstrating the presence of two different forms of CFC RSNs with particular directional
patterns. Again, we computed the similarity between SEEG and MEG and dissimilarity between CFS and PAC
using the Spearman’s test, yielding similar results as for directed degree (Tables 1,2).

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table 1: Parcel values are correlated between SEEG and MEG data
Rel. dir. degree
r

p

Directionality
r

p

1:2 CFS

0.136

0.101

0.094

0.254

1:2 PAC

0.233

0.004

0.259

0.002

1:3 CFS

-0.052

0.531

0.130

0.114

1:3 PAC

0.203

0.013

0.314

<10-4

Values obtained with Spearman’s test. Significant correlations (p < 0.05) in bold.

Table 2: Parcel values are anticorrelated between CFS and PAC
Rel. dir. degree
r

p

Directionality
r

p

1:2 SEEG

-0.254

0.002

-0.277

0.001

1:2 MEG

-0.114

0.168

-0.106

0.200

1:3 SEEG

-0.241

0.003

0.018

0.831

1:3 MEG

-0.240

0.003

-0.252

0.002

Values obtained with Spearman’s test. Significant correlations (p < 0.05) in bold.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. CFC networks have an asymmetric low- and high-frequency hub architecture
Relative low (f1) vs. high (f2) degree of each brain region (parcel) for CFS and PAC networks. Relative degree values
indicate whether parcel is primarily a hub for the low frequency (f1, red) or high frequency (f2 , blue) in inter-areal CFC.
Top row: Brain anatomy of CFS and PAC at ratio 1:2 connecting  and  frequencies. Bottom row: Brain anatomy
of CFS and PAC networks at ratio 1:3 connecting  and  frequencies. CFS and PAC networks show saliently
opposing anatomical structures connecting anterior and posterior brain regions.

Figure 6. Asymmetric directional connectivity in CFC networks
Averaged low (f1) vs. high (f2) -directionality values for each parcel. The values indicate whether parcel is a directional
hub for f1 (red) or for f2 (blue) in inter-areal CFC networks. Top row: Directionality for CFS and PAC networks at ratio
1:2 connecting  and  frequencies. Bottom row: Directionality for CFS and PAC at ratio 1:3 connecting  and 
frequencies. Directional connections of CFS and PAC networks reflect their structure in brain anatomy and show similar
opposite directional connections connecting anterior and posterior brain regions as seen in degree hub analysis.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Discussion
Human brain activity during rest, as revealed originally by fMRI, is characterized by intrinsically correlated
fluctuations among constellations of brain regions, known as RSNs (16,80,81). Also in human
electrophysiological measurements, PS and amplitude correlations of neuronal oscillations characterize
resting-state activity in a wide range of frequencies in anatomically well delineated and modular structures
(82). In this study, we have used a novel approach to investigate two forms of large-scale neuronal crossfrequency coupling (CFC) in human resting state activity. We identified the networks that connected neuronal
oscillations of different frequencies across brain regions with both SEEG and MEG data by using a novel
method for dissecting true from potentially spurious observations of CFC. We found that two distinct types of
true CFC, cross-frequency synchrony (CFS) and phase-amplitude coupling (PAC), to characterize human
resting-state activity. CFS and PAC networks showed distinct spectral profiles, anatomical architectures, and
coupling directions among brain regions.

Large-scale CFC networks characterize human resting state activity
A number of studies have previously reported local PAC (27-29,33,34,56-58,65,83) and CFS (4,8,36,37,5961) in human M/EEG and intracranial data. Both PAC (26,40-42,42,45-47) and CFS (4,43,47,48) have been
proposed to be central mechanisms for coordinating spectrally distributed neuronal processing and thereby
regulating the communication in multi-scale oscillatory networks. Despite extensive research, only few prior
studies have also examined inter-areal CFC (4,36,39,63,64). One study has found initial evidence for the
presence of PAC networks between theta and gamma oscillations, but not between other frequencies, during
resting state activity (64) and the resting-state connectomes of CFS have not been charted in any of the prior
studies save for a MEG-sensor-level analysis (4).
We found both inter-areal PAC and CFS to characterize both MEG and SEEG data during RS activity. Robust
increases in local  oscillations have been known to be a marker of resting human brain for several decades
(20,84-87). Here we show that  oscillations are also cross-frequency coupled with the faster  and  frequency
oscillations in both MEG and SEEG data. These CFC couplings were similar to those observed in task states

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(4,39), which is in line with suggestions of RSNs forming the underlying core of task-state networks (88). The
presence of both PAC and CFS during human RS indicates that the phase of  oscillations both couples with
the amplitude of  and  oscillations through PAC and is also aligned with  and  oscillation phases via CFS
spontaneously during intrinsic activity fluctuations.
Inter-areal CFS connected  oscillations with and oscillations only at small frequency ratios of 1:2 and
1:3, while PAC of  and  oscillations with higher frequencies was robust throughout ratios from 1:2 up to 1:7
in SEEG data and up to 1:4 in MEG data. Hence, in contrast to CFS, PAC in the  and  bands were found
also at high ratios in SEEG data, demonstrating that excitability fluctuations reflected in slow oscillations are
coupled to the strength of fast oscillations over a wide frequency range, either through slow modulation of fast
activity or as the temporally summed postsynaptic impact of intermittent fast activity per se. This is in line
with the previous findings of  PAC at high ratios in the rat hippocampus (49,51-53) and in human
intracranial recordings (27,28,34,38,65). The lack of high frequency ratios in CFS is not surprising as in CFS,
stable phase-difference between coupled oscillations is associated with consistent spike-time relationships
between the neuronal assemblies in different frequency bands and these are unlikely to be present over wide
frequency ratios due to the conceivably limited temporal accuracy in the mechanisms of the slower oscillation.
Although in MEG and EEG data resting-state activity usually peaks at  frequencies, this peak is typically
lower in epileptic patients (89). Accordingly, we found the main  peak in SEEG to be observable at around
7-8 Hz. Interestingly, in SEEG data, also  oscillations were coupled with  band oscillations by CFS.
Crucially, no peak in within-frequency PS or in PAC was observed in the  band, indicating that
coupling was a CFS-specific phenomenon.

Characteristics of CFC networks in the resting human brain
Central unresolved questions are whether CFC RSNs can be observed in the resting human brain activity with
consistent large-scale architectures and whether they exhibit characteristics are similar to those observed in
within-frequency coupled RSNs. Prior studies have found 1:1 PS in SEEG (7) and in MEG data (4,14,82,90)
to decrease as a function of distance. In this study, we found salient inter-areal CFC to characterize resting-

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

state brain activity so that the connection density of CFS and PAC decreased with distance between cortical
parcels (MEG) or electrode contacts (SEEG) similarly to that of inter-areal PS, which is in line with previous
results of CFS in MEG sensor space data (4).
Intracortical recordings have shown that oscillations of different frequencies are generated differentially across
cortical layers (91-94). Here we identified the cortical depth of each SEEG electrode (7,95) and found that
before the exclusion of potentially spurious connections,  CFS as well as ,  and  PAC were
significantly stronger among electrode pairs that were both located in superficial layers than between pairs
both located in deep layers. However, in corrected PAC data, we found the largest connection density values
for connections where the slow oscillation was located in the deep layers and the fast oscillation in the
superficial layers, and conversely the lowest values for those where it was vice-versa. These findings are in
line with previous results that reported  synchrony to be strongest in superficial layers, whereas  synchrony
was found in deep and superficial layers (92,93,96). One should however note that due to lack of current source
density analyses, for which the SEEG electrode-contact separation is too large, and because of complex current
source geometries in cortical circuitry and the volume conduction between layers (93), further studies are
required to investigate the localization of CFC in different cortical layers.

Distinct large-scale organization of CFS and PAC RSNs
To assess the large-scale architecture of the cortical CFC networks, we used two strategies for identifying LF
and HF hubs, i.e., brain regions where predominantly the slower or the faster oscillations of the CFC
connection are observed. Both approaches converged on showing robust anatomical asymmetries in LF and
HF hubs of  and  inter-areal CFC. In both SEEG and MEG, CFC RSNs coupled anterior and
posterior brain regions. The localization of hubs was similar between SEEG and MEG data, which corroborates
the validity of our findings. Importantly, however, we observed distinct and partially opposing localization of
the LF/HF hubs for CFS and PAC. In and CFS, the  LF hubs were observed in PFC and medial
regions that belong to the default mode network (16,81) or to control and salience networks in the functional
parcellation based on fMRI BOLD signal fluctuations (18,79,97). Many previous studies have found 
oscillations in these regions to be correlated with attentional and executive functions (20,23,24,87,98). In
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

contrast, the  and  HF hubs were found in more posterior regions such as sensorimotor region (SM) and the
occipital and temporal cortices where  and  oscillations are often associated with sensory processing (99102).
In contrast to CFS, the  LF hubs of and PAC were found in occipital, temporal, and posterior parietal
cortex whereas the  and  HF hubs in prefrontal and medial parietal cortex, which was essentially opposite to
the anatomical structure observed for CFS. Hence, both CFS and PAC RSNs coordinated cross-frequency
coupling of oscillations along the anterior-posterior, or higher-to-lower-order, brain systems, which suggests
that they reflect the network interactions for the coordination among attentional and executive networks and
task-positive sensory networks. In addition, the spectral differences and distinct large-scale structures of CFS
and PAC demonstrate that CFS and PAC are separable computational and neurophysiological mechanisms
rather than operationalizations of a hypothetical shared underlying “CFC” construct. This conclusion is in line
with prior findings during task performance (39). The localization of CFS and PAC showed that both are,
nevertheless, likely to coordinate intrinsic interactions among attention, control and default-mode networks on
the one hand and sensory processing systems on the other, and therefore are likely to regulate the interactions
between intrinsic and extrinsic processing. Overall, our data extends the scarce previous findings of inter-areal
:,: and  CFS and PACobserved earlier in source-reconstructed MEG/EEG data during VWM
(39) in fronto-parietal and visual systems, and of inter-areal  CFS between hippocampus and prefrontal
cortex in human intracranial EEG data (38).

True positive inter-areal CFC not explained by spurious connections characterize resting
state activity
Multiple concerns have been raised about the validity of previous observations of CFC (66,67,69-72,103). A
common point of critique is that non-sinusoidal waveforms or linear fast components (67) lead to observations
of spurious CFC by causing higher-frequency filtering artefacts that are locked to the waveform. Although
most of these critiques relate to PAC (66,103), and critique is raised mostly against local CFC (70,72), the
confounding effects of non-sinusoidal waveforms apply to CFS as well and may also lead to spurious inter-

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

areal CFC through a combination of local CFC and inter-areal within-frequency coupling. Furthermore,
another family of possible confounders is posed by amplitude fluctuations of oscillations or activities with a
non-zero mean (73), which lead to spurious observations of lower-frequency oscillations by filtering and
thereby to spurious observations of CFC or PAC in particular.
In this study, we mapped human CFC RSNs from SEEG and source-reconstructed MEG data. To identify true
neuronal CFC from amongst the spurious connections, we took advantage of the fact that inter-areal CFC can
only be spurious when the two signals are connected also via within-frequency (1:1) PS, or amplitude
correlations in the case of PAC, and local CFC. Thus, if this is not the case, the two signals can be assumed to
be from separable processes and an observation of inter-areal CFC between these signals are true. We used
this rationale in a novel graph-based analytical approach to control for possibly spurious CFC connections by
discarding those CFC observations between two signals that were also connected by inter-areal 1:1 phase
synchronization (PS) of oscillations or of their amplitude envelopes (for the high frequency in PAC) and local
CFC. Since this approach also may discard some true instances of inter-areal CFC, it gives a conservative
estimate of the presence of true neuronal inter-areal CFC. We used this approach to show that true neuronal
CFC characterizes human brain activity in both MEG and SEEG datasets. Our results demonstrate that true
neuronal CFC characterizes human resting state activity and couples  and  oscillations with faster
oscillations in the - and -frequency bands. The number of significant connections was reduced by exclusion
of the potentially spurious corrections, indicating that part of the commonly observed CFC in MEEG and
SEEG data may indeed be caused by higher-frequency filter artefacts arising from non-sinusoidal signal
components (66,67,69-72), or by amplitude fluctuations of non-zero-mean waveforms (73). However, our
results clearly indicate that in addition to possibly spurious CFC, also true neuronal CFC that cannot be
explained by such artefacts is observable in MEG and SEEG data.
We observed also local CFS and PAC to showed similar spectral distributions to inter-areal CFS and PAC,
respectively but with a greater fraction of significant observations. However, for local CFS and PAC, there is
no way to unequivocally distinguish between true and artefactual observations and hence the functional
significance of local CFC remains an open question. Moderately divergent findings between SEEG and MEG
may partially be explained by larger source-mixing in MEG, but also are in line with the fact that MEG and
SEEG are partially sensitive to distinct aspects of neuronal processes.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methodological considerations
We used in this study a novel approach to identify true inter-areal CFC and discard putatively spurious
connections by evaluating in multi-site recording data whether there is evidence for separable neuronal
oscillations. Given the accuracy of SEEG data and the fact that findings were similar between SEEG and MEG,
our observations establish the presence of true neuronal CFC to be a prominent feature of human resting state
electrophysiological activity. True neuronal CFC, by definition, is a coupling between two separate neuronal
processes while spurious CFC can be caused by filter artefacts in higher harmonic frequencies of a nonsinusoidal process, or by filter artefacts in lower frequencies stemming from amplitude fluctuations of nonzero-mean oscillations. We hence removed inter-areal CFC observations between oscillations that were also
be connected by local CFC and PS and thus could not be safely assumed to be independent processes. The
number of removed connections hence depends on the connection density of PS, which will differ between
different metrics of PS. In MEG, observation of artificial connections in PS can arise due to volume conduction
when using metrics such as the phase-locking value (PLV) (44,77,104). Artificial PS from volume conduction
has zero phase lag and can be avoided using the weighted Phase-Lag Index, wPLI (76) that is insensitive to
near-zero-lag connections. Therefore, the wPLI is much less likely to report false positives, but also discards
actual connections with zero phase lag, and can thus lead to some false negatives. In MEG data, PS was indeed
higher when using PLV than wPLI which led to a larger reduction of CFS in MEG during correction,
nevertheless, the connection density of corrected CFS and PAC still remained significantly different from zero.
In SEEG data, where there the effect of volume conduction is negligible with proper referencing, there were
no major differences in PS between the two metrics and the true CFS estimated with these approaches were
similar. These complementing results further strengthen the evidence for the presence of true inter-areal CFC.

Conclusions
We show here that large-scale networks of true neuronal CFS and PAC characterize human resting-state brain
activity in SEEG and in MEG data. Using a new graph theoretic approach, we validated that the observations

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of CFC were not explainable by filter artefacts. The CFC RSNs were akin both to known RSNs of phase
synchrony and fMRI BOLD correlations. CFC RSNs had a large-scale structure connecting slow and fast
oscillations between anterior and posterior parts of the brain. Salient differences in brain anatomy and spectral
properties demonstrated CFS and PAC RSNs were distinct and can be assumed to serve different
computational functions. Altogether, converging results from meso- and macroscale electrophysiological
recordings and two different populations provide strong evidence for the existence of two forms of true
neuronal CFC during human resting state and reveal their large-scale network organization.

Data and code availability statement
The connectomes underlying all results presented in Figures 2-6 and S3-S9 are available on DataDryad
(https://datadryad.org/review?doi=doi:10.5061/dryad.0k86k80). These files contain pairwise inter-areal
CFC and PS interactions between all parcels or electrode contacts, and local CFC interactions, for each
subject. Also included are support files containing such information as filtering parameters, cortical
parcellations, location of electrode contacts. Raw data cannot be made available due to data privacy
regulations set by the ethical committee. All quantitative results presented in the manuscript are based on this
data. The code used to obtain these results can be found on GitHub
(https://github.com/palvalab/Resting_State_CFC).
Acknowledgements:
We thank Salla Markkinen, Santeri Rouhinen, Jaana Simola, Jonni Hirvonen and Sami Karadeniz for the
help in MEG recordings and Annalisa Rubino for the help in SEEG recordings.

Funding Disclosure
This work was supported by the Academy of Finland (SA 266402 and 1303933 to SP and SA 253130 and
256472 MP).

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods

I. SEEG Data acquisition
Stereo-electroencephalography (SEEG) data were recorded from 59 subjects affected by drug resistant focal
epilepsy undergoing pre-surgical clinical assessment at "Claudio Munari” Epilepsy Surgery Centre, Niguarda
Hospital, Milan. “Monopolar”, i.e. bipolar with a single shared reference in the white matter, local field
potentials (LFPs) were recorded from brain tissue with platinum–iridium, multi-lead electrodes with 8-15
contacts each. These contacts were 2 mm long, 0.8 mm thick, and had an inter-contact border-to-border
distance of 1.5 mm (DIXI medical, Besancon, France). Anatomical positions and numbers of electrodes varied
according to surgical requirements (105).
From each subject, one 10-minute set of eyes-closed resting state data was recorded with a 192-channel SEEG
amplifier system (NIHON-KOHDEN NEUROFAX-110) at a sampling rate of 1000 Hz. Electrode positions
were assessed with computer-tomographic (CT) scans after implantation using the SEEGA tool (106).
Structural MRIs were also recorded prior to the electrode insertion and a rigid-body coregistration was used to
co-localize MRIs and post-implant CT scans (105). Based on this, electrode contacts were assigned to one of
148 parcels of the Destrieux atlas (74).
Subjects gave written informed consent for participation in research studies. The recording of this data was
approved by the ethical committee (ID 939) of the Niguarda “Ca’ Granda” Hospital, Milan, and was performed
according to the Declaration of Helsinki.
II. SEEG Data preprocessing and filtering
Defective electrode contacts were identified by clearly non–physiological activity and excluded from analysis.
For referencing, we used the closest-white matter referencing scheme (95) where each contact in cortical grey
matter is referenced to the nearest contact in white matter. The seizure onset and propagation zone were
identified by clinical experts in visual analysis and contacts in these areas were excluded from analysis, as
were contacts from subcortical regions. We excluded from connectivity analyses those contact pairs that shared

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the same reference or had a contact-to-contact distance < 2 cm in order to avoid spurious connectivity due to
volume conduction.
Due to possible filtering artefacts around epileptic spikes, periods of 500 ms duration containing Interictal
Epileptic (IIE) events were discarded, where at least 10% of contacts in narrow-band time series demonstrated
abnormal concurrent sharp peaks in more than half of frequency bands. To identify such periods, we first
searched for “spiky” periods in amplitude envelops for each contact with 500 ms non-overlapping time
windows along the whole recording. A 500 ms time window was tagged as “spiky” when any of its samples
was greater than the contact mean amplitude plus 5 times the contact‘s standard deviation. Band-stop filters
were applied at 50 Hz and 100 Hz to filter out line noise. Time series were then filtered with Morlet wavelets
with m = 5 (107) using 49 center frequencies from 1.2 to 315 Hz.
III. MEG and MRI Data acquisition
306 channel MEG (204 planar gradiometers and 102 magnetometers) was recorded with a Vectorview-Triux
(Elekta-Neuromag) at the BioMag Laboratory, HUS Medical Imaging Center from 19 healthy participants
during 10 minutes eyes-open resting state session. Overall 27 sets of resting state MEG data were obtained,
with 4 participants contributing 2 sets and 2 participants contributing 3 sets. Subjects were instructed to focus
on a cross on the screen in front of them. EOG (horizontal and vertical channels) were recorded for the
detection of ocular artefacts. MEG and EOG were recorded at 1000 Hz sampling rate. T1-weighted anatomical
MRI scans were obtained for cortical surface reconstruction models at a resolution of 1x1x1 mm with a 1.5 T
MRI scanner (Siemens, Germany) at Helsinki University Central Hospital. This study was approved by the
ethical committee of Helsinki University Central hospital and was performed according to the Declaration of
Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from each subject prior to the experiment.
IV. MEG data preprocessing and filtering Maxfilter with temporal signal space separation (tSSS) (108)
(Elekta Neuromag Ltd., Finland) was used to suppress extra-cranial noise from MEG sensors and to interpolate
bad

channels.

Using

independent

component

analysis

(ICA,

Matlab

toolbox

Fieldtrip,

http://fieldtrip.fcdonders.nl, (109)) we extracted and identified components that were correlated with ocular
artefacts (identified using the EOG signal), heart-beat artefacts (identified using the magnetometer signal as a
reference) or muscle artefacts. Time series data were then filtered into narrow-band time series using a bank
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of 53 Morlet filters with m = 5 and approximately log-linearly spaced center frequencies ranging from 1.1 to
315 Hz. The time-series data were down-sampled after filtering to a sampling rate approx. 5 times the center
frequency to minimize data size.
V. MEG source reconstruction: preparation of forward and inverse operators
FreeSurfer software (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) was used for volumetric segmentation of MRI data,
flattening, cortical parcellation, and neuroanatomical labeling with the Destrieux atlas. ((74,110,111). We
obtained a cortical parcellation of 200 parcels by iteratively splitting the largest parcels of the Destrieux atlas
along their most elongated axis at the group-level (10,100,112). All analyses were carried out using this
parcellation, except the directionality analysis (see below), for which the data were collapsed back to the 148parcel

Destrieux

atlas

to

facilitate

the

comparison

with

SEEG

data.

MNE

software

(http://martinos.org/mne/stable/index.html) (113,114) was used to create cortically constrained source models,
a MEG-MRI co-localization and for the preparation of the forward and inverse operators. The source models
had dipole orientations fixed to pial surface normals and a 5 mm inter-dipole separation throughout the cortex,
yielding 5086–7857 source vertices per hemisphere.

VI. MEG source reconstruction: inverse transform
We computed Noise Covariance Matrices (NCMs) using preprocessed broadband filtered (151-249 Hz) MEG
resting-state data time series, evaluated in 60 time windows of 10 s. The frequency band used for creating
NCMs comprises environmental, sensor, and biological noise components, but less neuronal activity than the
lower frequency bands. These NCMs were then used for creating inverse operators. A single inverse operator
created as described above was used for all wavelet frequencies. To reconstruct ongoing cortical phase-time
series, the filtered single-trial MEG time-series were inverse transformed.
VII. MEG Source collapsing
The source-vertex narrowband complex time-series were then collapsed into cortical parcel time-series in 200
of the split Destrieux atlas. To obtain optimal source-reconstruction accuracy, single source vertex time series
were collapsed into parcel time series after weighting with fidelity-optimized collapse operator (112). Using
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the neuroanatomical parcellation as a coordinate system allows the inter-subject representation of the MEG
data for the group level analysis without morphing the data from individual subjects.
VIII. Removal of low-fidelity parcels from MEG connectivity analysis
In phase-synchrony analyses of parcel time-series data, one of the major confounding factors is spurious edges
resulting from signal mixing between neighboring brain regions in data-acquisition and source-reconstruction
(44,104). We assessed the reliability of data based on phase-correlations between real and simulated data. We
estimated parcel fidelity, the phase correlation between the original simulated true parcel and the corresponding
forward-andinverse modelled parcel time series, for all 200 parcels and cross-patch mixing, phase correlation
between the original simulated true parcel and the corresponding forward-and-inverse modelled parcel time
series of all other parcels, for all parcel pairs (112). To decrease the probability of spurious synchronization,
for wPLI analysis, we excluded parcels with a fidelity <0.1, retaining 187 of parcels and 34782 or 87.4% of
connections. For PLV analysis, which is affected by signal mixing, we additionally excluded parcel pairs with
cross-patch PLV > 0.2143, which are thought to be affected strongly by mixing, so that in these analyses we
retained 28416 or 71.4% of connections. This threshold for cross-patch PLV was obtained as 1.95 times the
mean value in the simulations, which roughly corresponds to p < 0.05 significance level. The removed parcels
and connections were located mostly to deep and / or inferior sources, which generate the least detectable
signals in MEG and which are hence most likely to generate spurious connections.
IX. Analysis of inter-areal phase-synchronization (PS)
To identify cortex-wide phase-synchrony (PS) networks, we first computed individual parcel-to-parcel (MEG
data) or contact-contact (SEEG data) interaction matrices. Phase synchrony (PS) was estimated using the
weighted phase-lag index (wPLI) (76) as well as the phase-locking value (PLV) (4,35). Because of source
leakage, the use of PLV leads to the detection of zero-phase lag artificial interactions, while wPLI is insensitive
to zero-phase lag interactions and hence less affected by artificial interactions (44,115).
We computed PS across the whole time series for each frequency, and each contact pair or parcel pair i, j as:

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

|𝐸{𝑖𝑚(𝑋 )}|

𝑤𝑃𝐿𝐼𝑖,𝑗 = 𝐸{|𝑖𝑚(𝑋𝑖𝑗)|}

(1)

𝑖𝑗

, where im(Xij) is the imaginary part of the cross-spectrum of the complex time series Zi and Zj, and E{ } is the
expectancy value operator, and:
1

𝑃𝐿𝑉𝑖,𝑗 = |∑𝑡 exp{𝑖(𝜃𝑖 − 𝜃𝑗 )}|
𝑁

(2)

where 𝜃 is the phase of the complex filtered time series Z and N the number of samples t. We also calculated
for each contact or parcel pair one surrogate PS value where Zj had been time-shifted by a random number of
samples between 0 and N. For wPLI, we rejected connections with a z-score below 2, corresponding to  level
0.01. The PLV of uncorrelated and uniformly distributed phases can be described by the Rayleigh distribution.
We used the Rayleigh distribution to estimate a confidence limit of 2.42 for the ratio of PSmeas/PSsurr at  level
0.01 (4), where PSmeas is the measured value and PSsurr is the mean over the surrogate values from all valid
contact pairs or parcel pairs. Connections for which that ratio exceeded 2.42 were deemed significant.
X. Analysis of local and inter-areal of cross-frequency coupling (CFC): PAC and CFS
CFS and PAC were computed between all low-frequency (LF) at f1 and high-frequency (HF) at f2 combinations
for each frequency ratio 1:m from 1:2 to 1:7 and for each contact -pair i,j in SEEG data and for each parcelpair i,j in MEG data. CFS was computed as:
1

𝑃𝐿𝑉𝑖,𝑗,𝑚 = 𝑁 |∑𝑡 exp[i ∙ (𝑚 ∙ 𝜃𝑖,𝐿𝐹 − 𝜃𝑗,𝐻𝐹 )]|

(3)

where 𝜃𝑖,𝐿𝐹 and 𝜃𝑗,𝐻𝐹 are the phases of the time series of contact /parcels i,j and 𝜃𝑖,𝐿𝐹 has been upsampled to
match the sampling rate of the HF signal (4,39). Local CFS (CFSloc) was obtained where i=j, inter-areal CFS
where i≠j.
PAC was computed as:
1

𝑃𝐴𝐶𝑖,𝑗,𝑚 = 𝑁 |∑𝑡 exp[i ∙ (𝜃𝑖,𝐿𝐹 − 𝜃𝑗𝑒𝑛𝑣 )]|

(4)

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

𝑒𝑛𝑣
is the phase of the amplitude envelope of the HF signal filtered with a Morlet filter at LF, and
, where 𝜃𝑗,𝐻𝐹,𝐿𝐹

downsampled to match the LF signal’s sampling rate. Local PAC was obtained where i=j, inter-areal PAC
where i≠j (25).
XI. Analysis of amplitude-amplitude coupling
To estimate within-frequency amplitude correlations (AC), and as a pre-requisite to removal of potentially
spurious PAC (see next section), we also computed pairwise phase correlations of LF-modulated amplitude
envelopes of the HF signals. This was done by computing within-frequency phase synchrony between the
𝑒𝑛𝑣
phases of the LF-filtered amplitude envelopes 𝜃𝑗,𝐻𝐹,𝐿𝐹
for all contact pairs or parcel pairs i≠j using all

frequency pairs LF, HF that were used for PAC computations.
XII. Group-level statistics
For the group-level statistics of PS, AC, CFS, PAC, CFSlocal and PAClocal, we computed upper and lower
confidence limits (2.5% and 97.5%) with bootstrapping approach using N = 1000. We pooled significant edges
across subjects to obtain the mean strength and the group-level connection density over all channels (in SEEG)
or parcels (MEG). Since it can be expected that in the absence of any true interactions, 1% of edges would be
reported as significant anyways as statistical false positives, we subtracted 0.01 from all reported/plotted K
values.
XIII. Removal of potentially spurious CFC connections
The core tenet of CFC is that it indicates an interaction between two distinct neuronal processes and hence
CFC is true when there is evidence for the presence of two separate signals. Conversely, CFC may be spurious
if evidence of the presence of two separate signals is not obtained and it remains a possibility that a single
leaked non-sinusoidal signal or two inter-areally within-frequency coupled, non-sinusoidal signals may
account for the observation of inter-areal cross-frequency coupling. We developed a conservative connectionby-connection test of whether inter-areal CFC can unambiguously be attributed to two separable signals. In
this test, observations of inter-areal CFC are discarded between any two such signals that are also connected
by both inter-areal 1:1 PS/AC and local CFC at one or both of the locations. In effect, this implies that all interareal CFC connections are removed that are observed with one of the triangle motifs shown in Figure 1f for
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

spurious inter-areal CFC (right panel) or for true inter-areal CFC that was ambiguous (middle panel). Whether
1:1 PS or AC is used depends on the form of CFC so that inter-areal CFS was removed when there was a
triangle motif of local CFS at the parcel/contact of the low frequency (LF) oscillation and high-frequency (HF)
PS between the parcels/contacts or vice versa when there was local CFS at the parcel/contact of the HF
oscillation and low-frequency PS between the parcels/contacts.
Inter-areal PAC was removed when there was a triangle motif of either local PAC at the parcel/contact of the
HF oscillation and low-frequency PS between the parcels/contacts or vice versa when there was local PAC at
the parcel of the LF oscillation and AC of the HF time series.
To assess the fractions of excluded edges, we computed Kcorr as the fraction of the remaining significant edges
divided by number of possible connections after removing all putatively spurious connections.
XIV. Estimation of peak alpha frequency and correlation with the cross-frequency ratio in SEEG data
In order to determine the peak alpha frequency in SEEG phase-amplitude, of SEEG PAC, we interpolated the
values of group-level connection density K in the range 6-20 Hz with a cubic function, using the Python
package scipy, at a resolution of 0.1 Hz and located the frequency at which the interpolated K value was largest.
We then computed Pearson’s r as a metric of correlation between CF ratio and peak alpha frequency.
XV. Computation of CFC in distance bins
For both SEEG and MEG data, we divided all channel/parcel pairs into three distance bins containing the same
amount of edges. For SEEG data, the distance bins were 2cm – 4cm, 4cm – 5.6cm and 5.6cm – 13.7cm and
for MEG data these were 0cm – 6.3cm, 6.3cm – 9.1cm and 9.1cm – 17.7cm. We then computed the K values
separately in these distance bins as described above. We tested for significant differences between the first
and third bin with a Wilcoxon signed-rank test (p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons with BenjaminiHochberg).
XVI. Estimation of CFC in distinct cortical layers in SEEG data
We assigned SEEG electrode contacts to layers based on the Grey Matter Proximity Index (GMPI) which is
the distance between contact position and the nearest vertex of the white-grey surface, normalized by the

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cortical thickness in that point (7). Contacts with 0.5 < GMPI < 1.2 were marked as “superficial” and -0.3 <
GMPI < 0 as “deep”. We analyzed inter-areal CFC among electrode pairs in four groups: 1) where both
electrode contacts were in a superficial layer; 2) where both contacts were in a deep layer; 3) where the LF
contact was in a superficial and the HF contact in a deep layer; and 4) where the LF contact was in a deep and
the HF one in a superficial layer. We tested for significant difference between the group with the largest and
the group with the smallest values (groups 1&2 in uncorrected and 3&4 in corrected data) with a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test (p < 0.05, corrected for multiple comparisons with Benjamini-Hochberg).
XVII. Estimation of relative directed degree
We defined the relative degree per parcel for the 148-parcel Destrieux atlas as the fraction of significant edges
NE connected to a parcel over the total possible number of possible edges NE,pot for that parcel. In SEEG data,
NE,pot was obtained by pooling possible CFS or PAC edges over all subjects; for each subject, NE,pot,S was the
sum of possible, i.e. not excluded, connections from contacts assigned to that parcel to other electrodes. Parcels
with a degree lower than eight were excluded. The relative directed degree was estimated as the difference
between in- and out degree, where in-degree was associated with the HF end of a CFC connection, and outdegree with the LF end, so that a positive value indicated a HF hub and a negative value a LF hub. Values
were collapsed over all frequencies belonging to the frequency bands of interest.
XVIII. Estimation of CFC directionality
We estimated LF-HF directionality for frequency pairs LF, HF and all parcel pairs (p1≠p2) in the 148-parcel
Destrieux atlas.
We defined LF-HF directionality DirLH as:
𝐷𝑖𝑟𝐿𝐻 (𝐿𝐹, 𝐻𝐹, 𝑝1 , 𝑝2 ) =

1
(∑𝑀 𝑃𝐿𝑉𝐶𝐹 (𝐿𝐹, 𝐻𝐹, 𝑝1 , 𝑝2 ) − ∑𝑀 𝑃𝐿𝑉𝐶𝐹 (𝐿𝐹, 𝐻𝐹, 𝑝2 , 𝑝1 ))
𝑀

(5)

, where M is the number of connections between the two parcels. In SEEG, where several contacts can be
located in one parcel, M for a parcel pair p1,p2 is equal to the total number of contact pairs c1,c2 in all subjects
where c1 is located in p1 and c2 located in p2. Values for M in SEEG ranged from 0 to 1690. For all pairs (p1,p2)
in SEEG where M<8, DirLH was set to 0.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In MEG, where there is exactly one connection between any two parcels in a given set, M was equal to the
number of sets.
We then tested for significance for each DirLH (LF,HF,p1,p2) value using a permutation test (N = 1000).
In each permutation, the strengths of all connections PLVCF (p1,p2) and PLVCF (p2,p1) between two parcels p1,p2
were pooled and randomly assigned to two groups G1,G2. The permutated directionality DirLH value was then
computed as
𝑀

𝑀

1
(∑ 𝑃𝐿𝑉𝐶𝐹 (𝐿𝐹, 𝐻𝐹, 𝐺1 ) − ∑ 𝑃𝐿𝑉𝐶𝐹 (𝐿𝐹, 𝐻𝐹, 𝐺2 ))
𝐷𝑖𝑟𝐿𝐻,𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑚 (𝐿𝐹, 𝐻𝐹, 𝑝1 , 𝑝2 ) =
𝑀
If the the true DirLH value was larger than DirLH, perm in 95% of permutations, the connection was deemed
significant. A significant value DirLH < 0 thus indicated that parcel p1 was dominantly the place of the LF
oscillation and p2 the place of the HF oscillation, and vice versa for DirLH > 0.
The overall directionality DirLH(p)of a parcel p was computed as the number of its significantly positive DLH
values with other parcels minus the number of its significantly negative DLH values with other parcels, divided
by the number of possible connections with other parcels. Thus, similar to the degree-based hubness, a positive
or negative value of DirLH(p) indicated a parcel dominated by the HF or LF oscillations, respectively, in interareal CFC. Values were collapsed over all frequencies belonging to the frequency bands of interest.

Reference List
(1) Singer W. Neuronal synchrony: a versatile code for the definition of relations? Neuron 1999
Sep;24(1):49-65, 111-25.
(2) Fries P. A mechanism for cognitive dynamics: neuronal communication through neuronal coherence.
Trends Cogn Sci 2005 Oct;9(10):474-480.
(3) Segonne F, Dale AM, Busa E, Glessner M, Salat D, Hahn HK, et al. A hybrid approach to the skull stripping
problem in MRI. Neuroimage 2004 Jul;22(3):1060-1075.
(4) Palva JM, Palva S, Kaila K. Phase synchrony among neuronal oscillations in the human cortex. J Neurosci
2005 Apr 13;25(15):3962-3972.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(5) Marzetti L, Della Penna S, Snyder AZ, Pizzella V, Nolte G, de Pasquale F, et al. Frequency specific
interactions of MEG resting state activity within and across brain networks as revealed by the multivariate
interaction measure. Neuroimage 2013 Apr 28.
(6) Di Lorenzo G, Daverio A, Ferrentino F, Santarnecchi E, Ciabattini F, Monaco L, et al. Altered resting-state
EEG source functional connectivity in schizophrenia: the effect of illness duration. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience 2015 04/11;9:234.
(7) Arnulfo G, Hirvonen J, Nobili L, Palva S, Palva JM. Phase and amplitude correlations in resting-state
activity in human stereotactical EEG recordings. Neuroimage 2015 Feb 24;112:114-127.
(8) Nikulin VV, Brismar T. Phase synchronization between alpha and beta oscillations in the human
electroencephalogram. Neuroscience 2006;137(2):647-657.
(9) Uhlhaas PJ, Pipa G, Lima B, Melloni L, Neuenschwander S, Nikolic D, et al. Neural synchrony in cortical
networks: history, concept and current status. Front Integr Neurosci 2009;3:17.
(10) Palva JM, Monto S, Kulashekhar S, Palva S. Neuronal synchrony reveals working memory networks and
predicts individual memory capacity. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 Apr 20;107(16):7580-7585.
(11) Harris AZ, Gordon JA. Long-range neural synchrony in behavior. Annu Rev Neurosci 2015;38:171-94.
(12) Lobier M, Palva JM, Palva S. High-alpha band synchronization across frontal, parietal and visual cortex
mediates behavioral and neuronal effects of visuospatial attention. Neuroimage 2017 Oct 23;165:222-237.
(13) Hirvonen J, Wibral M, Palva JM, Singer W, Uhlhaas P, Palva S. Whole-Brain Source-Reconstructed MEGData Reveal Reduced Long-Range Synchronization in Chronic Schizophrenia. eNeuro 2017 Oct
17;4(5):10.1523/ENEURO.0338-17.2017. eCollection 2017 Sep-Oct.
(14) Hirvonen J, Monto S, Wang S, Palva J, Palva S. Dynamic large-scale network synchronization from
perception to action. Network Neuroscience 2018.
(15) Sadaghiani S, Hesselmann G, Friston KJ, Kleinschmidt A. The relation of ongoing brain activity, evoked
neural responses, and cognition. Front Syst Neurosci 2010 Jun 23;4:20.
(16) Raichle ME, MacLeod AM, Snyder AZ, Powers WJ, Gusnard DA, Shulman GL. A default mode of brain
function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 Jan 16;98(2):676-682.
(17) Fox MD, Snyder AZ, Vincent JL, Corbetta M, Van Essen DC, Raichle ME. The human brain is intrinsically
organized into dynamic, anticorrelated functional networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2005 Jul
5;102(27):9673-9678.
(18) Sadaghiani S, Scheeringa R, Lehongre K, Morillon B, Giraud AL, Kleinschmidt A. Intrinsic connectivity
networks, alpha oscillations, and tonic alertness: a simultaneous electroencephalography/functional
magnetic resonance imaging study. J Neurosci 2010 Jul 28;30(30):10243-10250.
(19) Hipp JF, Siegel M. BOLD fMRI Correlation Reflects Frequency-Specific Neuronal Correlation. Curr Biol
2015 May 18;25(10):1368-1374.
(20) Palva S, Palva JM. New vistas for alpha-frequency band oscillations. Trends Neurosci 2007
Apr;30(4):150-158.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(21) Buschman TJ, Miller EK. Top-down versus bottom-up control of attention in the prefrontal and
posterior parietal cortices. Science 2007 Mar 30;315(5820):1860-1862.
(22) Bastos AM, Vezoli J, Bosman CA, Schoffelen JM, Oostenveld R, Dowdall JR, et al. Visual Areas Exert
Feedforward and Feedback Influences through Distinct Frequency Channels. Neuron 2015 Jan 21;85(2):390401.
(23) Jensen O, Bonnefond M, Marshall TR, Tiesinga P. Oscillatory mechanisms of feedforward and feedback
visual processing. Trends Neurosci 2015;38(4):192-194.
(24) Palva S, Palva JM. Functional roles of alpha-band phase synchronization in local and large-scale cortical
networks. Front Psychol 2011;2:204.
(25) Vanhatalo S, Palva JM, Holmes MD, Miller JW, Voipio J, Kaila K. Infraslow oscillations modulate
excitability and interictal epileptic activity in the human cortex during sleep. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2004
Apr 6;101(14):5053-5057.
(26) Lakatos P, Shah AS, Knuth KH, Ulbert I, Karmos G, Schroeder CE. An oscillatory hierarchy controlling
neuronal excitability and stimulus processing in the auditory cortex. J Neurophysiol 2005 Sep;94(3):19041911.
(27) Canolty RT, Edwards E, Dalal SS, Soltani M, Nagarajan SS, Kirsch HE, et al. High gamma power is phaselocked to theta oscillations in human neocortex. Science 2006 Sep 15;313(5793):1626-1628.
(28) Axmacher N, Henseler MM, Jensen O, Weinreich I, Elger CE, Fell J. Cross-frequency coupling supports
multi-item working memory in the human hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2010 Feb 16;107(7):32283233.
(29) Roux F, Wibral M, Singer W, Aru J, Uhlhaas PJ. The Phase of Thalamic Alpha Activity Modulates Cortical
Gamma-Band Activity: Evidence from Resting-State MEG Recordings. J Neurosci 2013 11/06;33(45):17827.
(30) Lakatos P, Musacchia G, O'Connel MN, Falchier AY, Javitt DC, Schroeder CE. The spectrotemporal filter
mechanism of auditory selective attention. Neuron 2013 Feb 20;77(4):750-761.
(31) Park H, Ince RA, Schyns PG, Thut G, Gross J. Frontal top-down signals increase coupling of auditory lowfrequency oscillations to continuous speech in human listeners. Curr Biol 2015 Jun 15;25(12):1649-1653.
(32) Park H, Lee DS, Kang E, Kang H, Hahm J, Kim JS, et al. Formation of visual memories controlled by
gamma power phase-locked to alpha oscillations. Sci Rep 2016 Jun 16;6:28092.
(33) Keitel A, Gross J, Kayser C. Perceptually relevant speech tracking in auditory and motor cortex reflects
distinct linguistic features. PLoS Biol 2018 Mar 12;16(3):e2004473.
(34) Bahramisharif A, Jensen O, Jacobs J, Lisman J. Serial representation of items during working memory
maintenance at letter-selective cortical sites. PLoS Biol 2018 Aug 15;16(8):e2003805.
(35) Tass P, Rosenblum MG, Weule J, Kurths J, Pikovsky A, Volkmann J, et al. Detection of n : m phase
locking from noisy data: Application to magnetoencephalography. Phys Rev Lett 1998 OCT 12;81(15):32913294.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(36) Sauseng P, Klimesch W, Gruber WR, Birbaumer N. Cross-frequency phase synchronization: a brain
mechanism of memory matching and attention. Neuroimage 2008 Mar 1;40(1):308-317.
(37) Besle J, Schevon CA, Mehta AD, Lakatos P, Goodman RR, McKhann GM, et al. Tuning of the human
neocortex to the temporal dynamics of attended events. J Neurosci 2011 Mar 2;31(9):3176-3185.
(38) Chaieb L, Leszczynski M, Axmacher N, Hohne M, Elger CE, Fell J. Theta-gamma phase-phase coupling
during working memory maintenance in the human hippocampus. Cogn Neurosci 2015 Jun 23:1-9.
(39) Siebenhühner F, Wang SH, Palva JM, Palva S. Cross-frequency synchronization connects networks of
fast and slow oscillations during visual working memory maintenance. Elife 2016 Sep
26;5:10.7554/eLife.13451.
(40) Jensen O, Colgin LL. Cross-frequency coupling between neuronal oscillations. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences 2007 /7;11(7):267-269.
(41) Schroeder CE, Lakatos P. Low-frequency neuronal oscillations as instruments of sensory selection.
Trends Neurosci 2009 Jan;32(1):9-18.
(42) Canolty RT, Knight RT. The functional role of cross-frequency coupling. Trends Cogn Sci 2010
Nov;14(11):506-515.
(43) Fell J, Axmacher N. The role of phase synchronization in memory processes. Nat Rev Neurosci 2011
Feb;12(2):105-118.
(44) Palva S, Palva JM. Discovering oscillatory interaction networks with M/EEG: challenges and
breakthroughs. Trends Cogn Sci 2012 Apr;16(4):219-230.
(45) Lisman JE, Jensen O. The theta-gamma neural code. Neuron 2013 Mar 20;77(6):1002-1016.
(46) Roux F, Uhlhaas PJ. Working memory and neural oscillations: alpha-gamma versus theta-gamma codes
for distinct WM information? Trends Cogn Sci 2014 Jan;18(1):16-25.
(47) Hyafil A, Giraud AL, Fontolan L, Gutkin B. Neural Cross-Frequency Coupling: Connecting Architectures,
Mechanisms, and Functions. Trends Neurosci 2015 Nov;38(11):725-740.
(48) Palva JM, Palva S. Functional integration across oscillation frequencies by cross‐frequency phase
synchronization. Eur J Neurosci 2017 11/02; 2018/04;0(0).
(49) Tort AB, Kramer MA, Thorn C, Gibson DJ, Kubota Y, Graybiel AM, et al. Dynamic cross-frequency
couplings of local field potential oscillations in rat striatum and hippocampus during performance of a Tmaze task. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2008 Dec 23;105(51):20517-20522.
(50) Roopun AK, Kramer MA, Carracedo LM, Kaiser M, Davies CH, Traub RD, et al. Period concatenation
underlies interactions between gamma and beta rhythms in neocortex. Front Cell Neurosci 2008;2:1.
(51) Tort AB, Komorowski R, Eichenbaum H, Kopell N. Measuring phase-amplitude coupling between
neuronal oscillations of different frequencies. J Neurophysiol 2010 Aug;104(2):1195-1210.
(52) Belluscio MA, Mizuseki K, Schmidt R, Kempter R, Buzsaki G. Cross-frequency phase-phase coupling
between theta and gamma oscillations in the hippocampus. J Neurosci 2012 Jan 11;32(2):423-435.
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(53) Scheffer-Teixeira R, Belchior H, Caixeta F, Souza BC, Ribeiro S, Tort ABL. Theta Phase Modulates
Multiple Layer-Specific Oscillations in the CA1 Region. Cerebral Cortex 2012 10/01;22(10):2404-2414.
(54) Xu X, Zheng C, Zhang T. Reduction in LFP cross-frequency coupling between theta and gamma rhythms
associated with impaired STP and LTP in a rat model of brain ischemia. Frontiers in Computational
Neuroscience 2013 03/17;7:27.
(55) Scheffer-Teixeira R, Tort ABL. Unveiling Fast Field Oscillations through Comodulation. eNeuro 2017 Aug
4;4(4):10.1523/ENEURO.0079-17.2017. eCollection 2017 Jul-Aug.
(56) Jiang H, Bahramisharif A, van Gerven MAJ, Jensen O. Measuring directionality between neuronal
oscillations of different frequencies. NeuroImage 2015 September 2015;118:359-367.
(57) Watrous AJ, Deuker L, Fell J, Axmacher N. Phase-amplitude coupling supports phase coding in human
ECoG. Elife 2015 Aug 26;4:10.7554/eLife.07886.
(58) Berman JI, Liu S, Bloy L, Blaskey L, Roberts TPL, Edgar JC. Alpha-to-Gamma Phase-Amplitude Coupling
Methods and Application to Autism Spectrum Disorder. Brain Connectivity 2015 04/01;5(2):80-90.
(59) Jirsa V, Muller V. Cross-frequency coupling in real and virtual brain networks. Front Comput Neurosci
2013 Jul 3;7:78.
(60) Sauseng P, Klimesch W, Heise KF, Gruber WR, Holz E, Karim AA, et al. Brain oscillatory substrates of
visual short-term memory capacity. Curr Biol 2009 Nov 17;19(21):1846-1852.
(61) Akiyama M, Tero A, Kawasaki M, Nishiura Y, Yamaguchi Y. Theta-alpha EEG phase distributions in the
frontal area for dissociation of visual and auditory working memory. Sci Rep 2017 Mar 7;7:42776.
(62) Zheng C, Zhang T. Alteration of phase-phase coupling between theta and gamma rhythms in a
depression-model of rats. Cognitive Neurodynamics 2013 04/01;7(2):167-172.
(63) Isler JR, Grieve PG, Czernochowski D, Stark RI, Friedman D. Cross-frequency phase coupling of brain
rhythms during the orienting response. Brain Res 2008 9/26;1232(0):163-172.
(64) Florin E, Baillet S. The brain's resting-state activity is shaped by synchronized cross-frequency coupling
of neural oscillations. Neuroimage 2015 May 1;111:26-35.
(65) van der Meij R, Kahana M, Maris E. Phase-amplitude coupling in human electrocorticography is
spatially distributed and phase diverse. J Neurosci 2012 Jan 4;32(1):111-123.
(66) Kramer MA, Tort ABL, Kopell NJ. Sharp edge artifacts and spurious coupling in EEG frequency
comodulation measures. J Neurosci Methods 2008 05/30;170(2):352-357.
(67) Aru J, Aru J, Priesemann V, Wibral M, Lana L, Pipa G, et al. Untangling cross-frequency coupling in
neuroscience. Curr Opin Neurobiol 2015 Apr;31:51-61.
(68) van Driel J, Cox R, Cohen MX. Phase-clustering bias in phase–amplitude cross-frequency coupling and
its removal. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 2015 30 October 2015;254:60-72.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(69) Gerber EM, Sadeh B, Ward A, Knight RT, Deouell LY. Non-Sinusoidal Activity Can Produce CrossFrequency Coupling in Cortical Signals in the Absence of Functional Interaction between Neural Sources.
PLoS One 2016 Dec 12;11(12):e0167351.
(70) Scheffer-Teixeira R, Tort AB. On cross-frequency phase-phase coupling between theta and gamma
oscillations in the hippocampus. Elife 2016 Dec 7;5:10.7554/eLife.20515.
(71) Lozano-Soldevilla D, Ter Huurne N, Oostenveld R. Neuronal Oscillations with Non-sinusoidal
Morphology Produce Spurious Phase-to-Amplitude Coupling and Directionality. Front Comput Neurosci
2016 Aug 22;10:87.
(72) Cole SR, Voytek B. Brain Oscillations and the Importance of Waveform Shape. Trends Cogn Sci 2017
Feb;21(2):137-149.
(73) Nikulin VV, Linkenkaer-Hansen K, Nolte G, Lemm S, Muller KR, Ilmoniemi RJ, et al. A novel mechanism
for evoked responses in the human brain. Eur J Neurosci 2007 May;25(10):3146-3154.
(74) Destrieux C, Fischl B, Dale A, Halgren E. Automatic parcellation of human cortical gyri and sulci using
standard anatomical nomenclature. Neuroimage 2010 Oct 15;53(1):1-15.
(75) Muthukumaraswamy SD. High-frequency brain activity and muscle artifacts in MEG/EEG: a review and
recommendations. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 2013 03/28;7:138.
(76) Vinck M, Oostenveld R, van Wingerden M, Battaglia F, Pennartz CM. An improved index of phasesynchronization for electrophysiological data in the presence of volume-conduction, noise and sample-size
bias. Neuroimage 2011 Apr 15;55(4):1548-1565.
(77) Palva JM, Wang SH, Palva S, Zhigalov A, Monto S, Brookes MJ, et al. Ghost interactions in MEG/EEG
source space: A note of caution on inter-areal coupling measures. NeuroImage 2018 June 2018;173:632643.
(78) Bassett DS, Bullmore E. Small-world brain networks. Neuroscientist 2006 Dec;12(6):512-523.
(79) Yeo BT, Krienen FM, Sepulcre J, Sabuncu MR, Lashkari D, Hollinshead M, et al. The organization of the
human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity. J Neurophysiol 2011 Sep;106(3):11251165.
(80) Ciuciu P, Varoquaux G, Abry P, Sadaghiani S, Kleinschmidt A. Scale-free and multifractal properties of
fMRI signals during rest and task. Frontiers in Physiology 2012;3:186.
(81) Raichle ME. The Brain's Default Mode Network. Annu Rev Neurosci 2015 07/08; 2018/12;38(1):433447.
(82) Zhigalov A, Arnulfo G, Nobili L, Palva S, Palva JM. Modular co-organization of functional connectivity
and scale-free dynamics in the human brain. Network Neuroscience 2017;1.
(83) Demiralp T, Bayraktaroglu Z, Lenz D, Junge S, Busch NA, Maess B, et al. Gamma amplitudes are coupled
to theta phase in human EEG during visual perception. Int J Psychophysiol 2007 Apr;64(1):24-30.
(84) Berger H. Uber das elektroenkephalogramm des Menschen. Arch Psychiatr Nervenkr 1929;87:527-570.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(85) Klimesch W, Sauseng P, Hanslmayr S. EEG alpha oscillations: the inhibition-timing hypothesis. Brain Res
Rev 2007 Jan;53(1):63-88.
(86) Palva JM, Palva S. Roles of multiscale brain activity fluctuations in shaping the variability and dynamics
of psychophysical performance. Prog Brain Res 2011;193:335-350.
(87) Klimesch W. Alpha-band oscillations, attention, and controlled access to stored information. Trends
Cogn Sci 2012 Dec;16(12):606-617.
(88) Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain. Nat Rev
Neurosci 2002 Mar;3(3):201-215.
(89) Larsson P, Kostov H. Lower frequency variability in the alpha activity in EEG among patients with
epilepsy. Clinical Neurophysiology 2005 2018/04;116(11):2701-2706.
(90) Stein Av, Chiang C, Konig P. Top-down processing mediated by interareal synchronization. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 2000 Dec 19;97(26):14748-14753.
(91) Bollimunta A, Chen Y, Schroeder CE, Ding M. Neuronal mechanisms of cortical alpha oscillations in
awake-behaving macaques. J Neurosci 2008 Oct 1;28(40):9976-9988.
(92) Bollimunta A, Mo J, Schroeder CE, Ding M. Neuronal mechanisms and attentional modulation of
corticothalamic alpha oscillations. J Neurosci 2011 Mar 30;31(13):4935-4943.
(93) Haegens S, Barczak A, Musacchia G, Lipton ML, Mehta AD, Lakatos P, et al. Laminar Profile and
Physiology of the alpha Rhythm in Primary Visual, Auditory, and Somatosensory Regions of Neocortex. J
Neurosci 2015 Oct 21;35(42):14341-14352.
(94) Halgren M, Fabo D, Ulbert I, Madsen JR, Eross L, Doyle WK, et al. Superficial Slow Rhythms Integrate
Cortical Processing in Humans. Scientific Reports 2018 02/01;8(1):2055.
(95) Arnulfo G, Narizzano M, Cardinale F, Fato MM, Palva JM. Automatic segmentation of deep
intracerebral electrodes in computed tomography scans. BMC Bioinformatics 2015 Mar 25;16(1):99-0150511-6.
(96) Buffalo EA, Fries P, Landman R, Buschman TJ, Desimone R. Laminar differences in gamma and alpha
coherence in the ventral stream. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2011 Jul 5;108(27):11262-11267.
(97) Dosenbach NU, Fair DA, Miezin FM, Cohen AL, Wenger KK, Dosenbach RA, et al. Distinct brain networks
for adaptive and stable task control in humans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2007 Jun 26;104(26):11073-11078.
(98) Sauseng P, Klimesch W, Schabus M, Doppelmayr M. Fronto-parietal EEG coherence in theta and upper
alpha reflect central executive functions of working memory. Int J Psychophysiol 2005 Aug;57(2):97-103.
(99) Vidal JR, Chaumon M, O'Regan JK, Tallon-Baudry C. Visual grouping and the focusing of attention
induce gamma-band oscillations at different frequencies in human magnetoencephalogram signals. J Cogn
Neurosci 2006 Nov;18(11):1850-1862.
(100) Rouhinen S, Panula J, Palva JM, Palva S. Load dependence of beta and gamma oscillations predicts
individual capacity of visual attention. J Neurosci 2013 Nov 27;33(48):19023-19033.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(101) Honkanen R, Rouhinen S, Wang SH, Palva JM, Palva S. Gamma Oscillations Underlie the Maintenance
of Feature-Specific Information and the Contents of Visual Working Memory. Cereb Cortex 2015
Oct;25(10):3788-3801.
(102) Michalareas G, Vezoli J, van Pelt S, Schoffelen J, Kennedy H, Fries P. Alpha-Beta and Gamma Rhythms
Subserve Feedback and Feedforward Influences among Human Visual Cortical Areas. Neuron 2016.
(103) Jones SR. When brain rhythms aren't ‘rhythmic’: implication for their mechanisms and meaning.
Current Opinion in Neurobiology 2016 October 2016;40:72-80.
(104) Schoffelen JM, Gross J. Source connectivity analysis with MEG and EEG. Hum Brain Mapp 2009
Jun;30(6):1857-1865.
(105) Cardinale F, Cossu M, Castana L, Casaceli G, Schiariti MP, Miserocchi A, et al.
Stereoelectroencephalography: surgical methodology, safety, and stereotactic application accuracy in 500
procedures. Neurosurgery 2013 Mar;72(3):353-66; discussion 366.
(106) Narizzano M, Arnulfo G, Ricci S, Toselli B, Tisdall M, Canessa A, et al. SEEG assistant: a 3DSlicer
extension to support epilepsy surgery. - BMC Bioinformatics 2017(18):124.
(107) Tallon-Baudry C, Bertrand O, Delpuech C, Pernier J. Stimulus specificity of phase-locked and nonphase-locked 40 Hz visual responses in human. J Neurosci 1996 Jul 1;16(13):4240-4249.
(108) Taulu S, Simola J. Spatiotemporal signal space separation method for rejecting nearby interference in
MEG measurements. Phys Med Biol 2006 Apr 7;51(7):1759-1768.
(109) Oostenveld R, Fries P, Maris E, Schoffelen JM. FieldTrip: Open source software for advanced analysis
of MEG, EEG, and invasive electrophysiological data. Comput Intell Neurosci 2011;2011:156869.
(110) Dale AM, Fischl B, Sereno MI. Cortical surface-based analysis. I. Segmentation and surface
reconstruction. Neuroimage 1999 Feb;9(2):179-194.
(111) Fischl B, Salat DH, Busa E, Albert M, Dieterich M, Haselgrove C, et al. Whole brain segmentation:
automated labeling of neuroanatomical structures in the human brain. Neuron 2002 Jan 31;33(3):341-355.
(112) Korhonen O, Palva S, Palva JM. Sparse weightings for collapsing inverse solutions to cortical
parcellations optimize M/EEG source reconstruction accuracy. J Neurosci Methods 2014 Feb 6;226C:147160.
(113) Dale AM, Liu AK, Fischl BR, Buckner RL, Belliveau JW, Lewine JD, et al. Dynamic statistical parametric
mapping: combining fMRI and MEG for high-resolution imaging of cortical activity. Neuron 2000
Apr;26(1):55-67.
(114) Gramfort A, Luessi M, Larson E, Engemann DA, Strohmeier D, Brodbeck C, et al. MNE software for
processing MEG and EEG data. Neuroimage 2014;86:446-460.
(115) Wang S, Lobier L, Siebenhühner F, Puoliväli T, Palva S, Palva J. Hyperedge bundling: A practical
solution to spurious interactions in MEG/EEG connectivity analyses. NeuroImage 2018;S10538119(18):0056.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Suppl. Figure Legends

S1 Figure. Workflow for SEEG data
Workflow for the processing and analysis of SEEG data, flowing from top to bottom.

S2 Figure. Workflow for MEG data
Workflow for the processing and analysis of MEG data, flowing from top to bottom.

S3 Figure. Example of CFS in SEEG data
Cross-frequency phase synchrony (CFS) between two electrode contacts, whose location is indicated by big
blue and red circles on the anatomical image of a participant’s brain (left). The small circles indicates the
positions of closest white matter contacts. Top row: Broadband signal (black line) recorded from a contact in
the medial frontal gyrus (MFG), and the narrow-band signal (blue) at 9Hz. 2nd row: Broadband signal (black)
recorded from a contact in the intraparietal sulcus (IPS), and the narrowband signal (red) at 27Hz. 3rd row:
The instantaneous phases of the narrowband MfG 9Hz signal (top), the same phase multiplied with 3 (middle)
and of the IPS 27Hz signal. Bottom row: The 1:3 PLV (purple), indicating the strength of CFS coupling
between the 9Hz and the 27Hz signal, and the 95th %ile of 1:3 PLV values for surrogate data (grey dashed
line).
S4 Figure. Example of PAC in MEG data
Phase-amplitude coupling (PAC) between source-reconstructed signals in the postcentral gyrus (poCG) and
superior temporal sulcus (sTS), as shown on a template brain pial surface (left). Top row: Broadband signal
(black line) and 10Hz narrowband signal (blue) at poCG. Second row: Broadband signal (black) and 40Hz
narrowband signal (red) at sTS. Third row: Narrowband signals at 10 Hz and 40 Hz with the frequency ratio
of 1:4. Starting at around 200ms, the amplitude of the HF signal at 40 Hz starts being modulated by the phase
of the 10 Hz LF signal. Bottom row: Strength of 1:4 PAC coupling (purple) and the 95th %ile of surrogate
values obtained by phase shifting (grey dashed line).

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

S5 Figure. 1:1 phase synchrony in SEEG and MEG
a) Phase synchrony mean strength (top) and connection density K (bottom) in SEEG data with 95% confidence
limits estimated with the weighted Phase-Lag Index (wPLI) overall (left) and separately in three distance bins
containing equal numbers of connections (right). b) Phase synchrony in SEEG data estimated with the PhaseLocking Value (PLV). c-d) Phase synchrony in MEG data estimated with wPLI and PLV, respectively.

S6 Figure. Local CFS and PAC in SEEG and MEG data.
a) The mean PLV strength and fraction of significant parcels (K) with 95% confidence limits (shaded) of local
CFS in SEEG data for coupling ratios 1:2 (top) and 1:3 – 1:7 (bottom). Values are shown with 95% confidence
limits. b) The mean PLV strength and fraction of significant parcels K for local CFS in MEG data. c) Same
for local PAC in SEEG data. d) Same for local PAC in MEG data. e)-h) The same K values as shown in a-d
plotted in matrices for the whole spectral connectome.

S7 Figure. Strength of inter-areal CFS and PAC
The mean strength of inter-areal CFC with 95% confidence limits for ratio 1:2 (top row) and ratios 1:21:7
(bottom row), as estimated by the n:m PLV for CFS, or for PAC by the PLV of the LF signal and the phase of
the LF-filtered amplitude envelopes of the HF signal.

S8 Figure. Inter-areal CFS and PAC when PLV is used for removing spurious connections
a) Connection density K of inter-areal CFS in SEEG data before (left) and after removing possible spurious
connections (Kcorr, right) using the PLV as a metric for phase synchrony. b) Same for inter-areal PAC in SEEG
data. c)-d) Same for inter-areal CFS and PAC in MEG data.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

S9 Figure: Amplitude envelope correlations
Mean strength and K of synchronization between amplitude envelopes that were modulated by the phase of a
lower frequency at a ratio from 1:2 to 1:7. The same data is plotted as a function of the envelope frequency
(top row) and the modulating frequency (bottom row).

S10 Figure: Functional Networks
Functional networks of the Yeo parcellation.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/547638; this version posted February 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

