bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rho-kinase planar polarisation at tissue boundaries depends on phosphoregulation of membrane residence time
Clara Sidor1, Tim J. Stevens1, Li Jin1, Jérôme Boulanger1, Katja Röper1*

1

MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Francis Crick Avenue, Cambridge Biomedical

Campus, Cambridge, UK

* corresponding author and lead contact: kroeper@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Summary
Rho-kinase (Rok) is a major myosin II activator during morphogenesis. In the
Drosophila embryonic salivary gland placode Rok is planar polarised at the tissue
boundary, through a negative regulation by the apical polarity protein Crumbs that is
anisotropically localised at the boundary. However, in inner cells of the placode both
Crumbs and Rok are isotropically enriched at junctions. We propose a model that
reconciles both behaviours through modulation of Rok membrane residence time by
Crumbs and downstream effectors. Using FRAP in embryos expressing
endogenously-tagged Rok combined with in silico simulations, we find that the lower
membrane dissociation rate (koff) of Rok at the tissue boundary, where Crumbs
membrane levels are lower, explains this boundary-specific effect. The S/T-kinase
Pak1 negatively affects Rok membrane association in vivo within the epidermis, and
in vitro can phosphorylate Rok near the PH domain that mediates membrane
association. Pak1 is recruited to the membrane by Cdc42 which, like its binding
partner Crumbs, shows anisotropic localisation at the boundary. These data reveal
an important mechanism of modulation of Rok membrane residence time via
affecting the koff that may be widely employed during tissue morphogenesis.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Tissues arise during development through specification of primordia that will then
initiate morphogenetic movements (Castelli-Gair Hombria, 2016). Many primordia are
epithelial in nature and give rise to tubular epithelial organs, such as lung, kidney,
intestine in vertebrates or the equivalent organs in invertebrates. How are epithelial
primordia physically set aside from the surrounding tissue, apart from the inductive
change in transcription factor expression? We know from studies in the Drosophila
early embryonic epidermis as well as in larval wing discs that differently fated
compartments are physically clearly segregated and cell mixing across compartment
boundaries is restricted (Dahmann and Basler, 1999; Tepass et al., 2002). In both
tissues, this seems to be in part achieved through an increased tension at the
compartment boundary that coincides with junctional accumulation of actomyosin
into a seemingly supra-cellular structure, a so-called actomyosin cable (Röper,
2013). In the embryonic epidermis, the actomyosin cables found at parasegmental
boundaries physically restrains boundary-challenging divisions within the correct
compartment (Monier et al., 2010). The molecular mechanisms that drive actomyosin
cable assembly are not well understood, and where aspects have been uncovered, a
variety of tissue-specific mechanisms seem to contribute. Parasegmental cables for
instance arise over time from dorso-ventrally-polarised junctional myosin
accumulations (Tetley et al., 2016) that might themselves depend on a code of Toll
receptor expression within the early epidermis (Pare et al., 2014). In the wing disc,
the dorso-ventral boundary requires Notch-signaling (Major and Irvine, 2005, 2006).
Actomyosin-based compartment boundaries are not restricted to invertebrates, but
have in fact also been found in vertebrates, with key examples being the
rhombomere boundaries in the mammalian hindbrain (Calzolari et al., 2014) as well
as the neural plate-ectoderm boundary during neurulation (Galea et al., 2017).
We have previously identified that an actomyosin cable is positioned at the
boundary of the salivary gland placode in the Drosophila embryo (Röper, 2012). Two
epithelial placodes of about 100 cells on either side of the ventral midline become
specified at stage 10 of embryogenesis and will invaginate to form the two salivary
glands ((Girdler and Röper, 2014; Sidor and Röper, 2016); Fig. 1A,A’). The placodes
are contained within parasegment 2 of the embryo, and remnants of previous
parasegmental actomyosin cables are specifically retained near the ventral portion of
the placode, whilst a new section forms around the dorsal part, so that by mid stage
11 a circumferential actomyosin cable surrounds each placode (Röper, 2012). The
formation of this cable is transcriptionally initiated, as it is lacking in mutants for the
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

most upstream specifying transcription factor Sex Combs Reduced (Henderson and
Andrew, 2000; Röper, 2012). We have previously identified the apical
transmembrane protein Crumbs as a key determinant of actomyosin cable
positioning at the boundary of the placode. Crumbs levels are strongly increased
within the placode, whereas levels are reduced in the surrounding epidermal cells
surrounding the placode. Crumbs’s ability to form homophilic interactions (Fletcher et
al., 2012; Röper, 2012; Zou et al., 2012) leads to a highly anisotropic distribution of
Crumbs apically within placodal cells at the placode boundary: this Crumbs
anisotropy leads to accumulation of actomyosin and also Rho-kinase (Rok) reporters
at the placode boundary, away from membranes with high levels of Crumbs.
Moreover, ectopic boundaries of high/low Crumbs levels lead to ectopic cable
formation (Röper, 2012). Thus, Crumbs exerts a negative regulatory effect on
actomyosin cable formation likely through the upstream myosin activator Rho-kinase.
Based on studies in mammalian cells that reported that aPKC is able to
phosphorylate and thereby inactivate Rok (Ishiuchi and Takeichi, 2011), we
previously suggested that the effect in the placode was mediated by aPKC, which in
fly embryos closely follows Crumbs distribution (Röper, 2012). Complementary
localisation of Crumbs and actomyosin is not restricted to flies, but has also more
recently been reported in mouse (Ramkumar et al., 2016).
The precise role of the actomyosin cable surrounding the salivary gland
placode is not clear yet, though we know that it is under increased tension (Röper,
2012). In analogy to the suggested roles of other actomyosin cables, it could actively
help tissue invagination by exerting a centripetal force onto the placode tissue.
Alternatively, it could actively pull the surrounding epidermis inwards to cover the
previous placode area, or it could form an insulating stiff barrier between
morphogenetically different domains.
Crumbs is not the only homophilic plasma membrane receptor that can
influence actomyosin accumulation near junctions. Depending on the tissue, both ECadherin as well as the fly nectin Echinoid show a similar influence at boundaries of
expression levels (Chang et al., 2011). Thus, in addition to their adhesive function or,
as in the case of Crumbs, their apical polarity role, these receptors have a crucial
second role in planar patterning of cytoskeletal structures within the apical domain of
epithelial cells.
The negative influence of Crumbs on Rok localisation and activity is clear at
the placode boundary where Crumbs anisotropy triggers the actomyosin cable
assembly in boundary junctions with lower levels of Crumbs. However, in the inner
placodal cells both Crumbs and Rok membrane levels are high and isotropic. High
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

levels of Rok in inner placodal cells drive the tube formation process through a
combination of isotropic constriction near the invagination point, mediated by
dynamic pools of apical-medial actomyosin, and directed cell intercalation, mediated
by junctional pools of actomyosin (Booth et al., 2014; Sanchez-Corrales et al., 2018).
Thus, it appears that it is not the overall levels of Crumbs that negatively affect Rok,
but rather the difference in levels experienced within a single cell at the boundary
that allows negative regulation of Rok. The fact that absolute levels are irrelevant is
also supported by the fact that introduction of a new step change in Crumbs levels
within the placode, now adding a stripe of Crumbs expression even higher than the
already elevated placodal levels, triggers Crumbs anisotropy and ectopic myosin
cable formation (Röper, 2012). Here we propose a molecular mechanism by which
these different scenarios can be reconciled, based on a modulation of Rok residence
time at the apical plasma membrane mediated. We suggest that such mechanism
might be widely used in membrane receptors to allow combination of patterning
activity with other molecular functions.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Rho-kinase is planar polarised and complementary to Crumbs at the placode
and other tissue boundaries
We previously proposed that the apical transmembrane protein Crumbs actively
influences myosin II accumulation through a negative regulatory effect on Rok, the
most common activator of myosin II during morphogenetic processes (Röper, 2012).
However, current visualisation of Rok localisation and activity depends on overexpression of tagged active or kinase-dead versions (Simoes Sde et al., 2010). In
order to examine endogenous Rok localisation, we used CRISPR/Cas9 to engineer
an endogenously N-terminally tagged Rok with the bright mNeon-Green (mNG)
fluorescent protein ((Shaner et al., 2013).; Fig. 1B). The tag was inserted at the Nterminal end of the protein in frame with the start, therefore tagging major isoforms A,
B and C. Isoform D has an alternative start but it is not expressed during
embryogenesis (mod et al., 2010). Several transgenic lines expressing mNG-Rok
were obtained. Importantly, mNG-Rok did not form aggregates like many of the
overexpression lines (see Fig.4B) and the mNG-Rok flies were homozygous viable,
indicating that Rok function was not impaired by the mNG-tag.
In epithelial cells of the epidermis at different stages of embryogenesis as
well as in larval imaginal discs, mNG-Rok localised similarly to previously described
tagged Rok, being enriched in the apical domain of the cells (Fig. 1C-H;
Suppl.Fig.1C). At several boundaries of differently fated epidermal domains, such as
the embryonic salivary gland placode (Fig. 1C), the embryonic posterior spiracles
(Fig. 1 D, E), embryonic epidermal leading edge/amnioserosa interface (Fig. 1F) and
larval eye disc (Fig. 1H, I), mNG-Rok was strongly enriched at the boundary, as was
the downstream morphogenetic effector myosin II (Jacinto et al., 2002; Röper, 2012).
These were also all boundaries where Crumbs levels show a clear step change of
high versus low expression.
Crumbs induces Rho kinase planar polarisation at the placode boundary
In the embryonic salivary gland placode, mNG-Rok was enriched apically in
comparison to the surrounding embryonic epithelium (Fig. 1C and Fig. 2A-A’’).
However, in placode boundary cells, where Crumbs protein is highly anisotropically
localised within the apical domain (Fig. 2A, arrow, and C), Rok was planar polarised
(Fig.2A’ arrow). In these boundary cells, mNG-Rok accumulated in junctions with
lower levels of Crumbs and appeared depleted from junctions with high Crumbs
levels (Fig. 2C), suggesting that Crumbs negatively regulates endogenous Rok
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

membrane accumulation. In order to examine the effect of Crumbs on endogenous
Rok membrane localisation, we induced Crumbs overexpression in a stripe of cells in
mNG-Rok embryos using the en-Gal4 driver (using the UAS/Gal4 system; (Brand
and Perrimon, 1993)). This ectopic stripe of higher Crumbs levels created a new
high/low boundary of Crumbs protein within the salivary gland placode (Fig.2B,
arrow). At the boundary of the ectopic stripe, Crumbs localisation was highly
anisotropic, with Crumbs enriched in junctions with neighbouring cells that also
expressed high levels of Crumbs, and lower at junctions with the surrounding
placode cells (Fig. 2 B). Again, only within the cells at the stripe boundary, where
Crumbs was highly anisotropic, mNG-Rok was planar polarised and enriched at the
new ectopic boundary junctions with lower levels of Crumbs, and it was depleted
from junctions with higher levels of Crumbs (Fig. 2 B,’B’’). This negative effect was
also visible within the apical-basal extent of the epidermal cells, as an expansion of
the apico-lateral distribution of Crumbs due to ectopic overexpression lead to a basal
shift in mNG-Rok localisation within the lateral membrane (Suppl. Figure 1). Thus,
Crumbs negatively regulates endogenous Rok membrane association.
A model to explain Rok polarisation at the boundary via modulation of Rok
dynamics
We were intrigued by the fact that the negative regulatory effect of Crumbs appeared
to only affect Rok at the boundary of the salivary gland placode, but not all
throughout the tissue. In inner placodal cells, where Crumbs was highly enriched
isotropically at all sub-apical junctions, mNG-Rok was able to localise at these
junctions despite the high Crumbs levels (Fig. 2A, C). In contrast, in boundary cells
where Crumbs localisation was highly anisotropic, mNG-Rok was planar polarised.
Furthermore, an ectopic Crumbs boundary with much higher levels of Crumbs
present could also polarise Rok (Fig. 2B-B’’). Thus, it was the anisotropic distribution
of Crumbs within a cell, rather than its absolute levels in the plasma membrane, that
affected Rok membrane localisation (Fig. 2C).
One way to mechanistically reconcile these two situations (boundary versus
inner placode) is to consider the dynamics of Rok membrane localisation (Fig. 2D). If
we assume that at equilibrium Rok is able to associate and dissociate from the cell
membrane at specific rates, Crumbs could influence Rok membrane accumulation by
selectively increasing the Rok membrane dissociation rate (koff ). We propose that
within inner placodal cells, high levels of Crumbs in all junctions would lead to a
higher, though isotropic, Rok turnover. With Rok membrane recruitment remaining
unaffected, Rok would still localise at the plasma membrane in these inner cells.
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Across the tissue, Rok would dissociate more often from junctions with high levels of
Crumbs and would therefore accumulate at junctions with lower levels of Crumbs
and lower koff, resulting in the planar polarisation of Rok at the tissue boundary.
Endogenous Rok koff is lower at the boundary of the placode and leads to
planar polarisation of Rok in simulations
The above model clearly predicts that Rok’s mobility and in particular Rok’s koff at the
placode boundary should differ from Rok’s koff in an inner placode cell. To test this
prediction, we performed Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP)
experiments in stage 11-12 embryos expressing the endogenously tagged mNG-Rok
(Fig. 3A,B). We bleached small circular region of mNG-Rok at the apico-lateral
plasma membrane and imaged at 1s intervals to capture the mNG-Rok fluorescence
intensity pre- and post-bleach. mNG-Rok located at junctions within the centre of the
placode recovered significantly faster than mNG-Rok located at the boundary (Fig. 3
B-D). koff values were estimated from fluorescence recovery as 0.145 (+/- 0.010) for
the inner placodal cells and 0.106 (+/- 0.008) for the boundary and found significantly
different using a bootstrap procedure (p-value [bootstrap/boxplot]: 0.00249; Fig.
3C,D). Thus, the dynamic behaviour of mNG-Rok at junctions forming the boundary
of the placode compared to inner placode junctions supports the model for Rok
planar polarisation presented above.
In order to assess whether the difference in Rok’s koff measured at the
placode boundary and within the inner placode is in itself sufficient to produce planar
polarisation of Rok at the tissue boundary, we developed an in silico simulation of the
process, using particle-based stochastic reaction-diffusion (Fig. 3F,G; for details of
the implementation see Methods). We tested a variety of koff combinations for the
boundary and inner placodal cell membranes (keeping the kon constant; Suppl.Fig.
2). Uniform koff values in all membranes led, as expected, to isotropic membrane
accumulation of Rok (Fig. 3G, simulation 1). Setting a high koff in inner junctions
compared to boundary junctions led to a strong Rok polarisation at the boundary, but
markedly reduced Rok membrane localisation in inner cells (Fig.3G, simulation 2). By
contrast, koff values deduced from the in vivo FRAP measurements of mNG-Rok
were sufficient to trigger Rok planar polarisation in simulated boundary cells, at a
level similar to the polarisation measured in vivo (in silico polarisation value of 1.2,
Fig. 3G, simulation 3; compare to values for mNG-Rok in vivo in Fig. 6E and Fig.
7G). In these conditions, Rok accumulation at the membrane of inner cells with
higher koff was preserved, leading to a pattern that closely resembled Rok localisation
in the salivary gland placode in vivo (Fig. 1C’ and 2 A’).
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Thus, modulation of Rok membrane koff within the placode is sufficient to elicit
Rok planar polarisation specifically at the tissue boundary without affecting Rok
accumulation in the rest of the tissue. We next investigated the molecular basis for
this mechanism.
The Rok C-terminal region is required for its planar polarisation
Drosophila Rok is a large protein of 1391aa, containing an N-terminal kinase domain
followed by a coiled-coil region, and a C-terminal Shroom-binding domain (SBD),
Rho-binding domain (RBD) and PH-domain (PH) (Fig. 4A)(Amano et al., 2010;
Simoes Sde et al., 2014). In order to identify which of these domains were required
for apical planar polarisation, truncated versions of a Venus-tagged kinase-dead Rok
localisation reporter were overexpressed in embryos using the UAS/Gal4 system
under the control of Daughterless-Gal4, an early ubiquitous zygotic driver (Simoes
Sde et al., 2014)
The Venus-Rok[K116A]-∆SBD lacking the coiled-coil/Shroom-binding domain
was able to accumulate in apical membranes (at lower levels than the control VenusRok[K116A]) and could still polarise at the placode boundary (Fig. 4B vs C, and F’).
Venus-Rok constructs lacking the Rho-binding domain, Venus-Rok[K116A]∆RBD, or
the PH-domain, Venus-Rok[K116A]∆PH, although showing a strongly reduced
overall membrane accumulation, were able to localise at low levels to the membrane.
Both constructs failed to polarise at the tissue boundary (Fig. 4D-E’, and F’). Thus, in
addition to promoting Rok apical membrane recruitment, both the Rho-binding
domain and the PH domain are important for Rok planar polarisation in boundary
cells.
Rok membrane recruitment has been shown to be dependent on the small
GTPase Rho and its exchange factor RhoGEF2 (Amano et al., 2010; Mason et al.,
2016; Nakamura et al., 2017). In order to assess whether Rok planar polarisation is
caused by planar polarisation of these upstream activators, we examined the
localisation of an sfGFP tagged version of RhoGEF2 (Sarov et al., 2016) and the
GFP tagged Rho-binding domain of Anillin (AniRBD-GFP), a reporter for activated
GTP-bound Rho (Munjal et al., 2015). Neither RhoGEF2-sfGFP nor AniRBD-GFP
showed any apical planar polarisation within the boundary cells of the salivary gland
placode (Fig. 4 G-I). Thus, Rok planar polarisation is not driven by an upstream
polarisation of active Rho.
Taken together, these data suggest that, although Rho-binding was important
for Rok membrane recruitment, once at the membrane Rok planar polarisation is

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

regulated by a Rho-independent mechanism involving the Rok C-terminal membrane
association region.
Phosphorylation of the Rok C-terminal region by Pak1 regulates Rok
membrane association
Alternatively, regulation of Rok membrane association could be achieved via
modulation of Rok’s binding to Rho or to phospholipids, for instance through
phosphorylation in the vicinity of Rok’s RBD or PH domain. Phosphorylation near
phospholipid-interacting sequences in several Par-complex substrates has recently
been suggested to inhibit their membrane binding (Bailey and Prehoda, 2015). We
had previously suggested that Crumbs could negatively regulate Rok through one of
its downstream interactors, aPKC (Fig. 5A; (Röper, 2012)), which binds to the
Crumbs intracellular domain through its binding partner Par6 (Bulgakova and Knust,
2009). Previous data from mammalian tissue culture cells revealed that in this in vitro
system aPKC could phosphorylate human ROCK1, one of the two mammalian Rhokinases, near the RBD and PH-domains and a phospho-mimetic version of ROCK1
showed loss of plasma membrane association (Ishiuchi and Takeichi, 2011).
Furthermore, the p21-activated kinase 1 (Pak1), which is activated by the Par6
binding protein Cdc42, has recently been shown to act semi-redundantly with aPKC
to phosphorylate shared target proteins (Fig. 5A; (Aguilar-Aragon et al., 2018;
Bokoch, 2003)). Importantly, several putative phosphorylation sites for both Pak1 and
aPKC are highly conserved between Drosophila and mammalian Rho kinases (Blom
et al., 1999; Blom et al., 2004; Rennefahrt et al., 2007); Fig. 5B, Suppl. Fig.3). We
therefore set out to examine whether aPKC and/or Pak1 contributed to a regulation
of Rok membrane association.
To examine the role of aPKC and Pak1 in Rok membrane localisation, we
used the GAL4/UAS system to overexpress membrane targeted versions of aPKC or
Pak1 in engrailed stripes in embryos with endogenously tagged mNG-Rok. While
overexpression of UAS-aPKC[CAAX] did not significantly affect mNG-Rok membrane
localisation in the embryonic epithelium in comparison to control cells (Fig. 5C-C’’),
overexpression of UAS-Pak1[myr] strongly decreased mNG-Rok membrane
localisation (Fig. 5D-D’’).
Mass Spectrometric analysis of mammalian EpH4 tissue culture cell lysates
performed by (Ishiuchi and Takeichi, 2011) identified nine phosphorylated sites in
human ROCK1 in these cells, four of which are conserved in Drosophila Rok.
Strikingly, all four sites are located in the Rok C-terminal region, close to the RBD
and PH domains (Fig. 5B and Suppl. Fig.3). Furthermore, all are recognised as
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

putative phosphorylation substrates for Pak1 and aPKC (Fig. 5B; Suppl Fig. 3). We
designed three short peptides covering these putative sites and performed in vitro
kinase assays with the purified kinase domains of human Pak1 and human PKCi,
using a small Bazooka peptide (BazS980) as a positive control (Fig. 5E). Both Pak1
and aPKC kinase domains strongly phosphorylated the control Bazooka peptide, but
no aPKC phosphorylation of any of the Rok peptides was detected. By contrast,
Pak1 strongly phosphorylated Rok peptide 2 (Rok Pep2), containing serine S1365
and threonines T1366 and T1369, which are all located close to the C-terminal end
of the PH domain (Fig. 5B, E). This phosphorylation was completely abolished in a
peptide that had these three residues, S1365, T1366 and T1369, mutated to alanine
(Fig. 5E; Rok pep2AAA).
Altogether these data suggest that Pak1 negatively regulates Rok membrane
accumulation by phosphorylating its C-terminal region.
Pak1 regulates Rok planar polarisation downstream of Crb/Cdc42
Although zygotic loss of Pak1 is lethal, maternal contribution allows embryos to
develop normally as far as early stage 11, making it possible to investigate Pak1’s
role during salivary gland placode morphogenesis. Interestingly, Pak1 zygotic loss of
function has been shown to induce defects in embryonic dorsal closure as well as in
the late embryonic salivary glands (Bahri et al., 2010; Conder et al., 2007; Pirraglia et
al., 2010)). In early stage 11 pak114 zygotic mutant embryos, Pak1 was still
detectable in the epithelium and early salivary placodes were not affected. However,
in later placodes at stage 12 mNG-Rok planar polarisation at the salivary gland
boundary was strongly reduced and the overall organisation of the placode was
affected (Fig. 6A-B’). Moreover, UAS-Pak1[myr] overexpression in the salivary
placode using fkh-Gal4 (Henderson and Andrew, 2000) completely abolished mNGRok planar polarisation at the boundary (Fig. 6C and E) and also induced strong
defects at the tissue boundary, most obvious at later stages when the placode
seemed to pull away from the surrounding embryonic epithelium (Fig. 6D). These
results show that Pak1 plays a crucial role in salivary gland morphogenesis by
regulating Rok membrane localisation and planar polarisation.
To understand how Crumbs might affect Pak1 to control Rok planar
polarisation, we examined Pak1 protein localisation in the embryonic epidermis. Like
Crumbs protein, Pak1 was localised apically and was enriched in the salivary
placode (Fig. 6F-F’). Pak1 function depends on its activation by the small GTPase
Cdc42 (Bokoch, 2003). An mCherry-Cdc42 reporter expressed under the control of
the sqh promoter localised apically in the embryonic epithelium and showed
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

anisotropic distribution at the salivary gland placode boundary similar to Crumbs (Fig.
6G-G’’). Ectopic Crumbs expressed in en-Gal4 stripes also recruited this Cdc42reporter to ectopic locations (Fig. 6H-H’’). In order to confirm that Cdc42 activated
Pak1 in the embryonic epidermis we examined the localisation of Pak1 in cells
expressing constitutively active Cdc42V12 (Welch et al., 1998). In stripes of cells
expressing Cdc42V12 Pak1 localisation to junctions was strongly enhanced (Fig.6I-I’’).
Thus, the negative regulatory effect of Crumbs on Rok is likely mediated by
Pak1, recruited and activated by Crumbs-bound Cdc42.
Phosphorylation of Rok contributes to its planar polarisation in vivo
To confirm that phosphorylation of Rok by Pak1 or aPKC played a role in its planar
polarisation in vivo, we used the previously generated mNG-Rok strain to mutate the
four conserved putative phosphorylation sites described above, as well as eight
serines and threonines in close proximity (Fig. 5B, asterisks) using CRISPR/Cas9
and homologous recombination repair (Fig. 7A).
Although flies carrying this mNG-tagged phospho-site-mutant Rok (mNGRok[Pmut]; Fig. 7 B vs C) were homozygous viable, a two-fold increase in embryonic
lethality (12.1% of fertilised embryos) was observed in comparison to the parental
mNG-Rok strain (5.9% of fertilised embryos) (Fig. 7D).There was no increased
lethality at later developmental stages. We analysed planar polarisation of mNGRok[Pmut] in comparison to mNG-Rok by quantifying fluorescence intensity ratio
between boundary/outside membranes and boundary/boundary membranes in cells
that showed a clear Crumbs anisotropy (Fig. 7 E-G). Whereas, in agreement with
quantifications shown in Fig. 6E, mNG-Rok showed a clear polarisation at the
boundary, with a mean ratio of 1.317, mNG-Rok[Pmut] was on average not
polarised, with a mean ratio of 0.935 (Fig. 7G). This suggests that phosphorylation of
these consensus aPKC/Pak1 sites contributes to Rok planar polarisation.
We could not detect any phenotype in tissue bending and salivary gland
placode invagination at early stages, i.e. stages 11-12, in the phospho-mutant Rok
embryos, but could detect a fraction of embryos beyond stage 13 (23.3% in mNGRok[Pmut] compared to 0.0% in the mNG-Rok control) that showed a striking
phenotype: we observed a disruption and altered cell shapes within the epidermis at
the positions where the salivary gland placodes were located (Fig. 7H-J).The rest of
the epidermis appeared largely unaffected. At this stage in control embryos, the
circumferential actomyosin cable at the placode boundary was strongly highlighted
when stained with phalloidin to label F-actin (Fig. 7 H,H’’; (Röper, 2012)). By
contrast, we did not detect any accumulation of F-actin at comparable junctions in
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the mNG-Rok[P[mut] where the cable would be positioned in the wild-type (Fig. 7
I,I’’). Matching the phalloidin distribution, the mNG-Rok[Pmut] was still localised to
junctions in the placode area but there was no accumulation suggesting cable
localisation at this stage (Fig. 7 I’).
Thus, in agreement with the loss of Rok planar polarisation in the pak114
mutant, blocking phosphorylation of the Rok C-terminal domain by Pak1 through
mutation of the consensus sites affected Rok’s ability to be planar polarised.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Discussion
The prepatterning of tissues to prime and prepare them for subsequent
morphogenetic changes in development is key to successful organ morphogenesis.
This is initially controlled at the transcriptional level through morphogenetic networks
of transcription factors that drive primordium specification. How such patterning is
then transformed into the specific activation and placement of morphogenetic effector
proteins that impinge on cell shape and cell behaviour is much less understood.
In epithelial cells, junctional proteins as well as morphogenetically active
pools of actomyosin are concentrated within the apical and apico-lateral region of the
cells. This placement is controlled by the epithelial polarity network (Tepass, 2012).
Patterning of cytoskeletal activity and junctional changes, key ingredients of
morphogenetic changes in epithelial tissues, then takes place within this apical
domain. This can lead to apical planar polarisation of whole tissues or smaller
domains or rows of cells that are morphogenetically active, as for instance is the
case at the boundary of the salivary gland placode. In this case, the apical polarity
determinant Crumbs plays a dual role, firstly in maintaining apical-basal polarity of
epidermal cells including the salivary gland placode, and secondly in patterning
cytoskeletal behaviour within the apical domain. Crumbs levels, in fact, show
dynamic variations across much of the Drosophila embryonic epidermis until stage
14, and as described here, step changes in Crumbs levels tend to be accompanied
by actomyosin accumulation at these boundaries (Röper, 2013).
Rok as the key morphogenetic activator of non-muscle myosin II is crucial to
development in many animals. Thus, regulation and activity of Rok in cells is closely
controlled. Historic views of Rok activation assumed a potential fold-back mechanism
whereby the known regulatory activity of Rok’s C-terminus would contact the Nterminal kinase domain and block its activity (Amano et al., 1999; Julian and Olson,
2014). An alternative view is supported by recent evidence and suggests that the Cterminal domain is crucial for membrane interaction and that Rok is in fact always
found as a homodimer in an extended conformation (Truebestein et al., 2015;
Truebestein et al., 2016). Such an extended conformation and role of the C-terminus
in membrane binding is in agreement with our in vivo findings that phosphoregulation of this domain is critical for membrane localisation.
aPKC and Pak1 are both important kinases with a multitude of roles in
development and tissue homeostasis (Hong, 2018; Rane and Minden, 2014). Their
overlapping function though has only been appreciated recently (Aguilar-Aragon et
al., 2018). We originally favoured a role for aPKC in mediating the Crumbs regulatory
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

effect on Rok at the salivary gland placode boundary, in particular as aPKC
localisation closely mimics Crumbs localisation in the fly embryonic epidermis.
Without the ability to visualise endogenous Rok, any previous interpretation of effects
of aPKC on Rok were indirect, and overexpression constructs of Rok appear to not
completely copy endogenous Rok behaviour. But why ‘charge’ the Crumbs
intracellular domain with two kinases with highly overlapping targets? The fact that
Pak1 depends on Cdc42 for its activation might add another layer of control and
allow differential kinase usage or amplification of kinase activity depending on the
tissue context.
The differential expression of Crumbs between salivary gland placode and
surrounding epidermis, or epidermis and amnioserosa, demarcates clear boundaries.
These boundaries at the plasma membrane level can then be turned into cytoskeletal
planar polarisation, leading to physical boundaries due to for instance increased
tension at these boundaries. Crumbs is not the only homophilic interactor that can
exert such effects. Recent examples include E- and N-Cadherin patterning during
eye morphogenesis in the fly (Chan et al., 2017), as well as tissue-specific
expression of a Cadherin, Cad2, selectively in the neural cells in Ciona robusta,
thereby patterning myosin activity at the neural/epidermal boundary where there is a
step change in Cad2 expression (Hashimoto and Munro, 2018). Interestingly, in
Ciona Cad2 is also titrated away from the tissue boundary due to homophilic
interactions and also exerts a negative regulatory effect on myosin II accumulation.
In this context though, and in contrast to the salivary gland placode boundary, it is
RhoA activity that is polarised and increased at the tissue boundary, due to a
selective recruitment of a RhoGAP by Cad2 (Hashimoto and Munro, 2018). Thus,
although common principles in patterning tissue boundaries and patterning of
cytoskeletal activity are repeatedly used in development, the fine molecular details
vary depending on the tissue context.
We identified a mechanism that allows for a negative effect on Rok and
myosin accumulation at membranes only when a pre-existing molecular anisotropy of
an upstream factor is detected, thereby circumventing an on/off negative regulatory
interaction. In the Ciona example above, Cad2 levels are high in constricting neural
cells that internalise into the embryo, very reminiscent of the situation in the salivary
gland placode. Thus, the effect of Cad2 on myosin is not absolute here either. We
suspect that such a mechanism of modulation of membrane residence time via
affecting the koff might be widely employed during tissue morphogenesis, as it allows
for fine-tuning of cytoskeletal activity being integrated with other essential cell
biological functions of the upstream regulators. In the case of Crumbs, its crucial role
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in maintaining apical-basal polarity and thereby epithelial integrity can be combined
with its planar tissue patterning role.
In summary, this example of planar patterning in a morphogenetic process
illustrates that the study of such processes needs to take the dynamic behaviour of
components into account. The current exciting advances in light microscopy, live
imaging and image quantification will be of crucial help to facilitate and transform
such analyses in live tissues during development.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following people; for reagents and fly stocks:
Debbie Andrew, Jennifer Zallen, Tony Harris, Nicholas Harden, Barry Thompson,
Norbert Perrimon.
Work in the Röper lab is supported by the Medical Research Council (file reference
number U105178780).

Author contribution
Conceptualisation, K.R. and C.S.; Methodology, K.R., C.S. J.B., T.S.; Software, J.B.,
T.S.; Investigation, K.R., C.S.; Resources, C.S., L.J.; Writing-Original Draft, K.R.,
C.S.; Funding Acquisition, K.R.

Declaration of Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure and Figure legends
Figure 1. Wide-spread apical planar polarisation of Crumbs and Rho-kinase
during morphogenesis.
A The salivary gland develops from an epithelial placode on the ventral side of the
embryo. Cells become specified at late stage 10/early stage 11 (top panels) and by
stage 12 most secretory cells have invaginated to form a tube inside the embryo
(bottom panels). A’ The salivary gland placode boundary shows a strong enrichment
of myosin II (Zipper-YFP, green) into a supracellular cable, complementary to
anisotropic enrichment of Crumbs (Crumbs-GFP, magenta) in the placodal boundary
cells (Röper, 2012); stills of a time lapse movie of matching stages to schematics in
A. B Genomic locus of Drosophila melanogaster Rho-kinase (Rok), indicating exon
usage in splice variants and the position of the mNeonGreen (mNG) tag inserted at
the N-terminus using CRISPR/Cas9. C-H mNG-Rok enrichment (green) matching
myosin II enrichment and complementary to Crumbs anisotropic localisation
(magenta) is found at many epithelial boundaries: the embryonic salivary gland
placode (C-C’’), the embryonic boundary of the posterior spiracle placode (D-D’’),
the embryonic spiracular hair precursors (E-E’), the embryonic ventral midline (F-F’’),
the leading edge during embryonic dorsal closure (G-G’’) as well as the boundaries
of specified photoreceptor clusters during larval eye disc morphogenesis (H-I’’). The
boxes in D, H indicate magnifications in E-E’’ and I-I’’, respectivley. Arrowheads
point to the boundaries in Crumbs levels that shows strong mNG-Rok accumulation.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Rho-kinase planar polarisation at the boundary of the salivary gland
placode.
A-A’’ Crumbs is highly enriched in the salivary gland placode and reduced in levels
in the surrounding epidermal cells (A, magenta), leading to its strong anisotropic
localisation in boundary cells due to homophilic interactions (white arrows in A-A’’).
mNG-Rok is enriched complementary to Crumbs in boundary cells, but also strongly
enriched isotropically in junctions in the inner cells of the placode (A’, green). B-B’’
Introduction of a new boundary of Crumbs protein levels within the salivary gland
placode using en-Gal4 driven expression of UAS-Crumbs (B, magenta, levels are
adjusted to avoid oversturation in the overexpression stripe) leads to accumulation of
mNG-Rok at the new boundary (B’, green), complementary to anisotropic Crumbs at
the new boundary. See also Supplemental Figure 1. C The anisotropic and
complementary localisation of Crumbs and mNG-Rok shows a ‘boundary effect’, in
that the negative regulatory effect that Crumbs exerts on Rok localisation is only
apparent in cells that show Crumbs anisotropy (boundary cell), whereas isotropic
Crumbs accumulation in the centre of the placode (inner cells) does not prevent high
levels of junctional Rok accumulation. D A dynamic model of modulation of Rok
residence time at the membrane, depending on local levels of Crumbs, could explain
planar polarisation of Rok in cells showing Crumbs anisotropy whilst preserving
isotropic Rok localisation in cells with isotropic Crumbs. Asterisks indicate the
invagination point.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 1, related to Figure 2. Crumbs membrane localisation
locally affects Rok membrane localisation.
Overexpression of Crumbs in stripes, using en-Gal4 x UAS-Crumbs, within the
epidermis leads to spreading of Crumbs (magenta In A-C) to more basal position
along the lateral plasma membrane. This in turn leads to a basal displacement of
Rok (green) along the lateral side, visible through higher mNG-Rok membrane levels
at a sub-apical position (B’) and loss of it at the apical-most lateral position (A’).

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. FRAP analysis and in silico simulation of Rok dynamics at the
placode boundary versus inside the placode.
A Schematic of the placode indicating the boundary with low levels of Crumbs (blue)
as well as inner placodal cells with isotropically high levels of Crumbs (orange) where
FRAP analysis was performed. The invagination point (asterisk) and ventral midline
position are indicated. B, B’ Examples of boundary (B) and inner (B’) cell junctions of
mNG-Rok embryos during FRAP analysis, arrows indicate the positions of the
bleached regions (bleach at t=0). C, D Recovery curves fitted to data of FRAP
experiments for boundary junctions (red; n=26) and inner cell junctions (blue;
n=17)(C). koff values were estimated from the fluorescence recovery for the boundary
as 0.106 (+/- 0.008) and for the inner placodal cells as 0.145 (+/- 0.010) (C) and
found to be significantly different using a bootstrap procedure (D), with the p-value
determined as 0.00249 (**). Data represented are bootstrap sample, median and
quartiles. E We modelled the Rok planar polarisation in silico using particle based
stochastic reaction-diffusion (see Materials and Methods for details). F A group of
cells representing boundary and inner placodal cells are modelled, imposing different
koff values for the boundary with low Crumbs levels (region 2, blue) and a higher koff
for membrane with high levels of Crumbs (region 1 for placodal cell, orange). G
Examples of steady state outputs of the simulation, with simulation 1 depicting no
difference in koff, simulation 2 assuming a 5-fold difference in koff, and simulation 3
using the koff values determined by FRAP as input. See also Supplemental Figure 2.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 2, related to Figure 3. FRAP analysis and in silico
simulation of Rok dynamics at the placode boundary versus inside the
placode.
A Membrane versus cytoplasm enrichment of mNG-Rok in inner placodal cells and
surrounding epidermal cells. Data are represented as data points, mean and SEM. B
Mobile fraction of mNG-Rok at placode inner membranes (blue; value is 0.56) or the
boundary (red; value is 0.63), data points, mean and spread are shown. C Outputs of
in silico simulations as in Fig. 3G, comparing the same combinations of koff values
paired with different kon values (0.1; 0.2; 0.3). Color code for particle enrichment at
junctions as in Fig. 3G, numbers on representative junctions are the particle numbers
derived from simulations.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Rok’s RBD and PH domain are required for its planar polarisation and
placode enrichment.
A Schematic of Rok protein domains: N-terminal kinase domain followed by a coiledcoil domain, a Shroom-binding domain (SBD), a Rho-binding domain (RBD) and a Cterminal PH-domain. B-F’ Expression of variations of a Venus-tagged and kinasedead localisation reporter of Rok (Venus-Rok[K116A]) throughout the embryo using
Da-Gal4: B, B’ full-length Venus-Rok[K116A] looks similar to endogenously tagged
mNG-Rok and shows anisotropic enrichment at the boundary (F’), though note that
its accumulation at certain sites such as in the apical-medial region is enhanced,
likely due to the overexpression. C, C’ Rok lacking the coiled coil and SBD (Rok
∆CC-SBD) is less polarised at the boundary but retains some anisotropy (F’) and
also shows some apical-medial aggregation. D,D’ Rok lacking the RBD (Rok ∆RBD)
is still localised to cell junctions but not enriched in the placode and shows no
polarisation at the boundary (F’). E,E’ Rok lacking the PH domain (Rok ∆PH) is still
localised to cell junctions but not enriched in the placode and shows no polarisation
at the boundary (F’). F,F’ Polarisation quantification expressed as the intensity ratio
of boundary junction versus side junctions (F). F’ Mean values are:
Rok[K116A]=1.86; Rok ∆CC-SBD=1.433; Rok ∆RBD=1.005; Rok ∆PH=1.701. Data
are represented as data points, mean and SEM. Statistical tests used were unpaired
t-test, p values are indicated with ** being <0.005, *** being <0.0005, ****<0.0001, ns
being not significant. G-I Neither RhoGEF2 (G-G’’; visualised using sfGFPRhoGEF2) nor active Rho (H-H’’; visualised using EGFP-AniRBD) are polarised at
the placode boundary (I). I Polarisation quantification expressed as the intensity ratio
of boundary junction versus side junction. Data are represented as data points, mean
and SEM. Mean values are: sfGFP-RhoGEF2=0.9267; EGFP-AniRBD=0.8862.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Pak1 can phosphorylate Rok and induce its dissociation from the
membrane.
A Crumbs’ intracellular tail can interact with two kinases with highly overlapping
phosphorylation targets: aPKC and Pak1. B Both aPKC and Pak1 have many
overlapping predicted phosphorylation sites in Rok, in particular near the C-terminal
RBD and PH domains. Residues marked in red and named above the sequence are
conserved between Dm Rok and Hs ROCK1 and are phosphorylated in human EpH4
cells (Ishiuchi and Takeichi, 2011). Residues marked by asterisks were mutated in
mNG-Rok[Pmut], see Fig.7. We propose that phosphorylation of Rok by either or
both kinases could promote its dissociation from the plasma membrane. See also
Supplemental Figure 3. C-C’ Overexpression in stripes of a membrane-targeted
version of aPKC (magenta in C; using en-Gal4 UAS-aPKC[CAAX]) does not affect
membrane localisation of mNG-Rok (green) in the overexpressing stripes, as
quantified in C’’. Data are represented as data points, mean and SEM. Unpaired ttest was used to determine statistical significance, p value is 0.278 (ns). D-D’’
Overexpression in stripes of a membrane-targeted version of Pak1 (red marks
overexpression stripe in D; using en-Gal4 x UAS-mCherry, UAS-Pak1[myr]) leads to
loss of mNG-Rok (green) from the membrane in the overexpressing stripes, as
quantified in D’’. Data are represented as data points, mean and SEM. Unpaired ttest was used to determine statistical significance, p value is <0.0001 (****). E Using
purified kinase domains of either aPKC or Pak1 and short peptide substrates of Rok
(indicated in B) in an in vitro kinase assay, we can detect phosphorylation of Rok
peptide 2 (Rok pep2), that is located near the PH domain, by Pak1, but no
phosphorylation of any Rok peptide tested by aPKC. Both kinase domains
phosphorylate a known substrate peptide from Bazooka (BazS980). Data show fold
enrichment of radioactive P[33]-phosphate counts over ‘no substrate’ control, data
points, mean and SEM are shown. Rok pep2AAA is identical to the Rok pep2
peptide, with three potential phosphorylation sites mutated to alanine, S1365A,
T1366A, T1369A.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Figure 3, related to Figure 5. Analysis of predicted aPKC and
Pak1 phosphorylation sites in Dm Rok.
We used published predictive algorithms to identify potential aPKC and Pak1
phosphorylation sites in Dm Rok. Residues marked in yellow are predicted Pak1
sites (using DISPHOS) with a score >0.8, grey residues are predicted Pak1 sites
(using DISPHOS) with a score between 0.6 and 0.8. Blue marks residues as
predicted aPKC target sites (using NetPhos3.1). Green residues are predicted target
sites for both aPKC and Pak1. Bold, underlined residues mark the RBD and PH
domain. Conserved residues between human ROCK1 and Dm Rok that were found
to be phosphorylated in EpH4 cells are shown in red and underlined (Ishiuchi and
Takeichi, 2011).

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Pak1 acts downstream of Crumbs/Cdc42 and controls Rok planar
polarisation and cable formation at the placode boundary.
A-B’’ In contrast to the wild-type (A-A’’) where Pak1 is enriched in the placode (A’)
and mNG-Rok strongly accumulates at the placode boundary (A), in pak114 zygotic
mutants Pak1 antibody labelling is strongly reduced (B’) and mNG-Rok is not
polarised to the placode boundary (B, quantification in E). C-D’’ Overexpression of
the membrane-targeted form of Pak1, using UAS-Pak1[myr], in the salivary gland
placode alone using fkh-Gal4 leads to a disorganised placode at stage 11 (C’’) and
loss of mNG-Rok polarisation (C, and quantification in E). At late stage12, many
UAS-Pak1[myr] x fkhGal4 placodes show a disruption that suggests a ripping of cells
at the placode boundary (D’’). mNG-Rok remains at remnant cell boundaries (D). C’
and D’ show the increased levels of overexpressed membrane-localised Pak1 by
antibody staining. E Polarisation quantification expressed as the intensity ratio of
boundary junction versus side junction. Data are represented as data points, mean
and SEM. Mean values are: mNG-Rok control=1.304; mNG-Rok in pak114=0.99;
mNG-Rok fkh-Gal4 UAS-Pak1[myr]=1.006. Statistical tests used were unpaired ttest, p values are indicated with **** being <0.0001. Dotted lines indicate the placode
boundary and asterisks the invagination point.
F-F’’ Pak1 (F’ and magenta in F’’; revealed by anti-Pak1 antibody) is enriched in the
salivary gland placode compared to the surrounding epidermis. Crumbs is shown in
F and green in F’’. G-G’’ Cdc42-mCherry localisation (G’ and magenta in G’’) follows
endogenous Crumbs anisotropic localisation (G and green in G’’) at the placode
boundary (arrows). Polarisation quantification of mCherry-Cdc42 and Crumbs in
corresponding cells expressed as the intensity ratio of boundary junction versus side
junction (J). Mean values are: mCherry-Cdc42: 0.906; Crumbs: 0.714. Data are
represented as data points, mean and SEM. H-H’’ Overexpression of Crumbs (H and
green in H’’) in enGal4 stripes leads to ectopic recruitment of mCherry-Cdc42 (H’
and magenta in H’’) to sites of ectopic Crumbs, again following the anisotropy
(arrows). I-I’’ Overexpression of a constitutively active form of Cdc42, Cdc42V12, in
enGal4 stripes leads to a strongly increased membrane association of Pak1
(magenta in I and single channel in I’) in the overexpressing stripes. Membranes are
labelled with phalloidin to reveal F-actin (green in I and single channel in I’’). I’ and I’’
are magnifications of the box indicated in J. Dotted lines indicate the boundary of the
placode and asterisks mark the invagination point.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. A phospho-mutant Rok shows reduced planar polarisation at the
boundary.
A Schematic of the potential target sites for aPKC or Pak1 phosphorylation that are
mutated in the phospho-mutant Rok. B,C Localisation comparison between mNGRok (B) and phospho-mutant Rok (mNG-Rok[Pmut], C). Arrows point to the position
of the boundary, the asterisks mark the invagination point. D Flies homozygous for
phospho-mutant Rok are semi-viable, with 12.1% of embryos not hatching compared
to 5.9% in the corresponding mNG-Rok control. E-G Compared to the mNG-Rok
control (green in E, and E’’’) that shows polarisation at the boundary marked by
Crumbs (magenta in E ,and E’, E’’), mNG-Rok[Pmut] (green in F, and F’’’) shows a
loss of polarisation at the boundary marked by Crumbs (magenta in F, and F’, F’’).
G Polarisation quantification expressed as the intensity ratio of boundary junction
versus side junction. Data are represented as data points, mean and SEM. Mean
values are: mNG-Rok ctrl: 1.317; mNG-Rok[Pmut]: 0.935. Unpaired t-test was used
to compare samples, p value is indicated. H-J At stage 13 phospho-mutant Rok
embryos show a strong disruption of the placodal boundary in 23.3% of embryos
(compared to 0.0% in the control), Rok is in green in H, I and single in H’, I’, with
phalloidin to label cell outlines in magenta in H, I and single in H’’, I’’. J Quantification
of stage 13 gland phenotype prevalence. Arrowheads in H, I point to the pharyngeal
ridges and identify embryos as stage 13, arrows in H point to the planar polarised
mNG-Rok control at the boundary.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Movie 1. Dynamics of Crumbs and Myosin at the salivary gland
placode boundary.
Time-lapse movie of an embryo with endogenously tagged Crumbs (green, CrumbsGFP) and endogenously tagged Myosin II heavy chain (magenta, Zipper-YFP).
Frames are 3 min apart.
Supplemental Movie 2. Example of FRAP at a salivary gland placode boundary
junction.
Time-lapse movie of an embryo with endogenously tagged Rok (mNG-Rok), showing
a bleach and recovery at the boundary of the placode, quantification in Figure 3.
Supplemental Movie 3. Example of FRAP at a salivary gland inner cell junction.
Time-lapse movie of an embryo with endogenously tagged Rok (mNG-Rok), showing
a bleach and recovery at a junction of an inner placodal cell, quantification in Figure
3.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods
Fly stocks
The following transgenic fly lines were used: sqhAX3; sqh::sqhGFP42 (Royou et al.,
2004), Daughterless-Gal4 and enGal4 (Bloomington Stock Centre); fkhGal4
(Henderson and Andrew, 2000; Zhou et al., 2001) [kin (Sivasankar et al., 2009)d gift
of Debbie Andrew]; Crb-GFP (Huang et al., 2008); Zip-YFP (Lowe et al., 2014); UASCrb (Wodarz et al., 1995); UAS-Venus-Rok[K116A], UAS-Venus-Rok[K116A]∆RBD,
UAS-Venus-Rok[K116A] ∆CC-SBD; UAS-Venus-Rok[K116A]∆PH (Simoes Sde et
al., 2014); Ubi-EGFP-AnillinRBD (Munjal et al., 2015); sfGFP-RhoGEF2 (Sarov et al.,
2016); UAS-aPKC[CAAX] (Sotillos et al., 2004); UAS-Pak1[myr]; UAS-Cdc42[V12];
sqh::Cdc42-mCherry (Bloomington Stock Centre); pak1[14] (gift from B.Thompson);
y[1] sc[1] v[1]; [y[+t7.7] v[+t1.8]=nanos-Cas9]attp2 (gift from N. Perrimon).
Generation of transgenic fly lines
To generate Drosophila rok transgenic lines, donor (150 ng/µl) and guide RNA (100
ng/µl) plasmids were injected in pools (Bischof et al., 2013) into nanos::Cas9
(chromosome 3) embryos for the endogenous tagging, or into mNG-Rok ;
nanos::Cas9 embryos for the generation of the phospho-site mutant.
Fluorescent tagging of endogenous Rok via homology directed repair using CRISPRCas9
Two gRNAs targeting loci near the start codon of the Rho kinase gene were cloned
into pCFD3 vector (Addgene 49410) following the protocol from (Port et al., 2014). A
step by step protocol is available at (www.crisprflydesign.org).
Sequences of the guide RNAs were as follows:
gRNA 1: GACCAACAGGAAGCAGCAGCTGG
gRNA2: GCGCCGGTGAGTGCACGAGATGG
PCR primers for cloning into pCFD3:
P56F: 5’-GTCGACCAACAGGAAGCAGCAGC-3’
P56R: 5’-AAACGCTGCTGCTTCCTGTTGGT-3’
P57F: 5’-GTCGCGCCGGTGAGTGCACGAGA-3’
P57R: 5’-AAACTCTCGTGCACTCACCGGCG-3’
A donor construct containing the mNeonGreen sequence in fusion with the rok gene
in its genomic region was cloned into pBluescript SK(+) using Gibson assembly.
mNeonGreen was cloned between two 1kb-long homology sequences corresponding

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

to the genomic sequence on either side of the insertion site, to create homology arms
for directed repair.The 1 kb regions were amplified by PCR on each side of the
desired insertion site from genomic DNA. The mNeonGreen gene (Shaner et al.,
2013), was amplified by PCR from the mNeonGreen vector (Allele Biotechnology),
with the exclusion of the stop codon and the addition of a C-terminal linker.
Primers were designed with additional 5’ sequences (underlined below) to allow triple
ligation of the three PCR products into a pBluescript SK(+) vector using the Gibson
Assembly Master Mix (NEB). PAM sites were mutagenized (indicated in bold below)
to prevent re-cutting by Cas9 after transgenesis.
Primer sequences:
Left homology arm PCR primers:
P51F: 5’GACGGTATCGATAAGCTTGATATCGGCGCAGCGTCTAATTGAAAC-3’
P51R: 5’GCTGATACTGCTGCTaCAGCTGCTGC-3’
Right homology arm PCR primers:
5’TGCCAGCTGGACGAGAAACTGTGACCAAGCAGCGCAGCATGGATGTGGAACG
AAGGCGCCGgtgagtgcacgagatgtcggcccaaaagc
mNeonGreen PCR primers:
P54F:
5’GGAAGCAGCAGCTGtAGCAGCAGTATCAGCTTGTTATCTTGCATTTGCATGGT
GAGCAAGGGCGAGGAG-3’
P54R:
5’GCTTGGTCACAGTTTCTCGTCCAGCTGGCATGCCGGATCCGCCGCCCGATCC
GCCGCCGGATCCGCCCTTGTAAAGTTCATCCATCCCC-3’
Modifications were verified by sequencing of genomic DNA.
Mutagenesis of putative P-sites in endogenous mNG-rok via homology directed
repair using CRISPR-Cas9
Guide RNAs:
Four gRNAs targeting loci on both sides of the C-terminal region of Rok containing
the putative phosphorylation sites to be mutated were cloned into pCFD3 vector
(Addgene 49410) following the protocol from (Port et al., 2014).
Sequences: LJ20, LJ21, LJ22, LJ23
Donor plasmid:
A donor construct containing, between two 1kb-long homology arms, a Rok C-term
region mutagenized on 13 selected putative phosphorylation sites, was cloned into
pBluescript SK(+). The Rok C-term region was amplified by PCR and cloned into

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pBluescript SK(+)with primers designed to mutagenise the selected 13 putative
phosphorylation sites (Fig. 5B) and the 4 PAM sites.
Modifications were verified by sequencing of genomic DNA.
Embryo Immunofluorescence Labelling, Confocal, and Time-lapse imaging
Embryos were collected on apple juice-agar plates and processed for
immunofluorescence using standard procedures. Briefly, embryos were
dechorionated in 50% bleach, fixed in 10% EM-grade formaldehyde, and stained with
primary and secondary antibodies in PBT (PBS plus 0.5% bovine serum albumin and
0.3% Triton X-100). anti-Crumbs and anti-E-Cadherin antibodies were obtained from
the Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank at the University of Iowa (DSHB); antiPak1 (Harden et al., 1996); anti-aPKC (Santa Cruz); rhodamine-coupled phalloidin
(Molecular Probes). Secondary antibodies used were Alexa Fluor 488/Fluor
549/Fluor 649 coupled (Molecular Probes) and Cy3 and Cy5 coupled (Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratories). Samples were embedded in Vectashield
(Vectorlabs).
Images of fixed samples were acquired on an Olympus FluoView 1200 or a Zeiss
780 Confocal Laser scanning system as z-stacks to cover the whole apical surface of
cells in the placode. Z-stack projections were assembled in ImageJ or Imaris
(Bitplane), 3D rendering was performed in Imaris.
For live time-lapse experiments embryos of the genotype Crumbs-GFP
Zipper-YFP or mNG-Rok were dechorionated in 50% bleach and extensively rinsed
in water. Embryos were manually aligned and attached to heptane-glue coated
coverslips and mounted on custom-made metal slides; embryos were covered using
halocarbon oil 27 (Sigma) and viability after imaging after 24h was controlled prior to
further data analysis. Time-lapse sequences were imaged under a 40x/1.3NA oil
objective on an inverted Zeiss 780 Laser scanning system. Z-stack projections to
generate movies in Supplementary Material were assembled in ImageJ.
Quantification of boundary polarisation and membrane versus cytoplasm
enrichment
Fluorescence intensity was determined in ImageJ using projections covering the
apical junctional region (as determined by Crumbs or E-Cadherin staining). Using
Crumbs labeling of placodes, boundary cells showing clear Crumbs anisotropy were
identified and quantified. 3- to 5-pixel-wide lines to cover the width of junctions
(depending on the resolution of the image) were drawn at the boundary and at the
sides of the boundary cells (see Fig. 4F). The intensity was divided by the area
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

covered for each junction to determine the intensity/pixel. Values for the boundary
junction were divided by the values of the side junctions to determine two polarisaiton
values per boundary cell.
Membrane versus cytoplasm enrichment was determined in ImageJ using
projections covering the apical junctional region (as determined by Crumbs or ECadherin staining). 3- to 5-pixel-wide lines to cover the width of junctions (depending
on the resolution of the image) were drawn at a cell junction and a comparable line
was drawn across the apical cytoplasm. The intensity of each line was divided by the
area covered to determine the intensity/pixel. Values for the cell junction were
divided by the values of the cytoplasm to determine the membrane versus cytoplasm
enrichment.
N values for quantifications are as follows: Figure 4F’: UAS-Rok[K116A]: 4 placodes
(3 embryos), 15 cells (29 polarisation values); UAS-Rok[K116A]∆CC-SBD: 6
placodes (3 embryos), 18 cells (36 pol. values); UAS-Rok[K116A]∆RBD: 5 placodes
(3 embryos), 16 cells (32 pol. values); UAS-Rok[K116A]∆PH: 6 placodes (3
embryos), 16 cells (32 pol. values)/ Figure 4I: Ubi-EGFP-AniRBD: 4 placodes (3
embryos), 15 cells (30 pol. values); RhoGEF2 sfGFP: 3 placodes (3 embryos), 17
cells (34 pol. values)/ Figure 5C’’:UAS-aPKC[CAAX]: 3 embryos (6 overexpression
stripes), 30 cells; Control for aPKC stripe:3 embryos (6 control stripes), 30 cells/
Figure 5D’’: UAS-Pak1[myr]: 4 embryos (7 overexpression stripes), 35 cells; Control
for Pak1 stripe: 4 embryos (7 control stripes), 35 cells/ Figure 6E: mNG-Rok ctrl: 4
placodes (2 embryos), 23 cells (46 pol. values); mNG-Rok in pak1[14]: 3 placodes (2
embryos), 15 cells (30 pol. values); mNG-Rok fkhGal4 UAS-Pak1[myr]: 4 placodes (2
embryos), 26 cells (32 pol. values)/ Figure 6J: mCherry-Cdc42: 4 placodes (3
embryos), 24 cells (48 pol. values); Crumbs: 3 placodes (2 embryos), 14 cells (28
pol. values)/ Figure 7G: mNG-Rok ctrl: 5 placodes (5 embryos), 23 cells (44 pol.
values); mNG-Rok[Pmut]: 4 placodes (4 embryos), 18 cells (34 pol. measurements).
Statistical significance in comparisons was determined using unpaired t-test. Plots
show data points, mean and SEM. p-values are indicated as ** being <0.005, ***
being <0.0005, ****<0.0001, ns being not significant.
Embryo Viability Assay
Embryos of the genotype mNG-Rok control or mNG-Rok[Pmut] were treated as for
live imaging and mounted in separate sets of 100 embryos per experiment and let to
develop at 18ºC. After 48 hours hatched larvae, unfertilised embryos and developed
but dead embryos were counted.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

FRAP imaging and analysis
Movies of the apical region of the salivary placode epithelium in stage 11 mNG-Rok
embryos were acquired on an Andor Revolution XD Spinning Disk confocal with a
100X Objective (image size 512x512 pixels), 488 laser. 1.4 µm thick Z sections
(5x0.35 µm) were acquired to compensate for movement in z during acquisition. For
the FRAP, bleach dwell time was 500µs with 100% 488 laser power. Images were
acquired at 1 second intervals, 6 time points pre-bleach and 40 time points post
bleach.
Movies were analysed in ImageJ. Fluorescence intensity was measured in an 8-pixel
circular ROI at the site of bleach.
Measures were then normalised to account for the general photobleaching caused
by image acquisition. All values were multiplied by a photobleaching correction factor
Cphotobleaching:
𝐶"#$%$&'()*#+,- (𝑡) =

𝑊ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑒 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑎𝑡 𝑡1
𝑊ℎ𝑜𝑙𝑒 𝑖𝑚𝑎𝑔𝑒 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑦 (𝑡)

Normalised Fluorescence intensity measurements were used to plot the percentage
of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching as follows:
with 𝐹"A(&'()*# = 𝑎𝑣𝑔 𝐹%C %$ %D

𝐹(𝑡) =

(𝐹% − 𝐹"$F%&'()*# )
(𝐹"A(&'()*# − 𝐹"$F%&'()*# )

FRAP curve fitting and statistical analysis
The koff was estimated from the whole set of normalized fluorescence recovery
curves. We modeled the recovery using a single exponential function in the form of:

𝑎 (1 − 𝑒 GHIJJ % ). A non-linear regression algorithm was used to estimate parameters
from the data without prior averaging. As individual fluorescence recovery curves
were noisy, we used a bootstrap procedure generating 200 estimates to estimate the
statistical confidence of the estimated koff. This allowed us to compute a p-value
using a t-test based on bootstrap variance. Note that this p-value does not depend
on the number of bootstrap samples.
In silico Rok particle simulation
As illustrated in Figure 3F, we simulated the diffusion of membrane bound and
unbound particles (corresponding to Rok) within a pixel representation of a placodal
cell layer containing inner and boundary cells. Our intention was to create a
deliberately simple two-dimensional model that might nonetheless recapitulate the
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

salient features of the observed planar polarity. Different membrane association and
dissociation constants were modelled in different regions of the simulation according
to the zones illustrated in Figure 3G, i.e. distinguishing the placode boundary from
the inner placode membranes. Here the representation of the cell membranes with
superimposed particle positions automatically provided a visualization of the
simulation progress. By counting bound and unbound particles in different regions,
polarisation at the boundary was quantified and compared with microscopic
measurements. An exhaustive grid-search for parameters, which was initially corse
and then more fine-grained, was performed to determine the combinations of
diffusion, binding, unbinding and simulation time-step values that matched
observations.
In detail, point particles were modelled as moving with random sequential
displacements according to 2D Gaussian diffusion within a grid-based (i.e. pixel)
representation of a cell layer with membrane boundaries. Particles were set to freely
diffuse (off-grid) in the cell interior or diffuse laterally along the interior edge of the
cell membrane; i.e. as unbound and bound sates. The positional variance for free
diffusion (sigma) was set to correspond approximately to a diffusion coefficient of 25
μm2/s within a 25 μm wide cell area, which is the diffusion coefficient measured in
vivo for mammalian GFP-ROCK2 (Truebestein et al., 2015). Diffusion of bound
particles within the membrane was restricted to adjacent sites and was much slower
than for free particles, with diffusion coefficients tested in the range 0.1 - 0.001 μm2/s
(which made no practical difference) and final simulations set at 0.01 μm2/s. Using a
probabilistic model, that can be related to kon (association) and koff (dissociation)
constants, free particles that collided with the cell membrane were able to bind and
bound particles were able to spontaneously unbind/dissociate. Here simulation steps
typically corresponded to time segments of 50 ms, though a range of values was
tested. koff (in units of per second) was used to set the long-term probability of each
bound particle spontaneously unbinding within the simulation time-step. kon was less
straightforward to model as, for particles which collide with the membrane, it depends
on the concentration of receptive membrane sites and this varies throughout the
simulation. Accordingly, at-membrane binding probabilities of initially free particles
were set dynamically so that the derived, average kon measured in the simulation
converged to a desired value. In essence membrane binding probability was
increased when the target kon was undershot and reduced when overshot, averaging
around a fixed kon. A single kon value was used for all membrane regions, but
different koff values were used for placode boundary membranes and inner placode
membranes.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The in vivo kon used in simulations shown in Fig. 3 was estimated using the following
equation from the “diffusion plus binding” model from (Sprague et al., 2004):

𝑘$, ∗ =

𝑘$MM 𝐶(N
𝐹(N

The koff was calculated from our FRAP experiments, and we found that the

OPQ
RPQ

ratio

could be deduced from parameters measured in vivo:

𝐶(N
[𝑚𝑒𝑚𝑏𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑒]
=
× 𝑚𝑜𝑏𝑖𝑙𝑒 𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛
𝐹(N [𝑐𝑦𝑡𝑜𝑝𝑙𝑎𝑠𝑚𝑖𝑐]
We measured the membrane to cytoplasmic ratio of mNG-Rok in stage 11 embryos
and the value of the koff and mobile fraction were calculated from fitted FRAP curves
(Fig. 3C and Supplemental Fig.2 A,B): 𝑘$MM = 0.14; mobile fraction = 0.56;
membrane versus cytoplasm ration: 2.367.
Using the above equation and in vivo measured values, we estimated the kon to be
about 0.186, using 0.2 for simulations in Fig. 3, but also testing a range of kon values
between 0.1 and 0.3 in the simulations. Varying kon within this range did not affect the
polarisation values.
In order that the membrane binding sites be capable of saturation, the cell edge
pixels were subjected to a maximum occupancy value. For the final simulations this
was set at a value of 1 particle per pixel. Occupancy limits of 1-3 particles per pixel
were tested and overall this made little difference to the cell polarity, but had a
notable effect on the bound/free ratio, as we might expect.
Although the number of particles modelled within each cell could be varied, this
made little difference to the long term bound/unbound ratios, but naturally more
particles gave smoother, less variant values. Typically 1000 particles per cell were
simulated. The particle simulation was started with randomly distributed particle
positions within the cell interiors and progressed through 2000 unmonitored steps to
equilibrate the model. Thereafter analyses of the particle positions were made at
regularly spaced intervals for a further 10,000 steps. At each sample point the counts
of bound and unbound particles were recorded for the regions marked in Figure 3G
and later averaged for the whole simulation.
Python code to perform the 2D cell particle simulations, generating both regional
counts and pixmap images, is available at: https://github.com/tjs23/memodis
Rho-kinase sequence analysis
We used published predictive algorithms to identify potential aPKC and Pak1
phosphorylation sites in Dm Rok, DISPHOS (http://www.dabi.temple.edu/disphos/)
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and NetPhos3.1 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhos/). Rok sequences form
different species were compared and aligned in EMBOSS Matcher
(https://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/psa/emboss_matcher/).
In vitro kinase assay
The following High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC)-puriﬁed peptides were
ordered from Biomatik:
BazpepS980: EHFSRDALGRRSISEKHHAAL
Rokpep1T: LPKQKNKARSTAELRKKEKEM
Rokpep2STS: SKISPSQSTRSSYKPYAVNV
Rokpep2AAA: SKISPSQAARSAYKPYAVNV
Rokpep3S: KPYAVNVQRSATLPANSSLK
For in vitro kinase assays, 10µg of peptide substrate were incubated with either
150pg recombinant human Pak1 kinase domain (AbNOVA) or 0.1 µM recombinant
human PKCi kinase domain (a gift from N. McDonald via B. Thompson) for 30 min at
30°C in kinase reaction buffer (50 mM HEPES [(4-(2- hydroxyethyl)-1piperazineethanesulfonic acid] pH 7.5, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.01% Brij35)
containing 10 µM cold ATP and 3 µCi g-P33 ATP (Hartmann Analytic GmbH).
Samples were blotted on 2cm x 2cm squares of P81 phosphocellulose paper
(Millipore) and washed 3 x 10 min in 1% phosphoric acid, then 5 min in acetone.
Dried papers were then transferred to scintillation vials and immersed in liquid
scintillation cocktail (Ultima Gold XR, Perkin Elmer). Incorporation of g-P33 was
quantiﬁed in counts per minute by scintillation counting (Beckman LS 6500).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
Aguilar-Aragon, M., Elbediwy, A., Foglizzo, V., Fletcher, G.C., Li, V.S.W., and
Thompson, B.J. (2018). Pak1 Kinase Maintains Apical Membrane Identity in
Epithelia. Cell Reports 22, 1639-1646.
Amano, M., Chihara, K., Nakamura, N., Kaneko, T., Matsuura, Y., and Kaibuchi, K.
(1999). The COOH terminus of Rho-kinase negatively regulates rho-kinase activity.
J. Biol. Chem. 274, 32418-32424.
Amano, M., Nakayama, M., and Kaibuchi, K. (2010). Rho-kinase/ROCK: A key
regulator of the cytoskeleton and cell polarity. Cytoskeleton 67, 545-554.
Bahri, S., Wang, S., Conder, R., Choy, J., Vlachos, S., Dong, K., Merino, C., Sigrist,
S., Molnar, C., Yang, X., et al. (2010). The leading edge during dorsal closure as a
model for epithelial plasticity: Pak is required for recruitment of the Scribble complex
and septate junction formation. Development 137, 2023-2032.
Bailey, M.J., and Prehoda, K.E. (2015). Establishment of Par-Polarized Cortical
Domains via Phosphoregulated Membrane Motifs. Dev. Cell 35, 199-210.
Bischof, J., Bjorklund, M., Furger, E., Schertel, C., Taipale, J., and Basler, K. (2013).
A versatile platform for creating a comprehensive UAS-ORFeome library in
Drosophila. Development 140, 2434-2442.
Blom, N., Gammeltoft, S., and Brunak, S. (1999). Sequence and structure-based
prediction of eukaryotic protein phosphorylation sites. J. Mol. Biol. 294, 1351-1362.
Blom, N., Sicheritz-Ponten, T., Gupta, R., Gammeltoft, S., and Brunak, S. (2004).
Prediction of post-translational glycosylation and phosphorylation of proteins from the
amino acid sequence. Proteomics 4, 1633-1649.
Bokoch, G.M. (2003). Biology of the p21-activated kinases. Annual Review of
Biochemistry 72, 743-781.
Booth, A.J., Blanchard, G.B., Adams, R.J., and Röper, K. (2014). A dynamic
microtubule cytoskeleton directs medial actomyosin function during tube formation.
Dev. Cell 29, 562-576.
Brand, A.H., and Perrimon, N. (1993). Targeted gene expression as a means of
altering cell fates and generating dominant phenotypes. Development 118, 401-415.
Bulgakova, N.A., and Knust, E. (2009). The Crumbs complex: from epithelial-cell
polarity to retinal degeneration. J. Cell Sci. 122, 2587-2596.
Calzolari, S., Terriente, J., and Pujades, C. (2014). Cell segregation in the vertebrate
hindbrain relies on actomyosin cables located at the interhombomeric boundaries.
EMBO J. 33, 686-701.
Castelli-Gair Hombria, J. (2016). Organogenetic Gene Networks (Springer).
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Chan, E.H., Chavadimane Shivakumar, P., Clement, R., Laugier, E., and Lenne, P.F.
(2017). Patterned cortical tension mediated by N-cadherin controls cell geometric
order in the Drosophila eye. eLife 6.
Chang, L.H., Chen, P., Lien, M.T., Ho, Y.H., Lin, C.M., Pan, Y.T., Wei, S.Y., and Hsu,
J.C. (2011). Differential adhesion and actomyosin cable collaborate to drive
Echinoid-mediated cell sorting. Development 138, 3803-3812.
Conder, R., Yu, H., Zahedi, B., and Harden, N. (2007). The serine/threonine kinase
dPak is required for polarized assembly of F-actin bundles and apical-basal polarity
in the Drosophila follicular epithelium. Dev. Biol. 305, 470-482.
Dahmann, C., and Basler, K. (1999). Compartment boundaries: at the edge of
development. Trends Genet. 15, 320-326.
Fletcher, G.C., Lucas, E.P., Brain, R., Tournier, A., and Thompson, B.J. (2012).
Positive feedback and mutual antagonism combine to polarize crumbs in the
Drosophila follicle cell epithelium. Curr. Biol. 22, 1116-1122.
Galea, G.L., Cho, Y.J., Galea, G., Mole, M.A., Rolo, A., Savery, D., Moulding, D.,
Culshaw, L.H., Nikolopoulou, E., Greene, N.D.E., et al. (2017). Biomechanical
coupling facilitates spinal neural tube closure in mouse embryos. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 114, E5177-E5186.
Girdler, G.C., and Röper, K. (2014). Controlling cell shape changes during salivary
gland tube formation in Drosophila. Semin. Cell Dev. Biol. 31, 74-81.
Harden, N., Lee, J., Loh, H.Y., Ong, Y.M., Tan, I., Leung, T., Manser, E., and Lim, L.
(1996). A Drosophila homolog of the Rac- and Cdc42-activated serine/threonine
kinase PAK is a potential focal adhesion and focal complex protein that colocalizes
with dynamic actin structures. Mol. Cell Biol. 16, 1896-1908.
Hashimoto, H., and Munro, E. (2018). Differential expression and homotypic
enrichment of a classic Cadherin directs tissue-level contractile asymmetry during
neural tube closure. BioRxiv.
Henderson, K.D., and Andrew, D.J. (2000). Regulation and function of Scr, exd, and
hth in the Drosophila salivary gland. Dev. Biol. 217, 362-374.
Hong, Y. (2018). aPKC: the Kinase that Phosphorylates Cell Polarity. F1000Res 7.
Huang, J., Zhou, W., Watson, A.M., Jan, Y.N., and Hong, Y. (2008). Efficient endsout gene targeting in Drosophila. Genetics 180, 703-707.
Ishiuchi, T., and Takeichi, M. (2011). Willin and Par3 cooperatively regulate epithelial
apical constriction through aPKC-mediated ROCK phosphorylation. Nat. Cell Biol.
13, 860-866.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Jacinto, A., Wood, W., Woolner, S., Hiley, C., Turner, L., Wilson, C., Martinez-Arias,
A., and Martin, P. (2002). Dynamic analysis of actin cable function during Drosophila
dorsal closure. Curr. Biol. 12, 1245-1250.
Julian, L., and Olson, M.F. (2014). Rho-associated coiled-coil containing kinases
(ROCK): structure, regulation, and functions. Small GTPases 5, e29846.
Lowe, N., Rees, J.S., Roote, J., Ryder, E., Armean, I.M., Johnson, G., Drummond,
E., Spriggs, H., Drummond, J., Magbanua, J.P., et al. (2014). Analysis of the
expression patterns, subcellular localisations and interaction partners of Drosophila
proteins using a pigP protein trap library. Development 141, 3994-4005.
Major, R.J., and Irvine, K.D. (2005). Influence of Notch on dorsoventral
compartmentalization and actin organization in the Drosophila wing. Development
132, 3823-3833.
Major, R.J., and Irvine, K.D. (2006). Localization and requirement for Myosin II at the
dorsal-ventral compartment boundary of the Drosophila wing. Dev. Dyn. 235, 30513058.
Mason, F.M., Xie, S., Vasquez, C.G., Tworoger, M., and Martin, A.C. (2016). RhoA
GTPase inhibition organizes contraction during epithelial morphogenesis. J. Cell Biol.
214, 603-617.
mod, E.C., Roy, S., Ernst, J., Kharchenko, P.V., Kheradpour, P., Negre, N., Eaton,
M.L., Landolin, J.M., Bristow, C.A., Ma, L., et al. (2010). Identification of functional
elements and regulatory circuits by Drosophila modENCODE. Science 330, 17871797.
Monier, B., Pelissier-Monier, A., Brand, A.H., and Sanson, B. (2010). An actomyosinbased barrier inhibits cell mixing at compartmental boundaries in Drosophila
embryos. Nat. Cell Biol. 12, 60-65; sup pp 61-69.
Munjal, A., Philippe, J.M., Munro, E., and Lecuit, T. (2015). A self-organized
biomechanical network drives shape changes during tissue morphogenesis. Nature
524, 351-355.
Nakamura, M., Verboon, J.M., and Parkhurst, S.M. (2017). Prepatterning by
RhoGEFs governs Rho GTPase spatiotemporal dynamics during wound repair. J.
Cell Biol. 216, 3959-3969.
Pare, A.C., Vichas, A., Fincher, C.T., Mirman, Z., Farrell, D.L., Mainieri, A., and
Zallen, J.A. (2014). A positional Toll receptor code directs convergent extension in
Drosophila. Nature 515, 523-527.
Pirraglia, C., Walters, J., and Myat, M.M. (2010). Pak1 control of E-cadherin
endocytosis regulates salivary gland lumen size and shape. Development 137, 41774189.
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Port, F., Chen, H.M., Lee, T., and Bullock, S.L. (2014). Optimized CRISPR/Cas tools
for efficient germline and somatic genome engineering in Drosophila. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. USA 111, E2967-2976.
Ramkumar, N., Omelchenko, T., Silva-Gagliardi, N.F., McGlade, C.J., Wijnholds, J.,
and Anderson, K.V. (2016). Crumbs2 promotes cell ingression during the epithelialto-mesenchymal transition at gastrulation. Nat. Cell Biol. 18, 1281-1291.
Rane, C.K., and Minden, A. (2014). P21 activated kinases: structure, regulation, and
functions. Small GTPases 5.
Rennefahrt, U.E., Deacon, S.W., Parker, S.A., Devarajan, K., Beeser, A., Chernoff,
J., Knapp, S., Turk, B.E., and Peterson, J.R. (2007). Specificity profiling of Pak
kinases allows identification of novel phosphorylation sites. J. Biol. Chem. 282,
15667-15678.
Röper, K. (2012). Anisotropy of Crumbs and aPKC Drives Myosin Cable Assembly
during Tube Formation. Dev. Cell 23, 939-953.
Röper, K. (2013). Supracellular actomyosin assemblies during development.
Bioarchitecture 3, 45-49.
Royou, A., Field, C., Sisson, J.C., Sullivan, W., and Karess, R. (2004). Reassessing
the role and dynamics of nonmuscle myosin II during furrow formation in early
Drosophila embryos. Mol. Biol. Cell 15, 838-850.
Sanchez-Corrales, Y.E., Blanchard, G.B., and Roper, K. (2018). Radially patterned
cell behaviours during tube budding from an epithelium. eLife 7.
http://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.35717
Sarov, M., Barz, C., Jambor, H., Hein, M.Y., Schmied, C., Suchold, D., Stender, B.,
Janosch, S., K, J.V., Krishnan, R.T., et al. (2016). A genome-wide resource for the
analysis of protein localisation in Drosophila. eLife 5, e12068.
Shaner, N.C., Lambert, G.G., Chammas, A., Ni, Y., Cranfill, P.J., Baird, M.A., Sell,
B.R., Allen, J.R., Day, R.N., Israelsson, M., et al. (2013). A bright monomeric green
fluorescent protein derived from Branchiostoma lanceolatum. Nat. Methods 10, 407409.
Sidor, C., and Röper, K. (2016). Genetic Control of Salivary Gland Tubulogenesis in
Drosophila. In Organogenetic Gene Networks, (J. Castelli-Gair Hombría, and P.
Bovolenta, eds.) Springer International Publishing, pp. 125-149.
Simoes Sde, M., Blankenship, J.T., Weitz, O., Farrell, D.L., Tamada, M., FernandezGonzalez, R., and Zallen, J.A. (2010). Rho-kinase directs Bazooka/Par-3 planar
polarity during Drosophila axis elongation. Dev. Cell 19, 377-388.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Simoes Sde, M., Mainieri, A., and Zallen, J.A. (2014). Rho GTPase and Shroom
direct planar polarized actomyosin contractility during convergent extension. J. Cell
Biol. 204, 575-589.
Sivasankar, S., Zhang, Y., Nelson, W.J., and Chu, S. (2009). Characterizing the
initial encounter complex in cadherin adhesion. Structure 17, 1075-1081.
Sotillos, S., Diaz-Meco, M.T., Caminero, E., Moscat, J., and Campuzano, S. (2004).
DaPKC-dependent phosphorylation of Crumbs is required for epithelial cell polarity in
Drosophila. J. Cell Biol. 166, 549-557.
Sprague, B.L., Pego, R.L., Stavreva, D.A., and McNally, J.G. (2004). Analysis of
binding reactions by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching. Biophys. J. 86,
3473-3495.
Tepass, U. (2012). The apical polarity protein network in Drosophila epithelial cells:
regulation of polarity, junctions, morphogenesis, cell growth, and survival. Annu. Rev.
Cell Dev. Biol. 28, 655-685.
Tepass, U., Godt, D., and Winklbauer, R. (2002). Cell sorting in animal development:
signalling and adhesive mechanisms in the formation of tissue boundaries. Curr.
Opin. Genet. Dev. 12, 572-582.
Tetley, R.J., Blanchard, G.B., Fletcher, A.G., Adams, R.J., and Sanson, B. (2016).
Unipolar distributions of junctional Myosin II identify cell stripe boundaries that drive
cell intercalation throughout Drosophila axis extension. eLife 5.
Truebestein, L., Elsner, D.J., Fuchs, E., and Leonard, T.A. (2015). A molecular ruler
regulates cytoskeletal remodelling by the Rho kinases. Nature Communications 6,
10029.
Truebestein, L., Elsner, D.J., and Leonard, T.A. (2016). Made to measure - keeping
Rho kinase at a distance. Small GTPases 7, 82-92.
Welch, H., Eguinoa, A., Stephens, L.R., and Hawkins, P.T. (1998). Protein kinase B
and rac are activated in parallel within a phosphatidylinositide 3OH-kinase-controlled
signaling pathway. J. Biol. Chem. 273, 11248-11256.
Wodarz, A., Hinz, U., Engelbert, M., and Knust, E. (1995). Expression of crumbs
confers apical character on plasma membrane domains of ectodermal epithelia of
Drosophila. Cell 82, 67-76.
Zhou, B., Bagri, A., and Beckendorf, S.K. (2001). Salivary gland determination in
Drosophila: a salivary-specific, fork head enhancer integrates spatial pattern and
allows fork head autoregulation. Dev. Biol. 237, 54-67.
Zou, J., Wang, X., and Wei, X. (2012). Crb Apical Polarity Proteins Maintain
Zebrafish Retinal Cone Mosaics via Intercellular Binding of Their Extracellular
Domains. Dev. Cell 22, 1261-1274.
41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/615062; this version posted April 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

42

