bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Identifying gene function and module connections by
the integration of multi-species expression
compendia

Hao Li1, Daria Rukina2, Fabrice P. A. David3,4,5, Terytty Yang Li1, ChangMyung Oh1, Arwen W. Gao1, Elena Katsyuba1, Maroun Bou Sleiman1, Andrea
Komljenovic5,6, Qingyao Huang7, Robert W. Williams8, Marc RobinsonRechavi5,6, Kristina Schoonjans7, Stephan Morgenthaler2, Johan Auwerx1, *
1

Laboratory of Integrative Systems Physiology, Institute of Bioengineering, École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland

2

Institute of Mathematics, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne
1015, Switzerland
3

Gene Expression Core Facility, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne,
Lausanne 1015, Switzerland

4

SV-IT, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland;
5

6

Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland

Department of Ecology and Evolution, University of Lausanne, Lausanne,
Switzerland

7

Laboratory of Metabolic Signaling, Institute of Bioengineering, École Polytechnique
Fédérale de Lausanne, Lausanne 1015, Switzerland
8

Department of Genetics, Genomics and Informatics, University of Tennessee,
Memphis, TN 38163, USA

*Correspondence: admin.auwerx@epfl.ch (J.A.)

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Running title: GeneBridge predicts gene function and connections.
Keywords: Gene function prediction, expression compendia, module
connection, gene set analysis.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
The functions of many eukaryotic genes are still poorly understood. We
developed and validated a new method, termed GeneBridge, which is based
on two linked approaches to impute gene function and bridge genes with
biological processes. First, Gene-Module Association Determination (G-MAD)
allows the annotation of gene function. Second, Module-Module Association
Determination (M-MAD) allows predicting connectivity among modules. We
applied the GeneBridge tools to large-scale multi-species expression
compendia—1,700 datasets with over 300,000 samples from human, mouse,
rat, fly, worm, and yeast—collected in this study. Unlike most existing
bioinformatics tools, GeneBridge exploits both positive and negative
gene/module-module associations. We constructed association networks,
such as those bridging mitochondria and proteasome, mitochondria and
histone demethylation, as well as ribosomes and lipid biosynthesis. The
GeneBridge tools together with the expression compendia are available at
systems-genetics.org, to facilitate the identification of connections linking
genes, modules, phenotypes, and diseases.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
The identification of gene function and the integrated understanding of their
roles in physiology are core aims of many biological and biomedical research
projects — an effort that is still far from being complete (Edwards et al. 2011;
Pandey et al. 2014; Dolgin 2017; Stoeger et al. 2018). Traditionally, gene
function has been elucidated through experimental approaches, including the
evaluation of the phenotypic consequences of gain- or loss-of-function
(G/LOF) mutations (Austin et al. 2004; Dickinson et al. 2016), or by genetic
linkage or association studies (Williams and Auwerx 2015). A large number of
bioinformatics tools have been developed to predict gene function based on
sequence homology (Marcotte et al. 1999; Radivojac et al. 2013; Jiang et al.
2016), protein structure (Roy et al. 2010; Radivojac et al. 2013; Jiang et al.
2016), phylogenetic profiles (Pellegrini et al. 1999; Tabach et al. 2013; Li et al.
2014), protein-protein interactions (Rolland et al. 2014; Hein et al. 2015;
Huttlin et al. 2017), genetic interactions (Tong et al. 2004; Costanzo et al.
2010; Horlbeck et al. 2018), and co-expression (Langfelder and Horvath 2008;
Warde-Farley et al. 2010; Greene et al. 2015; van Dam et al. 2015;
Szklarczyk et al. 2016; Li et al. 2017; Obayashi et al. 2019).
With

the

development

of

transcriptome

profiling

technologies,

thousands of high-throughput studies have generated a wealth of genomewide data that has become a valuable resource for systems genetics
analyses. A few web resources, including GEO (Barrett et al. 2013),
ArrayExpress (Kolesnikov et al. 2015), GeneNetwork (Chesler et al. 2004),
and Bgee (Bastian et al. 2008) amongst others, have created repositories of
such expression data for curation, reuse, and integration. Several tools, such

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

as GeneMANIA (Warde-Farley et al. 2010), GIANT (Greene et al. 2015),
SEEK (Zhu et al. 2015), GeneFriends (van Dam et al. 2015), WeGET
(Szklarczyk et al. 2016), COXPRESdb (Obayashi et al. 2019), WGCNA
(Langfelder and Horvath 2008), and CLIC (Li et al. 2017), are able to assign
putative new functions to genes by means of correlations or co-expression
networks. At their core, these methods rely on the concept of guilt-byassociation – that transcripts or proteins exhibiting similar expression patterns
tend to be functionally related (Eisen et al. 1998). By using overrepresentation analyses on sub-networks or modules, one can then deduce
aspects of gene functions.
However, these approaches generally depend on discrete sets of
genes whose expression correlations exceed either a hard or soft threshold,
which would strongly influence the final results. In addition, such analyses
typically focus on positive or absolute values of correlations among datasets.
The key polarity of interactions is often lost among gene products and linked
modules (Warde-Farley et al. 2010; Greene et al. 2015; van Dam et al. 2015;
Zhu et al. 2015; Li et al. 2017). Gene set analyses, such as gene set
enrichment analysis (GSEA) (Subramanian et al. 2005), have been developed
to identify processes or modules that are affected by certain genetic or
environmental perturbations (Khatri et al. 2012). While GSEA removes the
necessity of assigning a certain threshold, its application has mainly been
limited to studying G/LOF models or environmental perturbations, where
comparisons are inherently among discrete categories. This limits its
applicability in most populations, in which variations among individuals are
often subtle and continuous (Williams and Auwerx 2015).

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Here

we

developed

the

GeneBridge

toolkit

that

uses

two

interconnected approaches to improve upon the identification of gene function
and to bridge genes to phenotypes using large-scale cross-species
transcriptome compendia collected for this study. First, we describe a
computational approach, named Gene-Module Association Determination (GMAD), to impute gene function. G-MAD considers expression as a continuous
variable and identifies the associations between genes and modules. Second,
we developed the Module-Module Association Determination (M-MAD)
method to identify connections between modules based on the transcriptome
compendia. The data and GeneBridge tools described here are available at
systems-genetics.org, an open resource, which will facilitate the identification
of novel connections between genes, modules, phenotypes, and diseases.

Results
Current status of gene annotations
Despite great efforts to annotate the cellular and physiological role of genes,
many of their functions remain poorly understood. One of the most widely
used resources of gene annotation for genes is the Gene Ontology (GO),
which characterizes gene function based on three ontologies, i.e. biological
process, molecular function, and cellular component (Ashburner et al. 2000).
Over 54% (10,543 genes) of all the protein-coding genes in humans have no
more than 10 annotations, including the uncurated IEA annotations (Inferred
from electronic annotation) (Fig. 1A), whereas the most annotated gene TP53
has more than 800 annotations (Fig. 1B). In fact, the top 20% most annotated
genes have more than 64% of all annotations in GO (Fig. 1C). From these
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

perspectives, it is clear that most human genes are still poorly annotated. The
pattern is similar in other model species. Specifically, over 48% (10,166
genes) in mouse, 60% (11,833 genes) in rat, 61% (8,514 genes) in fly, 29%
(5,885 genes) in worm, and 26% (1,566 genes) in yeast, have fewer than 10
entries in GO (Supplemental Fig. S1). This is also true for gene annotations
retrieved from other sources, such as GeneRIF (Gene Reference Into
Function) (Mitchell et al. 2003) (Fig. 1D-F), as well as for publications archived
in PubMed (Barrett et al. 2013; Dolgin 2017) (Fig. 1G-I, Supplemental Fig.
S1). The phenomenon that many genes are ignored in biological research has
been pointed out before (Edwards et al. 2011; Pandey et al. 2014; Stoeger et
al. 2018). Several possible reasons for this bias, such as prior knowledge,
publication bias, and priorities of funding support have been raised (Edwards
et al. 2011; Greene and Troyanskaya 2012; Stoeger et al. 2018). Therefore,
an unbiased approach for gene function analysis would most likely provide
many novel insights for future research.
Gene-Module Association Determination (G-MAD)
Owing to the fact that a large number of genes are still not well annotated or
even uncharacterized, we propose here a new computational strategy, “GeneModule Association Determination” (G-MAD), which uses expression data
from large-scale cohorts to propose potential functions of genes. We use the
term “modules” to refer the knowledge-based gene sets, ontology terms, and
biological pathways from different resources for simplicity in the rest of the
paper. The differences between gene sets or directed or undirected pathways
are important in many contexts, but for our purpose they can be treated in the
same manner as modules and will not be distinguished. The basic concept is

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

similar to classic pathway/gene set analysis, i.e. genes that possess similar
functions tend to have similar expression patterns (Subramanian et al. 2005).
However, instead of using binary group settings (e.g., control vs. treatment, or
wild-type vs. knockout) as commonly used in gene set analysis, we consider
the continuous expression levels of the gene-of-interest across a population
and determine its possible functions based on its co-expression patterns
against all genes. We applied a competitive gene set testing method —
Correlation Adjusted MEan RAnk gene set test (CAMERA), which adjusts for
inter-gene correlations (Wu and Smyth 2012) — to compute the enrichment
between gene-of-interest and biological modules. Gene-module connections
with enrichment p-values that survived multiple testing corrections of the gene
or module numbers were allocated connection scores of 1 or -1, based on the
enrichment direction, and 0 otherwise. The results were then meta-analyzed
across datasets, and gene-module association scores (GMAS) were
computed as the averages of the connection scores weighted by the sample
sizes and inter-gene correlation coefficients within modules (Fig. 2A).
We collected transcriptome datasets with over 80 samples from 6
species (human, mouse, rat, fly, worm and yeast), from GEO, ArrayExpress,
dbGaP, GeneNetwork, and other data repository sources (Supplemental
Table S1). For example, 1’337 datasets containing over 265’000 human
samples with whole genome transcript levels were analyzed in this study
(Supplemental Table S1). Genes annotated to some modules have higher coexpression in datasets from certain tissues than others (Supplemental Fig.
S2A), suggesting the tissue-specific activation of these modules. For instance,
genes involved in pancreatic secretion have much higher co-expressions in

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

datasets obtained from pancreas (Fig. 2B). Genes belonging to “collecting
duct acid secretion” module are highly co-expressed in kidney (Supplemental
Fig. S2B-D), while genes in the “lamellar body” module are highly coexpressed in lung (Supplemental Fig. S2E-G).
One should be aware of the fact that modules can overlap partially or
completely. For example, GO categories have a hierarchical structure. Each
GO term has "parent" terms (related usually by "part of" or "is a" relations),
and all genes annotated to the term will also be annotated to its parents.
Symmetrically, a GO term can be the parent term of other GO terms
(Ashburner et al. 2000). In addition, modules from different sources can be
very similar in composition. For example, oxidative phosphorylation (84
genes) from GO biological process, and respiratory chain (80 genes) from GO
cellular component have 65 genes (66%) in common in humans. Therefore,
we computed the similarities across all modules, and generated a global
module similarity network. As expected, redundant modules formed clusters in
the network, and we were able to extract 62 distinct module clusters in the
human module similarity network (Fig. 2C, Supplemental Table S2).
We assessed the performance of G-MAD in prioritizing known genes for
modules through cross validations. We then compared the area under the
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) with the ones obtained
from WeGET, a method predicting novel genes for various modules based on
weighted co-expression of around 1,000 expression datasets (Szklarczyk et
al. 2016). G-MAD exhibits better predictive performance than WeGET
(Supplemental Fig. S3). Furthermore, in order to determine the threshold of
significance of gene-module associations, we computed the GMAS of all the

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

known gene-module pairs. To be stringent in proposing novel gene-module
associations, we consider only 10% of all the known gene-module pairs as
significant, and picked a GMAS threshold of 0.268 (Fig. 2D). With this
threshold, we saw only 0.24% of unknown gene-module pairs are significant,
which is 40 times less than the known pairs.
The gene-module connections predicted by G-MAD provide a resource,
which researchers can use as a reference when annotating gene functions.
We describe below some examples on how the G-MAD results can be used to
facilitate the discovery of novel gene functions or the identification of new
members of modules. WDFY4 was recently annotated as a crucial gene in
activating immunological T cells in antiviral and antitumor immunity through a
functional CRISPR screen (Theisen et al. 2018). Through G-MAD, we found
that WDFY4 is indeed associated with antigen processing, T cell activation,
and immune response in human, mouse, and rat (Fig. 2E, Supplemental Fig.
S4A-B), verifying its functions conserved across species. Cholesterol is critical
in cell differentiation and growth. We identified 20 genes (AACS, ACLY,
ACSL3, ACSS2, CYB5B, DBI, ELOVL6, ERG28, FADS1, FASN, INSIG1,
PANK3, PCSK9, PCYT2, PNPLA3, RDH11, SLC25A1, STARD4, TMEM41B,
TMEM97) associated to cholesterol biosynthesis conserved in human, mouse,
and rat (Fig. 2F, Supplemental Fig. S4C-E). Several of these genes, including
FASN (Carroll et al. 2018) and TMEM97 (Bartz et al. 2009), have already
been described to have relevant functions in cholesterol metabolism.
G-MAD can also highlight tissue-specific gene-module associations
using datasets from specific tissues. EHHADH is a peroxisomal protein highly
expressed in liver and kidney (Fig. 3A) (Uhlen et al. 2015). Although best

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

known for its key role in the peroxisomal oxidation pathway, recent report
demonstrated that EHHADH mutations cause renal Fanconi's syndrome
(Klootwijk et al. 2014). G-MAD of EHHADH in liver and kidney identifies its
conserved role in peroxisome and fatty acid oxidation, and also recovers its
specific functions in liver (e.g. bile acid biosynthesis) and kidney (e.g. brush
border membrane) (Fig. 3B-E, Supplemental Table S3). SLC6A1 is one of the
major gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) transporters in the neurotransmitter
release cycle in brain (Carvill et al. 2015). However, SLC6A1 is also highly
expressed in the liver (Supplemental Fig. S5A), and its function in liver
remains poorly understood. G-MAD of SLC6A1 in all datasets and only
datasets from brain confirms its function as neurotransmitter transporters in
GABA release cycle (Supplemental Fig. S5B-C), while G-MAD using datasets
from liver identifies its possible role in carboxylic acid transport and
metabolism (Supplemental Fig. S5D-E, Supplemental Table S4).
G-MAD determines novel genes linked to mitochondria
Mitochondria are the main powerhouses of cells and harvest energy in the
form of ATP through mitochondrial respiration. There are around 1,100 genes
known to encode mitochondria-localized proteins (mito-proteins), depending
on the source used (e.g. 1,158 mito-proteins in Mitocarta (Calvo et al. 2016),
1,074 in Human Protein Atlas (Uhlen et al. 2015)); however, many of these
genes remain uncharacterized, and the list of mito-proteins is still incomplete
(Williams et al. 2018).
By using the genes annotated to be involved in respiratory electron
transport chain (ETC, Reactome: R-HSA-611105), we searched for genes
potentially related to respiratory electron transport, by applying G-MAD to
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expression datasets in human, mouse, and rat. As expected, genes annotated
in the ETC module are strongly enriched; moreover, other known ETC genes
that were not included in the module were also positively enriched, providing
proof that G-MAD can recover known gene functions (Fig. 4A, Supplemental
Fig. S6A-B). Based on G-MAD results from human, mouse and rat, there
were 707 genes showing conserved associations with the ETC (Fig. 4B).
Many of these genes, for example DMAC1/C9orf123 (Arroyo et al. 2016;
Stroud et al. 2016; Horlbeck et al. 2018), NDUFAF8/C17orf89 (Floyd et al.
2016), and FMC1/C7orf55 (Lefebvre-Legendre et al. 2001; Li et al. 2017)
were not included in the respiratory electron transport module, but have been
recently validated to be involved in mitochondrial respiration (Fig. 4B,
Supplemental Table S5). DDT is among the top genes associated with the
ETC (Fig. 4A-B), and there is no previous study linking it to mitochondria. GMAD reveals that DDT is strongly associated with mitochondrial respiration
across different species, including the invertebrate C. elegans (Fig. 4C-D,
Supplemental Fig. S6C-G), suggesting a conserved role of DDT in
mitochondria. We experimentally validated this finding through RNAi-mediated
DDT knockdown in HEK293 cells, which led to reduced transcript levels of
genes encoding for the ETC subunits (Fig. 4E) and decreased oxygen
consumption rate (OCR) (Fig. 4F, Supplemental Fig. S5H), confirming that
DDT impacts mitochondrial respiration. Similarly, we also confirmed the
involvement of BOLA3 in the ETC using G-MAD and experimental validations
(Cameron et al. 2011) (Supplemental Fig. S7).
Contrary to the existing methods that predict only positive gene-module
associations based on gene co-expression, G-MAD is also able to exploit

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

negative associations. For example, ARID1A exhibits significant negative
associations with the respiratory electron transport in human and mouse (Fig.
4A,G-H, Supplemental Fig. S8). ARID1A is a known member of the SWI/SNF
family, and the inactivating mutations of SWI/SNF complex genes (mainly
SMARCA4 and ARID1A) have recently been linked to increased expression of
ETC genes and mitochondrial respiration (Lissanu Deribe et al. 2018). To
further validate its regulatory role, we checked an extant public dataset from
mice with uterus-specific Arid1a knock-out (Kim et al. 2015), and confirmed
that dysfunction of Arid1a led to the increased expression of mitochondrial
genes (Fig. 4I), especially those involved in respiratory electron transport (Fig.
4J).
Module-Module Association Determination (M-MAD)
Biological processes and modules, such as metabolism, cellular signaling,
biogenesis, and degradation are interconnected and coordinated (Barabasi et
al. 2011). However, there are few reports exploring the connections between
modules in a systematic fashion (Li et al. 2008). Here we extend G-MAD to
develop Module-Module Association Determination (M-MAD) to investigate
the connections between modules based on the expression compendia.
Results for individual modules against all genes, obtained from G-MAD, were
used to compute their associations against all modules. The enrichment
scores of all genes for the target module were used as the gene-level
statistics to calculate the enrichment against all modules using CAMERA (Wu
and Smyth 2012). The resulting enrichment p-values across modules were
transformed to 1, 0, or –1 based on the Bonferroni threshold, and then meta-

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

analyzed across all datasets to obtain the module-module association scores
(MMAS) (Fig. 5A).
Module-module associations with an absolute MMAS of over 0.268,
corresponding to 4% of the total number of module pairs, were considered
significant and were used to construct a module association network (Fig. 5B).
Modules were represented as nodes with the same colors as the module
clusters from Fig. 2C. While the module similarity network in Fig. 2C is based
solely on existing gene annotations, the module association network relies on
analyzing the full expression datasets. It can thus reveal new biological
connections among modules, which were not included in literature-based
annotations. We compared the two networks (Supplemental Fig. S9) obtained
from module similarity (Fig. 2C) and module association (Fig. 5B).
Interestingly, there are numerous module pairs with no similarity/overlap of
annotated genes, but with high association based on expression (M-MAD)
(Fig. 5C). Moreover, many module pairs have predicted negative associations
(Fig. 5C). Therefore, these results provide a resource for hypothesis
generation and validation of the module connections.
By applying M-MAD, we observed a strong positive link between
mitochondrial modules and the proteasome (Fig. 5D, Supplemental Fig.
S10A-C). Most of the genes encoding proteasome subunits exhibit
remarkable association with the ETC in human and mouse (Supplemental Fig.
S10G), indicating a conserved co-regulatory mechanism. Dysfunction of
mitochondria and the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) are hallmarks of
aging and aging-related neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's,
Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases (Ortega and Lucas 2014; Ross et al.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2015; D'Amico et al. 2017). Abnormalities that perturb the crosstalk between
these two modules have been demonstrated to contribute to the pathogenesis
of these diseases and several mechanisms have been proposed (D'Amico et
al. 2017; Harrigan et al. 2017). It has also been shown that ETC disruption
leads to proteasome impairment (D'Amico et al. 2017), while conversely the
inhibition of the UPS causes mitochondrial dysfunction (Ross et al. 2015).
Similar to G-MAD, M-MAD can also predict negative connections
between modules. For example, we found strong negative connections
between histone demethylation processes and mitochondrial modules (Fig.
5E, Supplemental Fig. S10D-F). The link between epigenetics and
mitochondria is a research focus for many groups, including ours (Schroeder
et al. 2013; Merkwirth et al. 2016; Tian et al. 2016). It has been reported that
mitochondrial dysfunction affects histone methylation, and conversely histone
lysine demethylases can impact mitochondrial functions (Merkwirth et al.
2016). Most of the histone lysine demethylases showed negative associations
with the ETC in human and mouse (Supplemental Fig. S10G), suggesting a
conserved

negative

connection

between

histone

demethylation

and

mitochondrial function.
As another example of M-MAD, we investigated modules connected with
lipid biosynthetic modules. Interestingly, ribosome modules exhibited strong
negative association with lipid biosynthetic modules (Fig. 6A-B, Supplemental
Fig. S11A-B). This is in line with our previous finding that a ribosomal protein,
Rpl26, negatively correlates with body weight and fat mass (Li et al. 2018). In
support of this connection, liver and adipose transcripts of most ribosomal
protein genes negatively correlated with metabolic phenotypes, such as body

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

weight, fat mass, and cholesterol levels in the BXD mouse cohort (Wu et al.
2014) (Fig. 6C, Supplemental Fig. S11C), as well as in a CAST/EiJ and
C57BL/6J F2 intercross (Schadt et al. 2008) (Fig. 6D, Supplemental Fig.
S11D). Finally, RNAi targeting 9 of the identified ribosomal protein genes out
of total 13 tested led to the accumulation of lipid droplets in C. elegans (Fig.
6E, Supplemental Fig. S11E-G), further validating the robustness of the lipid
synthesis-ribosome connection across species.

Discussion
Significant efforts in biological research have been devoted to defining the
molecular and physiological functions of genes. However, many genes are
still not well annotated and even remain uncharacterized (Edwards et al.
2011; Dolgin 2017; Stoeger et al. 2018). Here we developed an approach,
termed G-MAD, to facilitate the identification of novel gene functions and to
establish

robust

connections

between

genes

and

modules.

Using

transcriptome datasets from cohorts ranging from human to mouse, rat, fly,
worm, and yeast, we identified millions of gene-module connections, many of
which are novel. Unlike usual co-expression analyses for predicting gene
functions, G-MAD can identify not only positive gene-module connections, but
also negative associations between genes and modules or processes. We
illustrated the predictive power of G-MAD in revealing potential gene-module
connections using the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) module as
an example. 707 genes were consistently associated with the ETC in human,
mouse and rat, of which DDT and BOLA3 were validated through

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

experiments. A negative connection between ARID1A, a member of the
SWI/SNF family, and the ETC was also identified using G-MAD, which was
consistent with a report that inactivation of SWI/SNF complex increased
mitochondrial respiration (Lissanu Deribe et al. 2018). Meanwhile, tissuespecific functions of genes, for example EHHADH and SLC6A1, can also be
identified using datasets derived from respective tissues.
In addition, we extended G-MAD to M-MAD, to uncover connections
between modules. Association scores of one module against all genes from
G-MAD were used to compute its associations with all modules. Similar to GMAD, M-MAD can identify both positive and negative module associations.
For example, in humans we identified around 2,000,000 associations between
all modules, over 170,000 of which negative. We constructed a module
association network based on these connected modules, and compared it to
the module similarity network. Interestingly, many of the associated module
pairs have low or no similarities in gene compositions. By applying M-MAD on
the ETC module, we discovered a conserved connection between
mitochondria and the proteasome in various organisms (D'Amico et al. 2017).
In addition, we identified negative associations between histone lysine
demethylation

and

mitochondrial

modules,

underscoring

the

inverse

connection between epigenetic regulation and mitochondrial function
(Schroeder et al. 2013; Merkwirth et al. 2016; Tian et al. 2016). Moreover, we
discovered and validated a novel negative regulatory role of ribosomal
proteins on lipid biosynthesis (Li et al. 2018).
In summary, we described here a set of approaches to identify gene
function and module connectivity, that we collectively termed GeneBridge, to

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reflect their capacity to bridge genes to biological functions and phenotypes.
The GeneBridge toolset is accessible through our open web resource
(systems-genetics.org) to the research community for hypothesis generation
or validation. It should be noted that although only protein-coding genes were
included in our analysis, the same approach can be applied to non-coding
genes to reveal their potential functions. Similarly, GeneBridge can also be
utilized to identify novel gene-disease associations based on known diseaseassociated genes from databases, such as the Human Disease Ontology
(DO) (Schriml et al. 2019) or DisGeNET (Pinero et al. 2017). The GeneBridge
toolkit could also be applied to large-scale proteomics datasets after
correcting for the background of all measured proteins. Integration of
GeneBridge with other well-established databases, such as BioGRID (Stark et
al. 2006) and STRING (Szklarczyk et al. 2015), will facilitate the investigation
of the connections between genes, modules, and diseases.

Methods
Gene annotations / Modules. Gene ontology (GO) annotations (Ashburner
et al. 2000) were downloaded from http://www.geneontology.org/ on Oct 4,
2017, with versions indicated by submission date below. Gene Reference Into
Function (GeneRIF) (Mitchell et al. 2003) was downloaded from
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nih.gov/gene/GeneRIF/ on Oct 11, 2017. Publication information
from PubMed was downloaded from
ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gene/DATA/gene2pubmed.gz on Mar 15, 2018.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Module data for all the species were retrieved from GO (Ashburner et al.
2000), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (Kanehisa et al.
2012), and Reactome (Croft et al. 2011). Annotations from GO with evidence
codes of IEA (inferred from electronic annotation), ND (No biological data
available), NR (Not recorded), NAS (Non-traceable author statement) were
removed from the analysis. The parent-child hierarchical structure of GO was
ignored. All modules, including the redundant modules (modules with similar
gene components), as well as parent-child modules, were considered as
independent in the analysis.
Modules with less than 15 genes or larger than 1,000 genes were
excluded, resulting in 6,979, 7,489, 7,462, 3,811, 2,495, and 2,381 modules
for human, mouse, rat, fly, worm, and yeast, respectively, for the analysis.
Module similarity calculation. Similarity between two modules were defined
as the Jaccard index 𝐽 𝐴, 𝐵 =

!∩!
!∪!

, i.e. the number of genes in A and B

divided by the number of genes in A or B. It measures the intersection
between the modules as a fraction of the total size.
Gene expression across tissues
Expression patterns of EHHADH and SLC6A1 in mRNA and protein levels
across human tissues were obtained from the Human Protein Atlas (Uhlen et
al. 2015), and are available from v18.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000113790EHHADH/tissue and v18.proteinatlas.org/ENSG00000157103-SLC6A1/tissue,
respectively.
Transcriptome datasets. Human GTEx transcriptome datasets were
downloaded from https://www.gtexportal.org (GTEx_Consortium 2013). Most

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of the microarray and RNAseq datasets were downloaded from GEO (Barrett
et al. 2013) and ArrayExpress (Kolesnikov et al. 2015), with processed human
and mouse RNAseq datasets obtained from ARCHS4 (Lachmann et al. 2018).
The rest of the datasets were downloaded from other sources, including the
database of Genotypes and Phenotypes (dbGaP) (Mailman et al. 2007),
Mouse phenome database(Bogue et al. 2018), and other data repository
websites. Data from single cell RNA-seq were excluded from the study
because they contain the many zero counts. Detailed information can be
found at systems-genetics.org/datasets.
Data preprocessing of transcriptome datasets. For microarray datasets,
the expression for a given gene with more than one probe set was
represented by the average values of all its probe sets. Un-annotated probe
sets were removed in the data pre-processing step. Only protein coding
genes were considered in the analysis, as non-coding genes are often not
well measured in microarray platforms. For RNAseq datasets, CPM (Count
Per Million) were calculated to normalize the gene expression across samples
and log2(CPM) were used for further analysis. Only protein coding genes were
considered in the analysis to match the data in microarray datasets.
Transcriptome data were standardized by quantile-transformation to fit a
normal distribution to avoid model misspecification when performing genelevel statistics. The expression values of all genes were normalized to the
range of 0 to 1. Samples and genes with more than 30% missing values were
removed from the analysis, and the remaining missing data were imputed
using nearest neighbor averaging by the impute.knn function in the “impute” R
package.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

For all the datasets, covariates were manually annotated and curated
based on the metadata available from the respective data sources. Datasets
containing data from different tissues were separated into single tissues. To
account for confounding sources of expression variations, the effects of
known covariates, including age, gender, genotype, platform, disease,
treatment, batch, etc, as well as hidden determinants of gene expression were
estimated and removed by using PEER (probabilistic estimation of expression
residuals) (Stegle et al. 2012), and the expression residuals were used for
further analysis.
Gene-Module Association Determination (G-MAD). G-MAD makes use of
the expression residuals of transcriptome datasets from large cohorts
(datasets with over 80 samples). The expression levels of the gene-of-interest
(target gene 𝑇) are used as a continuous trait to test whether a module M is
enriched when 𝑇 is highly expressed or, alternatively, whether it is depleted.
The analysis uses the competitive gene set testing method CAMERA, which
adjusts for inter-gene correlations (Wu and Smyth 2012). This adjustment is
important, because left unadjusted too many significant results would emerge.
To perform CAMERA, we first regress all genes 𝐺 on 𝑇 according to the
following relationship
𝐺 = 𝜇 + 𝛽!→! 𝑇 + 𝑒.
The fitting of this model equation to the observations is done separately for
each data set by using the least squares method. The result is one fitted
values 𝛽!→! per gene. These coefficients define a set of statistics numerically
characterizing the connection between the target gene 𝑇 and any gene 𝐺.
CAMERA provides a test of the null hypothesis that the average values of the
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

𝛽 coefficients for the genes 𝐺 in the module M are equal to the values for the
genes not in the module. In order to correct for the inter-gene correlations a
variance inflation factor is computed based on the average correlation
coefficient 𝜌! computed from the expression residuals obtained and only
using the genes in the module M. When the average association scores
between genes in the set and genes outside the set,

!∈! !!→!

|!|

and

!∉! !!→!

|!"#"$\!|

,

are compared on the final step, 𝜌! is included in the variance inflation factor.
The resulting statistic revealing the association between the target gene 𝑇 and
M we refer to as the enrichment score 𝐸𝑆! (𝑇).
The same procedure was conducted for all the genes in the analyzed
datasets to obtain the enrichment p-value matrix between genes and modules
in all the datasets. Two types of analyses can be applied on the gene-module
p-value matrix. One can extract the p-values for one gene against all modules
across the datasets to obtain the association between this gene and all
modules; or extract the p-values for one module against all genes to check
the association between this module and all genes. To avoid the situation
where the final association scores are highly influenced by a few datasets with
extremely low p-values, we converted the p-values to discrete association
scores based on a significance threshold for each dataset. For the Bonferroni
multiplicity correction, the significance thresholds for the p-values are either
!.!"

assessing genes for fixed modules 𝑝!|! = # !"#$%&' or assessing modules for
!.!"

fixed genes 𝑝!|! = # !"#"$ . Gene-module associations with p-values that
survived multiple testing corrections were set equal to 1 or −1, based on the

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

enrichment direction, and 0 otherwise: 𝑆 𝑝!|! =

±1,
0,

𝑝!|! <

!.!"
# !"#$%&',

𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒

where 𝑝!|! are one-sided p-values, corresponding to either positive or
negative associations. The resulting 𝑆 𝑝!|! values were then meta-analyzed
across the datasets, and the gene-module association scores (GMAS) were
computed as the weighted averages of the scores with the weights functions
of the sample sizes combined with the inter-gene correlation coefficients
within modules. Denote 𝐷! , 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝐽 available datasets with corresponding
sample sizes 𝑛! , 𝑗 = 1, … , 𝐽 , and average inter-gene correlations 𝜌! , 𝑗 =
1, … , 𝐽 . Let the p-value obtained for the 𝑗!! dataset is 𝑝!|! (𝑗) . The final
association score is then computed as

GMAS =

!
!!! 𝑤! 𝑆(𝑝!|! (𝑗))
,
!
𝑤
!
!!!

where weight for the 𝑗!! dataset is 𝑤! =

𝑛! 𝜌! . Under the null hypothesis, if

we consider the positive and negative associations separately, the random
variables 𝑆 𝑝!|! (𝑗) follow a Bernoulli distribution with probability of success
!.!"

= # !"#$%&' . Therefore, statistic GMAS is the weighted sum of Bernoulli
variables, whose theoretical distribution is hard to establish. The weight is
proportional to the square root of the sample size in the 𝑗!! dataset. Another
important component of 𝑤! is the average correlation coefficients among
genes in the module in the 𝑗!! dataset, 𝜌! , which reflects the co-expression or
“level of activation” of the module for this dataset.
For the final decision we use thresholding of GMAS. We selected a very
stringent threshold for GMAS, so that only a small proportion of the known
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

gene-module connections are recovered. We found that a threshold of 0.268
enables us to recover 10% of the known gene-module links.
Module-Module Association Determination (M-MAD). M-MAD takes the
association p-value matrix between a target module and all genes in all
datasets (Fig. 2A bottom-left), and uses the –log10(p) values as a continuous
trait to test whether other biological modules are enriched by containing genes
that are highly associated with the target module. The analysis again uses the
competitive gene set testing method CAMERA. Our function, -log10(p),
transforms the p-values near zero to high positive values and p-values near 1
to transformed values near zero. Applied to p-values uniformly distributed in
the interval between 0 and 1, the resulting transformed values have an
exponential distribution skewed towards 0. CAMERA will then compute a pvalue for testing the equality of the average transformed values for the genes
in the other biological modules compared to all other genes. It will result in a
small p-value when many of the genes in the other biological modules are
relatively highly connected to the target module. The same analysis is
performed for all modules to achieve a final association p-value matrix
between modules. The Bonferroni correction was used to correct for the
multiple testing errors with

!.!"
#!"#$%&'

as the significance threshold. To avoid the

situation where the final association scores are highly influenced by a few
datasets with extreme low p-values, module-module connections with
enrichment p-values that survived multiple testing corrections were allocated
1 or -1, based on the enrichment directions, and 0 otherwise. The results were
then meta-analyzed across the datasets, and the module-module association
scores (MMAS) were computed as the weighted averages of the connection

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

scores by the sample sizes and inter-gene correlation coefficients within
modules across datasets.
Module network analysis. Module networks were constructed using Gephi
0.9.2 (Mathieu et al. 2009) based on either the module similarities or module
connections from M-MAD. The Fruchterman-Reingold algorithm (Fruchterman
and Reingold 1991) was used to create the network layout with a gravity value
of 10. Iterations were stopped when the network reached stability. The node
colors were obtained using the community detection algorithm (Vincent et al.
2008) embedded as the modularity tool in Gephi. Clusters with more than 20
nodes were colored to illustrate the module communities. The most frequent
10 biological terms (excluding biological meaningless words, such as “of”, “in”,
or “and”) were used to represent the modules of these communities. The
statistical characteristics of the module networks were computed using Gephi.
For the network visualization of G-MAD results for one gene, modules were
plotted according to their x and y coordinates of the module similarity network,
and the gene-module association scores (GMAS) against all modules were
used to color the modules using indicated color codes.
Gene correlation network analysis. Gene correlation networks were
constructed based on the Pearson correlation among genes of indicated
modules in respective datasets using the “layout_with_fr” function in the
igraph R package. Edges with correlation p-values lower than the indicated
cutoffs in the figure panels were plotted.
Cross validation. In order to test the predictive performance of G-MAD and
compare it with the available methods using co-expression, we performed a
cross validation analysis by removing groups of genes from modules, re25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

computing the associations between the removed genes and the reduced
module and testing if we can rediscover the removed genes (Szklarczyk et al.
2016). We applied leave-one-out cross validation for modules with no more
than 50 genes, and 10-fold cross validation for larger modules. The area
under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) is used to
estimate the performance of prediction, with an AUC of 1 indicating perfect
prediction and 0.5 indicating random guess.
Gene set enrichment analysis. Transcriptome data of uterus-specific Arid1a
knockout mice(Kim et al. 2015) were downloaded from GEO under the
accession number GSE72200. For enrichment analysis, genes were ranked
based on their fold changes between Arid1a knockout and control samples,
and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) was performed to identify the
enriched gene sets using the R/fgsea package (Subramanian et al. 2005;
Sergushichev 2016).
Transcript-phenotype correlation analysis in mouse cohorts. Phenotype
data, as well as transcriptome data of liver and white adipose tissue, from the
BXD (Wu et al. 2014) and CTB6F2 (Schadt et al. 2008) mouse cohorts were
downloaded

from

GeneNetwork

(www.genenetwork.org).

Spearman’s

correlation coefficient rho was used to calculate the correlation between the
transcript levels of ribosomal protein genes and metabolic phenotypes.
Cell culture and siRNA transfection. Human embryonic kidney (HEK) 293
cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 100
IU/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin. HEK 293 cells were grown to
approximately 70% confluence in 12-well plate. The cells were treated with
either scrambled siRNA, or human DDT / BOLA3 siRNA (Dharmacon) mixed

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

with lipofectamine 2000 to yield a final concentration of 100nM according to
the supplier’s protocol. After siRNA treatment for 48 hours, cells were
collected for quantitative real-time PCR assay. Primers used in this assay are
listed in Supplemental Table S5. Statistical significance was determined by
two-tailed Student’s t-test.
Mitochondrial function assay. Mitochondrial oxygen consumption rate
(OCR) was measured on a Seahorse XFe96 analyzer (Agilent) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. HEK 293 cells were seeded on to 96-well XF
analyzer assay plate. Cells were treated with scrambled siRNA or human
DDT / BOLA3 siRNA. After 48 hours siRNA treatment, Seahorse XFe96
analyzer was used to measure OCR of the cells. After basal OCR levels were
measured, HEK 293 cells were cumulatively treated with 1µM Oligomycin
(ATP synthase inhibitor), then 3µM carbonyl cyanide 4-(trifluoromethoxy)
phenylhydrazone (FCCP, mitochondrial uncoupler). Then, a mixture of 1µM
Antimycin A (mitochondrial respiratory chain Complex III inhibitor) and 1µM
Rotenone (Complex I inhibitor) was added. OCR levels were normalized to
total protein content per well determined by Lowry protein assay. Statistical
significance was determined by two-tailed Student’s t-test.
C. elegans experiments. Lipid droplets were stained in C. elegans as
described previously (Li et al. 2018). Inhibition of ribosome in early stage of
worms affects their development and growth, so RNAi was performed after
the worms reached adulthood. Specifically, L1 larvae of N2 worms were
grown on regular nematode growth media (NGM) plates at 20°C for 2 days
until reaching adulthood. Then worms were then transferred to RNAi plates
with 1mM IPTG containing HT115 bacteria expressing RNAi clones for

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ribosomal genes or empty vector. After 2 days of RNAi treatment, worms were
collected, washed twice with 1x PBS and then suspended in 120 µl of PBS.
Then 120 µl 2x MRWB buffer (160 mM KCl, 40 mM NaCl, 14 mM Na2EGTA,
30 mM PIPES pH 7.4, 1 mM Spermidine, 0.4 mM Spermine, 2%
paraformaldehyde, 0.2% beta- mercaptoethanol) was added. The worms were
taken through 3 freeze-thaw cycles between dry ice/ethanol mixture and warm
running tap water, followed by 1 minute spinning at 14,000g. Worms were
then washed once using PBS to remove paraformaldehyde. Oil Red O
staining of lipid droplets was performed after fixation. Worms were resuspended and dehydrated in 60% isopropanol. 250 µl of 60% Oil Red O
stain was added to each sample, and samples were incubated overnight at
room temperature. Worms were washed twice in 60% isopropanol solution
after Oil Red O staining. The region immediately behind the pharynx of each
worm was used for imaging of the lipid droplets (Li et al. 2018). The lipid
droplets were quantified using Fiji (ImageJ) as previously described (Li et al.
2018). Statistical significance was determined by two-tailed Student’s t-test.

Data access
Data Availability. All data included in the study is available from
https://systems-genetics.org/. Code Availability. Code used in the study is
available from https://github.com/lihaone/GeneBridge.

Acknowledgments

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We are grateful to the research groups who made these data publicly
available for systems biology research. We thank N. Agarwal for help in data
preprocessing. We thank the entire J.A. lab for comments and discussions.
H.L. is the recipient of a doctoral scholarship from the China Scholarship
Council. This work was supported by grants from the EPFL, the ERC (AdG787702), the SNSF (310030B-160318), the AgingX program of the Swiss
Initiative for Systems Biology (RTD 2013/153), and the NIH (R01AG043930).

Disclosure declaration
The authors declare no competing interests.

Author contributions
Conceptualization: H.L., and J.A.; Data curation: H.L.; Formal analysis: H.L.,
D.R., S.M., and J.A.; Funding acquisition: R.W.W., M.R-R., K.S., and J.A.;
Methodology: H.L., D.R., A.K., Q.H., S.M., and J.A.; Resources: H.L., D.R.,
F.P.A.D., M.B.S., S.M., and J.A.; Software: H.L., and F.P.A.D.; Validation:
H.L., T.Y.L., C-M.O., A.W.G., and E.K.; Visualization: H.L., and J.A.; Writing –
original draft: H.L., and J.A.; Writing – review & editing: H.L., S.M., and J.A.

References
Arroyo JD, Jourdain AA, Calvo SE, Ballarano CA, Doench JG, Root DE,
Mootha VK. 2016. A Genome-wide CRISPR Death Screen Identifies
Genes Essential for Oxidative Phosphorylation. Cell metabolism 24(6):
875-885.
Ashburner M, Ball CA, Blake JA, Botstein D, Butler H, Cherry JM, Davis AP,
Dolinski K, Dwight SS, Eppig JT et al. 2000. Gene ontology: tool for the
unification of biology. The Gene Ontology Consortium. Nature genetics
25(1): 25-29.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Austin CP, Battey JF, Bradley A, Bucan M, Capecchi M, Collins FS, Dove WF,
Duyk G, Dymecki S, Eppig JT et al. 2004. The knockout mouse project.
Nature genetics 36(9): 921-924.
Barabasi AL, Gulbahce N, Loscalzo J. 2011. Network medicine: a networkbased approach to human disease. Nature reviews Genetics 12(1): 5668.
Barrett T, Wilhite SE, Ledoux P, Evangelista C, Kim IF, Tomashevsky M,
Marshall KA, Phillippy KH, Sherman PM, Holko M et al. 2013. NCBI
GEO: archive for functional genomics data sets--update. Nucleic acids
research 41(Database issue): D991-995.
Bartz F, Kern L, Erz D, Zhu M, Gilbert D, Meinhof T, Wirkner U, Erfle H,
Muckenthaler M, Pepperkok R et al. 2009. Identification of cholesterolregulating genes by targeted RNAi screening. Cell metabolism 10(1):
63-75.
Bastian F, Parmentier G, Roux J, Moretti S, Laudet V, Robinson-Rechavi M.
2008. Bgee: Integrating and Comparing Heterogeneous Transcriptome
Data Among Species. In Data Integration in the Life Sciences, (ed. A
Bairoch, S Cohen-Boulakia, C Froidevaux), pp. 124-131. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Bogue MA, Grubb SC, Walton DO, Philip VM, Kolishovski G, Stearns T, Dunn
MH, Skelly DA, Kadakkuzha B, TeHennepe G et al. 2018. Mouse
Phenome Database: an integrative database and analysis suite for
curated empirical phenotype data from laboratory mice. Nucleic acids
research 46(D1): D843-D850.
Calvo SE, Clauser KR, Mootha VK. 2016. MitoCarta2.0: an updated inventory
of mammalian mitochondrial proteins. Nucleic acids research 44(D1):
D1251-1257.
Cameron JM, Janer A, Levandovskiy V, Mackay N, Rouault TA, Tong WH,
Ogilvie I, Shoubridge EA, Robinson BH. 2011. Mutations in iron-sulfur
cluster scaffold genes NFU1 and BOLA3 cause a fatal deficiency of
multiple respiratory chain and 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase enzymes.
American journal of human genetics 89(4): 486-495.
Carroll RG, Zaslona Z, Galvan-Pena S, Koppe EL, Sevin DC, Angiari S,
Triantafilou M, Triantafilou K, Modis LK, O'Neill LA. 2018. An
unexpected link between fatty acid synthase and cholesterol synthesis
in proinflammatory macrophage activation. The Journal of biological
chemistry 293(15): 5509-5521.
Carvill GL, McMahon JM, Schneider A, Zemel M, Myers CT, Saykally J,
Nguyen J, Robbiano A, Zara F, Specchio N et al. 2015. Mutations in
the GABA Transporter SLC6A1 Cause Epilepsy with Myoclonic-Atonic
Seizures. American journal of human genetics 96(5): 808-815.
Chesler EJ, Lu L, Wang J, Williams RW, Manly KF. 2004. WebQTL: rapid
exploratory analysis of gene expression and genetic networks for brain
and behavior. Nature neuroscience 7(5): 485-486.
Costanzo M, Baryshnikova A, Bellay J, Kim Y, Spear ED, Sevier CS, Ding H,
Koh JL, Toufighi K, Mostafavi S et al. 2010. The genetic landscape of a
cell. Science 327(5964): 425-431.
Croft D, O'Kelly G, Wu G, Haw R, Gillespie M, Matthews L, Caudy M,
Garapati P, Gopinath G, Jassal B et al. 2011. Reactome: a database of

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reactions, pathways and biological processes. Nucleic acids research
39(Database issue): D691-697.
D'Amico D, Sorrentino V, Auwerx J. 2017. Cytosolic Proteostasis Networks of
the Mitochondrial Stress Response. Trends in biochemical sciences
42(9): 712-725.
Dickinson ME, Flenniken AM, Ji X, Teboul L, Wong MD, White JK, Meehan
TF, Weninger WJ, Westerberg H, Adissu H et al. 2016. Highthroughput discovery of novel developmental phenotypes. Nature
537(7621): 508-514.
Dolgin E. 2017. The most popular genes in the human genome. Nature
551(7681): 427-431.
Edwards AM, Isserlin R, Bader GD, Frye SV, Willson TM, Yu FH. 2011. Too
many roads not taken. Nature 470(7333): 163-165.
Eisen MB, Spellman PT, Brown PO, Botstein D. 1998. Cluster analysis and
display of genome-wide expression patterns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A
95(25): 14863-14868.
Floyd BJ, Wilkerson EM, Veling MT, Minogue CE, Xia C, Beebe ET, Wrobel
RL, Cho H, Kremer LS, Alston CL et al. 2016. Mitochondrial Protein
Interaction Mapping Identifies Regulators of Respiratory Chain
Function. Molecular cell 63(4): 621-632.
Fruchterman TMJ, Reingold EM. 1991. Graph drawing by force-directed
placement. Software: Practice and Experience 21(11): 1129-1164.
Greene CS, Krishnan A, Wong AK, Ricciotti E, Zelaya RA, Himmelstein DS,
Zhang R, Hartmann BM, Zaslavsky E, Sealfon SC et al. 2015.
Understanding multicellular function and disease with human tissuespecific networks. Nature genetics 47(6): 569-576.
Greene CS, Troyanskaya OG. 2012. Accurate evaluation and analysis of
functional genomics data and methods. Annals of the New York
Academy of Sciences 1260: 95-100.
GTEx_Consortium. 2013. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project.
Nature genetics 45(6): 580-585.
Harrigan JA, Jacq X, Martin NM, Jackson SP. 2017. Deubiquitylating
enzymes and drug discovery: emerging opportunities. Nature reviews
Drug discovery.
Hein MY, Hubner NC, Poser I, Cox J, Nagaraj N, Toyoda Y, Gak IA,
Weisswange I, Mansfeld J, Buchholz F et al. 2015. A human
interactome in three quantitative dimensions organized by
stoichiometries and abundances. Cell 163(3): 712-723.
Horlbeck MA, Xu A, Wang M, Bennett NK, Park CY, Bogdanoff D, Adamson
B, Chow ED, Kampmann M, Peterson TR et al. 2018. Mapping the
Genetic Landscape of Human Cells. Cell 174(4): 953-967 e922.
Huttlin EL, Bruckner RJ, Paulo JA, Cannon JR, Ting L, Baltier K, Colby G,
Gebreab F, Gygi MP, Parzen H et al. 2017. Architecture of the human
interactome defines protein communities and disease networks. Nature
545(7655): 505-509.
Jiang Y Oron TR Clark WT Bankapur AR D'Andrea D Lepore R Funk CS
Kahanda I Verspoor KM Ben-Hur A et al. 2016. An expanded
evaluation of protein function prediction methods shows an
improvement in accuracy. Genome biology 17(1): 184.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Kanehisa M, Goto S, Sato Y, Furumichi M, Tanabe M. 2012. KEGG for
integration and interpretation of large-scale molecular data sets.
Nucleic acids research 40(Database issue): D109-114.
Khatri P, Sirota M, Butte AJ. 2012. Ten years of pathway analysis: current
approaches and outstanding challenges. PLoS Comput Biol 8(2):
e1002375.
Kim TH, Yoo JY, Wang Z, Lydon JP, Khatri S, Hawkins SM, Leach RE,
Fazleabas AT, Young SL, Lessey BA et al. 2015. ARID1A Is Essential
for Endometrial Function during Early Pregnancy. PLoS genetics 11(9):
e1005537.
Klootwijk ED, Reichold M, Helip-Wooley A, Tolaymat A, Broeker C, Robinette
SL, Reinders J, Peindl D, Renner K, Eberhart K et al. 2014.
Mistargeting of peroxisomal EHHADH and inherited renal Fanconi's
syndrome. The New England journal of medicine 370(2): 129-138.
Kolesnikov N, Hastings E, Keays M, Melnichuk O, Tang YA, Williams E, Dylag
M, Kurbatova N, Brandizi M, Burdett T et al. 2015. ArrayExpress
update--simplifying data submissions. Nucleic acids research
43(Database issue): D1113-1116.
Lachmann A, Torre D, Keenan AB, Jagodnik KM, Lee HJ, Wang L, Silverstein
MC, Ma'ayan A. 2018. Massive mining of publicly available RNA-seq
data from human and mouse. Nature communications 9(1): 1366.
Langfelder P, Horvath S. 2008. WGCNA: an R package for weighted
correlation network analysis. BMC bioinformatics 9: 559.
Lefebvre-Legendre L, Vaillier J, Benabdelhak H, Velours J, Slonimski PP, di
Rago JP. 2001. Identification of a nuclear gene (FMC1) required for the
assembly/stability of yeast mitochondrial F(1)-ATPase in heat stress
conditions. The Journal of biological chemistry 276(9): 6789-6796.
Li H, Wang X, Rukina D, Huang Q, Lin T, Sorrentino V, Zhang H, Bou
Sleiman M, Arends D, McDaid A et al. 2018. An Integrated Systems
Genetics and Omics Toolkit to Probe Gene Function. Cell systems
6(1): 90-102 e104.
Li Y, Agarwal P, Rajagopalan D. 2008. A global pathway crosstalk network.
Bioinformatics 24(12): 1442-1447.
Li Y, Calvo SE, Gutman R, Liu JS, Mootha VK. 2014. Expansion of biological
pathways based on evolutionary inference. Cell 158(1): 213-225.
Li Y, Jourdain AA, Calvo SE, Liu JS, Mootha VK. 2017. CLIC, a tool for
expanding biological pathways based on co-expression across
thousands of datasets. PLoS computational biology 13(7): e1005653.
Lissanu Deribe Y, Sun Y, Terranova C, Khan F, Martinez-Ledesma J, Gay J,
Gao G, Mullinax RA, Khor T, Feng N et al. 2018. Mutations in the
SWI/SNF complex induce a targetable dependence on oxidative
phosphorylation in lung cancer. Nature medicine 24(7): 1047-1057.
Mailman MD, Feolo M, Jin Y, Kimura M, Tryka K, Bagoutdinov R, Hao L,
Kiang A, Paschall J, Phan L et al. 2007. The NCBI dbGaP database of
genotypes and phenotypes. Nature genetics 39(10): 1181-1186.
Marcotte EM, Pellegrini M, Ng HL, Rice DW, Yeates TO, Eisenberg D. 1999.
Detecting protein function and protein-protein interactions from genome
sequences. Science 285(5428): 751-753.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Mathieu B, Sebastien H, Mathieu J. 2009. Gephi: An Open Source Software
for Exploring and Manipulating Networks. International AAAI
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
Merkwirth C, Jovaisaite V, Durieux J, Matilainen O, Jordan SD, Quiros PM,
Steffen KK, Williams EG, Mouchiroud L, Tronnes SU et al. 2016. Two
Conserved Histone Demethylases Regulate Mitochondrial StressInduced Longevity. Cell 165(5): 1209-1223.
Mitchell JA, Aronson AR, Mork JG, Folk LC, Humphrey SM, Ward JM. 2003.
Gene indexing: characterization and analysis of NLM's GeneRIFs.
AMIA Annual Symposium proceedings AMIA Symposium: 460-464.
Obayashi T, Kagaya Y, Aoki Y, Tadaka S, Kinoshita K. 2019. COXPRESdb
v7: a gene coexpression database for 11 animal species supported by
23 coexpression platforms for technical evaluation and evolutionary
inference. Nucleic acids research 47(D1): D55-D62.
Ortega Z, Lucas JJ. 2014. Ubiquitin-proteasome system involvement in
Huntington's disease. Frontiers in molecular neuroscience 7: 77.
Pandey AK, Lu L, Wang X, Homayouni R, Williams RW. 2014. Functionally
enigmatic genes: a case study of the brain ignorome. PloS one 9(2):
e88889.
Pellegrini M, Marcotte EM, Thompson MJ, Eisenberg D, Yeates TO. 1999.
Assigning protein functions by comparative genome analysis: protein
phylogenetic profiles. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 96(8): 4285-4288.
Pinero J, Bravo A, Queralt-Rosinach N, Gutierrez-Sacristan A, Deu-Pons J,
Centeno E, Garcia-Garcia J, Sanz F, Furlong LI. 2017. DisGeNET: a
comprehensive platform integrating information on human diseaseassociated genes and variants. Nucleic acids research 45(D1): D833D839.
Radivojac P Clark WT Oron TR Schnoes AM Wittkop T Sokolov A Graim K
Funk C Verspoor K Ben-Hur A et al. 2013. A large-scale evaluation of
computational protein function prediction. Nature methods 10(3): 221227.
Rolland T, Tasan M, Charloteaux B, Pevzner SJ, Zhong Q, Sahni N, Yi S,
Lemmens I, Fontanillo C, Mosca R et al. 2014. A proteome-scale map
of the human interactome network. Cell 159(5): 1212-1226.
Ross JM, Olson L, Coppotelli G. 2015. Mitochondrial and Ubiquitin
Proteasome System Dysfunction in Ageing and Disease: Two Sides of
the Same Coin? International journal of molecular sciences 16(8):
19458-19476.
Roy A, Kucukural A, Zhang Y. 2010. I-TASSER: a unified platform for
automated protein structure and function prediction. Nature protocols
5(4): 725-738.
Schadt EE, Molony C, Chudin E, Hao K, Yang X, Lum PY, Kasarskis A,
Zhang B, Wang S, Suver C et al. 2008. Mapping the genetic
architecture of gene expression in human liver. PLoS biology 6(5):
e107.
Schriml LM, Mitraka E, Munro J, Tauber B, Schor M, Nickle L, Felix V, Jeng L,
Bearer C, Lichenstein R et al. 2019. Human Disease Ontology 2018
update: classification, content and workflow expansion. Nucleic acids
research 47(D1): D955-D962.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Schroeder EA, Raimundo N, Shadel GS. 2013. Epigenetic silencing mediates
mitochondria stress-induced longevity. Cell metabolism 17(6): 954-964.
Sergushichev A. 2016. An algorithm for fast preranked gene set enrichment
analysis using cumulative statistic calculation. bioRxiv.
Stark C, Breitkreutz BJ, Reguly T, Boucher L, Breitkreutz A, Tyers M. 2006.
BioGRID: a general repository for interaction datasets. Nucleic acids
research 34(Database issue): D535-539.
Stegle O, Parts L, Piipari M, Winn J, Durbin R. 2012. Using probabilistic
estimation of expression residuals (PEER) to obtain increased power
and interpretability of gene expression analyses. Nature protocols 7(3):
500-507.
Stoeger T, Gerlach M, Morimoto RI, Nunes Amaral LA. 2018. Large-scale
investigation of the reasons why potentially important genes are
ignored. PLoS biology 16(9): e2006643.
Stroud DA, Surgenor EE, Formosa LE, Reljic B, Frazier AE, Dibley MG,
Osellame LD, Stait T, Beilharz TH, Thorburn DR et al. 2016. Accessory
subunits are integral for assembly and function of human mitochondrial
complex I. Nature 538(7623): 123-126.
Subramanian A, Tamayo P, Mootha VK, Mukherjee S, Ebert BL, Gillette MA,
Paulovich A, Pomeroy SL, Golub TR, Lander ES et al. 2005. Gene set
enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based approach for interpreting
genome-wide expression profiles. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 102(43): 1554515550.
Szklarczyk D, Franceschini A, Wyder S, Forslund K, Heller D, Huerta-Cepas
J, Simonovic M, Roth A, Santos A, Tsafou KP et al. 2015. STRING
v10: protein-protein interaction networks, integrated over the tree of
life. Nucleic acids research 43(Database issue): D447-452.
Szklarczyk R, Megchelenbrink W, Cizek P, Ledent M, Velemans G,
Szklarczyk D, Huynen MA. 2016. WeGET: predicting new genes for
molecular systems by weighted co-expression. Nucleic acids research
44(D1): D567-573.
Tabach Y, Billi AC, Hayes GD, Newman MA, Zuk O, Gabel H, Kamath R,
Yacoby K, Chapman B, Garcia SM et al. 2013. Identification of small
RNA pathway genes using patterns of phylogenetic conservation and
divergence. Nature 493(7434): 694-698.
Theisen DJ, Davidson JT, Briseño CG, Gargaro M, Lauron EJ, Wang Q,
Desai P, Durai V, Bagadia P, Brickner JR et al. 2018. WDFY4 is
required for cross-presentation in response to viral and tumor antigens.
Science 362(6415): 694-699.
Tian Y, Garcia G, Bian Q, Steffen KK, Joe L, Wolff S, Meyer BJ, Dillin A.
2016. Mitochondrial Stress Induces Chromatin Reorganization to
Promote Longevity and UPR(mt). Cell 165(5): 1197-1208.
Tong AH, Lesage G, Bader GD, Ding H, Xu H, Xin X, Young J, Berriz GF,
Brost RL, Chang M et al. 2004. Global mapping of the yeast genetic
interaction network. Science 303(5659): 808-813.
Uhlen M, Fagerberg L, Hallstrom BM, Lindskog C, Oksvold P, Mardinoglu A,
Sivertsson A, Kampf C, Sjostedt E, Asplund A et al. 2015. Proteomics.
Tissue-based map of the human proteome. Science 347(6220):
1260419.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

van Dam S, Craig T, de Magalhaes JP. 2015. GeneFriends: a human RNAseq-based gene and transcript co-expression database. Nucleic acids
research 43(Database issue): D1124-1132.
Vincent DB, Jean-Loup G, Renaud L, Etienne L. 2008. Fast unfolding of
communities in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics:
Theory and Experiment 2008(10): P10008.
Warde-Farley D, Donaldson SL, Comes O, Zuberi K, Badrawi R, Chao P,
Franz M, Grouios C, Kazi F, Lopes CT et al. 2010. The GeneMANIA
prediction server: biological network integration for gene prioritization
and predicting gene function. Nucleic acids research 38(Web Server
issue): W214-220.
Williams EG, Auwerx J. 2015. The Convergence of Systems and Reductionist
Approaches in Complex Trait Analysis. Cell 162(1): 23-32.
Williams EG, Wu Y, Ryu D, Kim JY, Lan J, Hasan M, Wolski W, Jha P, Halter
C, Auwerx J et al. 2018. Quantifying and Localizing the Mitochondrial
Proteome Across Five Tissues in A Mouse Population. Molecular &
cellular proteomics : MCP.
Wu D, Smyth GK. 2012. Camera: a competitive gene set test accounting for
inter-gene correlation. Nucleic acids research 40(17): e133.
Wu Y, Williams EG, Dubuis S, Mottis A, Jovaisaite V, Houten SM, Argmann
CA, Faridi P, Wolski W, Kutalik Z et al. 2014. Multilayered genetic and
omics dissection of mitochondrial activity in a mouse reference
population. Cell 158(6): 1415-1430.
Zhu Q, Wong AK, Krishnan A, Aure MR, Tadych A, Zhang R, Corney DC,
Greene CS, Bongo LA, Kristensen VN et al. 2015. Targeted exploration
and analysis of large cross-platform human transcriptomic compendia.
Nature methods 12(3): 211-214, 213 p following 214.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures and Figure legends

Figure 1. Known annotations for human genes. The number of annotations
per gene for human genes in GO (A), GeneRIF (D), and number of
publications in Pubmed (G). The top 10 genes with the most
annotations/publications in GO (B), GeneRIF (E), and PubMed (H) are rank
ordered. The percentage of all annotations/publications covering the top 20%
most annotated genes in human (C, F, I).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Gene-Module Association Determination (G-MAD).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A, G-MAD methodology. See text and Materials and Methods for detailed
description.
B, Co-expressions among genes of pancreatic secretion module across
tissues in human. The average correlation coefficient across all genes in the
pancreatic secretion module in around 1,300 human expression datasets from
18 major tissues is used as to illustrate the co-expressions of this module
across tissues. Genes in the pancreatic secretion module have higher coexpression in datasets from the pancreas compared to those from other
tissues.
C, Module similarity network showing the composition similarities across all
module pairs. Modules were detected using community detection algorithm
embedded in Gephi and indicated in different colors. The 10 most frequent
words of the module terms in each module were used to represent the
module, and can be found at Supplemental Table S2.
D, Distribution of GMAS of all gene-module pairs with known connections in
human. 10% of the known gene-module pairs have GMAS over 0.268.
E, G-MAD revealed the potential role of WDFY4 in T cell activation and
immune response. The threshold of significant gene-module association is
indicated by the red dashed line. Modules are organized by the module
similarities. Known modules connected to WDFY4 from annotations are
shown in red dots (there is no known connected module for WDFY4), and
other modules with GMAS over the threshold are shown in black dots. Dot
sizes reflect the GMAS of WDFY4 against the respective modules.
F, G-MAD identified the involvement of known as well as 20 novel genes in
cholesterol biosynthesis. The threshold of significant gene-module association
is indicated by the red dashed line. Genes are organized by the genetic
positions across chromosomes. Genes annotated to be involved in cholesterol
biosynthesis are shown in red dots, and novel genes with GMAS over the
threshold are shown in black dots. Novel genes conserved in human, mouse
and rat are highlighted in red bold text.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. G-MAD identifies tissue-specific associated modules for
EHHADH by using datasets from different tissues.
A, Expression patterns of EHHADH across tissues. The figure was adapted
from the Human Protein Atlas.
B-D, G-MAD of EHHADH in human using datasets from all tissues (B), from
liver (C), or from kidney (D). The threshold of significant gene-module
association is indicated by the red dashed line. Modules are organized by
their similarities. Known modules connected to EHHADH from gene
annotations are shown in red dots, and other modules with GMAS over the
threshold are shown by black dots.
E, Comparison of G-MAD results of EHHADH in liver and kidney. Known
modules connected to EHHADH are shown in red dots. The threshold of
significant gene-module association is indicated by the red dashed line.
Modules significantly associated with EHHADH only in one specific tissue are
highlighted. The comparison of the association results of EHHADH in liver and
kidney can be found at Supplemental Table S3.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. G-MAD predicts novel genes linked to mitochondria.
A, G-MAD Manhattan plot of the respiratory electron transport (Reactome: RHSA-611105) module in human. Genes are arranged based on their genetic
positions, and genes annotated to be involved in the module are colored red.
Genes with absolute GMAS over 0.268 are considered significantly
associated. DDT, BOLA3, and ARID1A are labeled.
B, Venn diagram of novel genes associated with respiratory electron transport
module in human, mouse and rat. 707 genes were predicted to be mitoproteins by G-MAD in all three species. 351 genes, including
DMAC1/C9orf123, NDUFAF8/C17orf89, FMC1/C7orf55, and BOLA3, were
recently annotated to be involved in mitochondrial respiration in at least one
species. While 356 genes, including DDT, C16orf91, C15orf61, FLAD1, and
GRHPR, have not been previously linked with mitochondria based on the

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

current annotations. The association results for all genes in human, mouse
and rat can be found at Supplemental Table S4.
C, DDT associates with mitochondrial respiratory chain modules in human.
The threshold of significant gene-module association is indicated by the red
dashed line. Modules are organized by module similarities. Known modules
connected to DDT from annotations are highlighted in red, and other modules
with GMAS over the threshold are colored in black. Dot sizes reflect the
GMAS of DDT against the respective modules.
D, Module similarity network showing the modules associated with DDT.
Modules are plotted based on their layout in Fig. 2C and colored based on
their GMAS against DDT.
E, Silencing DDT expression in HEK293 cells decreases expression levels of
indicated genes involved in mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes. Error
bars represent standard errors. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001. n=12.
F, DDT knockdown leads to the reduction of oxygen consumption rate (OCR)
as a reflection of mitochondrial respiration in human HEK293 cells. Addition of
specific mitochondrial inhibitors, including the oligomycin (ATPase inhibitor),
FCCP (uncoupling agent), and rotenone/antimycin A (electron transport chain
inhibitors) are indicated by arrows.
G, ARID1A negatively associates with mitochondrial respiratory chain in
human. The threshold of significant gene-module association is indicated by
the red dashed line. Modules are organized by the module similarities. Known
modules connected to ARID1A from extant annotations are highlighted in red,
and other modules with GMAS over the threshold are colored in black. Dot
sizes are proportional to GMAS of the respective modules.
H, Module similarity network showing the modules associated with ARID1A.
Modules are colored based on their GMAS against ARID1A.
I, Arid1a uterine-specific knockout mice showed positive enrichment in
mitochondrial respiration modules. Nominal p-values from the GSEA results
are used to plot against normalized enrichment score (NES), with dot sizes
indicating the number of genes in the modules and transparencies indicating
the false discovery rate (FDR).
J, Enrichment plot showing the enrichment of genes included in respiratory
electron transport in uterus-specific Arid1a knockout mice compared to wildtype controls. Genes are ranked based on the fold change between Arid1a
knockout and wild-type mice, and the ranking positions of genes in respiratory
electron transport are labeled as vertical black bars. NES, normalized
enrichment score. FDR, false discovery rate.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Module-Module Association Determination (M-MAD) reveals
module connections.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A, Scheme of the M-MAD methodology in detecting module connections.
Intermediate results of G-MAD for all modules are further processed and used
as the basis of M-MAD. The -log10(p) values of G-MAD for the target module
against all genes in each dataset are used as the gene statistic for the
module, and connections between the target module and all modules are
calculated using CAMERA. The results are then meta-analyzed by taking the
sample sizes and inter-gene correlations of all datasets to compute the
module-module association score (MMAS) between modules.
B, Module association network showing the connections across all modules.
Colors of nodes represent the module modules defined in the global module
similarity network in Fig. 2C. Module clusters with respective colors are
identified and labeled. Modules used as examples in following figures are
highlighted in circle.
C, Comparison of pairwise module connections derived from module
similarities in Fig. 2D and associations (from M-MAD) in Fig. 5B. A red
dashed line is plotted when the pairwise module similarity equals association.
The distributions of module similarity and association scores are illustrated in
the top and at the right of the plot and are colored in red and blue,
respectively. Two examples of novel module connections are labeled.
D-E, Subnetworks showing the association between mitochondrial and
proteasomal modules (D), and mitochondrial and histone demethylation
modules (E). Edges colors indicate the significance of module connections,
with red as positive and blue as negative.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. M-MAD reveals a negative association between the ribosome
and lipid biosynthetic modules.
A, Subnetwork for the ribosome and lipid biosynthetic modules. The colors of
the edges indicate the significance of module connections, with red as
positive and blue as negative.
B, Lipid biosynthetic process negatively connected with ribosomal modules in
human. The threshold of significant module-module connection is indicated by
the red dashed line. Modules are organized by the module similarities. Dot
sizes are proportional to MMAS of the respective modules.
C-D, Transcripts of genes encoding for ribosomal proteins in the liver
negatively correlate with metabolic traits, such as body weight, fat mass,
plasma glucose and cholesterol levels, in the BXD (C) and CTB6F2 (D)
mouse cohorts. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001.
E, Feeding adult C. elegans with RNAi clones of ribosomal proteins, including
rps-10, rpl-14, and rpl-26, results in the accumulation of lipids, as reflected by
Oil Red O staining. Experimental scheme and additional examples are shown
in Supplemental Fig. S7. ***, p < 0.001. ev, empty vector. n=3.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Figures

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S1. Statistical summary of available annotations for genes in M.
musculus (A), R. norvegicus (B), D. melanogaster (C), C. elegans (D),
and S. cerevisiae (E). The number of annotations per gene in GO (1),
GeneRIF (3), and the number of publications in PubMed (5) for respective
species. The percentage of the annotations/ publications covering the top
20% most annotated genes (2, 4, 6).

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S2. Tissue specific co-expression of modules.
A, Heatmap showing the correlation coefficient averages of genes (𝜌) in
modules from expression data of a subset of all human datasets. Datasets
from different tissues are arranged and colored (top bar). Modules are
clustered in rows using hierarchical clustering. 𝜌 values for each module are
centered and scaled per module.
B, E, Distribution of the co-expression of genes in the “collecting duct acid
secretion” (B) or “lamellar body” (E) module across tissues in human. The
average correlation coefficient of the gene pairs of the module in 1,300 human
expression datasets from 18 major tissues was used as to illustrate the coexpressions of this module across tissues. Genes in “collecting duct acid

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

secretion” (B) and “lamellar body” (E) module have higher co-expression in
datasets from kidney and lung, respectively, indicating the potential to assign
tissue-specificity.
C-G, Pearson correlation network of genes in the “collecting duct acid
secretion” (C, D) or “lamellar body” (F, G) module in representative datasets
of lung (C, F) and kidney (D, G). The number of genes (nodes) and gene pairs
(edges) that survive the indicated threshold of correlation significance are
shown. Genes in the “collecting duct acid secretion” module have higher coexpression in datasets from the kidney (C) than the lung (D), while genes in
the “lamellar body” module have higher co-expression in datasets from the
lung (F) than the kidney (G).

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S3. Comparison of the predictive performance of G-MAD with
available methods.
The predictive performance of G-MAD is compared to WeGET using crossvalidation. Cross validation evaluates the robustness of the methods by
removing the genes from the query module and test the performance in
redetecting them. Performance of the method is computed as the area under
the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) for each module. A high
AUC indicates that most of the genes in the module are rediscovered when
they are removed from the module in the analysis.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S4. G-MAD in mouse and rat confirms the gene-module connections
between WDFY4 and T cell activation, and links 20 new genes with
cholesterol biosynthesis.
A, B, G-MAD of Wdfy4 in mouse (A) and rat (B) confirms its involvement in T
cell activation and immune response. The threshold of significant genemodule association is indicated by the red dashed line. Modules are
organized by the module similarities. Known modules connected to Wdfy4
from annotations are shown in red dots (no connected modules for Wdfy4),
and other modules with GMAS over the threshold are shown with black dots.
C, D, G-MAD confirms the involvement of novel genes in cholesterol
biosynthesis in mouse (C) and rat (D). The threshold of significant genemodule association is indicated by the red dashed line. Genes are arranged
based on their genetic positions. Genes annotated to be involved in
cholesterol biosynthesis are shown in red dots, and genes with GMAS over
0.268 are shown in black dots. Novel genes conserved in human, mouse and
rat are highlighted in red bold text. Mvd and Mvk (highlighted in blue text in D)
are included in the annotation of cholesterol biosynthesis module in human
and mouse, but not in rat.
E, Venn diagram comparing G-MAD results of cholesterol biosynthesis in
human, mouse, and rat. 20 novel genes were identified with conserved
associations with cholesterol biosynthesis in all 3 species.

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S5. G-MAD identifies tissue-specific associated modules for
SLC6A1 by using datasets from different tissues.
A, Expression patterns of SLC6A1 across tissues. The figure was adapted
from the Human Protein Atlas.
B-D, G-MAD of SLC6A1 in human using datasets from all tissues (B), from
brain (C), or from liver (D). The threshold of significant gene-module
association is indicated by the red dashed line. Modules are organized by
their similarities. Known modules connected to SLC6A1 from gene
annotations are shown in red dots, and other modules with GMAS over the
threshold are shown by black dots.
E, Comparison of G-MAD results of SLC6A1 in brain and liver. Known
modules connected to SLC6A1 are shown in red dots. The threshold of
significant gene-module association is indicated by the red dashed line.
Modules significantly associated with SLC6A1 only in one specific tissue are
highlighted. The comparison of the association results of SLC6A1 in brain and
liver can be found at Supplemental Table S4.

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S6. G-MAD verifies the potential
mitochondrial respiration in mouse and rat.

involvement

of

DDT

in

A, B, G-MAD of respiratory electron transport in mouse (A) and rat (B). The
threshold of significant gene-module association is indicated by the red
dashed line. Genes are arranged based on their genetic positions. Genes
annotated to be involved in respiratory electron transport are shown in red
dots, and other genes with GMAS over 0.268 are highlighted by black dots.

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

C, D, G-MAD of Ddt in mouse (C) and rat (D) confirms its involvement in
mitochondrial respiratory chain. The threshold of significant gene-module
association is indicated by the red dashed line. Modules are organized by
their similarities. Known modules connected to Ddt from gene annotations are
shown in red dots, and other modules with GMAS over the threshold are
shown by black dots.
E, F, Network plots showing the significantly connected modules of Ddt in
mouse (E) and rat (F). Modules are colored based on their GMAS against
Ddt.
G, G-MAD of ddt/mif-2 in C. elegans confirms its involvement in mitochondrial
respiratory chain function also in invertebrates. The threshold of significant
gene-module association is indicated by the red dashed line. Modules are
organized by their similarities. Known modules connected to ddt/mif-2 from
gene annotations are shown in red dots, and other modules with GMAS over
the threshold are shown by black dots.
H, DDT RNAi reduced basal and maximum oxygen consumption rate (OCR)
in HEK293 cells. Results were computed from Fig. 4F. ***, p < 0.001.

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S7. G-MAD confirms the involvement of BOLA3 in mitochondrial
respiration.
A-D, BOLA3/Bola3/bola-3 associates with mitochondrial respiratory chain
modules in human (A), mouse (B), rat (C), and C. elegans (D). The threshold
of significant gene-module association is indicated by the red dashed line.
Modules are organized by module similarities. Known modules connected to
BOLA3/Bola3/bola-3 from annotations are highlighted in red (no connected
modules for BOLA3/Bola3/bola-3), and other modules with GMAS over the
threshold are colored in black. Dot sizes reflect the GMAS of BOLA3 against
the respective modules.
E, Silencing BOLA3 expression in HEK293 cells decreases expression levels
of indicated genes involved in mitochondrial respiratory chain complexes.
Error bars represent standard errors. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001.
n=9.
F, BOLA3 knockdown leads to the reduction of oxygen consumption rate
(OCR) as a reflection of mitochondrial respiration in human HEK293 cells.
Addition of specific mitochondrial inhibitors, including the oligomycin (ATPase
inhibitor), FCCP (uncoupling agent), and rotenone/antimycin A (electron
transport chain inhibitors) are indicated.

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S8. G-MAD verifies the negative association of Arid1a with
mitochondrial respiration in mouse and rat.
A, B, G-MAD of Arid1a in mouse (A) and rat (B) confirms its negative
association with mitochondrial respiratory chain. The threshold of significant
gene-module association is indicated by the red dashed line; note that the
associations are only suggestive in the mouse. Modules are organized by
their similarities. Known modules connected to Arid1a from gene annotations
are shown in red dots, and other modules with GMAS over the threshold are
shown by black dots.
C, D, Network plot showing the significantly connected modules of Arid1a in
mouse (C) and rat (D). Modules are colored based on their GMAS against
Arid1a.

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S9. Comparison of module similarity network and module
association network.
Module network obtained from module similarity (A) and association (B; MMAD) were put together to facilitate the comparison.

56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S10. M-MAD and G-MAD identify the connections between
respiratory electron transport chain and proteasome, as well as histone
lysine demethylation.
A-F, M-MAD results for proteasome (A-C) and histone lysine demethylation
(D-F) in human (A, D), mouse (B, E), and rat (C, F). The threshold of
significant module-module connection is indicated by the red dashed line.
Modules are organized by the module similarities. Dot sizes are proportional
to MMAS of the respective modules.
G, G-MAD results for electron transport chain from human and mouse are
plotted in the x and y axes, respectively. Genes annotated to be involved in
respective modules are indicated in different colors.
57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig. S11. Validations of the negative association between ribosome and
lipid biosynthetic modules.
A-B, M-MAD results for lipid biosynthetic process in mouse (A) and rat (B).
The threshold of significant module-module connection is indicated by the red
dashed line; note that the associations are only suggestive in the mouse.
Modules are organized by the module similarities. Dot sizes are proportional
to MMAS of the respective modules.
C-D, Transcripts of genes encoding for ribosomal proteins in the white
adipose tissue negatively correlate with metabolic traits in the BXD (C) and
CTB6F2 (D) mouse cohorts. *, p < 0.05; **, p < 0.01; ***, p < 0.001. ScWAT,
subcutaneous white adipose tissue.
E, Scheme of the experimental design. L1 worm larvae were grown on regular
NGM plates at 20°C for 2 days and then transferred to RNAi plates with 1mM
IPTG containing HT115 bacteria expressing RNAi clones for ribosomal genes
or empty vector (ev). After 2 days, worms were collected and lipid droplets
were stained using Oil Red O.
58

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/649079; this version posted May 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

F, Representative images of worm lipid droplet staining after RNAi of
ribosomal genes.
G, Quantification of the lipid droplet staining intensity in F. *, p < 0.05; **, p <
0.01; ***, p < 0.001. n=3.

Supplemental Tables
Supplemental Table S1. Datasets used in this study.
Supplemental Table S2. Top 10 most frequent terms of the module clusters
in Fig. 2C.
Supplemental Table S3. Tissue-specific association of EHHADH in kidney
and liver tissues in humans.
Supplemental Table S4. Tissue-specific association of SLC6A1 in brain and
liver tissues in humans.
Supplemental Table S5. G-MAD results on respiratory electron transport in
human, mouse and rat.
Supplemental Table S6. qPCR primer sequences used in this study.

59

