bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Signaling gradients in surface dynamics as basis for planarian regeneration
Arnd Scheel 1 , and Angela Stevens 2 , and Christoph Tenbrock 2 ,
1 University
2 University

of Minnesota, School of Mathematics, 206 Church St. S.E., Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA
of Münster (WWU), Applied Mathematics, Einsteinstr. 62, D-48149 Münster, Germany

Abstract
We introduce and analyze a mathematical model for the regeneration of planarian flatworms. This system of
differential equations incorporates dynamics of head and tail cells which express positional control genes that in
turn translate into localized signals that guide stem cell differentiation. Orientation and positional information
is encoded in the dynamics of a long range wnt-related signaling gradient. We motivate our model in relation
to experimental data and demonstrate how it correctly reproduces cut and graft experiments. In particular, our
system improves on previous models by preserving polarity in regeneration, over orders of magnitude in body size
during cutting experiments and growth phases. Our model relies on tristability in cell density dynamics, between
head, trunk, and tail. In addition, key to polarity preservation in regeneration, our system includes sensitivity of
cell differentiation to gradients of wnt-related signals relative to the tissue surface. This process is particularly
relevant in a small tissue layer close to wounds during their healing, and modeled here in a robust fashion through
dynamic boundary conditions.

1

Introduction

Planarians are nonparasitic flatworms commonly found in freshwater streams and ponds [62, 64] with a body size in
the mm-scale. They possess the ability to regenerate after rather severe injuries to their body. In extreme cases, the
entire organism can regenerate perfectly from a fragment just 0.5% of the original size. The potential of the relevant
processes has helped direct a tremendous amount of attention toward studying mechanisms during regeneration in
these organisms.
The purpose of this paper is to present a minimal model, informed by experimental data, that reproduces this
fascinating regenerative behavior. To the best of our knowledge, the mathematical model we introduce here, is
to date the only one, based on reacting and diffusing species, that is able to correctly recover most of the typical
cutting and grafting experiments. In particular, our model shows preservation of polarity during regeneration small
tissue fragments. This reflects experimental findings where small tissue parts cut from a planarian regenerate to a
fully functioning and intact organism with head and tailpositioned such, that the original orientation of the tissue
fragment is respected. On the other hand, when tissue parts are cut from a donor and implanted into a host, the
newly created planarian integrates the positional information of the tissue fragment from the donor with the new
positional information it obtains from the host.
The mechanism proposed here resolves a conundrum in modeling efforts. In fact, many models of spontaneous
formation of finite-size structure in unstructured tissue allude to a Turing type mechanism to select a finite wavelength.
These types of models have often been discussed in the context of regeneration phenomena in hydra, which exhibit
similar robustness features as planarian regeneration that we focus on here. Regeneration of hydra has been one of
the central motivations for many studies of activator-inhibitor type systems [40]. Such Turing mechanisms however
do not scale across several orders of magnitude as seen in the patterning of planarians, nor do they incorporate robust
selection of polarity. In the remainder of this introduction, we briefly describe the species and kinetics in our model,
the role of dynamic boundary conditions, and the key experiments that we aim to mimic in our modeling efforts.
Cell types and signaling agents. We focus on the ante-posterior axis, describing dynamics in a one-dimensional
domain x ∈ [−L, L], populated by different cell types and signaling agents. Head cells h and tail cells d are generated
from stem cells s through differentiation. Head and tail cells generate signals uh and ud , respectively. In addition, we
model production and diffusion of a long-range wnt-related signal w, in the following often referred to as wnt-signal
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in short, that encodes orientational information through its gradient. We model random motion of cells and diffusion
of signal molecules U (t, x) = (s, h, d, uh , ud , w)(t, x) through diffusion coefficients Dj , and postulate kinetics
• Fs (s, uh , ud ) for proliferation and differentiation of stem cells;
• Fh (s, h, uh ), Fd (s, d, ud ) for differentiation of stem cells into head and tail cells and death of those;
• Fuh (h, d, uh ), Fud (h, d, ud ) for regulation of the signals uh and ud by head and tail cells;
• Fw (h, d, w) for degradation and production of the wnt-related signal by head and tail cells, respectively.
The kinetics of Fs regulate a near-constant supply of stem-cells. The dynamics for the signals uh and ud , which are
produced by head and tail cells but degraded by reactions with tail and head cells, respectively, encode tristability
between a head-only, a tail-only, and a zero state. The long-range signal w is produced by tail cells and degraded by
reactions with head cells. As a result, a healthy planarian consists of a high concentration of h near x = −L, a high
concentration of d near x = L, and a near-constant gradient of w in x ∈ (−L, L), see Figure 2.1.
wnt-related regulation of cell types. We emphasize here that differentiation rates do not depend on w in our
model. In other words, we do not incorporate mechanisms that convert levels of the wnt-related signal (or other
long-range signals) into positional information that in turn directs the differentiation process. Such mechanisms,
often referred to as the French-flag model [86, 87], are widely assumed to play a key role in early development
and likely also have significant influence on the regeneration of planarians [64]. Here, we omit this dependence for
several reasons. First, we believe that such positional information is inherently inapt at explaining the preservation
of polarity, since the absolute levels of the wnt-signal play apparently little role in the regeneration from small tissue
fragments. This is exemplified by the robustness of regeneration and polarity in regards to the location of the cut out
tissue fragment, near head, near tail, or from central parts of the body. Second, such information is not necessary
in the early stages of the regeneration, but seems to be relevant only later, when also the size of functional regions
such as head or tail are regulated. Lastly, related to this latter point, there is little concrete information so far on
the nature of biological mechanisms that would accomplish this translation of, for instance, wnt-signal levels into
an information for differentiation of stem cells in a robust fashion. Therefore we see value in not simplifying the
modeling task by the addition of such somewhat poorly substantiated regulatory mechanisms.
Rather than using positional information based on the absolute value of the wnt-signal, our mathematical model
is crucially based on the detection of gradients of wnt, in particular the orientation of the gradient relative to the
respective body edge (encoded in the outer normal of the boundary). We see this orientation of the gradient as an in
some sense necessary, minimal information, to guide regeneration while at the same time preserving polarity. This
detection of gradient orientation is encoded in boundary dynamics that we shall explain next.
Boundary dynamics. Cutting experiments eliminate head and/or tail cells, therefore ultimately influence the
wnt-pathway and destroy the associated signaling gradient. We therefore include boundary dynamics into our model
which represent wound healing processes at wound edges that in particular lead to regeneration of head, tail, and
ultimately reestablish the signaling gradient of w. This is due to fast differentiation of stem cells close to the
wound edges. Differentiation into head versus tail cells is guided by information on the normal derivative of the
residual signal w in the body fragment. We model these boundary dynamics through dynamic boundary conditions
(sometimes referred to as Wentzell boundary conditions in the literature). Therefore, we introduce values U± (t) of
all cell and signal concentrations at the left and right boundary compartment, respectively, that specifically act as
Dirichlet conditions for the chemical species U (t, x). We then introduce differential equations for U± (t) based on
a diffusive flux ∂ν U to ensure mass balance, the same kinetics Fj , now evaluated at the boundary, and, crucially,
one additional term that accounts for strong differentiation of stem cells into head and tail cells, namely s · Ψh/d ,
during wound healing. We postulate that, as a key ingredient to robust regeneration and preservation of polarity,

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the production rate Ψh/d = Ψh/d (h, d, ∂ν w) depends sensitively on the normal derivative of the long-range signal w,
measuring roughly the sign of ∂ν w. We model this switching behavior through a rate function
Ψh (h, d, ∂ν w) = τ (1 − h)(1 − d)χε>θ (∂ν w),

Ψd (h, d, ∂ν w) = τ (1 − h)(1 − d)χε<−θ (∂ν w),

where τ  1 is the rate and χεj are smooth versions of the characteristic function such as
χε>θ (ξ) =

1
(tanh((ξ − εθ)/ε) + 1)) ,
2

χε<−θ (ξ) =

1
(tanh(−(ξ + εθ)/ε) + 1)) ;
2

(1.1)

see Figure 3.1 for an illustration. The steepness ε−1 of the smoothed characteristic function can be interpreted as
a sensitivity of the production in regards to small gradients. One can envision many scenarios that enable stem
cell differentiation to be guided by gradients of a chemical signal, for instance through comparing signal strength
spatially or temporally. This latter pr ocess can be enhanced by directed motion of stem cells or progenitors into
the respective directions. Indeed, migratory stages of progenitors from their place of birth to their site of terminal
differentiation are discussed in [64]
From a mathematical perspective, it is interesting to note that dynamic boundary conditions of this type cannot
be readily replaced by, say, Robin boundary conditions, by letting for instance rates of boundary dynamics tend to
infinity. This mathematical curiosity bears consequences on modeling assumptions, implying for instance the presence
of a distinguished boundary/body region. Such a region has recently also been discussed in the experimental literature
[64], where the concept of poles, separating head regions from trunk, is attributed a key role in regeneration. On
the mathematical side, we make this curious role of dynamic boundary conditions precise in a simple reduced model
toward the end of this paper.
Regeneration from cutting, grafting, and growth — simulations. The model ingredients presented thus far
can, to a large extent, be motivated through experimental data. We validate the modeling effort by displaying results
from numerical simulations that mimic basic experiments on regeneration, such as cutting, grafting, and growth; see
Section 3.
Regeneration — analysis. We provide some analytical understanding of the key ingredients of our mathematical
model by deriving a reduced system, consisting of an order parameter c that lumps concentrations of head and tail
cells into a scalar quantity, coupled to the long-range wnt-related signal w. In this reduction, we clearly illustrate how
the nonlinear boundary fluxes restoring head and tail cell concentrations, dependent on the information of normal
derivatives of the gradient, initiate and organize the regeneration process. We outline a (in)stability analysis that
points to the origin of regeneration and we pinpoint failure of this process when dynamic boundary conditions are
relaxed to, say, nonlinear mixed (or Robin) boundary conditions. Lastly, we distill the key feature, restoration of a
signal gradient through boundary, respectively body edge, sensing, into a dramatically oversimplified scalar model
for the wnt-related signal. In this scalar model, we then clearly outline the limits of regeneration and point to curious
oscillations, caused by coupling of scalar, non-oscillatory dynamics in the boundary to the diffusive signal field in the
bulk and the resulting delayed feedback mechanism.
Outline. We review biological experiments that motivate our model and compare with other systems in the literature in Section 2. We then introduce our mathematical model and describe numerical simulations that mimic
planarian regeneration in various scenarios in Section 3. Section 4 contains analytical results that reduce dynamics
to a two-species and ultimately a scalar reaction-diffusion system, thus exhibiting the key dynamic ingredients of our
original model. We also discuss the necessity of the somewhat non-standard boundary conditions and the limitations
of the tristability mechanism. We conclude with a brief summary and discussion.
Acknowledgments. CT was supported by a fellowship of the Graduate School of the Cells-in-Motion Cluster
of Excellence EXC 1003–CiM, University of Münster (WWU). ASc was partially supported through NSF grants
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DMS–1311740 and DMS–1907391, a Research Award from the Alexander-von-Humboldt Foundation, and a WWU
Fellowship. ASc and ASt were supported by the DFG (German Research Foundation) under Germanys Excellence
Strategy EXC 2044-390685587, Mathematics Münster: Dynamics - Geometry Structure. CT and ASt gratefully
acknowledge numerous valuable discussions about the biology of planarians with Kerstin Bartscherer.

2

Planarian regeneration — experiments and models

We give a brief overview of planarians in Section 2.1, describe experiments with a short comparison to our findings
from the mathematical model in Section 2.2, give genetic information in Section 2.3, and summarize the existing
mathematical literature in Section 2.4.

2.1

Basics of planarian regeneration

In planarian pluripotent adult stem cells (neoblasts), are the source of all cell types. Neoblasts divide, differentiate,
and differentiated cells die after some time. There is a continuous turnover of cells, still the flatworm maintains
cell type proportions. Understanding the mechanisms responsible for this dynamic steady state is one important
objective in research on planarians.
Planarians exhibit a bilateral symmetry, three distinct body axes, a well-differentiated nervous system including
a brain, a gastrovascular tract, a body-wall musculature, and they consist of three tissue layers [32]. The best
experimental data is available for the species ”Schmidtea mediterranea”, which is 1 mm to 20 mm long [62] and
consists of 100.000 to more than 2.000.000 cells. At least 20 to 30 different types of differentiated cells are observed.
The broadly distributed pluripotent population of neoblasts constitutes possibly up to 30 % of the total cell population
[7] and are the only proliferating cells in planarians [75].
Regeneration in our context is the ability of an organism to replace lost or damaged tissue. The regenerative abilities
of humans are limited to special tissues only. Examples for regeneration after injury in animals include regeneration
of deer antlers, fins of fish, tails of geckos, or complete limbs in some crabs or salamanders. Planarians and hydra are
among the few species that seem to possess a nearly unlimited regenerative ability. They recover from practically
every injury, and regenerate when aging. A small fragment cut out of a planarian, as small as about 0.5 %, can
regenerate a full animal, including in particular an intact brain [62]. Some asexual planarian species even reproduce
by tearing themselves apart and subsequently develop into two intact worms [32]. Clearly, the study of this behavior
holds tremendous appeal when considering the potential of a better understanding of regeneration of tissues in the
human body, for instance parts of the heart muscle after an infarct.

2.2

Experiments

We give a short overview of classical experiments and refer to [8, 10, 6, 11, 13, 16, 66, 42, 57, 58, 67, 72, 47, 43, 41, 65]
for more details. We also briefly point to and summarize our findings in relation to these experiments.
2.2.1

Cutting experiments

Cutting tissue off a planarian results in regeneration of both parts into an intact organism, more or less independent
of position, size, or direction of the cut, with few exceptions, discussed below. Here we focus on regeneration of the
anterior-posterior (AP, or head-to-tail) axis, and think mostly of dissections transverse to the AP axis into strips
whose width is a fraction of the original length of the planarian body; see Figure 2.1. Each of these tissue strips will
regenerate into a complete animal after several weeks. In tissue pieces cut close to head or tail, regeneration of a
new head might occur in as little as three to four weeks. Complete regeneration, including restoration of the right
proportions, usually requires two to three months, depending on the shape of the respective tissue fragment [41]; see
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2.1 for schematics of experiments and representation in our model. Polarity in such fragments is preserved,
that is, a head will regenerate at the edge that has been closer to the head before, and the tail will regenerate at the
opposite end. In particular, neighboring cells in a planarian will regenerate as either head or as tail after they have
been separated by a cut! Among the few exceptions are very long or very short tissue fragments, which sometimes
regenerate a second head instead of a tail. Moreover, tissue parts that are too small or too thin are not able to
regenerate at all.
Our mathematical model reproduces all of these experiments robustly, for a wide range of parameter values, with a
few exceptions that we note below; see Figure 3.4 for simulations of our full system and Figures 4.2, 4.3, and 4.4, 4.5
for simulations of a reduced model and for a scalar equation. In our mathematical model head and tail cells are treated
equivalently with equal weights to cells and corresponding reaction rates. As a consequence, simulations are not able
to produce a bias between two-headed and two-tailed animals. Specific outcomes depend only on small fluctuations in
initial conditions when recovery is not robust, that is for very small or or for large fragments. Matching experiments,
we found recovery somewhat more robust for tissue fragments from the center of the body when compared to equally
sized fragments cut from regions near head or near tail. In the analytically best understood case of the scalar model,
we observed that when changing parameters toward a regime where regeneration is impossible, oscillations occure in
the recovery process before, upon further change of parameter values, the wnt-gradient fails to recover at all. These
are the exceptions from the otherwise matching behavior of our mathematical model in comparison to experimental
findings.
Grafting experiments. In grafting experiments a tissue fragment of an intact donor planarian is cut out and
transplanted into another healthy host planarian, whose regeneration is then studied. The donor usually regenerates
as described before, whereas the host may develop new phenotypes; see again Figure 2.1. Most interesting are
experiments where parts of the head of the donor are transplanted into different positions within the host. Depending
on size and position of the donor head tissue within the host, the host will either regenerate into a completely normal
animal, with the grafted head vanishing, or it will generate a second axis at the position of the transplant such
that the AP axis splits into two branches of equal length exhibiting two heads and one tail, or it will generate a
two-headed planarian. Data suggests that outgrowth is more likely if there is a larger distance between the head
transplant and the head of the host. Similarly, outgrowth seems to become more likely for larger head transplants
and for tissue taken closer to the head of the donor.
Transplanting a donor tail into the upper part of the host might reorganize the host’s middle region, sometimes
regenerating a second pharynx in opposite direction, possibly also leading to outgrowth. Transplanting a complete
lower donor fragment below an upper fragment of a bisected host, such that just an intermediate strip for a complete
animal is missing, will always regenerate the intermediate strip.
We mimic such experiments in simulations of our mathematical model; see Figure 3.5 and 3.6 for the full system and
Figure 4.2 for the reduced model and confirm to some extent the observed dichotomy between the emergence of a
new head and the vanishing of the grafted head during regeneration. As a caveat, the insight into these phenomena
from our model is limited by the fact that we do not model regulation of organ growth through chemical signals.
Growth and Shrinking. Adult planarians of the species “Schmidtea mediterranea” are roughly 20 mm long if well
fed, and can shrink to about 1 mm if starved, and regrow when food supply is restored, keeping relative proportions
and ratios of cell populations intact [7]. During regeneration after cutting experiments, this ability is crucial: if,
for instance, a tissue fragment is cut from close to head or tail, it will initially lack a pharynx, and therefore draw
resources from the fragment shrinking to as little as a tenth of the original fragment size.
We show experiments that show robust behavior over a wide range of body sizes and growth rates; see Figure 3.7.
Hydra. The regeneration of hydra, a freshwater polyp, shows similarities to that of planarians, with comparable
outcomes for most of the experiments mentioned above; see [80, 33, 71, 70, 12, 84] and references therein. Different
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2.1: Typical experiments and their representations in terms of our mathematical model. Top left: Schematic illustration of head
grafting and regeneration of a two-headed animal. Top right: Head grafting and regeneration into a normal planarian with one head
and one tail. Middle row: Cutting experiment and regeneration of 8 planarians. Bottom row: Schematic illustration of experiments
on planarians and associated spatial distribution of concentrations h, d, w, s, uh , ud . Homeostasis (left) has head cells concentrated on
the left, tail cells concentrated on the right, a wnt-gradient directed towards wnt-production in the tail, roughly constant stem cell
populations with slightly decreased populations where differentiation into head and tail cells occurs, and head and tail signals are closely
mimicking the distribution of head and tail cells. In grafting experiments (center), the head region of a donor planarian is grafted into
a host planarian, retaining roughly the distribution of cell concentrations and signaling molecules from its original location. In cutting
experiments (right), a thin fragment (here from the trunk region) retains a small wnt-gradient but no head or tail cells. Regeneration in
this context refers to reestablishing head and tail cell populations while preserving polarity.

from planarians, hydra stem cells are distributed exclusively inside the body region, below the epithelium, such that
a fragment consisting only of head or foot cells will not regenerate; see [1] for one of the very few quantitative studies
on induction of additional foot or tail axes.
An interesting dissociation experiment for hydra has not been described for planarians so far. When a tissue fragment
of hydra is pressed through a net and the resulting small fragments are reorganized randomly, a bulb of hydra tissue
without any sense of polarity and positional information arises. This tissue fragment will subsequently regenerate
head and foot structures. However, depending on the number of involved cells, it might generate several heads and

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

body axes that will separate only later [48]; compare Figure 3.6 for a related set-up in our model.

2.3

Genetic information.

In order to identify gene expression and their spatial and temporal dynamics in planarians, the amount of RNA
produced from specific genes during protein synthesis is measured, for instance through in situ hybridization or
northern blot [49]. Therefore genes can be identified, which are mainly expressed close to the head or tail, or after
wounding and feeding. To artificially influence gene expression by RNA interference, targeted mRNA molecules are
neutralized, thus synthesis of messenger molecules stops at an earlier point in time. With this manipulation it can
be tested, e.g. which of the genes being expressed within the head region are actually necessary to regenerate a head.
So far, in both hydra and planarians, it does not seem possible to track the corresponding messenger molecules directly.
Corresponding antibodies are not yet available. The experimental methods described above, do allow however, to
some extent, for an analysis of the production dynamics and functioning of these signals. The identification of their
final distribution in the planarian body seems out of reach at the moment, but would be important to know for further
mathematical modeling efforts. We refer to [51], [64] for a review on biological results pertinent to our mathematical
model presented here.
Gene expression sites. The three main body axes in planarians are organized by different signaling systems.
Knock-out experiments suggest that these systems act quite independently [61]. We therefore focus on genes which
organize the anterior-posterior (AP) axis. Information about the other axes, and more details on the AP axis can
be found in [2, 61, 52, 22, 4, 19, 63].
Genes which are expressed close to the head are notum, sFRP-1, ndl-4, prep, and sFRP-2, among others. While
being expressed mainly in the upper half of planarians, some of these genes are also expressed at the lower tip of the
pharynx region in the center of the body. Genes which are expressed closer to the tail include wnt1, fz4, wnt11-2,
wnt11-1, wnt11-5 (or wntP-2), and Plox4-Dj. Among the head related genes, notum and sFRP-1 are expressed
more locally, while expression of sFRP-2 extends from the planarian head tip to its center. Similarly, among the tail
related genes, wnt1 is expressed very locally, while wnt11-5 is expressed from the tail tip to the center region in a
graded fashion. Local expression here refers to only a few cells at the very tips of the planarian that are responsible
for the production of associated molecules, most likely subepidermal muscle cells [85].
The time dynamics of gene expression after wounding are described in [4, 53, 81, 54]. When a tissue strip of a
planarian is cut from the center of the body, lacking head and tail, one can distinguish between genes that are
activated early, during the first 0 − 18 hours after amputation, or later. Further one can identify genes that are
expressed asymmetrically, either at head or at tail wounds but not at both. Genes, that are expressed very early
after wounding include wnt1, wnt11-5, notum, sFRP-1, but only notum is expressed asymmetrically, that is, at
wounds that face missing head structures. Genes such as wnt1 are expressed first at all wound sites and their
expression is normalized to the behavior we described before, only later. Among 128 wound induced genes only
notum shows the polarized expression [88], mentioned already, and only the downstream factor of wnt-signaling,
β-catenin, seems to influence this asymmetric expression [68].
Knock-out experiments. While it is highly desirable to acquire information about the action of genes and
especially their corresponding messenger molecules, a clear picture seems elusive at this point, due to the shear
number of genes involved in regeneration processes; see [61] and [51] for recent reviews.
Inhibition of most genes that are expressed early after wounding with expression patterns related to head or tail
identities causes regeneration failures of the respective body region at their sites of expression. For instance, inhibition
of notum and head amputation prevents head regeneration, while inhibition of wnt1 and tail amputation prevents
tail regeneration. In these cases the planarian will regenerate with two tails or two heads, respectively. Considering
wnt1 and notum as one of the first expressed genes after wounding it is interesting to note that they act in an

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

antagonizing manner [27].
Most important for establishing and maintaining the AP axis/polarity appears to be the canonical wnt-pathway.
This can be demonstrated by influencing the level of β-catenin inside the cell. High levels of wnt signaling correlate
with high levels of β-catenin within the cytoplasm. The inhibition of β-catenin itself leads to different phenotypes
[2]. If low doses of inhibitor dsRNA are injected into a planarian and the tail is removed, the wound closes but no
tail regenerates. On the other hand, higher doses will lead to regeneration of a second head at the tail wound with
a second opposing pharynx in the middle of the planarian body. If the doses are further increased, the pharynx
(both) become disorganized and ectopic eyes appear. A complete inhibition of β-catenin leads to a radially shaped
planarian which has head-related structures (nerve cells, eyes, etc.) at every side, even without tail amputation. In
this context, we remark that more recently, an organizing β-catenin concentration gradient, with maximum at the
head and minimum at the tail has been confirmed experimentally [74, 73].
Gene expression in hydra. The hydra homologue of the above mentioned genes wnt, dishevelled, gsk3, tcf and
β-catenin seem to act in a comparable way. Studies on expression pattern and knock-out experiments can be found
in [56, 25, 55, 28, 20]. The similarities appear strong enough to suggest that models developed here for planarians
would carry implications also for hydra. More generally, the wnt-pathway appears to be more widely conserved
during evolution in many species, beyond hydra and planaria.

2.4

Mathematical models in the literature

Efforts toward mathematical modeling the emergence of pattern or structure in seemingly unpatterned developmental
stages of organisms go back to Alan Turing’s seminal work [77], where he studied the possibility of pattern formation
in systems of reaction-diffusion equations, based on disparate diffusion length scales. He included in particular the
case of vanishing diffusion and elaborated on the selection of long-, finite-, and short-wavelength patterns, as well
as oscillatory, traveling-wave patterns, depending on reaction constants. The key observation was that it is possible
that the spatially extended system can be unstable, even when simple kinetics do not exhibit instability, hence the
terminology of diffusion-driven instabilities and pattern formation. He also modeled the development of tentacles in
hydra [77] but could not finish a follow-up manuscript on mathematical modeling of developmental processes because
of his untimely death. The system of two reaction-diffusion equations from Turing’s paper has been tremendously
influential in the literature and was used and built upon by others to model, for instance regeneration in hydra,
in particular in [21] where the notion of activator-inhibitor system was introduced. For other models based on
such kind of dynamics see [45], [46] and the references therein. Turing’s mechanism has also been incorporated
into descriptions and models of regeneration after cutting experiments in hydra and planarians and a certain class of
grafting experiments. However, the main feature of Turing’s mechanism, the selection of a preferred finite wavelength,
like for the tentacles of hydra, there turns into a drawback since patterns in such models strongly depend on
the domain size, exhibiting more concentration maxima and minima on larger domains, while the pattern in the
regeneration of the planarian body axis develops and is robust over several orders of magnitudes of variation in
body size. Attempts in the literature to address this conundrum are typically built on additional species that evolve
dynamically and affect reaction constants in Turing’s mechanism in ways that change Turing’s selected wave length.
In well designed contexts, one can thus achieve scaling invariance of patterns over large changes in domain size
[50, 79, 78, 83], thus providing mechanisms and models for experimental evidence of scale-independent patterning as
for instance in zebra fish [3].
With a focus back to planarians, regeneration of a pattern would not necessitate the formation of multi-modal
structures but rather necessitate establishing a monotone signaling gradient. Generation of such monotone structures
has in turn been studied mathematically quite extensively in other modeling contexts, for instance in phase separation
[18] and in cell polarization [44]. In the reaction-diffusion context, the simplest formulations lead to 2-species massconserving reaction-diffusion systems, which can exhibit pattern formation, albeit with a wavelength proportional to
the domain. Patterns of smaller wavelength are unstable against coarsening although coarsening can be slow or even
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

arrested for small or vanishing diffusivities.
Motivated by the receptor-ligand binding model [69], a more complex model for regeneration in hydra was developed
in [34], again based on diffusion driven instabilities with features of activator-inhibitor models. Later, introduction
of hysteresis into such models allowed the authors to correctly recover grafting experiments in numerical simulations
of this system of six coupled ordinary and partial differential equations for most relevant scenarios [35]. Intuitively,
mechanisms based on hysteresis or multistability are well suited to describe the outcome of grafting experiments as
higher values of suitable variables, which correspond to head identities, are stabilized, independent of position or
domain size. Additionally, effects such as the absorption of very small transplants might be explainable, too. In
fact, our model contains some features of the associated multistability. On the other hand these models typically do
not generate relevant patterns robustly in situations corresponding to cutting and dissociation experiments. Systems
of ordinary differential equations (vanishing diffusivities) coupled to partial differential equations have been studied
extensively, yet more recently in regard to their pattern-forming capabilities [37, 36, 23, 38, 31, 39], finding for
instance stable patterns and unbounded solutions developing spikes. In a different direction, the role of hysteresis in
diffusion-driven instabilities and de novo formation of stable patterns was investigated in [24, 30]
Lastly, we point out that our analysis connects with recent efforts to model and understand the role of distinguished
surface reactions and bulk-to-surface coupling in morphogenesis [17, 15, 29, 59, 60]. Envisioning for instance two
species reacting and diffusing with equal diffusion constant on a surface, but one of the species diffusing rapidly into,
through, and back out of the bulk, one immediately finds the disparate effective diffusivities necessary for pattern
formation in Turing’s mechanism, thus providing a biologically realistic mechanism for robust pattern formation.
We refer to [76] for a more in-depth discussion of recent models based on diffusion-driven pattern formation, and in
particular also to the modeling and simulation of some variants of the mathematical model discussed here.
As we shall see below, our model bears little resemblance with the modeling efforts described in this section. It is
arguably simpler, at least in the reduced forms of Section 4, than most models based on diffusion-driven instabilities,
and possibly more versatile in the experimental phenomenology that can be robustly reproduced.

3

Cell types, signals, and boundary dynamics

We introduce cell and signal densities motivated by the discussion in Section 2, together with the associated production rates in Section 3.1. We then discuss dynamic boundary conditions and the additional gradient-sensing effect in
Section 3.2. Section 3.3 contains numerical results on cutting, grafting, and growth, illustrating the features of our
mathematical model.
Much of the mathematical formulation, including cell types and signals, is based on the thesis of one of the authors
[76], but we deviate in our treatment of boundary conditions and gradient sensing.

3.1

Cell types, signals, and rates in the bulk

We restrict ourselves to processes regulating the anterior-posterior (AP) axis and therefore consider a simple onedimensional spatial domain x ∈ [−L, L].
Cell types.

We model three cell types depending on time t and position x within the planarian,

s(t, x)

density of stem cells

h(t, x)

density of head-specific cells

d(t, x)

density of tail-specific cells

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Signals. Next, we distinguish between signals, whose actions are strongly associated with one of the cell types
and are typically very localized, and signals with long-range effects that are influenced by more than one cell type.
Short-range signals in our model, acting locally, are
uh (t, x)

density of signals related to head-specific cells

ud (t, x)

density of signals related to tail-specific cells

In addition, we consider a longer range wnt-related signal that establishes a full body gradient. It is produced by
tail cells and degraded by reactions with head cells,
w(t, x)

density of lumped wnt-signaling

The idea here is that body fragments retain a gradient in the concentration of this signal w which can then provide
clues for polarization in regeneration. In fact, much of the current understanding of planarian regeneration rests on the
idea of such a full body gradient of wnt-signaling [2], although details are not completely understood. Measurements
of β-catenin, a cell-internal downstream factor of wnt-signaling [19] seem to support this idea of a long-range gradient
in concentration, decreasing from tail to head [73, 74]. Expression of wnt1 is clearly associated with tail identities
[53] and leads to accumulation of β-catenin inside the cells [14]. On the other hand notum, a wnt antagonist [27]
expressed locally at the tip of the head [61], is the only gene that shows polarized expression directly after wounding
[88] and is required for head regeneration [68]. Its expression is exclusively affected by β-catenin signaling [68, 54].
It therefore appears that these mutual dependencies of β-catenin and members of the wnt-signaling family together
with its inhibitors form a wnt-related signaling gradient over the full body.
Our variable w represents this long-range wnt-signaling family. Although it is often argued that a corresponding
signal, produced by head cells and degraded by tail cells, play a role in regeneration, we do not incorporate an
additional variable modeling such a signal since at present understanding the additional information in such a signal
would be equivalent to 1 − w and therefore not contribute in a mathematically essential way.
Reaction and diffusion. We model the space-time evolution of these six concentrations U = (s, h, d, uh , ud , w)
via a reaction-diffusion system
∂t U = DU + F(U ),

D = diags (Ds , Dh , Dd , Duh , Dud , Dw ),

F = (Fs , Fh , Fd , Fuh , Fud , Fw ).

(3.1)

Boundary conditions are explained in Section 3.2. First, we discuss the specific forms of the production rates Fj ,
j ∈ {s, h, d, uh , ud , w}.
Stem cell production and differentiation rates. We assume that stem cells proliferate, undergo apoptosis [9],
and differentiate irreversibly into other cell types guided by positional control genes, that is, the head and tail related
signals,
∂t s = Ds ∂xx s + ps (s) − ph uh s − pd ud s,
(3.2)
s
− ηs s encodes saturated proliferation and apoptosis. The localized signals uh , ud trigger
where ps (s) = ps 1+s
differentiation into the associated cell lines and are subsequently produced by these cells. This system acts during
both, normal tissue turnover and regeneration [62].

Head and tail cells. Head and tail cells do not proliferate but result from differentiation of stem cells and undergo
apoptosis, leading to
∂t h = Dh ∂xx h + ph uh s − ηh h,

(3.3)

∂t d = Dd ∂xx d + pd ud s − ηd d.

(3.4)

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Signal production and depletion rates. The differentiated cells produce the signal associated with their cell
type and degrade signals associated with other cell types,
∂t uh = Duh ∂xx uh + h2 (r0 − r1 uh ) − r2 uh d − r3 uh ,
2

(3.5)

∂t ud = Dud ∂xx ud + d (r0 − r1 ud ) − r2 ud h − r3 ud ,

(3.6)

∂t w = Dw ∂xx w − pw hw + pw d(1 − w) .

(3.7)

Specifically, r0 and r1 measure saturated production of cell-type related short-range signals, r2 degradation of shortrange signals in reactions with the respective other cell type, and r3 otherwise induced losses of the signals. The
quadratic dependence of production of uh and ud on h and d, respectively, is relevant, since replacing this reaction
by first-order kinetics, that is, linear in h, d, would not result in tristability and spontaneous growth of head and tail
regions; see (4.1) in our analysis and model reduction, Section 4.1.
The kinetics of the wnt-signaling complex w are motivated by simple degradation via head cells and saturated
production via tail cells. We have used the same parameter pw for degradation and production rates. We tested
differing rates with qualitatively similar outcomes. Reducing for instance to a smaller saturated production rate, the
tail simply regenerates more slowly, that is, only after the head is formed. Grafting experiments seemed insensitive
to changes in rates. Growth experiments fail only when the saturated production rate is too small to compensate
for the effect of dilution.

3.2

Dynamic boundary conditions and wnt-signaling gradients

Tissue loss, for instance from cutting, leads to a local peak of stem cell differentiation [82]. This reaction, which is
specific to wounds with loss of tissue is not completely understood [51], but appears to be important for regeneration.
We choose dynamic (or Wentzel) boundary conditions to model such strong effects near cutting sites during wound
healing. These somewhat non-standard boundary conditions supplement the reaction-diffusion system (3.1) with
inhomegeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions and evolution equations for the time dependent Dirichlet data,
∂t U = DUxx + F(U ),
Ux=±L = U±
d
1
U± = − D ∂ν U |x=±L + F(U± ) + B.
dt
γ

(3.8)
(3.9)

We think of the concentrations U± as measures for spatially constant concentrations in a boundary compartment.
Within this boundary compartment, close to the respective body edges, the same reactions F as in the central body
parts/bulk take place, and diffusive flux terms − γ1 D ∂ν U |x=±L guarantee mass conservation up to production terms,
as can be seen from the short calculation
! Z
 Z
Z
X
X
X
d
d
U+
γU± = F(U ) +
D∂ν U |±L + γ U± = F(U ) + γ
(F(U± ) + B) ,
dt
dt
±
±
±
where γ is the size of the boundary compartment (or the body edge), measured in unit lengths. The key difference
between these boundary compartments and the bulk of the domain is the presence of the terms B that we shall
describe, below.
The main rationale for dynamic boundary conditions is the need to model dynamics in a thin but finite-size boundary
compartment close to the body edges, where kinetics are slightly different from the planarian trunk. We assume
that the boundary compartment is comparatively small such that concentrations of all cells and signals are constant
inside, that is, U± does not depend on space.
Dynamic boundary conditions can be compared to nonlinear fluxes. Formally, letting the size of the boundary
compartments γ tend to 0 and assuming at the same time rapid reactions N1 within these boundary compartments
1
d
U± = − D ∂ν U |x=±L + N ,
dt
γ
11

N =

1
N1 + N2 ,
γ

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

one finds in the limit γ = 0 the mixed boundary condition D∂ν U = N1 (U ). We shall see later, in the simplified
example of a reduced two-species model in Section 4.4, that such a limit to “instantaneous” boundary conditions
does not appear to be feasible in our modeling context. Beyond this apparent mathematical necessity, there appears
to be biological data suggesting the presence of such regions close to the body edges, which separate head- and tail
regions from the trunk, and the concept of pole regions is thought to play a fundamental role in regeneration, see
[64].
Numerical discretization provides yet a different way to rationalize these dynamic boundary conditions. Representing
the main body by grid points U1 , . . . , UN , each carrying mass hUj where h is the grid size, we would simply add
extra grid points U0 = U− and UN +1 = U+ , which carry mass γUj , j = 0, N + 1. This can now be thought of as
an inhomogeneous spatial grid, imposing no-flux boundary conditions on the thus extended domain. Clearly, letting
the size γ of the boundary compartment decrease to the order of the grid scale h, we loose the concept of dynamic
boundary conditions and should interpret the additional reaction terms B as nonlinear fluxes. We are not aware of
a systematic analysis of such limits, connecting discretization, nonlinear fluxes, and dynamic boundary conditions.
Sensitivity to wnt-signaling gradients The additional terms B in the boundary dynamics model the strong
local peak of differentiation of stem cells at wounds inside a formed blastema. In our model, this occurs in a region
at the end of the interval considered. The differentiation process appears to be guided by wnt-signaling [2] and
preserves polarity. Cutting experiments, where body fragments from quite different regions of a planarian regenerate
while preserving polarity suggest that absolute values of wnt-signaling do not provide the relevant information. In
light of these experiments, and in order to restore polarity from thin fragments regardless of specific location of the
fragment inside the animal, it therefore seems necessary that stem cells detect gradients of wnt-related signaling and
differentiate accordingly. Indeed, inspecting the normal derivative of w at the boundary after cutting in Figure 2.1,
one readily sees that the sign of the normal derivative gives clues as to whether differentiation towards head or tail
cells should occur.
Sensing of the gradient of wnt-signaling can be accomplished by stem cells in many ways, for instance during their
(directed) movement towards the wounding site. During their movement they may measure the signal at different
time steps or different locations, see [5], [26]. We do not attempt to model details of this sensing process and simply
include a lumped reaction term for the differentiation of stem cells that depends sharply on the sign of the normal
derivative of w.
Specifically, we include proliferation and terms for differentiation into the dynamics of s± , h± , and d± , of the form
d
±
s± = −Ds ∂ν s|x=±L + Fs − Ψ±
h s − Ψd s,
dt
d
h± = −Dh ∂ν h|x=±L + Fh + Ψ±
h s,
dt
d
d± = −Dd ∂ν d|x=±L + Fd + Ψ±
d s.
dt

(3.10)
(3.11)
(3.12)

The functions Ψ±
h/d select differentiation of stem cells specifically in the boundary compartments, triggered by the
lack of either head or tail cells, and directed according to the sign of ∂ν w,
Ψ±
h/d = Ψh/d (h, d, ∂ν w)|x=±L ,
Ψh (h, d, ∂ν w) = τ (1 − h)(1 −
Ψw (h, d, ∂ν w) = τ (1 − h)(1 −

d)χε>θ (∂ν w),
d)χε<−θ (∂ν w).

(3.13)
(3.14)
(3.15)

Here, τ is the rate of this mechanism and χεj are smooth versions of the characteristic function given in (1.1); see
Figure 3.1 for a schematic representation of the indicator functions χ.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3.1: Schematic plot of the indicator functions χ that detect positive and negative values of the gradient, respectively, with offset
θ and sensing thresholds ε.

Ds
Dh
Dd
Duh
Dud
Dw
γ
L

1
10−3
10−3
10−2
10−2
1
0.3
10

ps
ph
pd
pw
r0
r1
r2
r3

100
1
1
10
18
12
6
6

ηs
ηh
ηd
τ
θ
ε

100
1
1
0.5
3
2 · 10−3

Table 1: Parameter values used in the numerical simulations throughout, unless noted otherwise.

3.3

Cutting, grafting, and growth

We present numerical simulations of our mathematical model illustrating homeostasis, cutting, grafting, and growth,
confirming and expanding on the schematic representation in Figure 2.1.
Parameter values: diffusivities and rate constants. We chose parameter values representing roughly expected
orders of magnitude within the system. Moderate changes of parameters do not have a significant effect on the
outcome of simulations but we discuss some notable exceptions, below. The following table shows default parameter
values, used unless noted otherwise. Random motion of stem cells is of order one as they move fairly freely through
the body. Recall that we do not model directed motion of stem cells but recognize that such mechanisms may be
necessary to accomplish gradient sensing in a robust fashion. Random motion of head and tail cells is very slow.
Similarly, local signals uh/d diffuse slowly, while the long-range wnt-related signal has a diffusion constant of order 1.
We work on domains of length 10 and attribute a mass fraction γ = 0.3 to the boundary, unless otherwise indicated.
We assume fast proliferation of stem cells ps  1 and fast signaling dynamics relative to cell differentiation, rj  1.
Cell differentiation ph/d and apoptosis ηh/d as well as differentiation at the tissue edges during wound healing τ occur
on a time scale of order 1. The production rate of wnt-related signals pw  1 is comparatively fast. The constant ε is
small, approximating discontinuous switching in the kinetics, the constant θ measuring minimal detectable strength
of the gradient at the body/wound edge in ε-units is set to 3. We comment below on some of the effects of changing
parameter values but did not attempt a systematic study of parameter space.
Numerical implementation. We implemented the dynamic boundary conditions as time-dependent Dirichlet
conditions. We then solved the system with grid spacing dx = 0.01 and time stepping 5 · 10−4 using a semi-implicit
Euler method. We found little changes from refining spatio-temporal grids and also used Matlab’s stiff solver
ode15s for comparison with good agreement.
Homeostasis. We obtained equilibrium profiles starting with initial conditions that represent head and tail cells
in the boundary compartments at the body edges, a uniform distribution of stem cells throughout the trunk, and a
uniform wnt-signaling gradient. Solving the initial-value problem for a short time until, we found that concentrations
approached constants in time.
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Specifically, we used initial conditions
h0 (x)

≡ 0,

h−,0 = 1, h+,0 = 0

d0 (x)

≡ 0,

d−,0 = 0, d+,0 = 1

s0 (x)

≡ 1,

s−,0 = 1, s+,0 = 1

w0 (x) =

x+L
2L ,

w−,0 = 0, w+,0 = 1,

and let uh and ud equal h and d, respectively, for the initial data. The results, schematically shown in Figure 2.1, are
displayed in Figure 3.2 and illustrate the stationary profiles of healthy organisms of different body size. We found
1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

-1

0

1

-5

0

0
-25

5

0

25

Figure 3.2: Equilibrium profiles showing a linear wnt-signaling profile, head and tail cells concentrated near boundaries, stem cell
concentrations with small deviations from constant, and chemical signals closely following head and tail-cell concentrations, respectively.
Note the different scales for x, which represent different body sizes of planarians. Homeostasis and subsequent cutting experiments are
illustrated in the supplementary materials cutting sequel.mp4.

that the linear concentration profile in the wnt-signal is quite robust under dramatic changes in the domain size.
Fixing the width of the boundary compartment γ and varying L we found robust homeostasis between L = 0.005
(!) and L = 40. For very small L, the total variation of the wnt-signal w decreases: w stays bounded away from 0
and 1, and the gradient of w remains bounded as L tends to zero. In this regime, the signals uh and ud follow the
concentrations h and d, respectively, less closely, being much smaller in amplitude. On the other hand, for very large
L, the equilibrium state is sensitive to small fluctuations since the wnt-signaling gradient is small, within the interval
[−θ · ε, θ · ε] where detection of the gradient is no longer decisive. Increasing the size of the boundary compartment
γ helped stabilize dynamics generally and we found robust homeostasis for domain sizes 1, . . . , 50 and boundary
compartments of size γ = 0.1, . . . , 15. Very small sizes of the boundary compartment, such as γ = 0.015, L = 5, were
not able to sustain a head-trunk-tail profile, consistent with our discussion in Section 4, below. Whenever we saw
homeostasis, we also tested robustness against small amplitude perturbations and found recovery within expected
limits. A typical dangerous perturbation would for instance attempt to alter the sign of the wnt-signaling gradient
near the boundary. We discuss perturbations more in line with some experiments, below.
The localization of the regions occupied by head and tail cells depends first on the strength of random motion Dd , Dh
of d and h and diffusion rates of their associated morphogens; see Figure 3.3. On the other hand, changing production
and degradation rates r0 , r1 , r2 , r3 for uh/d , one can trigger a spontaneous expansion of the region of head and tail
cells, where now the rate of expansion depends on these rates and the diffusivities.
1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

-5

0

5

-5

0

5

-5

0

5

Figure 3.3: Growing and shrinking of head and tail cell regions (left/center) with r0 = 16, r3 = 4 (left) and r0 = 18, r3 = 10 (center);
initial conditions: s ≡ 1, linear w-gradients, no head or tail cells. Expansion of head/tail regions shown on the left with snapshots at
T = 12 (opaque) and T = 120 (solid); shrinking terminates and homeostasis is reached at T = 12. Right, influence of strong random
motion and diffusion on homeostasis. Throughout, parameters are as in Table 1 unless noted otherwise. Compare also the visualization
in the supplementary materials cutting sequel.mp4.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cutting. Relating to experiments where a strip of the trunk of a planarian is cut out, we now study initial
conditions that arise when using part of the homeostatic state in the central region of the domain, that is,
w=

α(x + L)
+ y0 ,
2L

s ≡ 1,

h ≡ d ≡ uh ≡ ud ≡ 0,

(3.16)

where α represents the fraction of the fragment cut out, and y0 ∈ [0, 1] the w-concentration at the left edge of the
cut fragment, corresponding to a cutting location x0 = L(2y0 − 1) ∈ [−L, L]. In other words, α = 0.02 corresponds
to a cut of 2% of body length and y0 = 0.75 corresponds to a cut at three quarters of the body lengths distance
from the head. Boundary data is chosen compatible U± = U (±L) at time 0. Figure 3.4 demonstrates recovery from
cuts of 2% and 4% of body length. Recovery is more sensitive if segments are cut out from tail or head regions. As
expected, recovery depends on the sensitivity ε−1 and the threshold θ. Smaller values of ε and θ increase sensitivity
and enhance recovery. On the other hand, small values of θ and ε also enhance vulnerability to noise and its effect
on wnt-signaling gradients near the boundary. Smaller mass fractions γ . 0.03 in the boundary compartments for
a domain with L = 5 prevent recovery even for medium-size cuts, to the same extent as homeostasis breaks down.
Generally, for cuts near the tail, the head regenerates first, and vice-versa. Throughout the simulations, polarity is
consistently preserved.
1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

-5

0

5

0
-5

0

5

-5

0

5

Figure 3.4: Regeneration after cutting experiments: cutting 1/50th from trunk region y0 = 0.7 (left), 1/25th close to tail y0 = 0.815
(center) and from tail y = 0.95 (right); see (3.16) for initial conditions. Note the failure to regenerate through the emergence of heads on
both sides and the loss of the wnt-signaling gradient on the right, for a cut very close to the tail region. Throughout, parameters are as
in Table 1; opaque curves show concentrations at earlier snapshots as listed in the title.

In our numerical simulations, one observes an initial strong burst in differentiation triggered by the boundary sensing
Ψ±
of stem cells ps . Simulations still show a resulting decrease
h/d . This is compensated for by the strong proliferation
R
1
in the stem cell population at the boundary, s± < 2L s, which can be much more pronounced for different parameter
values such as smaller ps or larger τ . This reflects and quantifies in our model the experimentally observed strong
proliferation of stem cells during wound healing.
Grafting. In this third set of numerical experiments, we study initial conditions where head cells are inserted into
a healthy planarian. We therefore use the results of the homeostasis simulation as initial condition and then change
values in a region of size 10% of the length of the organism. In this region, we increase the concentration of head cells
h and the associated morphogen uh to 1 and eliminate wnt-signaling, that is, set w ≡ 0. We observe that the head
region survives and changes the profile of wnt-signal concentrations. Grafting head cells of a donor close to the head
region of the host leads to merging of the two head regions. Grafting donor head cells near the tail of the host can
preserve the tail, unless tail cells are significantly destroyed during grafting. Figure 3.5 shows numerical experiments
corresponding to these three scenarios. We think of these different outcomes, for instance the possibility of merging
of heads vs persistence of the new head as reflecting the dichotomy seen in experiments where an additional head
may grow out of a graft or the graft may just disappear; see the discussion in Section 2 and Figure 2.1.
We caution here that these numerical experiments rely to some extent on astute choices of production rates for head
and tail cells and the associated morphogen, as well as the choice of diffusivity. In our experiments, the boundary
between head and trunk cells is nearly stationary and sharply localized. Roughly speaking, an open set of parameter
values will lead to expanding head (or tail) regions, a complementary open set will lead to shrinking head (or tail)
regions. At the boundary of these parameter regions, head and tail regions will remain nearly stationary, subject
only to a slow coarsening interaction as seen in the head-to-head grafting. Stronger diffusivities will enhance both
speed of growth and shrinking as well as the slow coarsening. Our choices of parameters are close to the critical
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

values, where head and tail regions neither shrink nor expand. We emphasize that for parameters where head- or tail
regions shrink, grafted regions will slowly disappear, but the head- and tail regions near the boundary will persist
due to the wnt-related gradient triggered differentiation of stem cells.
We did not explore the phenomena of growth and shrinking of planarians in much more detail than in the next
paragraph, since our model so far does not include any well-motivated mechanisms that would regulate the size of
organs.
1
0.5
0

1

1

0.5

0.5
0

0

-5

0

5

-5

0

-5

5

0

5

Figure 3.5: Regeneration after grafting head tissue into center of trunk (left), head region (center), and tail region (right). Throughout,
parameters are as in Table 1; opaque curves show concentrations at earlier snapshots as listed in the title. Note in particular the
persistence of the grafted head in the left and right panels versus the merging (and eventual vanishing) of the graft in the center panel.
Compare also the visualization in the supplementary materials grafting.mp4.

We note that regions between two heads (or between two tails) do not generate a wnt-signaling gradient. One would
therefore predict that secondary cutting experiments with tissue from such regions after grafting would not be able
to regenerate consistently and not preserve polarity.
Mimicking dissociation experiments in hydra, we also explored outcomes of random grafting in our mathematical
model, see Figure 3.6. We inserted head and tail fragments of roughly 3% of body length randomly at various
locations in the simulated planarian. Whenever these pieces are large enough, they persist as head and tail regions;
smaller regions eventually disappear.
1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0
-5

0

5

0
-10

0

10

0
-20

0

20

Figure 3.6: Regeneration after grafting multiple head and tail regions, for different body lengths L = 10, 20, 40. Throughout, parameters
are as in Table 1; opaque curves show concentrations at earlier snapshots as listed in the title. Annihilation of all grafts on the left, and
multiple persistent regions for larger domains (center and right).

Growth. As a last experiment, we demonstrate that the mechanisms of our model are capable of sustaining robust
patterning when the body size of the planarian expands. In our simulations, the body size expands uniformly at a
constant speed c = 0.3, 1.5, 3 and we monitor the concentration profiles; see Figure 3.7. More precisely, we assume
that tissue locations evolve according x(t) = x(0)
L0 (L0 + ct), where (−L0 , L0 ) is the body size at time t = 0 and
(−L(t), L(t)), L(t) = L0 + ct, is the body size at time t. Mass conservation in the extended domain, in the absence
c
of reaction terms, then forces the dilution ∂t U (t, x) = ρ(t)U (t, x), with ρ(t) = − L(t)
. Transforming back to a fixed
L2

domain with a coordinate change x 7→ xL0 /L(t) gives a diffusion equation on (−L, L) with diffusion matrix L(t)0 2 D.
In the abstract formulation (3.1), we therefore simply amend the diffusion constant in our model and add a dilution
term to model the system on the growing domain,
∂t U = D(t)Uxx + F(U ) + ρ(t)U,

D(t) =

L20
D,
L(t)2

ρ(t) = −

c
.
L(t)

(3.17)

We chose to preserve the relative size of the boundary compartments such that γ = γ(t) = γ(0)
L0 L(t), which introduces
the same dilution term in the equation for the dynamic boundary values U± . Fluxes need to be adjusted to the

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1
changing diffusion constant − γ(t)
D(t)∂ν U . We refer to [76] for a more detailed discussion of different growth laws
and references to the literature.

We simulated the resulting system on a fixed grid corresponding to scaled x-coordinates but plotted the outcome
in the actual unscaled x-variables. Parameters were chosen according to Table 1. The results are displayed in
Figure 3.7. For slow and moderate growth speeds, the concentration profiles resemble the homeostatic profiles at a
given length. We observe failure to maintain key features only for quite rapid expansion (the time scales of c = 3
corresponds to a doubling of a planarian of size 9 in 3 time units, while cell differentiation happens with rate 1,
generating at most 1 unit volume of head or tail cells from stem cells in one time unit). This failure at rapid growth
can be attributed to the dilution of the wnt-related signal that is not adequately compensated for by production
through tail cells and diffusion. As a result, the wnt-signaling gradient becomes very small in the head region. As
already demonstrated in the case of fixed domains during homeostasis and cutting, solutions become sensitive to
perturbations when wnt-signaling gradients approach the sensing limits determined by ε and θ.
1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0
-10

0

10

0

-20

0

20

-50

0

50

Figure 3.7: A healthy planarian under uniform linear growth with speeds c = 0.3, 1.5, 3; see text for more details. Concentration
profiles are plotted in actual coordinates, such that they occupy only part of the final domain at earlier times (faded curves terminate
at ±(L0 + cT )). Profiles are well maintained close to homeostasis for slow (left) and moderate (center) growth speeds. For larger speeds
(right) dilution of w reduces the overall concentration such that the gradient at the left boundary where w ∼ 0 falls below the sensing
threshold. As a result concentration of head cells decreases on the left boundary and a second tail replaces the head.

Of course, the externally imposed growth used here is not a completely appropriate representation of the actual
growth of planarians while feeding. Conversely, the model can not yet clearly characterize the dynamics under
starvation conditions when sizes of planarians shrink by an order of magnitude: the negative dilution term would
give an overcrowding of cells with sometimes unstable signaling gradients near the boundary. A more accurate model
would relate growth laws and proliferation, which in turn depends on food supply. Nevertheless, the scenario studied
here does show the inherent independence of the patterning from body size and its robustness for growing planarians.

4

Analysis via model reduction

We first argue that stem cells and short-range signals can be eliminated in a quasi-steady state approximation in
Section 4.1. We reduce the resulting system for (h, d, w) further by considering one order parameter c for the cell type
instead of the two concentrations (h, d) in Section 4.2 and illustrate how this reduced two-species system captures
regeneration after cutting and grafting in Section 4.3. Finally, we focus on the key element of the process, the
restoration of the wnt-related signal in a further reduced scalar equation.

4.1

Eliminating stem cells and short-range signals

A simple analysis of kinetics, supported by observations in numerical simulations, suggests two quick simplifications
by reduction.
Stem cell populations are constant in time and space. Inspecting the proliferation and differentiation rates
of stem cells, one notices that proliferation is much faster than differentiation and equilibrium concentrations depend
only marginally on differentiation, that is, on the concentrations of uh/d . Setting ps (s) = 0, we then obtain equilibrium
concentrations s = (ps − ηs )/ηs , namely, in our choice of parameters, s ≡ 1.
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Short-range signals are tied to cell populations. Assuming in the following that s ≡ 1, we notice that the
signal production rates rj are much larger than the cell differentiation and death rates ph/d and ηh/d . Using an
adiabatic reduction for the kinetics, one then equilibrates the reaction rates for uh/d and finds uh/d as functions of
h and d,
r0 h2
r0 d2
uh =
,
u
=
.
(4.1)
d
r1 h2 + r2 d + r3
r1 d2 + r2 h + r3
Similar to the case of stem cell dynamics, the reduction for the kinetics is valid under suitable bounds on gradients,
and we shall demonstrate below that such reduced systems capture the key structure of the dynamics quite well.
In summary, the reduction thus far, substituting the expressions for uh/d into the equations for h, d, w, after setting
s ≡ 1, yields the system
r0 h2
− ηh h ,
r1 h2 + r2 d + r3
r0 d2
∂t d = Dd ∂xx d + pd
− ηd d ,
r1 d2 + r2 h + r3
∂t w = Dw ∂xx w − pw hw + pw d(1 − w) .
∂t h = Dh ∂xx h + ph

(4.2)

For the boundary data, we find
d
h±
dt

r0 h2±
1
= − Dh ∂ν h± + ph
− ηh h± + Ψ±
h,
γ
r1 h2± + r2 d± + r3

d
d±
dt
d
w±
dt

r0 d2±
1
= − Dd ∂ν d± + pd
− ηd d± + Ψ±
d,
2
γ
r1 d± + r2 h± + r3
1
= − Dw ∂ν w± − pw h± w± + pw d± (1 − w± )) .
γ

where again
Ψh (h, d, ∂ν w) = τ (1 − h)(1 − d)χε>0 (∂ν w),

Ψw (h, d, ∂ν w) = τ (1 − h)(1 − d)χε<0 (∂ν w) .

Simulations of this reduced model are almost indistinguishable from the full model andtherefore we do not display
the somewhat redundant graphics, here. We proceed by a further, more phenomenological simplification.

4.2

From cell type to order parameter

In numerical simulations of our mathematical model, which are related to the main biological experiments described
above, concentration profiles of h and d are mostly constant, taking on values (h∗ , 0), (0, d∗ ), or (0, 0), where in fact
h∗ = d∗ = h+ ,
p
ph r0 ± p2h r02 − 4ηh2 r1 r3
h± =
,
2ηh r1
provided that p2h r02 > 4ηh2 r1 r3 , which we shall assume in the sequel. These three states are in fact stable equilibria
for the ODE kinetics and for the full PDE (4.2) for h, d, (due to the equal diffusivites) and correspond to head-only,
tail-only, and trunk-only states, respectively. The equilibria (h− , 0) and (0, h− ) satisfy 0 < h− < h+ and are unstable
threshold states, separating initial conditions that evolve toward head cells from initial conditionsevolving toward
trunk-only cells. Due to the symmetric choice of parameter values, pure head and tail states have equal concentration
values here, although this is not necessary in order to capture the considered phenomena.
Regions of constant values of h and d are separated by interfaces (or fronts) that propagate with a speed determined
by the parameter values rj , ηj , and pj . There are three possible fronts, head-trunk, tail-trunk, and head-tail.
Fronts between pure head and trunk state can be understood in the h-equation alone, setting d ≡ 0. This equation
∂t h = Dh ∂xx h + gh (h),

gh (h) = ph
18

r0 h2
− ηh h,
r1 h2 + r3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4.1: Schematic of the reduction from cell type to order parameter. In the kinetics of the head-cell dynamics, the ω-limit set
of a large ball consists of the line segments of the coordinate axis between the origin and pure-head and pure-tail state, respectively.
Restricting to this ω-limit set (1) gives the joined line segments, which one then (2) bends open to (3) arrive at a straight one-dimensional
line segment with dynamics equivalent to the scalar order parameter c ∼ d − h; see text for a rationale for this reduction including
diffusive effects, particularly fronts.

R
is in fact a gradient flow related to the free energy Dh 12 h2x + Gh (h). Here G0h = −g is the potential with critical
points 0, h± . The direction of motion of the front changes sign at the Maxwell point, when G(h+ ) = G(0). For the
parameter values chosen in our simulations, fronts propagate slowly toward the head region. Fronts between tail
and trunk regions are completely equivalent. Fronts between tail and head regions do not propagate if they exist.
Depending on parameter values, such fronts may not exist but front-like initial conditions rather split into two fronts
(h∗ , 0) ↔ (0, 0) ↔ (0, h∗ ), where the newly emerged state (0, 0) expands. All of those features can be captured in a
scalar equation. Somewhat formally, on the level of the kinetics, one can envision straightening out the line segments
in the h − d-plane (h∗ , 0) → (0, 0) → (0, d∗ ) into a one-dimensional line segment −1 → 0 → 1; see Figure 4.1. One
then arrives at the scalar equation
ct = Dc cxx + c(1 − c2 )(c2 − κ2 ),
(4.3)
with 0 < κ < 1. Equation (4.3) possesses stable equilibria {−1, 0, 1} corresponding to (1, 0), (0, 0), and (0, 1),
respectively, and possesses reflection symmetry between c → −c, mimicking
√ the reflection symmetry between d and
h in our simplified model. Here, the critical “Mawell” point is κ∗ = 1/ 3, such that (0, 0) invades (1, 0) and (0, 1)
for κ < κ∗ and (0, 0) is invaded otherwise. Similarly to the systems case (4.2), fronts between −1 and 1 alias head
and tail exist in (4.3) precisely when splitting of the front is not expected, that is, when −1 invades 0. This can be
readily seen from the phase portrait of the steady-state equation.
The dynamics for wnt-related signal concentrations need to be modified accordingly, with production and degradation
now occurring for c positive and negative, respectively, for instance through a term
wt = Dw wxx + pw (cχε>0 (c)(1 − w) + cχε<0 (c)w) .

(4.4)

Gradient sensing at the body edge is lumped together to yield a production term in the equations for the boundary
concentrations c± of the form
d
c±
dt
d
w±
dt

1
= − Dc ∂ν c± + +c± (1 − c2± )(c2± − κ2 ) + Ψ±
c ,
γ
1
= − Dw ∂ν w± + pw (c± χε>0 (c± )(1 − w± ) + c± χε<0 (c± )w± ) ,
γ

(4.5)
(4.6)

where
ε
ε
Ψ±
c = τ χ>θ (−∂ν w|±L )(1 − c± ) + τ χ<−θ (∂ν w|±L )(−1 − c± ).

The set of equations (4.3)–(4.4) with dynamic boundary conditions (4.5)–(4.6) form the minimal reduced system
that is able to mimic robust regeneration under cutting, grafting, and growth, which we shall demonstrate in the
next section.

4.3

Homeostasis, cutting, and grafting in the reduced model

We simulate system (4.3)—(4.6) with parameter values
Du = 0, 001, Dw = 1, κ = 0.577, pw = 10, ε = 0.002, τ = 0.5, θ = 3, γ = 0.3,
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on a domain of size 2L = 10. Figure 4.2 illustrates the prototypical experiments and regeneration with these
parameter values. Initial conditions for cutting are
w=

α(x + L)
+ y0 , c ≡ 0.
2L

(4.7)

Initial conditions for grafting are the homeostatic equilibrium with w = 0 and c = ±1 on segments of length 1.
1

1

0

0

0

-1

-1

-1

-5

0

5

1

-5

0

5

-25

0

25

Figure 4.2: Simulations of the reduced model (4.3)—(4.6) with initial conditions corresponding to a cutting experiment (left), a grafting
experiment where a head is grafted into the center portion (middle), and a random grafting of head and tail pieces (right); see text for
details on initial conditions.

Note that we chose κ near the Maxwell point, which prevents changes of size in grafting experiments. Different
choices lead to expanding or retracting head- or tail regions, as shown in the full model in Figure 3.3.
Increasing ε or decreasing the mass in the body edge compartments γ significantly will prevent recovery. Near
critical values, we observe non-monotone behavior of the gradient and the boundary values w± ; see Figure 4.3. We
will point to some explanation in the next section when we discuss an even further reduced, scalar model. As in the
1

0.5

0

0

0.45

-1

-1

1

0.4

-5

0

5

-5

0

5

0

2

4

6

8

Figure 4.3: Simulations of the reduced model (4.3)—(4.6) with initial conditions corresponding to cutting experiments, with parameter
choices causing difficult recovery or recovery failure. Larger ε = 0.012 leads to slow and non-monotone recovery (left; associated time
series of w− on the right): the wnt-signaling gradient first decreases before head and tail cell populations are established. The same
phenomenon occurs when reducing the mass in the boundary compartment γ = 0.055 while keeping ε = 0.002 (center). Larger values of
ε and smaller values of γ typically prevent recovery.

full model, we see a dichotomy for head grafts, between merging of the two heads for grafts near the head of the
host, and persistence of one head only for grafts sufficiently far away from the head of the host. This we relate to
the dichotomy between vanishing of the graft and outgrowth of a new head in experiments.

4.4

Analysis and comparison with Robin boundary conditions.

Throughout this section, we restrict to sensitivity thresholds θ = 0. System (4.3)–(4.4) allows for a trivial solution
c ≡ 0, w ≡ 1/2. In fact, cutting experiments with small fragments can be thought of as starting with initial
conditions close to this trivial solution. Regeneration and regeneration failure from small fragments can therefore
be well predicted from a stability analysis of this trivial solution: stability would prevent regeneration from small
fragments, while instability indicates the initial phase of the pattern-forming process.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Linearizing at the trivial solution, we find the system
ct
wt
d
c±
dt
d
w±
dt

= DC cxx − κ2 c, |x| < L
1
= Dw wxx + c, |x| < L
2
1
τ
= − Dc ∂ν c|±L − κ2 c± + ∂ν w|±L ,
γ
ε
1
1
= − Dw ∂ν w|±L + c± .
γ
2

(4.8)
(4.9)
(4.10)
(4.11)

After Laplace transform, the associated eigenvalue problem can be converted into a transcendental equation which
however is difficult to analyze theoretically. Numerically, one readily finds instabilities in the relevant parameter
regimes. We illustrate here the basic instability mechanism with some formal simplifications.
Consider the left boundary, such that the eigenfunctions are of the form c = c0 e−ρx , w = w0 e−ρ̃x + w1 e−ρx , where ρ
and ρ̃ are determined by the spectral parameter λ, Dc ρ2 = κ2 + λ, Dw ρ̃2 = λ, and w1 depends on c0 . Substituting
these expressions into the equations on the boundary yields a generalized eigenvalue problem.
λc0
λw0

1
τ
= − Dc (−ρc0 ) − κ2 c0 + (−ρ̃w0 − ρw1 ),
γ
ε
1
1
= − Dw (−ρ̃w0 − ρw1 ) + c0 .
γ
2

(4.12)
(4.13)

The key ingredient here are the off-diagonal terms: τε ρ̃w0 from τε ∂ν w in the equation for c0 , and 12 c0 in the equation
for w0 . For positive λ, these terms are both positive hence causing a negative determinant and hence instability.
These off-diagonal terms can also be understood more directly but less quantitatively as encoding a positive feedback
mechanism. A small increase of w− will cause a positive normal derivative of w and hence an increase in c− at the
boundary from the equation for c− . The increase in c− translates into a further increase of w− through the term
1
2 c− in the equation for w− , thus providing the positive feedback mechanism responsible for instability.
It is here that we can see how dynamic boundary conditions are a key ingredient. Relaxing these dynamic boundary
conditions by letting reaction rates at the boundary tend to infinity, we formally obtain the mixed Robin boundary
conditions
τ
0 = c± .
0 = −κ2 c± + ∂ν w|±L ,
ε
One readily sees that, for well-posedness, the condition from the equation for c− needs to be associated with the
equation for w since it contains the w normal derivative, while the condition from the second equation for c− simply
gives a Dirichlet condition for the c-equation. As a consequence, the c-equation decouples as a simple diffusion
equation with decay −κ2 c− and Dirichlet boundary conditions. Setting c = 0 then gives a diffusion equation for w
with homogeneous Neumann boundary conditions, which implies stability.
More directly, this calculation points to the failure of a much simpler model. Indeed, we could model an instantaneous
adaptation of tail and head cell concentrations, alias the order parameter c, to the sign of the signal gradient through
c = sign(∂ν w), with a possibly smoothed out version of the sign-function. One would then let w follow head and
tail cell concentrations encoded in c, for instance through w = c. This approach is bound to fail, since the boundary
condition c = sign(∂ν w) will not enforce c to increase from 0 to 1, say, in a cutting experiment where ∂ν w > 0.
Instead, the boundary condition can be satisfied by an, in comparison, much smaller adjustment of the w-levels near
the boundary which achieves ∂ν w = 0, lowering for instance the concentration of w only slightly in a region close
to the boundary. The value ∂ν w = 0 then is compatible with c = 0 in the boundary condition (with the convention
sign(0) = 0). We tested such boundary conditions numerically and observed a subsequent decay of the w-gradient
and convergence to c = 0, that is, failure of regeneration. Relating to the previous discussion, the boundary condition
c = sign(∂ν w) fails to enforce regeneration since it is not explicitly associated with a forced change in levels of c, but
acts rather as a nonlinear flux for the w-equation. Dynamic boundary conditions provide precisely this association
and therefore guarantee regeneration.
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We numerically confirmed these observations on the necessity of dynamic boundary conditions. We observed stability
both in a discretization with mixed boundary conditions and when reducing mass fractions to the scale of the grid
size.

4.5

Recovery of the long-range signal gradient as organizing feature

We can achieve a further simplification to a single scalar equation if we focus on experiments with only head and tail at
the respective extremity, excluding in particular grafting experiments, and tracking only wnt-related concentrations.
We assume that the order parameter c mostly vanishes in the domain, that is, head- and tail-cells are confined
to the boundary regions. In this case, the kinetics for w vanish inside the bulk |x| < L, and we are left with a
simple diffusion equation for w. Note that his explicitly excludes grafting experiments and more generally states
with multiple head and tail regions.
With this assumption it is also sufficient to track the boundary data c± for the order parameter. Assuming now that
c± adjusts rapidly according to (4.5), we can set c± ∼ sign ∂ν w. This all gives us the simple scalar equation
d
1
w± = − Dw ∂ν w|±L + Ψ±
w ,
dt
γ

wt = Dw wxx , |x| < L,

(4.14)

with
 ε

ε
Ψ±
w = τ χ<−θ (∂ν w)(−w) + χ>θ (∂ν w)(1 − w) .
Cutting — numerical experiments. We first illustrate regeneration of the wnt-signaling gradient after cutting,
and therefore use parameters
Dw = 1, pw = 10, ε = 0.002, τ = 50, θ = 3, γ = 0.3, L = 10.
Figure 4.4 shows recovery from small fragments cut from center- or head regions. Recovery is slightly less robust
for fragments cut near head or tail. For increasing values of ε which amounts to decreasing the sensitivity of the
1

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0

0

-5

0

5

-5

0

-5

5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

5

0.4
0.2
0

0

0
0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

Figure 4.4: Simulations of the scalar model (4.14) with initial conditions corresponding to cutting experiments, that is, linear profiles in
w with small slopes. The left panel shows robust recovery for a very small fraction, 0.1%, from the center region. The center panel shows
recovery for a somewhat larger fraction, 4%, from the head region. Here the cut is reflected to demonstrate that recovery is independent
of the orientation of the x-interval. The right panel shows failure of recovery when a slightly smaller fragment is cut from the head
region, in agreement with experimental observations that recovery from fragments near head and tail is less robust; see text for details.
Note the slightly different time instances shown in the right panel, illustrating the very rapid failure to preserve the sign of ∂ν w near the
boundary. The second row shows corresponding time series of w− .

gradient sensing at the boundary (or, also, for increasing values off the mass fraction γ), we see a transition to a
system state which fails to recover; see Figure 4.5. One first sees oscillatory decay toward the trivial state w ≡ 0.5
before sustained oscillations emerge in a weakly subcritical Hopf bifurcation. The unstable periodic orbit separates
initial conditions that lead to the trivial, trunk-only state w ≡ 0.5 from initial conditions that converge to large-scale
oscillations. The large oscillations eventually appear to terminate in a heteroclinic bifurcation for larger values of ε.
We saw qualitatively similar transitions when decreasing the mass fraction γ instead of increasing ε.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.55

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0

0.45
-5

0

0
-5

5

0

5

-5

0.55

1

1

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.45
20

40

60

80

100

5

0

0
0

0

0

20

40

60

80

100

0

10

20

30

40

50

Figure 4.5: Simulations of the scalar model (4.14) with initial conditions corresponding to a cutting experiments and moderate value of
sensitivity ε−1 = 15. An unstable oscillation separates initial conditions w.r.t. α that decay to w = 0.5 (left) from initial conditions
with sustained large-amplitude oscillations (center). Note the different scales for w here. Oscillations disappear in a saddle-node of
periodic orbits for smaller values of ε. For yet smaller sensitivity ε ∼ 12.5, the oscillations seem to disappear in a heteroclinic bifurcation
(right). Corresponding time series of w− in the second row. See text for predictions of Hopf bifurcations and implications for model
corroborations. Oscillations are illustrated in the supplementary materials scalar oscillations.mp4.

Analysis — equilibria and stability. We assume that τ  1 and neglect the flux term − γ1 Dw ∂ν w. We also
assume that θ = 0 such that the characteristic function takes value 1/2 at w = 1/2. At the boundary, equilibria then
satisfy either,
• w = 1, ∂ν w > 0;
• w = 0, ∂ν w < 0;
• w = 1, ∂ν w = 0.
For moderately sized domains, L  ε, this yields three equilibria, w ≡ 1/2, w = (x+L)/(2L), and w = (−x+L)/(2L),
corresponding to only trunk, head-tail, and tail-head solutions. Linearizing at these equilibria, we find a diffusion
equation with dynamic boundary conditions
wt = Dw wxx , |x| < L,

1
τ
d
w± = − Dw ∂ν w|±L − τ w + µ ∂ν w ,
dt
γ
ε

(4.15)

where µ = 1 for the trunk solution w ≡ 0 and µ = 0 for the head-tail and tail-head solutions.
One readily finds that head-tail and tail-head solutions are always stable. To analyze stability of the trunk-only
solution, mu = 1, we consider the semi-unbounded domain x > 0, set w = eλt+ρx , with λ = ρ2 , to find the
characteristic equation


τ
1
2
ρ +
−
ρ + 1 = 0.
ε
γ
For ρ to correspond to an eigenvalue, we need Reρ < 0, which implies
• real instability:

τ
ε

>

τ
ε

> γ1 . We find

1
γ

+ 2 gives 2 real roots ρ± < 0 and two associated real unstable eigenvalues λ± > 0;
√
• complex instability: γ1 + 2 > τε > γ1 + 2 gives 2 complex conjugate roots with Reρ± < 0 and two associated
complex conjugate unstable eigenvalues Reλ± > 0;
√
• Hopf bifurcation: τε = γ1 + 2 gives 2 complex conjugate roots with Reρ± < 0 and two purely imaginary
eigenvalues Reλ± = 0;
√
• stability: τε < γ1 + 2 gives eigenvalues λ with negative real part.
We found that the Hopf bifurcation is subcritical, the unstable periodic solution stabilizes in a saddle-node bifurcation
of periodic orbits, grows in amplitude and eventually disappears in a heteroclinic bifurcation for sufficiently large
values of γ.
The dynamics are quite different if the boundary conditions are relaxed to Robin boundary conditions, for instance

τ χε<−θ (∂ν w)(−w) + χε>θ (∂ν w)(1 − w) = 0,
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

at x = ±L. Neglecting the flux term − γ1 Dw ∂ν w, that is, with sufficiently large mass fractions γ, equilibria for
dynamic and Robin boundary conditions coincide. Stability of equilibria is however quite different: the linearization
with Robin boundary conditions is a Sturm-Liouville eigenvalue problem
µ
∂ν w − w = 0, |x| = L,
ε

λw = wxx , x ∈ (−L, L),

with real eigenvalues λ0 > 0 > λ1 > . . ., λ0 ∼ ε2 /µ2 for L  1. The dynamics generally do not allow for oscillations
as observed in the case of periodic boundary conditions. Nevertheless, the trivial trunk-only solution is unstable in
this approximation and we see robust recovery of small w-gradients. One can attribute the appearance of oscillations
to an effective distributed delay in the otherwise scalar equation for the boundary dynamics of w− caused by the
coupling to the diffusive field w(t, x) which acts as a buffer that stores a blurred history of boundary data.
The transitions discussed here occur when gradient dependence at the boundary is not sufficiently sensitive, that is,
ε is not sufficiently small or τ is too small, or when the mass fraction in the boundary region γ is too small. This
appears to be a prediction quite specific to this model, occurring to some extent also in the full system and the
system with order parameter. We are not aware of experimental observations of oscillations in cases where recovery
and regeneration are severely impeded. But any such observation would clearly corroborate our basic modeling
assumptions.

5

Discussion

We presented a mathematical model for robust regeneration of planarians. Our model is able to reproduce most
cutting and grafting experiments. As opposed to modeling efforts based on Turing-type mechanisms, our model
preserves polarity after cutting and yields robust results over organism scales differing by factors of 100.
Central to our model are two observations from experiments:
(i) sharply increased activity including stem cell proliferation near wound healing sites;
(ii) global gradients of chemical signals, related to the wnt-signaling pathway.
We translate the first observation into dynamic boundary condition, modeling changed reaction kinetics in a boundary
compartment. The second observation has often been discussed in connection with the regulation of tissue size,
expanding on the idea of the French-flag model. The role of this global signal gradient is different in our model:
we postulate that the gradient, rather than absolute levels of the signal are sensed by stem cell populations and, at
wound sites, translated into directed differentiation. We suspect that within a rather general modeling context, such
a gradient sensing is necessary in order to reproduce robust preservation of polarity in cutting experiments.
We incorporate these ingredients into a comprehensive model for 6 species, 3 cell type populations and 3 chemical
signals. Through model reduction to an order parameter for cell types and one long-range chemical signal, only, we exhibit how these two ingredients organize the regeneration process. In the reduced model, we can point to regeneration
as an instability mechanism for a trivial, unpatterened state and identify analytically limits of robust regeneration.
The process is fundamentally different from Turing’s mechanism, and driven by the boundary compartments.
There are several ways in which the model could be refined. First, one can quite easily introduce a head-tail bias,
which is clearly observed in experiments. This could be introduced either through different sensing thresholds θ at
body edges, or through different differentiation and proliferation kinetics. One can thus introduce a bias towards
head generation from small fluctuation of trivial states. We are not aware of a causal rather than a phenomenological
justification of this bias. Second, we do not attempt to model regulation of the size of the head and tail regions.
Since our model relies essentially on establishing a global signaling gradient, cells can clearly obtain positional
information by reading out absolute levels of the wnt-related signal. Postulating such a dependence of differentiation
or apoptosis on these levels, one can then introduce w-dependence in the {s, h, d, uh , ud }-subsystem and thus influence
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the tristability. Front motion as described in the reduced model in Section 4.2 would then depend on w levels, and
stationary interfaces would lock into fixed w-levels, thus regulating a fixed size of head or tail as a percentage of the
full body length. In the order parameter model, this could for instance be accomplished by a w dependence of the
quintic kinetics,
ct = cxx + c(1 − c2 )(c − χε>0.85 (w))(c − χε<−0.85 (w)),
which would regulate the size of head and tail to regions where w > 0.8 and w < −0.8, respectively, about 15% of
body size, each. Pushing this further, such effects could also model the spontaneous formation of head cell clusters
when suppressing the wnt-signaling pathway. Lastly, one could address directed motion of stem cells or progenitors.
Our focus here was on essential features enabling regeneration in a minimal model and we therefore ignored (active)
transport other than random motion and diffusion. Since experiments appear to point to a significant role of directed
motion, a model that takes such effects into account could potentially improve both qualitatively and quantitatively
on the results presented here.

References
[1] J. Achermann and T. Sugiyama. Genetic analysis of developmental mechanisms in hydra: X. Morphogenetic
potentials of a regeneration-deficient strain (reg-16). Developmental biology, 107(1):13–27, 1985.
[2] T. Adell, F. Cebrià, and E. Saló. Gradients in planarian regeneration and homeostasis. Cold Spring Harbor
perspectives in biology, 2(1):a000505, 2010.
[3] M. Almuedo-Castillo, A. Bläßle, D. Mörsdorf, L. Marcon, G. H. Soh, K. W. Rogers, A. F. Schier, and P. Müller.
Scale-invariant patterning by size-dependent inhibition of nodal signalling. Nature Cell Biology, 20(9):1032–1042,
2018.
[4] M. Almuedo-Castillo, M. Sureda-Gómez, and T. Adell. Wnt signaling in planarians: new answers to old
questions. International Journal of Developmental Biology, 56(1-2-3):53–65, 2012.
[5] W. Alt. Biased random walk models for chemotaxis and related diffusion approximations. Journal of Mathematical Biology, 9(2):147–177, 1980.
[6] J. Baguñà. Mitosis in the intact and regenerating planarian Dugesia mediterranea n. sp. II. Mitotic studies during
regeneration, and a possible mechanism of blastema formation. Journal of Experimental Zoology, 195(1):65–79,
1976.
[7] J. Baguñà and R. Romero. Quantitative analysis of cell types during growth, degrowth and regeneration in the
planarians Dugesia mediterranea and Dugesia tigrina. Springer, 1981.
[8] J. Baguñà and R. Romero. Quantitative analysis of cell types during growth, degrowth and regeneration in
the planarians Dugesia mediterranea and Dugesia tigrina. In The Biology of the Turbellaria, pages 181–194.
Springer, 1981.
[9] J. Baguñà, R. Romero, E. Saló, J. Collet, C. Auladell, M. Ribas, M. Riutort, J. Garcı́a-Fernàndez, F. Burgaya,
and D. Bueno. Growth, degrowth and regeneration as developmental phenomena in adult freshwater planarians.
In Experimental embryology in aquatic plants and animals, pages 129–162. Springer, 1990.
[10] J. Bagu, S. Carranza, M. Pala, C. Ribera, G. Giribet, M. A. Arnedo, M. Ribas, and M. Riutort. From morphology
and karyology to molecules. new methods for taxonomical identification of asexual populations of freshwater
planarians. a tribute to professor mario benazzi. Italian Journal of Zoology, 66(3):207–214, 1999.
[11] C. R. Bardeen and F. Baetjer. The inhibitive action of the roentgen rays on regeneration in planarians. Journal
of Experimental Zoology Part A: Ecological Genetics and Physiology, 1(1):191–195, 1904.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[12] H. R. Bode. Head regeneration in Hydra. Developmental dynamics, 226(2):225–236, 2003.
[13] I. Bowen, T. Ryder, and J. Thompson. The fine structure of the planarian Polycelis tenuis Iijima. Protoplasma,
79(1-2):1–17, 1974.
[14] C. Cramer von Laue. Untersuchungen zur dualen Funktion von β-Catenin im Wnt-Signalweg und der Cadherinvermittelten Zelladhäsion bei Hydra. PhD thesis, Technische Universität, 2004.
[15] D. Cusseddu, L. Edelstein-Keshet, J. Mackenzie, S. Portet, and A. Madzvamuse. A coupled bulk-surface model
for cell polarisation. Journal of Theoretical Biology, 2018.
[16] E. De Vries, J. Baguñà, and I. Ball. Chromosomal polymorphism in planarians (Turbellaria, Tricladida) and
the plate tectonics of the western Mediterranean. Genetica, 62(3):187–191, 1984.
[17] C. M. Elliott, T. Ranner, and C. Venkataraman. Coupled bulk-surface free boundary problems arising from a
mathematical model of receptor-ligand dynamics. SIAM J. Math. Anal., 49(1):360–397, 2017.
[18] P. C. Fife. Models for phase separation and their mathematics. Electron. J. Differential Equations, pages No.
48, 26, 2000.
[19] M. Gagliardi, A. Hernandez, I. J. McGough, and J.-P. Vincent. Inhibitors of endocytosis prevent Wnt/Wingless
signalling by reducing the level of basal β-catenin/Armadillo. J Cell Sci, 127(22):4918–4926, 2014.
[20] L. Gee, J. Hartig, L. Law, J. Wittlieb, K. Khalturin, T. C. Bosch, and H. R. Bode. β-catenin plays a central
role in setting up the head organizer in hydra. Developmental biology, 340(1):116–124, 2010.
[21] A. Gierer and H. Meinhardt. A theory of biological pattern formation. Kybernetik, 12(1):30–39, 1972.
[22] K. A. Gurley, S. A. Elliott, O. Simakov, H. A. Schmidt, T. W. Holstein, and A. S. Alvarado. Expression
of secreted Wnt pathway components reveals unexpected complexity of the planarian amputation response.
Developmental biology, 347(1):24–39, 2010.
[23] S. Härting and A. Marciniak-Czochra. Spike patterns in a reaction–diffusion ode model with Turing instability.
Mathematical Methods in the Applied Sciences, 37(9):1377–1391, 2014.
[24] S. Härting, A. Marciniak-Czochra, and I. Takagi. Stable patterns with jump discontinuity in systems with
Turing instability and hysteresis. Disc. Cont. Dyn. Sys. A., 38:757–800, 2017.
[25] B. Hobmayer, F. Rentzsch, K. Kuhn, C. M. Happel, C. C. von Laue, P. Snyder, U. Rothbächer, and T. W.
Holstein. WNT signalling molecules act in axis formation in the diploblastic metazoan Hydra. Nature,
407(6801):186–189, 2000.
[26] M. Iijima, Y. E. Huang, and P. Devreotes. Temporal and Spatial Regulation of Chemotaxis. Developmental
Cell, 3:469–478, 2002.
[27] S. Kakugawa, P. F. Langton, M. Zebisch, S. A. Howell, T.-H. Chang, Y. Liu, T. Feizi, G. Bineva, N. O’Reilly,
A. P. Snijders, et al. Notum deacylates Wnt proteins to suppress signalling activity. Nature, 519(7542):187–192,
2015.
[28] T. Lengfeld, H. Watanabe, O. Simakov, D. Lindgens, L. Gee, L. Law, H. A. Schmidt, S. Özbek, H. Bode, and
T. W. Holstein. Multiple Wnts are involved in Hydra organizer formation and regeneration. Developmental
biology, 330(1):186–199, 2009.
[29] H. Levine and W.-J. Rappel. Membrane-bound Turing patterns. Phys. Rev. E (3), 72(6):061912, 5, 2005.
[30] Y. Li, A. Marciniak-Czochra, I. Takagi, and B. Wu. Steady states of fitzhugh-nagumo system with non-diffusive
activator and diffusive inhibitor. preprint, 2017.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[31] Y. Li, A. Marciniak-Czochra, I. Takagi, B. Wu, et al. Bifurcation analysis of a diffusion-ode model with Turing
instability and hysteresis. Hiroshima Mathematical Journal, 47(2):217–247, 2017.
[32] D. Lobo, W. S. Beane, and M. Levin. Modeling planarian regeneration: a primer for reverse-engineering the
worm. PLoS Comput Biol, 8(4):e1002481, 2012.
[33] H. K. MacWilliams. Hydra transplantation phenomena and the mechanism of hydra head regeneration: II.
Properties of the head activation. Developmental biology, 96(1):239–257, 1983.
[34] A. Marciniak-Czochra. Receptor-based models with diffusion-driven instability for pattern formation in hydra.
Journal of Biological Systems, 11(03):293–324, 2003.
[35] A. Marciniak-Czochra. Receptor-based models with hysteresis for pattern formation in hydra. Mathematical
biosciences, 199(1):97–119, 2006.
[36] A. Marciniak-Czochra, S. Härting, G. Karch, and K. Suzuki. Dynamical spike solutions in a nonlocal model of
pattern formation. Nonlinearity, 31(5):1757–1781, 2018.
[37] A. Marciniak-Czochra, G. Karch, and K. Suzuki. Instability of Turing patterns in reaction-diffusion-ode systems.
Journal of Mathematical Biology, 74(3):583–618, 2017.
[38] A. Marciniak-Czochra, G. Karch, K. Suzuki, J. Zienkiewicz, et al. Diffusion-driven blowup of nonnegative
solutions to reaction-diffusion-ode systems. Differential and Integral Equations, 29(7/8):715–730, 2016.
[39] A. Marciniak-Czochra, M. Nakayama, I. Takagi, et al. Pattern formation in a diffusion-ode model with hysteresis.
Differential and Integral Equations, 28(7/8):655–694, 2015.
[40] H. Meinhardt. Turing’s theory of morphogenesis of 1952 and the subsequent discovery of the crucial role of local
self-enhancement and long-range inhibition. Interface Focus, 2(4):407–416, 2012.
[41] T. H. Morgan. Experimental studies of the regeneration of Planaria maculata. Development Genes and Evolution,
7(2):364–397, 1898.
[42] T. H. Morgan. The control of heteromorphosis in Planaria maculata. Archiv für Entwicklungsmechanik der
Organismen, 17(4):683–695, 1904.
[43] T. H. Morgan. Polarity considered as a phenomenon of gradation of materials. Journal of Experimental Zoology,
2(4):495–506, 1905.
[44] Y. Mori, A. Jilkine, and L. Edelstein-Keshet. Wave-pinning and cell polarity from a bistable reaction-diffusion
system. Biophysical journal, 94(9):3684–3697, 2008.
[45] J. D. Murray. Mathematical biology I: An introduction. Interdisciplinary Applied Mathematics, 17. SpringerVerlag, New York, 2002.
[46] J. D. Murray. Mathematical biology II: Spatial models and biomedical applications. Interdisciplinary Applied
Mathematics, 18. Springer-Verlag, New York, 2003.
[47] P. A. Newmark and A. S. Alvarado. Not your father’s planarian: a classic model enters the era of functional
genomics. Nature Reviews Genetics, 3(3):210–219, 2002.
[48] K. Noda. Reconstitution of dissociated cells of hydra. Zool. Mag., 80:99–101, 1971.
[49] C. Nüsslein-Volhard and E. Wieschaus. Mutations affecting segment number and polarity in Drosophila. Nature,
287(5785):795–801, 1980.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[50] H. G. Othmer and E. Pate. Scale-invariance in reaction-diffusion models of spatial pattern formation. Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences, 77(7):4180–4184, 1980.
[51] S. Owlarn and K. Bartscherer. Go ahead, grow a head! A planarian’s guide to anterior regeneration. Regeneration, 3(3):139–155, 2016.
[52] C. P. Petersen and P. W. Reddien. Smed-βcatenin-1 is required for anteroposterior blastema polarity in planarian
regeneration. Science, 319(5861):327–330, 2008.
[53] C. P. Petersen and P. W. Reddien. A wound-induced Wnt expression program controls planarian regeneration
polarity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(40):17061–17066, 2009.
[54] C. P. Petersen and P. W. Reddien. Polarized notum activation at wounds inhibits Wnt function to promote
planarian head regeneration. Science, 332(6031):852–855, 2011.
[55] I. Philipp, R. Aufschnaiter, S. Özbek, S. Pontasch, M. Jenewein, H. Watanabe, F. Rentzsch, T. W. Holstein,
and B. Hobmayer. Wnt/β-catenin and noncanonical Wnt signaling interact in tissue evagination in the simple
eumetazoan Hydra. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(11):4290–4295, 2009.
[56] G. Plickert, V. Jacoby, U. Frank, W. A. Müller, and O. Mokady. Wnt signaling in hydroid development:
formation of the primary body axis in embryogenesis and its subsequent patterning. Developmental biology,
298(2):368–378, 2006.
[57] H. Randolph. The regeneration of the tail in Lumbriculus. Journal of Morphology, 7(3):317–344, 1892.
[58] H. Randolph. Observations and experiments on regeneration in planarians. Development Genes and Evolution,
5(2):352–372, 1897.
[59] A. Rätz and M. Röger. Turing instabilities in a mathematical model for signaling networks. J. Math. Biol.,
65(6-7):1215–1244, 2012.
[60] A. Rätz and M. Röger. Symmetry breaking in a bulk-surface reaction-diffusion model for signalling networks.
Nonlinearity, 27(8):1805–1827, 2014.
[61] P. W. Reddien. Constitutive gene expression and the specification of tissue identity in adult planarian biology.
Trends in Genetics, 27(7):277–285, 2011.
[62] P. W. Reddien and A. S. Alvarado. Fundamentals of planarian regeneration. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol.,
20:725–757, 2004.
[63] H. Reuter, M. März, M. C. Vogg, D. Eccles, L. Grı́fol-Boldú, D. Wehner, S. Owlarn, T. Adell, G. Weidinger,
and K. Bartscherer. β-catenin-dependent control of positional information along the AP body axis in planarians
involves a teashirt family member. Cell Reports, 10(2):253–265, 2015.
[64] J. C. Rink. Stem Cells, Patterning and Regeneration in Planarians: Self-Organization at the Organismal Scale,
pages 57–172. Springer, New York, 2018.
[65] E. Saló and J. Baguñà. Regeneration and pattern formation in planarians. Development, 83(1):63–80, 1984.
[66] E. Saló and J. Baguñà. Cell movement in intact and regenerating planarians. Quantitation using chromosomal,
nuclear and cytoplasmic markers. Development, 89(1):57–70, 1985.
[67] F. V. Santos. Studies on transplantation in Planaria. Biological Bulletin, 57(3):188–197, 1929.
[68] M. L. Scimone, S. W. Lapan, and P. W. Reddien. A forkhead transcription factor is wound-induced at the
planarian midline and required for anterior pole regeneration. PLoS Genet, 10(1):e1003999, 2014.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/733246; this version posted August 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

[69] J. Sherratt, P. Maini, W. Jäger, and W. Müller. A receptor based model for pattern formation in hydra. Forma,
10(2):77–95, 1995.
[70] H. Shimizu, Y. Sawada, and T. Sugiyama. Minimum tissue size required for hydra regeneration. Developmental
biology, 155(2):287–296, 1993.
[71] S. Shostak. Inhibitory gradients of head and foot regeneration in Hydra viridis. Developmental biology, 28(4):620–
635, 1972.
[72] L. R. Smales and H. D. Blankespoor. The epidermis and sensory organs of Dugesia tigrina (Turbellaria: Tricladida). Cell and Tissue Research, 193(1):35–40, 1978.
[73] T. Stückemann, J. P. Cleland, S. Werner, H. T.-K. Vu, R. Bayersdorf, S.-Y. Liu, B. Friedrich, F. Jülicher, and
J. C. Rink. Antagonistic Self-Organizing Patterning Systems Control Maintenance and Regeneration of the
Anteroposterior Axis in Planarians. Developmental Cell, 40(3):248–263, 2017.
[74] M. Sureda-Gómez, J. M. Martı́n-Durán, and T. Adell. Localization of planarian β-CATENIN-1 reveals multiple
roles during anterior-posterior regeneration and organogenesis. Development, 143(22):4149–4160, 2016.
[75] J. Tasaki, N. Shibata, O. Nishimura, K. Itomi, Y. Tabata, F. Son, N. Suzuki, R. Araki, M. Abe, K. Agata, et al.
ERK signaling controls blastema cell differentiation during planarian regeneration. Development, 138(12):2417–
2427, 2011.
[76] C. Tenbrock. Mathematical models for regeneration on the example of planarians. PhD-Thesis, University of
Münster (WWU), Germany, 2017.
[77] A. M. Turing. The chemical basis of morphogenesis. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B, 1952.
[78] D. M. Umulis. Analysis of dynamic morphogen scale invariance. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
6(41):1179–1191, 2009.
[79] D. M. Umulis and H. G. Othmer. Mechanisms of scaling in pattern formation. Development, 140(24):4830–4843,
2013.
[80] G. Webster. Studies on pattern regulation in hydra. Development, 16(1):123–141, 1966.
[81] D. Wenemoser, S. W. Lapan, A. W. Wilkinson, G. W. Bell, and P. W. Reddien. A molecular wound response
program associated with regeneration initiation in planarians. Genes & Development, 26(9):988–1002, 2012.
[82] D. Wenemoser and P. W. Reddien. Planarian regeneration involves distinct stem cell responses to wounds and
tissue absence. Developmental biology, 344(2):979–991, 2010.
[83] S. Werner, T. Stückemann, M. Beirán Amigo, J. C. Rink, F. Jülicher, and B. M. Friedrich. Scaling and
regeneration of self-organized patterns. Phys. Rev. Lett., 114:138101, Apr 2015.
[84] O. K. Wilby and G. Webster. Experimental studies on axial polarity in hydra. Development, 24(3):595–613,
1970.
[85] J. N. Witchley, M. Mayer, D. E. Wagner, J. H. Owen, and P. W. Reddien. Muscle cells provide instructions for
planarian regeneration. Cell reports, 4(4):633–641, 2013.
[86] L. Wolpert. Positional information and the spatial pattern of cellular differentiation. Journal of Theoretical
Biology, 25(1):1 – 47, 1969.
[87] L. Wolpert. Positional Information and Pattern Formation in Development. Developmental Genetics, 1994.
[88] O. Wurtzel, L. E. Cote, A. Poirier, R. Satija, A. Regev, and P. W. Reddien. A generic and cell-type-specific
wound response precedes regeneration in planarians. Developmental Cell, 35(5):632–645, 2015.

29

