bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Stress-Induced Expression is Enriched for Evolutionarily
Young Genes in Diverse Budding Yeasts
Tyler W. Doughty, Iván Domenzain, Aaron Millan-Oropeza, Noemi Montini, Philip A.
de Groot, Rui Pereira, Jens Nielsen, Céline Henry, Jean-Marc G. Daran, Verena
Siewers* & John P. Morrissey*
*Corresponding Authors
Correspondence to Verena Siewers (siewers@chalmers.se) or John Morrissey
(j.morrissey@ucc.ie).

Affiliations
Department of Biology and Biological Engineering, Chalmers University of
Technology, SE-41296, Gothenburg, Sweden
Tyler W. Doughty, Iván Domenzain, Rui Pereira, Jens Nielsen & Verena Siewers
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Chalmers University of
Technology, SE-41296, Gothenburg, Sweden
Tyler W. Doughty, Iván Domenzain, Rui Pereira, Jens Nielsen & Verena Siewers
Plateforme d’Analyse Protéomique Paris Sud-Ouest (PAPPSO), INRA, MICALIS
Institute, Université Paris-Saclay, 78350 Jouy-en-Josas, France.
Aaron Millan-Oropeza & Céline Henry
School of Microbiology, University College Cork, T12YN60, Ireland, Centre for
Synthetic Biology & Biotechnology, APC Microbiome Ireland, and Environmental
Research Institute, Cork, Ireland.
Noemi Montini & John P. Morrissey
Department of Biotechnology, Delft University of Technology, Van der Maasweg 9,
2629 HZ Delft, The Netherlands
Philip A. de Groot & Jean-Marc G. Daran

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract:

The Saccharomycotina subphylum (budding yeasts) spans more than 400 million
years of evolution and includes species that thrive in many of Earth’s harsh
environments. Characterizing species that grow in harsh conditions could enable the
design of more robust yeast strains for biotechnology. However, tolerance to stressful
conditions is a multifactorial response, which is difficult to understand since many of
the genes involved are as yet uncharacterized. In this work, three divergent yeast
species were grown under multiple stressful conditions to identify stress-induced
genes. For each condition, duplicated and non-conserved genes were significantly
enriched for stress responsiveness compared to single-copy conserved genes. To
understand this further, we developed a sorting method that considers evolutionary
origin and duplication timing to assign an evolutionary age to each gene. Subsequent
analysis of the sets of genes that changed expression revealed a relationship
between stress-induced genes and the youngest gene set, regardless of the species
or stress in question. These young genes are rarely essential for growth and evolve
rapidly, which may facilitate their functionalization for stress tolerance and may
explain their stress-induced expression. These findings show that systems-level
analyses that consider gene age can expedite the identification of stress tolerance
genes.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Yeasts in the Saccharomycotina subphylum, “budding yeasts”, have proven to be
useful platforms for the production of ethanol, flavors, nutritional supplements,
biopharmaceuticals, as well as other valuable chemicals1,2,3. At present, industrial
production using budding yeasts as a platform is dominated by the extensively
characterized species Saccharomyces cerevisiae. S. cerevisiae exhibits common
budding yeast phenotypes (e.g. efficient growth on simple sugars) as well as a less
common adaptation amongst budding yeasts, high ethanol tolerance4. Together,
these traits enable cost-effective production of 100 billion liters of ethanol annually
using S. cerevisiae as a platform1. Other budding yeasts have adaptations that make
them well-suited for production of specific biomolecules, something that is possible
due to the improved strain engineering capacity following the emergence of
CRISPR/Cas95,6. Examples are Yarrowia lipolytica, which evolved to tolerate
hydrophobic environments and can produce high-yields of fatty acids7,8, and
Kluyveromyces marxianus, whose thermotolerance is a beneficial feature for
industrial processes6,9. Despite progress in sequencing genomes and phenotypic
characterization of these and many other yeast species, the genes that underpin
adaptation to cope with harsh conditions remain enigmatic.
For the species above, adaptation to natural environments enables robustness in
industrial biotechnology processes. Understanding an exceptional stress tolerances
from specific budding yeast species, might therefore enable the engineering of panrobust industrial strains, thereby reducing process costs and increasing yields10,11.
Although studies that sought to characterize stress tolerances in S. cerevisiae have
elucidated mechanisms that influence robustness10,12,13, engineering more robust S.
cerevisiae strains without physiological trade-offs remains challenging9. One
complication is that stress exposure often results in hundreds of significant
transcriptional changes13,14, most of which do not correlate with single gene deletion
changes in robustness11. These results suggest that several genes from different
gene families may contribute additively to robustness and/or that stress genes may
exist as duplicates, as is the case for antifreeze protein genes in artic yeasts15. Thus,
researchers have employed systems biology to characterize the transcriptome and/or
proteome-wide stress-induced changes13,14,16–18. These approaches have identified
biological processes that exhibit altered expression in response to stress exposure,
which build upon and relate to extensive previous research into gene functions (e.g.
GO term enrichment analysis). These associations are possible due to extensive
annotations of S. cerevisiae genes that result from decades of experimental
analyses19. For most other yeast species, the majority of gene functional information
is acquired second hand via homology search tools. This paradigm results in a large
portion of genes of unknown function, which is especially large for species that are
phylogenetically distant from extensively characterized species like S. cerevisiae20.
These uncharacterized genes are difficult to integrate into omics analyses like GO
term enrichment, as they do not have a known function or localization. Because of
this, gene functional analysis of poorly characterized species is restricted to
conserved genes, which may not be the only genes that influence stress-tolerance
phenotypes. Currently, hundreds of whole genome sequences are available from
diverse budding yeasts21, including several species that are known to exhibit extreme
stress tolerances22, but many of the causative genes that enable yeast stress
tolerances remain elusive.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Here, we analyzed stress conditions to assess gene expression changes after stress
adaptation in three diverse budding yeast species, one of which is well characterized
(S. cerevisiae), and two that are less-well-characterized (K. marxianus and Y.
lipolytica). The goal of this analysis was to identify common systems-level trends that
are shared between each species stress responses. This analysis discovered that
each organism displayed a consistent response at the level of gene expression that
was characterized by the enrichment of stress responsive genes amongst certain
categories: namely, to genes of unknown function and to recently (in evolutionary
time) duplicated and taxonomically restricted genes (young genes). The findings of
this work suggest an evolutionary mechanism that is biased for stress tolerance
functionalization and periodic expression of young genes. We propose that the gene
sorting method herein provides a path forward for more rapid identification of stress
response genes in environmentally robust yeast, thereby accelerating understanding
of niche adaption in budding yeasts.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Results
Stress Adaptation Responsive Genes are Enriched for Duplicated and NonConserved Genes
In this work, S. cerevisiae, K. marxianus, and Y. lipolytica were exposed to stress
conditions that are present in natural environments, such as those caused by
seasonal temperature variation and growth on sugar-rich or acidic substrates22.
These stress responses are industrially-relevant, as they are caused by feedstocks
(high osmotic pressure and low pH) or process conditions (elevated temperatures)
during industrial fermentations11. Characterizing stress responses in these species is
valuable due to their phylogenetic diversity, which spans much of the
Saccharomycotina subphylum21. To minimize noise caused by variable growth rate23,
experiments were carried out in steady-state chemostats at a fixed growth rate under
standard or stress conditions. This experimental setup allows strains to acclimate to,
and grow in the presence of sub-lethal stress before sampling and analysis, which is
referred to as stress adaptation herein. Transcriptomic changes that occurred in
response these stress conditions were identified via differential expression analysis
(Figure 1A).
In order to understand the function of stress responsive genes, biological process
annotations were acquired from Ensembl (S. cerevisiae) or identified using
BLAST2GO20 for (K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica). BLAST2GO annotated gene
functions to otherwise unknown genes based on homology to an experimentally
characterized gene. This process failed to annotate 20% and 40% of the mRNAs
measured by RNAseq in this study for K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica respectively
(Supplemental 1A). The lower frequency of gene annotation for Y. lipolytica was
expected, since this species is not closely related to extensively characterized
yeasts21. Comparison of gene annotations and differential gene expression showed a
higher percentage of genes of unknown function that were stress responsive than
would be expected. For example, 38% of all protein-coding genes measured in this
study for Y. lipolytica lacked a functional annotation, while 50% of stress responsive
genes were genes of unknown function (Supplemental Figure 1B).
This high proportion of stress-responsive genes of unknown function suggested that
the most broadly conserved genes, which often have functional annotations, might be
under-represented amongst the stress responses. To assess this, orthologous
proteins shared between the three yeast species were inferred using OrthoFinder,
which enables proteome-wide matching based on amino-acid sequence and chain
length similarity in order to predict proteins that descend from a common ancestor24.
To assess the fidelity of ortholog predictions, protein complexes and enzymatic
processes that are expected to be conserved amongst budding yeasts were
searched for amongst orthology inference results25. This analysis found that
orthology inference identified the majority of the expected complex members and
enzymes as orthologs (Supplemental Figure 2B), which supports the high fidelity of
OrthoFinder predictions that was observed previously24. The results of the orthology
inference analysis were used to divide each protein into one of three classes, singlecore orthologous, multi-core orthologous, and non-orthologous. These proteins were
matched to their corresponding genes for comparison to RNAseq differential

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

expression. Gene sorting examples are shown in Supplemental Figure 2A and the
entire list of genes can be found in Supplemental Sheet I.
The results of orthology inference for S. cerevisiae are shown in Figure 1B as an
example. Each measured protein-coding gene from S. cerevisiae was identified as
either 1) present as a single-copy gene with an ortholog in K. marxianus and Y.
lipolytica (black Single-Core), 2) present as a duplicated gene with an ortholog in K.
marxianus and Y. lipolytica (gray Multi-Core), or 3) lacking an ortholog in K.
marxianus or Y. lipolytica (color Non-Core). The resulting groups were compared to
the observed differentially expressed genes, which showed that multi-core and noncore genes were significantly enriched amongst DE genes in each stress condition
tested (Figure 1C). The same gene sorting regime shows that K. marxianus and Y.
lipolytica exhibited similar DE gene enrichment for the multi-core and non-core gene
groups (Figure 1C and Supplemental Figure 3A). Similar results were found amongst
proteomics measurements for some stress conditions, but this analysis was hindered
by low detection of non-core proteins (Supplemental Figure 3C).
The phenomenon depicted in Figure 1C shows that single-core genes, which are
predicted to have descended from a last common ancestor between the three yeast
species (approximately 325 million years ago21) were under-represented amongst
stress responsive genes for each stress and each organism. In contrast, genes that
have duplicated or emerged in more recent evolutionary time were enriched amongst
stress responsive genes. These observations suggest that evolutionary events may
predict differential expression amongst these diverse yeast species (Figure 1D).

Figure 1) Stress Adaptation Responsive Genes are Enriched for Duplicated and NonConserved Genes
A. S. cerevisiae, K. marxianus, and Y. lipolytica were cultivated in chemostats at a growth rate of 0.1/h
in standard conditions, or in the presence of stress (elevated temperature, low pH, or KCl). RNA-seq
was performed followed by differential expression analysis. B. The protein coding genes of S.
cerevisiae, K. marxianus, and Y. lipolytica were probed for orthology using OrthoFinder. S. cerevisiae
gene grouping is shown as an example. Orthologous genes (core genes) were identified and grouped
by their copy number in S. cerevisiae with multi-copy orthologs in gray and single-copy orthologs in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

black. Genes that were not matched to orthologs were designated as non-core genes (blue). C.
Differentially expressed (log2FC>1, FDR<0.01) mRNAs were normalized to the total number of
detected genes inside of their respective group resulting in a percentage DE for each gene group,
which was normalized to the DE % of the dataset to obtain fold enrichment. D. A diagram of expected
gene origin for the species in this figure. Single Core orthologs are predicted to originate from a Last
Common Ancestor >325 million years ago. Multi- and Non-Core Genes are predicted to have
duplicated, arisen de novo, or via another evolutionary event less than 325 million years ago.

Stress Adaptation Responsive Genes in S. cerevisiae are Enriched for Young
Genes
The results in Figure 1 suggested a relationship between the genes that exhibit
differential expression in response to stress and evolutionary events, like de novo
gene emergence and gene duplication. Further characterization of this relationship
could aid in understanding stress gene evolution and could help to predict novel
genes that enable stress tolerance. Thus, we sought to test this relationship more
stringently by dividing the protein-coding genes of S. cerevisiae into more precise
groups that collectively represent a broad swath of eukaryotic evolution. The resulting
groups are referred to as gene age groups, which were determined by ortholog
presence at shared copy number in common ancestors that date from over 400
million years ago to 20 million years ago21. A similar approach, phylostratigraphy,
divides genes into groups based on homology and has been used to infer gene
origination events to identify periods in evolution that correlate with adaptive events26.
However, the results in Figure 1C indicated that an analysis paradigm that considers
both gene origin timing (like phylostratigraphy) and gene duplication timing could
provide new insights into stress responsive gene expression.
Gene grouping based on gene age was assessed using OrthoFinder24 and is
described in detail in the Supplemental Methods. Briefly, all S. cerevisiae genes were
divided into three initial subsets; 1) fixed duplicates from the whole-genome
duplication (WGD)27, 2) genes that are present as single-copy genes, and 3)
duplicate genes that arose outside of the whole-genome duplication (non-WGD)
(Figure S4A). Ortholog inference was used to sort each of the 4,351 single-copy
genes into a single bin based on the most distant ancestor with an orthologous gene
using the hierarchal approach shown in Figure S4C. The multi-copy non-WGD gene
groups were sorted by the presence of orthologous genes with the same copy
number in a bottom-up approach in order to trace the relative timing of gene
duplication events (Supplemental Figure 4D). Finally, genes that were duplicated
during the whole-genome duplication were grouped together. This sorting method
matched each protein coding gene from S. cerevisiae to a single group that reflects
the timing of the emergence (single-copy genes) or timing of duplication (multi-copy
genes) of each gene, which we refer to as gene age. A complete list of genes
measured in this study and their relationships is found in Supplemental Table II.
The gene groupings in Figure 2B were compared to the stress RNAseq data to
determine the percentage of significantly differentially expressed genes in each age
group. This analysis found a stepwise increase in differentially expressed gene
enrichment in progressively younger gene groups in S. cerevisiae. Genes that were
found to be conserved to filamentous fungi (ancient genes from group I) were 4.2 to
6.6-fold less likely to be differentially expressed after stress adaptation compared to
S. cerevisiae-specific genes (group V) (Figure 2C). Similar trends were observed

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

when considering only upregulated or downregulated genes, however, upregulated
genes showed a more pronounced bias towards young genes with 6.6 to 16.8 fold
enrichment between group I and group V genes (Supplemental Figure 5). Analysis of
the expression pattern of young genes (those in groups IV and V) showed that few
genes exhibited significantly changed expression in response to all stresses (Figures
2D and 2E).
The findings in Figure 2 were further tested by analyzing additional stress adaptation
experiments for S. cerevisiae exposed to ethanol in a previous study28 or anaerobic
stress (this study) (Supplemental Figure 6). In both cases, young genes were
enriched, and ancient genes were depleted amongst differentially expressed genes
in response to stress adaptation. A similar enrichment for young genes was observed
amongst varying amounts of ethanol stress, despite difference in the number of total
significant gene expression changes (Supplemental Figure 6D). Together, these
observations suggest that gene age is a viable predictor of differential expression
amongst many types and levels of stress in S. cerevisiae.

Figure 2) Stress Adaptation Responsive Genes in S. cerevisiae are Enriched for Young Genes
A A simplified phylogenetic tree for S. cerevisiae showing speciation events and the Whole Genome
Duplication (red *). B The measured transcripts from this study were grouped based on gene age via
orthology inferrence (described in Supplemental Figure 4 and Supplemental Methods). C Differentially
expressed genes for S. cerevisiae were parsed by their grouping shown in b, then normalized to the
group size and the total measured DE % (dashed line). Transcripts in groups IV and V were assessed
for shared downregulated genes (D) or upregulated genes (E).

Stress Adaptation Responsive Genes in K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica are
Enriched for Young Genes
The findings in Figure 2 showed an inverse correlation between gene age and stress
differential expression in S. cerevisiae. If these findings were shared amongst other
yeast species, they might imply an underlying evolutionary mechanism that can

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

predict the genes that are more likely to be involved in stress adaptation. To test for a
relationship between differential expression and gene age, we stratified the proteincoding genes of K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica using the same sorting concept
described above for S. cerevisiae (Supplemental Figure 4). The only modification to
these sorting approaches was the elimination of the whole-genome duplication
group, as neither of these species has undergone a recent whole-genome
duplication29,30.
Analysis of K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica gene groups in relation to each stress
condition showed similar patterns to S. cerevisiae, with ancient genes exhibiting
under-representation for significant differential expression compared to young gene
groups (Figure 3 and Supplemental Figure 7). Also, as with S. cerevisiae, there were
few young differentially expressed genes that responded to all stresses, suggesting
that these expression changes were often condition specific (Figure 3D and 3E).
These biases towards young genes might explain the low observed overlap between
significant expression changes amongst 1:1:1 orthologs shared between the three
budding yeasts when exposed to the same type of stress (Supplemental Figure 8).
Together, these findings showed that in all three yeasts studied, young genes were
enriched for long-term stress-responsiveness, or adaptation, compared to ancient
genes. Further, since the species chosen for this analysis span much of the diversity
of the budding yeast subphylum21, these results may be indicative of a shared stress
adaptation mechanism, rather than a shared response of specific genes, amongst
budding yeasts.

Figure 3) Stress Adaptation Responsive Genes in K. marxianus are Enriched for
Young Genes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A A simplified phylogenetic tree for K. marxianus showing speciation events and organisms
used in orthology queries. B Detected transcripts from this study were grouped based on
ortholog presence in the groups shown (described in supplemental Figure 4). C Differentially
expressed genes for K. marxianus were parsed by their grouping shown in A and B, then
normalized to the group size and the total measured DE % (dashed line).
Transcripts in groups IV and V, were assessed for shared downregulated genes (D) or upregulated
genes (E).

Young Genes are Less Expressed, Shorter, Less Likely to be Essential, and
Accumulate Sequences Changes More Rapidly than Ancient Genes.
To understand the functions associated with the gene groupings produced in this
study, we assessed biological process enrichment amongst the ancient and young
gene sets in S. cerevisiae, where ample functional information is available. This
analysis showed ancient genes associated with fundamental biological processes
including primary metabolism, tRNA aminoacylation, and DNA strand elongation, and
94% of these genes were annotated with at least one biological process GO term.
Conversely, young genes (groups IV and V) were associated with more specialized
functions like maltose transport, vitamin biosynthesis, and aldehyde metabolism, with
many young genes lacking any biological process annotations in S. cerevisiae (40%).
K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica also exhibited high percentages of young genes that
were not associated with a biological process (41% and 69% respectively)
(Supplemental Figure 9B). The fundamental nature of ancient gene functional
associations was reflected by their high likelihood to be essential or required for
optimal growth compared to young genes. Conversely, the more specialized
functions of young genes were reflected by the 16-fold decrease in likelihood of
growth impairment upon deletion compared to ancient genes (Figure 4C)31. Analysis
of cellular component enrichment showed that young proteins (groups IV and V)
were significantly enriched for localization to the plasma membrane, cell wall, and
vacuole, which was distinct from ancient proteins (group I) enrichment for nuclear,
cytoplasmic, and mitochondrial localization (Supplemental Table III).
Further characterization of young protein-coding genes found that they exhibited
lower median gene expression and were less frequently detected via mass
spectrometry in non-stress samples compared to ancient genes (Figures 4A and 4B).
Previous works have shown that low expression and non-essentiality correlate with
increased adaptation rates32,33, suggesting that young genes could adapt more
rapidly compared to ancient genes. To test this, amino acid sequence identity was
compared between homologous proteins from members of the same genus using
BLAST+. Analysis of each protein sequence from groups I and IV allowed sequence
identity changes to be compared over the same span of evolutionary time to assess
adaptation rates. This analysis was adjusted to reflect the estimated evolutionary
time elapsed21 between each pair of species and showed that the average frequency
of amino acid identity changes was higher for young protein groups compared to
ancient protein groups (Figure 4D).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4) Young Genes are Less Expressed, Often Non-Essential, and Adapt More Rapidly than
Ancient Genes
A. Transcripts measured in standard growth conditions were normalized to the read depth and gene
length to generate Transcripts per Million (TPM). Error bars at the 95% confidence interval of the
median. B. The percentage of mRNAs measured in this study compared to proteins measured via
mass spectrometry by quantifying eXtracted Ion Chromatograms. Experimental samples from
standard conditions were used for this analysis. C. The percentage of essential genes (black) and
non-essential genes associated with slow growth (gray) is shown for S. cerevisiae ancient genes (I)
20
and young genes (IV and V). Essential and slow growth ORFs were obtained from Giaever 2002 . D.
The percentage of amino acid identity changes for each protein in comparison to its closest homolog
from a member of the same genus. Results were adjusted to the percent amino acid change per
million years (% ID lost/MYear) using the estimated divergence time between pairs of organisms13.
The median and 95% confidence interval is shown for each group is denoted by a black line. Queries
were performed between S. cerevisiae/S. eubayanus, K. marxianus/K. lactis, or Y. lipolytica/Y. bubula.
E. A model for evolution to intermittent stress. Random mutations occur naturally amongst genes in
each age group (red arrows) followed by non-stress selection for benign mutants (red blocked arrow).
Mutants that do not influence growth are selected upon stress exposure for fitness benefits.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Discussion
Budding yeasts are attractive for industrial production of biomolecules, since they
grow rapidly, utilize inexpensive substrates, and are readily engineered to produce
heterologous gene products1,2,3. However, stresses that result from feedstock
composition, toxic products, and fluctuating reaction temperatures can lower the
cost-effectiveness of industrial processes by diminishing productivity and yields11.
Previous works have phenotypically characterized yeasts exhibiting stress tolerant
phenotypes22, and whole genome sequencing data are available, but the genes that
have evolved in these yeasts to enable survival and growth under unfavorable,
stress-inducing conditions remain unclear. We now identify an association between
stress-induced gene expression and gene age. We show that younger genes,
namely, those that have are restricted to a genus or species, or have duplicated in
recent evolutionary time, are more likely to respond to different types of long-term
stress, such as those that we imposed in continuous (chemostat) cultivation in this
report. These stress-responsive genes can also be considered adaptation or nichespecialization genes as they evolved to enable the yeasts carrying them tolerate
ongoing harsh conditions.
The findings that adaptation rates and stress gene expression are biased toward
young genes for three distantly related yeast species suggests an underlying
evolutionary mechanism. The model in Figure 4E suggests that during non-stress
periods, ancient and young gene mutations may occur at similar rates, however,
ancient genes may be subject to more stringent counter-selection (red blocked
arrow) due to their higher expression and influence on growth (Figures 4A and 4C).
Conversely, non-synonymous mutations amongst young genes might accumulate
more rapidly because these genes are rarely growth-related (Figure 4C and 4D). The
resulting increase in sequence space that is sampled by young genes would increase
the probability of young mutants to enter stress-growth competition, thus increasing
the chances of selecting young gene adaptations to benefit stress tolerance. We
suggest that these events occur in a cyclical manner, enabling stress-tolerance
functionalization of young genes without diminishing growth potential. This model
could also apply to promoter sequences, which would enable specialized genes to
adapt dynamic expression patterns in order to save resources during non-stress
growth. This mechanism would explain the higher propensity of young genes to
change expression in response to stress. The model might also provide an insight as
to why improved stress tolerance in some laboratory-evolved strains comes at a cost
to growth under standard growth conditions34,35. In this case, the relatively short, noncyclical stresses applied during adaptive laboratory evolution does not allow for the
counterselection of growth mutations.
In this work we found that young genes represented 4%, 5%, and 14% of proteincoding genes in K. marxianus, S. cerevisiae, and Y. lipolytica, respectively, which is
in the same range as the 7-19% of genes in C. elegans, D. melanogaster, and H.
sapiens that lack recognizable homologs in other organisms26,36. Previous works
have linked some young genes to species and genus-specific adaptations, including
movement on the surface of fast water in Rhagovelia water striders37, HIV-1
resistance in owl monkeys38,39, and the concurrent evolution of antifreeze proteins in
several species40–42. Antifreeze protein genes are well-studied examples of young

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

genes that arose via de novo gene origin events between 13 and 18 million years
ago in codfishes and are present at variable copy number in some species43.
Concurrently, the psychrophilic yeast G. antarctica, has evolved to encode nine
antifreeze protein genes whose expression levels are induced by exposure to
cold15,44. These attributes of antifreeze protein genes are similar to the young genes
in this study, which were stress responsive, emerged in recent evolutionary time, and
often exist at variable copy number. It seems plausible that the young, stress
responsive genes described herein for K. marxianus could influence this species
growth at higher temperatures (45°C)9 than other members of the Kluyveromyces
genus, like K. lactis (37°C)45. Further, the acquisition of this thermotolerant
phenotype in a short span of evolutionary time would be consistent with the
involvement of rapidly adapting young genes.
This study and previous stress tolerance investigations have identified several dozen
to several hundred significant gene expression changes after stress exposure in
budding yeasts13,16–18,28. Despite analysis of stress-responsive genes in several
robust species, rational engineering of robust strains remains difficult. The findings of
this work suggest that perturbing evolutionarily young stress-responsive genes from
stress tolerant species is a pragmatic path forward toward designing robust industrial
strains. This suggestion is based on two points; 1) single gene perturbations often fail
to reproduce stress-response phenotypes13 and 2) many mutations that improve
stress tolerance cause trade-off phenotypes10,34,35. Establishing more robust
industrial production strains may require several gene mutations and/or expression of
several exogenous genes, while avoiding growth or physiological perturbations. To
accomplish this, new, knowledge-driven approaches are needed to aid the
identification of relevant genes that can be manipulated to confer the desired trait
without negative consequences on growth. These aims are complicated by
incomplete gene function information, which is particularly lacking for many stress
tolerant yeast species. In this work, we present a gene sorting method that identifies
a class of genes that are likely to be enriched in response to diverse stresses. By
leveraging gene age information, it will be possible to focus rational experimental
designs on novel stress tolerance genes. Identifying these genes offers
biotechnological potential as well as the tools to understand the process of species
diversification and niche adaptation in yeast.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Methods
Strains and Cultivation Conditions
Y. lipolytica (W29), K. marxianus (CBS6556), and S. cerevisiae (CEN.PK113-7D)
were grown in 30mL synthetic media at 30°C for 24 h in shake flasks, followed by
inoculation of bioreactors and an initial batch growth phase. After the completion of
the batch phase, chemostat cultivation was started with a dilution rate of 0.1/h and a
working volume of 500 mL (S. cerevisiae) or 1 L (K. marxianus and Y. lipolytica).
Stress conditions were achieved by altering either temperature, pH, or osmotic
pressure (KCl) for the duration of the cultivation, specific conditions are listed in
Supplemental Figure 8. Standard growth temperature was adjusted to reflect
organism specific tolerances. Cultivations for were performed in synthetic medium
(SM)46 containing 5 g·L-1 (NH4)2SO4, 3 g·L-1 KH2PO4, 0.5 g·L-1 MgSO4·7H2O, 7.5
g.L-1 glucose, trace elements and vitamins with 1 g L-1 pluronic PE6100 to reduce
foaming. Sample collection was carried out after at least five volume changes (50 h)
in steady state growth conditions. Steady state growth was defined as less than 5%
deviation in biomass dry weight.
Ortholog Prediction with OrthoFinder
For Figure 1, proteome-wide homology matching was executed using OrthoFinder24.
Proteins were excluded from the core genome (non-core) if orthology search
predicted zero orthologous proteins in any of the query species. Proteins were
designated single-core if they were encoded by single-copy genes in the species
(e.g. S. cerevisiae HIS1) or multi-core if they were duplicated in the species (e.g. S.
cerevisiae GAL1 and GAL3) (Supplemental Figure 2). Protein groups were matched
to their underlying genes for gene expression analyses. This grouping strategy was
carried out to sort each species protein-coding genes into a single group. Results of
these gene sorting analyses are shown in Supplemental Sheet I.
For Figure 2, Figure 3, and Supplemental Figure 7, OrthoFinder was used to identify
orthologs between each yeast and a set of eukaryotic organisms. This is shown in
Supplemental Figure 4 and is discussed in more detail in the supplemental methods,
results of these gene sorting analyses are shown in Supplemental Table II.
RNAseq Preparation and Mapping
RNA extractions were performed on samples that were mechanically lysed with
0.5mm acid washed beads using an MP-Biomedicals™ FastPrep-24 for three oneminute cycles. Further extraction was performed using an RNeasy® Kit from Qiagen.
Libraries were prepared using the TruSeq mRNA Stranded HT kit. Sequencing was
carried out using an Illumina NextSeq 500 High Output Kit v2 (75 bases), with a
minimum of 8 million paired-end reads per replicate. The Novo Nordisk Foundation
Centre for Biosustainability (Technical University of Denmark), performed the RNA
sequencing and library preparation. RNAseq datasets can be found using SRA
accession PRJNA531619. RNAseq read mapping was performed after analysis in
FASTQC, which identified one sample from K. marxianus as having overrepresented
sequences. This sample was excluded from the analysis herein. Analysis for TPM in
Figure 4a was performed using Hisat247 and StringTie48. RNAseq mapping for
differential expression was mapped with STAR49 and reads were assigned with
featureCounts50. Differential expression results can be found in Supplemental Table
3.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Mass Spectrometry Measurements for Proteomics
Sample preparation details can be found in supplementary data. Peptides were
analyzed in an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo
Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent acquisition mode using High Collision
Dissociation (details in supplementary data). Protein identification was performed
using the search engine X!Tandempipeline 3.4.451. Data filtering was set to peptide
E-value < 0.05, protein log(E-value) < –2 and to a minimum of two identified peptides
per protein. Relative quantification of protein abundance was carried out using two
complementary methods, one based on spectral counting and other considering the
area of eXtracted Ion Chromatograms (XIC) of a given peptide at specific retention
time as described in Millan-Oropeza 201752. MS data are available online on public
databases via the PRIDE53 repository with the dataset identifier PXD011426 and
PROTICdb51,54 or via the following URLs:
http://moulon.inra.fr/protic/chassy_kluyveromyces
http://moulon.inra.fr/protic/chassy_yarrowia
http://moulon.inra.fr/protic/chassy_saccharomyces
Differential Expression Analysis
Differential expression data was generated using limma55 and edgeR56 R packages,
with filtering to remove lowly expressed genes/proteins. In addition, each dataset was
filtered to remove genes/proteins for which the relative standard deviation was
greater than 1 (RSD>1) for replicates for a given condition and organism. Differential
expression was defined by a significance cutoff of absolute log2FC>1, False
Discovery Rate<0.01 for a stress condition compared to control. All mapped
transcript data, protein detection data, custom tools, and analysis scripts can be
found at:
https://github.com/SysBioChalmers/OrthOmics

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.

5.

6.

7.
8.

9.
10.

11.

12.

13.

14.

15.

16.
17.

18.

Mohd Azhar, S. H. et al. Yeasts in sustainable bioethanol production: A review.
Biochem Biophys Rep 10, 52–61 (2017).
Nielsen, J. & Keasling, J. D. Engineering Cellular Metabolism. Cell 164, 1185–
1197 (2016).
Sanchez-Garcia, L. et al. Recombinant pharmaceuticals from microbial cells: a
2015 update. Microb. Cell Fact. 15, 33 (2016).
Ma, Y. J., Lin, L. L., Chien, H. R. & Hsu, W. H. Efficient utilization of starch by a
recombinant strain of Saccharomyces cerevisiae producing glucoamylase and
isoamylase. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 31 ( Pt 1), 55–59 (2000).
Ledesma-Amaro, R. & Nicaud, J. M. Yarrowia lipolytica as a biotechnological
chassis to produce usual and unusual fatty acids. Prog Lipid Res 61, 40–50
(2016).
Varela, J. A., Gethins, L., Stanton, C., Ross, P. & Morrissey, J. P. Applications
of Kluyveromyces marxianus in Biotechnology. in Yeast Diversity in Human
Welfare (eds. Satyanarayana, T. & Kunze, G.) 439–453 (Springer Singapore,
2017). doi:10.1007/978-981-10-2621-8_17
Nicaud, J.-M. Yarrowia lipolytica. Yeast 29, 409–418 (2012).
Gonçalves, F. A. G., Colen, G. & Takahashi, J. A. Yarrowia lipolytica and its
multiple applications in the biotechnological industry. The Scientific World
Journal (2014). doi:10.1155/2014/476207
Lane, M. M. & Morrissey, J. P. Kluyveromyces marxianus: A yeast emerging
from its sister’s shadow. Fungal Biol. Rev. 24, 17–26 (2010).
Mans, R., Daran, J. G. & Pronk, J. T. Under pressure: evolutionary engineering
of yeast strains for improved performance in fuels and chemicals production.
Curr Opin Biotechnol 50, 47–56 (2018).
Deparis, Q., Claes, A., Foulquie-Moreno, M. R. & Thevelein, J. M. Engineering
tolerance to industrially relevant stress factors in yeast cell factories. FEMS
Yeast Res 17, (2017).
Caspeta Y.; Ghiaci, P.; Feizi, A.; Buskov, S.; Hallström, B.; Petranovic, D.;
Nielsen, J., L. . C. Altered Sterol Composition Renders Yeast Thermotolerant.
Science (80-. ). 346, 75–78 (2014).
Gibney, P. A., Lu, C., Caudy, A. A., Hess, D. C. & Botstein, D. Yeast metabolic
and signaling genes are required for heat-shock survival and have little overlap
with the heat-induced genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, E4393-402
(2013).
Lahtvee, P.-J., Kumar, R., Hallström, B. M. & Nielsen, J. Adaptation to different
types of stress converge on mitochondrial metabolism. Mol. Biol. Cell 27,
2505–2514 (2016).
Firdaus-Raih, M. et al. The Glaciozyma antarctica genome reveals an array of
systems that provide sustained responses towards temperature variations in a
persistently cold habitat. PLoS One 13, e0189947 (2018).
Silva, A. et al. Regulation of transcription elongation in response to
osmostress. PLoS Genet 13, e1007090 (2017).
Hughes Hallett, J. E., Luo, X. & Capaldi, A. P. State transitions in the TORC1
signaling pathway and information processing in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.
Genetics 198, 773–786 (2014).
Kasavi, C., Eraslan, S., Oner, E. T. & Kirdar, B. An integrative analysis of
transcriptomic response of ethanol tolerant strains to ethanol in

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

19.
20.

21.
22.
23.
24.

25.
26.

27.

28.
29.
30.

31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.

37.

38.

Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mol. Biosyst. 12, 464–476 (2016).
Botstein, D. & Fink, G. R. Yeast: An Experimental Organism for 21st Century
Biology. Genetics 189, 695 LP – 704 (2011).
Conesa, A. et al. Blast2GO: a universal tool for annotation, visualization and
analysis in functional genomics research. Bioinformatics 21, 3674–3676
(2005).
Shen, X. X. et al. Tempo and Mode of Genome Evolution in the Budding Yeast
Subphylum. Cell 175, 1533-+ (2018).
Buzzini, P., Turchetti, B. & Yurkov, A. Extremophilic yeasts: the toughest
yeasts around? Yeast 35, 487–497 (2018).
O’Duibhir, E. et al. Cell cycle population effects in perturbation studies. Mol.
Syst. Biol. 10, 732 (2014).
Emms, D. M. & Kelly, S. OrthoFinder: solving fundamental biases in whole
genome comparisons dramatically improves orthogroup inference accuracy.
Genome Biol. 16, 157 (2015).
Prachumwat, A. & Li, W.-H. Protein Function, Connectivity, and Duplicability in
Yeast. Mol. Biol. Evol. 23, 30–39 (2005).
Domazet-Lošo, T., Brajković, J. & Tautz, D. A phylostratigraphy approach to
uncover the genomic history of major adaptations in metazoan lineages.
Trends Genet. 23, 533–539 (2007).
Byrne, K. P. & Wolfe, K. H. The Yeast Gene Order Browser: Combining
curated homology and syntenic context reveals gene fate in polyploid species.
Genome Res. (2005). doi:10.1101/gr.3672305
Lahtvee, P.-J. et al. Absolute Quantification of Protein and mRNA Abundances
Demonstrate Variability in Gene-Specific Translation Efficiency in Yeast. Cell
Syst. 4, 495-504.e5 (2017).
Wolfe, K. H. Origin of the Yeast Whole-Genome Duplication. PLoS Biol. 13,
e1002221–e1002221 (2015).
Magnan, C. et al. Sequence Assembly of Yarrowia lipolytica Strain
W29/CLIB89 Shows Transposable Element Diversity. PLoS One 11, e0162363
(2016).
Giaever, G. et al. Functional profiling of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae
genome. Nature 418, 387–391 (2002).
Pál, C., Papp, B. & Hurst, L. D. Highly expressed genes in yeast evolve slowly.
Genetics 158, 927–931 (2001).
Mata Bahler, J., J. Correlations Between Gene Expression and Gene
Conservation in Fission Yeast. Genome Res. 13(12), 2686–2690 (2003).
Huang, C.-J., Lu, M.-Y., Chang, Y.-W. & Li, W.-H. Experimental Evolution of
Yeast for High-Temperature Tolerance. Mol. Biol. Evol. 35, 1823–1839 (2018).
Caspeta, L., Chen, Y. & Nielsen, J. Thermotolerant yeasts selected by adaptive
evolution express heat stress response at 30°C. Sci. Rep. 6, 27003 (2016).
Khalturin, K., Hemmrich, G., Fraune, S., Augustin, R. & Bosch, T. C. More than
just orphans: are taxonomically-restricted genes important in evolution? Trends
Genet 25, 404–413 (2009).
Santos, M. E., Le Bouquin, A., Crumière, A. J. J. & Khila, A. Taxon-restricted
genes at the origin of a novel trait allowing access to a new environment.
Science (80-. ). 358, 386–390 (2017).
Sayah, D. M., Sokolskaja, E., Berthoux, L. & Luban, J. Cyclophilin A
retrotransposition into TRIM5 explains owl monkey resistance to HIV-1. Nature
430, 569–573 (2004).

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/660274; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

39.
40.

41.

42.
43.

44.

45.

46.

47.
48.
49.
50.

51.

52.

53.
54.
55.
56.

Stremlau, M. et al. The cytoplasmic body component TRIM5alpha restricts HIV1 infection in Old World monkeys. Nature 427, 848–853 (2004).
Zhuang, X., Yang, C., Murphy, K. R. & Cheng, C.-H. C. Molecular mechanism
and history of non-sense to sense evolution of antifreeze glycoprotein gene in
northern gadids. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116, 4400–4405 (2019).
Chen, L., DeVries, A. L. & Cheng, C. H. Convergent evolution of antifreeze
glycoproteins in Antarctic notothenioid fish and Arctic cod. Proc Natl Acad Sci
U S A 94, 3817–3822 (1997).
Chen, S., Krinsky, B. H. & Long, M. New genes as drivers of phenotypic
evolution. Nat Rev Genet 14, 645–660 (2013).
Baalsrud, H. T. et al. De novo gene evolution of antifreeze glycoproteins in
codfishes revealed by whole genome sequence data. Mol. Biol. Evol. 35, 593–
606 (2017).
Hashim, N. H. F. et al. Characterization of Afp1, an antifreeze protein from the
psychrophilic yeast Glaciozymaantarctica PI12. Extremophiles 17, 63–73
(2013).
Steensma, H. Y., M., de J. F. C. & Linnekamp, M. The use of electrophoretic
karyotypes in the classification of yeasts:Kluyveromyces marxianus and K.
lactis . Curr. Genet. 14, 311–317 (1988).
Verduyn, C., Postma, E., Scheffers, W. A. & Van Dijken, J. P. Effect of benzoic
acid on metabolic fluxes in yeasts: a continuous‐culture study on the regulation
of respiration and alcoholic fermentation. Yeast 8, 501–517 (1992).
Kim, D., Langmead, B. & Salzberg, S. L. HISAT: a fast spliced aligner with low
memory requirements. Nat. Methods 12, 357 (2015).
Pertea, M. et al. StringTie enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome
from RNA-seq reads. Nat. Biotechnol. 33, 290 (2015).
Dobin, A. et al. STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. Bioinformatics 29,
15–21 (2013).
Liao, Y., Smyth, G. K. & Shi, W. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose
program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics 30,
923–930 (2014).
Langella, O. et al. X!TandemPipeline: A Tool to Manage Sequence
Redundancy for Protein Inference and Phosphosite Identification. J Proteome
Res 16, 494–503 (2017).
Millan-Oropeza, A. et al. Quantitative Proteomics Analysis Confirmed Oxidative
Metabolism Predominates in Streptomyces coelicolor versus Glycolytic
Metabolism in Streptomyces lividans. J Proteome Res 16, 2597–2613 (2017).
Vizcaíno, J. A. et al. 2016 update of the PRIDE database and its related tools.
Nucleic Acids Res. 44, 11033 (2016).
Ferry-Dumazet, H. et al. PROTICdb: A web-based application to store, track,
query, and compare plant proteome data. Proteomics 5, 2069–2081 (2005).
Ritchie, M. E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNAsequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43, e47 (2015).
McCarthy, D. J., Chen, Y. & Smyth, G. K. Differential expression analysis of
multifactor RNA-Seq experiments with respect to biological variation. Nucleic
Acids Res 40, 4288–4297 (2012).

18

