bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Nutrient regulation of the islet epigenome controls adaptive insulin secretion
Matthew Wortham1, Fenfen Liu1, Johanna Y. Fleischman1, Martina Wallace2, Francesca
Mulas1, Nicholas K. Vinckier1, Austin R. Harrington1, Benjamin R. Cross1, Joshua
Chiou1, Nisha A. Patel1, Yinghui Sui1, Ulupi S. Jhala1, Orian S. Shirihai3, Mark O.
Huising4, Kyle J. Gaulton1, Christian M. Metallo2, Maike Sander1,5,*

1

Departments of Pediatrics and Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Pediatric Diabetes
Research Center, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA
2
Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037,
USA
3
Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles,
CA 90095, USA
4
Department of Neurobiology, Physiology and Behavior, College of Biological Sciences,
and Physiology and Membrane Biology, School of Medicine, University of California,
Davis, Davis, CA 95616, USA

5
*

Corresponding author

Correspondence: masander@ucsd.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Adaptation of the islet β-cell insulin secretory response to changing insulin demand is
critical for blood glucose homeostasis, yet the mechanisms underlying this adaptation are
unknown. Here, we show that nutrient-stimulated histone acetylation plays a key role in
adapting insulin secretion through regulation of genes involved in β-cell nutrient sensing
and metabolism. Nutrient regulation of the epigenome occurs at sites occupied by the
chromatin-modifying enzyme Lsd1 in islets. We demonstrate that β-cell-specific deletion
of Lsd1 leads to insulin hypersecretion, aberrant expression of nutrient response genes,
and histone hyperacetylation. Islets from mice adapted to chronically increased insulin
demand exhibited similar epigenetic and transcriptional changes. Moreover, genetic
variants associated with fasting glucose and type 2 diabetes are enriched at LSD1-bound
sites in human islets, suggesting that interpretation of nutrient signals is genetically
determined. Our findings reveal that adaptive insulin secretion involves Lsd1-mediated
coupling of nutrient state to regulation of the islet epigenome.

Main
The ability to regulate nutrient metabolism in response to feeding and fasting is necessary
for metabolic homeostasis. Nutrient utilization is acutely regulated by hormones and
metabolites that change in response to feeding state1. If an energy state persists, adaptive
control mechanisms increasingly influence nutrient metabolism. This is exemplified by
adaptation of liver metabolism to fasting, wherein a network of nutrient- and hormoneresponsive transcriptional complexes act in tandem with epigenetic changes to drive
metabolic rewiring coupled to changes in fuel availability2-6. Understanding how feeding

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and fasting signals are interpreted in metabolic tissues is critical to developing a
comprehensive understanding of energy homeostasis.
Insulin produced by pancreatic β-cells is the key stimulus for carbohydrate
metabolism, and therefore it is critical that insulin secretion is adjusted commensurate
with changes in energy state1. The insulin secretory response to feeding is primarily
controlled by glucose and potentiated by intra-islet glucagon7,8 and incretin hormones
such as Glp-1 through stimulation of cAMP production9-11. The postprandial increase of
serum glucose accelerates glucose metabolism within the β-cell to initiate a signalling
cascade involving ATP-stimulated plasma membrane depolarization, Ca2+ influx, and
insulin vesicle exocytosis12. Although much is known regarding how nutritional and
hormonal signals acutely regulate the insulin secretory response9, it is unclear how
feeding and fasting evoke sustained functional changes as β-cells adapt to these nutrient
states.
It has long been recognized that the insulin secretory response is attenuated by
prolonged fasting13-15 and sensitized in response to nutrient overload during adaptation to
obesity16,17. During fasting, β-cells rewire their metabolism to increase fatty acid
oxidation at the expense of glucose metabolism, thereby reducing the ability of glucose to
stimulate insulin secretion18,19. This metabolic switch is in part transcriptionally driven
through upregulation of Pparα20. In the fed state, key nutritional signals that promote
insulin secretion such as glucose and Glp-1 also trigger changes in β-cell gene
expression21,22, raising the possibility that these feeding-induced transcriptional changes
contribute to adaptive enhancement of the insulin secretory response. Gene regulation in
response to glucose has also been associated with changes in histone acetylation23,24,

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

suggesting that chromatin modifications could contribute to nutrient-regulated
transcription in β-cells. It is unknown whether feeding is coupled to transcriptional or
epigenomic regulation in β-cells to mediate functional changes that endure over the
duration of the fed state.
To investigate adaptation of pancreatic islets to changes in nutrient state, we
employed a time-restricted feeding paradigm25 to reinforce natural rhythms of food intake
in mice. Food availability was restricted to the 12-hour dark phase for six days, which did
not result in weight loss (Extended Data Fig. 1a, b). Notably, time-restricted feeding of
normal chow has previously been shown to not affect glucose tolerance25. On the final
day of entrainment after 12 hours of fasting, food was provided to one group for 4 hours
and withheld from the fasted group, which resulted in differences in blood glucose levels
(Extended Data Fig. 1c). Glucose stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) by isolated islets
was higher in the fed than in the fasted state (Extended Data Fig. 1d), suggesting that
even short-term changes in nutrient state trigger adaptive changes in the insulin secretory
response. To assess transcriptional changes associated with adaptation to feeding, we
analysed islets from fasted and fed mice by mRNA-seq (Fig. 1a, Supplementary Table
1), revealing 1,186 differentially expressed genes (P < 0.01; Extended Data Fig. 2a,
Supplementary Table 2a). Functional annotation of feeding-responsive genes identified
regulation of metabolic (carbohydrate, lipid, and amino acid metabolism) and nutrientsensing (MAPK, mTOR, and FoxO) pathways (Fig. 1b, c) known to adapt the insulin
secretory response to energy state17-19,26-30.
Metabolic cues have been shown to effect transcriptional changes in part by
regulating the epigenome6,31-33. In particular, acetylation of histone H3 Lys27 (H3K27ac),

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a histone modification associated with active promoters and enhancers34 (“active
chromatin” hereafter), is dynamically regulated in response to changes in nutrient
state6,23,32. To determine whether islet active chromatin is responsive to nutrient cues, we
performed chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by massively parallel DNA
sequencing (ChIP-seq) for H3K27ac in islets from fasted and fed mice (Fig. 1a,
Supplementary Table 3). We found that 48% of H3K27ac peaks exhibited nutrient
state-regulated changes in signal (> 1.2-fold, P < 0.0001, see Methods for details on
differential peak calling), the vast majority of which (80%) gained acetylation with
feeding (Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 2b, c, Supplementary Table 4a). Feedinginduced deposition of H3K27ac occurred independently of changes in monomethylation
of H3 Lys4 (H3K4me1; Extended Data Fig. 2d), a histone modification that co-occurs
with H3K27ac in active chromatin34. Sites gaining H3K27ac with feeding were enriched
near genes upregulated in the fed state (Fig. 1e, f), suggesting effects of these chromatin
changes on gene transcription. Feeding-induced H3K27ac sites were enriched for motifs
recognized by ETS and AP-1 family transcription factors (TFs) (Fig. 1g, Supplementary
Table 5a), of which many were expressed in islets (e.g. ETS: Elk1, Elk4, Elf1, Erg, Ets1,
Etv1, Gabpa; AP-1: Jun, Fos) (Fig. 1g). Notably, these TFs are signal-dependent and
have been shown to mediate adaptation to changes in energy state in metabolic tissues4.
Together, these findings reveal that H3K27ac is dynamically regulated by feeding in
islets and suggest signal-dependent regulation of chromatin at these sites.
Adaptive changes in insulin secretion are evoked by both short-term and
prolonged changes in nutrient state16, the latter being exemplified by compensatory
insulin secretion in obesity17. During chronic overfeeding, augmented insulin secretion

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

counteracts insulin resistance, thereby preventing hyperglycaemia. To determine whether
similar transcriptional and epigenetic changes as observed in our 4-hour-fed versus 16hour-fast model also occur in response to a sustained increase of nutrient intake, we
analysed islets from leptin receptor-deficient db/db mice at the onset of hyperglycaemia,
when db/db islets exhibit insulin hypersecretion indicative of an adaptive response
(Extended Data Fig. 1e, f). Gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) revealed significant
overlap between genes upregulated in db/db islets and genes induced by feeding,
including known regulators of nutrient signalling, such as Irs222,35, Mapkapk336, and
Pak337 (Fig. 1h, i, Supplementary Tables 1 and 2b). This suggests shared adaptive
mechanisms in response to short-term or chronic changes in nutrient state. Analysis of
chromatin state in db/db islets further revealed hyperacetylation of H3K27 and
hypermethylation of H3K4 at active chromatin sites, most prominently at feedinginduced H3K27ac sites (Fig. 1j, Extended Data Fig. 2e, f, Supplementary Table 3).
Together, these findings indicate that chronic overfeeding augments nutrient-stimulated
histone acetylation and gene transcription concomitant with increased histone
methylation.
Dynamics in nutrient state can evoke changes to the epigenome through histonemodifying enzymes that utilize intermediary metabolites as cofactors or substrates or
through indirect mechanisms via nutrient-responsive signalling pathways6,31-33.
Posttranslational histone modifications regulate transcription via recruitment of proteins
that impact chromatin accessibility or mediate interactions between regulatory elements.
Histone acetylation state exerts a dominant effect on transcription, which is fine-tuned by
histone methylation and other modifications38,39. One histone-modifying enzyme that has

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

been shown to be associated with acetylated histones and to modulate acetylation and
methylation state is the histone demethylase Lsd140,41. In adipose tissue, Lsd1 functions
as a signal-dependent chromatin modifier that adapts metabolism to changes in nutrient
state42,43.
Based on this evidence, we investigated whether Lsd1 associates with nutrientregulated chromatin in islets. ChIP-seq for Lsd1 in islets revealed a strong positive
correlation between Lsd1 and H3K27ac signal intensities (Spearman’s σ = 0.84, P < 2.2 x
10-16; Fig. 1k, Supplementary Tables 3 and 6a), as was observed in other cell types41,44.
Throughout the genome, Lsd1 predominantly occupied promoters and associated with
active and not repressed chromatin (Extended Data Fig. 2g-k). Analysis of the extent of
overlap between Lsd1-bound sites and feeding-regulated active chromatin revealed
enrichment of Lsd1 binding and signal intensity at sites gaining H3K27ac with feeding
(Fig. 1l-n, Extended Data Fig. 2k, Supplementary Table 4b). Compared to feedinginduced H3K27ac regions not bound by Lsd1, H3K27ac regions bound by Lsd1 were
enriched for motifs of the ETS and AP-1 TF families, in particular MAPK-dependent Elk
TFs (Extended Data Fig. 2l, Supplementary Table 5b), suggesting specific association
of Lsd1 with sites regulated by signal-dependent TFs. Supporting the relevance of these
binding events for gene regulation, Lsd1 peaks were overrepresented near genes
upregulated by feeding (Extended Data Fig. 2m), such as Irs2, Mapkapk3, and Pak3
(Fig. 1o, Extended Data Fig. 2h). Thus, Lsd1 occupies active chromatin sites that gain
acetylation with feeding and associates with feeding-induced genes involved in nutrient
signalling.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To investigate the function of Lsd1 in β-cells, we deleted Lsd1 in β-cells of adult
mice using Pdx1-CreER (Lsd1Δβ hereafter; Fig. 2a, b, Extended Data Fig. 3a) and
monitored glucose homeostasis. Ad libitum-fed male and female Lsd1Δβ mice began to
exhibit hypoglycaemia three weeks after Lsd1 inactivation (Fig. 2c, Extended Data Fig.
3b). The same phenotype was observed following Lsd1 deletion with the MIP-CreER
transgene (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Lsd1Δβ and control mice did not differ with regard to
food consumption or body weight, and insulin sensitivity was modestly reduced
(Extended Data Fig. 3d-f), excluding reduced caloric intake or increased insulin
sensitivity as the primary cause of hypoglycaemia. Analysis of β-cell mass, islet
endocrine cell type composition, and pancreatic insulin content (Extended Data Fig. 3gi) further ruled out β-cell hyperplasia as underlying the hypoglycaemia.
To investigate the progressive nature and possible nutrient dependency of the
hypoglycaemic phenotype, we analysed blood glucose levels in Lsd1Δβ mice in different
nutritional states before and at the onset of overt hypoglycaemia. One week after Lsd1
deletion, ad libitum-fed mice maintained normal blood glucose levels throughout the day
(Extended Data Fig. 3j). An intraperitoneal glucose tolerance test further indicated that
glucose sensing during stimulation is normal one week following Lsd1 inactivation
(Extended Data Fig. 3k). However, after overnight fasting Lsd1Δβ mice exhibited
significantly lower blood glucose levels at this time point (Fig. 2d). Fasting
hypoglycaemia was accompanied by inappropriately high plasma insulin levels in the
fasted but not the fed state (Fig. 2e). It is unlikely that this phenotype is caused by a
defective counter-regulatory response because blood glucagon levels were not reduced in

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

fasted Lsd1Δβ mice (Extended Data Fig. 3l). These findings suggest that adaptation of
the β-cell insulin secretory response to fasting is disrupted in Lsd1Δβ mice.
To test whether Lsd1Δβ mice exhibit insulin hypersecretion at sub-stimulatory
glucose concentrations, we studied Lsd1Δβ islets in perifusion experiments. One week
after Lsd1 deletion, Lsd1Δβ islets exhibited increased insulin secretion at intermediate and
high glucose concentrations compared to control islets (Fig. 2f), and by the three-week
time point, islets secreted insulin even at supraphysiologically low glucose levels (Fig.
2g). Thus, Lsd1Δβ islets hypersecrete insulin in response to glucose prior to an overt in
vivo phenotype, suggesting transient in vivo compensation. These results demonstrate
that Lsd1 inactivation results in a cell-autonomous increase of GSIS and failure to
suppress insulin secretion in response to hypoglycaemia.
Insulin secretion is modulated by fatty acids and amino acids as well as
hormones9,11; therefore, we tested whether islets from Lsd1Δβ mice respond aberrantly to
other secretagogues. While Lsd1Δβ islets responded normally to the fatty acid palmitate
and to co-stimulation with leucine and glutamine (Extended Data Fig. 4a), they
exhibited an exaggerated response to Exendin-4, an analogue of the feeding-induced
hormone Glp-1 (Fig. 2h). The increased sensitivity to Glp-1 or other cAMP-generating
pathways7,8 could contribute to hypoglycaemia in the fed state following Lsd1
inactivation (Fig. 2d).
Glucose sensing by the β-cell relies on glucose metabolism, such that the rate of
glycolysis is determined by blood glucose concentration. An increase in the β-cell
ATP/ADP ratio in response to glucose triggers insulin secretion by inducing closure of an
ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel, membrane depolarization, and subsequent

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

calcium (Ca2+) influx12. Having found that insulin secretion becomes progressively
uncoupled from glucose levels in Lsd1-deficient β-cells, we sought to determine which
step(s) of stimulus-secretion coupling is deregulated. As a readout for metabolic activity,
we measured respiration under basal and stimulatory glucose conditions (2.8 mM and
16.8 mM glucose, respectively), and found that Lsd1Δβ islets consumed more oxygen in
low glucose than control islets (Fig. 3a). Reduced respiration following inhibition of ATP
synthase by oligomycin indicates that oxygen consumption in Lsd1Δβ islets is coupled to
ATP synthesis (Fig. 3a). Accordingly, ATP content in low glucose was elevated in
Lsd1Δβ islets (Fig. 3b). To study stimulus-secretion coupling downstream of ATP
production in Lsd1Δβ islets, we measured Ca2+ influx in basal and stimulatory glucose
concentrations. Consistent with their higher ATP content, Lsd1-deficient β-cells exhibited
elevated Ca2+ levels in basal glucose levels akin to control β-cells under stimulatory
glucose concentrations (Fig. 3c), suggesting constitutive activation of voltage-gated Ca2+
channels. To test whether Ca2+ influx in Lsd1Δβ β-cells is triggered by tonic inhibition of
KATP channels in basal glucose concentrations, we treated islets with the KATP channel
opener diazoxide. Showing the KATP channel-dependency of Ca2+ influx in Lsd1-deficient
β-cells, diazoxide inhibited Ca2+ influx (Fig. 3d) and reduced basal insulin secretion (Fig.
3e). Together, these results suggest that altered metabolism in Lsd1Δβ islets promotes
basal insulin hypersecretion via closure of KATP channels and subsequent activation of
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels.
To directly test whether the metabolism of glucose fuels ATP production and
constitutive insulin secretion in Lsd1Δβ islets, we determined the metabolic fate of
glucose in islets using isotopic tracing of uniformly-13C-labeled glucose (hereafter U-13C-

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

glucose; Fig. 3f). For these experiments, control and Lsd1Δβ islets were incubated in 2.8
mM of U-13C-glucose, reflective of a non-stimulatory glucose concentration, and
analysed by targeted metabolomics to determine abundance and isotopic labelling of
glucose-derived metabolites. Lsd1Δβ islets exhibited increased isotopic labelling and
accumulation of citrate and malate (Fig. 3g, h), which have been shown to increase
during glucose stimulation45,46. Lsd1Δβ islets also exhibited increased

13

C labelling of

glycine, aspartate, and glutamate (Extended Data Fig. 4b), reflecting accelerated glucose
metabolism via glycolysis and the TCA cycle. Lactate production was not altered
(Extended Data Fig 4c), suggesting that Lsd1Δβ islets metabolize much of this glucose in
mitochondria. These results indicate that Lsd1 deficiency gives rise to a basal metabolic
state that resembles the glucose-stimulated state of normal islets.
Glucose metabolism stimulates insulin secretion via both “triggering” and
“amplifying” pathways12. The triggering pathway is stimulated when ATP produced from
glucose oxidation inhibits KATP channels, resulting in depolarization and opening of
voltage-gated Ca2+ channels. The amplifying pathway potentiates the effect of Ca2+ upon
insulin vesicle exocytosis, which occurs in part via accumulation of intermediary
metabolites9,46. Having observed augmented production of glucose-derived citrate and
malate in Lsd1Δβ islets (Fig. 3g, h), we predicted that these metabolites could
hyperactivate the amplifying pathway. Thus, we assessed activity of the amplifying
pathway by constitutively activating the triggering pathway with KCl and preventing
metabolic effects on the KATP channel with simultaneous diazoxide treatment. This
revealed constitutive activation of the amplifying pathway in Lsd1Δβ islets (Fig 3i).
Supporting the important role of accelerated glucose metabolism in basal insulin

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

hypersecretion by Lsd1-deficient β-cells, inhibition of glycolysis with mannoheptulose
partially rescued basal insulin hypersecretion by Lsd1Δβ islets (Fig. 3j). Altogether, these
findings suggest that aberrant glucose metabolism in the unstimulated state activates both
triggering and amplifying pathways of insulin secretion in Lsd1Δβ islets. Dual activation
of these pathways likely underlies the increased severity of the phenotype compared to
models of triggering pathway deregulation such as Sur1 inactivation47.
Having observed uncoupling of insulin secretion from nutrient state in Lsd1Δβ
mice, we sought to determine the molecular mechanisms underlying these changes. To
this end, we characterized transcriptomes and epigenomes of Lsd1Δβ islets before and at
the onset of hypoglycaemia at one and three weeks after Lsd1 deletion, respectively (Fig.
4a). mRNA-seq analysis revealed that many transcriptional changes observed three
weeks after Lsd1 inactivation were already present at week one (280 of 643 genes
upregulated at week three and 124 of 350 genes downregulated at week three; P < 0.01
using Cuffdiff; Spearman’s σ = 0.49, P < 2.2 x 10-16 for regulated genes; Fig. 4b,
Supplementary Tables 1 and 2c). Thus, loss of Lsd1 in β-cells has effects on gene
transcription prior to manifestation of overt hypoglycaemia. Concordant with the
transcriptomic changes, Lsd1Δβ islets also exhibited early alterations in islet chromatin
state. Of 16,324 total differential H3K27ac peaks (> 1.5 absolute fold difference)
between Lsd1Δβ and control islets at either one or three weeks following Lsd1
inactivation, 3,076 peaks (19% of total differential peaks) were already changed at week
one (Fig. 4c, Extended Data Fig. 5a, Supplementary Tables 3 and 4c). Remarkably,
early H3K27ac changes comprised mostly a gain in acetylation (3,329 differential peaks
gaining vs. 49 losing acetylation at week one). Amongst all classes of H3K27ac sites,

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

early hyperacetylated sites exhibited the strongest Lsd1 binding signal (Fig. 4d),
suggesting direct effects of Lsd1. These sites also exhibited H3K4me1 accumulation
(Extended Data Fig. 5b-d, Supplementary Table 4d), consistent with Lsd1’s activity as
a H3K4 mono- and di-demethylase48 and further supporting a direct role for Lsd1 at these
sites.
The similarities between effects of Lsd1 deletion (Fig. 4c), short-term feeding
(Fig. 1d, Extended Data Fig. 2b, c), and chronic overfeeding (Fig. 1j) on islet H3K27ac
raised the possibility that Lsd1 dampens acetylation at nutrient-regulated H3K27ac sites.
Indeed, sites that gained H3K27ac with feeding exhibited excess H3K27ac deposition in
Lsd1Δβ islets (Extended Data Fig. 5e). Uncoupling of histone acetylation from feeding
state in Lsd1Δβ islets indicates that Lsd1 is required for the β-cell to interpret nutrient
signals at the level of the epigenome. However, as in db/db islets (Extended Data Fig.
2e), hyperacetylation in Lsd1Δβ islets was also evident at H3K27ac sites not regulated by
short-term feeding (Extended Data Fig. 5e). Similarly, Lsd1Δβ (Extended Data Fig. 5f,
g) and db/db islets (Extended Data Fig. 2f, h) exhibited increased H3K4
monomethylation at feeding-induced H3K27ac sites, whereas a gain in H3K4me1 was
not observed after short-term feeding (Extended Data Fig. 2d, h). Thus, Lsd1 deletion or
prolonged overfeeding have more pronounced effects on the epigenome relative to shortterm feeding.
To identify gene expression changes that drive insulin hypersecretion following
Lsd1 inactivation, we determined functional category enrichment among differentially
expressed genes in Lsd1Δβ islets. Enrichments were independently assessed for genes
regulated at one or three weeks after Lsd1 inactivation to account for transient or delayed

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

regulation (Supplementary Tables 2c and 7a-c). This analysis revealed deregulation of
processes involved in the control of insulin secretion, such as nutrient-dependent
signalling, cell metabolism, and vesicle transport, with most genes exhibiting concordant
changes at both time points (Fig. 4e, f, Extended Data Fig. 6a, b). Among the
deregulated genes were ligands that stimulate receptors of nutrient-responsive signalling
pathways in β-cells, such as Cx3cl1, Egf, and Igf2, which have positive effects on insulin
secretion49-51. Additional deregulated genes included Irs2, Dusp1, Mapkapk3, and Pak3,
which are intermediates of the PI3K/Akt and MAPK signalling pathways that are known
to promote insulin secretion22,35,52,53. Of interest was the high expression of Atf3, Fos,
Jun, and Nr4a1 in Lsd1Δβ islets. These TFs are stimulus-induced immediate-early genes,
which are transcribed within minutes after activation of a signalling pathway21,54. Nr4a1,
Atf3, and Fos have been shown to regulate insulin secretion in β-cells55-57, suggesting that
immediate-early genes could mediate adaptation of the insulin secretory response to
changes in the nutrient environment. Transcription start sites (TSSs) of many nutrient
response genes, such as Irs2, Mapkapk3, and Pak3 (Fig. 4g, Extended Data Fig. 5g),
were Lsd1-bound and exhibited H3K27 hyperacetylation and increased H3K4
monomethylation in Lsd1Δβ islets, indicating direct effects of Lsd1 on chromatin state at
these gene loci. Of note, the low-Km glucose-phosphorylating enzyme hexokinase 1
(Hk1) was only upregulated at three weeks but not at one week after Lsd1 inactivation
(Fig. 4f). Hk1 is normally absent from β-cells58, which enables β-cell glucose sensing
through the high-Km glucose-phosphorylating enzyme glucokinase (Gck). Ectopic
expression of Hk1 in β-cells accelerates glycolysis in low glucose59 and causes basal
insulin hypersecretion and hypoglycaemia60 similar to Lsd1Δβ mice three weeks after

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Lsd1 inactivation (Fig. 2d, g). This suggests that the delayed upregulation of Hk1 could
be a major contributor to the late onset of overt hypoglycaemia in Lsd1Δβ mice. An
additional driver for progressive dysregulation of insulin secretion could be genes
involved in HIF-1α signalling, which were similarly first increased three weeks following
Lsd1 deletion (Fig. 4e). HIF-1α mediates β-cell metabolic reprogramming and is induced
by chronic accumulation of cAMP, a second messenger of Glp-1 and glucagon receptor
signalling61,62. Taken together, these observations support a model whereby Lsd1
inactivation deregulates nutrient-dependent signalling pathways and leads to metabolic
reprogramming of β-cells, thereby uncoupling insulin secretion from nutrient state.
The overlap in cellular processes affected by Lsd1 deletion (Fig. 4e) and induced
by feeding (Fig. 1c) led us to examine whether Lsd1 inactivation deregulates similar
genes as those regulated during adaptation to changing nutrient states (e.g. Irs2,
Mapkapk3, Pak3, Atf3, Nr4a1, and Nr4a2). GSEA revealed enrichment of genes
upregulated by feeding as well as genes upregulated in db/db islets among those
overexpressed in Lsd1Δβ islets (Fig. 4h, i, Extended Data Fig. 7a). Similar genes were
acutely induced in β-cells21 and islets by co-stimulation with glucose and the Glp-1
effector cAMP (Extended Data Fig. 7b-d), indicating that Lsd1-deficient β-cells
resemble β-cells in a nutrient-stimulated state despite being exposed to similar nutrient
environments in vivo at one week after Lsd1 inactivation (Extended Data Fig. 3j, k).
Together, these findings show that Lsd1 mediates coupling of environmental nutrient
signals to transcription of genes associated with β-cell functional adaptation.
The prevalence of nutrient response genes with known roles in insulin secretion
(e.g. Atf3, Irs2, and Nr4a1)35,55,56 among Lsd1-regulated transcripts (Fig. 4i) suggested

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

that Lsd1 could adapt the insulin secretory response by modulating nutrient-dependent
signalling. Several lines of evidence pointed to an important role for MAPK signalling in
this process. First, nutrient stimulation increases ERK phosphorylation in β-cells26.
Furthermore, both feeding and Lsd1 deletion stimulated expression of MAPK pathwayassociated genes (Fig. 1c, Fig. 4e). Finally, feeding-regulated H3K27ac sites bound by
Lsd1 were highly enriched for recognition motifs of the MAPK effectors Elk1 and Elk4
(Extended Data Fig. 2l). To determine the importance of MAPK signalling for insulin
hypersecretion in Lsd1Δβ islets, we treated control and Lsd1Δβ islets with an ERK
inhibitor for 24 hours. Indeed, ERK inhibitor treatment rendered the insulin secretory
response of Lsd1Δβ islets indistinguishable from control islets (Fig. 4j). Together, these
results demonstrate that inhibition of MAPK signalling reverses insulin hypersecretion
induced by Lsd1 inactivation, indicating functional convergence of Lsd1-regulated
programs and the MAPK signalling pathway in β-cells.
To next determine whether LSD1 function is conserved in human β-cells, we
treated cadaveric human islets with the LSD1 inhibitor tranylcypromine (LSD1i) or
conducted knockdown in human β-cells and performed GSIS assays. Similar to Lsd1Δβ
murine islets (Fig. 2h), LSD1i-treated human islets or β-cells transduced with an LSD1shRNA exhibited increased basal insulin secretion (Fig. 5a, Extended Data Fig. 8a-d).
Transcriptome analysis of LSD1i-treated human islets revealed that genes induced by
LSD1i treatment were also upregulated in Lsd1Δβ mouse islets (Fig. 5b), including
immediate-early genes (ATF3, EGR1, IER3, JUN, JUND, MAFF, KLF4, NFIL3) and the
nutrient-response gene IRS2 (Supplementary Tables 1 and 2d).

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To further determine whether LSD1 associates with active chromatin in human
islets as observed in mice, we conducted ChIP-seq for LSD1 (Supplementary Tables 3
and 6b). As in mouse islets (Fig. 1k, l, Extended Data Fig. 2g, i), LSD1 predominantly
occupied active promoters and enhancers in human islets (Extended Data Fig. 8e,
Supplementary Table 6b), with LSD1 and H3K27ac signal intensities correlating across
the genome (Spearman’s σ = 0.79, P < 2.2 x 10-16; Extended Data Fig. 8f-h,
Supplementary Table 6c).
Given the here-demonstrated role for LSD1 in the regulation of insulin secretion,
we postulated that genetic variants associated with traits relevant to insulin secretion
could exert their function through sites occupied by LSD1. To test this prediction, we
calculated enrichment of genetic variants at LSD1-bound sites for association with type 2
diabetes (T2D)63, diabetes-related quantitative phenotypes64-67, and other complex traits
and diseases for calibration68-77. We observed significant enrichment (P < 0.05) of body
mass index-adjusted fasting glucose (FG adj. BMI) and T2D association (FG adj. BMI,
enrichment = 57.2, P = 0.03; T2D, enrichment = 26.5, P = 4.65 x 10-4) (Fig. 5c). As
expected, traits associated with insulin resistance (e.g. fasting insulin) as well as most
non-metabolic traits showed no evidence for enrichment. The one exception was
Alzheimer’s disease, which could indicate that LSD1 regulates similar genes in brain as
in islets, consistent with known functions for Lsd1 in neuronal gene regulation78.
In order to define the LSD1-mediated gene networks affected by T2D- and fasting
glucose-associated variation, we annotated genetic variants in LSD1-bound sites with
evidence for T2D or FG adj. BMI association with their putative target genes in islets
using chromatin loops derived from promoter capture Hi-C (pcHi-C) data23

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(Supplementary Table 8a-b). We observed significant enrichment of genes looped to
FG adj. BMI and T2D-associated LSD1-bound sites among genes upregulated in LSD1itreated islets (Fig. 5d). For example, at loci harbouring the signal-dependent immediateearly genes IER3 and JUN, T2D-associated variants in LSD1-occupied enhancers
exhibited chromatin looping to the IER3 and JUN promoters, respectively (Fig. 5e,
Extended Data Fig. 8i). IER3 and JUN mRNAs were both upregulated by LSD1
inactivation in human and mouse islets (Fig. 4f, Fig. 5f, Extended Data Fig. 8j). In sum,
our findings identify a key role for LSD1 in preserving glucose homeostasis of mice and
humans by ensuring the insulin secretory response is coupled to nutrient state.

Discussion
Through integrated studies of β-cell physiology, epigenomics, and transcriptomics, we
have established nutrient-dependent regulation of the islet epigenome as a mechanism for
β-cell functional adaptation to changes in organismal insulin demand. We find that
feeding induces histone hyperacetylation and transcription at gene loci involved in the
regulation of β-cell nutrient signalling and metabolism, indicating that nutrients sensitize
the response of β-cells to insulin secretory cues through effects on the epigenome. Our
analysis identifies Lsd1 as a component of the transcriptional complexes residing at sites
whose acetylation levels are coupled to nutrient state. By dampening histone acetylation
and methylation at these sites, Lsd1 prevents aberrantly high expression of nutrientinduced genes, thereby counteracting the sensitisation of the β-cell insulin secretory
response by nutrient cues. The function of Lsd1 in β-cells has similarity with its role in
neurons, where Lsd1 regulates chromatin state and expression of genes that are

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

modulated by excitatory stimuli78. Lsd1 has been shown to affect histone acetylation via
cross-talk with histone methylation40, demethylation of TFs79, and through nonenzymatic scaffolding functions80. Further studies will be needed to define the precise
mechanisms through which Lsd1 regulates nutrient-responsive chromatin in β-cells.
Our findings suggest that regulation of chromatin state at active regulatory
elements of genes involved in metabolism and nutrient signalling provides a mechanism
for β-cells to adapt their insulin secretory response to changing insulin demands. At
nutrient-responsive genes, we observed qualitatively similar changes in H3K27
acetylation and gene expression in a short-term feeding model as in the db/db model of
chronic overnutrition at a time point when db/db islets exhibit adaptive insulin
hypersecretion. These findings suggest that this epigenetic mechanism of nutrientinduced β-cell functional adaptation is relevant during both short-term and chronic
nutrient stimulation.
Adaptation of metabolic tissues to changing nutrient states requires accurate
interpretation of environmental signals. We show that in β-cells, the chromatin modifier
Lsd1 is required for interpreting environmental nutrient signals at the level of the
epigenome. The observed enrichment of T2D-associated variants at LSD1-bound sites in
human islets suggests that interpretation of nutrient signals is influenced by genetic
variation, thereby impacting T2D risk. Gene-environment interactions play an important
role in T2D pathogenesis81. Our findings support a model whereby influences from
environmental nutrient signals and genetic variation converge at the level of the β-cell
epigenome to affect adaptation of the insulin secretory response. Deeper investigation of
environmental regulation of the epigenome in metabolic tissues should have relevance for

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

understanding the pathogenesis of T2D, and should help pave the way for therapeutic
intervention.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods
Animal studies
All mice used were of mixed strain backgrounds with approximately equal contributions
from C57BL/6N and CD1, with the exception of db/db mice, which were on a pure
C57BLKS/J background, and mice used for Lsd1 ChIP-seq, which were on a pure
C57BL/6N background. Animals were housed 1-5 mice per cage under standard housing
conditions with free access to water and chow (PicoLab Rodent Diet 20 pellets, #5053),
unless otherwise indicated. Male mice were used for all experiments unless otherwise
indicated. The following mouse strains were used in this study: Lsd1flox82, Pdx1-CreER83,
MIP-CreER84, mIns1-H2b-mCherry85, and db/db (Jackson labs strain 000642). To delete
Lsd1 in Lsd1flox/flox; Pdx1-CreER or Lsd1flox/flox; MIP-CreER mice, tamoxifen (Sigma) was
injected subcutaneously with 4 doses of 4 or 6 mg, respectively, every other day in 10- to
14-week-old mice. For Lsd1 deletion, control Lsd1+/+; Pdx1-CreER or Lsd1+/+; MIPCreER mice were tamoxifen-injected in parallel unless otherwise indicated. Tamoxifen
was dissolved in corn oil at 20 mg/mL for injections. Post-tamoxifen time points are
expressed relative to the final tamoxifen injection. db/db mice were analysed weekly by
blood glucose measurements, and islets were harvested from experimental db/db and
control db/+ littermates for ChIP-seq and mRNA-seq once glycaemia in db/db mice
exceeded 250 mg/dL. All animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal
Care and Use Committee of the University of California, San Diego.

Metabolic Studies

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Feeding entrainment was adapted from25 with the exception that the feeding period
encompassed the entire 12-hour dark phase. For all fasting experiments, mice were
transferred to fresh cages containing woodchip bedding to prevent coprophagia. Unless
otherwise indicated, blood glucose, body weight, and serum insulin were measured
between ZT3 and ZT4 (Bayer Contour glucometer; Bayer, Tarreytown, NJ). Food intake
was measured by weighing food hoppers over time, whereas each cage of co-housed mice
was considered one replicate, and food intake was averaged over the number of mice per
cage. Overnight fasts were performed for 16 hours between ZT12 and ZT4 the following
day. For serum hormone measurements, blood was collected from the tip of the tail and
centrifuged, and the supernatant assayed for insulin content by ELISA (ALPCO) or for
glucagon content by radioimmunoassay (EMD Millipore).
Glucose and insulin tolerance tests were performed in mice fasted for 6 hours.
Food was withdrawn at ZT0 and fasting blood glucose levels were recorded at ZT6. Mice
were then injected intraperitoneally with a dextrose solution at a dose of 1.5 g/kg body
weight (glucose tolerance tests) or an insulin solution (bovine insulin, Sigma) at a dose of
0.25 U/kg body weight (insulin tolerance tests). Blood glucose was measured as above at
the indicated time points following injections. Pancreatic insulin content was determined
as previously described86.

Cell line and islet culture
Mouse islets were isolated and cultured as previously described45. Mouse islets were
cultured in complete media (RPMI 1640 with 8 mM glucose, 10% FBS, 2 mM Lglutamine, 100 U/mL Pen/Strep, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM HEPES, and 0.25

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mg/mL amphoterecin B) at 37°C with 5% CO2 for a maximum of 48 hours. For cAMP
stimulation, islets were treated with 0.5 mM cpt-cAMP (Sigma) in culture media
containing 11 mM glucose after overnight recovery from isolation. For Erk inhibition, 1
µM SCH772984 (Apex) or vehicle (DMSO) was added to the culture medium for 24
hours immediately following islet isolation and was excluded during perifusion assays.
Human islets were acquired through the Integrated Islet Distribution Program.
Upon receipt, islets were stained with dithizone and positively-staining material was
hand-picked using a dissection microscope. Islets were allowed to recover 18-48 hours in
complete media (CMRL 1066 with 13 mM glucose, 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine, 100
U/mL Pen/Strep, 1 mM sodium pyruvate, 10 mM HEPES, and 0.25 mg/mL amphoterecin
B) at 37°C with 5% CO2 prior to treatments. For LSD1 inhibition studies, 2 mM
tranylcypromine (Sigma) or vehicle (H2O) was included in the culture media for 24 hours
prior to analysis. Donor information can be found in Supplementary Table 9.

Immunohistochemistry, islet composition, and β-cell mass measurements
Immunohistochemistry, islet endocrine cell composition, and β-cell mass measurements
were performed as previously described86. A mouse-on-mouse kit (Vector labs) was used
according to the manufacturer’s instructions to stain using primary antibodies of mouse
origin.

Insulin secretion measurements
Static insulin secretion assays were performed as previously described45. Unless
otherwise noted, all insulin secretion measurements were performed after islets were

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

allowed to recover overnight from isolation (mouse islets) or shipment (human islets) in
complete islet media (formulations described above). Secreted insulin and islet insulin
content were determined by ELISA (ALPCO) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.
Insulin secretion assays were performed immediately following islet isolations
and hand-picking for comparison of islets in the fed and fasted states and for comparison
of db/db and control (db/+) islets to avoid reversion of transient in vivo changes. For
comparison of islets in the fed and fasted states, fatty-acid-free bovine serum albumin
was used to avoid the stimulatory effect of trace fatty acids in the fasted state27.
The following compounds were included as indicated during stimulations:
Exendin-4 (10 nM), L-leucine and L-glutamine (10 mM each), the fatty acid palmitate
(100 µM), KCl (30 mM), and diazoxide (100 µM). For glycolysis inhibition, islets were
preincubated in 100 mM D-mannoheptulose (Fisher Scientific) in Krebs-RingersBicarbonate-HEPES (KRBH) buffer (130 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 1.2 mM CaCl2, 1.2 mM
MgCl2, 1.2 mM KH2PO4, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 25 mM NaHCO3, and 0.1% bovine
serum albumin) containing 2.8 mM glucose for one hour at 37°C with 5% CO2 prior to
the beginning of the experiment and where indicated, mannoheptulose continued to be
included throughout starvation and stimulation steps.
Perifusion was carried out using the Biorep perifusion system. Islets were first
starved for 30 min in KRBH containing 2.8 mM glucose at 37°C with 5% CO2 and were
then loaded into perifusion chambers (130 islets/chamber). For equilibration, islets were
perifused with KRBH containing 2.8 mM glucose for 30 min, at which point islets were
stimulated with KRBH containing the indicated glucose concentrations and perifusate

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

was collected for analysis. Perifusion was carried out at 37°C with a flow rate of 80
µL/min. At the end of each experiment, islets were transferred to Eppendorf tubes and
lysed by sonication for insulin content determination.

Islet respirometry
Respirometry was performed as previously described45. Briefly, following islet isolations,
islets were pooled within each experimental group and transferred to complete islet
media, then shipped overnight at room temperature to Boston University. Islets were then
allowed to recover overnight at 37°C with 5% CO2, then respirometry was performed
using the Seahorse Bioscience XF24 Extracellular Flux Analyzer. Plates were first loaded
with 60 islets per well in XF Assay Media (Seahorse Bioscience) supplemented with 2.8
mM glucose, 1% FBS, and 5 mM HEPES. Following a 1-hour starvation period in this
media, oxygen consumption was measured at baseline and following sequential additions
of 16.8 mM glucose, 5 µM oligomycin, and 2 µM antimycin A.

ATP measurements
Following islet isolations, islets were pooled within each experimental group then
allowed to recover overnight in complete media. The day of the assay, islets were prestarved in KRBH containing 2.8 mM glucose for 1 hour, and then transferred to 200 µl of
the same media as pools of 20 islets each in round-bottom 96 well plates and incubated
for 30 min to allow for ATP production. Islets were then washed once in ice cold DPBS
then lysed in 0.83% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 5 min at room temperature. Following
lysis, TCA was neutralized with 60 mM Tris-Acetate pH 8.0 and 0.6% SDS. ATP

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

measurements were performed using the Enliten ATP assay kit (Promega) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

Calcium imaging
Calcium imaging was performed with the indicated genotypes of mice also carrying the
mIns1-H2b-mCherry transgene85. Following islet isolations, islets were allowed to
recover overnight in complete islet media at 37°C with 5% CO2. Islets were dispersed
with 0.05% trypsin/EDTA (Invitrogen) by incubating at 37°C for 5 min with gentle
agitation, then dissociated islet cells were plated on glass-bottom petri dishes coated with
poly-l-lysine. Cells were allowed to attach overnight. The day of the assay, cells were
loaded with Fluo-4 by incubation in KRBH containing 5.5 mM glucose, 4.56 µM Fluo-4,
AM (Thermo), and 0.02% Pluronic F-127 (Biotium) for 45 min at 37°C. Cells were then
washed three times with KRBH containing 2.8 mM glucose and were starved for 1 hour
prior to imaging. Fluorescence was monitored and analysed as previously described87.
Fluorescence maxima and minima were obtained by treating cells with 50 µM ionomycin
or 100 mM EGTA, respectively.

Targeted metabolomics
Islets were prepared for targeted metabolomics essentially as previously described45.
Briefly, islets were pooled within each experimental group and allowed to recover
overnight in complete islet media. The day of nutrient tracing, islets were briefly washed
in KRBH containing 2.8 mM unlabeled glucose and were then transferred to KRBH
containing 2.8 mM U-13C glucose in low-adherence 12-well plates in groups of 220 islets

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

per well (each well being considered a replicate). Plates were then incubated at 37°C and
5% CO2 for two hours to allow for 13C incorporation into downstream metabolites, which
is not expected to result in steady state labelling based previous islet tracing
experiments45. After tracing, islets were transferred to pre-chilled Eppendorf tubes,
washed once in 0.9% NaCl, and snap frozen. Samples were prepared for GC-MS and
analysed as previously described45. The same numbers of islets were extracted in each
group and norvaline was added as an internal standard. Data was normalized to the
internal standard and metabolite abundances were expressed relative to control islets.

Human β-cell dissociation/reaggregation, lentiviral shRNA transduction, and insulin
secretion assays
Immediately following shipment, human islets were dissociated by first washing
in Versene (Thermo) and then incubating with 0.05% trypsin/EDTA at 37 °C for 7
minutes. Islet pellets were triturated then digestion was quenched in islet media.
Dissociated islet cells were pelleted via centrifugation for 5 minutes at 1200 rpm in a
swing-out rotor centrifuge, and then resuspended in CMRL media supplemented with 5%
foetal bovine serum, 20 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.1 mg/mL DNase. Islet cell
suspensions were stained with HIC3-2D12 (1:20 dilution) and APC-conjugated HIC12B4 (1:100) antibodies. HIC-2D12 was detected with anti-IgM PE. Cells were then
stained with propidium iodide as a dead cell marker, and live β-cells were FACS-sorted
based on negativity for propidium iodide and HIC-2D12 and positivity for HIC1-2B4, as
described elsewhere88. Collected β-cells were immediately pelleted by centrifugation as
before, then resuspended at a concentration of 50,000 cells/mL. pLKO.1-encoded

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

lentiviruses producing either nontargeting scramble shRNA or a pool of lentiviruses
producing LSD1 shRNA were then added to cells. LSD1 shRNA mature antisense
sequences are as follows: Nontargeting control, CCTAAGGTTAAGTCGCCCTCG;
TRCN0000046068,

TATTCAGTTTAATGTCTAGGC;

TRCN0000046069,

TAGTGCCAACAGTATTGGAGC;

TRCN0000046070,

TAAGGTGCTTCTAATTGTTGG;

TRCN0000046071,

ATGACTAAGGTAAGATGTAGC.
Cells were seeded at 5,000 cells/well into V-bottom 96-well plates. Plates were
spun at 365 rcf for 5 minutes at room temperature to pellet islet cells, and were then
incubated overnight at 37°C with 5% CO2. Islets were then subjected to a complete media
change and incubated an additional 4 days to allow for β-cell reaggregation and LSD1
protein degradation, at which point insulin secretion assays were performed. For insulin
secretion assays, islet aggregates were washed three times with KRBH supplemented
with 2.8 mM glucose then incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 for one hour for starvation, at
which point starvation media was removed. Aggregates were then incubated with KRBH
containing either 2.8 mM glucose or 16.8 mM glucose and returned to the incubator for
one hour. Following incubation, media and lysates were harvested as described above for
aggregates and insulin content was determined by ELISA (ALPCO) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Knockdown was verified in whole dissociated islets infected
as above and reaggregated in Aggrewell plates, using GFP-expressing pLKO.1-encoded
lentivirus for visualization of transduction efficiency in control islets. Reaggregated
whole islets were visualized for GFP expression and harvested for Western blotting 72
hours following transduction.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

RNA extraction, mRNA-seq, and qRT-PCR
Unless otherwise stated, islets were processed for RNA purification immediately
following isolation. Islets were hand-picked twice under a dissecting microscope to
minimize acinar contamination. Islets were then pooled from at least 2 mice and RNA
was isolated using the RNeasy Micro kit (QIAGEN) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. mRNA-seq libraries were prepared from 35 ng of total RNA using the
TruSeq Stranded mRNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina) with the exception of db/db mouse
islets and their respective controls, from which libraries were generated with 1 µg of total
RNA as previously described89. Libraries were single-end sequenced at a length of 50 bp
per read using HiSeq 4000 (Illumina). RT-qPCR was performed as previously
described86. A list of primers used for qPCR can be found in Supplementary Table 10.

ChIP-seq
Islets were processed for ChIP immediately following isolation (for mouse islets) or
shipping (for human islets). Mouse islets were hand-picked twice under a dissecting
microscope to minimize acinar cell contamination. Human islets selected for ChIP-seq
analysis were of > 90% purity to facilitate analysis of large quantities of islets without the
need for dithizone staining. For Lsd1 ChIP, islets were transferred to complete islet
media containing 1.11% formaldehyde and fixed on a rocker for 15 minutes. The reaction
was quenched for 5 minutes in 0.125 M glycine. Cells were then washed in DPBS
containing 0.5% NP-40 then once again in DPBS supplemented with 0.5% NP-40 and 1
mM PMSF. Islets were lysed and ChIP was performed using the ChIP-IT High

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Sensitivity Kit (Active Motif) with 30 µg of sheared chromatin and 4 µg anti-Lsd1
antibody (ab17721, Abcam). For histone ChIP, islets were washed once in Hanks
Balanced Salt Solution (Hyclone) and then fixed for 10 min in DPBS containing 1.11%
formaldehyde. Cross-linking was quenched as before, then islets were lysed by passage
through a 25 gauge needle in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-Hcl, pH 8.0, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM
MgCl2, 1% NP-40, 1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate). ChIP was then performed as
described above using 10 or 30 µg of sheared chromatin and 4 µg of anti-H3K4me1
(ab8895, Abcam) or anti-H3K27ac (39133, Active Motif) antibodies, respectively.
Libraries were constructed from purified DNA using the KAPA DNA Library
Preparation Kit for Illumina (Kapa Biosystems). Input libraries were prepared from each
experimental replicate using 10 ng of DNA purified immediately following shearing.
Libraries were sequenced using HiSeq 4000 (Illumina) as above.

mRNA-seq data analysis
mRNA-seq reads were mapped to NCBI37/mm9 (mouse) or GRCh37/hg19 (human)
genomes by STAR (STAR-STAR_2.4.0f1, --outSAMstrandField intronMotif -outFilterMultimapNmax 1 --runThreadN 5), excluding reads mapping to multiple loci.
Reads with exact matches were used to determine RPKM by Cufflinks (cufflinks v2.2.1,p 6 -G $gtf_file --max-bundle-frags 1000000000). Correlations between mRNA-seq
replicates can be found in Supplementary Table 1. Genes with mean RPKM > 1 in at
least one experimental group were considered to be expressed, and all non-expressed
genes were excluded from downstream analyses. According to this criterion, 12,447
genes were expressed in fed or fasted islets, 12,763 genes were expressed in Lsd1Δβ or

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

control islets over the combined time points, and 12,750 genes were expressed in db/db
or control (db/+) islets. Cuffdiff was used to assess expression differences for all
pairwise comparisons, with P < 0.01 considered significant. For volcano plots, P-values
= 0 were graphed as 0.00001. GSEA was performed using default settings with an FDR
cutoff of 0.25 being considered significant90. Enrichment in human gene sets was
performed by converting human gene symbols to mouse orthologues using bioDBnet91.
All differentially expressed genes identified in this study are listed in Supplementary
Table 2a-d.

ChIP-seq data analysis
Single-end 50-bp ChIP-seq reads were mapped to NCBI37/mm9 (mouse) or
GRCh37/hg19 (human) genomes using Bowtie2 with a seed length of 33 bp and a
maximum of 2 mismatches allowed in the seed region, discarding reads aligning to
multiple sites. Duplicate reads were removed using SAMtools. Biological replicates from
each condition (n = 2) were assessed for similarity genome-wide using the
multiBamSummary program (in “bins” mode) of the deepTools bioinformatics suite92.
Replicates were merged for analysis based on high (> 0.78) Pearson correlation
coefficients as indicated in Supplementary Table 3. Human islet H3K27ac ChIP-seq data
were downloaded from93,94 and processed in parallel.
Tag directories were generated from bam files and replicates were combined
using HOMER. ChIP-seq peaks within tag directories were identified with the findPeaks
command in HOMER (-style histone, -P 0.0000001 for H3K27ac and -style factor for
Lsd1) using input tag directories as background. For identification of changes in

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

H3K27ac signal with feeding, all H3K27ac peaks in the fed and fasted states were
merged using BEDtools and then findPeaks was again used to identify peaks with higher
signal (> 1.2-fold and P-value < 0.0001) in fed or fasted H3K27ac tag directories with the
reciprocal condition set as background. The annotatePeaks.pl command in HOMER was
used to quantify tag densities for histograms, heatmaps, and boxplots. Tag density
boxplots (± 1 kb from the center of each peak) were visualized using R, with boxplot
whiskers indicating the interquartile range x 1.5 or maxima and minima if all data points
fell within this range. Heatmaps were visualized using the heatmap.2 package in R.
BEDtools was used to determine associations between different coordinate sets (e.g. Lsd1
or H3K27ac peaks) located within ± 1 kb. ChIP-seq genome browser tracks were
generated using the makeUCSCfile command in HOMER, which normalizes all tag
directories to 107 total tags. A smoothening window of “4” was applied to all tracks using
the UCSC Genome Browser.
Classes of Lsd1-regulated H3K27ac peaks were determined based on tag intensity
calls ± 1 kb using the annotatePeaks.pl command in HOMER as described for boxplots
above. To normalize distribution, each tag density value was transformed using the
formula log2((y + 1)/(x + 1)), with x representing the control tag density value and y
representing the Lsd1Δβ tag intensity value. Peaks were then categorized based on the
time point at which they first reached the cutoff of 1.5-absolute fold difference in either
direction, resulting in classes of peaks that gain H3K27ac first at week 1 (3,320 peaks),
peaks that gain H3K27ac first at week 3 (10,233), peaks that lose H3K27ac first at week
3 (2,713), peaks that never reach this cutoff (21,972), and a negligible number of peaks
that lose H3K27ac first at week 1 (44) or exhibit losses and then gains in H3K27ac at

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

week 1 and week 3, respectively (14). Peaks that first gain H3K27ac at week 1 were then
further subdivided into peaks that continue to accumulate H3K27ac from week 1 to week
3 (> 0.5-absolute fold additional increases over week 1; 448 peaks), peaks that exhibit
concordant gains from Wk 1 to Wk 3 (within ± 0.5-absolute fold additional changes;
2,611 peaks), and into a negligible number of peaks that gained then lost H3K27ac from
week 1 to week 3 (261 peaks). Further analysis excluded classes represented by
negligible numbers of peaks as indicated above, focusing on those described in Extended
Data Fig. 5a.
Classes of Lsd1-regulated H3K4me1 patterns at active chromatin were
determined similarly to those of H3K27ac. Considering that H3K4me1 exhibited more
modest changes relative to H3K27ac, thresholds were set to 1.2-absolute fold differences.
H3K4me1 changes were more concordant from week 1 to week 3 and therefore all time
points and directions of deregulation were considered: peaks gaining H3K4me1 at both
time points (9,780), gaining H3K4me1 at week 1 only (9,988), gaining H3K4me1 at
week 3 only (2,569), losing H3K4me1 at both time points (1,640), losing H3K4me1 and
week 1 only (1,756), losing H3K4me1 at week 3 only (1,709), or failing to reach the
threshold at any time point (10,283). Coordinates of all ChIP-seq peaks and peak classes
can be found in Supplementary Tables 4a-d and 6a-c.
Heatmap data of relative H3K4me1 in Lsd1Δβ islets were generated by
transforming 100 bp bin tag densities using the formula log2((y + 0.05)/(x+0.05)) to
match transformations applied over a 2 kb window for the above analyses. Heatmap data
was sorted based on Lsd1 tag counts and displayed using the heatmap.2 package in R.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Motif enrichment analysis
Motif enrichments were determined using HOMER. Enrichments were calculated for
sequences within peak coordinates (-size given) relative to the background set of
H3K27ac peaks indicated for each calculation. A complete list of motif enrichment
results can be found in the Supplementary Table 5a-b.

Permutation-based significance
Enrichment tests for associations among TSSs, Lsd1 peaks, and H3K27ac peaks were
determined using a random sampling approach to compare the number of true overlaps to
the number of expected overlaps. Null distributions (expected overlap frequencies) were
obtained by performing 10,000 iterations of randomly shuffling test coordinates using
BEDtools then intersecting shuffled coordinates with reference coordinates ± 50 kb.
Permutation data plots are presented with test coordinate sets on the x-axis and reference
coordinate sets as the plot title.

Gene ontology
Functional categories related to the set of feeding-regulated genes and links between each
pair of categories were identified with Metascape as described in http://metascape.org/.
Statistically enriched pathways from KEGG and Reactome were hierarchically clustered
into a tree based on Kappa-statistical similarities among their gene memberships. A 0.3
kappa score was applied as the threshold to define clusters, each of them representing a
group of similar functional categories. A subset of representative terms from each cluster
was automatically selected by Metascape and converted into a network, where terms with

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

similarity > 0.3 are connected by edges. Specifically, terms with the most significant Pvalues from each of the clusters were depicted as network nodes, with the constraint of
having a maximum of 15 terms per cluster and 250 terms in total, with node size
representative of the degree of enrichment. For clarity, a representative term was selected
to represent each cluster.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) enrichment methods
Stratified LD score regression95 was used to assess whether LSD1-bound sites were
enriched for GWAS signal for metabolic (HOMA-B64, HOMA-IR64, fasting glucose65,
fasting glucose adjusted for BMI65, fasting insulin65, fasting insulin adjusted for BMI65, 2
hour glucose adjusted for BMI66, fasting proinsulin67, and type 2 diabetes63) and wellpowered

non-metabolic

control

traits

(Alzheimer’s

disease68,

systemic

lupus

erythematosus69, autoimmune vitiligo70, primary biliary cirrhosis71, primary sclerosing
cholangitis72, inflammatory bowel disease73, rheumatoid arthritis74, coronary artery
disease75, schizophrenia76, and major depressive disorder77), using European subset
summary statistics where available. After filtering out ENCODE blacklisted regions34,
islet LSD1 peaks were used as a binary annotation. The partitioned heritability version of
LD score regression was used to estimate enrichment (%h2/%SNPs) using the baseline
LD model v2.2.
Putative target genes of LSD1-bound sites were determined using promoter
capture Hi-C data from primary human islets23. For each site, gene promoters mapping in
a chromatin loop to the site were identified using a 5 kb flanking window around loop
anchors. Genetic variants in T2D and fasting glucose adjusted for BMI GWAS datasets

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

were intersected with LSD1-bound sites, retaining variants with at least nominal
association (P < 0.05), and annotating variants with putative target genes of the
overlapping LSD1 site.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1

Cahill, G. F., Jr. Fuel metabolism in starvation. Annu Rev Nutr 26, 1-22 (2006).

2

Kersten, S. et al. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha mediates the
adaptive response to fasting. J Clin Invest 103, 1489-1498 (1999).

3

Liu, Y. et al. A fasting inducible switch modulates gluconeogenesis via
activator/coactivator exchange. Nature 456, 269-273 (2008).

4

Hakvoort, T. B. et al. Interorgan coordination of the murine adaptive response to
fasting. J Biol Chem 286, 16332-16343 (2011).

5

Fleet, T. et al. SRC-2 orchestrates polygenic inputs for fine-tuning glucose
homeostasis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112, E6068-6077 (2015).

6

Goldstein, I. et al. Transcription factor assisted loading and enhancer dynamics
dictate the hepatic fasting response. Genome Res 27, 427-439 (2017).

7

Capozzi, M. E. et al. beta Cell tone is defined by proglucagon peptides through
cAMP signaling. JCI Insight 4 (2019).

8

Zhu, L. et al. Intra-islet glucagon signaling is critical for maintaining glucose
homeostasis. JCI Insight 5 (2019).

9

Prentki, M., Matschinsky, F. M. & Madiraju, S. R. Metabolic signaling in fuelinduced insulin secretion. Cell Metab 18, 162-185 (2013).

10

Kashima, Y. et al. Critical role of cAMP-GEFII--Rim2 complex in incretinpotentiated insulin secretion. J Biol Chem 276, 46046-46053 (2001).

11

Rorsman, P. & Braun, M. Regulation of insulin secretion in human pancreatic
islets. Annu Rev Physiol 75, 155-179 (2013).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

12

Henquin, J. C. Triggering and amplifying pathways of regulation of insulin
secretion by glucose. Diabetes 49, 1751-1760 (2000).

13

Levy, J., Herchuelz, A., Sener, A. & Malaisse, W. J. The stimulus-secretion
coupling of glucose-induced insulin release. XX. fasting: a model for altered
glucose recognition by the B-cell. Metabolism 25, 583-591 (1976).

14

Fery, F., d'Attellis, N. P. & Balasse, E. O. Mechanisms of starvation diabetes: a
study with double tracer and indirect calorimetry. Am J Physiol 259, E770-777
(1990).

15

Bjorkman, O. & Eriksson, L. S. Influence of a 60-hour fast on insulin-mediated
splanchnic and peripheral glucose metabolism in humans. J Clin Invest 76, 87-92
(1985).

16

Wortham, M. & Sander, M. Mechanisms of beta-cell functional adaptation to
changes in workload. Diabetes Obes Metab 18 Suppl 1, 78-86 (2016).

17

Zhou, Y. P., Cockburn, B. N., Pugh, W. & Polonsky, K. S. Basal insulin
hypersecretion in insulin-resistant Zucker diabetic and Zucker fatty rats: role of
enhanced fuel metabolism. Metabolism 48, 857-864 (1999).

18

Burch, P. T. et al. Adaptation of glycolytic enzymes: glucose use and insulin
release in rat pancreatic islets during fasting and refeeding. Diabetes 30, 923-928
(1981).

19

Tamarit-Rodriguez, J., Vara, E. & Tamarit, J. Starvation-induced changes of
palmitate metabolism and insulin secretion in isolated rat islets stimulated by
glucose. Biochem J 221, 317-324 (1984).

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

20

Gremlich, S. et al. Pancreatic islet adaptation to fasting is dependent on
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha transcriptional up-regulation of
fatty acid oxidation. Endocrinology 146, 375-382 (2005).

21

Glauser, D. A., Brun, T., Gauthier, B. R. & Schlegel, W. Transcriptional response
of pancreatic beta cells to metabolic stimulation: large scale identification of
immediate-early and secondary response genes. BMC Mol Biol 8, 54 (2007).

22

Jhala, U. S. et al. cAMP promotes pancreatic beta-cell survival via CREBmediated induction of IRS2. Genes Dev 17, 1575-1580 (2003).

23

Miguel-Escalada, I. et al. Human pancreatic islet three-dimensional chromatin
architecture provides insights into the genetics of type 2 diabetes. Nat Genet 51,
1137-1148 (2019).

24

Mosley, A. L., Corbett, J. A. & Ozcan, S. Glucose regulation of insulin gene
expression requires the recruitment of p300 by the beta-cell-specific transcription
factor Pdx-1. Mol Endocrinol 18, 2279-2290 (2004).

25

Hatori, M. et al. Time-restricted feeding without reducing caloric intake prevents
metabolic diseases in mice fed a high-fat diet. Cell Metab 15, 848-860 (2012).

26

Mezza, T. et al. Nuclear export of FoxO1 is associated with ERK signaling in
beta-cells lacking insulin receptors. J Biol Chem 291, 21485-21495 (2016).

27

Stein, D. T. et al. Essentiality of circulating fatty acids for glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion in the fasted rat. J Clin Invest 97, 2728-2735 (1996).

28

Alejandro, E. U. et al. Overexpression of kinase-dead mTOR impairs glucose
homeostasis by regulating insulin secretion and not beta-cell mass. Diabetes 66,
2150-2162 (2017).

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

29

Kim-Muller, J. Y. et al. Metabolic inflexibility impairs insulin secretion and
results in MODY-like diabetes in triple FoxO-deficient mice. Cell Metab 20, 593602 (2014).

30

Jaafar, R. et al. mTORC1 to AMPK switching underlies beta-cell metabolic
plasticity during maturation and diabetes. J Clin Invest 130 (2019).

31

Wellen, K. E. et al. ATP-citrate lyase links cellular metabolism to histone
acetylation. Science 324, 1076-1080 (2009).

32

Cluntun, A. A. et al. The rate of glycolysis quantitatively mediates specific
histone acetylation sites. Cancer Metab 3, 10 (2015).

33

Carey, B. W., Finley, L. W., Cross, J. R., Allis, C. D. & Thompson, C. B.
Intracellular alpha-ketoglutarate maintains the pluripotency of embryonic stem
cells. Nature 518, 413-416 (2015).

34

The Encode Project Consortium. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in
the human genome. Nature 489, 57-74 (2012).

35

Hennige, A. M. et al. Upregulation of insulin receptor substrate-2 in pancreatic
beta cells prevents diabetes. J Clin Invest 112, 1521-1532 (2003).

36

Wei, Y. et al. The stress-responsive kinases MAPKAPK2/MAPKAPK3 activate
starvation-induced autophagy through Beclin 1 phosphorylation. Elife 4 (2015).

37

Piccand, J. et al. Pak3 promotes cell cycle exit and differentiation of beta-cells in
the embryonic pancreas and is necessary to maintain glucose homeostasis in adult
mice. Diabetes 63, 203-215 (2014).

38

Tang, Z. et al. SET1 and p300 act synergistically, through coupled histone
modifications, in transcriptional activation by p53. Cell 154, 297-310 (2013).

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

39

Wang, S. P. et al. A UTX-MLL4-p300 transcriptional regulatory network
coordinately shapes active enhancer landscapes for eliciting transcription. Mol
Cell 67, 308-321 e306 (2017).

40

Cao, K. et al. An Mll4/COMPASS-Lsd1 epigenetic axis governs enhancer
function and pluripotency transition in embryonic stem cells. Sci Adv 4, eaap8747
(2018).

41

Whyte, W. A. et al. Enhancer decommissioning by LSD1 during embryonic stem
cell differentiation. Nature 482, 221-225 (2012).

42

Hino, S. et al. FAD-dependent lysine-specific demethylase-1 regulates cellular
energy expenditure. Nat Commun 3, 758 (2012).

43

Duteil, D. et al. LSD1 promotes oxidative metabolism of white adipose tissue.
Nat Commun 5, 4093 (2014).

44

Hnisz, D. et al. Super-enhancers in the control of cell identity and disease. Cell
155, 934-947 (2013).

45

Wortham, M. et al. Integrated In vivo quantitative proteomics and nutrient tracing
reveals age-related metabolic rewiring of pancreatic beta cell function. Cell Rep
25, 2904-2918 e2908 (2018).

46

Farfari, S., Schulz, V., Corkey, B. & Prentki, M. Glucose-regulated anaplerosis
and cataplerosis in pancreatic beta-cells: possible implication of a pyruvate/citrate
shuttle in insulin secretion. Diabetes 49, 718-726 (2000).

47

Seghers, V., Nakazaki, M., DeMayo, F., Aguilar-Bryan, L. & Bryan, J. Sur1
knockout mice. A model for K(ATP) channel-independent regulation of insulin
secretion. J Biol Chem 275, 9270-9277 (2000).

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

48

Shi, Y. et al. Histone demethylation mediated by the nuclear amine oxidase
homolog LSD1. Cell 119, 941-953 (2004).

49

Lee, Y. S. et al. The fractalkine/CX3CR1 system regulates beta cell function and
insulin secretion. Cell 153, 413-425 (2013).

50

Lee, H. Y. et al. Epidermal growth factor increases insulin secretion and lowers
blood glucose in diabetic mice. J Cell Mol Med 12, 1593-1604 (2008).

51

Modi, H. et al. Autocrine action of IGF2 regulates adult beta-cell mass and
function. Diabetes 64, 4148-4157 (2015).

52

Kalwat, M. A., Yoder, S. M., Wang, Z. & Thurmond, D. C. A p21-activated
kinase (PAK1) signaling cascade coordinately regulates F-actin remodeling and
insulin granule exocytosis in pancreatic beta cells. Biochem Pharmacol 85, 808816 (2013).

53

Bowe, J. E., Chander, A., Liu, B., Persaud, S. J. & Jones, P. M. The permissive
effects of glucose on receptor-operated potentiation of insulin secretion from
mouse islets: a role for ERK1/2 activation and cytoskeletal remodelling.
Diabetologia 56, 783-791 (2013).

54

Susini, S., Roche, E., Prentki, M. & Schlegel, W. Glucose and glucoincretin
peptides synergize to induce c-fos, c-jun, junB, zif-268, and nur-77 gene
expression in pancreatic beta(INS-1) cells. FASEB J 12, 1173-1182 (1998).

55

Zmuda, E. J. et al. The roles of ATF3, an adaptive-response gene, in high-fat-dietinduced diabetes and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. Mol Endocrinol 24, 14231433 (2010).

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

56

Reynolds, M. S. et al. beta-Cell deletion of Nr4a1 and Nr4a3 nuclear receptors
impedes mitochondrial respiration and insulin secretion. Am J Physiol Endocrinol
Metab 311, E186-201 (2016).

57

Ray, J. D. et al. Nkx6.1-mediated insulin secretion and beta-cell proliferation is
dependent on upregulation of c-Fos. FEBS Lett 590, 1791-1803 (2016).

58

Schuit, F., Moens, K., Heimberg, H. & Pipeleers, D. Cellular origin of hexokinase
in pancreatic islets. J Biol Chem 274, 32803-32809 (1999).

59

Becker, T. C., BeltrandelRio, H., Noel, R. J., Johnson, J. H. & Newgard, C. B.
Overexpression of hexokinase I in isolated islets of Langerhans via recombinant
adenovirus. Enhancement of glucose metabolism and insulin secretion at basal but
not stimulatory glucose levels. J Biol Chem 269, 21234-21238 (1994).

60

Epstein, P. N., Boschero, A. C., Atwater, I., Cai, X. & Overbeek, P. A. Expression
of yeast hexokinase in pancreatic beta cells of transgenic mice reduces blood
glucose, enhances insulin secretion, and decreases diabetes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 89, 12038-12042 (1992).

61

Van de Velde, S., Hogan, M. F. & Montminy, M. mTOR links incretin signaling
to HIF induction in pancreatic beta cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108, 1687616882 (2011).

62

Carlessi, R. et al. GLP-1 receptor signalling promotes beta-cell glucose
metabolism via mTOR-dependent HIF-1alpha activation. Sci Rep 7, 2661 (2017).

63

Mahajan, A. et al. Fine-mapping type 2 diabetes loci to single-variant resolution
using high-density imputation and islet-specific epigenome maps. Nat Genet 50,
1505-1513 (2018).

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

64

Dupuis, J. et al. New genetic loci implicated in fasting glucose homeostasis and
their impact on type 2 diabetes risk. Nat Genet 42, 105-116 (2010).

65

Manning, A. K. et al. A genome-wide approach accounting for body mass index
identifies genetic variants influencing fasting glycemic traits and insulin
resistance. Nat Genet 44, 659-669 (2012).

66

Saxena, R. et al. Genetic variation in GIPR influences the glucose and insulin
responses to an oral glucose challenge. Nat Genet 42, 142-148 (2010).

67

Strawbridge, R. J. et al. Genome-wide association identifies nine common
variants associated with fasting proinsulin levels and provides new insights into
the pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes. Diabetes 60, 2624-2634 (2011).

68

Lambert, J. C. et al. Meta-analysis of 74,046 individuals identifies 11 new
susceptibility loci for Alzheimer's disease. Nat Genet 45, 1452-1458 (2013).

69

Bentham, J. et al. Genetic association analyses implicate aberrant regulation of
innate and adaptive immunity genes in the pathogenesis of systemic lupus
erythematosus. Nat Genet 47, 1457-1464 (2015).

70

Jin, Y. et al. Genome-wide association studies of autoimmune vitiligo identify 23
new risk loci and highlight key pathways and regulatory variants. Nat Genet 48,
1418-1424 (2016).

71

Cordell, H. J. et al. International genome-wide meta-analysis identifies new
primary biliary cirrhosis risk loci and targetable pathogenic pathways. Nat
Commun 6, 8019 (2015).

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

72

Ji, S. G. et al. Genome-wide association study of primary sclerosing cholangitis
identifies new risk loci and quantifies the genetic relationship with inflammatory
bowel disease. Nat Genet 49, 269-273 (2017).

73

de Lange, K. M. et al. Genome-wide association study implicates immune
activation of multiple integrin genes in inflammatory bowel disease. Nat Genet
49, 256-261 (2017).

74

Okada, Y. et al. Genetics of rheumatoid arthritis contributes to biology and drug
discovery. Nature 506, 376-381 (2014).

75

Nelson, C. P. et al. Association analyses based on false discovery rate implicate
new loci for coronary artery disease. Nat Genet 49, 1385-1391 (2017).

76

Schizophrenia Working Group of the Psychiatric Genomics, C. Biological
insights from 108 schizophrenia-associated genetic loci. Nature 511, 421-427
(2014).

77

Wray, N. R. et al. Genome-wide association analyses identify 44 risk variants and
refine the genetic architecture of major depression. Nat Genet 50, 668-681 (2018).

78

Rusconi, F. et al. LSD1 modulates stress-evoked transcription of immediate early
genes and emotional behavior. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113, 3651-3656 (2016).

79

Kim, D. et al. PKCalpha-LSD1-NF-kappaB-signaling cascade is crucial for
epigenetic control of the inflammatory response. Mol Cell 69, 398-411 e396
(2018).

80

Maiques-Diaz, A. et al. Enhancer activation by pharmacologic displacement of
LSD1 from GFI1 induces differentiation in acute myeloid leukemia. Cell Rep 22,
3641-3659 (2018).

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

81

Drong, A. W., Lindgren, C. M. & McCarthy, M. I. The genetic and epigenetic
basis of type 2 diabetes and obesity. Clin Pharmacol Ther 92, 707-715 (2012).

82

Wang, J. et al. Opposing LSD1 complexes function in developmental gene
activation and repression programmes. Nature 446, 882-887 (2007).

83

Gu, G., Dubauskaite, J. & Melton, D. A. Direct evidence for the pancreatic
lineage: NGN3+ cells are islet progenitors and are distinct from duct progenitors.
Development 129, 2447-2457 (2002).

84

Tamarina, N. A., Roe, M. W. & Philipson, L. Characterization of mice expressing
Ins1 gene promoter driven CreERT recombinase for conditional gene deletion in
pancreatic beta-cells. Islets 6, e27685 (2014).

85

Benner, C. et al. The transcriptional landscape of mouse beta cells compared to
human beta cells reveals notable species differences in long non-coding RNA and
protein-coding gene expression. BMC Genomics 15, 620 (2014).

86

Taylor, B. L., Liu, F. F. & Sander, M. Nkx6.1 is essential for maintaining the
functional state of pancreatic beta cells. Cell Rep 4, 1262-1275 (2013).

87

Chailangkarn, T. et al. A human neurodevelopmental model for Williams
syndrome. Nature 536, 338-343 (2016).

88

Bramswig, N. C. et al. Epigenomic plasticity enables human pancreatic alpha to
beta cell reprogramming. J Clin Invest 123, 1275-1284 (2013).

89

Xie, R. et al. Dynamic chromatin remodeling mediated by polycomb proteins
orchestrates pancreatic differentiation of human embryonic stem cells. Cell Stem
Cell 12, 224-237 (2013).

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

90

Subramanian, A. et al. Gene set enrichment analysis: a knowledge-based
approach for interpreting genome-wide expression profiles. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 102, 15545-15550 (2005).

91

Mudunuri, U., Che, A., Yi, M. & Stephens, R. M. bioDBnet: the biological
database network. Bioinformatics 25, 555-556 (2009).

92

Ramirez, F. et al. deepTools2: a next generation web server for deep-sequencing
data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res 44, W160-165 (2016).

93

Pasquali, L. et al. Pancreatic islet enhancer clusters enriched in type 2 diabetes
risk-associated variants. Nat Genet 46, 136-143 (2014).

94

Parker, S. C. et al. Chromatin stretch enhancer states drive cell-specific gene
regulation and harbor human disease risk variants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110,
17921-17926 (2013).

95

Bulik-Sullivan, B. K. et al. LD Score regression distinguishes confounding from
polygenicity in genome-wide association studies. Nat Genet 47, 291-295 (2015).

Acknowledgements
We thank A. Pospisilik and S. Panda for helpful discussions, N. Rosenblatt for mouse
husbandry, I. Matta for assistance with islet preparations, and Michael Rosenfeld for
Lsd1flox mice. We acknowledge support of the UCSD IGM Genomic Center (P30
DK064391) for mRNA-seq and ChIP-seq. Human pancreatic islets were provided by the
NIDDK-funded Integrated Islet Distribution Program (IIDP) at City of Hope, National
Institutes of Health (NIH) Grant 2UC4DK098085. This work was supported by NIH

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

training grant T32DK007494-30, Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation postdoctoral
fellowship 3-PDF-2014-193-A-N, and John G. Davies Endowed Fellowship in Pancreatic
Research to M. Wortham, NIH grants DK068471 to M.S., CA188652 to C.M.M.,
DK114650 to K.J.G., DK110276 to M.O.H., and DK116038 to U.S.J.

Author Contributions
M. Wortham and M.S. conceived the study, were responsible for its overall design, and
prepared the manuscript. M. Wortham, F.L., and J.Y.F. performed mouse experiments.
F.L. performed islet isolations. M. Wortham, J.Y.F., A.R.H., B.R.C., N.A.P., and M.O.H.
performed islet experiments and hormone measurements. M. Wortham, N.K.V., N.A.P.,
and U.S.J. generated ChIP-seq data. M. Wortham, M. Wallace, and C.M.M. performed
and/or interpreted glucose tracing experiments. M. Wortham, F.M., N.K.V., and Y.S.
performed bioinformatics analysis. J.C. and K.J.G. analysed human genetic data. O.S.S.
designed and interpreted islet respirometry experiments.

Author Information
The authors declare no competing interests. Correspondence and requests for materials
should be addressed to masander@ucsd.edu.

Data availability
ChIP-seq and mRNA-seq data will be deposited in GEO prior to publication. Accession
numbers for human islet H3K27ac ChIP-seq data used in this study are: GSE51311 and
E-MTAB-1919.

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures

Figure 1. Nutrient state regulates histone acetylation and transcription in pancreatic
islets.
(a) Schematic of experiments performed.

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(b and c) Networks of genes downregulated (b) or upregulated (c) (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff)
by feeding relative to fasting, shown as clustered functional categories. n = 3 biological
replicates of islets pooled from separate mice per group.
(d) H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal at sites losing or gaining H3K27ac with feeding. n = 2
biological replicates of islets pooled from separate mice per group; data from independent
ChIP-seq experiments were merged for analysis. Boxplot whiskers span data points
within the interquartile range x 1.5. ***P < 0.001 by Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(e and f) Association frequencies between transcription start sites (TSSs) of genes
downregulated (e) or upregulated (f) by feeding with the indicated classes of H3K27ac
peaks ± 50 kb. Open bars indicate association frequencies expected by chance. ***P <
0.001 for enrichment, ###P < 0.001 for depletion, NS, not significant by permutation test.
(g) Transcription factor (TF) motifs enriched at sites gaining H3K27ac with feeding
relative to all other H3K27ac peaks plotted against mRNA levels of cognate TFs in islets
from fed mice.
(h) Gene set enrichment analysis of genes upregulated in db/db compared to control (ctrl,
db/+) islets (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff; n = 3 biological replicates of islets pooled from
separate mice per group) against mRNA-seq data from islets after feeding and fasting.
(i) Log2 fold changes in mRNA levels in islets after feeding compared to fasting and in
db/db compared to control islets. Genes upregulated in both conditions (P < 0.01 by
Cuffdiff) are highlighted in orange. For clarity, only the upper right quadrant is shown.
(j) ChIP-seq signal for H3K27ac at the indicated classes of H3K27ac peaks in db/db and
control islets. n = 2 biological replicates of islets pooled from separate mice per group;
data from independent ChIP-seq experiments were subsequently merged for analysis.
Boxplot whiskers span data points within the interquartile range x 1.5. ***P < 0.001 by
Wilcoxon rank-sum test; NS, not significant.
(k) Scatterplot of Lsd1 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq signals at all H3K27ac peaks. Colour
intensity of each dot corresponds to Lsd1 ChIP-seq signal intensity. Lsd1 ChIP-seq data
are from n = 1 biological replicate from pooled islets. Data were highly correlated with
Lsd1 ChIP-seq data from an independent biological replicate (see Supplementary Table
3).
(l) Proportion of Lsd1 peaks associated with the indicated classes of H3K27ac peaks ± 1
kb. Numbers indicate Lsd1 peaks associated with each class of H3K27ac peaks.
(m) Enrichment test of association frequencies between Lsd1 peaks and the indicated
classes of H3K27ac peaks ± 50 kb. Open bars indicate association frequencies expected
by chance. *P < 0.01 for enrichment, #P < 0.01 for depletion by permutation test.
(n) Lsd1 ChIP-seq signal at the indicated classes of H3K27ac peaks. Boxplot whiskers
span data points within the interquartile range x 1.5. ***P < 0.001 by Wilcoxon rank-sum
test.
(o) Lsd1 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq genome browser tracks for representative genes
exhibiting concordant increases in mRNA and H3K27ac levels with feeding and in db/db
islets.
Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are
provided online.

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Lsd1 inactivation in β-cells causes insulin hypersecretion and
hypoglycaemia.
(a) Schematic of alleles and treatments used to inactivate Lsd1. TM, tamoxifen; wks,
weeks; q2d, every other day.
(b) Immunofluorescence staining for insulin (Ins), glucagon (Gcg) and Lsd1 on pancreas
sections from control (ctrl, control TM-treated Lsd1fl/+; Pdx1-CreER mice) and Lsd1Δβ
mice two days after TM treatment. Scale bar, 50 µm.
(c) Time course of ad libitum-fed blood glucose levels in control (TM-treated Lsd1+/+;
Pdx1-CreER mice; n = 9) and Lsd1Δβ (n = 10) mice. Pre-TM, within 3 days prior to initial
TM injection. ***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test.
(d and e) Blood glucose (d) and serum insulin (e) levels in ad libitum-fed and 16 hourfasted mice of the indicated genotypes. Control fed week one: n = 15, Lsd1Δβ fed week
one: n = 13, control fasted week one: n = 5, Lsd1Δβ fasted week one: n = 8, control fed
week three and control fasted week three: n = 7, all other groups, n = 9 mice (d). Control
fed week one: n = 15, Lsd1Δβ fed week one: n = 12, control fasted week one and control
fasted week three: n = 5, Lsd1Δβ fed week three and Lsd1Δβ fasted week three: n = 8, all
other groups: n = 7 mice (e). *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed
t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance as necessary.

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(f and g) Insulin secretion by control and Lsd1Δβ islets during perifusion with the
indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) at one week (f) and three weeks (g)
following TM treatment (n = 4 pools of 130 islets each). Right (f), data shown at a
reduced scale for the indicated time points. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001 by two-way
ANOVA for genotype for each time block.
(h) Static insulin secretion assay in control and Lsd1Δβ islets stimulated with the indicated
glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) with and without Exendin-4 (Ex-4) three weeks
following TM treatment. Control 2.8 mM glucose: n = 4 pools of 10 islets each, control
2.8 mM glucose + Ex-4: n = 5 islet pools, all other groups: n = 6 islet pools. *P < 0.05,
***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance
as necessary.
Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values
for all indicated statistical tests are provided online.

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Accelerated glucose metabolism promotes insulin hypersecretion in Lsd1Δβ
islets.
(a) Oxygen consumption rate (OCR) of control (ctrl) and Lsd1Δβ islets treated
sequentially with the indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM), oligomycin (OM),
and antimycin A (AM). Control: n = 10 pools of 60 islets each, Lsd1Δβ: n = 8 islet pools.
***P < 0.001 by two-way ANOVA for genotype for each time block.
(b) ATP content of control and Lsd1Δβ islets cultured in 2.8 mM glucose. Control: n = 10
pools of 20 islets each, Lsd1Δβ: n = 9 islet pools. *P < 0.05 by unpaired two-tailed t-test.
(c and d) Intracellular Ca2+ concentration in β-cells from control and Lsd1Δβ mice
cultured in the indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) (c) or treated with the
KATP channel opener diazoxide (Dz) (d). Control: n = 38 (c) or 46 (d) β-cells, Lsd1Δβ: n =
32 (c) or 36 (d) β-cells. Results are representative of 3 independent experiments. ***P <
0.001 by two-way ANOVA for genotype for each time block. #P < 0.05, ###P < 0.001
by two-way ANOVA for the interaction between genotype and time for each time block.
(e) Static insulin secretion assay in control and Lsd1Δβ islets stimulated with the indicated
glucose concentrations with and without Dz. Control 2.8 mM glucose: n = 5 pools of 10
islets each, all other groups: n = 6 islet pools. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01 by unpaired twotailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance as necessary. NS, not
significant.

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(f) Schematic of isotopic glucose tracing experiment. Metabolites displayed in (g, h) are
indicated in red.
(g and h) Molar percent enrichment (MPE) of 13C (g) and relative abundances (h) of the
indicated metabolites following two hours of tracing in 2.8 mM U-13C glucose. n = 3
pools of 220 islets each. ***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test.
(i and j) Static insulin secretion assay of control and Lsd1Δβ islets stimulated with the
indicated glucose concentrations under depolarizing conditions (30 mM KCl and 100 µM
Dz) (i) or with and without the glycolysis inhibitor mannoheptulose (Mh) (j). Lsd1Δβ 2.8
mM glucose/Dz/KCl (i), Lsd1Δβ 2.8 mM glucose (j), and control 2.8 mM glucose/Mh (j):
n = 5 pools of 10 islets each, all other groups: n = 6 islet pools. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001
by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance as necessary.
NS, not significant.
Islets were isolated from control and Lsd1Δβ animals three weeks following tamoxifen
treatment for all experiments. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. Source data for all
quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are provided online.

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Lsd1 inactivation in β-cells deregulates genes involved in nutrientdependent signalling and cell metabolism.
(a) Schematic of experiments performed. Ctrl, control; TM, tamoxifen; wk/s, week/s.
(b) Relative mRNA levels for differentially expressed genes (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff) in
Lsd1Δβ islets compared to control islets at the indicated time points following TM
treatment. The grey line indicating a slope of 1 provides a reference for corresponding
mRNA levels between time points. Lsd1Δβ week three: n = 5 biological replicates of islets
pooled from separate mice per group, all other groups: n = 3 biological replicates.
(c) H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal at H3K27ac peaks (from Extended Data Fig. 2b) plotted as
relative tag density in Lsd1Δβ islets compared to control islets at the indicated time points
following TM treatment. Peaks were classified by the timepoint when relative tag density
in Lsd1Δβ islets exceeded 1.5-absolute fold difference compared to control islets (see
Methods for additional details on peak classification). n = 2 biological replicates of islets

56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pooled from separate mice per group; data from independent ChIP-seq experiments were
subsequently merged for analysis.
(d) Lsd1 ChIP-seq signal at the indicated classes of H3K27ac peaks (from c). Lsd1 ChIPseq data are from n = 1 biological replicate from pooled islets. Data were validated to be
highly correlated with ChIP-seq data prepared from an independent biological replicate.
Boxplot whiskers span data points within the interquartile range x 1.5. ***P < 0.001 by
Wilcoxon rank-sum test.
(e) Median log2 fold expression changes in mRNA levels between Lsd1Δβ and control
islets within each of the indicated functional categories at one and three weeks following
TM treatment.
(f) Log2 fold changes in mRNA levels between Lsd1Δβ and control islets at one and three
weeks following TM treatment. Genes annotated to nutrient-dependent signalling
pathways (from e) and differentially expressed (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff) in Lsd1Δβ islets
compared to control islets at either one or three weeks following TM treatment are
plotted.
(g) Lsd1 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq genome browser tracks at representative nutrientdependent signalling pathway genes in control and Lsd1Δβ islets one week following TM
treatment.
(h) Gene set enrichment analysis of genes upregulated by feeding in islets (top, P < 0.01
by Cuffdiff) and in db/db compared to control (db/+) islets (bottom, P < 0.01 by
Cuffdiff) against mRNA-seq data from Lsd1Δβ and control islets one week following TM
treatment.
(i) Log2 fold changes in mRNA levels in islets after feeding compared to fasting and in
Lsd1Δβ compared to control islets one week following TM treatment. Genes upregulated
in both conditions (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff) are highlighted in blue. For clarity, only the
upper right quadrant is shown.
(j) Insulin secretion by control and Lsd1Δβ islets during perifusion with the indicated
glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) following 24-hour treatment with SCH772984
(Erki) or vehicle. Islets were isolated one week following TM treatment. Right, data
shown at a reduced scale for the indicated time points. n = 6 pools of 130 islets each.
Data in are shown as mean ± S.E.M. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 vehicle-treated
Lsd1Δβ relative to vehicle-treated control islets by two-way ANOVA for genotype for
each time block, #P < 0.05, ##P < 0.01, ###P < 0.001 Erki-treated relative to vehicletreated Lsd1Δβ islets by two-way ANOVA for treatment group for each time block.
Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are
provided online.

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. LSD1 regulates insulin secretion in human islets and its binding sites are
enriched for type 2 diabetes-associated variants.
(a) Static insulin secretion assay in human islets stimulated with the indicated glucose
(Glc) concentrations (in mM) following 24-hour treatment with the LSD1 inhibitor
(LSD1i) TCP or vehicle control (ctrl). n = 8 donors. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M.
***P < 0.001 by paired two-tailed t-test.
(b) Gene set enrichment analysis of genes upregulated by LSD1i treatment in human
islets (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff; n = 5 donors each treated with vehicle or LSD1i) against
mRNA-seq data from Lsd1Δβ and control mouse islets one week following TM treatment.
LSD1i-regulated genes were converted to mouse orthologues for enrichment analysis.
(c) GWAS enrichment (%h2/%SNPs) of metabolic (top) and non-metabolic traits
(bottom) at LSD1 ChIP-seq peaks in human islets using LD-score regression. Data shown
represent enrichment estimate and standard error, and significant estimates are
highlighted in red. *** P < 0.001, * P < 0.05 by LD-score regression. Data from
independent ChIP-seq experiments from 2 donors were merged for analysis.
(d) Gene set enrichment analysis of genes whose promoters interact with an LSD1-bound
site containing a type 2 diabetes (T2D)-associated variant (top) or a BMI-adjusted fasting
glucose (FG adj. BMI)-associated variant (bottom) from promoter capture Hi-C data
against mRNA-seq data from LSD1i-treated and control human islets.

58

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(e) LSD1 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq and promoter capture Hi-C (pcHi-C)23 genome browser
tracks showing interaction between the LSD1-bound site containing T2D-associated
variant rs62399063 (highlighted in orange) and the IER3 promoter in human islets.
(f) Bar graph of IER3 mRNA level in human islets treated with LSD1i as in (a). Data
shown as mean ± S.E.M. **P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff.
Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are
provided online.

59

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data

Extended Data Figure 1. Short-term and prolonged increases in nutrient intake
enhance glucose stimulated insulin secretion. Related to Figure 1.
(a) Schematic of time-restricted feeding experiment used to entrain food intake in mice.
Arrows indicate food removal and body weight measurements. ZT, Zeitgeber time; h,
hours.
(b) Animal weights at the indicated days of time-restricted feeding (taken at ZT0). n = 20
mice. P-value was calculated by one-way ANOVA.
(c) Blood glucose levels at the time of islet isolation (ZT16). Fasted: n = 8 mice, fed: n =
9 mice. ***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test.
(d) Static insulin secretion assay in islets from fed and fasted mice stimulated with the
indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM). Fasted or fed 2.8 mM glucose: n = 8
pools of 10 islets each, fasted or fed 16.8 mM glucose: n = 12 islet pools. *P < 0.05, by
unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance as necessary.
(e) Time course of ad libitum-fed blood glucose levels in control (ctrl, db/+; n = 19) and
db/db (n = 18) mice at the indicated ages in weeks (wks). Data are shown as mean ±
S.E.M. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction
for unequal variance as necessary.
(f) Static insulin secretion assay in 10-week-old control and db/db islets stimulated with
the indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM). Control 2.8 mM glucose: n = 4 pools
of 10 islets each, all other groups: n = 6 islet pools. Data in are shown as mean ± S.E.M.
***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance.
Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values
for all indicated statistical tests are provided online.

60

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 2. Lsd1 associates with feeding-regulated active chromatin
enriched for motifs recognized by signal-dependent transcription factors. Related to
Figure 1.

61

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(a) Volcano plot comparing mRNA levels in islets from fed and fasted mice.
Differentially expressed genes are indicated in purple or blue (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff). n =
3 biological replicates of islets pooled from separate mice per group.
(b and c) Heatmaps (b) and histograms (c) of H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal for the indicated
classes of H3K27ac peaks. n = 2 biological replicates of islets pooled from separate mice
per group; data from independent ChIP-seq experiments were merged for analysis.
(d-f) ChIP-seq signal for H3K4me1 (d, f) and H3K27ac (e) at the indicated classes of
H3K27ac peaks in islets from fed and fasted mice (d) or in db/db and control (ctrl, db/+)
islets (e, f). n = 2 biological replicates of islets pooled from separate mice per group; data
from independent ChIP-seq experiments were subsequently merged for analysis. Boxplot
whiskers span data points within the interquartile range x 1.5. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001 by
Wilcoxon rank-sum test; NS, not significant.
(g) Distribution of Lsd1 peaks at the indicated genomic features. Lsd1 ChIP-seq data are
from n = 1 biological replicate from pooled islets. Data were highly correlated with Lsd1
ChIP-seq data from an independent biological replicate (see Supplementary Table 3).
(h) Lsd1 and H3K4me1 ChIP-seq genome browser tracks for genes shown in Fig. 1o in
islets from fed and fasted mice and in db/db and control islets.
(i) ChIP-seq signal for H3K27ac and Lsd1 at the indicated chromatin states.
(j) Venn diagram comparing the number of transcription start sites (TSSs) associated ±
50 kb with an Lsd1 peak and TSSs associated ± 50 kb with an H3K27ac peak within ± 1
kb of an Lsd1 peak.
(k) Proportion of the indicated classes of H3K27ac peaks associating with an Lsd1 peak
± 1 kb. Numbers indicate H3K27ac peaks associated with an Lsd1 peak.
(l) Transcription factor (TF) motifs enriched at H3K27ac peaks gaining acetylation with
feeding and associated with an Lsd1 peak ± 1 kb relative to H3K27ac peaks gaining
acetylation with feeding and not associated with an Lsd1 peak plotted against mRNA
levels of cognate TFs in islets from fed mice.
(m) Association frequencies between TSSs of genes downregulated or upregulated by
feeding with an Lsd1 peak ± 50 kb. Open bars indicate association frequencies expected
by chance. **P < 0.01 for enrichment and ###P < 0.001 for depletion by permutation test.
Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are
provided online.

62

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 3. Hypoglycaemia in Lsd1Δβ mice is not caused by altered
insulin sensitivity, food intake, β-cell mass, or circulating glucagon. Related to
Figure 2.
(a) Immunofluorescence staining for the indicated proteins on pancreas sections from
control (ctrl, TM-treated Lsd1flox/+; Pdx1-CreER mice) and Lsd1Δβ mice two days after
TM treatment. Scale bar, 50 µm.
(b) Time course of ad libitum-fed blood glucose levels in female control (TM-treated
Lsd1+/+; Pdx1-CreER mice, n = 11) and Lsd1Δβ (n = 10) mice. pre-TM, within 3 days
prior to initial TM injection.
(c) Time course of ad libitum-fed blood glucose levels in Lsd1+/+; MIP-CreER (n = 12)
and Lsd1flox/flox; MIP-CreER (n = 8) mice following TM treatment.
(d and e) Time courses of food intake (d) and body weight (e) in control and Lsd1Δβ mice
following TM treatment. n = 5 cages of mice per group (d), n = 10 mice per group (e).
(f) Insulin tolerance tests in control (n = 7) and Lsd1Δβ (n = 9) mice three weeks
following TM treatment.

63

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(g-i) β-cell mass (g), islet cell type composition (h), and pancreatic insulin content (i) of
control and Lsd1Δβ mice three weeks following TM treatment. n = 3 (g) or 4 (h, i) mice
per group.
(j) Blood glucose levels in control and Lsd1Δβ mice at 4-hour increments across a 40-hour
time course in control and Lsd1Δβ mice one week following TM treatment. n = 7 mice per
group.
(k) Glucose tolerance tests in control (n = 12) and Lsd1Δβ (n = 15) mice one week
following TM treatment.
(l) Serum glucagon levels in ad libitum-fed and 16-hour fasted mice of the indicated
genotypes. Fed Lsd1Δβ: n = 6, all other groups: n = 7 mice per group.
Wk/s, week/s; TM, tamoxifen. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01,
***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance
as necessary (b-l). NS, not significant. Source data for all quantifications and exact Pvalues for all indicated statistical tests are provided online.

64

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 4. Functional and metabolic characteristics of islets from
Lsd1Δβ mice. Related to Figures 2 and 3.
(a) Static insulin secretion assays in control (ctrl) and Lsd1Δβ islets stimulated with the
indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) with or without amino acids leucine and
glutamine (Leu/Gln) or the fatty acid palmitate (PA). Control 2.8 mM Glucose +
Leu/Gln, Control 2.8 mM Glucose + PA, Control 16.8 mM Glucose + Leu/Gln, Control
16.8 mM Glucose + PA, Lsd1Δβ 16.8 mM Glucose + PA: n = 5 pools of 10 islets each per
group, all other groups: n = 6 islet pools.
(b and c) Molar percent enrichment (MPE) of 13C for amino acids (b) and lactate (c) in
islets following two hours of tracing in 2.8 mM U-13C glucose. n = 3 pools of 220 islets
each.
Islets were isolated from control and Lsd1Δβ animals three weeks following tamoxifen
treatment for all experiments. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. *P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001
by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance as necessary.
NS, not significant. Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated
statistical tests are provided online.

65

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 5. Concordant changes in H3K27ac and H3K4me1 after Lsd1
inactivation. Related to Figure 4.
(a) H3K27ac ChIP-seq signal at the indicated classes of H3K27ac peaks (from Fig. 4c)
plotted as relative tag density in Lsd1Δβ islets compared to control (ctrl) islets at one and
three weeks (Wk) following TM treatment. n = 2 biological replicates of islets pooled
from separate mice per group; data from independent ChIP-seq experiments were
subsequently merged for analysis. Boxplot whiskers span data points within the
interquartile range x 1.5.
(b) H3K4me1 ChIP-seq signal at H3K27ac peaks (from Extended Data Fig. 1b) plotted
as relative tag density in Lsd1Δβ islets compared to control islets at the indicated time
points following TM treatment. The gray line indicating a slope of 1 provides a reference
for corresponding changes at the two time points. Peaks were classified by the timepoint
when relative tag density in Lsd1Δβ islets exceeded 1.2-absolute fold difference compared
to control islets (see Methods for additional details on peak classification). n = 2
biological replicates of islets pooled from separate mice per group; data from independent
ChIP-seq experiments were subsequently merged for analysis.
(c) Lsd1 ChIP-seq signal at the indicated classes of H3K4me1 sites (from b). Lsd1 ChIPseq data are from n = 1 biological replicate from pooled islets. Data were validated to be
highly correlated with ChIP-seq data prepared from an independent biological replicate.
Boxplot whiskers span data points within the interquartile range x 1.5.
(d) Heatmaps of Lsd1 ChIP-seq signal and relative H3K4me1 tag density in Lsd1Δβ islets
compared to control islets one week following TM treatment for the indicated classes of

66

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

H3K27ac peaks (from Fig. 4c). Coordinates indicate position relative to each H3K27ac
peak center. Peaks are ordered by Lsd1 intensity.
(e and f) ChIP-seq signal for H3K27ac (e) and H3K4me1 (f) at the indicated classes of
H3K27ac peaks in control and Lsd1Δβ islets one week following TM treatment. Boxplot
whiskers span data points within the interquartile range x 1.5.
(g) Lsd1 and H3K4me1 ChIP-seq genome browser tracks for genes shown in Fig. 4g in
control and Lsd1Δβ islets one week following TM treatment.
*P < 0.05, ***P < 0.001 by Wilcoxon rank-sum test. NS, not significant. Source data for
all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are provided online.

67

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 6. Lsd1 regulates metabolic and vesicle transport genes in βcells. Related to Figure 4.
(a and b) Log2 fold changes in mRNA levels between Lsd1Δβ and control (ctrl) islets at
one and three weeks following TM treatment. Genes differentially expressed (P < 0.01 by
Cuffdiff) in Lsd1Δβ islets compared to control islets at either one or three weeks following
TM treatment and annotated to the shown functional categories (from Fig. 4e) are plotted.

68

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 7. Lsd1 inactivation upregulates a feeding-induced gene
expression signature downstream of cAMP. Related to Figure 4.
(a) Log2 fold changes in mRNA levels in db/db compared to control (ctrl, db/+) islets and
in Lsd1Δβ and control (TM-treated Pdx1-CreER mice) islets one week following TM
treatment. Genes upregulated in both conditions (P < 0.01 by Cuffdiff) are highlighted in
orange. For clarity, only the upper right quadrant is shown.
(b and c) Gene set enrichment analysis of genes upregulated by glucose (Glc) and cAMP
co-treatment in Min6 insulinoma cells21 against mRNA-seq data from Lsd1Δβ and control
islets one week following TM treatment (b) or against islet mRNA-seq data from fed and
fasted mice (c).
(d) qPCR of select nutrient-dependent signalling pathway genes in primary mouse islets
treated with 11 mM glucose and 0.5 mM cpt-cAMP for 1 hour. n = 3 pools of 50 islets
each per group. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. *P < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001
by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal variance as necessary.
Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are
provided online.

69

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extended Data Figure 8. LSD1 associates with active chromatin in human islets.
Related to Figure 5.
(a) Static insulin secretion assays for each human islet preparation stimulated with the
indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) following 24-hour treatment with the
LSD1 inhibitor (LSD1i) TCP or vehicle control (ctrl). Donor 1 2.8 mM Glc + vehicle and
16.8 mM Glc + vehicle, Donor 2 2.8 mM Glc + vehicle, Donor 3 2.8 mM Glc + vehicle,
Donor 4 all groups, donor 5 16.8 mM Glc + LSD1i, donor 7 2.8 mM Glc + LSD1i and
16.8 mM Glc + LSD1i, donor 10 2.8 mM Glc + vehicle: n = 5 pools of 10 islets each, all
other groups: n = 6 pools of islets. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. *P < 0.05, **P <

70

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/742403; this version posted August 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

0.01, ***P < 0.001 by unpaired two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal
variance as necessary. NS, not significant.
(b) Western blot for the indicated proteins (left) and GFP fluorescence overlaid with the
transmitted light channel (right) in dissociated and reaggregated human islets transduced
with LSD1 shRNA lentivirus or GFP-expressing control lentivirus.
(c and d) Static insulin secretion assays for sorted and reaggregated human β-cells
stimulated with the indicated glucose (Glc) concentrations (in mM) following
transduction with LSD1 shRNA or non-targeting (ctrl) shRNA lentiviruses shown in
aggregate (c, n = 5 donors) or as individual donors (d). Donors 11, 13, and 15: n = 4
pools of 5,000 reaggregated β-cells each, donor 12: n = 6 pools of reaggregated β-cells,
donor 14: n = 5 pools of reaggregated β-cells. Data are shown as mean ± S.E.M. *P <
0.05 by paired (c) or unpaired (d) two-tailed t-test with Welch’s correction for unequal
variance as necessary. NS, not significant.
(e) H3K27ac and LSD1 ChIP-seq signals at the indicated ChromHMM states in human
islets. Data from independent ChIP-seq experiments from four donors (H3K27ac) or 2
donors (LSD1) were merged for analysis. Boxplot whiskers span data points within the
interquartile range x 1.5.
(f) Scatterplot of ChIP-seq signals for H3K27ac and LSD1 in human islets.
(g and h) Numbers of H3K27ac peaks associated with an LSD1 peak ± 1 kb (g) and vice
versa (h).
(i) LSD1 and H3K27ac ChIP-seq and promoter capture Hi-C (pcHi-C)23 genome browser
tracks showing interaction between the LSD1-bound site containing T2D-associated
variant rs11207510 (highlighted in orange) and the JUN promoter in human islets.
(j) Bar graph of JUN mRNA level in human islets treated with LSD1i as in (Fig. 5a).
Data shown as mean ± S.E.M. ***P < 0.001 by Cuffdiff.
Source data for all quantifications and exact P-values for all indicated statistical tests are
provided online.

71

