bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

An optimized protocol for iDISCO+ rat brain clearing, imaging, and analysis
Audrey Branch1, Daniel Tward1,3, Joshua T Vogelstein3, Zhuhao Wu4,5, and Michela Gallagher2

1
2
3
4

Co-First authors

Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, USA.

Department of Biomedical Engineering Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, USA.

Department of Cell, Developmental & Regenerative Biology,

School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, USA.

Corresponding Author:
Audrey Branch, PhD
Department of Psychological and Brain Sciences
The Johns Hopkins University
3400 North Charles Street
116 Dunning Hall
Baltimore, MD 21218
Phone: 706-507-8770
Email: abranch@jhu.edu

5

Department of Neuroscience, Icahn

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The advent of whole brain clearing and imaging methods have extended the breadth and depth at which
neural populations can be studied. However, these methods have yet to be applied to larger brains, such
as the brains of the common laboratory rat, despite the importance of these models in behavioral
neuroscience research. Here we introduce an optimized iDISCO+ based immunolabeling and clearing
methodology for application to adult rat brain hemispheres. We validate this methodology through the
testing of common antibodies. In order to extend the accessibility of this methodology for general use,
we have developed an open source platform for the registration of rat brain volumes to standard brain
atlases for high throughput analysis.

Introduction
Understanding the structure and function of the myriad of cells comprising the central nervous system
requires precise methods for labeling and measuring intact neural cell populations. The development of
brain clearing protocols in recent years has greatly enhanced our ability to visualize fluorescently tagged
cell populations in the intact brain. Such methods have now been used to identify components of
coactivated neural populations using immediate early genes (Renier, Adams et al. 2016), to delineate
connectivity between brain regions (Ye, Allen et al. 2016), to assess three-dimensional transcriptional
profiling (Wang, Allen et al. 2018), to demonstrate complex connections between the nervous system
and peripheral tissues (Chi, Wu et al. 2018, Wang, Allen et al. 2018), and to illuminate circuit level
connectivity (Lerner, Shilyansky et al. 2015). However, these methods have yet to be applied broadly
outside of the context of transgenic mouse models, as they are optimized to detect endogenous
fluorescent reporters and are difficult to scale up for larger tissues. For example, while clearing methods
have been tested for laboratory rat brains (Stefaniuk, Gualda et al. 2016), such applications often rely on
the expression of fluorescent reporters. Rats have long been the model of choice for behavioral and
cognitive neuroscience as they exhibit a broad and rich repertoire of quantifiable behaviors and their
larger size assists in stereotaxic targeting of brain regions of interest. However, their larger size also
presents a challenge in the application of brain clearing methodology, as these methods depend on the
removal of lipids to achieve transparency. Furthermore, there is a relative deficit of transgenic rat
models, limiting the potential application of clearing methods such CLARITY and CUBIC (Chung, Wallace
et al. 2013, Susaki, Tainaka et al. 2015). Efforts to apply whole brain lightsheet imaging methods to rats
models are further hampered by a deficit of data processing methods applicable to cleared rat brain
tissue. Here we address these issues by outlining a brain clearing method that is optimized for
application to rat brain hemispheres, and an open source platform optimized for registering the
resulting lighsheet imaged brain data sets to a standard rat brain atlas.

Here, we successfully applied the iDISCO+ protocol to rat brain hemisphere. This protocol was chosen
for its compatibility with immunolabeling, its simplicity, and its low cost. We first optimized the protocol
to ensure even clearing throughout an intact rat brain hemisphere, and then applied it with
immunolabeling against endogenous proteins and virally expressed reporters. To maximize the
application of this method for use in rat models, we developed a registration method that can address
lightsheet imaging artifacts simultaneously with alignment of the image set to any MRI based rat brain
atlas, which can be run using a regular desktop computer.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
iDISCO+ delipidation and clearing for rat brain tissue
Rat brain tissue presents a challenge for whole brain clearing and imaging methodologies. The rat brain
is larger than that of the mouse and contains a slightly different lipid and myelination profile. For
optimal application to rat brain tissue, we reasoned that the protocol must be able to label endogenous
or exogenous markers, as rat-based studies tend to rely on virally expressed or immunolabeled targets
rather than endogenously expressed fluorescent markers. We began with the published iDISCO+
protocol (Renier, Adams et al. 2016) which is optimized for immunolabeling, using the suggested steps
outlined for whole mouse brains. Initial application of this protocol to adult rat brain tissue (6 months)
resulted in incomplete clearing in the center of the tissue and slight discoloration, likely due to
incomplete removal of lipids and oxidation, respectively (Fig. 1B). Given the larger size and older
chronological age of our rat subjects relative to the mice for which the protocol was developed (Fig.1D
for size comparison) we speculated that rat brain tissue may require enhanced delipidation to fully clear
the tissue, and thus sought to enhance the effectiveness of the lipid removal steps.

Toward this goal, we adapted the delipidation methods of the AdipoClear protocol (Chi, Wu et al. 2018),
which was developed to clear and immunolabel lipid dense adipose tissue without damaging tissue
structure. A schematic of this modified protocol with relevant additions and substitutions is shown in
Fig.1A, alongside rat brain hemisphere cleared with this new protocol (Fig1C), as compared to results of
the previous version of the protocol (Fig1B). A full outline of protocol steps and recommendations can
be found in Supplemental Figure 1.

In order to ensure that the modification of the protocol did not interfere with immunolabeling, we
tested several different antibodies which have previously been shown to be compatible with iDISCO+.
Brains were imaged using a LaVision BioTec Ultramicroscope with a 2X variable zoom lens, which allows
for an entire rat brain hemisphere to be imaged in either sagittal or horizontal orientation. To achieve
even illumination across the tissue, both lasers were used for all scans and the maximum lightsheet
width and NA were used. The measured z resolution (thickness) of the lightsheet with this configuration
is ~2.5 μm at its thinnest point (LaVision BioTec’s information). Figure 2 shows representative results of
staining in a rat brain with several common antibodies. Images are shown for anti-tyrosine hydroxylase
staining throughout the z-extent of the tissue, demonstrating no loss of image resolution with increasing
z-depth (Fig. 1 A-K). Previously validated antibodies including parvalbumin (Fig2L), cFos (Fig.2M) and GFP
and RFP (Fig.2N) are also compatible with the protocol.

Registration of cleared brain image data to rat brain atlas
Extracting meaningful information from cleared intact brain tissue typically involves quantifying the
distribution of labeled celled cells within anatomically meaningful regions. Our imaging of rat brain
hemispheres generated data sets with ~2500 tiffs per channel in sagittal orientation and ~3500 in
horizontal and are therefore too large to be manually annotated. While some methods do exist for
automatically register lightsheet imaged brains to atlases, they are typically designed for use with
mouse tissue (Renier, Adams et al. 2016) or for application to aqueous based clearing methods (Susaki,
Tainaka et al. 2015, Kutten 2016), which have a very different intensity profile than tissue cleared with
iDISCO. We therefore sought to develop an automated annotation method optimized for iDISCO+

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cleared rat brain tissue. The most common approach to this form of annotation involves estimating a
nonlinear registration between observed data and a well characterized atlas, then using the
transformation to transfer annotations from the atlas onto the observed dataset.

A variety of methods

exist for registering medical image data to standard brain atlases (Klein, Andersson et al. 2009). Given
the similarity of the data structure between MRI and cleared brain imaging, efforts have been made to
apply these methods for the registration of cleared brain image sets to atlases, using a combination of
rigid and or affine deformations of the sample data to align it with the atlas space (Susaki, Tainaka et al.
2015, Renier, Adams et al. 2016).

However, light sheet microscopy images of cleared tissue present challenges not seen in human MRI.
Specifically, the major challenges needing to be addressed are image registration in the presence of
missing or damaged tissue and variable image contrast. We use an image registration framework
developed originally for digital pathology (Tward 2019) that functions robustly in the presence of these
issues. In this framework, contrast differences between atlas images and target images are estimated
jointly with image registration parameters. The location of missing and damaged tissue or other
artifacts, is also estimated jointly in an iterative fashion using the Expectation Maximization algorithm
(Dempster 1977).

Our starting data set was obtained by imaging a rat brain hemisphere positioned in sagittal orientation
using a 2X variable zoom objective at a 0.63X zoom setting (1.2X effective magnification). Using the
488nm laser and imaging from through the z extent of the hemisphere with a 2.5 um step size resulted
in a data set of 2500 individual tiffs representing autofluorescent intensity profile of major anatomical
structures throughout the entirety of the hemisphere. We choose the Waxholm MRI atlas (Papp,
Leergaard et al. 2014, Kjonigsen, Lillehaug et al. 2015) for initial testing of the alignment of this data set
with this methodology. An example result illustrating image annotation through registration is shown in
Fig. 4. Panel C shows anatomical structures defined in the atlas as colors, overlayed on the the grayscale
atlas image. A good alignment can readily be observed for subcortical gray matter structures, as well as
for cortical boundaries. Panel D shows a comparison between atlas and target image intensities, where
yellow indicates relatively good agreement between the images.

Image registration typically involves many parameter choices that result in a barrier to use for
neuroscientists. Our approach to improving accessibility is to make several examples publicly available
through github [https://github.com/dtward/image_lddmm_tensorflow], using Jupyter notebooks
[https://jupyter.org/] as an intuitive web browser based interface. See
Example_iDISCO_rat_waxholm.ipynb in the repository for one example from which the figures in this
paper are generated. All necessary parameter choices have been made and justified within the Jupyter
notebook. This approach can be extended to a variety of other model organisms and humans and will be
the subject of future work.

Discussion

Unbiased assessment of neuronal populations in intact brains is a valuable exploratory tool, but remains
limited in its application. We have developed a brain clearing methodology that is capable of evenly
immunolabeling and clearing an adult rat brain hemisphere using adult Long Evans rats. We began by
applying the solvent based iDISCO+ (Renier, Adams et al. 2016) methodology, which offers several
advantages for application to the larger brain of the common Long Evans outbred rat strain. iDISCO+

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

delipidation and clearing causes minimal distortion of tissue size as compared to aqueous based
protocols which tend to enlarge samples (Wan, Zhu et al. 2018) and was developed to optimize the
penetration of antibodies for immunolabeling of endogenous proteins. In addition, the inherent
autofluorescence present in the 488nm wavelength spectrum of iDISCO+ cleared brains provides highly
detailed structural information which can be used to register resulting image data sets to standard MRI
based brain atlases. Taken together, this brain clearing and imaging platform makes efficient analysis of
cleared rat brains attainable for use in the common laboratory rat.

Methods
Animals
Young male Long-Evans rats were obtained at 4-6 months of age from Charles River Laboratories
(Raleigh, NC) and housed in a vivarium at Johns Hopkins University until 24-26 months of age. All rats
were individually housed at 25°C and maintained on a 12 hr light/dark cycle. Food and water were
provided ad libitum until indicated otherwise. The rats were examined for health and pathogen-free
status throughout the study, as well as necropsies at the time of sacrifice. All procedures were approved
by the Johns Hopkins University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in accordance with the
National Institutes of Health directive.

Sample collection
Young adult male rats (6-10 months old) were heavily anesthetized with an overdose of isofluorane and
intracardiac perfusion and fixation was performed with PBS+NaN3 followed by 4% PFA. All samples were
post-fixed in 4% PFA at 4°C overnight. Fixed samples were then washed in PBS+NaN3 for 1 hour three
times.

iDISCO+ Rat Protocol

Reagent

Reference

PBS 10X

Ambion AM9624

ParaFormAldehyde 16% (PFA)

EMS 15710-S

Triton X-100

Sigma X100-500ML

Tween-20

Sigma P9416-100ML

Glycine

Sigma G7126-500G

Sodium Azide (NaN3)

58032-100G

10N Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH)

Fisher SS255-1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Heparin

Sigma H3393-50KU

DMSO

Fisher D128-4

Methanol (MeOH)

Fisher A412SK-4

Hydrogen Peroxide 30% (H2O2)

Sigma 216763-100ML

DiChloroMethane (DCM)

Sigma 270997-12X100ML

DiBenzylEther (DBE)

Sigma 108014-1KG or 3KG

methyl-β-cyclodextrin (MβCD)

Sigma 332615

2-Mercaptoethanol (βME)

Sigma M6250

Delipidation and Permeabilization
Fixed samples were washed in B1n buffer 2 hr, 4 hr, and overnight. Samples were then
washed/dehydrated in a 20%, 40%, 60%, 80% MeOH/B1n gradient for 1 hr each. Samples were then
treated with 100% dichloromethane (DCM) for 30 minutes three times, then overnight. DCM was
washed out with 100% MeOH for 1.5 hr, 3 hr, and overnight and rehydrated with a reverse gradient of
MeOH/B1n 80%, 60%, 40%, 20% for 1 hr each, and 100% B1n for 1hr then overnight. This was followed
by washes with SdC buffer for 4 hr followed by 2 x 24 hrs, and 2 x 48 hrs. Finally, samples were treated
with a 5% DMSO/0.3M Glycine/PTxwH solution at 37°C for 6h and overnight, then washed in PTwH for
1.5 hr, 3 hr, and overnight. All steps were performed with shaking at 150 RPM.

Immunolabeling

Samples were incubated in primary antibody solution (primary antibody, DMSO, glycine, PTwH) for 8
days. After primary antibody incubation, samples were washed in PTwH for 3hr, 4hr, overnight, and 4 x
24hrs to wash out residual primary antibody. Samples were then incubated for 8 days in secondary
antibody solution (secondary antibody, PTwH), then washed PTwH for 3hr, 4hr, overnight, and 4 x 24hrs
to wash out residual secondary antibody. In this study, we tested the following primary antibodies:
rabbit anti-cFos (Cell Signaling, cat# 2250 ; 1:200), rabbit anti-parvalbumin (Swant, cat#: PV27, 1:200),
sheep anti-tyrosine hydroxylase (Millipore, AB1542, 1:200), chicken anti-GFP (Aves, cat#: GFP-1020,
1:1000), and rabbit anti-RFP (Rockland, cat.#: 600-401-379, 1:1000). Secondary antibodies were used at
the same concentration as their respective primary antibodies and included donkey anti-rabbit 568
(ThermoFisher, cat# A10042), donkey anti-chicken 647 (Millipore, cat# AP194SA6) or donkey anti-sheep
647 (ThermoFisher, cat# A-21448).

Tissue Clearing

Samples were post-fixed in 2% PFA overnight at 4°C, then dehydrated in 20%, 40%, 60%, 80%, 100%
H2O/MeOH series for 30 minutes at each step at RT. Following dehydration, samples were washed with
100% DCM 2 x 1.5hr, 3hr, and overnight, followed by clearing with DBE. Samples were stored in the dark
until imaging.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lightsheet imaging

All samples were imaged on a lightsheet microscope (Ultramicroscope II, LaVision Biotec) equipped with
a 2X (low magnification, whole brain) or 4X (high magnification) lens and a sCMOs camera (Andor Neo).
Images were acquired with the ImspectorPro software (LaVision BioTec). For imaging, samples were
clamped in place to the sample holder in sagittal orientation (midline up), or horizontal orientation
(dorsal up) and placed in an imaging reservoir filled with DBE and illuminated from the side by the laser
light sheet. The samples were scanned with the 488 (filter: 575/40 , 561 (filter: 620/60 ), and 640nm
(filter: 680/30) laser channels with a step size of 2.5 μm for the 2X objective on 0.6X zoom setting (1.2X
effective magnification), resulting 3D image sets with approximately 2.5 μm3 voxel size.
Image processing

Several preprocessing steps were used before registration. First, streak correction was performed by
zeroing out signal at -10.5 degrees, 0 degrees, and 10 degrees in the Fourier domain as shown in Figure
3. These artifacts are associated to shadowing when tissue boundaries are parallel to the light source.
Second, slice to slice intensity variations were corrected such that the mean signal changed smoothly
across slices. To accomplish this, mean intensity was computed as a function of slice number, and the
resulting signal was smoothed using a Gaussian kernel with standard deviation 33 slices. Each slice
intensity was then normalized by dividing by its mean intensity, and multiplied by its smoothed
intensity. Third, 3D images were inhomogeneity corrected using the N4 algorithm implemented in
simple ITK (Tustison, Avants et al. 2010). Fourth, images were downsampled by averaging neighboring
voxels, to a resolution of 0.077 mm. This corresponds approximately to the resolution of the Waxholm
MRI atlas after a factor of 2 downsampling.
Images for figures were generated using ImageJ. For signal channels, background subtraction was
performed using a 50 um rolling ball radius. For figures showing autofluorescent channels, no image
modification was performed other than those discussed in each figure.
Registration

We perform deformable image registration between the autofluorescence channel J : X ⊂ R3 → R (this
notation means “J is a function that maps points in some subset of 3D space to real numbers”) and the
Waxholm T2* rat atlas I : X → R. Autofluorescence has been successfully used for registration in similar
modalities such as CLARITY (Kutten 2016).
We construct spatial transformations  : X → X using the Large Deformation Diffeomorphic Metric
Mapping model (Beg M.F 2005) solving a variational problem to minimize the weighted sum of a
regularization cost and a matching cost. The diffeomorphic property (smooth, 1 to 1, with smooth
inverse) is ensured by defining  as the flow of a smooth velocity field v : X → R3 for t ∈ [0,1]:
t

Sufficient smoothness is ensured by defining a regularization function via

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

where L is the differential operator L = (id − a2∆) (Dupuis P. 1998) for a a smoothness scale (with units
p

of length), ∆ the Laplacian (
), and p ≥ 2 power. We choose a =2 voxels (double check!) and
2
p = 2. The parameter σ is a weighting factor.
To choose an appropriate matching cost, we must overcome several important challenges intrinsic to
this data. The image intensity profile differs from the MRI atlas, and tissue is missing due to cutting and
limited field of view, artifacts are present.
R

We overcome these challenges simultaneously using estimation within a generative statistical model,
rather than proposing a series of steps in a pipeline. Instead of using a similarity function such as
˜
normalized cross correlation or mutual information, we predict J in terms of I = I(−1) and use a simple
Gaussian white noise model as a cost (sum of square error).
.

Where
is a cubic polynomial which predicts the intensities in J from those in I˜. The
2
factor σ is a weighting factor, chosen to be approximately equal to the variance of the noise in our
Gaussian white noise model.
M

Using a white noise model allows us to accommodate missing data using the expectation maximization
algorithm, as discussed in (Tward 2019). In each E step we compute posterior probabilities that tissue
falls into one of two classes: some location in the atlas image ((M)atching), or (A)rtifact and missing
tissue. The data likelihood under the first class uses the model described above, while the latter is
thought of as constant intensity (unknown mean c ) with Gaussian white noise of variance σ 2. We
A

choose σ 2 = 10σ 2 . Let
the first class is
A

A

be a zero mean Gaussian CDF, the posteriors for

M

.
In the M step each unknown parameter is estimated by minimizing our cost function weighted by the
posterior above. The mean c can be found exactly via a weighted average. The θ can be found exactly
by solving a linear equation (weighted least squares). In both cases the weights at each voxel are given
by p(x). The v is estimated iteratively using weighted LDDMM, as described in (Tward 2019).
A

t

EM iterations result in a monotonically increasing complete data likelihood (Dempster 1977). We note
that this approach to missing data is only possible because our cost function represents a negative log
likelihood.
This procedure was implemented in python tensorflow [https://www.tensorflow.org/], handling high
performance computing requirements such as parallelizing across multiple cores or GPU.
Working examples are prepared through jupyter notebooks jupyter.org and made publicly available
through neurodata.io/ndreg.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Registration Interface
An example Jupyter notebook illustrating our registration procedure can be found here:
https://github.com/neurodata/ndreg and a walkthrough can be found in Supplemental Materials. The
registration procedure includes preprocessing, followed by registration at 2 different resolutions, using
the lower resolution result as an initial guess for unknown parameters at higher resolution. The
following figures shows an overview of the notebook, with user inputs, atlas processing, atlas
orientation verification, tif processing, target orientation verification, and registration error at low and
high resolution. Users can download this notebook and simply replace filenames with their data.

Funding sources:
We would like to acknowledge generous support from the National Institute of Health (NIH) (grant
P01AG009973 “Cognitive and Hippocampal/Cortical Systems in Aging” to MG), the National Science
Foundation (NSF) (Award Number EEC-1707298 to JTV), and the Johns Hopkins University Kavli
Neuroscience Discovery Institute Postdoctoral Fellowship to AB and DT.

References

Beg M.F, M. M. I., Trouve A., Younes L. (2005). "Computing large deformation metric mappings
via geodesic flows of diffeomorphisms. ." International Journal of Computer Vision 61(2): 139157.
Chi, J., Z. Wu, C. H. J. Choi, L. Nguyen, S. Tegegne, S. E. Ackerman, A. Crane, F. Marchildon, M.
Tessier-Lavigne and P. Cohen (2018). "Three-Dimensional Adipose Tissue Imaging Reveals
Regional Variation in Beige Fat Biogenesis and PRDM16-Dependent Sympathetic Neurite
Density." Cell Metab 27(1): 226-236 e223.
Chung, K., J. Wallace, S. Y. Kim, S. Kalyanasundaram, A. S. Andalman, T. J. Davidson, J. J.
Mirzabekov, K. A. Zalocusky, J. Mattis, A. K. Denisin, S. Pak, H. Bernstein, C. Ramakrishnan, L.
Grosenick, V. Gradinaru and K. Deisseroth (2013). "Structural and molecular interrogation of
intact biological systems." Nature 497(7449): 332-337.
Dempster, A. P., Laird, N.M. and Rubin, D.B. (1977). "Maximum likelihood from incomplete data
via the EM algorithm." Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Methodological) 39(1):
1-22.
Dupuis P., G. U., Miller M.I. (1998). "Variational problems on flows of diffeomorphisms for
image matching." Quarterly of Applied Mathematics. LVI(3): 587-600.
Kjonigsen, L. J., S. Lillehaug, J. G. Bjaalie, M. P. Witter and T. B. Leergaard (2015). "Waxholm
Space atlas of the rat brain hippocampal region: three-dimensional delineations based on
magnetic resonance and diffusion tensor imaging." Neuroimage 108: 441-449.
Klein, A., J. Andersson, B. A. Ardekani, J. Ashburner, B. Avants, M. C. Chiang, G. E. Christensen,
D. L. Collins, J. Gee, P. Hellier, J. H. Song, M. Jenkinson, C. Lepage, D. Rueckert, P. Thompson, T.
Vercauteren, R. P. Woods, J. J. Mann and R. V. Parsey (2009). "Evaluation of 14 nonlinear
deformation algorithms applied to human brain MRI registration." Neuroimage 46(3): 786-802.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639674; this version posted November 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Kutten, K. S., Vogelstein, J.T., Charon, N., Ye, L., Deisseroth, K., Miller, M.I. (2016). "Deformably
Registering and Annotating Whole CLARITY Brains to an Atlas via Masked LDDMM." Proc. SPIE
9896 Optics, Photonics and Digital Technologies for Imaging Applications IV arXiv:1605.02060
Lerner, T. N., C. Shilyansky, T. J. Davidson, K. E. Evans, K. T. Beier, K. A. Zalocusky, A. K. Crow, R.
C. Malenka, L. Luo, R. Tomer and K. Deisseroth (2015). "Intact-Brain Analyses Reveal Distinct
Information Carried by SNc Dopamine Subcircuits." Cell 162(3): 635-647.
Papp, E. A., T. B. Leergaard, E. Calabrese, G. A. Johnson and J. G. Bjaalie (2014). "Waxholm
Space atlas of the Sprague Dawley rat brain." Neuroimage 97: 374-386.
Renier, N., E. L. Adams, C. Kirst, Z. Wu, R. Azevedo, J. Kohl, A. E. Autry, L. Kadiri, K. Umadevi
Venkataraju, Y. Zhou, V. X. Wang, C. Y. Tang, O. Olsen, C. Dulac, P. Osten and M. Tessier-Lavigne
(2016). "Mapping of Brain Activity by Automated Volume Analysis of Immediate Early Genes."
Cell 165(7): 1789-1802.
Stefaniuk, M., E. J. Gualda, M. Pawlowska, D. Legutko, P. Matryba, P. Koza, W. Konopka, D.
Owczarek, M. Wawrzyniak, P. Loza-Alvarez and L. Kaczmarek (2016). "Light-sheet microscopy
imaging of a whole cleared rat brain with Thy1-GFP transgene." Sci Rep 6: 28209.
Susaki, E. A., K. Tainaka, D. Perrin, H. Yukinaga, A. Kuno and H. R. Ueda (2015). "Advanced
CUBIC protocols for whole-brain and whole-body clearing and imaging." Nat Protoc 10(11):
1709-1727.
Tustison, N. J., B. B. Avants, P. A. Cook, Y. Zheng, A. Egan, P. A. Yushkevich and J. C. Gee (2010).
"N4ITK: improved N3 bias correction." IEEE Trans Med Imaging 29(6): 1310-1320.
Tward, D. J., Brown, T., Kageyama, Y., Patel, J., Hou, Z., Mori, S., Albert, M., Troncoso, J. and
Miller, M. (2019). "Diffeomorphic registration with intensity transformation and missing data:
Application to 3D digital pathology of Alzheimer's disease." BioRxiv.
Wan, P., J. Zhu, J. Xu, Y. Li, T. Yu and D. Zhu (2018). "Evaluation of seven optical clearing
methods in mouse brain." Neurophotonics 5(3): 035007.
Wang, X., W. E. Allen, M. A. Wright, E. L. Sylwestrak, N. Samusik, S. Vesuna, K. Evans, C. Liu, C.
Ramakrishnan, J. Liu, G. P. Nolan, F. A. Bava and K. Deisseroth (2018). "Three-dimensional
intact-tissue sequencing of single-cell transcriptional states." Science 361(6400).
Ye, L., W. E. Allen, K. R. Thompson, Q. Tian, B. Hsueh, C. Ramakrishnan, A. C. Wang, J. H.
Jennings, A. Adhikari, C. H. Halpern, I. B. Witten, A. L. Barth, L. Luo, J. A. McNab and K.
Deisseroth (2016). "Wiring and Molecular Features of Prefrontal Ensembles Representing
Distinct Experiences." Cell 165(7): 1776-1788.

A.

MeOH/
DCM

B1n

SdC

MeOH

Cholesterol
Removal

Lipid
Removal

DCM

DBE

B.

C.

D.

Refractive Index
Matching

iDISCO+
Dissect
Trim

Rat Brain Hemisphere
(physical dimension)

6

Imaging

Delipidation

Immunolabeling

2X/0.5NA Lens
0.6X zoom setting
(1.2X effective)

Clearing

Autofluorescence for Registration
2.5 um step per tiff
Voxel size ~ 2.5 μm3
13.25 mm

Perfusion

Laser 488

6
14

11.7 mm

Sheet width: Max; Sheet NA: Max
Artifact
Removal

Atlas
Alignment

Missing Data
Estimation

LDDMM Alignment

Figure 1: A: Overview of the rat brain
optimized clearing, imaging, and
registration pipeline. B: Rat brain
hemisphere cleared with original
iDISCO+ protocol retains opaque
center. C: Rat brain hemisphere
cleared with optimized protocol. D:
Mouse brain hemisphere cleared with
optimized protocol.

A.

B.

250 μm

F.

K.

L.

C.

D.

1750 μm

3250 μm

4750 μm

6250 μm

G.

H.

I.

J.

M.

E.

Figure 2: A-E: Anti-tyrosine hydroxylase
staining, whole brain. Images are zprojections (50 tiffs); approximate depth
in tissue indicated. F-J: Cropped insets of
corresponding tiffs, showing resolution.
K: Parvalbumin. L: cFos. M: GFP, RFP.

Figure 3: Imaging artifact correction. A-D: Streak correction. Left: before filtering, right: after filtering. Top: spatial domain,
bottom: frequency domain. E, F: Nonuniformity correction. Nonuniform image (E) is corrected (F) using a spatially smooth
multiplicative transform. Axes x0, x1, and x2 have units in mm.

A.

B.

C.

D.

Figure 4 . A: Target image is aligned with a deformed atlas image (B). Annotation labels are showed
overlaid on target image (C), and both images are shown as red and green channels (D) yielding yellow
where image intensities are similar. All images are shown with 5 slices in 3 planes.

