bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Functions of ventral visual cortex after bilateral hippocampal loss
Jiye G. Kim1, Emma Gregory2, Barbara Landau2, Michael McCloskey2, Nicholas B.
Turk-Browne1,3,4, & Sabine Kastner1,3
1

Princeton Neuroscience Institute, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 08544
Department of Cognitive Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, 21218
3
Department of Psychology, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, 08544
4
Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 06520.

2

Running Title: Repetition suppression in amnesia
Corresponding author:
Sabine Kastner
Princeton Neuroscience Institute
Washington Road
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
Phone: (310) 933-2563
Email: skastner@princeton.edu

Keywords: repetition suppression; long-lag adaptation; amnesia; medial temporal lobe;
lateral occipital cortex; parahippocampal place area; fMRI.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2
Abstract
Repeated stimuli elicit attenuated responses in visual cortex relative to novel stimuli.
This adaptation phenomenon can be considered a form of rapid learning and a
signature of perceptual memory. Adaptation occurs not only when a stimulus is
repeated immediately, but also when there is a lag in terms of time and other
intervening stimuli before the repetition. But how does the visual system keep track of
which stimuli are repeated, especially after long delays and many intervening stimuli?
We hypothesized that the hippocampus supports long-lag adaptation, given that it
learns from single experiences, maintains information over delays, and sends feedback
to visual cortex. We tested this hypothesis with fMRI in an amnesic patient, LSJ, who
has encephalitic damage to the medial temporal lobe resulting in complete bilateral
hippocampal loss. We measured adaptation at varying time lags between repetitions in
functionally localized visual areas that were intact in LSJ. We observed that these areas
track information over a few minutes even when the hippocampus is unavailable.
Indeed, LSJ and controls were identical when attention was directed away from the
repeating stimuli: adaptation occurred for lags up to three minutes, but not six minutes.
However, when attention was directed toward stimuli, controls now showed an
adaptation effect at six minutes but LSJ did not. These findings suggest that visual
cortex can support one-shot perceptual memories lasting for several minutes but that
the hippocampus is necessary for adaptation in visual cortex after longer delays when
stimuli are task-relevant.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

3

Introduction
Repeated visual stimuli elicit weaker responses in visual cortex than novel
stimuli. This adaptation phenomenon (also called repetition suppression or repetition
attenuation) can be considered a form of rapid learning and a signature of perceptual
memory for previously viewed stimuli. Adaptation has been observed in many visual
regions including the lateral occipital cortex (LOC) for repeated presentations of objects
(e.g., 1-5) and in the parahippocampal place area (PPA) for repeated presentations of
scenes 6-8). Adaptation occurs not only when a stimulus is repeated immediately (with
no intervening stimuli), but also after a time lag of several minutes or longer during
which intervening stimuli are presented (e.g., 9-14). Although immediate adaptation may
reflect a refractory period caused by temporary physiological changes in the local visual
area being stimulated (e.g., synaptic depression; see 15), the neural mechanisms
underlying long-lag adaptation remain unknown.
For repetitions outside an immediate refractory period, adaptation requires more
durable memories for previous stimuli. The memories could be stored in the adapting
area itself (i.e., a long-term form of the local changes underlying immediate adaptation),
or in other brain regions that provide feedback to the area. The first possibility is called
into question by the observation that adaptation can occur for stimuli that have only
been seen once before, because cortical learning processes may not support one-shot,
long-term memory formation. Indeed, cortex is thought to learn long-term memories only
gradually after many exposures and opportunities for consolidation (e.g., 16). Moreover,
adaptation can occur after numerous, often highly similar, intervening stimuli, and these
stimuli would interfere with sensory representations of the prior stimuli.
For these reasons, here we evaluate the second possibility — that long-lag
adaptation in visual cortex is supported by memories stored elsewhere. We focus on
one particular memory system — the hippocampus. The hippocampus is a good
candidate for supporting adaptation because (a) it is positioned at the top of the ventral
visual stream, with anatomical connections from and to many visual areas (17); (b) it
can learn rapidly from even a single experience (e.g., 16); (c) it can reinstate memories
in visual cortex (e.g., 18-20); (d) it can keep multiple similar stimuli distinct because of
sparse coding and pattern separation (e.g., 21); (e) it distinguishes between repeated
and novel stimuli of different types (e.g., 14, 22) and (f) it has been linked to cortical
adaptation for the repetition of associations (23-24).
We asked whether the hippocampus is necessary for long-lag adaptation, and in
particular what role it plays in cortical adaptation for individual stimuli. To establish
necessity, we examined patient LSJ (25-28) who has complete bilateral hippocampal
loss (Figure 1A). We hypothesized that if the lag between repetitions extends beyond
the timescale at which local physiological changes can produce (immediate) adaptation,
LSJ will differ from healthy control participants and fail to show adaptation in visual
cortex due to the lack of hippocampal feedback. Alternatively, if LSJ shows similar
adaptation effects as controls, it is possible that visual cortex can keep track of visual
information over certain delays independent of the hippocampus. Because the
timescale hypothesized to require the hippocampus is unknown, we varied the repetition

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4
lag across several experiments: immediate (in a block design), 30 seconds, 3 minutes,
and 6 minutes (all in event-related designs).
Another factor that might affect hippocampal involvement is whether the repeated
stimuli are attended and task-relevant. Attention modulates the hippocampus (29),
which in turn determines what it learns (30-32). Moreover, attention influences
adaptation in visual cortex by increasing selectivity or specificity of the neural population
representing the attended sitmuli (33-36). Thus, for the longest lag (6 minutes), which
we expected to be most likely to require the hippocampus, we ran two experiments, one
with attended and one with non-attended stimuli.

Figure 1. LSJ and localizer stimuli. (A) T2-weighted MRI scan of LSJ’s brain reveals lesions
in the bilateral medial temporal lobes (in white), extending laterally to the anterior temporal lobe
especially in the left hemisphere. More than 98% of her hippocampus was destroyed bilaterally
(27). See Experimental Procedures for further details on the case history. (B) Sample stimuli
from the functional localizers used to define object- and scene-selective ROIs. LOC was defined
by the contrast of objects vs. scrambled. PPA was defined by the contrast of scenes vs. faces.

Results
Visual Selectivity
To examine adaptation effects in visual cortex, we used functional localizers to
define regions of interest (ROIs) for object-selective LOC and scene-selective PPA in
each participant. In alternating blocks of trials, LSJ and age-matched controls (total of n
= 18 across all experiments) passively viewed series of either objects vs. scrambled
objects, or scenes vs. faces (Figure 1B). LOC was defined based on the contrast of
greater blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) responses to objects than scrambled
objects. PPA and other scene-selective areas (transverse occipital sulcus, TOS;
retrosplenial cortex, RSC) were defined based on the contrast of greater BOLD
responses to scenes than faces. As control regions, retinotopic early visual areas (V1V4) and the face-selective fusiform face area (FFA) were defined for each participant.
Retinotopic areas were defined using a standard topographic mapping procedure from a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

5
separate scanning session (8, 37), and FFA was defined based on the contrast faces
vs. scenes.
Figure 2 depicts the locations and BOLD time courses of LOC and PPA for LSJ
and a representative control participant C1 for visualization purposes. The statistical
comparison of LSJ to the control group for this and subsequent analyses was done with
a modified independent samples two-tailed t-test (38), which accounts for the limited
size of the control group and tests the null hypothesis that the single case (LSJ) comes
from a population of controls (see Experimental Procedures). Because ROIs were
functionally localized in every subject, the comparisons of ROIs between LSJ and
controls below are collapsed across experiments. The sizes of LOC and PPA did not
differ reliably between LSJ and controls, (t17 = -1.32, p = 0.22 and t17 = -1.36, p = 0.20,
respectively). The sizes of other visual ROIs also did not differ between LSJ and
controls (V1: t17 = -0.27, p = 0.79; V2: t17 = 1.31, p = 0.22; V3: t17 = 0.77, p = 0.50; V4:
t17 = 0.67, p = 0.52; TOS: t17 = -0.03, p = 0.98; RSC: t17 = -1.64, p = 0.13; FFA: t17 = 0.97, p = 0.35). Despite extensive MTL damage, LSJ showed intact object selectivity in
LOC and scene selectivity in PPA and none of the functionally localized ROIs differed in
size to that of controls. These results suggest that MTL is not necessary for the basic
function and organization of category-selective and retinotopic visual cortex.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

6
Figure 2. Localizer results. Object-selective LOC (blue) and scene-selective PPA (red) are
superimposed on the inflated brains of LSJ (A) and a representative control participant C1 (B).
The BOLD time courses in the localizer from (C) LSJ’s and (D) C1’s LOC and PPA are shown
for the sake of visualization. The error bars in this figure reflect standard errors across different
blocks of trials.

Immediate Adaptation
In Experiment 1, we used a block design to examine adaptation for immediate
stimulus repetitions (Figures 3A and 3B). Previous studies in healthy adults (e.g., 1, 5-6)
have shown robust adaptation in LOC and PPA when comparing blocks that contain,
respectively, one object or scene presented repeatedly (“repeat”) with blocks of the
same total number of stimuli but with each stimulus being novel (“new”). We
hypothesized that such short-lag adaptation is mediated by the visual system and thus
does not depend on the hippocampus. Consequently, we expected that both LSJ and
controls would show adaptation effects in this paradigm. This first experiment was an
important step to establish that the adaptation paradigm was a feasible way to test LSJ
in an fMRI study, given the difficulties of working with severely amnesic patients in such
an environment.
Figures 3C and 3D show the BOLD time courses in LOC for objects and PPA for
scenes from LSJ, C1, and averaged controls (n = 8). As expected, control participants
showed greater BOLD responses to the new vs. repeat blocks. To quantify these
effects, we computed, for each ROI in each participant, an adaptation index (AI): the
difference in peak responses to the new and repeat conditions as a proportion of the
variance across blocks from the combined conditions (see Experimental Procedures).
AI values greater than zero denote greater BOLD responses for the new than repeat
conditions. Controls had AIs reliably greater than zero for objects in LOC (t7 = 8.58, p <
0.0001) and scenes in PPA (t7 = 8.90, p < 0.0001). LSJ also showed positive AIs for
both objects in LOC and scenes in PPA. Furthermore, LSJ’s AI for LOC (t7 = 0.21, p =
0.84) and PPA (t7 = -1.04, p = 0.33) did not differ reliably from controls (see Figure S1 to
compare LSJ’s AI values against individual controls for this and subsequent Exps.). See
Figure S2 and Tables S1-S2 for adaptation effects in other ROIs (for this and
subsequent Exps.). To examine whether or not LSJ’s adaptation effects are expected
by chance, we performed a permutation test to compute the null distribution of AIs by
randomizing the condition labels and computing AIs across 1000 iterations (see Figure
S3). This analysis showed that LSJ’s AIs for LOC and PPA (for this and subsequent
Exps. where LSJ showed adaptation effects) was not due to chance and well below the
5% tail of the permutation distribution.
Neither controls nor LSJ showed hemispheric differences in AIs for this and
subsequent experiments (see Figure S4 and Tables S3-S4). Consistent with our
hypothesis, these results suggest that the hippocampus is not necessary for immediate
adaptation effects in ventral visual cortex. It also demonstrated the feasibility to test the
patient in this type of study.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

7

Figure 3. Block design and immediate adaptation. (A) Example line-drawing objects and
scenes used as stimuli. (B) Blocks alternated between “new” (12 different stimuli) and “repeat”
(1 stimulus repeated 12 times) conditions, with order counterbalanced across runs. Objects and
scenes were shown in separate runs. BOLD time courses and AIs for LSJ (red), a
representative control C1 (blue), and the average of all controls (green) for (C) objects in LOC
and (D) scenes in PPA. The asterisks above the control average denote significant adaptation
effects from zero using a one-sample t-test (*** p < 0.001). Error bars in the line graphs for LSJ
and C1 denote standard errors across blocks of trials. The error bars for average controls (for
this and subsequent figures) denote standard errors across subjects. Using the Crawford and
Howell’s t-test for case-control comparisons (38), LSJ’s AIs did not reliably differ from control
AIs for both LOC and PPA.

Long-Lag Adaptation Without Attention
In Experiment 1, at the boundary condition of immediate repetitions (i.e., zero
lag), it appeared that local physiological changes within visual cortex were sufficient for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

8
adaptation, or at least that such adaptation could occur independently of the
hippocampus. However, these physiological changes may dissipate some period of time
after stimulus presentation, which might correspond to the lag at which longer-term
memories are required and adaptation would become hippocampally dependent. As we
did not know a priori at which timescale this might happen, we manipulated lag
parametrically across the remaining experiments.
30-s Lag
Experiment 2 used a rapid event-related design in which each stimulus was
repeated once at a lag of approximately 30 s or 6 intervening stimuli (Figure 4A). We
again examined BOLD responses to objects in LOC and scenes in PPA (in separate
runs). While passively viewing the stimuli, participants engaged in an “alphabet game”
at the center of the screen that required them to think of words that began with a cued
letter (see Experimental Procedures). This task was chosen because it is one of LSJ’s
favorite activities and it reduced attention to the object and scene stimuli, as they were
task-irrelevant and presented in the background of the letters.
Figures 4B and 4C show the BOLD time courses and AIs for LSJ, C1, and the
control group, averaged for object presentations in LOC and scene presentations in
PPA. The AI quantification for this experiment (and all subsequent event-related
experiments) was the difference between the average peak responses (time points 4-8
s post stimulus onset) for the new and repeat conditions (see Experimental
Procedures). The controls’ AIs for objects in LOC were reliably positive (t7 = 7.76, p <
0.001), indicating adaptation approximately 30 s after first exposure to a stimulus. LSJ
also showed a positive AI, and it did not differ from controls (t7 = 1.00, p = 0.35).
Likewise, the controls’ AIs for scenes in PPA were reliably positive (t7 = 7.34, p <
0.001). LSJ also showed a positive AI, which again did not differ from controls (t7 = 0.74, p = 0.48).
Similar to immediate adaptation, both controls and LSJ showed reliable
adaptation in LOC and PPA, suggesting that the hippocampus is not necessary to
bridge across repetitions spaced by 30 s and that cortex keeps track of visual input over
this period of time. It is notable that these effects occurred despite the fact that attention
was drawn away from the stimuli to a different task, suggesting a highly automated
tracking of stimuli by the visual system across this time interval.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

9

Figure 4. Event-related design and 30-s lag adaptation. (A) Example sequence for the
lagged adaptation experiments with rapid-event related design. Each stimulus was repeated just
once, after 30 s (Experiment 2), 3 mins (Experiment 3), or 6 mins (Experiment 4) on average.
Participants performed a demanding alphabet task interleaved with the stimuli, in which the
computer generated a word starting with one letter of the alphabet and then the participant
generated a word covertly starting with the next letter. BOLD timecourses and AIs for repetitions
after a 30-s lag of (B) objects in LOC and (C) scenes in PPA. For calculating AIs, peak
responses were defined as the average BOLD response 4-8 s post-stimulus.

3-min Lag
Having observed reliable adaptation in both LSJ and controls at a 30-s lag, in
Experiment 3, we increased the lag to approximately 3 mins or 42 intervening stimuli.
Anecdotally, LSJ seems to have a shorter time window of memory than this (e.g., she
repeats questions, and forgets having done tasks, after 1-2 mins), and so this lag

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

10
seemed like a reasonable timescale for possibly observing engagement of the
hippocampus. Everything else was the same as Experiment 2, except that the longer
lag meant that the initial and repeated presentations of each stimulus occurred in
different runs. LSJ and controls passively viewed the stimuli shown in the background
while engaging in the alphabet game at the center of the screen.
Figures 5A and 5B show the BOLD time courses and AIs for LSJ, C1, and the
control average for objects in LOC and scenes in PPA. The control AIs for objects in
LOC were again reliably positive (t7 = 5.04, p < 0.002) and not different from LSJ’s AI (t7
= -0.12, p = 0.91). Likewise, the control AIs for scenes in PPA were again reliably
positive (t7 = 4.89, p < 0.002) and not different from LSJ’s AI (t7 = 1.51, p = 0.18). Thus,
the pattern of results for a 3-min lag was very similar to that for the 30-s lag.

Figure 5. 3-min lag adaptation. BOLD timecourses and AIs for repetitions after a 3-min lag of
(A) objects in LOC and (B) scenes in PPA (** p < 0.01).

6-min Lag
Given that increasing the lag from 30 s to 3 mins did not impact the results, in
Experiment 4 we doubled it again to approximately 6 mins or 68 intervening stimuli.
Figures 6A and 6B show the BOLD timecourses and AIs for LSJ, C1, and the
control average for objects in LOC and scenes in PPA, respectively. In contrast to the
prior experiments, the increased lag eliminated the long-lag adaptation effect observed
previously. The control AIs did not reliably differ from 0 for either objects in LOC (t7 =
0.67, p = 0.52) or scenes in PPA (t7 = 1.06, p = 0.33). Using an independent samples ttest, the AIs for the 6-min lag were reliably weaker than for the 30-s lag in both LOC and
PPA (t14 = 3.66, p = 0.003 and t14 = 3.91, p = 0.002, respectively) and compared to the
3-min lag (t14 = 4.06, p = 0.001 and t14 = 3.66, p = 0.003, respectively). LSJ was not

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

11
different from controls for either objects in LOC (t7 = -0.41, p = 0.69) or scenes in PPA
(t7 = -0.88, p = 0.41).
Although LSJ no longer showed adaptation, the lack of adaptation in controls
prevents us from concluding based on this experiment that the hippocampus is
necessary. Instead, it appears that the automatic tracking of stimulus information
performed by the visual system occurs on the order of a few minutes, but reaches a limit
within a 3-6 minute time frame.

Figure 6. 6-min lag adaptation. BOLD timecourses and AIs for repetitions after a 6-min lag of
(A) objects in LOC and (B) scenes in PPA.

Long-Lag Adaptation With Attention
Why did we not observe adaptation in controls after a 6-min lag, despite the fact
that previous studies (9-10, 39) have found such effects at even longer lags? One
difference is that the prior studies employed behavioral tasks that required participants
to attend to and make categorization judgments about the stimuli. For instance,
participants might be instructed to name objects (e.g., 39, 9-10) or perform a
categorization task such as deciding whether an object is bigger or smaller than a
shoebox (12, 40-41). In contrast, Experiments 2 - 4 used a task that was orthogonal to
the repeating stimuli and thus drew attention away from them. Consistent with the
importance of stimuli being task-relevant, selective attention has been shown to
modulate long-lag adaptation (34, 36, 42-43).
To examine the role of attention in long-lag adaptation as well as possible
interactions with hippocampus, in Experiment 5 we asked participants to perform a
go/no-go categorization on the stimuli (Figure 7A). All other experimental parameters
were identical to Experiment 4 (e.g., lag was 6 minutes). For objects, participants were
instructed to press a button if the presented object was a natural object; and for scenes,
if the presented scene was an indoor scene. To help LSJ remember the task, a task

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

12
prompt (“Press a button if this is a natural object” for objects and “Press a button if this
is an indoor scene” for scenes) was shown on top of the screen throughout the
experimental runs for all subjects.

Figure 7. Task-relevant design and 6-min lag adaptation. (A) Example trial sequence using
an event-related design with a categorization task. For scenes (shown here), participants were
instructed to press a button if the presented scene was an indoor scene. For objects,
participants were instructed to press a button if the presented object was a natural object. The
task prompt was shown on the top of the screen throughout the experiment to minimize the
memory demands of the task on LSJ. BOLD time courses and AIs for LSJ, C1, and the average
of all controls for (B) objects in LOC and (C) scenes in PPA. (* p < 0.05).

In contrast to Exp. 4 controls showed reliable adaptation effects (Figure 7B and
7C) in LOC for objects (t7 = 8.38, p < 0.0001) and PPA for scenes (t7 = 6.26, p < 0.001).
Strikingly, LSJ did not show any adaptation, with AIs near 0 and lower than all controls

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

13
for objects in LOC (t7 = -2.83, p < 0.03) and scenes in PPA (t7 = -2.56, p < 0.04). See
Figure S1 for comparison of LSJ and individual controls’ AI values. These findings
suggest that the hippocampus is necessary for tracking stimuli over a time period of 6
minutes after initial presentation when the repeating stimuli are task-relevant. The
comparison of AIs across experiments for controls and LSJ are summarized in Figure 8.
Behavioral accuracy in the tasks was high for both LSJ (88.6% for objects and
89.7% for scenes) and controls (mean = 94.6% for objects and 94.2% for scenes), and
LSJ’s accuracies did not differ reliably from those of controls (t7 = -1.19, p = 0.27 for
objects and t7 = -1.06, p = 0.33 for scenes). Response times (RTs) did differ between
LSJ and controls for objects (789 vs. mean of 593 ms, respectively; t7 = 2.96, p = 0.02),
but not for scenes (687vs. mean of 610 ms, respectively; t7 = 1.20, p = 0.27).
Making the stimuli task relevant also let us examine response priming in behavior
by comparing RTs for the first vs. second exposure of each stimulus. Controls were
reliably faster for the second than the first exposure of objects (mean difference = 43.8
ms, t7 = 3.90, p < 0.006) and marginally faster for scenes (mean difference = 10.9 ms, t7
= 2.03, p < 0.08). LSJ also showed a numerical benefit for second vs. first exposures
(8.1 ms for objects and 10.9 ms for scenes), and these differences were not reliably
different from controls (t7 = -1.06, p = 0.32 and t7 = -0.32, p = .76, respectively).
Controls did not exhibit greater accuracy on the categorization tasks for the second vs.
first exposure of objects (mean difference = -0.44%, t7 = 0.91, p = .39) or scenes (mean
difference = 0.21%, t7 = -0.60, p = 0.56). LSJ showed similar accuracy results
(difference of 0.41% for objects, t7 = 0.58, p = 0.57 and 0.22% for scenes, t7 < 0.01, p >
0.99).
Together, these results suggest that LSJ was able to perform the behavioral
tasks. The only reliable difference from controls was the overall RT in the object task,
and thus any adaptation effects that hold for both objects and scenes cannot be fully
explained by differences in task performance or difficulty. The behavioral priming for
controls and LSJ is consistent with prior studies showing preserved long-lasting
behavioral priming in hippocampal amnesia (44-46). Moreover, the presence of this
behavioral priming effect does not entail that adaptation occurred in visual cortex, as
behavioral response priming has been shown to be supported by frontal and other
structures also preserved in LSJ (41, 47-48).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

14

Figure 8. Comparison across experiments. AIs from Experiments 2-5 are re-plotted for LSJ
(in red) and controls (in green) for objects in LOC (A) and scenes in PPA (B).

Discussion
We conducted a case study of LSJ, a patient with complete bilateral hippocampal
loss, across a series of five fMRI experiments with two sessions per experiment (to
replicate the findings across object and scene stimulus classes). Our findings provide a
comprehensive account of the role of the hippocampus in neural adaptation
(summarized in Figure 8). Using localizers, we first defined ROIs for object-selective
LOC and scene-selective PPA, as well as other category-selective (TOS, RSC, FFA)
and early visual areas (V1-V4). None of these ROIs differed in size from controls,
suggesting that the organization and selectivity of ventral visual cortex does not depend
on the hippocampus. Also like controls, LSJ showed adaptation in LOC and PPA for
object and scene repetitions, respectively, whether they occurred immediately, after 30
s, or after 3 mins. LSJ did not show adaptation for repetitions after 6 mins, regardless of
whether the stimuli were task-relevant or -irrelevant. In contrast, controls showed robust
adaptation after 6 mins when the stimuli were task-relevant. These results suggest that
visual cortex, independent of a contribution from the hippocampus, is able to sustain
perceptual memory for stimuli viewed once up to about 3 minutes but not 6 minutes
ago. Attention can modulate adaptation at long (at least 6 minutes) lags, and the
hippocampus plays a vital role in mediating long-lag adaptation for task-relevant stimuli

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

15
in visual cortex. Although we do not currently have a detailed mechanistic account of
our results, below we provide interpretations that can pave the way for future studies.
It has previously been argued that distinct neural mechanisms underlie
immediate and long-lag adaptation effects (e.g., 9,10,12,49). It is possible that
immediate adaptation effects are driven by local mechanisms within visual cortex that
do not require feedback from higher-order areas, but instead reflect physiological
changes such as synaptic depression or neuronal fatigue (e.g., 15). EEG studies (12,
49) have supported such a distinction by demonstrating different temporal components
of adaptation: an early signature (150-300 ms after stimulus onset) and a late signature
(400-600 ms after stimulus onset). Accordingly, the early signature may reflect local
physiological changes, whereas the late signature may reflect feedback from higherorder areas that maintain information about recent stimuli. Our results can be
interpreted in this framework by positing that repetitions up to three minutes apart
produce adaptation in the early component, but that beyond this lag, adaptation would
appear in a late component. Moreover, LSJ and other hippocampal patients should
show adaptation only in the early component. Future studies examining the temporal
dynamics of adaptation effects would be needed to test this hypothesis with our stimuli,
tasks, and lags.
Putting aside the longest lag, it appears surprising that adaptation could occur in
visual cortex after three minutes without a hippocampus. Indeed, adaptation in LSJ at
this lag was robust for objects in LOC and scenes in PPA. Prior fMRI (9, 10, 39) and
monkey electrophysiology studies (50-52) have shown adaptation effects at long lags.
However, to what extent these effects were dependent on the hippocampus or other
structures in the medial temporal lobe was unclear. Here, we show that without the
hippocampus, LOC and PPA can track visual information over the course of three
minutes. Recently, it has been suggested that LOC and PPA have temporal receptive
windows of several minutes (53). The temporal receptive window is mapped with a
stimulus that has a higher order structure (i.e., a movie stimulus with a continuous plot)
and temporal receptive window would be a representation of some aspect of a stimulus
that bridges over a long time. The stimuli in our experiments were random with no
overarching structure of the objects or the order in which the objects were presented.
Thus, it is unlikely that the temporal receptive window can explain the adaptation effects
observed in LOC and PPA for longer lags up to 3 minutes. One alternative is that
working memory could play a role in supporting adaptation effects up to 3 minutes. This
also seems unlikely because our stimuli consisted of hundreds of images that were
presented in the background when subjects were performing an orthogonal task. The
alphabet-naming task diverted their attention away from the stimuli, discouraging their
active maintenance in working memory during the experiment.
Even more strikingly, LSJ seemed to show adaptation at 3 minutes lag in early
visual areas (V1-V4), especially for scenes (Figure S1 and Table S2). However,
whether stimulus information is maintained this long in such areas is unclear, especially
because they are typically believed to have a relatively short temporal window over
which sensory information is integrated (53). One possibility is that higher-level areas
like LOC and PPA track the information and send feedback to early visual areas.
Another possibility is that a memory system other than the hippocampus is involved. For

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

16
example, the intact frontal cortex of LSJ may have automatically maintained recent
stimuli up to this lag.
Previous studies of long-lag adaptation have found that the magnitude of
adaptation decreases with increasing lag between the first and second presentations of
stimuli (11, 14, 54-55). This is consistent with our finding that robust adaptation for taskirrelevant stimuli at the three-minute lag was eliminated by 6 minutes. However, we
found that attention was another important factor, as adaptation re-emerged at 6
minutes when the stimuli were made task-relevant. Thus, while adaptation dissipates
over time, attention may act to extend it.
We occasionally, although not consistently, observed adaptation effects in
regions that are not selective for objects or scenes (e.g., adaptation in PPA or early
visual areas to repetition of objects; Figure S2 and Tables S1 and S2). This was more
prominent in the shorter lag experiments. These findings are consistent with previous
studies showing that adaptation effects can be found in regions without visual selectivity
(e.g., 13). Moreover, attention increases selectivity in ventral visual cortex (33), and the
adaptation effects observed in controls when stimuli were task-relevant were more
specific to the corresponding category-selective ROIs (Figures S2 and Tables S1 and
S2).
Could the lack of adaptation in LSJ with a six-min lag when the stimuli were taskrelevant (Experiment 5) be explained by differences in task performance or difficulty?
Although it is challenging to eliminate this possibility, we think that such factors are
unlikely to explain our results in a parsimonious way. First, accuracy did not differ
between LSJ and controls in either the object or scene tasks. Second, even though LSJ
was slower than controls in the object task, she was not reliably slower in the scene
task, and both stimulus categories produced the same pattern of differential adaptation
effects. Finally, LSJ showed evoked BOLD responses in LOC and PPA for new stimuli
that were comparable to controls, suggesting that she was perceptually processing the
stimuli. Together this evidence suggests that LSJ and controls’ performance to the
categorization task was qualitatively comparable and whatever differences in adaptation
effects between LSJ and controls cannot be attributed to differences in performance
difficulties, attentional deployment or deficits.
A central result of our study is that the hippocampus appears to support long-lag
adaptation beyond three minutes when stimuli are task-relevant and thus attention and
memory systems are interacting. How could the hippocampus support such adaptation?
One potential mechanism is that the hippocampus (and potentially other areas) forms
long-term memories of the attended stimuli, and such memories are the only remaining
trace of the stimuli after six minutes. When a repeated stimulus is subsequently
perceived, the memory of the initial presentation is retrieved and reinstated in visual
cortex (e.g., 20, 56-57). This reinstatement could have the effect of facilitating sensory
processing in the visual cortex, leading to an overall reduction in visual activity. This
cannot occur in LSJ, as she lacks these hippocampal memories, potentially explaining
why she did not show adaptation at the longest lag. This proposed relationship between
hippocampally dependent long-term memory and long-lag adaptation is consistent with
prior studies that have linked adaptation to behavioral measures of long-term memory
(e.g., 42, 58).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

17
To examine whether or not the hippocampus is involved at all in adaptation, we
examined the hippocampus of controls in all of our experiments (see Figure S6). As the
repetition lag increased, hippocampus activity changed from no visually evoked
response in the immediate to short-lag experiments to evoked responses at 6 min lag
experiments for both the object and scene tasks. This pattern of hippocampus activity
suggests that the hippocampus is more engaged in the longer than shorter lag
adaptation.
Support of the view that the hippocampus is involved in adaptation effects with
enhanced attention to stimuli come from studies examining repetition effects on eye
movements with amnesic patients with hippocampus damage (59-60). While these
patients demonstrate the behavioral repetition effect of eye movement on repeated
scenes under passive viewing (i.e., fewer fixations and fewer regions of sampling when
viewing repeated versus new stimuli), they do not show this effect when instructed to be
aware of the old and new status of the scenes. Our results support these findings that
repetition effects with enhanced attentional processing is hippocampus-dependent.
Attention and memory are intricately connected systems and selective attention
has been shown to facilitate memory formation (61). The precise neural mechanism
whereby attention influences memory is still debated, with recent studies suggesting
that attention can modulate hippocampal activity during stimulus encoding (30-31).
Selective attention has also been shown to stabilize neural representations in the
hippocampus during encoding (32). Thus, the dependence of long-lag adaptation on
attention in controls is consistent with a mechanism based on long-term hippocampal
memory. Specifically, task-relevant stimuli may have produced more robust memory
traces in the hippocampus, which in turn facilitated processing in visual cortex via
reinstatement during repetitions. This idea is also consistent with findings that
adaptation effects in category-selective cortex interact with episodic memory processes
in the hippocampus (24).
Another mechanism for the hippocampal dependence of long-lag adaptation
could be based on the role of the hippocampus in predictive coding. Several studies
have shown that expected stimuli evoke weaker responses in visual cortex, and this has
been provided as an explanation for adaptation (62). Namely, because the environment
is relatively stable over time, we are more likely to encounter a recently seen stimulus
again than a new stimulus for the first time. Accordingly, repeated stimuli should be
more expected than novel stimuli, all else being equal. In predictive coding models, this
has the consequence of potentiating or “explaining away” sensory representations of
the expected stimuli, preventing these stimuli from producing a net increase in activity.
As a result, the visual system preferentially represents unexpected stimuli (i.e.,
prediction errors), in the service of learning to generate better predictions over time.
Where such expectations are stored is the subject of much investigation, with
candidates including orbitofrontal cortex (63) and the ventral striatum (64). However, the
hippocampus has recently emerged as a candidate system for learning about the
structure of the visual environment (65) and for generating predictions about upcoming
visual stimuli based on this structure (66). Without a hippocampus, LSJ may not be able
to form such expectations as well (27), attenuating their impact on the visual system.
In Experiment 5, both LSJ and controls exhibited behavioral priming in the
categorization tasks. This is consistent with previous studies demonstrating preserved

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

18
behavioral priming in hippocampal patients (44-46). These amnesic patients, despite
being severely impaired in recognizing previously presented stimuli, still exhibited longlasting priming effects to similar degrees as healthy controls (46). Behavioral priming is
often accompanied by repetition suppression in ventral visual cortex (e.g., 12, 41, 4748, 67), but priming can be dissociated from such suppression (68) and is thought to
depend instead on frontal cortex (41, 47-48, 67). Indeed, LSJ exhibited behavioral
priming effects without adaptation in LOC or PPA.
In summary, the present study offers insights into the role of the hippocampus in
the function of ventral visual cortex and the tracking of visual information in cortex
without the support of the hippocampus. Although an intact hippocampus does not
appear to be required for adaptation from seconds to a few minutes, it may be required
for longer delays under conditions of enhanced attentional processing. This further
highlights how the hippocampus can contribute to visual perception and learning,
justifying and explaining its position at the top of the visual processing hierarchy.
Methods
Case History
LSJ is a 68 year-old (62 at the time of the first and 63 at the time of last scan
session), right-handed, college-educated woman. She is a highly successful artist and
amateur musician. She contracted herpes encephalitis in 2007. High-resolution
anatomical MRI revealed that more than 98% of her hippocampus was destroyed
bilaterally (27); she also has extensive damage to other MTL and anterior temporal
regions, especially in the left hemisphere (Figure 1A). Her medical history prior to this
event was unremarkable. LSJ suffers from anterograde and retrograde amnesia and her
score on the Wechsler Memory Scale’s General Memory is < 0.1%. Her basic sensory
and language abilities seem intact. A thorough examination of LSJ’s memory functions
is detailed in Gregory et al.'s study (25; For additional reports concerning LSJ’s memory
and learning abilities, see 26-28).
Participants
A total of 18 age-matched control subjects participated in the experiments (all
right-handed, two males, mean age = 62.8 (range 56 - 69), no history of neurological
disorder). For each experiment, there were 8 control participants. The same 8 controls
participated in Experiments 1-3 and three of these controls also participated in
Experiments 4 and 5. The other 10 participants tested in Experiments 4 and 5 were
distinct individuals. Because of the extensive nature of the experiments, we were
unfortunately unable to recruit the same control participants for all experiments. But for
any given lag-duration the same 8 controls participated in both the object and scene
experiments. In addition to the adaptation experiments, all participants completed
functional localizer and retinotopy scans, as described below. LSJ and control
participants were scanned in multiple sessions at Princeton University. All participants
had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and gave informed consent to a protocol
approved by Princeton University’s Institutional Review Board.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

19
fMRI Acquisition and Preprocessing
Participants were scanned in multiple scan sessions with a Siemens Skyra 3T
scanner. During each session, high-resolution T1-weighted anatomical scans using the
MPRAGE sequence were obtained with the following parameters: TR = 2.3s, TE =
1.97ms, flip angle = 9°, matrix = 256 x 256, resolution = 1mm isotropic, slices = 176.
These anatomical scans were used to align the functional data across sessions. The
fMRI scans were acquired with a T2*-weighted echo planar imaging sequence:
retinotopy scans, TR = 2.5s, TE = 30ms, flip angle = 75°, matrix = 64 x 64, resolution =
3mm isotropic, slices = 39; functional localizers and adaptation experiments, TR = 2s,
TE = 30ms, flip angle = 72°, matrix = 64 x 64, resolution = 3mm isotropic, slices = 36.
The functional scans were preprocessed in AFNI (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni),
including de-spiking, slice time correction, motion correction, and de-trending. Although
LSJ had significantly more motion during some of the experiments than compared to
controls, the amount of motion LSJ had did not differ reliably across different
experiments. See Figure S5 for LSJ’s motion parameters for all experiments and for
comparison of LSJ and controls’ motion. Thus, any differences between LSJ and
controls cannot be merely attributed to differences in motion during scanning.
Data were smoothed with a 4mm full-width half-maximum Gaussian kernel and
normalized to percent signal change by dividing the time series by its mean intensity. All
functional scans were co-registered to each session’s anatomical scan. FreeSurfer
(http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu) and SUMA (http://afni.nimh.nih.gov/afni/suma) were
used to make inflated and flat cortical surface reconstructions. After preprocessing, the
retinotopy and localizer runs were projected onto the inflated brains and voxels that fell
within the gray matter boundary were used to define regions-of-interest (ROIs).
ROI Localization and Retinotopic Mapping
Functional localizers were used to define LOC, PPA, TOS, RSC and FFA in each
participant. Runs with alternating blocks of grayscale objects and grid-scrambled
objects were used to localize LOC. Separate runs with alternating blocks of grayscale
scenes and faces were used to define scene- and face-selective ROIs. Scene-selective
ROIs (PPA, TOS, RSC) were defined from scene > face blocks, and the face-selective
ROI (FFA) was defined from face > scene blocks. The ROIs were defined using a
thresholded t-map of p < .05, Bonferroni corrected. See Figure 1B for sample stimuli.
Each localizer run (2.6 min) began and ended with 8 seconds of fixation. There were
eight 12-s blocks in each run, each separated by 6 s of fixation. Each block consisted of
12 different images, randomly selected without replacement from a total of 40 images
per category. Stimuli subtended 11° and were presented for 500 ms with an interstimulus interval (ISI) of 500 ms. Each participant was scanned in two object localizer
runs and two scene/face localizer runs.
Retinotopic areas V1, V2, V3, V4 were defined in each participant across four
runs. Each run started with a 10 s fixation period followed by 5 cycles of a wedge that
rotated around a central fixation (32 s for a full rotation). The wedge spanned 1-13.5° in
eccentricity with an arc length of 45° and was filled with 1000 dots (0.1°, 65 cd/m2)
moving in random direction at a rate of 7°/s. The wedge rotated either clockwise or
counter-clockwise in alternating runs. To delineate visual areas a Fourier analysis was
used where the amplitude and phase of the harmonic at the stimulus frequency was

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

20
determined. The statistical threshold used to delineate ROIs was p < 0.001,
uncorrected, derived from the F ratio of the Fourier transform. Similar phase encoding
parameters and procedures were used previously 8, 37, 69) and the details of the
statistical analyses were reported previously (70-71).
Adaptation Experiments
A large set of line drawing objects and colored scene photographs were used for
the adaptation experiments. Different sets of object and scene stimuli were used for
each experiment and stimuli used for the functional localizers and adaptation
experiments did not overlap. Examples are shown in Figure 3A.
Immediate adaptation (Experiment 1)
Every participant was scanned in six object and six scene runs. Each run started
with 8 s of fixation followed by six blocks each lasting 12 s followed by 12 s of fixation,
for a total of 2.5 mins (Figures 3A and 3B). The new and repeat blocks were presented
in an alternating fashion. During the new block, 12 distinct objects or scenes were
presented. In the repeat block, one object or scene was repeated 12 times. Each image
subtended 10° and was presented centrally for 750 ms with an inter-trial-interval of 1s.
Square-wave functions matching the timecourse of the design were convolved and
regressors for each timepoints for each block were used in a multiple regression model.
Additional nuisance regressors included motion parameters, linear drifts within runs,
and shifts between runs. The resulting beta values of this regression model were used
for the timecourse analyses. To quantify adaptation effects, an adaptation index (AI)
was computed for each ROI and participant using similar methods previously published
(8, 72):
AI =

!"#$%&' - !"#$(&)&*+

,(σ- New + σ- Repeat)/2

where PeakNew and PeakRepeat are defined as the average response over the timepoints
at the peak of the hemodynamic response (8-16 s after block onset) for new and repeat
blocks, respectively, and σ2New and σ2Repeat are the variance of these peak responses
across new and repeat blocks, respectively. AIs greater than 0 indicate greater
responses for new vs. repeat blocks.
Long-lag adaptation (Experiments 2-5)
The long-lag adaptation experiments were conducted using a rapid event-related
design. Each run started with 8 s of fixation period followed by 36 trials, and ended with
6 s of fixation. During each trial, a stimulus was presented centrally with a fixation cross
for 750 ms followed by 250 ms of fixation (Figure 4A). The ITI was 4 s for two-thirds of
the trials and 6 s for the remaining one-third of trials, randomized across runs for each
subject. During the fixation period of each trial of Experiments 2-4, either a word or a
letter prompt (e.g., “A?”) for the alphabet game (described below) was presented for 3 s.
There were eight runs for each for the object and scene conditions within every
experiment. Repetitions occurred at different lags across experiments: Experiment 2, 30
s (range 2-10 intervening stimuli); Experiment 3, 3 mins (range 36-54 intervening
stimuli); Experiment 4 and 5, 6 mins (range 56-70 intervening stimuli). There were 144

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

21
new trials and 144 repeat trials for each experiment. Across different experiments,
different sets of objects and scenes were used because some of the subjects
participated in more than one experiment. BOLD responses were estimated within ROIs
using a general linear model with stimulus events and motion parameters from the
preprocessing. Stimulus events were modeled with a series of finite impulse response
functions, one regressor for each of ten 2-s timepoints. The beta values were converted
to percent signal change and averaged over the time period of the peak hemodynamic
response (4-8 s after stimulus onset). The difference between the average peak
response for the new minus repeat conditions was used to compute AIs for the eventrelated designs. Since all trials for each condition were used to model the hemodynamic
response functions for the new and repeat conditions, these AI computations differed
from the AI quantification for the block design experiment, which took into consideration
the peak responses for each condition as proportion to the variance across blocks.
Behavioral Tasks
fMRI runs were designed to be shorter than usual — i.e., no longer than 3 mins,
estimated as LSJ’s attention span based on observations and verbal reports from LSJ’s
family. LSJ and control participants engaged in a perceptual preference task during the
experiments with block designs (i.e., functional localizer and Experiment 1), which
encouraged participants to focus on the visual stimuli being presented. After each block
of trials, participants were prompted with: “Press a button if you liked what you saw.” To
ensure that LSJ did not forget the task during stimulus presentation, task instructions
were also shown on the screen during the fixation period before each block: “Now you
are going to see some [objects/textures/scenes/faces]. Pay attention!”.
Although this task is subjective in nature, results suggest that LSJ and controls
mostly liked the stimuli being presented and responded after most of the blocks. For the
localizer runs, controls reported to like the stimuli on 78.1% of the object blocks and
92.2% of the scene blocks. LSJ’s behavioral performance was similar to that of controls
(87.5% for both object and scene blocks) and did not differ significantly (t17 = 0.39, p =
.70 and t17 = -0.29, p = 0.77, respectively). Similarly, for Experiment 1, LSJ (83.3% for
objects and 94.4% for scenes) and controls (88.9% for objects and 91.7% for scenes)
responded that they liked most of the blocks presented and LSJ’s preference scores did
not differ reliably from controls (t7 = -1.31, p = 0.23 and t7 = 0.28, p = 0.76, respectively).
While preparing for the study the authors met with LSJ, her family members, and
other researchers to assess what kinds of tasks LSJ would be able and motivated to
perform, given her limited memory span. On many occasions, we observed that LSJ
likes to play an alphabet game where she and another player (e.g., her sister) take turns
going through the alphabet and generating a unique word for each letter. With the help
of the alphabet game, which provides sequential structure, we observed that LSJ can
maintain a fluid conversation for several minutes. Given these observations, we
designed a virtual alphabet game between the computer and LSJ that was administered
during fMRI. This task encouraged LSJ and control participants to fixate the centrally
presented letters and stay engaged during retinotopy and most event-related designs
(Experiments 2-4). LSJ and the computer went through the alphabet letter-by-letter,
taking turns generating words that begin with the prompted letter. For example, the
computer might start by generating a word that starts with an “A” (e.g., “Admire”) and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

22
this word is shown at fixation. Then, “B?” would be displayed at fixation and participants
needed to generate a word that starts with the letter B.
The words generated on the computer’s turns consisted of mostly non-object
words (e.g., verbs and abstract nouns) to avoid interfering with the object and scene
stimuli as much as possible and they were not repeated across runs or experiments.
Letters and words were displayed on the screen every 4 s. When generating words,
participants were instructed to only think of the word and not to say the word out loud, to
reduce the possibility of head motion and artifacts related to producing speech. This
task allowed us to examine long-lag adaptation when objects/scenes were taskirrelevant.
In Experiment 5, participants performed a go/no-go categorization task on the
objects/scenes, to evaluate the role of task relevance. For objects, participants were
instructed to press a button if the presented object was a natural object (e.g., plants,
animals) and to withhold a response if the object was artificial. For scenes, participants
were instructed to press a button if the presented scene was an indoor scene (e.g.,
kitchen, office) and to withhold a response if the scene was outdoor. Equal numbers of
natural and artificial objects and indoor and outdoor scenes were used.
Single Case Study Statistics
The statistical comparison of LSJ to the control group was done with a modified
independent samples two-tailed t-test (38), which accounts for the limited size of the
control group and tests the null hypothesis that the single case comes from a population
of controls. This method has been widely used in neuropsychological case studies (8,
73-74) and has advantages over other single case statistics such as the modified
ANOVA or z-score inferences (75). As a visual benchmark, we compared LSJ’s results
to a representative control participant C1 for each experiment. We confirmed that C1
was representative by comparing their data (e.g., size of ROIs, amplitude of adaptation
index) to the rest of the control group for each experiment. None of the tests resulted in
a significant difference (all ps > 0.05).
Acknowledgements: We thank LSJ’s sister for her extensive help and feedback, and
dedicate this article to the memory of their mother, who also provided considerable
support. This research was funded by NIH EY02316601 (JGK); Johns Hopkins Brain
Science Institute (BL & MM); NIH R01 EY021755 (NTB); NSF BCS 1025149 (SK); NIH
2RO1 MH64043 (SK).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

23
References
1. Grill-Spector K, Kushnir T, Edelman S, Avidan G, Itzchak Y, Malach R (1999)
Differential processing of objects under various viewing conditions in the human
lateral occipital complex. Neuron 24:187-203.
2. Grill-Spector K, Malach R (2001) FMR-adaptation: A tool for studying the
functional properties of human cortical neurons. Acta Psychol 107:293-321.
3. Hatfield M, McCloskey M, Park S (2016) Neural representation of object
orientation: A dissociation between MVPA and repetition suppression.
Neuroimage 139:136-148.
4. Kim JG, Biederman I, Lescroart MD, Hayworth KJ (2009) Adaptation to objects in
the lateral occipital complex (LOC): Shape or semantics? Vision Res 49:22972305.
5. Konen CS, Kastner S (2008) Two hierarchically organized neural systems for
object information in human visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 11:224-231.
6. Epstein R, Harris A, Stanley D, Kanwisher N (1999) The parahippocampal place
area: recognition, navigation, or encoding? Neuron 23:115-125.
7. Epstein RA, Parker WE, Feiler AM (2008) Two kinds of fMRI repetition
suppression? Evidence for dissociable neural mechanisms. J Neurophys
99:2877-2886.
8. Kim JG, Aminoff EM, Kastner S, Behrmann M (2015) A neural basis for
developmental topographic disorientation. J Neurosci 35:12954-12969.
9. van Turennout M, Ellmore T, Martin A (2000) Long-lasting cortical plasticity in the
object naming system. Nature 3:1329-1334.
10. van Turennout M, Bielamowicz L, Martin A (2003) Modulation of neural activity
during object namging: Effects of time and practice. Cereb Cortex 13:381-391.
11. Henson R, Shallice T, Dolan R (2000) Neuroimaging evidence for dissociable
forms of repetition priming. Science 287:1269-1272.
12. Henson RN, Ross ARE, Vuilleumeir P, Rugg MD (2004) The effect of repetition
lag on electrophysiological and haemodynamic correlates of visual object
priming. NeuroImage 21:1674-1689.
13. Weiner KS, Sayres R, Winberg J, Grill-Spector K (2010) FMRI-adaptation and
category selectivity in human ventral temporal cortex: Regional differences
across time scales. J Neurophys 103:3349-3365.
14. Brozinsky CJ, Yonelinas AP, Kroll NEA, Ranganath C (2005) Lag-sensitive
repetition suppression effects in the anterior parahippocampal gyrus.
Hippocampus 15:557-561.
15. Grill-Spector K, Henson R, Martin A (2006) Repetition and the brain: Neural
models of stimulus-specific effects. Trends Cog Sci 10:14-23.
16. Norman KA, O’Reilly RC (2003) Modeling hippocampal and neocortical
contributions to recognition memory: A contemporary-learning-systems approach.
Psych Rev 110:611-646.
17. Felleman DJ, Van Essen DC (1991) Distributed hierarchical processing in the
primate cerebral cortex. Cereb Cortex 1:1-47.
18. Turk-Browne NB, Scholl BJ, Johnson MK, Chun MM (2010) Implicit perceptual
anticipation triggered by statistical learning. J Neurosci 30:11177-11187.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

24
19. Staresina BP, Henson RNA, Kriegeskorte N, Alink A (2012) Episodic
reinstatement in the medial temporal lobe. J Neurosci 32:18150-18156.
20. Bosch SE, Jehee JFM, Fernandez G, Doeller CF (2014) Reinstatement of
associative memories in early visual cortex is signaled by the hippocampus. J
Neurosci 34:7493-7500.
21. O’Reilly RC, Rudy JW (2001) Conjunctive representation in learning and
memory: Principles of cortical and hippocampal function. Psych Rev 108:311345.
22. Rolls ET, Cahusac PMB, Feigenbaum JD, Miyashita Y (1993) Responses of
single neurons in the hippocampus of the macaque related to recognition
memory. Exp Brain Res 93:299-306.
23. Vannini P, Hedden T, Sullivan C, Sperling RA (2013) Differential functional
response in the posteromedial cortices and hippocampus to stimulus repetition
during successful encoding. Hum Brain Mapp 34:1568-1578.
24. Kremers NAW, Deuker L, Kranz TA, Oehrn C, Fell J, Axmacher N (2014)
Hippocampal control of repetition effects for associative stimuli. Hippocampus
24:892-902.
25. Gregory E, McCloskey M, Landau B (2014) Profound loss of general knowledge
in retrograde amnesia: evidence from an amnesic artist. Front Hum Neurosci
8:287.
26. Gregory E, McCloskey M, Ovans Z, Landau B (2016) Declarative memory and
skill-related knowledge: Evidence from a case of amnesia and implications for
theories of memory. Cog Neuropsychol 33:220-240.
27. Schapiro AC, Gregory E, Landau B, McCloskey M, Turk-Browne NB (2014) The
necessity of the medial temporal lobe for statistical learning. J Cogn Neurosci
26:1736-1747.
28. Valtonen J, Gregory E, Landau B, McCloskey M (2014) New learning of music
after bilateral medial temporal lobe damage: Evidence from an amnesic patient.
Front Hum Neurosci 8:694.
29. Aly M, Turk-Browne NB (2016b) Attention stabilizes representations in the
human hippocampus. Cereb Cortex 26:783-796.
30. Uncapher MR, Rugg MD (2009) Selecting for memory? The influence of selective
attention on the mnemonic binding of contextual information. J Neurosci 29:82708279.
31. Carr VA, Engel SA, Knowlton BJ (2013) Top-down modulation of hippocampal
encoding activity as measured by high-resolution functional MRI.
Neuropsychologia 51:1829-1837.
32. Aly M, Turk-Browne NB (2016a) Attention promites episodic encoding by
stabilizing hippocampal representations. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113:E420-429.
33. Murray SO, Wojciulik E (2003) Attention increases neural selectivity in the human
lateral occipital complex. Nat Neurosci 7:70-74.
34. Moore KS, Yi D-J, Chun M (2013) The effect of attention on repetition
suppression and multivoxel pattern similarity. J Cog Neurosci 25:1305-1314.
35. Eger E, Henson RNA, Driver J, Dolan RJ (2004) BOLD repetition decreases in
object-responsive ventral visual areas depend on spatial attention. J
Neurophysiol 92:1241-1247.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

25
36. Yi D-J, Chun MM (2005) Attentional modulation of learning-related repetition
attenuation effects in human parahippocampal cortex. J Neurosci 25:3593-3600.
37. Bandettini PA, Jesmanowicz A, Wong EC, Hyde JS (1993) Processing strategies
for time-course data sets in functional MRI of the human brain. Magn Reson Med
30:161-173.
38. Crawford JR, Howell DC (1998) Regression equations in clinical
neuropsychology: An evaluation of statistical methods for comparing predicted
and obtained scores. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 20:755-762.
39. Meister IG, Weidemann J, Foltys H, Brand H, Willmes K, Krings T, Thron A,
Topper R, Boroojerdi B (2005) The neural correlate of very-long-term picture
priming. Eu. J Neurosci 21:1101-1106.
40. Koutstaal W, Wagner AD, Rotte M, Maril A, Buckner RL, Schacter DL (2001)
Perceptual specificity in visual object priming: Functional magnetic resonance
imaging evidence for a laterality difference in fusiform cortex. Neuropsychologia
39:184-199.
41. Dobbins IG, Schnyer DM, Verfaellie M, Schacter D (2004) Cortical activity
reductions during repetition priming can restult from rapid response learning.
Nature 428:316-319.
42. Turk-Browne NB, Yi D-J, Chun MM (2006) Linking implicit and explicit memory:
Common encoding factors and shared representations. Neuron 49:917-927.
43. Vuilleumier P, Schwartz S, Duhoux S, Dolan RJ, Driver J (2006) Selective
attention modulates neural substrates of repetition priming and “implicit” visual
memory: Suppressions and enhancements revealed by fMRI. J Cogn Neurosci
17:1245-1260.
44. Warrington EK, Weiskrantz L (1974) The effect of prior learning on subsequent
retention in amnesic patients. Neuropsychologia 12:419-428.
45. Gabrieli JDE, Milberg W, Keane MM, Corkin S (1990) Intact priming of patterns
despite impaired memory. Neuropsychologia 28:417-427.
46. Cave BC, Squire LR (1992) Intact and long-lasting repetition priming in amnesia.
J Exp Psychol 18:509-520.
47. Maccotta L, Buckner RL (2004) Evidence for neural effects of repetition that
directly correlate with behavioral priming. J Cog Neurosci 16:1625-1632.
48. McMahon DBT, Olson CR (2007) Repetition suppression in monkey
inferotemporal cortex: Relation to behavioral priming. J Neurophysiol 97:35323543.
49. Nagy ME, Rugg MD (1989) Modulation of event-related potentials by word
repetition: The effects of inter-item lag. Psychophysiol 26:431-436.
50. Li L, Miller EK, Desimone R (1993) The representation of stimulus familiarity in
anterior inferior temporal cortex. J Neurophys 69:1918-1929.
51. Anderson B, Mruczek, REB, Kawasaki K, Sheinberg D (2008). Effects of
familiarity on neurla activity in monkey inferior temporal lobe. Cereb Cortex
18:2540-2552.
52. Freedman DJ, Riesenhuber M, Poggio T, Miller EK (2006) Experiencedependent sharpening of visual shape selectivity in inferior temporal cortex.
Cereb Cortex 16:1631-1644.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

26
53. Hasson U, Chen J, Honey CJ (2015) Hierarchical process memory: Memory as
an integral compoent of information processing. Trends Cogn Sci 19:304-313.
54. Xiang J-X, Brown MW (1998) Differential neuronal encoding of novelty, familiarity
and recency in regions of the anterior temporal lobe. Neuropharmacol 37:657676.
55. Fahy FL, Riches IP, Brown MW (1993) Neuronal activity related to visual
recognition memory: Long-term memory and the encoding of recency and
familiarity information in the primate anterior and medial inferior temporal and
rhinal cortex. Exp Brain Res 96:457-472.
56. Gordon AM, Rissman J, Kiani R, Wagner AD (2014) Cortical reinstatement
mediates the relationship between content-specific encoding activity and
subsequent recollection decisions. Cereb Cortex 24:3350-3364.
57. Danker JF, Tompary A, Davachi L (2017) Trial-by-trial hippocampal encoding
activation predicts the fidelity of cortical reinstatement during subsequent
retrieval. Cereb Cortex 27:3515-3524.
58. Manelis A, Wheeler ME, Paynter CA, Storey L, Reder LM (2011) Opposing
patterns of neural priming in same-exemplar vs. different-exemplar repetition
predict subsequent memory. NeuroImage 55:763-772.
59. Smith CN, Squire LR (2007) Experience-dependent eye movements reflect
hippocampus-dependent (aware) memory. J Neurosci 28:12825-12833.
60. Smith CN, Squire LR (2017) When eye movements express memory for old and
new scenes in the absence of awareness and independent of hippocampus.
Learn & Mem 24:95-103.
61. Chun MM, Turk-Browne NB (2007) Interactions between attention and memory.
Curr Opin Neurobiol 17:177-184.
62. Summerfield C, de Lange FP (2014) Expectation in perceptual decision making:
Neural and computational mechanisms. Nat Rev Neurosci 15:745-756.
63. Bar M, Kassam KS, Ghuman AS, Boshyan J, Schmid AM, Dale AM, Hamalainen,
MS, Marinkovic K, Schacter DL, Rosen BR, Halgren E (2006) Top-down
facilitation of visual recognition. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103:449-454.
64. O’Doherty J, Dayan P, Schultz J, Deichmann R, Friston K, Dolan RJ (2004)
Dissociable roles of ventral and dorsal striatum in instrumental conditioning.
Science 304:452-454.
65. Schapiro AC, Turk-Browne NB, Botvinick MM, Norman KA (2017)
Complementary learning systems within the hippocampus: A neural network
modelling approach to reconciling episodic memory with statistical learning. Phil
Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 372:1711.
66. Hindy NC, Ng FY, Turk-Browne NB (2016) Linking pattern completion in the
hippocampus to predictive coding in visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 19:665-667.
67. Wig GS, Grafton ST, Demos KE, Kelley WM (2005) Reductions in neural activity
underlie behavioral components of repetition priming. Nat Neurosci 8:1228-1135.
68. Xu Y, Turk-Browne NB, Chun MM (2007) Dissociating task performance from
fMRI repetition attenuation in ventral visual cortex. J Neurosci 27:5981-5985.
69. Swisher JD, Halko MA, Merabet LB, McMains SA, Somers DC (2007) Visual
topography of human intraparietal sulcus. J Neurosci 27:5326-5337.
70. Schneider KA, Richter MC, Kastner S (2004) Retinotopic organization and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

27
functional subdivisions of the human lateral geniculate nucleus: A high-resolution
functional magnetic resonance imaging study. J Neurosci 24:8975-8985.
71. Arcaro MJ, McMains SA, Singer BD, Kastner S (2009) Retinotopic organization
of human ventral visual cortex. J Neurosci 29:10638-10652.
72. Pinsk MA, Arcaro M, Weiner KS, Kalkus JF, Inati SJ, Gross CG, Kastner S
(2009) Neural representations of faces and body parts in macaque and human
cortex: A comparative fMRI study. J Neurophysiol 101:2581-2600.
73. Behrmann M, Peterson MA, Moscovitch M, Suzuki S (2006) Independent
representation of parts and the relations between them: Evidence from
integrative agnoisa. J Exp Psychol 32:1169-1184.
74. Konen CS, Behrmann M, Nishimura M, Kastner S (2011) The functional
neuroanatomy of object agnosia: A case study. Neuron 71:49-60.
75. Crawford JR, Garthwaite PH, Howell DC, Gray CD (2004) A single case with a
control sample: Modified t-tests versus Mycroft et al.’s (2002) modified ANOVA.
Cog Neuropsych 21:750-755.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplemental Information

Functions of ventral visual cortex after bilateral hippocampal loss
Jiye G. Kim, Emma Gregory, Barbara Landau, Michael McCloskey, Nicholas B. TurkBrowne, & Sabine Kastner

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S1. AI comparisons between LSJ and individual controls. Normalized (zscores with mean and SD from controls) AIs from Experiments 1-5 are plotted for LSJ
(in red) and controls (in blue) for objects (A) and scenes (B). For Exps. 1-4, LSJ’s AIs
are within the distribution of controls’ AIs. In Exp. 5, for both object and scene, LSJ’s AI
values were about 3 SD below control mean AI values.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S2. Adaptation effects in visual ROIs across experiments. AIs from
Experiments 1-5 are plotted for LSJ (in red) and controls (in green) for visual ROIs for
objects (A) and scenes (B). For this and subsequent figures and tables, one-sample ttests were used to determine reliably positive AIs for controls (* p < 0.05) and Crawford
and Howell’s t-test (1) for a single case (two-tailed) was used to compare AIs between
LSJ and controls. The t-values and p-values for reliable adaptation effects in these ROIs
for controls and the comparison between LSJ and controls are reported in Table S1 for
objects and Table S2 for scenes.

Table S1. T-values and p-values (in parentheses) for adaptation effects in visual ROIs across experiments for
objects in controls, and the comparison bewteen LSJ and controls.

Table S2. T-values and p-values (in parentheses) for adaptation effects in visual ROIs across experiments for
scenes in controls, and the comparison between LSJ and controls.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S3. Permutation test for LSJ’s adaptation effects. To examine whether or not
LSJ’s adaptation effects are expected by chance, we performed a permutation test to
compute the null distribution of adaptation indices (AI). We randomly assigned condition
labels to each block (Exp. 1) or trial (Exp. 2 and Exp. 3) using LSJ’s data and computed
AIs over 1000 iterations. The distributions of the null AIs are plotted in blue for each
experiment and for each ROI where LSJ showed adaptation. The red dashed vertical
line indicates LSJ’s AIs as a reference. In all of the experiments, LSJ’s AI was within the
5% tail of the distribution (Exp. 1, LOC: 0.1%, PPA: 0.1%; Exp. 2, LOC: 0.3%, PPA:
4.5%; Exp. 3, LOC: 0.9%, PPA: 0%).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S4. Adaptation effects by hemisphere across experiments. AIs for left and
right LOC for objects (A) and PPA for scenes (B) are plotted across experiments.
Controls showed reliably positive AIs in both hemispheres for all experiments except for
Experiment 4 (*** p < 0.001, ** p < 0.01). In Experiment 5, LSJ showed marginally
reduced AIs in left († p ≤ 0.1) and significantly in the right (* p < 0.05) hemispheres for
both LOC and PPA. The t-values and p-values for reliable adaptation effects in left and
right hemispheres in controls and the comparison between LSJ and controls are
reported in Table S3 for objects and Table S4 for scenes.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table S3. T-values and p-values (in parentheses) for adaptation effects in left and
right LOC across experiments for objects in controls, and the comparison
between LSJ and controls.

Table S4. T-values and p-values (in parenthesis) for adaptation effects in left and
right PPA across experiments for scenes in controls, and the comparison
between LSJ and controls.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S5. Comparison of motion parameters between LSJ and controls and
across experiments for LSJ. (A) The six motion directions (roll, pitch, yaw, dS, dL and
dP) were averaged for each subject for each experiment. LSJ had significantly more
motion than controls in 6/10 experiments (* p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01). However, the amount
of motion for LSJ did not differ across experiments (B) as assessed by a two-way
ANOVA with experiments (1-5) and motion direction (roll, pitch, yaw, dS, dL, and dP) as
independent variables. There was no main effect of experiment for both objects (F4,20 =
1.02, p = 0.42) and scenes (F4,20 = 0.69, p = 0.61).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S6. Hippocampus activity across experiments for controls. Hippocampus
was anatomically localized using Freesurfer’s (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu)
subcortical segmentation tool (2) for each control subject. Hippocampus activity was
examined across all object (A) and scene (B) experiments. During Exp. 1, there was no
visually evoked responses in the hippocampus for both object and scene tasks. For
comparison, refer to Figure 3 for visually evoked responses in LOC and PPA for Exp. 1.
In Exp. 5, there are clear evoked responses in the hippocampus (especially for scenes)
suggesting that the hippocampus is involved in the long-lag adaptation with directed
attention which supports the impairment in LSJ.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673228; this version posted June 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1. Crawford JR, Howell DC (1998) Regression equations in clinical
neuropsychology: An evaluation of statistical methods for comparing predicted
and obtained scores. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol 20:755-762.
2. Fischl B, Salat DH, Busa E, Albert M, Dieterich M, Haselgrove C, van der Kouwe
A, Killiany R, Kennedy D, Klaveness S, Montillo A, Makris N, Rosen B, Dale AM
(2002) Whole brain segmentation: Automated labeling of neuroanatomical
structures in the human brain. Neuron 33:341-355.

