bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Stress Resets Transgenerational Small RNA Inheritance
Leah Houri-Ze’evi*1,#, Guy Teichman*1,#, Hila Gingold1, Oded Rechavi1,#
1

Department of Neurobiology, Wise Faculty of Life Sciences & Sagol School of

Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel 69978.
* Equal contribution
#

Corresponding

authors:

odedrechavi@gmail.com,

leah.houri@gmail.com,

guy.teichman@gmail.com

Abstract
Transgenerational inheritance of small RNAs is challenging basic concepts of
heredity and achieving control over such responses is of great interest. In C.
elegans nematodes, small RNAs are transmitted across generations to establish
a transgenerational memory trace of ancestral environments and distinguish self
from non-self genes. Inheritance of small RNAs is regulated by dedicated
machinery and carryover of aberrant heritable small RNA responses was shown
to be maladaptive and to induce sterility. Here we show that various types of
stress (starvation, high temperatures, and high osmolarity) but not non-stressful
changes in cultivation conditions, lead to resetting of small RNA inheritance. We
found that stress leads to a genome-wide reduction in heritable small RNA levels
and that mutants defective in different stress pathways exhibit irregular RNAi
inheritance dynamics. Moreover, we discovered that resetting of heritable RNAi
is orchestrated by MAPK pathway factors, the transcription factor SKN-1, and the
MET-2 methyltransferase. Termination of small RNA inheritance, and the fact
that this process depends on stress, could protect from run-on of environmentirrelevant heritable gene regulation.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Different human diseases, for example a number of imprinting-associated
syndromes (Angelman syndrome, Prader-Willi syndrome, and BeckwithWiedemann syndrome) arise due to inheritance of parental information which is
not encoded in the DNA sequence (Tucci et al., 2019). In addition, while the
mechanisms are still unclear, many widespread disorders were suggested to be
influenced by non-genetic inheritance and to be affected by the ancestors’ life
history (Bohacek and Mansuy, 2015; Chen et al., 2016; Gapp et al., 2014;
Kazachenka et al., 2018; Nilsson et al., 2018; Öst et al., 2014; Skvortsova et al.,
2018; Teperino et al., 2013). Thus, development of methods for resetting of
detrimental heritable effects could potentially benefit future treatment of these
diseases and enable the progeny to start as a “blank slate”.
In Caenorhabditis elegans nematodes, much knowledge has been gained
in recent years regarding the mechanisms that enable transgenerational gene
regulation via inheritance of small RNAs (Rechavi and Lev, 2017; Serobyan and
Sommer, 2017). Dedicated small RNA inheritance proteins, which are required
specifically for heritable responses, have been identified (de Albuquerque et al.,
2015; Ashe et al., 2012; Buckley et al., 2012; Houri-Ze’evi et al., 2016; Lev et al.,
2017, 2019; Shirayama et al., 2012; Wan et al., 2018; Xu et al., 2018)). In worms,
multigenerational small RNA inheritance is robust and requires RNA-dependent
RNA Polymerases (RdRPs) which use the target mRNA as a template for
amplifying “Secondary” and “Tertiary” small RNAs (Rechavi et al., 2011;
Sapetschnig et al., 2015). The amplification reaction outcompetes the dilution of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the heritable small RNA molecules in every generation (Rechavi et al., 2011).
Multiple “Primary” small RNA species (exogenous and endogenous small
interfering RNAs and PIWI-interacting RNAs) can induce amplification of
heritable small RNAs (Das et al., 2008; Sijen et al., 2001). In the nucleus,
amplified small RNAs lead to transcriptional silencing of their targets, in
cooperation with chromatin regulators (Burton et al., 2011; She et al., 2009).
Nuclear small RNAs modify the chromatin, and some changes in histone marks
are transgenerationally inherited, also in response to environmental changes
(Klosin et al., 2017). Specific worm Argonaute proteins (HRDE-1, CSR-1,
WAGO-4, WAGO-1) were found to physically carry small RNAs in the germline
and across generations (Ashe et al., 2012; Claycomb et al., 2009; Shirayama et
al., 2012; Wedeles et al., 2013; Xu et al., 2018)
The worm’s small RNA pools change transgenerationally in response to
multiple environmental challenges such as viral infection (Rechavi et al., 2011),
starvation (Rechavi et al., 2014), and stressful temperatures (Ni et al., 2016;
Schott et al., 2014). Further, C. elegans actively regulates small RNA inheritance
and controls the duration and potency of the transgenerational effects (HouriZeevi and Rechavi, 2017). Heritable RNA interference (RNAi) responses, which
are mediated by small RNAs, can be induced by targeting of germline-expressed
genes using double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) triggers. Typically, such heritable
responses last 3-5 generations (Alcazar et al., 2008), but the duration of the
heritable response can differ in some mutants. For example, MET-2, an histone 3
lysine 9 (H3K9) methyltransferase, is required for termination of heritable RNAi,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and accordingly RNAi inheritance is stable in met-2 mutants (Lev et al., 2017).
Moreover, even in wild type animals, inheritance of ancestral RNAi responses
can be extended by triggering dsRNA-induced silencing of other genes in the
progeny (Houri-Ze’evi et al., 2016). Together, these different mechanisms
constitute a transgenerational “timer” which restricts inheritance of small RNA
responses (Houri-Zeevi and Rechavi, 2017).
It was hypothesized that continuation of some gene expression programs
in the progeny could increase the descendants’ chances to survive, especially if
parents and progeny experience the same conditions (Houri-Ze’evi et al., 2016;
Jablonka, 2013, 2017; Kishimoto et al., 2017). However, if the environmental
conditions change, the carryover of ancestral responses could become
detrimental (Jablonka, 2013). Indeed, in worms, mutants which are unable to
regulate multigenerational accumulation of heritable small RNAs become sterile
(Lev et al., 2017, 2019; Ni et al., 2016; Simon et al., 2014). Therefore, it is
possible that mechanisms have evolved to terminate or extend small RNA-based
inheritance according to the presence or absence of dramatic shifts in settings.
In this study, we examined if changes in environmental conditions
between generations alter the dynamics of small RNA inheritance. We found that
stress resets small RNA inheritance and that termination is orchestrated by the
MAPK stress pathway, the SKN-1 transcription factor, and the MET-2 H3K9
methyltransferase. We suggest that this mechanism could unburden the progeny
from irrelevant heritable gene regulation.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
We examined whether discrepancies between the growth conditions of the
ancestors and their progeny would affect small RNA inheritance. We applied
different types of stress to progeny that inherited small RNA responses from
unstressed parents. To monitor small RNA-mediated inheritance, we used three
different inheritance assays:
First, we investigated the heritable responses initiated by exogenouslyderived small RNAs, by silencing a single-copy germline-expressed gfp. Feeding
the worms with bacteria that express anti-gfp directed dsRNA induces heritable
silencing that lasts for ±3-5 consecutive generations (Alcazar et al., 2008)
(Methods). We subjected P0 animals to RNAi and tested how the heritable
silencing is affected in the F1 progeny following exposure to three different types
of stressors, experienced during the first larval stage (L1). To stress the worms
we heat shocked the progeny for 2 hours (Zevian and Yanowitz, 2014), cultured
the progeny in hyperosmotic conditions for 48 hours (Rodriguez et al., 2013), or
starved the progeny for 6 days (Rechavi et al., 2014) (See Figure 1A, 1B and
Methods). We then examined the inheritance of RNAi responses that were
initiated in the previous non-stressed generation. We found that stressing the
worms during the L1 stage led to a reduction in heritable GFP silencing at the
adult stage. Importantly, the strong reduction in silencing was not restricted to the
F1 progeny that were directly stressed as it was observed also in the nonstressed F2 and F3 progeny (q-value<0.0004, Figure 1C). Thus, stress

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

experienced during the F1 generation (at the L1 stage) erases dsRNA-induced
(exo-siRNA) silencing in a transgenerational manner.

A

Initiation of a heritable silencing response
P0

Control

F1

Heat
Shock

Osmotic
Stress

Starvation

Stress

F2

F3
No stress

B

C

Germline
GFP
expression Empty vector

Stress
F1

Anti-gfp RNAi

No stress
F2

No stress
F3

Figure 1: Stress resets heritable small RNA silencing
A. Experimental scheme. Heritable small RNA responses are initiated at the first
generation, and the F1 progeny are then subjected to three different stress types
(heat shock {HS}, hyperosmotic stress {Osm}, starvation {Str}). Inheritance of the
ancestral response is scored both in the stressed generation and in the next
generations which were grown under regular growth conditions.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B. Representative images of worms containing the Pmex-5::gfp transgene, treated with
empty vector containing bacteria (left) or with anti-gfp dsRNA-producing bacteria
(right).
C. Heritable exo-siRNAs silencing is reset by stress. The graph displays the measured
germline GFP fluorescence levels of individual worms (y-axis) across generations
under the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the value of an individual
worm. Shown are the median of each group, with box limits representing the 25th
(Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and
whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were
obtained using Dunn’s test. (***) indicates q<0.001 (see Methods).

Next, we examined if stress also resets heritable silencing that is triggered
by endogenous small interfering RNAs (endo-siRNAs) or PIWI-interacting small
RNAs (piRNAs). For this purpose, we used (1) worms that carry a gfp transgene
that contains an endo-siRNA-target sequence (an “endo-siRNA” sensor,
integrated in the genome of the GR1720 strain (Billi et al., 2012)), and (2) worms
that stochastically silence a foreign mcherry transgene, that contains multiple
piRNAs-recognition sites (Zhang et al., 2018) (see also Figure 2A and 2B, and
Methods). We found that all three stressors (starvation, high temperatures, and
hyperosmotic conditions) reset both endo-siRNAs- and piRNAs-mediated
heritable silencing in worms directly exposed to stress (q-value<0.0005 and qvalue<0.0007, Figure 2A and 2B). However, in contrast to exo-siRNAs mediated
silencing that was reset in a transgenerational manner (Figure 1C), we found
that unstressed worms in the next generations re-established endo-siRNAs- and
piRNAs-mediated silencing. Unlike exogenous dsRNA-derived primary siRNAs

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

which cannot be re-synthesized in the progeny, primary piRNAs and primary
endo-siRNAs are encoded in the genome and therefore we reason that these
small RNAs are transcribed de novo in each generation, compensating in the
next generation for stress-induced erasure of the parental molecules.
A

B

endo-siRNAs-induced silencing

piRNAs-induced silencing

Control

Control

Stress

Stress

Stress

No stress

Stress

No stress

F1

F2

F1

F2

Figure 2: Stress resets endo-siRNAs and piRNAs-induced silencing
A. Representative images of worms expressing endo-siRNAs sensor (left) or the
piRNAs sensor (right) under control or stress (HS) conditions.
B. The graph displays the measured GFP (left, endo-siRNAs sensor) or mCherry (right,
piRNAs sensor) fluorescence levels of individual worms (y-axis) across generations
under the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the value of an individual
worm. Shown are the median of each group, with box limits representing the 25th
(Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were
obtained using Dunn’s test. Not significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (*) indicates
q<0.05, and (***) indicates q<0.001 (see Methods).

We then tested whether the ability of stress to reset heritable small RNA
responses depends on the developmental stage or the generation in which stress
is applied after the initial RNAi event:
As was observed when stress was applied during the L1 stage, we found
that stressing adult worms also led to resetting of heritable silencing (q<0.0001,
Supplementary Figure 1). Thus, stress-induced resetting of RNAi inheritance is
not restricted to the L1 stage.
While exposing the F1 generation to stress led to erasure of the heritable
silencing response (as described in Figure 1B), when stress was applied two
generations after exposure to dsRNA, we did not detect statistically-significant
stress-induced resetting (Figure 3A). In accordance with these results, we
previously showed that re-challenging the F1 but not F2 progeny with RNAi
extends the duration of ancestral RNAi responses (Houri-Ze’evi et al., 2016).
Together, these results reveal a critical period, at the F1 generation, during which
heritable silencing is still plastic.
Exposure to stress can be viewed simply as a change in the growing
conditions, from non-stressful to stressful settings. We wondered whether any
form of change – and not just stress – could lead to resetting of heritable small
RNA responses. To test this hypothesis, we examined how an “improvement” in
the cultivation conditions would affect small RNA inheritance. We exposed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

parents that were grown under stressful conditions to RNAi and examined the
heritable response in progeny grown in non-stressful conditions (see scheme in
Figure 3B). We found that resetting occurs only in response to stress (qvalue<0.0001, Figure 3B), and not when the progeny of stressed worms is
transferred to non-stressful conditions. In contrast, we observed that RNAi
responses initiated in stressed parents are strengthened when the progeny is
transferred to non-stressful conditions (q-value<0.0053, Figure 3B). Accordingly,
RNAi inheritance was weaker in worms that were grown in stressful conditions
for two consecutive generations than in worms maintained in non-stressful
conditions for the same time (q-value<0.0001, Figure 3B). Thus, stress, and not
just any change, leads to resetting of heritable small RNA responses, regardless
of the ancestral growth conditions.
B.

A.
Initiation of a heritable
silencing response

Initiation of a heritable silencing response
No stress

P0

F1

Stress (3)

F1

No stress
No stress

F2

No stress

No stress

Stress

Stress (3)
Stress at F2

Stress

**

No stress No stress
to
to
No stress
Stress

F2 generation

No stress

***

***
Stress at F1

Stress

P0

Stress
to
Stress

Stress
to
No stress

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: Resetting of heritable small RNA responses can only occur during the F1
generations and is induced specifically by stress
A. Stress applied two generations after the initiation of the heritable small RNAs response
does not reset the inheritance. Upper panel: Experimental scheme. A heritable anti-gfp
small RNA response is initiated at the first generation and the progeny are then subjected
to three different stress types (heat shock, hyperosmotic stress, starvation). Stress is
applied at the first generation (F1) or the second generation (F2) after the initiation of the
heritable response. Inheritance of the ancestral response is scored at the F2 generation.
Lower panel: The ability of stress to reset heritable small RNAs depends on the
generation during which stress is applied. Worms which were stressed two generations
after the initiation of RNAi did not show any altered inheritance dynamics. The graph
displays the measured GFP fluorescence levels of individual worms (y-axis) across
generations under the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the value of an
individual worm. Shown are the median of each group, with box limits representing the
25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and
whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were obtained
using Dunn’s test. Not significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05 and (***) indicates q<0.001 (see
Methods).

B. Shifting from stress to non-stress conditions fails to reset small RNA inheritance. Upper
panel: Experimental scheme. Worms grown in regular growth conditions (20°C, control)
or in high temperatures (25°C, stress) are exposed to an anti-gfp RNAi trigger. The next
generation are then grown either in similar conditions (control to control, stress to stress)
or transferred to the other growth condition (control to stress, stress to control). Lower
panel: Stress, and not any change in the environment, resets heritable small RNAs.
Worms which were exposed to high temperatures at the next generation reset the RNAiinduced gfp silencing regardless of the growth conditions at the previous generation. The
graph displays the measured GFP fluorescence levels of individual worms (y-axis) under

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the value of an individual worm.
Shown are the median of each group, with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th
(Q3) percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and whiskers indicating
Q1-1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were obtained using Dunn’s test.
not significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (**) indicates q<0.01 and (***) indicate q<0.001
(see Methods).

To study whether stress-induced resetting is a regulated process, we
examined mutants defective in different stress pathways. Out of the 9 mutants
defective in stress responses that we examined, only two (daf-16, aak-1/2) did
not show altered RNAi inheritance dynamics. Interestingly, daf-16 was shown to
be involved in heritable “mortal germline” phenotype (Mrt) (Simon et al., 2018)
and aak-1/2 was implicated in regulating transgenerational consequences of
starvation (Demoinet et al., 2017). The remaining 7 mutants showed either
defective (mek-1/sek-1, kgb-1, hsf-1) or enhanced (pmk-1, sek-1, skn-1, daf-2)
RNAi inheritance (Figure 4A and Supplementary Figure 2 and 3). This was true
irrespectively of whether the mutant progeny experienced stress or not and could
suggest that stress regulation and small RNA inheritance are interconnected.
We next examined whether these genes are not only involved in RNAi
inheritance but also in its resetting in response to stress. We found that MAP
Kinase (MAPK) genes (sek-1/mek-1, sek-1, pmk-1, kgb-1), and the skn-1 gene
(encoding a transcription factor which is regulated by p38 MAPK-dependent
phosphorylation) are required specifically for resetting of RNAi inheritance in
response to stress (Figure 4B, 4C, and Supplementary Figure 2 and 3).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/669051; this version posted June 13, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The MAPK pathway is necessary for integrating responses to multiple
types of stress, such as DNA damage (Bianco and Schumacher, 2018;
Ermolaeva et al., 2013), osmotic stress (Gerke et al., 2014), heat shock
(Mertenskötter et al., 2013), and pathogen infection (Troemel et al., 2006).
Interestingly, we found that some of the mutants that did not reset heritable
silencing following stress showed enhanced RNAi inheritance (sek-1, pmk-1,
skn-1, acting in the same signaling cascade), while others were defective in RNAi
inheritance (sek-1/mek-1 and kgb-1) (Figure 4). Thus, the ability to reset
heritable responses following stress, and the ability to transmit RNAi, appear to
be two distinct functions. Overall, we conclude that resetting of heritable silencing
following stress is a regulated process which is mediated by the MAPK pathway
and by the skn-1 transcription factor.

A

B

C
MAP3K

MLK-1

NSY-1

MAP2K

MEK-1

SEK-1

MAPK

KGB-1

PMK-1

mek-1;sek-1

i

VHP-1

SKN-1
sek-1

ii

F1

F2

F1

F1

F2
skn-1

v

F2

F2
kgb-1

iii

pmk-1

iv

F1

F1

F2

Figure 4: The MAPK pathway and the SKN-1 transcription factor regulate small RNAs
resetting in response to stress
A. Mutants defected in stress processing pathways display altered heritable RNAi
dynamics. Heatmap representing the log2-fold change of GFP fluorescence levels
(color coded and indicated numbers) in mutants worms compared to WT at the F1
(up) and F2 (down) generations after RNAi. Shown are results under normal
conditions (no stress). FDR-corrected values were obtained using Dunn’s test. The
comparison values of each mutant were calculated based on its independent
experiments (see full results in Supplementary Figure 2 and 3).
B. Members of C. elegans’ MAPK pathway, found to influence resetting of small RNAs.
Based on (Ewbank, 2006; Inoue et al., 2005; Kim et al., 2004; Mizuno et al., 2008)
C. Mutants defected in the MAPK signaling pathway do not reset heritable RNAi
responses following stress. The graphs display the measured germline GFP
fluorescence levels of mutant worms (y-axis) across generations under the indicated
condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the value of an individual worm. Each mutant
was examined in an independent experiment. Shown are the median of each group,
with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles, notch
representing a 95% confidence interval, and whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and
Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were obtained using Dunn’s test. Not significant
(ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (*) indicates q<0.05, (**) indicates q<0.01, and (***) indicates
q<0.001, see Methods). Full results (including the side-by-side wild-type results of
each experiment) can be found in Supplementary Figure 2 and 3.

To examine how stress-induced resetting affects the heritable small RNA
molecules, we used small RNA sequencing. Endogenous small RNAs align to
large parts of the genome, and their inheritance is especially important for
transgenerational regulation of germline expressed transcripts (de Albuquerque
et al., 2015; Gu et al., 2009; Phillips et al., 2015). We sequenced small RNAs
from worms which were stressed at the L1 stage (starvation, heat shock,
hyperosmotic conditions) and from their progeny (see scheme in Figure 5A and
Methods). The sequencing results revealed that the overall levels of
endogenous small RNAs decrease in response to each of the three stresses
(See Figure 5B and Methods). Specifically, the levels of endogenous small
RNAs which align in the antisense orientation to protein-coding genes, noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs), and pseudogenes were all significantly reduced
following stress (Figure 5B).
In worms that were directly exposed to stress, all three types of stress
conditions led to resetting of heritable endogenous small RNA levels. However,
across multiple repeats (see Methods), different stressors shape the small RNA
pools of the next generation in different ways (Figure 5B). Non-stressed progeny
that derive from starved parents maintained the reduction in the overall levels of
the different types of endogenous small RNA in all three repeats. In contrast, in
non-stressed progeny that were derived from heat-shocked parents the levels of
most types of endogenous small RNAs were elevated. We did not detect a
consistent heritable change in the global levels of endogenous small RNAs in

non-stressed progeny that derive from parents that experienced hyperosmotic
stress (Figure 5B).
When comparing all samples derived from stressed worms, we identified a
list of 281 genes that were targeted by stress-affected endogenous small RNAs
with high confidence (FDR<0.1, Figure 5C, 5D and Supplementary Table 1). In
the non-stressed progeny of these worms, we did not detect wide-spread
changes in stress-affected small RNAs (only 10 genes were targeted by such
small RNAs, Supplementary Table 2). In 72% (202/281) of the gene targets of
stress-affected small RNAs, the targeting small RNAs were down-regulated, or
“reset”, following stress. The small RNAs which target the remaining 79 (28%)
genes were up-regulated following stress and were almost exclusively CSR-1dependent endo-siRNAs (hypergeometric test, p-value=2.9 e-48, 96% were found
to be physically bound to CSR-1, (Claycomb et al., 2009)) (Figure 5E). Unlike
other endo-siRNAs, CSR-1 endo-siRNAs were demonstrated to promote gene
expression rather than gene silencing (Wedeles et al., 2013). The endogenous
small RNAs that were down-regulated following stress exhibited a strong
enrichment for mutator-dependent small RNAs (FDR= 2.2e-75, (Phillips et al.,
2014; Yang et al., 2016; Zhang et al., 2011)); Small RNAs which are reset
following stress overlap with small RNAs that are depleted due to defects in
proteins which are localized to the mutator foci, granules that are required for
small RNA amplification (Phillips et al., 2012) (see Figure 5C and 5E). These
proteins (mut-16, mut-14;smut-1 (Phillips et al., 2014; Zhang et al., 2011)) were
shown to be involved in multiple endogenous small RNA biogenesis pathways,

affecting both somatic and germline small RNAs, and are required for efficient
small RNA amplification and cleavage of target RNAs (rde-8 and nyn-1;nyn-2
(Tsai et al., 2015)). Interestingly, generation of mut-14;smut-1;mut-16 triple
mutants was shown to enable erasure of heritable small RNA-based memory of
self and non-self genes (de Albuquerque et al., 2015; Phillips et al., 2015). We
further found that targets of stress-reduced small RNAs are enriched for dsRNAproducing loci (FDR=0.0019) (Saldi et al., 2014) and for piRNAs gene targets
(FDR= 3.2e-07) (Bagijn et al., 2012) (See full list of enrichments in
Supplementary Table 3). Out of the gene targets of stress-affected small RNAs,
31/281 (FDR=2.8e-14) were previously identified as genes which are targeted by
small RNAs transgenerationally in response to L1 starvation (Rechavi et al.,
2014). Further, the 281 genes targeted by stress-affected small RNAs show
enrichment for stress-related functions. As a group, these genes were shown to
be regulated by the TGF-beta pathway (FDR=2.4e-08) (Shaw et al., 2007), the
insulin pathway (FDR=1.2e-08) (Halaschek-Wiener et al., 2005), and to be
affected in response to rapamycin exposure (FDR=0.0023 (Calvert et al., 2016)),
and changes in temperature (FDR=0.0027 (Viñuela et al., 2011)). Specifically, we
found a significant enrichment for target genes which are regulated by SKN-1
and by KGB-1 (FDR=0.00095 and FDR= 0.032 respectively), which we identified
as regulators of stress-induced resetting of small RNAs (Figure 4C and
Supplementary Figure 2). Overall, our sequencing data show that different
types of stress dramatically reshape the heritable small RNA pool, affecting in
particular stress-related targets.

A

B
Non-stressed
progeny (P)

S

P

S

P

S

P

S

P

Log2 Fold-change

Stress (S)
Control
(C)
Heat Shock
(HS)
Osmotic Stress
(OSM)
Starvation
(STR)

S
Small RNAs
Sequencing

All annotated
features

Protein
Coding

Pseudogenes

ncRNAs

P

miRNAs

Small RNAs which target:

C
2.5

Stress-reset
small RNAs

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
-0.5
-1
-1.5
-2
-2.5

Stressupregulated
small RNAs

D

STR OSM HS HS OSM STR OSM HS STR

Small RNA reads antisense to F31E9.11
1st Repeat

2nd Repeat

C

C

E

3rd Repeat

mut-16
m u t-1 6
down

Control

C

rde-8/
nyn-1;2
rd e 8 d

csr-1
c s r1 d o w n

hrde-1
h rd e

down

down

Stressreset small
RNAs

Heat
Shock
Osmotic
Stress

Stressupregulated
small RNAs

Starvation
Reads
count

Genomic
location

m u t-1 6

rd e 8 d

up

up

c s r1 u p

h rd e
up

Figure 5: Genome-wide small RNA changes following stress
A. Experimental scheme. Worms were exposed to stress during their first larval stage
and were collected for RNA extraction and small RNA sequencing on the first day of
adulthood. The next generation was grown under normal conditions (See Methods).
B. Changes in total small RNA levels aligning to various genomic features. Presented
are the Log2 fold-change values (y-axis) for each condition (color coded) when
compared to the control. Each dot represents one independent biological repeat.
C. Clustering of the 281 stress-affected small RNA targets, based on their normalized
total number of reads in each sample (4 different conditions in 3 independent
biological repeats). Hierarchical clustering was performed with Spearman's rank
correlation as a distance metric and 'average' linkage. The data have been
standardized across all columns for each gene, so that the mean is 0 and the
standard deviation is 1.
D. An example of a stress-affected small RNAs target. The F31E9.11 gene is covered
by small RNAs which are reset across all stress conditions. Shown are the
normalized read counts (y-axis) as function of genomic location (x-axis) of small
RNAs targeting the F31E9.11 gene. Exons appear on a grey background.
E. Overlap of targets of stress-affected small RNAs with known targets of different small
RNA pathways. Each square represents the proportional overlap of reset (upper row)
or up-regulated (bottom row) small RNA targets with known targets of the indicated
small RNA pathways. Shown are results for MUT-16-dependent small RNA targets
(Zhang et al., 2011), NYN-1;2/RDE-8-dependent small RNA targets (Tsai et al.,
2015), CSR-1-bound small RNA targets (Claycomb et al., 2009) and HRDE-1-bound
small RNA targets (Buckley et al., 2012).

In a previous study, we found that MET-2, a methyltransferase required for
mono- and di-methylation of H3K9, is essential for termination of RNAi
inheritance, and that in met-2 mutants aberrant endo-siRNAs accumulate over
generations, leading eventually to sterility (Mortal Germline, Mrt phenotype) (Lev
et al., 2017). Interestingly, the targets of stress-affected small RNAs were
enriched for genes which were previously found to be mis-regulated in met-2
mutants (FDR=2.1e-05) (Zeller et al., 2016) and we found that these genes have
exceptionally high levels of H3K9me2 (Figure 6A, Supplementary Figure 4A
and Methods).
We therefore examined if MET-2’s regulation over RNAi inheritance is
required also for the resetting that follows exposure to stress. We found that
MET-2 is essential for stress-induced resetting of heritable RNAi (Figure 6B).
Further, even when we examined inheritance of weak RNAi responses (by
tittering down the amount of dsRNA used to induce RNAi), met-2 mutants were
resistant to small RNAs resetting (Supplementary Figure 4B). Thus, MET-2 is
required for the execution of stress-induced small RNA resetting, even when
accounting for the exceptionally strong RNAi inheritance in met-2 mutants.
In summary, we found that worms erase heritable small RNAs in response
to stress, and that stress response pathways affect the dynamics of RNAi
inheritance. Resetting is an actively regulated process which depend on the
MET-2 methyltransferase. This mechanism can be important for ensuring
heritable small RNAs maintain environment-relevant genes regulation programs.

B

H3K9me2

A

Averaged signal

Randomized sets

F1

F2
Wild-type

F1

F2

met-2 mutants
Re-synthesis of
heritable small RNAs

C

No change

STRESS
MAPK
SKN-1
MET-2

Non-stressful
change

THE NEXT
GENERATIONS

Small RNA Resetting

Termination of
Inheritance

Figure 6: Stress-induced small RNA resetting depends on the H3K9 methyltransferase
MET-2
A. Targets of stress-affected small RNAs show significantly increased H3K9me2 marks.
An analysis of H3K9me2 signal (based on published data from (McMurchy et al.,
2017)). Presented is the averaged H3K9me2 signal (y-axis) of all protein coding
genes (blue) and target genes of stress-affected small RNAs (red). All genes are
aligned according to their Transcription Start Sites (TSS), and the regions of 500
base pairs upstream and downstream of the TSS are shown on the x-axis. Each gray
line (right panel) represents the average of a random set of genes (500 iterations)
equal in size to the set of target genes of stress-affected small RNAs.

B. met-2 mutant worms do not reset heritable small RNAs in response to stress. The

graph displays the measured germline GFP fluorescence levels of wild-type and met2 mutant worms (y-axis) across generations under the indicated condition (x-axis).
Each dot represents the value of an individual worm. Shown are the median of each
group, with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles, notch
representing a 95% confidence interval, and whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and
Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were obtained using Dunn’s test. Not significant
(ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (*) indicates q<0.05, and (***) indicates q<0.001, see
Methods).
C. A model summarizing stress-induced resetting of heritable small RNAs. Small RNAs

from both endogenous and exogenous sources are reset in response to stress.
Resetting is mediated by the MAPK pathway, the SKN-1 transcription factor and the
H3K9 methyltransferase MET-2. Endogenous small RNAs which are encoded in the
genome are re-synthesized in the next generations, while small RNAs from
exogenous sources and transient responses are eliminated.

Discussion
In this study we found that stress leads to resetting of transgenerationally
transmitted small RNAs, erasing heritable gene regulatory responses. Stressinduced resetting depends on the MAPK pathway and the SKN-1 transcription
factor, and is regulated by MET-2, an H3K9 methyltransferase that is required for
germline reprogramming (Kerr et al., 2014). We found that stress induces a
reduction in small RNA levels across the genome. This reduction stems from
changes in multiple distinct small RNA species, including small RNAs that
regulate stress-related genes. We speculate that a mechanism for resetting of

heritable small RNAs could be adaptive in rapidly changing environments (See
model in Figure 6C).
We previously described a tunable mechanism that controls the duration
of heritable RNAi responses and found that ancestral RNAi responses can be
enhanced by non-target-specific reactivation of the RNAi system in the progeny
(Houri-Ze’evi et al., 2016). We hypothesized that when both parents and progeny
are challenged by dsRNA-induced RNAi it could be beneficial for the worms to
extend the duration of ancestral RNAi responses. We reasoned this could be the
case since under these circumstances the child’s environment resembles the
parent’s, and therefore the heritable response could still be relevant for the
progeny. In contrast, stress-induced resetting of heritable small RNAs, the
phenomenon described in this manuscript, could unburden descendants from
heritable information that is no longer relevant.
Accumulating evidence from the past two decades, collected in different
organisms, suggest that stress can lead to intergenerational and
transgenerational epigenetic changes (Bohacek and Mansuy, 2015). In certain
instances, stress was found to lead to transient heritable reduction in small RNAs
and chromatin marks (Belicard et al., 2018; Klosin and Lehner, 2016). Such
heritable effects on chromatin were referred to as “epigenetic wounds” which
“heal” following gradual re-accumulation of the marks over generations (Klosin
and Lehner, 2016). Our results suggest that reduction in small RNAs following
stress is an active and regulated process which is initiated by stress-signaling
pathways (and specifically, the MAPK pathway).

Active removal of epigenetic regulation in response to stress could serve
as a mechanism for increasing genetic and phenotypic variability. Small RNAs in
C.elegans distinguish between self and non-self genes (Shirayama et al., 2012),
and orchestrate gene expression in the germline and during development (Feng
and Guang, 2013; Gu et al., 2009; Han et al., 2009). Relieving the regulation of
heritable small RNAs could be a way to increase phenotypic plasticity or to reveal
hidden genetic variability. For example, a conserved microRNA in flies was
shown to buffer developmental programs against variation (Li et al., 2009).
We have recently found that changes in neuronal small RNA levels
generate transgenerational effects (Posner et al., in Press). Similarly, it has been
shown that olfactory memory can become heritable (Moore et al., 2018; Pereira
et al., 2019; Remy, 2010). The systemic response to stress that KGB-1, SKN-1
and SEK-1 mediate (factors which are shown here to be required for resetting)
was shown in the past to be coordinated by the nervous system (Bishop and
Guarente, 2007; Liu et al., 2018; Shivers et al., 2009). Therefore, it could be
interesting to understand if and how resetting of heritable small RNAs is
controlled by neuronal activity.
Non-DNA-based inheritance could be involved in multiple human
disorders (Crews et al., 2014; Nilsson et al., 2018; Tucci et al., 2019). It is still
unclear whether the same mechanisms that allow transgenerational inheritance
in worms exist in mammals (Horsthemke, 2018). If analogous mechanisms are
indeed conserved, understanding the pathways that counteract transmission or

maintenance of heritable small RNAs could aid in prevention or treatment of
various diseases.

Acknowledgments
We thank all members of the Rechavi lab for fruitful discussions and for
their support. Some strains were provided by the CGC, which is funded by NIH
Office of Research Infrastructure Programs (P40 OD010440). We thank the
Richard Roy lab for providing strain MR1175 (aak-1/2) and the Julie Ahringer lab
for providing strain JA1527. We thank Yoav Ze’evi (statistics unit, Yoav
Benjamini’s group) for his help with the statistical analysis. O.R is thankful to the
Adelis foundation grant #0604916191. L.H-Z. is thankful to the Clore foundation.
The Rechavi lab is funded by ERC grant #335624 and the Israel Science
Foundation (grant#1339/17).

Supplementary Figures

Stress during
adulthood

No stress

Supplementary Figure 1: Stress resets heritable small RNAs even when applied during
adulthood. Related to Figure 1.
Stress applied during adulthood leads to resetting of heritable silencing in the next
generation. The graph displays the measured germline GFP fluorescence levels of individual
worms (y-axis) across generations under the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot
represents the value of an individual worm. Shown are the median of each group, with box
limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles, notch representing a 95%
confidence interval, and whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected

values were obtained using Dunn’s test. Not significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05 and (***)
indicates q<0.001 (see Methods).

A

B

C

D

E

Supplementary Figure 2: Multiple stress signaling and processing pathways affect
heritable RNAi dynamics and stress-induced resetting of heritable silencing. Related
to Figure 4.
The graphs display the measured germline GFP fluorescence levels of mutant worms (yaxis) across generations under the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the
value of an individual worm. Each mutant was examined in an independent experiment.
Shown are the median of each group, with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3)
percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and whiskers indicating Q11.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were obtained using Dunn’s test. Not
significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (*) indicates q<0.05, (**) indicates q<0.01, and (***)

indicates q<0.001, see Methods). Each mutant strain was examined side-by-side with WT
worms.
i.

sek-1 mutants do not reset a heritable silencing response following stress

ii. pmk-1 mutants do not reset a heritable silencing response following stress
iii. mek/sek-1 mutants do not reset a heritable silencing response following
stress
iv. kgb-1 mutants do not reset a heritable silencing response following stress
v. skn-1 hypomorphs do not reset a heritable silencing response following
stress

A

B

C

Supplementary Figure 3: Mutations in daf-16, aak-1/2 and daf-2 genes do not affect
stress-induced resetting of heritable responses. Related to Figure 4.
The graphs display the measured germline GFP fluorescence levels of mutant worms (yaxis) across generations under the indicated condition (x-axis). Each dot represents the
value of an individual worm. Each mutant was examined in an independent experiment.
Shown are the median of each group, with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3)
percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and whiskers indicating Q1-

1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values were obtained using Dunn’s test. Not
significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (*) indicates q<0.05, (**) indicates q<0.01, and (***)
indicates q<0.001, see Methods). Each mutant strain was examined side-by-side with WT
worms.
i.

daf-16 mutants show regular RNAi inheritance dynamics and reset a
heritable silencing response following stress.

ii. aak-1/2 mutants show regular RNAi inheritance dynamics and reset a
heritable silencing response following stress.
iii. daf-2 mutants show enhanced RNAi inheritance dynamics and reset a
heritable silencing response following stress.

A

H3K9me3 marks

H3K9me2 marks

B

WT

OD=2

F1 Generation

OD=0.5

met-2 mutants

OD=2

OD=0.5

Supplementary Figure 4: Targets of stress-affected small RNAs show
unique H3K9 marks and the H3K9 methyltransferase met-2 is required for
the execution of small RNA resetting. Related to Figure 6.
A. Targets of stress-affected small RNAs show significantly different
H3K9me2 and H3K9me3 marks. An analysis of H3K9me2 and H3K9me3
signals (based on published data from (McMurchy et al., 2017)). All genes
are aligned according to their Transcription Start Sites (TSS), and the
regions of 500 base pairs upstream and downstream of the TSS are

shown on the x axis. The y axis shows the averaged signal of the
H3K9me2 (left panel) and H3K9me3 (right panel) modifications as a
function of distance from the TSS. The chromatin modification profile is
shown for 3 genes sets: all protein coding (yellow), set of genes that are
up-regulated in stress (blue) and set of genes that are down-regulated in
stress (red). Each gray line represents the average of a random set of
genes equal in size to the set of up-regulated (upper panels) or downregulated (lower panels) genes.
B. met-2 mutants do not reset heritable silencing even when weaker RNAi
inheritance responses are induced. WT and met-2 worms are exposed at
the P0 generation to dsRNA-producing bacteria of varying concentrations
(either OD=2 or OD=0.5) and examined for stress-induced resetting at the
F1 generation.
The graphs display the measured germline GFP fluorescence levels of
WT and met-2 mutant worms (y-axis) under the indicated condition (xaxis). Each dot represents the value of an individual worm. Shown are the
median of each group, with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th
(Q3) percentiles, notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and
whiskers indicating Q1-1.5*IQR and Q3+1.5*IQR. FDR-corrected values
were obtained using Dunn’s test. Not significant (ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05,
(**) indicates q<0.01, and (***) indicates q<0.001, see Methods).

Materials and Methods
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Worms’ maintenance
Standard culture techniques were used to maintain the nematodes. The
worms were grown on Nematode Growth Medium (NGM) plates and fed with
OP50 bacteria. Except when otherwise noted, all experiments were performed at
20°C. The worms were kept fed for at least five generations before the beginning
of each experiment. Extreme care was taken to avoid contamination or
starvation. Contaminated plates were discarded from the analysis. All
experiments were performed with at least 3 biological replicates. The nematode
strains used in this study are indicated in the Key Resources Table.
RNAi treatment
The standard assay for RNAi by feeding was carried out as previously
described (Kamath et al., 2000): HT115 bacteria that transcribe dsRNA targeting
gfp, or control HT115 bacteria that only contain an empty vector plasmid, were
grown in LB containing Carbenicillin 1:1000, and were than seeded on NGM
plates that contain Carbenicillin 1:1000 and IPTG 1:1000. In the generation of
worms that was exposed to RNAi (P0), worms were cultivated on those plates.
In experiments where the concentration of RNAi bacteria was controlled, a
spectrophotometer was used to measure optical density at OD600. HT115
bacteria were diluted with empty vector bacteria to 2 OD and 0.5 OD.
L1 stress

Synchronized eggs were obtained by bleaching gravid adult worms. The
progeny was then subjected to the various stress conditions.
Heat shock
Heat shock treatment was performed at 37°C. The nematodes were heat
shocked 24 hours after the bleach treatment, for a duration of 120 minutes. After
heat shock, the treated worms were placed back in an incubator set to 20°C, with
each plate placed in a separate location (not in a pile) to avoid temperature
differences between top/bottom plates and the middle plates.
Hyperosmotic stress
After bleach, the obtained eggs were seeded on high-salt growth media
plates (350mM NaCl) and were grown on these plates for 48 hours. After 48
hours, the worms were washed off with M9 buffer onto regular NGM plates.
Starvation
For starvation conditions, the nematodes were grown on empty NGM
plates and were maintained this way for a total of 6 days. After 6 days, the worms
were washed off with M9 onto regular NGM plates seeded with OP50 bacteria. In
the experiment with aak-1/2 double mutants, both the wild-type and mutant
worms were starved for 3 days instead of 6 days, due to starvation-sensitivity of
the mutants.
In the experiments described in Figure 2b (a reverse change in settings;
from stressed conditions to regular growth conditions), P0 nematodes were
grown to adulthood on plates with RNAi bacteria in either a 20°C or a 25°C. The

nematodes were bleached in adulthood, and their progeny were grown to
adulthood on NGM plates either in a 20°C or a 25°C.
Adults stress
In the adult stress assays (Supplementary Figure 1b), stress conditions
were applied when the worms reached young adulthood, with heat shock lasting
one hour, hyperosmotic stress lasting 24 hours, and starvation lasting 48 hours.
The next generations
In both assays (L1 and adults stress), the next generation of worms was
cultured by randomly picking several mothers from each plate to a fresh plate
and allowing them to lay eggs for few hours (8-24 hours). The number of picked
worms and length of egg-laying period were constant within each experiment
across all plates and conditions.
piRNAs- and endo-siRNAs-derived silencing assays
To obtain expression of the piRNAs-silenced mCherry and the endosiRNAs-silenced GFP, worms were grown in 25°C for 3 generations and then
transferred back to recovery at 20°C. After two generations, worms were
bleached and assayed for the different stress conditions, as described above.
Fluorescence microscopy
We used an Olympus BX63 microscope for fluorescence microscopy
assays. Experiments were filmed with a 10X objective lens, with an exposure
time of 750ms.
Small RNAs sequencing
Collecting the worms

Total RNA was extracted from “day one” adults. As stress induces
variability in development even in isogenic worms’ populations, tight
synchronization of the worms’ populations was achieved by picking L4 worms
one day prior to collecting the worms for sequencing. Each experiment started by
exposure of the generation before stress to an anti-gfp RNAi trigger to enable the
phenotypic detection of resetting in the next generations. All sequencing
experiments were done in triplicates (independent biological replicates).
Libraries preparation
Worms were lysed using the TRIzol® reagent (Life Technologies) followed
by repetitive freezing, thawing, and vortex. The total RNA samples were treated
with tobacco acid pyrophosphatase (TAP, Epicenter), to ensure 5′
monophosphate-independent capturing of small RNAs. Libraries were prepared
using the NEBNext® Small RNA Library Prep Set for Illumina® according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The resulting cDNAs were separated on a 4% agarose
E-Gel (Invitrogen, Life Technologies), and the 140–160 nt length species were
selected. cDNA was purified using the MinElute Gel Extraction kit (QIAGEN).
Libraries were sequenced using an Illumina NextSeq500 instrument.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Fluorescence analysis; GFP
Using the ImageJ Fiji “measure” function (Schindelin et al., 2012), we
measured the integrated density of the three germline nuclei closest to
spermatheca in each worm, as well as a mean background measurement of the

worm in the germline’s vicinity. If less than three germline nuclei were visible, a
measurement was taken in the estimated location of the germline instead. The
corrected total cell fluorescence (CTCF) of each germline nucleus was calculated
as previously described. We used the mean of all three CTCF scores as the
worm’s fluorescence score.
Fluorescence analysis; piRNAs- and endo-siRNAs-derived silencing
Using Fiji (Schindelin et al., 2012), we have measured the integrated
density of the whole worm, as well as one background measurement per worm.
The corrected total fluorescence (CTF) of each worm was calculated as
described above.
Statistical analyses
Due to the highly variable nature of small RNA inheritance and erasure,
we have elected to analyze our data using two - tailed Dunn’s multiple
comparison test. We corrected for multiple comparisons using the BenjaminiHochberg false discovery rate (FDR), with an FDR of 0.05. The q-values reported
in this study are adjusted to multiple comparisons. In the figures, not significant
(ns) indicates q ≥ 0.05, (*) indicates q<0.05, (**) indicate q<0.01, and (***)
indicate q<0.001. Unless marked otherwise in the figures, comparisons were
made between each stressed group and its corresponding unstressed control
group.
Box plot graphs
Data are the individual worms’ mean germline CTCF, with each dot
representing the measurement of a single worm. Data are represented as

medians, with box limits representing the 25th (Q1) and 75th (Q3) percentiles,
notch representing a 95% confidence interval, and whiskers indicating Q11.5*IQR and Q3+1.5IQR. The minimal value of each experiment was set at 0 and
the other values were adjusted accordingly.
Small RNA-seq Analysis
The Illumina fastq output files were first assessed for quality, using
FastQC (Andrews, 2010), and compared to the FastQC-provided example of
small RNA sequencing results. The files were then assigned to adapters clipping
using Cutadapt (Martin, 2011) and the following specifications were used:
cutadapt -m 15 -a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCT input.fastq >
output.fastq
-m 15: discard reads which are shorter than 15 nucleotides after the adapter
clipping process
-a AGATCGGAAGAGCACACGTCT: the 3’ adapter sequence used as a query
The clipped reads were then aligned against the ce11 version of the C. elegans
genome using ShortStack (Shahid and Axtell, 2014) using the default settings:
ShortStack --readfile Input.fastq –genomefile Ce11Reference.fa
Next, we counted reads which align in the sense or antisense orientation to
genes. Since stress is known to affect the abundance of structural RNA
molecules, we omitted reads which align to structural genes from our analyses.
We used the python-based script HTSeq-count (Anders et al., 2014) and the
Ensembl-provided gff file (release-95), using the following command:
Antisense:

HTSeq.scripts.count --stranded=reverse --mode=union input.sam
GENES.gff > output.txt
Sense:
HTSeq.scripts.count --stranded=yes --mode=union input.sam GENES.gff
> output.txt
We then assigned the summarized counts for differential expression analysis
using the R package DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014) and limited the hits for genes
which were shown to have an FDR<0.1. Normalization of the total number of
reads in each sample, and the total number of reads which align to the different
types of genomic features (Figure 5b) was generated based on the SizeFactor
normalization provided by the DESeq2 package (the median ratio method).
Plotting H3K9me2 and H3K9me3 profiles
Chip-Seq data were downloaded from GSE87522. The transcription start
site (TSS) of all the protein coding genes in C. elegans were extracted from
UCSC Genome Browser. We aligned all the genes according to their
Transcription Start Sites (TSS) and extracted the signal along the flanking
regions of 500 base pairs upstream and downstream of the TSS. In the case of
genes with two transcripts or more, we averaged the histone modification signal
of all the corresponding transcripts. The signal of individual genes was
determined as the averaged signal of the two published replicates of each
chromatin modification.

DATA AVAILABILITY
Description: Small RNAs sequencing Fastq and count files.
Sequencing and count files have been deposited in the GEO under ID code
GSE129988

Supplementary Tables:
1. Supplementary Table 1: 281 targets of small RNAs which are affected
across all stress conditions at the stress generation. Table presents
DESeq2 comparison of Control vs. Stress samples. Related to Figure 5.
2. Supplementary Table 2: 10 targets of small RNAs which are affected
across all stress conditions at the next generation. Table presents
DESeq2 comparison of Control vs. Stress samples. Related to Figure 5.
3. Supplementary Table 3: Enrichment table for the 281 targets of stress
affected genes, generated using WormExp (Yang et al., 2016). Related to
Figure 5.

References
de Albuquerque, B.F.M., Placentino, M., and Ketting, R.F. (2015). Maternal
piRNAs Are Essential for Germline Development following De Novo
Establishment of Endo-siRNAs in Caenorhabditis elegans. Dev. Cell 34, 448–
456.
Alcazar, R.M., Lin, R., and Fire, A.Z. (2008). Transmission dynamics of heritable
silencing induced by double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genetics
180, 1275–1288.
Anders, S., Pyl, P.T., and Huber, W. (2014). HTSeq A Python framework to work
with high-throughput sequencing data (Cold Spring Harbor Labs Journals).
Andrews, S. (2010). FastQC A Quality Control tool for High Throughput
Sequence Data. Http://Www.Bioinformatics.Babraham.Ac.Uk/Projects/Fastqc/.
Ashe, A., Sapetschnig, A., Weick, E.-M., Mitchell, J., Bagijn, M.P., Cording, A.C.,
Doebley, A.-L., Goldstein, L.D., Lehrbach, N.J., Le Pen, J., et al. (2012). piRNAs
can trigger a multigenerational epigenetic memory in the germline of C. elegans.
Cell 150, 88–99.
Bagijn, M.P., Goldstein, L.D., Sapetschnig, A., Weick, E.-M., Bouasker, S.,
Lehrbach, N.J., Simard, M.J., and Miska, E.A. (2012). Function, targets, and
evolution of Caenorhabditis elegans piRNAs. Science 337, 574–578.
Belicard, T., Jareosettasin, P., and Sarkies, P. (2018). The piRNA pathway
responds to environmental signals to establish intergenerational adaptation to
stress. BMC Biol. 16, 103.
Bianco, J.N., and Schumacher, B. (2018). MPK-1/ERK pathway regulates DNA

damage response during development through DAF-16/FOXO. Nucleic Acids
Res. 46, 6129–6139.
Billi, A.C., Alessi, A.F., Khivansara, V., Han, T., Freeberg, M., Mitani, S., and
Kim, J.K. (2012). The Caenorhabditis elegans HEN1 ortholog, HENN-1,
methylates and stabilizes select subclasses of germline small RNAs. PLoS
Genet. 8, e1002617.
Bishop, N.A., and Guarente, L. (2007). Two neurons mediate diet-restrictioninduced longevity in C. elegans. Nature 447, 545–549.
Bohacek, J., and Mansuy, I.M. (2015). Molecular insights into transgenerational
non-genetic inheritance of acquired behaviours. Nat. Rev. Genet. 16, 641–652.
Buckley, B.A., Burkhart, K.B., Gu, S.G., Spracklin, G., Kershner, A., Fritz, H.,
Kimble, J., Fire, A., and Kennedy, S. (2012). A nuclear Argonaute promotes
multigenerational epigenetic inheritance and germline immortality. Nature 489,
447–451.
Burton, N.O., Burkhart, K.B., and Kennedy, S. (2011). Nuclear RNAi maintains
heritable gene silencing in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108,
19683–19688.
Calvert, S., Tacutu, R., Sharifi, S., Teixeira, R., Ghosh, P., and de Magalhães,
J.P. (2016). A network pharmacology approach reveals new candidate caloric
restriction mimetics in C. elegans. Aging Cell 15, 256–266.
Chen, Q., Yan, M., Cao, Z., Li, X., Zhang, Y., Shi, J., Feng, G., Peng, H., Zhang,
X., Zhang, Y., et al. (2016). Sperm tsRNAs contribute to intergenerational
inheritance of an acquired metabolic disorder. Science 351, 397–400.

Claycomb, J.M., Batista, P.J., Pang, K.M., Gu, W., Vasale, J.J., van Wolfswinkel,
J.C., Chaves, D.A., Shirayama, M., Mitani, S., Ketting, R.F., et al. (2009). The
Argonaute CSR-1 and its 22G-RNA cofactors are required for holocentric
chromosome segregation. Cell 139, 123–134.
Crews, D., Gillette, R., Miller-Crews, I., Gore, A.C., and Skinner, M.K. (2014).
Nature, nurture and epigenetics. Mol. Cell. Endocrinol. 398, 42–52.
Das, P.P., Bagijn, M.P., Goldstein, L.D., Woolford, J.R., Lehrbach, N.J.,
Sapetschnig, A., Buhecha, H.R., Gilchrist, M.J., Howe, K.L., Stark, R., et al.
(2008). Piwi and piRNAs act upstream of an endogenous siRNA pathway to
suppress Tc3 transposon mobility in the Caenorhabditis elegans germline. Mol.
Cell 31, 79–90.
Demoinet, E., Li, S., and Roy, R. (2017). AMPK blocks starvation-inducible
transgenerational defects in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 114,
E2689–E2698.
Ermolaeva, M.A., Segref, A., Dakhovnik, A., Ou, H.-L., Schneider, J.I.,
Utermöhlen, O., Hoppe, T., and Schumacher, B. (2013). DNA damage in germ
cells induces an innate immune response that triggers systemic stress
resistance. Nature 501, 416–420.
Ewbank, J. (2006). Signaling in the immune response. WormBook 1–12.
Feng, X., and Guang, S. (2013). Small RNAs, RNAi and the Inheritance of Gene
Silencing in Caenorhabditis elegans. J. Genet. Genomics 40, 153–160.
Gapp, K., Jawaid, A., Sarkies, P., Bohacek, J., Pelczar, P., Prados, J., Farinelli,
L., Miska, E., and Mansuy, I.M. (2014). Implication of sperm RNAs in

transgenerational inheritance of the effects of early trauma in mice. Nat.
Neurosci. advance on.
Gerke, P., Keshet, A., Mertenskötter, A., and Paul, R.J. (2014). The JNK-like
MAPK KGB-1 of Caenorhabditis elegans promotes reproduction, lifespan, and
gene expressions for protein biosynthesis and germline homeostasis but
interferes with hyperosmotic stress tolerance. Cell. Physiol. Biochem. 34, 1951–
1973.
Gu, W., Shirayama, M., Conte, D., Vasale, J., Batista, P.J., Claycomb, J.M.,
Moresco, J.J., Youngman, E.M., Keys, J., Stoltz, M.J., et al. (2009). Distinct
argonaute-mediated 22G-RNA pathways direct genome surveillance in the C.
elegans germline. Mol. Cell 36, 231–244.
Halaschek-Wiener, J., Khattra, J.S., McKay, S., Pouzyrev, A., Stott, J.M., Yang,
G.S., Holt, R.A., Jones, S.J.M., Marra, M.A., Brooks-Wilson, A.R., et al. (2005).
Analysis of long-lived C. elegans daf-2 mutants using serial analysis of gene
expression. Genome Res. 15, 603–615.
Han, T., Manoharan, A.P., Harkins, T.T., Bouffard, P., Fitzpatrick, C., Chu, D.S.,
Thierry-Mieg, D., Thierry-Mieg, J., and Kim, J.K. (2009). 26G endo-siRNAs
regulate spermatogenic and zygotic gene expression in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 18674–18679.
Horsthemke, B. (2018). A critical view on transgenerational epigenetic
inheritance in humans. Nat. Commun. 9, 2973.
Houri-Ze’evi, L., Korem, Y., Sheftel, H., Faigenbloom, L., Toker, I.A., Dagan, Y.,
Awad, L., Degani, L., Alon, U., Rechavi, O., et al. (2016). A Tunable Mechanism

Determines the Duration of the Transgenerational Small RNA Inheritance in
C. elegans. Cell 165, 88–99.
Houri-Zeevi, L., and Rechavi, O. (2017). A Matter of Time: Small RNAs Regulate
the Duration of Epigenetic Inheritance. Trends Genet. 33, 46–57.
Inoue, H., Hisamoto, N., An, J.H., Oliveira, R.P., Nishida, E., Blackwell, T.K., and
Matsumoto, K. (2005). The C. elegans p38 MAPK pathway regulates nuclear
localization of the transcription factor SKN-1 in oxidative stress response. Genes
Dev. 19, 2278–2283.
Jablonka, E. (2013). Epigenetic inheritance and plasticity: The responsive
germline. Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 111, 99–107.
Jablonka, E. (2017). The evolutionary implications of epigenetic inheritance.
Interface Focus 7, 20160135.
Kamath, R.S., Martinez-Campos, M., Zipperlen, P., Fraser, A.G., and Ahringer, J.
(2000). Effectiveness of specific RNA-mediated interference through ingested
double-stranded RNA in Caenorhabditis elegans. Genome Biol. 2, 2–1.
Kazachenka, A., Bertozzi, T.M., Sjoberg-Herrera, M.K., Walker, N., Gardner, J.,
Gunning, R., Pahita, E., Adams, S., Adams, D., and Ferguson-Smith, A.C.
(2018). Identification, Characterization, and Heritability of Murine Metastable
Epialleles: Implications for Non-genetic Inheritance. Cell 175, 1259–1271.e13.
Kerr, S.C., Ruppersburg, C.C., Francis, J.W., and Katz, D.J. (2014). SPR-5 and
MET-2 function cooperatively to reestablish an epigenetic ground state during
passage through the germ line. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 111, 9509–9514.
Kim, D.H., Liberati, N.T., Mizuno, T., Inoue, H., Hisamoto, N., Matsumoto, K., and

Ausubel, F.M. (2004). Integration of Caenorhabditis elegans MAPK pathways
mediating immunity and stress resistance by MEK-1 MAPK kinase and VHP-1
MAPK phosphatase. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 101, 10990–10994.
Kishimoto, S., Uno, M., Okabe, E., Nono, M., and Nishida, E. (2017).
Environmental stresses induce transgenerationally inheritable survival
advantages via germline-to-soma communication in Caenorhabditis elegans.
Nat. Commun. 8, 14031.
Klosin, A., and Lehner, B. (2016). Mechanisms, timescales and principles of
trans-generational epigenetic inheritance in animals. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 36,
41–49.
Klosin, A., Casas, E., Hidalgo-Carcedo, C., Vavouri, T., and Lehner, B. (2017).
Transgenerational transmission of environmental information in C. elegans.
Science 356, 320–323.
Lev, I., Seroussi, U., Gingold, H., Bril, R., Anava, S., and Rechavi, O. (2017).
MET-2-Dependent H3K9 Methylation Suppresses Transgenerational Small RNA
Inheritance. Curr. Biol. 27, 1138–1147.
Lev, I., Toker, I.A., Mor, Y., Nitzan, A., Weintraub, G., Bhonkar, O., Shushan, I.
Ben, Seroussi, U., Claycomb, J.M., Gingold, H., et al. (2019). Germ Granules
Functions are Memorized by Transgenerationally Inherited Small RNAs. BioRxiv
576934.
Li, X., Cassidy, J.J., Reinke, C.A., Fischboeck, S., and Carthew, R.W. (2009). A
microRNA imparts robustness against environmental fluctuation during
development. Cell 137, 273–282.

Liu, L., Ruediger, C., and Shapira, M. (2018). Integration of Stress Signaling in
Caenorhabditis elegans Through Cell-Nonautonomous Contributions of the JNK
Homolog KGB-1. Genetics 210, 1317–1328.
Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold
change and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 15, 550.
Martin, M. (2011). Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput
sequencing reads. EMBnet.Journal 17, 10.
McMurchy, A.N., Stempor, P., Gaarenstroom, T., Wysolmerski, B., Dong, Y.,
Aussianikava, D., Appert, A., Huang, N., Kolasinska-Zwierz, P., Sapetschnig, A.,
et al. (2017). A team of heterochromatin factors collaborates with small RNA
pathways to combat repetitive elements and germline stress. Elife 6.
Mertenskötter, A., Keshet, A., Gerke, P., and Paul, R.J. (2013). The p38 MAPK
PMK-1 shows heat-induced nuclear translocation, supports chaperone
expression, and affects the heat tolerance of Caenorhabditis elegans. Cell Stress
Chaperones 18, 293–306.
Mizuno, T., Fujiki, K., Sasakawa, A., Hisamoto, N., and Matsumoto, K. (2008).
Role of the Caenorhabditis elegans Shc adaptor protein in the c-Jun N-terminal
kinase signaling pathway. Mol. Cell. Biol. 28, 7041–7049.
Moore, R.S., Kaletsky, R., and Murphy, C.T. (2018). C. elegans pathogenic
learning confers multigenerational pathogen avoidance. BioRxiv 476416.
Ni, J.Z., Kalinava, N., Chen, E., Huang, A., Trinh, T., and Gu, S.G. (2016). A
transgenerational role of the germline nuclear RNAi pathway in repressing heat
stress-induced transcriptional activation in C. elegans. Epigenetics Chromatin 9,

3.
Nilsson, E.E., Sadler-Riggleman, I., and Skinner, M.K. (2018). Environmentally
induced epigenetic transgenerational inheritance of disease. Environ.
Epigenetics 4, dvy016.
Öst, A., Lempradl, A., Casas, E., Weigert, M., Tiko, T., Deniz, M., Pantano, L.,
Boenisch, U., Itskov, P.M., Stoeckius, M., et al. (2014). Paternal Diet Defines
Offspring Chromatin State and Intergenerational Obesity. Cell 159, 1352–1364.
Pereira, A., Gracida, X., Kagias, K., and Zhang, Y. (2019). Learning of
pathogenic bacteria in adult C. elegans bidirectionally regulates pathogen
response in the progeny. BioRxiv 500264.
Phillips, C.M., Montgomery, T.A., Breen, P.C., and Ruvkun, G. (2012). MUT-16
promotes formation of perinuclear mutator foci required for RNA silencing in the
C. elegans germline. Genes Dev. 26, 1433–1444.
Phillips, C.M., Montgomery, B.E., Breen, P.C., Roovers, E.F., Rim, Y.-S.,
Ohsumi, T.K., Newman, M.A., van Wolfswinkel, J.C., Ketting, R.F., Ruvkun, G.,
et al. (2014). MUT-14 and SMUT-1 DEAD Box RNA Helicases Have Overlapping
Roles in Germline RNAi and Endogenous siRNA Formation. Curr. Biol. 24, 839–
844.
Phillips, C.M., Brown, K.C., Montgomery, B.E., Ruvkun, G., and Montgomery,
T.A. (2015). piRNAs and piRNA-Dependent siRNAs Protect Conserved and
Essential C. elegans Genes from Misrouting into the RNAi Pathway. Dev. Cell
34, 457–465.
Rechavi, O., and Lev, I. (2017). Principles of Transgenerational Small RNA

Inheritance in Caenorhabditis elegans. Curr. Biol. 27, R720–R730.
Rechavi, O., Minevich, G., and Hobert, O. (2011). Transgenerational Inheritance
of an Acquired Small RNA-Based Antiviral Response in C. elegans. Cell 147,
1248–1256.
Rechavi, O., Houri-Ze’evi, L., Anava, S., Goh, W.S.S., Kerk, S.Y., Hannon, G.J.,
and Hobert, O. (2014). Starvation-Induced Transgenerational Inheritance of
Small RNAs in C. elegans. Cell 158, 277–287.
Remy, J.-J. (2010). Stable inheritance of an acquired behavior in Caenorhabditis
elegans. Curr. Biol. 20, R877-8.
Rodriguez, M., Snoek, L.B., De Bono, M., and Kammenga, J.E. (2013). Worms
under stress: C. elegans stress response and its relevance to complex human
disease and aging. Trends Genet. 29, 367–374.
Saldi, T.K., Ash, P.E., Wilson, G., Gonzales, P., Garrido-Lecca, A., Roberts,
C.M., Dostal, V., Gendron, T.F., Stein, L.D., Blumenthal, T., et al. (2014). TDP-1,
the Caenorhabditis elegans ortholog of TDP-43, limits the accumulation of
double-stranded RNA. EMBO J. 33, 2947–2966.
Sapetschnig, A., Sarkies, P., Lehrbach, N.J., and Miska, E.A. (2015). Tertiary
siRNAs mediate paramutation in C. elegans. PLoS Genet. 11, e1005078.
Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch,
T., Preibisch, S., Rueden, C., Saalfeld, S., Schmid, B., et al. (2012). Fiji: an opensource platform for biological-image analysis. Nat. Methods 9, 676–682.
Schott, D., Yanai, I., and Hunter, C.P. (2014). Natural RNA interference directs a
heritable response to the environment. Sci. Rep. 4, 7387.

Serobyan, V., and Sommer, R.J. (2017). Developmental systems of plasticity and
trans-generational epigenetic inheritance in nematodes. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev.
45, 51–57.
Shahid, S., and Axtell, M.J. (2014). Identification and annotation of small RNA
genes using ShortStack. Methods 67, 20–27.
Shaw, W.M., Luo, S., Landis, J., Ashraf, J., and Murphy, C.T. (2007). The C.
elegans TGF-β Dauer Pathway Regulates Longevity via Insulin Signaling. Curr.
Biol. 17, 1635–1645.
She, X., Xu, X., Fedotov, A., Kelly, W.G., and Maine, E.M. (2009). Regulation of
Heterochromatin Assembly on Unpaired Chromosomes during Caenorhabditis
elegans Meiosis by Components of a Small RNA-Mediated Pathway. PLoS
Genet. 5, e1000624.
Shirayama, M., Seth, M., Lee, H.-C., Gu, W., Ishidate, T., Conte, D., and Mello,
C.C. (2012). piRNAs initiate an epigenetic memory of nonself RNA in the C.
elegans germline. Cell 150, 65–77.
Shivers, R.P., Kooistra, T., Chu, S.W., Pagano, D.J., and Kim, D.H. (2009).
Tissue-specific activities of an immune signaling module regulate physiological
responses to pathogenic and nutritional bacteria in C. elegans. Cell Host Microbe
6, 321–330.
Sijen, T., Fleenor, J., Simmer, F., Thijssen, K.L., Parrish, S., Timmons, L.,
Plasterk, R.H., and Fire, A. (2001). On the role of RNA amplification in dsRNAtriggered gene silencing. Cell 107, 465–476.
Simon, M., Sarkies, P., Ikegami, K., Doebley, A.-L., Goldstein, L.D., Mitchell, J.,

Sakaguchi, A., Miska, E.A., and Ahmed, S. (2014). Reduced insulin/IGF-1
signaling restores germ cell immortality to caenorhabditis elegans Piwi mutants.
Cell Rep. 7, 762–773.
Simon, M., Spichal, M., Heestand, B., Frenk, S., Hedges, A., Godwin, M.,
Wellman, A.S., Sakaguchi, A., and Ahmed, S. (2018). DAF-16/Foxo suppresses
the transgenerational sterility of prg-1 piRNA mutants via a systemic small RNA
pathway. BioRxiv 326751.
Skvortsova, K., Iovino, N., and Bogdanović, O. (2018). Functions and
mechanisms of epigenetic inheritance in animals. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 19,
774–790.
Teperino, R., Lempradl, A., and Pospisilik, J.A. (2013). Bridging epigenomics and
complex disease: the basics. Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 70, 1609–1621.
Troemel, E.R., Chu, S.W., Reinke, V., Lee, S.S., Ausubel, F.M., and Kim, D.H.
(2006). p38 MAPK regulates expression of immune response genes and
contributes to longevity in C. elegans. PLoS Genet. 2, e183.
Tsai, H.-Y., Chen, C.-C.G., Conte, D., Moresco, J.J., Chaves, D.A., Mitani, S.,
Yates, J.R., Tsai, M.-D., and Mello, C.C. (2015). A Ribonuclease Coordinates
siRNA Amplification and mRNA Cleavage during RNAi. Cell 160, 407–419.
Tucci, V., Isles, A.R., Kelsey, G., Ferguson-Smith, A.C., Erice Imprinting Group,
V., Bartolomei, M.S., Benvenisty, N., Bourc’his, D., Charalambous, M., Dulac, C.,
et al. (2019). Genomic Imprinting and Physiological Processes in Mammals. Cell
176, 952–965.
Viñuela, A., Snoek, L.B., Riksen, J.A.G., and Kammenga, J.E. (2011). Gene

Expression Modifications by Temperature-Toxicants Interactions in
Caenorhabditis elegans. PLoS One 6, e24676.
Wan, G., Fields, B.D., Spracklin, G., Shukla, A., Phillips, C.M., and Kennedy, S.
(2018). Spatiotemporal regulation of liquid-like condensates in epigenetic
inheritance. Nature 557, 679–683.
Wedeles, C.J., Wu, M.Z., and Claycomb, J.M. (2013). Protection of germline
gene expression by the C. elegans Argonaute CSR-1. Dev. Cell 27, 664–671.
Xu, F., Feng, X., Chen, X., Weng, C., Yan, Q., Xu, T., Hong, M., and Guang, S.
(2018). A Cytoplasmic Argonaute Protein Promotes the Inheritance of RNAi. Cell
Rep. 23, 2482–2494.
Yang, W., Dierking, K., and Schulenburg, H. (2016). WormExp: a web-based
application for a Caenorhabditis elegans -specific gene expression enrichment
analysis. Bioinformatics 32, 943–945.
Zeller, P., Padeken, J., van Schendel, R., Kalck, V., Tijsterman, M., and Gasser,
S.M. (2016). Histone H3K9 methylation is dispensable for Caenorhabditis
elegans development but suppresses RNA:DNA hybrid-associated repeat
instability. Nat. Genet. 48, 1385–1395.
Zevian, S.C., and Yanowitz, J.L. (2014). Methodological considerations for heat
shock of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Methods 68, 450–457.
Zhang, C., Montgomery, T.A., Gabel, H.W., Fischer, S.E.J., Phillips, C.M.,
Fahlgren, N., Sullivan, C.M., Carrington, J.C., and Ruvkun, G. (2011). mut-16
and other mutator class genes modulate 22G and 26G siRNA pathways in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 108, 1201–1208.

Zhang, D., Tu, S., Stubna, M., Wu, W.-S., Huang, W.-C., Weng, Z., and Lee, H.C. (2018). The piRNA targeting rules and the resistance to piRNA silencing in
endogenous genes. Science 359, 587–592.

KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins
Levamisole hydrochloride
Trizol Reagent
Phenol Chloroform Isoamyl
Heavy Phase Lock tube

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

Sigma
Life Technologies
Sigma
QuantaBio

L0380000
15596026
P2069
23028330

Ultra Pure Glycogen
RNA 5' Polyphosphatase
NEBNext® Multiplex Small RNA Library Prep Set for
Illumina
TapeStation screen tapes

ThermoFisher
Epicenter
New England Biolabs

10814010
RP8092H
E7300

Agilent

5067-5582

TapeStation reagents

Agilent

5067-5588
5067-5583

E-Gel 4% agarose
MinElute DNA purification kit
RNase free Nuclease-free water
NlaIII

Life Technologies
Qiagen
Ambion
New Englang BioLabs
(NEB)

Critical Commercial Assays
TG NextSeq® 500/550 High Output Kit v2 (75 cycles)

5067-5589
G401004
28006
AM9932
0631207

Illumina

TG-160-2005

This paper
REF

GSE129988
GSE87522

The Eric Miska lab
(Sapetschnig et al.,
2015)
The Julie Ahringer lab
(Zeiser et al., 2011)

X1263

C. elegans: Strain GR1720:
mgSi4 [(pCMP2) ubl-1p::GFP::siR-1-sensor-ubl-1-3'UTR
+ Cbr-unc-119(+)] IV

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center

WB strain: GR1720

C. elegans: Strain KB3:
kgb-1 (um3) IV
C. elegans: Strain KB3:
kgb-1 (um3) IV crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain FK171:
mek-1(ks54); sek-1(qd127)
C. elegans: Strain FK171:
mek-1(ks54); sek-1(qd127) X crossed with Strain
SX1263

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

KB3

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

FK171

Deposited Data
Small RNA sequencing data
H3K9me2/3 ChIP data
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
C. elegans: Strain SX1263: mex-5::gfp::h2b::tbb-2 II
C. elegans: Strain JA1527:
weSi14 [Pmex-5::mCherry::(Gly)5Ala/his-58/tbb-2
3′UTR; cb-unc-119(+)] IV

JA1527

C. elegans: Strain CF1038:
daf-16(mu86) I
C. elegans: Strain CF1038:
daf-16(mu86) I, crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain KU4:
sek-1(km4) X
C. elegans: Strain KU4:
sek-1(km4) X, crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain KU25:
pmk-1(km25) IV
C. elegans: Strain KU25:
pmk-1(km25) IV, crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain MR1175:
aak-1(tm1944) III, aak-2(ok524) X
C. elegans: Strain MR1175:
aak-1(tm1944) III, aak-2(ok524) X, crossed with Strain
SX1263
C. elegans: Strain CB1370:
daf-2(e1370) III
C. elegans: Strain CB1370:
daf-2(e1370) III, crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain QV225:
skn-1(zj15) IV
C. elegans: Strain QV225:
skn-1(zj15) IV, crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain MT13293:
met-2(n4256) III
C. elegans: Strain MT13293:
met-2(n4256) III, crossed with Strain SX1263
C. elegans: Strain RB1789:
met-2(ok2307) III
C. elegans: Strain RB1789:
met-2(ok2307) III, crossed with Strain SX1263
Oligonucleotides
PCR 1-FWD: mek-1/sek-1
TTTCCATCAACTCAGTCGCCG
PCR 1-REV1: mek-1/sek-1
TTCATTAGTCAATTGGGTCAG
PCR 1-REV2: mek-1/sek-1
CACTTTTCAATTAAGGTACAAC
PCR 2-FWD: kgb-1
CCCTACTTTATAATGAGATGC
PCR 2-REV1: kgb-1
TTCATTAGTCAATTGGGTCAG
PCR 2-REV2: kgb-1
CACTTTTCAATTAAGGTACAAC
PCR 3-FWD: daf-16
GTTCAGTAGACGGTGACCATCT
PCR 3-REV1: daf-16
GCTTCGGCTTGAAAGATCAGTG
PCR 3-REV2: daf-16
GTACGCCGTGGTCCGACTA

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

CF1038

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

KU4

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

KU25

The Richard Roy lab
(Demoinet et al.,
2017)
This study

MR1175

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

CB1370

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

QV225

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

MT13293

Caenorhabditis
Genetics Center
This study

RB1789

IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT

PCR 4-FWD: skn-1
GAAGAGAATGCTCGATATGAAG
PCR 4-REV: skn-1
TTTCAGTCGTTTATAAGAGAGC
PCR 5-FWD: aak-1
ATCGATACGGAACCAACTG
PCR 5-REV: aak-1
GGGTATGGTAGTACCAATAGG
PCR 6-FWD: aak-2
CGATAGCACAGACAACAGTTCG
PCR 6-REV: aak-2
GATGGTGGCCCTCTTCATC
PCR 7-FWD1: daf-18
AGGGTAATGCATTTCAGCAC
PCR 7-FWD2: daf-18
CCCGCATATAAACTGGAAATGTG
PCR 7-REV: daf-18
CAAATACGTCAGTTTCAACGTG
PCR 8-FWD: pmk-1
CTATAAGTTGCCATGACCTC
PCR 8-REV: pmk-1
GCTCCCATCAACATTGATAC
PCR 9-FWD1: sek-1
CTAGAATAAGTGCTATGCTAG
PCR 9-FWD2: sek-1
GTTGTCTAAGTATAATTGTCC
PCR 9-REV: sek-1
TGATTGATTATAACTACGAGG
PCR 10-FWD1: met-2
TTTACTGTCACATCACCTGC
PCR 10-FWD2: met-2
AAGCAGATGTTTGTCAGAATCC
PCR 10-REV: met-2
AGCAGCATTCATCTTCGC
Software and Algorithms
FastQC
Cutadapt
Shortstack
HTSeq count
R Deseq2
Fiji
MATLAB R2018b
IoSR-Surry MatlabToolbox (BoxPlot function)

GraphPad Prism 8

IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT
IDT

(Andrews, 2010)
(Martin, 2011)
(Shahid and Axtell,
2014)
(Anders et al., 2014)
(Love et al., 2014)
(Schindelin et al.,
2012)
MATLAB
Institute of Sound
Recording, University
of Surrey
GraphPad Software

https://github.com/Io
SRSurrey/MatlabToolbo
x
www.graphpad.com

