bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Experimental and stochastic models of melanoma T-cell therapy define
impact of subclone fitness on selection of antigen loss variants

Nicole Glodde1,2,3*, Anna Kraut4*,%, Debby van den Boorn-Konijnenberg1, Saskia Vadder1, Florian
Kreten4, Jonathan L. Schmid-Burgk5, Pia Aymans6, Kai Echelmeyer7, Martin Rumpf7, Jennifer
Landsberg6, Tobias Bald2,3,8, Thomas Tüting3,7#, Anton Bovier4,#,%, Michael Hölzel1,#,%,§

1

Institute of Experimental Oncology, University Hospital Bonn, University of Bonn, Bonn,

Germany
2

Department of Dermatology, University Hospital, Magdeburg University, Germany

3

Laboratory of Experimental Dermatology, Department of Dermatology, University Hospital Bonn,

Bonn, Germany.
4

Institute for Applied Mathematics, Bonn University, Bonn, Germany.

5

Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

6

Department of Dermatology and Allergy, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

7

Institute for Numerical Simulation, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany

8

Oncology and Cellular Immunology Laboratory, QIMR Berghofer Medical Research Institute,

Herston, Queensland, Australia.
§

Lead contact: michael.hoelzel@ukbonn.de

*

These authors contributed equally

#

these senior authors contributed equally

%

Corresponding authors: kraut@iam.uni-bonn.de, bovier@uni-bonn.de,

michael.hoelzel@ukbonn.de

Summary
Antigen loss is a key mechanism how tumor cells escape from T-cell immunotherapy. Using a
mouse model of melanoma we directly compared antigen downregulation by phenotypic adaptation
with genetically hardwired antigen loss. Unexpectedly, genetic ablation of Pmel, the melanocyte
differentiation antigen targeted by adoptively transferred CD8+ T-cells, impaired melanoma cell
growth in untreated tumors due to competitive pressure exerted by the bulk wild-type population.
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

This established an evolutionary scenario, where T-cell immunotherapy imposed a dynamic fitness
switch on wild-type melanoma cells and antigen loss variants, which resulted in highly variable
enrichment of the latter in recurrent tumors. Stochastic simulations by an individual-based
continuous-time Markov process suggested variable fitness of subclones within the antigen loss
variant population as the most likely cause, which was validated experimentally. In summary, we
provide a framework to better understand how subclone heterogeneity in tumors influences immune
selection of genetic antigen loss variants through stochastic events.
Key words
Melanoma, immunotherapy, resistance, antigen loss, selection, clonal evolution, phenotypic
plasticity, intratumor heterogeneity, Markov process, mathematical model, stochastic
Introduction
Cytotoxic CD8+ T cells play an important role in tumor immune surveillance. They recognize
peptides (epitopes) derived from tumor cell-encoded gene products (antigens) which are presented
on major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I molecules. Epitope-specific activation of CD8 +
T cells leads to tumor cell killing through the release of cytotoxic granules and cytokines, amongst
others, which can be exploited therapeutically by different strategies. One approach is genetic
engineering of autologous CD8+ T cells by introducing a tumor antigen-specific T cell receptor
(TCR) (D’Ippolito et al., 2019; Yang and Rosenberg, 2016). After ex vivo expansion these TCRtransgenic (TCRtg) CD8+ T cells can be re-infused into the same patient, a procedure known as
adoptive T cell transfer (ACT). Clinical trials have been conducted in patients with various types of
cancer showing that the emergence of resistant tumor cell variants restrains durable responses
(Chodon et al., 2014; Mehta et al., 2018; Tran et al., 2016).
Malignant melanoma, an aggressive type of skin cancer, is a paradigm disease for the development
of novel immunotherapies including ACT. Using mouse models, we previously found that
melanomas can escape from ACT targeting the melanocyte differentiation antigen Pmel (also
known as gp100) by dedifferentiation (Landsberg et al., 2012), an epigenetic mechanism also
known as phenotype switching or phenotypic plasticity (Hoek and Goding, 2010; Hoek et al.,
2008). Briefly, infiltrating activated Pmel-specific CD8+ T-cells (Pmel-1 T-cells) instigated proinflammatory cytokine release which induced dedifferentiation and downregulation of the Pmel
antigen in melanoma cells, which impaired immune recognition and killing (Landsberg et al., 2012;
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Riesenberg et al., 2015). Reciprocally, melanoma cells upregulated mesenchymal and neural crest
progenitor cell traits, a finding that was recently confirmed in melanoma patients treated with ACT
directed against the differentiation antigen MART-1 (Mehta et al., 2018; Reinhardt et al., 2017).
Thus, phenotypic plasticity of melanoma cells emerges as a relevant mechanism of resistance to
immunotherapy (Arozarena and Wellbrock, 2019; Hölzel et al., 2013).
A better understanding how the various cell populations interact over time could help to improve
current ACT regimens, but longitudinal analyses impose challenges with regard to tissue sampling,
both in patients and animal models. We therefore reasoned that mathematical modeling as in
(Eftimie et al., 2011; Kuznetsov et al., 1994) could complement our experimental approaches and
potentially make novel predictions. Recently, we proposed a stochastic model of ACT, which is an
extension of individual-based stochastic models for adaptive dynamics, where we use the term
individual for cells and relevant events for each individual (e.g. cell division and death) occur
randomly (Baar et al., 2016). Using adjusted parameters the model faithfully recapitulated tumor
growth kinetics and melanoma cell state transitions as reported in our previous experimental study
(Landsberg et al., 2012).
Here, we used experimental and mathematical models of ACT in order to compare the evolution of
gene edited Pmel antigen loss variants (Pmel knockout; Pmel KO) with adaptive dedifferentiation,
because genetically hardwired loss of target antigen expression or presentation is another key
mechanism of resistance to immunotherapy (Restifo et al., 1996; Sucker et al., 2017; Zaretsky et al.,
2016). ACT strongly selected for PmelKO melanoma cells, but unexpectedly they exhibited a growth
defect in the absence of therapy imposed by the bulk wild-type (WT) melanoma cell population.
This established an evolutionary scenario of competing tumor cell populations, where Pmel KO and
WT melanoma cells switch their fitness in response to ACT. Accounting for context-dependent
fitness, the stochastic model suggested subclone fitness variability as the most likely cause for the
unanticipated high variability of PmelKO cells enrichment found in ACT-recurrent melanomas,
which was confirmed experimentally by different approaches. Our work emphasizes the need to
take evolutionary dynamics into account when interpreting variant allele frequencies in therapy
resistant tumor specimens and it provides a framework for stochastic modeling these scenarios.
Results

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Our experimental ACT regimen consists of (i) a single dose of cyclophosphamide
(chemotherapeutic conditioning), (ii) intravenous injection of Pmel-specific CD90.1+CD8+ TCRtg
Pmel-1 T cells, (iii) in vivo activation of Pmel-1 T cells with a human gp100-expressing adenovirus
vaccine (Ad-hgp100) and (iv) innate immune system activation with CpG and poly(I:C)
(Kohlmeyer et al., 2009; Landsberg et al., 2012). Recently, we found that short-term concomitant
treatment with small molecule inhibitors (e.g. capmatinib) of the c-MET receptor tyrosine kinase
(METi) enhanced ACT efficacy (ACTMETi) by blocking the recruitment of T cell-suppressive
neutrophils early during treatment, regardless whether c-MET signaling was an intrinsic driver of
melanoma cell growth (HCmel12 model) or not (B16F1 model) (Glodde et al., 2017).
Dynamic Pmel antigen expression in response to MET inhibitor (METi) treatment
The syngeneic HCmel12 melanoma model was established from a primary melanoma in HgfCdk4R24C mice (Bald et al., 2014), a model in which transgenic expression of the ligand HGF
(hepatocyte growth factor) constitutively activates c-MET signaling. As HCmel12 grows rapidly,
phenotype switching occurs dynamically and genetic manipulation is facile (Bald et al., 2014), we
considered HCmel12 as being suited for modeling the dynamics of different melanoma cell
populations during ACTMETi. We first asked whether METi treatment could influence the phenotype
(differentiation) of HCmel12 cells, an important parameter in our stochastic ACT model (Baar et al.,
2016), because it was reported that MAPK inhibitors upregulated melanocyte differentiation
antigens in human melanomas (Boni et al., 2010; Frederick et al., 2013). In order to have matched
METi-insensitive controls in addition to B16F1, we generated METi-resistant variants of HCmel12
(HCmel12METi-R), which remained METi-resistant even after passaging in vivo and showed sustained
c-MET downstream signaling activity (phospho-ERK and phospho-AKT) in the presence of METi
(Figure S1A-D). Indeed, we found that METi (capmatinib) induced Pmel protein expression in
parental HCmel12 cells (WT, wild-type), whereas it remained unchanged in B16F1 cells and
HCmel12METi-R (Figure S1E). Also METi treatment impaired TNF-α induced dedifferentiation of
HCmel12 WT cells, but not B16F1 cells (Figure S1F). Despite these dynamic changes of Pmel,
concomitant METi treatment enhanced ACT efficacy against HCmel12 METi-R melanomas and Pmel-1
T-cell expansion to the same extent as previously reported for parental HCmel12 WT melanomas
(Figure S1G-J) (Glodde et al., 2017). In conclusion, short-term METi treatment increased Pmel
antigen levels in HCmel12 WT cells, but this effect did not account for the immunomodulatory
effects of METi treatment in conjunction with ACT in line with our previous work. An explanation
is that the vaccination with Ad-hgp100 transiently provides excess antigen to the adoptively
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

transferred Pmel-1 T cells, which limits the influence of Pmel antigen level expressed by tumor
cells during the early phase of treatment. However, we reasoned that antigen expression by tumor
cells becomes a critical determinant later in the course of therapy when adenoviral antigen
expression declines.
Highly variable enrichment of PmelKO variants in ACTMETi recurrent melanomas
To confirm this, we analyzed ACTMETi-recurrent HCmel12 melanomas and we found reduced
expression of Pmel by immunohistochemistry (Figure 1A-C), in line with melanoma
dedifferentiation being a mechanism of ACT resistance (Landsberg et al., 2012; Mehta et al., 2018).
This in turn raised the question whether genetic ablation of Pmel in HCmel12 cells would confer
any additional advantage to escape from ACTMETi. Using CRISPR-Cas9 we targeted the Pmel gene
upstream of the region encoding for the gp100 epitope with three different sgRNA constructs for
control purposes, which were transfected individually into HCmel12 cells. Co-transfection of a
GFP expression construct allowed us to isolate highly transfected cells in order to increase the
frequency of HCmel12 Pmelindel cells in polyclonal cell cultures. After a short period of in vitro
expansion we determined the Pmelindel allele frequencies by amplicon NGS using a modified version
of the OutKnocker tool (Schmid-Burgk et al., 2014), which revealed polyclonal indel distributions
typical for CRISPR-Cas9 gene editing with largely inactivating frame-shift events (Figure 1D).
We then mixed the three polyclonal HCmel12 Pmel indel cultures with parental HCmel12 cells (WT;
wild type) cells in order to obtain a Pmel indel allele frequency of 20% and injected these mixtures
(HCmel12pcMix; polyclonal mix culture) into the flank of syngeneic mice (Figure 1E). Animals
bearing established HCmel12pcMix melanomas were treated with ACTMETi or left untreated for control
purposes (Figure 1F). Of note, all HCmel12pcMix melanomas escaped from ACTMETi, whereas we
previously reported that ACTMETi achieved eradication of parental HCmel12 melanomas in about
30% of cases (Glodde et al., 2017). When tumors reached a size of 10mm in diameter and mice had
to be sacrificed for animal welfare, we isolated genomic DNA from untreated as well as recurrent
HCmel12pcMix melanomas and we determined the Pmel indel allele frequencies by amplicon NGS. A
HCmel12-specific mutation in p53 (p53R172H) was used for tumor cell content normalization, as this
mutation is absent from host cells in the tumor microenvironment. Pmel indel alleles were strongly
enriched in recurrent HCmel12pcMix melanomas being on average >99% inactivating (PmelKO) frameshift indels (Figure 1G), which demonstrated that HCmel12 Pmel KO cells gained fitness in

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

comparison to HCmel12 WT cells in response to ACT METi. Notably, this enrichment was subject to
unanticipated high variability ranging from 20% to almost 100% (mean 58.5%).
Reduced fitness of PmelKO variants within a bulk wild-type melanoma cell population
Furthermore, the average PmelKO allele frequency detected in untreated HCmel12 pcMix tumors (mean
7.8%) was clearly below the frequency at the time of injection (17%) (# in Figure 1G), which again
was unexpected. This suggested that HCmel12 PmelKO cells had a reduced fitness in the context of a
bulk HCmel12 WT population when immunological selection pressure by Pmel-1 T cells was
absent. To corroborate this notion, we analyzed the dynamics of small in-frame indel alleles that are
likely to preserve Pmel protein function. We hypothesized that HCmel12 cells with small in-frame
indels should exhibit the same context-dependent fitness as HCmel12 WT cells. In support for this
idea, several untreated HCmel12pcMix melanomas contained a substantial proportion of small inframe indel alleles (up to 44% of total Pmel indels), whereas small in-frame indel alleles were
almost undetectable (<1% of total Pmel indels) in ACTMETi-recurrent HCmel12pcMix melanomas
(Figure 1H and 1I). In conclusion, this finding supported the notion that genetic Pmel loss reduced
HCmel12 fitness in untreated melanomas, but strongly increased their fitness under ACTMETi.
Wild-type melanoma cells impose competitive pressure on PmelKO melanoma cells
Next, we analyzed the in vivo growth rate of pure HCmel12 Pmel KO melanomas, because a growth
rate similar to HCmel12 WT melanomas would argue that HCmel12 WT cells exerted competitive
pressure on PmelKO cells within HCmel12pcMix melanomas. For this purpose, we isolated three
independent HCmel12 PmelKO clones and validated Pmel gene editing by amplicon NGS as well as
Western blot confirming absence of Pmel protein expression (Figure S2A and S2B). An equal
mixture of the three HCmel12 PmelKO clones was injected into the flank of syngeneic mice and
indeed pure HCmel12 PmelKO melanomas exhibited a growth rate similar as HCmel12 WT
melanomas (Figure S2C). Hence, this result argues for a scenario where HCmel12 WT cells impose
a competitive pressure on HCmel12 PmelKO cells.
Stochastic model of ACTMETi implementing pre-existing PmelKO antigen loss variants
Our herein described approach with HCmel12 pcMix melanomas established an evolutionary scenario
of competing tumor cell populations undergoing a reciprocal fitness switch upon ACT METi. This
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

prompted us to use mathematical modeling in order to better understand of cell population
dynamics and potentially explain the highly variable enrichment of Pmel KO cells in recurrent
melanomas. The stochastic model of ACTMETi is based on the individual-based Markov process in
Baar et al. (Baar et al., 2016). We adjusted this model according to the context of HCmel12 pcMix
melanomas treated with ACTMETi. We consider six different types of interacting cell populations or
molecules collectively termed as individuals: Differentiated (Diff) and dedifferentiated (Dedi) WT
melanoma cells, PmelKO melanoma cells (KO), CD8+ Pmel-1 T-cells (CD8), cytokines (Cyto), and
dead melanomas cells (Dead). The latter are included, because we reasoned that they contribute to
measured tumor sizes, although they do not influence the evolution of the other cells in our
mathematical model. Cytokines comprise a variety of different molecules, in particular T cell
effector cytokines such as TNF-α and IFN-γ, that evoke a pro-inflammatory microenvironment
promoting melanoma cell dedifferentiation and upregulation of negative immune checkpoint
molecules (Chen et al., 2019; Landsberg et al., 2012; Reinhardt et al., 2017; Riesenberg et al.,
2015). The state of the mathematical process
N(t)=(NDiff(t),NDedi(t),NKO(t),NDead(t),NCD8(t),NCyto(t))
describes how many of these different types of individuals (cells, cytokines) are present in the
tumor tissue as a function of time t starting with tumor cell inoculation at t=0.
We distinguish different events that change the state of this system: Cell division, cell death,
cytokine secretion, killing of WTDiff melanoma cells, phenotype switching between WTDiff and
WTDedi melanoma cells, and spontaneous mutations generating PmelKO melanoma cells. All of these
events happen at certain rates or frequencies that depend on several fixed parameters and the current
state of the system. The dynamics of the Markov process are summarized by its infinitesimal
generator that takes the form of
Lφ(N)=∑eϵE(φ(N+ve)-φ(N))Re(N),
where E is the set of possible events, v e is the change in the population associated to an event, and
Re(N) is the rate at which the event occurs. It can be constructed rigorously similar to the process in
(Fournier and Méléard, 2004). The following examples illustrate two events: (i) Increased cytokine
release results in a higher rate of dedifferentiation of WT Diff melanoma cells, in which case the
cytokine induced switch happens at rate Re(N)=sCyDi,DeNCytoNDiff; (ii) an increase in WT melanoma
cells imposes a higher competitive pressure (parametrized by c KO,Di/cKO,De) on PmelKO cells elevating
their rate of cell death Re(N)=(dKO+cKO,DiNDi+cKO,DeNDe+cKO,KONKO)NKO. The effects of ACTMETi are
modeled through (i) the addition of 105 Pmel-1 T-cells on the respective day of adoptive T-cell
transfer and (ii) the intermittent change of parameters within the five days of concomitant METi
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

treatment, namely reduced WT melanoma cell dedifferentiation, a general reduction of tumor cell
growth through a decreased cell division rate, and an increased rate of Pmel-1 T-cell proliferation
and killing of WTDiff cells via decreased T-cell suppression based on experimental data in Glodde et
al. Figure 2A shows an interaction diagram that summarizes all these effects. A more detailed
description of the mathematical model and the different events and rates is given in the methods
section. Simulations using the adjusted model recapitulated the tumor growth kinetics of HCmel12
WT melanomas treated with ACTMETi from Glodde et al. (Figure 2B and 2C). Of note, our
simulations also predicted a critical threshold of tumor size at treatment onset, below which
ACTMETi achieves long-term melanoma control or eradication in line with the experimental data.
Simulating the dynamics of PmelKO antigen loss variants during ACTMETi
Next, we simulated the dynamics of pre-existing PmelKO melanoma cells within a bulk WT
melanoma cell population, because we sought to explain the highly variable enrichment of Pmel KO
cells found in ACTMETi-recurrent HCmel12pcMix melanomas from our experiments. In the stochastic
model, the context-dependent fitness describes the growth rate of a certain cell type and it is
determined by the fixed fitness of its individuals (composed of cell division b and death rate d) and
competition c with other individuals. For example, the fixed fitness of Pmel KO cells is rKO=bKO-dKO
while their context-dependent fitness in a population of state N is
fKO(N)=bKO-dKO-cKO,DiNDiff-cKO,DeNDedi-cKO,KONKO.
Since the overall growth rate is very similar for untreated pure WT or Pmel KO melanomas (Figure
S2C), the reduced fitness of PmelKO cells in HCmel12pcMix tumors is modeled via a high competitive
pressure cKO,Di/cKO,De that WT melanoma cells impose on PmelKO melanoma cells. Figure 3A shows
how the growth of the unfit PmelKO melanoma cell population slows down until a critical number of
WT melanoma cells is reached and its overall growth rate (context-dependent fitness) becomes
negative. The number of PmelKO melanoma cells then decreases and would eventually reach zero. In
our experiments, however, mice needed to be sacrificed before this would happen.
If Pmel-1 T-cell killing of WTDiff melanoma cells was not influenced by the presence of Pmel KO
melanoma cells, our simulations predicted that the enrichment of PmelKO cells in ACTMETi-recurrent
melanomas would be a lot higher than what was measured experimentally, making up nearly the
entire melanoma cell population. However, if the portion of Pmel KO melanoma cells is high, one
may assume that WTDiff melanoma cells will be ‘shielded’ from Pmel-1 T-cell recognition and
killing due to physical obstruction, an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and other
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mechanisms. We model this ‘shielding effect’ by introducing the percentage of WT Diff melanoma
cells (out of all tumor cells) as a factor into the killing rate of Pmel-1 T-cells and also their
proliferation rate since Pmel-1 T-cell activation depends on Pmel antigen presentation. The
influence of this factor is determined by its exponent α, which we termed ‘shielding parameter’.
The killing rate thus takes the form
Re(N)=kDiNDiffNCD8[NDiff/(NDiff+NDedi+NKO)]α(1-hNCyto)+,
where the last factor models cytokine-induced T-cell exhaustion. The T-cell proliferation rate has
the same structure.
A higher value of α causes a larger ‘shielding effect’ through WT Dediff and PmelKO melanoma cells.
Figure 3B shows how, under ACTMETi, the PmelKO cell population grows rapidly, as soon as the
number of WT cells drops low enough to no longer impose a large competitive pressure (Figure 3B,
right zoom-in panel). As a result, the few remaining WT Diff cells are protected by the abundant
PmelKO cells, which allows for the recovery of the WT population. As soon as WT cells surpass the
critical level for competition, the number of Pmel KO cells and their proportion of the total melanoma
cells decrease again (Figure 3C). Due to these high fluctuations, the measured percentage of PmelKO
cells is highly dependent on (i) the time point of sequencing (harvesting the tumor tissue), and (ii)
the influence of the shielding effect. More details on the determination of the parameter α are given
in the methods section, supported by Figure S3A and S3B.
Subclone fitness variability as potential cause of variable immune selection of PmelKO cells
Figure 3D compares the measured percentage of PmelKO cells in experiments and simulations, with
and without ACTMETi. The parameters of the mathematical model were chosen such that they match
the mean percentage of 7.8% PmelKO cells in the untreated case and 58.5% under ACT METi (from
Figure 1G). Varying the time point of sequencing (harvesting) by picking a random point between
0.5 mm around the documented diameter in the simulations partially explains the fluctuations in the
experimental data. Nevertheless, especially in the case of ACTMETi, we still witness a much higher
variation in the experimental data compared to the simulations. Tumor cell heterogeneity is another
possibility, which is experimentally modeled in our HCmel12 pcMix approach by genetically ablating
Pmel antigen expression in thousands instead of raising single cell clones. Each of the generated
HCmel12 PmelKO subclones may display a slightly different fitness due to pre-existing genetic or
epigenetic heterogeneity or even CRISPR-Cas9 off-target effects, amongst others. Therefore, we
run simulations for varying fitness by changing the birth rate b KO and the natural death rate dKO , and
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

thus the overall growth rate. Figure 3E displays the simulated percentage of PmelKO cells in
untreated and recurrent melanomas, determined at tumor sizes between 9 and 11 mm, plotted
against their individual fitness rKO. The experiments in Figure S2C suggest an average individual
fitness of rKO=0.36. The results show no major difference between the two approaches of varying
bKO and dKO. They do, however, account for most of the variation seen in the experimental data as,
especially in the case of ACTMETi treatment, the percentage of PmelKO cells at the time point of
sequencing (harvesting) largely increases with increasing fitness r KO. Thus, in contrast to the tumor
size at therapy onset, which surprisingly has very little influence on the Pmel KO cell percentage even
when lying above and below the critical threshold for tumor eradication (Figure S3A), varying
subclone fitness is a likely explanation for the highly variable enrichment of Pmel KO cells found in
ACTMETi-recurrent melanomas.
Validating impact of subclone fitness variability on immune selection of PmelKO cells
To experimentally confirm this prediction from our simulations, we first analyzed the Pmel indel
distributions from ACTMETi-recurrent HCmel12pcMix melanomas. We reasoned that a restriction of the
indel distribution, if compared to the input distribution at tumor cell inoculation, would suggest that
the population of PmelKO cells is heterogeneous containing a few PmelKO subclones with superior
fitness that drives their relative enrichment in untreated and ACTMETi-treated tumors. Indeed, the
analysis revealed a few predominant indels deviating from the input indel distribution (Figure 3F).
In particular, predominance of indels, which were underrepresented in the input distribution,
strongly suggested the selection of a few PmelKO subclones with superior fitness.
To further substantiate this finding, we revisited our experiments with HCmel12 Pmel KO single cell
subclones (Figure S2) now asking whether they exhibited differences in fitness or not. For this
purpose, we equally mixed the three PmelKO subclones together with WT cells to achieve an overall
PmelKO subclone frequency of 25% (8.3% per PmelKO subclone) (Figure 4A) or 50% (16.7% per
PmelKO subclone) (Figure 4B). Mixed cultures were termed as HCmel12 sccMix and injected into the
flank of syngeneic mice. Once tumors were established animals were treated with ACTMETi or left
untreated (Figure 4C-F). Mice were sacrificed when tumors reached the experimental cutoff size of
10 mm in diameter. Frequencies of the three Pmel KO subclones in ACTMETi-recurrent melanomas
were determined by amplicon NGS and we found that clone #1 was predominantly enriched in all
cases, whereas enrichment of the other subclones occurred only when the input frequency was
increased (Figure 4G). In vitro, proliferation of all PmelKO subclones was comparable to HCmel12
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

WT cells and if, at all, it was slightly reduced for subclone #1 (Figure 4H). Taken together, selection
of HCmel12 PmelKO single cell clones under ACTMETi was strongly biased suggesting substantial
differences in the fitness of these subclones.
To confirm this, we stably transduced HCmel12 WT and the Pmel KO single cell clones with
expression constructs encoding for mCherry and tagGFP2, respectively, and injected mixtures at a
1:1 ratio into the flank of syngeneic mice (Figure 4I). Dual-color imaging of whole-mount sections
was performed when the tumors had reached a size of 3-4 mm in diameter (Figure 4J). We observed
a similar engraftment of HCmel12 WT cells and the PmelKO single cell clone #1, but the clones #2
and #3 were clearly underrepresented (Figure 4K). Taken together, these results confirmed the
prediction from our simulations that PmelKO subclones substantially differ in fitness providing an
explanation for the highly variable enrichment of PmelKO cells in ACTMETi-recurrent melanomas.
Simulating the spontaneous occurrence of Pmel mutations
So far, we only addressed scenarios with pre-existing PmelKO cells, but if the mutation occurred
spontaneously, it would start out with a single cell. In order to determine whether a single Pmel KO
cell can fixate although it is unfit compared to the bulk WT cell population, we introduced the
possibility of spontaneous mutations from WT cells to Pmel KO cells into our stochastic model. With
1.5 mutations per day on average in a tumor of 3 mm in diameter (typical melanoma size at
treatment onset in our experiments), we have chosen a relatively low frequency of mutational
events to obtain Figure 5A. For this choice of parameters, in more than half of the simulation runs
the PmelKO cells fixate and cause a relapse within the first 100 days after tumor inoculation. Even
when further decreasing the probability of mutation, this still happens, but in less cases and at a
later time points. Whenever the Pmel KO cells fixate, i.e. surpass a detectable number of cells, the
same effects as in the experimental setup can be witnessed. For a smaller pure WT tumor, below the
critical threshold for tumor eradication, the Pmel KO cell population grows and thus protects the WT
cells from dying out. The latter can then recover and eventually expand within the Pmel KO tumor.
Compared to the situations with a pre-existing portion of Pmel KO cells, this happens much later,
because spontaneously occurring PmelKO cells start to grow from a much lower number. However,
the relapse phase itself takes a very similar course (Figure 5A, right zoom-in panel). Figure 5B
shows the results of a number of different simulation runs, where the Pmel KO cells fixate at different
times to cause a relapse (the occurrence of the mutation that caused the relapse is marked with a
cross). This variability is due to the stochasticity of our model where (i) mutations occur randomly
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

at different time points and (ii) PmelKO mutants may die out before they fixate and hence the first
mutation may not always be successful.
Simulations predict cell death induction as strategy to eliminate residual PmelKO melanoma cells
As above in Figure 3E, we again varied the individual fitness rKO of the PmelKO cells. For the
percentage of PmelKO cells at 9 to 11 mm diameter we obtain a similar picture (Figure S4). We see
slightly more variability between simulation runs, particularly for high fitness, and on average
lower percentages for the intermediate fitness values. However, the overall range in between the
highest and lowest values for r KO remains the same and there is no major difference between the
variation of bKO and dKO. In addition to the percentage of PmelKO cells, we also studied the
likelihood of relapses. Figure 5C shows the number of simulation runs (out of 100) that exhibit a
relapse within one year after tumor inoculation. Besides the expectable higher number of relapses
for higher fitness rKO, we also observe different behavior between the variation of b KO and dKO. In
the cases where the fitness decrease (compared to rKO=0.36) is obtained by an increased death rate
dKO or the fitness increase is due to a higher birth rate b KO, we detect fewer relapses than in the other
cases. This is due to the fact that we have higher rates bKO and dKO (while keeping rKO the same),
which causes more birth and death events in the same time interval and thus higher fluctuations in
the PmelKO population. This makes it more likely for the mutant to die out before fixation, i.e.
before it reaches a population size at which it cannot go extinct due to random fluctuations, and thus
relapses become less likely. Mathematically this is in line with theoretical results calculating the
probability of fixation, within a population at state N, to be proportional to f KO(N)+/bKO and thus to
decrease with higher rate bKO (for constant rKO and hence fKO(N)). Once a certain population size is
reached, the fluctuations have less influence and the Pmel KO cells grow according to their average
dynamics, hence their enrichment at relapse is less sensitive to the different approaches. From a
clinical perspective, these simulations suggest that active cell death induction is the most effective
strategy in order to eliminate residual resistant tumor cells.
Discussion
We used experimental and mathematical models of melanoma T-cell therapy in order to study the
dynamics of antigen loss variants. Tumor cells can downregulate or abolish target antigen
expression by epigenetic and genetically hardwired mechanisms (mutations, deletions). In the case
of melanoma, melanocyte differentiation antigens like Pmel or MART-1 are well studied targets for
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

antigen-specific T-cell transfer or tumor vaccine therapies both in pre-clinical mouse models and
clinical trials (Chodon et al., 2014; Kohlmeyer et al., 2009). However, intratumoral heterogeneous
expression patterns and melanoma dedifferentiation, a stress-induced adaptive resistance
mechanism, impose challenges for therapeutic efficacy and durability (Landsberg et al., 2012;
Mehta et al., 2018). Firstly, our experimental data showed that complete abrogation of Pmel antigen
expression by gene editing provided survival benefit to melanoma cells in mice treated with Pmelspecific T-cell therapy (ACTMETi) despite the fact that melanoma cells can downregulate Pmel
expression by dedifferentiation. This result was rather expected, as the importance of high target
antigen expression by tumor cells for successful immunotherapy is well established (Leisegang et
al., 2016). Of note, the epitope EGSRNQDWL derived from murine Pmel protein is a low affinity
epitope (peptide-MHC affinity; IC50 23 μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, in
contrast to the corresponding high affinity epitope KVPRNQDWL (peptide-MHC affinity; IC 50 186
nM) derived from human PMEL (Engels et al., 2013; Overwijk et al., 1998). Thus, complete loss of
antigen expression facilitates tumor immune escape even in the context of a low affinity CD8 + Tcell epitope.
To us, it was however unanticipated that the enrichment of engineered Pmel antigen loss variants in
recurrent melanomas was subject to such a high variability. In addition, we incidentally found that
Pmel ablation resulted in a growth disadvantage imposed by wild type melanoma cells when
inoculated together in untreated mice. Hence, the fitness of wild type and PmelKO melanoma cells
switched upon ACTMETi, for which reason we assumed that the immune selection of Pmel KO cells
was highly variable because of the dynamics and complexity of interactions between tumor cell
variants and T-cells. Mathematical models allowed us to easily manipulate the system and study
possible sources for the variable enrichment of Pmel KO cells under ACTMETi. Given that timing of
harvesting tumor tissues for sequencing was standardized in our experimental setup (10 mm tumor
diameter), our simulations predicted subclone fitness variability as the most likely cause, which we
confirmed by different experimental approaches. We suggest a scenario, where therapy-dependent
fitness gain by antigen loss and a variable subclone fitness contribute to a composite fitness that
determines subclone dynamics under CD8+ T-cell selection pressure. In essence, this underscores
the importance of tumor heterogeneity on tumor immune surveillance of melanomas, as also
demonstrated by recent studies analyzing melanoma patient samples or using UVB-induced mouse
melanomas as a models system (McGranahan et al., 2016; Wolf et al., 2019).

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We believe that our findings have important implications for the analysis of patient samples,
because the genomic comparison of pre- and post-treatment tumor specimens, untreated and
recurrent melanomas in our experimental setting, is a standard approach to identify genetic changes
in tumor cells that cause resistance to immunotherapy (Zaretsky et al., 2016). A highly variable
enrichment of resistant tumor cell variants limits their detection likelihood, because the chance of
being identified as a recurrent event decreases. We therefore postulate that many mechanisms of
immunotherapy resistance remain to be discovered, in particular those genetic events that are
associated with a reduced tumor cell fitness prior to treatment. Hence, we envision that
implementing evolutionary mathematical models into genomic analysis pipelines could help to
identify such resistance mechanisms more reliably.
Finally, our simulations of spontaneous antigen loss mutations further emphasized the importance
of stochastic modeling, in particular when studying small tumor cell populations. While the
deterministic approximation is a good representation of the evolution of large cell populations
(Ethier and Kurtz, 1986), random effects are necessary to account for variable relapse times and
cause further variation in enrichment of T-cell therapy resistant variants. Moreover, stochastic
fluctuations are essential since they can cause extinction of antigen loss variants even though their
context-dependent fitness might be positive, i.e., they would grow out in the deterministic model.
This ties in with (Champagnat, 2006) calculating the probability of fixation of a mutant to be f Mut/
bMut, which, for constant rMut=bMut-dMut, decreases with increasing bMut. In other words, treatments
that enforce tumor cell death such as Bcl-2 family antagonists (Ashkenazi et al., 2017) are predicted
to efficiently eliminate residual resistant tumor cell variants and thus prevent melanoma recurrence.
This scenario reminds of a recent study, where tissue-resident memory CD8 T-cells were shown to
achieve long-term immune surveillance of residual melanoma cells in the skin of mice (Park et al.,
2019). Experimental models like this seem to be suitable to confirm the prediction regarding cell
death induction and may eventually contribute to improved therapeutic strategies that prevent tumor
recurrences after successful immunotherapy.
Author contributions
Conceptualization, T.T., A.B., M.H.; Methodology, N.G., D.vdBK., T.B.; Algorithms, A.K., K.E.,
F.K., M.R., JL.SB, A.B.; Software, A.K., K.E., M.R., JL.SB; Validation, N.G., D.vdBK., S.V., P.A.,
T.B.; Formal Analysis, N.G., A.K., T.B., J.L., M.H.; Investigation, N.G., D.vdBK., S.V., T.B., P.A.;
Resources, N.G., T.B., J.L., T.T., M.H.; Data Curation, N.G., A.K., T.B., M.H.; Writing – Original
Draft, N.G., A.K., A.B., M.H.; Writing – Review & Editing, T.T., A.B., M.H.; Supervision, M.R.,
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

J.L., A.B., T.T., M.H.; Project Administration, T.T., A.B., M.H.; Funding Acquisition, T.T., A.B.,
M.H. The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We thank P. Wurst and An. Dolf from the UKB FACS core facility for help with flow cytometry and
cell sorting. T.T. was funded in part by grants from the DFG (TU 90/8-1 and A27 in the SFB854).
A.B. and M.R. were funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) under Germany's Excellence Strategy - GZ 2047/1, Project-ID 390685813. A.B. and
M.H. were supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC2151 – Project-ID 390873048. T.T. and
M.H. were funded by Else-Kröner-Fresenius-Stiftung (EKFS 2013_A297).

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Arozarena, I., and Wellbrock, C. (2019). Phenotype plasticity as enabler of melanoma progression
and therapy resistance. Nat. Rev. Cancer 19, 377–391.
Ashkenazi, A., Fairbrother, W.J., Leverson, J.D., and Souers, A.J. (2017). From basic apoptosis
discoveries to advanced selective BCL-2 family inhibitors. Nat Rev Drug Discov 16, 273–284.
Baar, M. and Bovier, A. (2018). The polymorphic evolution sequence for populations with
phenotypic plasticity. Electron J Probab 23, no. 72, 1-27.
Baar, M., Coquille, L., Mayer, H., Hölzel, M., Rogava, M., Tüting, T., and Bovier, A. (2016). A
stochastic model for immunotherapy of cancer. Sci Rep 6, 24169.
Bald, T., Quast, T., Landsberg, J., Rogava, M., Glodde, N., Lopez-Ramos, D., Kohlmeyer, J.,
Riesenberg, S., van den Boorn-Konijnenberg, D., Hömig-Hölzel, C., et al. (2014). Ultravioletradiation-induced inflammation promotes angiotropism and metastasis in melanoma. Nature 507,
109–113.
Bolker, B., and Pacala, S.W. (1997). Using Moment Equations to Understand Stochastically Driven
Spatial Pattern Formation in Ecological Systems. Theor Popul Biol 52, 179–197.
Bolker, B.M., and Pacala, S.W. (1999). Spatial Moment Equations for Plant Competition:
Understanding Spatial Strategies and the Advantages of Short Dispersal. Am Nat 153, 575–602.
Boni, A., Cogdill, A.P., Dang, P., Udayakumar, D., Njauw, C.-N.J., Sloss, C.M., Ferrone, C.R.,
Flaherty, K.T., Lawrence, D.P., Fisher, D.E., et al. (2010). Selective BRAFV600E inhibition
enhances T-cell recognition of melanoma without affecting lymphocyte function. Cancer Res. 70,
5213–5219.
Butcher, J.C. (1963). Coefficients for the study of Runge-Kutta integration processes. J Aust Math
Soc 3, 185–201.
Champagnat, N. (2006). A microscopic interpretation for adaptive dynamics trait substitution
sequence models. Stoch Process Appl 116, 1127–1160.
Champagnat, N., and Méléard, S. (2011). Polymorphic evolution sequence and evolutionary
branching. Probab Theory Related Fields 151, 45–94.
Champagnat, N., Ferrière, R., and Méléard, S. (2008). From Individual Stochastic Processes to
Macroscopic Models in Adaptive Evolution. Stoch Models 24, 2–44.
Chen, S., Crabill, G.A., Pritchard, T.S., McMiller, T.L., Wei, P., Pardoll, D.M., Pan, F., and
Topalian, S.L. (2019). Mechanisms regulating PD-L1 expression on tumor and immune cells. J
Immunother Cancer 7, 305.
Chodon, T., Comin-Anduix, B., Chmielowski, B., Koya, R.C., Wu, Z., Auerbach, M., Ng, C.,
Avramis, E., Seja, E., Villanueva, A., et al. (2014). Adoptive transfer of MART-1 T-cell receptor
transgenic lymphocytes and dendritic cell vaccination in patients with metastatic melanoma. Clin.
Cancer Res. 20, 2457–2465.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Dieckmann, U., and Law, R. (1996). The dynamical theory of coevolution: a derivation from
stochastic ecological processes. J Math Biol 34, 579–612.
D’Ippolito, E., Schober, K., Nauerth, M., and Busch, D.H. (2019). T cell engineering for adoptive T
cell therapy: safety and receptor avidity. Cancer Immunol. Immunother. 68, 1701–1712.
Eftimie, R., Bramson, J.L., and Earn, D.J.D. (2011). Interactions Between the Immune System and
Cancer: A Brief Review of Non-spatial Mathematical Models. Bull Math Biol 73, 2–32.
Engels, B., Engelhard, V.H., Sidney, J., Sette, A., Binder, D.C., Liu, R.B., Kranz, D.M., Meredith,
S.C., Rowley, D.A., and Schreiber, H. (2013). Relapse or eradication of cancer is predicted by
peptide-major histocompatibility complex affinity. Cancer Cell 23, 516–526.
Ethier, S.N., and Kurtz, T.G. (1986). Markov processes: characterization and convergence. Wiley
Ser in Probab and Math Stat, John Wiley & Sons, New York.
Fournier, N., and Méléard, S. (2004). A microscopic probabilistic description of a locally regulated
population and macroscopic approximations. Ann Appl Probab 14, 1880–1919.
Frederick, D.T., Piris, A., Cogdill, A.P., Cooper, Z.A., Lezcano, C., Ferrone, C.R., Mitra, D., Boni,
A., Newton, L.P., Liu, C., et al. (2013). BRAF inhibition is associated with enhanced melanoma
antigen expression and a more favorable tumor microenvironment in patients with metastatic
melanoma. Clin. Cancer Res. 19, 1225–1231.
Gillespie, D.T. (1976). A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolution of
coupled chemical reactions. J Comput Phys 22, 403–434.
Glodde, N., Bald, T., van den Boorn-Konijnenberg, D., Nakamura, K., O’Donnell, J.S.,
Szczepanski, S., Brandes, M., Eickhoff, S., Das, I., Shridhar, N., et al. (2017). Reactive Neutrophil
Responses Dependent on the Receptor Tyrosine Kinase c-MET Limit Cancer Immunotherapy.
Immunity 47, 789-802.e9.
Hoek, K.S., and Goding, C.R. (2010). Cancer stem cells versus phenotype-switching in melanoma.
Pigment Cell Melanoma Res 23, 746–759.
Hoek, K.S., Eichhoff, O.M., Schlegel, N.C., Döbbeling, U., Kobert, N., Schaerer, L., Hemmi, S.,
and Dummer, R. (2008). In vivo switching of human melanoma cells between proliferative and
invasive states. Cancer Res. 68, 650–656.
Hölzel, M., Bovier, A., and Tüting, T. (2013). Plasticity of tumour and immune cells: a source of
heterogeneity and a cause for therapy resistance? Nat. Rev. Cancer 13, 365–376.
Kohlmeyer, J., Cron, M., Landsberg, J., Bald, T., Renn, M., Mikus, S., Bondong, S., Wikasari, D.,
Gaffal, E., Hartmann, G., et al. (2009). Complete regression of advanced primary and metastatic
mouse melanomas following combination chemoimmunotherapy. Cancer Res. 69, 6265–6274.
Kutta, W. (1901). Beitrag zur näherungsweisen Integration totaler Differentialgleichungen. Zeit
Math Phys 46, 435–453.
Kuznetsov, V.A., Makalkin, I.A., Taylor, M.A., and Perelson, A.S. (1994). Nonlinear dynamics of
immunogenic tumors: Parameter estimation and global bifurcation analysis. Bull Math Biol 56,
295–321.
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Landsberg, J., Kohlmeyer, J., Renn, M., Bald, T., Rogava, M., Cron, M., Fatho, M., Lennerz, V.,
Wölfel, T., Hölzel, M., et al. (2012). Melanomas resist T-cell therapy through inflammation-induced
reversible dedifferentiation. Nature 490, 412–416.
Law, R. and Dieckmann, U. (1999). Moment approximations of individual-based models. In: The
geometry of ecological interactions: simplifying spatial complexity. Cambridge Univ. Press, pp
252–270
Leisegang, M., Engels, B., Schreiber, K., Yew, P.Y., Kiyotani, K., Idel, C., Arina, A., Duraiswamy,
J., Weichselbaum, R.R., Uckert, W., et al. (2016). Eradication of Large Solid Tumors by Gene
Therapy with a T-Cell Receptor Targeting a Single Cancer-Specific Point Mutation. Clin. Cancer
Res. 22, 2734–2743.
Marchetti, L., Priami, C., and Thanh, V.H. (2016). HRSSA – Efficient hybrid stochastic simulation
for spatially homogeneous biochemical reaction networks. J Comput Phys 317, 301–317.
McGranahan, N., Furness, A.J.S., Rosenthal, R., Ramskov, S., Lyngaa, R., Saini, S.K., JamalHanjani, M., Wilson, G.A., Birkbak, N.J., Hiley, C.T., et al. (2016). Clonal neoantigens elicit T cell
immunoreactivity and sensitivity to immune checkpoint blockade. Science 351, 1463–1469.
Mehta, A., Kim, Y.J., Robert, L., Tsoi, J., Comin-Anduix, B., Berent-Maoz, B., Cochran, A.J.,
Economou, J.S., Tumeh, P.C., Puig-Saus, C., et al. (2018). Immunotherapy Resistance by
Inflammation-Induced Dedifferentiation. Cancer Discov 8, 935–943.
Overwijk, W.W., Tsung, A., Irvine, K.R., Parkhurst, M.R., Goletz, T.J., Tsung, K., Carroll, M.W.,
Liu, C., Moss, B., Rosenberg, S.A., et al. (1998). gp100/pmel 17 is a murine tumor rejection
antigen: induction of “self”-reactive, tumoricidal T cells using high-affinity, altered peptide ligand.
J. Exp. Med. 188, 277–286.
Overwijk, W.W., Theoret, M.R., Finkelstein, S.E., Surman, D.R., de Jong, L.A., Vyth-Dreese, F.A.,
Dellemijn, T.A., Antony, P.A., Spiess, P.J., Palmer, D.C., et al. (2003). Tumor regression and
autoimmunity after reversal of a functionally tolerant state of self-reactive CD8+ T cells. J. Exp.
Med. 198, 569–580.
Park, S.L., Buzzai, A., Rautela, J., Hor, J.L., Hochheiser, K., Effern, M., McBain, N., Wagner, T.,
Edwards, J., McConville, R., et al. (2019). Tissue-resident memory CD8+ T cells promote
melanoma-immune equilibrium in skin. Nature 565, 366–371.
Reinhardt, J., Landsberg, J., Schmid-Burgk, J.L., Ramis, B.B., Bald, T., Glodde, N., Lopez-Ramos,
D., Young, A., Ngiow, S.F., Nettersheim, D., et al. (2017). MAPK Signaling and Inflammation Link
Melanoma Phenotype Switching to Induction of CD73 during Immunotherapy. Cancer Res. 77,
4697–4709.
Restifo, N.P., Marincola, F.M., Kawakami, Y., Taubenberger, J., Yannelli, J.R., and Rosenberg, S.A.
(1996). Loss of functional beta 2-microglobulin in metastatic melanomas from five patients
receiving immunotherapy. J. Natl. Cancer Inst. 88, 100–108.
Riesenberg, S., Groetchen, A., Siddaway, R., Bald, T., Reinhardt, J., Smorra, D., Kohlmeyer, J.,
Renn, M., Phung, B., Aymans, P., et al. (2015). MITF and c-Jun antagonism interconnects
melanoma dedifferentiation with pro-inflammatory cytokine responsiveness and myeloid cell
recruitment. Nat Commun 6, 8755.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Runge, C. (1895). Über die numerische Auflösung von Differentialgleichungen. Math Ann 46, 167–
178.
Salis, H. and Kaznessis, Y. (2005). Accurate hybrid stochastic simulation of a system of coupled
chemical or biochemical reactions. J Chem Phys 122, 054103.
Schmid-Burgk, J.L., Schmidt, T., Gaidt, M.M., Pelka, K., Latz, E., Ebert, T.S., and Hornung, V.
(2014). OutKnocker: a web tool for rapid and simple genotyping of designer nuclease edited cell
lines. Genome Res. 24, 1719–1723.
Sucker, A., Zhao, F., Pieper, N., Heeke, C., Maltaner, R., Stadtler, N., Real, B., Bielefeld, N., Howe,
S., Weide, B., et al. (2017). Acquired IFNγ resistance impairs anti-tumor immunity and gives rise to
T-cell-resistant melanoma lesions. Nat Commun 8, 15440.
Tran, E., Robbins, P.F., Lu, Y.-C., Prickett, T.D., Gartner, J.J., Jia, L., Pasetto, A., Zheng, Z., Ray, S.,
Groh, E.M., et al. (2016). T-Cell Transfer Therapy Targeting Mutant KRAS in Cancer. N. Engl. J.
Med. 375, 2255–2262.
Wolf, Y., Bartok, O., Patkar, S., Eli, G.B., Cohen, S., Litchfield, K., Levy, R., Jiménez-Sánchez, A.,
Trabish, S., Lee, J.S., et al. (2019). UVB-Induced Tumor Heterogeneity Diminishes Immune
Response in Melanoma. Cell 179, 219-235.e21.
Yang, J.C., and Rosenberg, S.A. (2016). Adoptive T-Cell Therapy for Cancer. Adv. Immunol. 130,
279–294.
Zaretsky, J.M., Garcia-Diaz, A., Shin, D.S., Escuin-Ordinas, H., Hugo, W., Hu-Lieskovan, S.,
Torrejon, D.Y., Abril-Rodriguez, G., Sandoval, S., Barthly, L., et al. (2016). Mutations Associated
with Acquired Resistance to PD-1 Blockade in Melanoma. N. Engl. J. Med. 375, 819–829.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Main figure titles and legends

Figure 1. Highly variable enrichment of Pmel KO antigen loss variants in ACTMETi-recurrent
melanomas
(A) Experimental outline of HCmel12 WT melanomas treated with ACTMETi. (B) Representative
Pmel expression by immunohistochemistry in untreated and ACTMETi-recurrent HCmel12 WT
melanomas. (C) Quantification of the experiments from B. Two-sided Mann-Whitney-U test. (D)
Pmel indel distribution in HCmel12 cells gene-edited with the indicated sgRNAs. Portions of
frameshift and in-frame indels are indicated. (E) Experimental outline of HCmel12pcMix melanomas
treated with ACTMETi. (F) Individual tumor growth curves of HCmel12 pcMix melanomas left untreated
or treated with ACTMETi. (G) Amplicon NGS based quantification of PmelKO allele percentages in
the tumor cell fraction of untreated or recurrent ACT METi-treated HCmel12pcMix melanomas. (H) As
G, but total Pmel indel percentages and the respective portions of frameshift and small in-frame
indels. (I) Examples of small in-frame indels detected in G, H.
Figure 2. Mathematical model of ACTMETi on the basis of an individual-based continuous-time
Markov process
(A) Interaction diagram displaying cells/molecules (filled circles) and mechanisms that are
incorporated in the mathematical model. Arrows represent possible changes to the state of the
system, e.g., cell division, cytokine secretion, or cell death. Formulae describe the frequencies at
which these population changes occur. (B) Tumor growth curves from experimental data published
in Glodde et al. (C) Tumor growth curves generated by simulations for different initial tumor sizes,
shown as tumor diameter [mm]. Vertical lines mark beginning of METi injections, injection of
Pmel-1 T cells, and end of METi injections. Dashed lines indicate tumors undergoing eradication.
Figure 3. Simulations suggest variable sublcone fitness within the Pmel KO melanoma cell
population as cause of highly variable enrichment in ACTMETi-recurrent tumors.
Simulations of the evolution of different cell/molecule types for the untreated case (A) and under
ACTMETi (B, left and right zoom-in panel), shown as number of cells in 10e7. (C) Simulations of the
evolution of tumor size, shown as diameter [mm], and percentage of Pmel KO cells. Initial tumor of
medium size and α=4. For A-C vertical lines mark beginning of METi injections (‘), injection of
Pmel-1 T-cells (#), and end of METi injections (“) and the time that 10 mm tumor diameter is
reached (&). (D) Comparison of experimental data (Exp.) from Figure 1G and simulation results

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Sim.) for the frequency of PmelKO alleles in ACTMETi-recurrent HCmel12pcMix melanomas.
Percentage determined at a random time +-0.5 mm of the measured diameter in experiments. (E)
Predictions for enrichment of PmelKO cells under varying subclone fitness rKO=bKO-dKO and
different tumor sizes at time point of harvesting. Predicted variability of enrichment by different
tumor sizes at time point of harvesting (§) verus different sublcone fitness (¶). (F) Pmel indel
distribution in untreated (upper row) and ACTMETi-recurrent (lower row) HCmel12pcMix melanomas
determined by amplicon NGS. Orange dots indicate respective indel frequency at the time of tumor
cell injection (Figure 1D, right panel)
Figure 4. Isolated HCmel12 PmelKO single cell clones (sublcones) exhibit different fitness in
vivo resulting in biased selection under ACTMETi
(A-B) Experimental outline of HCmel12sscMix melanomas treated with ACTMETi. Mixing ratios of
HCmel12 WT and PmelKO single cell clones are indicated. (C-F) Individual tumor growth curves of
HCmel12sscMix melanomas described in A-B left untreated or treated with ACTMETi. (G) Percentages
of individual PmelKO single cell clones (subclones) in ACTMETi-recurrent tumor from D and F
determined by amplicon NGS. (H) Quantification of in vitro cell growth of individual PmelKO single
cell clones compared to HCmel12 WT cells. Two-sided t test. ***p<0.001. (I) Experimental outline
of color-coding approach comparing early outgrowth of HCmel12 Pmel KO single cell clones versus
WT cells in untreated mice. (J) Representative whole-mount fluorescent images corresponding to
experimental setup described in I. eGFP signal represented in false color blue. (K) Corresponding
quantification of J. One sample t-test with hypothetical mean of 50%. *p<0.05, **p<0.01.
Figure 5. Simulations of spontaneously occurring Pmel KO antigen loss variants suggest cell
death inducing as preferred strategy to prevent outgrowth of residual cells.
(A) Right and left zoom-in panel: Simulation of the evolution of different cell/molecule types under
ACTMETi, shown as number of cells in 10e7. Initial pure WT tumor size below critical threshold for
therapy success. Natural mutation to PmelKO cells at rate of m=10e-7. (B) Simulations of tumor
growth curves, shown as diameter [mm] on a log-scale. Red curve shows no successful mutation
while first successful mutations of blue and green curves are marked with crosses. For A-B vertical
lines mark beginning of METi injections (‘), injection of Pmel-1 T-cells (#), and end of METi
injections (“) and the time that 10 mm tumor diameter is reached (&). (C) Number of tumors going
into relapse (reaching diameter of 10 mm) within one year after tumor inoculation, out of 100 runs
under varying subclone fitness rKO=bKO-dKO.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

METHODS

CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be
fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Michael Hölzel (michael.hoelzel@ukbonn.de). Request regarding
source code (C++) of the mathematical model will be fulfilled by bovier@uni-bonn.de or
kraut@iam.uni-bonn.de.

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

Mice
C57BL/6J mice (H2-Db) were purchased from Charles River. T-cell receptor (TCR)-transgenic
Pmel-1 mice expressing an ab TCR specific for amino acids 25-33 of human (high affinity) and
mouse (low affinity) Pmel (gp100) presented by H2-Db were bred as described previously (Engels
et al., 2013; Kohlmeyer et al., 2009; Landsberg et al., 2012; Overwijk et al., 2003). All animals
were maintained under specific pathogen-free conditions in individually ventilated cages and
experiments were performed with 6-8 weeks old mice. All experiments were approved by the
responsible authorities (Landesverwaltungsamt, SA, and LANUV, NRW; Germany) and were
performed according to the institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of laboratory
animals.

Cell line
The melanoma cell line HCmel12 was established from the Hgf-Cdk4 R24C melanoma model as
described previously (Bald et al., 2014). Monoclonal and polyclonal HCmel12 Pmel KO variants
were generated using the CRISPR-Cas9 genome engineering technology (see below in the “method
details” section). All HCmel12 melanoma cell variants were routinely cultured in “complete RPMI
medium”, i.e. RPMI 1640 medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% FCS (Biochrome),
2 mM L-glutamine, 10 mM non-essential amino acids, 1 mM Hepes (all from Life Technologies),
20 µM 2-mercaptoethanol (Sigma), 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin (Invitrogen).
All cell lines used in this study were routinely tested for mycoplasma contamination by PCR.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

METHOD DETAILS

Generation of gp100 (Pmel/silv) sgRNA CRISPR-Cas9 plasmids
px330-U6-Chimeric_BB-CBh-hSpCas9 (px330) (Addgene, plasmid #42230) was digested with
BbsI and gel purified. Small DNA oligonucleotides (Microsynth) representing sgRNAs against exon
1 of murine Pmel (also known as gp100) were annealed and cloned into digested pX330. The
following target sequences were used (underlined PAM sequences NGG at the end were not
included in the oligo) based on design rules described at http://www.genome-engineering.org/):
sgRNA#1, GCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTGG;
sgRNA#2, GCTGAGTGCTCTGCTGGCTGTGG;
sgRNA#3, GAGTGCTCTGCTGGCTGTGGGGG.
3 μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, ing from each oligo was mixed to annealing buffer (100mM NaCl and 50mM Hepes pH7.4) in 50
μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inl total volume. This mixture was incubated for 4 minutes at 90°C, then 10 minutes at 70°C. Next,
the annealed oligos were slowly cooled down to 10°C. 2μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inl of the annealed oligos were ligated into
100 ng of linearized vector (pX330). The ligated product was then transformed into DH10ß chemocompetent bacteria and correct clones were identified by sequencing.

Generation of HCmel12 PmelKO cultures
5*105 HCmel12 melanoma cells were seeded in 12-well plates 2 hours prior to reverse transfection.
The cells were transfected with 2μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, ing plasmid (mix of 1.6μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, ing px330-sgRNA and 0.4μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, ing pRp-GFP)
using Fugene HD transfection reagent (Promega) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
DNA:Fugene HD ratio of 1:3 was determined to be the optimal condition for HCmel12 cells. GFP
positive cells were sorted (BD FACSAria II Cell Sorter; BD Biosciences) after 48 hours and
expanded. For generation of gene-edited Hcmel Pmel KO single cell clones, cells were seeded at 0.7
cells per 96-well. Single cell clones were further expanded until a 70 percent confluence was
achieved. Single cell clones with successfully targeted Pmel gene were identified by amplicon next
generation sequencing (Illumina MiSeq platform). For polyclonal Pmel gene editing approaches,
the frequency of Pmel frame-shift and in-frame indels of FACS sorted cultures was determined by

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

amplicon next generation sequencing and a modified version of the OutKnocker webtool
(http://www.outknocker.org) (Schmid-Burgk et al., 2014).

Amplicon next generation sequencing
Genomic DNA (gDNA) from cultured cells and homogenized melanoma tissues was extracted
using the Nucleo Spin Tissue kit (Macherey&Nagel) according to the manufacturer's
recommendations. For the generation of targeted PCR amplicons for next generation sequencing
(NGS), a two-step PCR protocol was performed. For the first PCR, a Pmel gene-specific primer
pair (Pmel_Ex1_fwd & Pmel_Ex1_bwd; encompassing the sgRNA target site was used with
additional adapter sequences for the second PCR. The Pmel gene-specific sequences are underlined:
Pmel_Ex1_fwd,
ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGCTCTTCCGATCTAAGGCCTATGCAAATGACCATC;
Pmel_Ex1_bwd,
TGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTAGGACAAGCCTAAAGTATTTTGACTT
G.
Adapter-specific universal primers containing barcode sequences and the Illumina adapter
sequences P5 and P7 were used for the second PCR (Combinations of D501.. and D701.. primers).
In the first PCR, the genomic region of interest was amplified with 18 cycles, using approximately
20-50 ng of gDNA as input and Phusion HD polymerase (New England Biolabs) in a 12.5 μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inl
mixture according to manufacturer’s protocol. Next, 2 μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inl were transferred to the second PCR. This
product was amplified with another 18 cycles in a 25 μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inl reaction mix with Phusion HD polymerase.
Next-generation sequencing was performed with MiSeq Gene & Small Genome Sequencer
(Illumina) according to manufacturer's standard protocols with a single-end read and 300 cycles
(MiSeq Reagent Kit v2 300 cycle).

Tumor transplantation experiments
Cohorts of syngeneic C57BL/6 mice were injected intracutaneously (i.c.) with a total of 2*10 5
HCmel12 melanoma cells (WT, PmelKO or mixtures thereof as described in the main text) into the
flank. Polyclonal HCmel12 Pmelindel cultures (#1, #2 and #3) were mixed with parental HCmel12
(HCmel12 WT) cells in order to obtain a Pmel indel frequency of 20%. For monoclonal approaches,

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

three independent HCmel12 PmelKO clones (#1, #2 and #3) were mixed in the same ratio and
injected either alone or mixed with HCmel12 WT cells to achieve an overall Pmel KO single cell
clone frequency of 25 or 50%, respectively. Tumor size was measured twice weekly and recorded as
diameter in millimeter. Mice with tumors exceeding 10 mm in diameter or signs of illness were
sacrificed for animal welfare reasons.

Multimodal adoptive T-cell immunotherapy (ACT) plus c-MET inhibition
Adoptive T cell transfer immunotherapy (ACT) was performed as previously described (Glodde et
al., 2017; Kohlmeyer et al., 2009; Landsberg et al., 2012). In brief, when transplanted tumors
reached a size of 3-5 mm in diameter mice were preconditioned for ACT by intraperitoneal (i.p.)
injection of 2 mg (100 mg/kg) cyclophosphamide 24 hours before adoptive transfer of Pmel-1 T
cells. One day later, 2*106 naïve Pmel-specific TCR transgenic CD90.1+CD8+Vß13+ T-cells,
isolated from spleens of Pmel-1 transgenic mice were intravenously (i.v.) injected and activated in
vivo by a single intraperitoneal dose (5*108 PFU) of the recombinant adenoviral vector Ad-gp100
(Kohlmeyer et al., 2009). On days 3, 6 and 9 after adoptive pmel-1 T cell transfer, mice received
50µg of CpG 1826 DNA (MWG Biotech) and 50 µg of polyinosinic:polycytidylic acid (Invivogen)
in 100µl of PBS peritumorally. The complete ACT protocol was combined with intraperitoneal
injections of a c-MET inhibitor (5 mg/kg KG METi, capmatinib; Novartis and Selleck Chemicals)
in 100 µl PBS every 12 hours for 5 consecutive days as previously described (Glodde et al., 2017).

Histology and immunohistology
Tumor tissue samples were immersed in a zinc-based fixative (BD Pharmingen). Tissues were
embedded in paraffin and sections stained with rabbit anti-mouse Pmel pAb (NBP1-69571; Novus
Biologicals) followed by enzyme-conjugated secondary antibodies and the LSAB-2 color
development system (DAKO). Heavily pigmented mouse melanomas were bleached before staining
(20 min at 37°C in 30% H2O2 and 0.5% KOH, 20 sec in 1% acetic acid and 5 min in TRIS buffer).
Stained sections were examined with a Zeiss Axio Observer Z1 microscope. Images were acquired
with a Zeiss AxioCam ICc5 digital camera and processed with Adobe Photoshop. The percentage of
Pmel (gp100)-positive melanoma cells was evaluated in five high-power fields per tumor by three
independent investigators.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Flow cytometry
To analyze the effect of c-MET inhibition on inflammation-induced dedifferentiation in vitro,
HCmel12 and B16F1 melanoma cells were stimulated with recombinant murine TNF-α (1000
U/ml; Peprotech) or 100 nM capmatinib (Selleck Chemicals) alone or in combination for 72 hours.
Vehicle treated cells served as controls. Cells were stained with a biotinylated polyclonal antibody
specific for mouse NGFR (R&D) followed by an appropriate Streptavidin conjugated secondary
antibody according to standard protocols. Data were acquired with a FACSCanto flow cytometer
(BD Biosciences) and analyzed with the FlowJo software (TreeStar, V7.6.5 for Windows).

Determining HCmel12 tumor cell content
To determine the HCmel12 tumor cell content in whole-tumor DNA preparations, the genomic
region containing the HCmel12 private p53R172H mutation was amplified by a two-step PCR. First
we used gene-specific primers followed by barcoded primers (Illumina barcodes: D501-508 &
D701-D712) containing the Illumina adapters P5 and P7. The following primers were used for the
p53 gene (Trp53) specific first PCR (gene specific sequences underlined):
Trp53_NG1_fwd,
ACACTCTTTCCCTACACGACGctcttccgatctCCCTCAATAAGCTATTCTGCCAG;
Trp53_NG1_bwd,
TGACTGGAGTTCAGACGTGTGCTCTTCCGATCTAGGCCTAAGAGCAAGAATAAGTC.
Pooled PCR products were sequenced on the Illumina MiSeq platform. We used the R-based
Bioconductor programming environment to import raw FASTQ files and performed the read
alignment to the genomic region of mouse p53 with the align function of the Rsubread package.
The deepSNV package was used to determine p53wt versus p53R172H ratios at the position encoding
for the p53R172H mutation. Pmel knockout allele frequencies were divided by the tumor cell content
(mutant p53 allele ratio) for normalization.

Indel detection
For basic indel detection we used the web-based program outknocker (http://www.outknocker.org/)
or a slightly modified version thereof (Schmid-Burgk et al., 2014). FASTQ files were imported and
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the sequence of the Pmel PCR amplicon was used as reference sequence for alignment. To
determine polyclonal indel distribution and quantify frame-shift and in-frame indels, individual
reads were transferred into an indel-size/indel-position matrix. This analysis was done for
polyclonal genome-edited HCmel12 cultures and untreated versus ACTMETi-treated HCmel12
tumors. All analyses were done using the R-based statistical computing platform.

Generation of HCmel12METi-R cells
Spontaneous METi-resistant HCmel12 cells (HCmel12METi-R) were raised by continuous exposure
of low-density seeded parental HCmel12 cells with the c-MET inhibitor capmatinib (100 nM).
Three independent colonies arising approximately after three weeks of continuous exposure were
isolated, propagated and further characterized by colony formation assays, Western blot analysis
and gene expression microarray (data not shown). For a single round of in vivo passaging, 2*105
HCmel12METi-R cells were injected into the flank of syngeneic C57BL/6J mice and ex vivo
HCmel12METi-R cultures were established after sacrificing the mice.

Cell growth assays
3000 HCmel12 melanoma cell variants were plated in 12-well plates and treated with the MET
inhibitor capmatinib (also known as INC280) or the MEK inhibitor trametinib (also known as
GSK1120212) (all inhibitors for in vitro assays from Selleck Chemicals) at indicated concentrations
or vehicle control for 6 days. Dishes were stained with a standard crystal violet staining procedure.
In brief, cells were washed with PBS, fixed in 4% formaldehyde solution and stained with 0.05%
crystal violet in water for 30min. Stained dishes were washed three times with water to remove
background staining. Colonies were scanned and quantified using the Odyssey SA Infrared Imaging
System (LICOR Biosciences) as surrogate measure for cell number.

Immunoblots
Protein lysates were prepared from cultured cells after 2 or 72 hours of incubation with capmatinib
(INC280), trametinib (GSK1120212) or vehicle control and lysed directly in Laemmli buffer (SDS
loading buffer). The lysates were incubated for 5 minutes at 95oC prior to loading. Samples were
loaded and separated by SDS–PAGE gel electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with 0.2 μM) and rather poorly recognized by Pmel-1 T cells, inm pore size (GE Healthcare) according to standard protocols. Blots were immunostained
with p44/42 MAPK (ERK1/2) rabbit monoclonal antibody (#9102; Cell Signaling), phospho-ERK
(E-4) mouse monoclonal antibody (sc-7383; Santa Cruz), Akt (pan) (40D4) mouse monoclonal
antibody (#2920; Cell Signaling), phospho-Akt (Ser473) (D9E) rabbit monoclonal antibody (#4060;
Cell

Signaling),

ß-Actin

(C4)

mouse

monoclonal

antibody

(sc-47778;

Santa

Cruz),

gp100/PMEL/SILV polyclonal goat antibody (NB100-41098; Novus Biologicals), c-Met (B-2)
mouse monoclonal antibody (sc-8057; Santa Cruz) and phospho-Met (Tyr1234/1235) (D26) rabbit
monoclonal antibody (#3077; Cell Signaling). Bound antibodies were visualized with IRDye
680RD or IRDye 800CW secondary antibodies (LICOR Biosciences) for detection in the 700 nm
and 800 nm channel, respectively. Blots were scanned with the Odyssey SA Infrared Imaging
System (LICOR Biosciences).

Analysis of spatial growth patterns in transplanted melanoma by genotype-dependent
color-coding.
For whole mount immunofluorescence analysis melanoma cells were transduced with retroviral
vectors generated using the proviral constructs pRp-tagGFP2 or pRp-mCherry and two retroviral
packaging plasmids pMD.2G (expressing VSVg) and pCMVGag-Pol as described (Riesenberg et
al., 2015). mCherry-expressing HCmel12 WT and tag-GFP2 expressing PmelKO single cell clones
were individually mixed at a ratio 1:1 and injected intracutaneously into the flank of C57BL/6 mice.
Mouse skin melanomas with a diameter of 3-4 mm were harvested, fixed in PLP-Buffer (0.05 M
phosphate buffer containing 0.1 M L-lysine [pH 7.4], 2 mg/ml NaIO4, and 10 mg/ml
paraformaldehyde) over night at 4°C and mounted with Fluoromount-G (Southern Biotech). Images
were acquired with an upright LSM780 confocal laser-scanning microscope (Carl Zeiss
Microimaging) equipped with a Plan Apochromat 20x/0.8. Image analysis was performed using the
Imaris software (Bitplane) as described previously (Bald et al., 2014; Glodde et al., 2017).

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Statistical analyses.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statistical significance of experimental results was evaluated with GraphPad Prism 8 software or R
computing platform using the parametric unpaired two-tailed student´s t-test or the non-parametric
Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney test depending of the type of source data (e.g. normal distribution). The
use of statistical tests is specified in the figure legends. P-values less than 0.05 were considered
significant (*p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001).

MATHEMATICAL MODELING
UNDERLYING MODEL
Stochastic model
To study the evolution of melanomas under the improved ACT METi therapy, we use an individualbased continuous-time Markov process that is an extension of the model in (Baar et al., 2016). This
model itself is based on an individual-based model of adaptive dynamics, introduced in (Bolker and
Pacala, 1997, 1999; Dieckmann and Law, 1996; Law and Dieckmann, 1999; Fournier and Méléard,
2004) and further developed over the last years (Champagnat, 2006; Champagnat and Méléard,
2011; Champagnat et al., 2008), in particular for the scenario of phenotypic switching (Baar and
Bovier, 2018). The tumor is composed of a finite number of different cells and cytokines. The state
of the system, i.e. the number of different cells/molecules at time t, is described by the vector
N(t)=(NDiff(t),NDedi(t),NKO(t),NDead(t),NCD8(t),NCyto(t)),

where

we

distinguish

differentiated,

dedifferentiated, PmelKO, and dead (not yet disintegrated) melanoma cells, as well as antigenspecific cytotoxic CD8+ Pmel-1 T-cells (for simplicity abbreviated as T-cells in the following
section), and cytokines (e.g. TNF-α and IFN-γ). The dynamics of the system are determined by a
number of events that change the state of the population and occur at certain rates or frequencies.
Those rates determine the exponential waiting time until the next event occurs and depend on fixed
parameters as well as the current state of the population. The evolution of the Markov process is
described by its infinitesimal generator that is of the form
Lφ(N)=∑eϵE(φ(N+ve)-φ(N))Re(N),
where E is the set of possible events, ve is the change in the population associated to an event, Re(N)
is the rate at which the event occurs, and φ is a measurable bounded function. It can be constructed
rigorously similar to the process in (Fournier and Méléard, 2004).
In our model we consider the following events and rates (visualized in Figure 2A):
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Differentiated WT melanoma cells
– reproduce clonal at rate (1-m)bDiNDiff
– switch to dedifferentiated state (naturally) at rate sDi,DeNDiff
– die (naturally and due to competitive pressure) at rate
(dDi+cDi,DiNDiff+cDi,DeNDedi+cDi,KONKO)NDiff
Dedifferentiated WT melanoma cells
– reproduce clonal at rate (1-m)bDeNDedi
– switch to differentiated state (naturally) at rate sDe,DiNDedi
– die (naturally and due to competitive pressure) at rate
(dDe+cDe,DiNDiff+cDe,DeNDedi+cDe,KONKO)NDedi
PmelKO melanoma cells
– reproduce clonal at rate bKONKO
– arise as mutants from (de)differentiated melanoma cells at rate m(bDiNDiff+bDeNDedi)
– die (naturally and due to competitive pressure) at rate
(dKO+cKO,DiNDiff+cKO,DeNDedi+cKO,KONKO)NKO
Dead melanoma cells
– get disintegrated at rate dDeadNDead
CD8 Pmel-1 T-cells (abbreviated as T-cells)
– reproduce/get activated/get recruited and simultaneously secrete l cytokines at rate
bCDNDiffNCD8[NDiff/(NDiff+NDedi+NKO)]α(1-hNCyto)+
– kill differentiated melanoma cells at rate kDiNDiffNCD8[NDiff/(NDiff+NDedi+NKO)]α(1-hNCyto)+
– die/get inactive at rate dCDNCD8
Cytokines
– induce an additional dedifferentiation of melanoma cells at rate sCyDi,DeNCytoNDiff
– get disintegrated at rate dCyNCyto

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Most

rates

correspond

to

a

standard

birth-and-death-model

with

competition

and

switching/mutation. The unusual rates are the ones of T-cell reproduction and melanoma cell
killing. They do not only depend on the number of differentiated melanoma cells and T-cells but
include two additional factors. [NDiff/(NDiff+NDedi+NKO)]α represents the effect of differentiated cells
being shielded from the T cells by other melanoma cells, not susceptible to the T-cells. It partially
takes into account the spatial structure of the tumor. The proportion of differentiated cells
[NDiff/(NDiff+NDedi+NKO)] is weighed by a parameter α that determines the influence of this shielding
effect. The factor (1-hNCyto)+ corresponds to cytokine-induced T-cell exhaustion. As the number of
inflammatory cytokines increases, the melanoma cells up-regulate PD-1 ligands (PD-L1) that
inhibit the immune reaction.
The injections of METi are not modeled by an additional particle, but as a change in the parameters
during the five days of injections. This is reasonable since regular injections ensure a relatively
stable level of METi, which is then degraded quickly after the injections stop. Melanoma cell
reproduction and T cell exhaustion are down-regulated, while reproduction and killing activity of Tcells are up-regulated.
Dead melanoma cells are included in the model since they contribute to the experimentally
measured diameter of the tumor.
Deterministic approximation and hybrid algorithm
In simulations, we use a Gillespie-type algorithm that generates a realization of the stochastic
process by simulating single events (Gillespie, 1976). Since this method is computationally
intensive in large populations with frequent events, we combine stochastic simulations of rare
events and deterministic simulations (employing Runge-Kutta methods (Butcher, 1963; Kutta,
1901; Runge, 1895)) of frequent events to reduce the running time while keeping random effects
such as subpopulations dying out. Similar approaches have been discussed in (Marchetti et al.,
2016; Salis and Kaznessis, 2005). This is reasonable due to an approximation result by Ethier and
Kurtz (Ethier and Kurtz, 1986): For a large system, where the number of particles (cells, molecules
etc) is of order K, the relative number of particles N(t)/K behaves approximately like the solution to
a deterministic system of differential equations. If, for each event e, the population changes from N
to N+ve at rate K*R’e(N/K), then N(t)/K≈n(t) with
dn(t)/dt=∑eϵEveR’e(n(t)).

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

PARAMETER CHOICES
Derivation from experiments
We have two sets of parameters corresponding to two sets of experiments. First, the experiments
with pure wild type tumors from Glodde et al. (Glodde et al., 2017), which are displayed in Figure
2B, and second, the experiments including PmelKO cells that are new to this paper. Between the sets
of experiments, the melanoma cells showed slightly different behavior (e.g. different speed of
growth), however this can be achieved through variation of the parameters, leaving the systemic
level (different events, structure of the rates) unchanged.
We assume that the tumor takes the form of a 3-dimensional ball to relate the number of cells in our
model to the tumor diameter measured in the experiments. A 5 mm tumor contains roughly 7*10e7
cells and since the measured tumor size varies from 1 mm ≈ 5.6*10e5 cells to 10 mm ≈ 5.6*10e8
cells, we choose K=10e7 as the typical size for the deterministic approximation.
The number of initially injected melanoma cells is 2*10e5. Since likely not all of these cells
contribute to form the growing tumor, the initial condition N Diff(0)+NDedi(0)+NKO(0) is varied
between 10e4 and 2*10e5.
The growth parameters of the different melanoma cells can be approximated from experiments
where tumor cells are injected into mice and then left to grow without treatment. We set the death
rates to 0.1 and assume the same rates for differentiated and dedifferentiated wild-type tumor cells,
since we cannot distinguish them in the experiment. Through a logistic fitting, we determine the
birth and self-competition rates. The cross-competition between Pmel KO and wild-type cells is only
relevant to the new experiments and is chosen to fit the percentages in Figure 1G (results in Figure
3D).
The rates for natural and cytokine-induced switching between differentiated and dedifferentiated
wild-type melanoma cells are chosen to fit experiments from Figure S1F, where wild-type
melanoma cells are treated in vitro with TNF-α and/or METi. Without treatment, a ratio of 0.95:0.05
of differentiated to dedifferentiated melanoma cells is observed, which determines the ratio between
the natural switch rates. This ratio shifts to 0.65:0.35 under the influence of TNF-α, which indicates
an additional, cytokine-induced, dedifferentiation. Under addition of METi alone, the ratio is the

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

same as in the untreated case, while a combination with TNF-α results in a ratio of 0.85:0.15. This
suggests that METi has no influence on the natural switch rates, while partially cancelling the
cytokine-induced switch.
The therapy parameters (reproduction, death, killing efficiency, and exhaustion of T-cells, secretion
and degradation of cytokines) are chosen to fit the experiments in Figure 2B and experiments with
pure wild-type tumors corresponding to the protocol in Figure 1A. During the course of therapy,
2*10e5 specific T-cells are injected into the mice, which do not all infiltrate the tumor tissue.
Simulations show that a variation of the number of T-cells has little to no effect on the evolution of
the tumor, therefore we fix it to 10e5 for all simulation runs. The variation between different mice is
obtained by running simulations with different initial conditions (initial number of melanoma cells).
The effect of METi on the proliferation, killing efficiency, and exhaustion of T-cells is determined
comparing experiments with therapy protocols including and excluding METi injections.
The parameter for the degradation of dead melanoma cells is chosen to fit the descent of tumor size
during the 5 days of METi injections. During this phase, the most dead melanoma cells are
produced due to effective killing by T cells, which contributes to the measured tumor diameter.
The parameter α, which scales the effect of differentiated cells being shielded from T-cells by other
melanoma cells, is chosen to fit the percentages in Figure 1G (reseults in Figure M3D). The
parameter has little influence in the simulations with pure wildtype tumors, which is why we
determine it after fitting the other therapy parameters. An increase in α corresponds to a larger
shielding effect. Since the experimental data in Figure 1G has a broad spectrum, we investigate
several sources of variation to determine α. In Figure S3A, the composition of the tumor is analysed
at a diameter of 10 mm, while the initial conditions are varied (keeping the initial percentage of
PmelKO cells at 17,1%). Even though we compare initial sizes that lie below and above the critical
threshold for therapy success, the percentages are very similar. Therefore, we fix the initial number
of cells to a medium amount of 10e5 cells in Figure S3B and vary the time at which the percentage
is taken between 9 and 11 mm diameter. Figure 3C shows that the choice of this time has a big
influence on the percentage of PmelKO cells. Temporarily, the those cells make up a large portion of
the tumor with up to 80%, before the wild-type cells recover and the context-dependent fitness of
PmelKO cells become negative again due to the increased competitive pressure. To obtain an average
of around 60%, we set α to 4.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Glodde et al.,

Glodde et al.,

This paper,

This paper,

ACT

ACTMETi

ACT

ACTMETi

K

10e7

10e7

10e7

10e7

bDi=bDe

0.5

0.113

0.45

0.113

bKO

-

-

0.46

0.33

dDi=dDe=dKO

0.1

0.1

0.1

0.1

cDi,Di=cDi,De=cDe,Di=cDe,De 0.0053

0.0002

0.0047

0.0002

cKO,KO

-

-

0.0048

0.003

cDi,KO=cDe,KO

-

-

0.00002

0.00002

cKO,Di=cKO,De

-

-

0.0117

0.0117

dDead

0.5

0.5

0.5

0.5

sDi,De

0.05

0.05

0.05

0.05

sDe,Di

0.95

0.95

0.95

0.95

sCyDi,De

2

0.02

2

0.02

bCD

60

70

70

100

dCD

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

kDi

200

250

100

120

h

1.2

0.6

1.5

1

l

3

3

3

3

dCy

1

1

1

1

α

4

4

4

4

Natural mutation and variation of parameters
In the simulation we introduce a natural mutation to investigate the spontaneous occurrence of
PmelKO mutants due to mutation from the wild-type population (in contrast to artificially
introducing them into the tumor). We choose the mutation probability such that the occurrence of a
mutant is likely but fixation is not ensured. With m=10e-7, the probability of at least one mutant
occurring before the therapy starts at day 14 is approximately 80% but the probability of more than
three mutants occurring is only 10% (the growth of the wild-type population is roughly exponential
and the occurrence of mutants is a Poisson point process for which probabilities can be calculated).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/860023; this version posted November 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In Figures 3E, 5C, and S4 the birth rate bKO and natural death rate dKO of the PmelKO mutants are
varied between [0.3,0.55] and [0.01,0.26] respectively to obtain individual fitness values r KO=bKOdKO in [0.2,0.45].
DATA AND SOFTWARE AVAILABILITY
The stochastic-deterministic hybrid algorithm is implemented in C++. The source code can be made
available upon inquiry.

35

Glodde, Kraut et al. Figure 1

C
ACTMETi recurrent

Non-treated

ACTMETi
CpG
Poly(I:C)

Cy

'
C57BL/6

14 15

Pmel

100µm

21
24 Days
18
capmatinib (METi)

100µm

Pmel

Days post tumor inoculation

D

HCmel12-WT

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

In-frame (IF)
17%
83%
Frameshift
(KO)

5
0

10

1

10

30

84%
Frameshift
(KO)

WT

IF
KO
80%

IF
KO
80%

16.7%
3.3%

16.6%
3.4%

17.7%
2.3%

10
Tumor diameter [mm]

WT

80%

C57BL/6
HCmel12pcMix
PmelKO gRNA-2

'

pmel-1 T cells
+ Ad-hgp100
Cy

14 15

18

C57BL/6

HCmel12pcMix
PmelKO gRNA-3

ACTMETi
CpG
Poly(I:C)

21
capmatinib

24

80
60
40
20
0

ACTMETi recurrent

Pmel indel frequency in tumor cells (%)

Pmel indel frequency in tumor cells (%)

100

60
50

In-frame (IF)
11%

40
89%
Frameshift
(KO)

30
20
10
0

10

1

10

PmelKO indel gRNA-1
PmelKO indel gRNA-2

Days

PmelKO gRNA-1
PmelKO gRNA-2
PmelKO gRNA-3

6
4
2

Non-treated
0

14
28
42
56
Days post tumor inoculation

70

8
6
4

50

***

100
80
60
40
20

#

0
Non-treated

2

ACTMETi

ACTMETi
recurrent

# Average PmelKO allele frequency
in tumor cells at day 0 (17%)

0

25

14
28
42
56
Days post tumor inoculation

IPmel (gp100) – exon 1

20

P

V

L

V

70

Prmel/gp100 - exon 1
L

S

A

L

L

A

V

G

A

L

10

..CCCGTGCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTGGCTGTGGGGGCCCTAGAA..
..CCCGTGCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTG---GTGGGGGCCCTAGAA..
..CCCGTGCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTGGCTGTGGGGGCCCTAGAA..
TGT

5

Non-treated
PmelKO indel gRNA-3
Pmel in-frame indel
(gRNA-1/2/3)

Pmel gRNA target sequences:

gRNA-2

exon 2
GSQNRDWLGV..

E

..CCCGTGCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTGGCTGTGGGGGCCCTAGAA..
..CCCGTGCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTG---GTGGGGGCCCTAGAA..
..CCCGTGCTTGTGCTGAGTGCTCTGCTG------GGGGCCCTAGAA..

15

0

30

G

HCmel12pcMix

0

Days post tumor inoculation

H

ACTMETi
recurrent

Pmel/gp100
gRNA-3

10
Tumor diameter [mm]

HCmel12pcMix
Transplant

Non-treated

Indel size [bp]

8

0

HCmel12pcMix
PmelKO gRNA-1

0

Indel size [bp]

F
IF
KO

20

50

E
WT

40

HCmel12-WT

In-frame (IF)
11%

Indel size [bp]

Mixing
80% WT
20% Indel

60

Pmel/gp100
gRNA-2

15
10

80

HCmel12-WT

Pmel/gp100
gRNA-1

20

**

100

Pmel KO indel frequency in tumor cells (%)

pmel-1 T cells
+ Ad-hgp100
Transplant

% Pmel/gp100 positive cells (IHC)

B

HCmel12-WT

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

A

EGSQNRDW
murine gp100
epitope

gRNA-3

PAM sequence

Cyto

d
Glodde,
Kraut et al. Figure 2
Cy

e NC yt o

⇣ N Di f f ⌘ ↵
(Di)
bC D ⌫NtDi
ff
NT o t
·(1 hNC y )+

e, Di

A
Di↵

CD8

Cyto:
(e.g. TNF-!)
⌘↵
⇣ N Di f Cytokines
f
t Di
t Di⌫N
PmelKO
t (CD)
C DKO:
8 NTHCmel12
ot
·(1 hN
C yt o )+HCmel12 WT dediffereniated
Dedi:

m)bDi bDi

+ cDi, Di NDi f f
cDi, De NDedi
, K O NK O

Cyto

dC y

†

d Dead

Cy

s Di, De NC y t o

mbDi
mbDe

KO
bK O

(1

Dedi

m)bDe

dKO
d De + cDe, Di NDi f f
+cK O, Di NDi f f
+cDe, De NDedi
+cK O, De NDedi
+cDe, K O NK O
+cK O, K O NK O

B

⇣ N f f ⌘↵
bC D NDi f f NDi
T ot
·(1 hNC y t o )+

s De, Di

(1

CD8

Di↵

s Di, De

⇣ N Di f f ⌘ ↵

k Di NC D 8 NT o t
·(1 hNC y t o )+

m)bDi

d Di + cDi, Di NDi f f
+cDi, De NDedi
+cDi, K O NK O

Dead

Experimental data from Glodde, Bald et al., Immunity 2017
(PMID:29045907)

Tumor diameter [mm]

ad

Diff: HCmel12
WT differentiated
dC D
CD8: CD8+ Pmel-1 T cells
Dead: Dead cells
: Removed cead cells

dC D

d Dead

†

C
Simulation by mathematical model

Tumor diameter [mm]

i, De

Days post tumor inoculation

Days post tumor inoculation

Glodde, Kraut et al. Figure 3

B

‚ „

&

#
WT Diff. cells
WT Dediff. cells
PmelKO cells
Pmel-1 T cells
Cytokines

Number of cells (10e7)

Days post tumor inoculation

‚

Days post tumor inoculation

D

ACTMETi
Non-treated recurrent

% PmelKO tumor cells

% Pmel KO tumor cells

Tumor diameter (mm)

‚# „

&

Days post tumor inoculation

E
ACTMETi recurrent

Non-treated

% PmelKO tumor cells

C

„

#
WT Diff. cells
WT Dediff. cells
PmelKO cells
Pmel-1 T cells
Cytokines

&

% Pmel KO tumor cells

Number of cells (10e7)

WT Diff. cells
WT Dediff. cells
PmelKO cells

Number of cells (10e7)

A

¶
§

Days post tumor inoculation
Exp. Sim. Exp. Sim.
Individual fitness r

Individual fitness r
Varying birth death
9 mm
10 mm
11 mm

F

50
40
30
20
10
0
10

1

−10

−30

60

Non-treated

50
40
30
20
10
0

−50

10

1

60

ACTMETi
recurrent

50
40
30
20
10
0
10

1

−10

−30

Indel size [bp]

−30

80

Non-treated

60

40

20

0

−50

10

1

Indel size [bp]

−50

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

Indel size [bp]

−10

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

Non-treated

60

ACTMETi
recurrent

50
40
30
20
10
0
10

1

−10

−30

Indel size [bp]

−10

−30

−50

Indel size [bp]

−50

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

60

Indel frequency (%) in input distribution (PmelKO gRNA-3)

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

Pmel/gp100 indel frequency (%)

PmelKO indel gRNA-3
Pmel inframe indel

60

ACTMETi
recurrent

50
40
30
20
10
0
10

1

−10

−30

Indel size [bp]

−50

Glodde, Kraut et al. Figure 4

#3

#2

#1

100

ACTMETi

pmel-1
- T cells
+ Ad-hgp100
Cy

0

14 15

18

Tumor area in mm

WT

HCmel12sccMix

D

C

HCmel12 PmelKO
single cell subclones

CpG
Poly(I:C)

21
capmatinib

24

Days

Non-treated

80
60
40
20
0

Days post tumor inoculation

100

0

14

28

42

56

ACTMETi

80

Tumor area in mm

A

60
40
20
0

70

0

14

Days post tumor inoculation
HCmel12 PmelKO
single cell subclone

#2

E

#1

0

pmel-1
- T cells
+ Ad-hgp100
Cy

14 15

18

Tumor area in mm

HCmel12sccMix

ACT

METi

CpG
Poly(I:C)

21
capmatinib

24

Days

#3

60
40
20
0

14

28

42

56

60
40
20
0

70

0

14

#3

#1

HCmel12sccMix input

WT

42%
0%
0%
58%

79%
0%
0%
21%

82%
1%
0%
18%

I

J

#1
WT

50%

50%

50%

100μm
WT

Ø 3-4mm

PmelKO clone #2

100μm
WT

clone #3 eGFP
WT

Merge

mCherry

Day 0

Ø 3-4mm

100μm

PmelKO clone #3

56

70

88%
0%
3%
9%

K

***

150
***

100

50

0

WT
#1
#2
#3
HCmel12
HCmel12 PmelKO
clones

Tumor Ø 3-4mm

PmelKO clone #1

mCherry

Day 0
50%

Ø 3-4mm

clone #2 eGFP
WT

eGFP (false color)

52%
35%
6%
7%

mCherry

Day 0
50%

WT

clone #1 eGFP
WT

mCherry

48%
34%
0%
18%

% HCmel12 PmelKO cells of WT cells

50%

39%
10%
0%
50%

42

H

#2

#2

28

Days post tumor inoculation

HCmel12sccMix
ACTMETi
recurrent
subclone #1
PmelKO subclone #2
subclone #3
WT

70

ACTMETi

80

Days post tumor inoculation

G
HCmel12sccMix input

Non-treated

80

0

Days post tumor inoculation

56

100

100

WT

42

F

Relative cell growth in vitro (%)

#3

Tumor area in mm

B

28

Days post tumor inoculation

100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
100
80
60
40
20
0

p=0.79
PmelKO
subclone #1

*

**

PmelKO
subclone #2

PmelKO
subclone #3

Glodde, Kraut et al. Figure 5

A

‚#„

‚# „

&
Number of cells (10e7)

Number of cells (10e7)

WT Diff. cells
WT Dediff. cells
PmelKO cells
Pmel-1 T cells
Cytokines

Days post tumor inoculation

C
B
Tumor diameter (mm)

‚# „

Days post tumor inoculation

Number of relapses out of 100 simulations

Days post tumor inoculation

&
WT Diff. cells
WT Dediff. cells
PmelKO cells
Pmel-1 T cells
Cytokines

Varying birth death

Individual fitness r

