bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Title:
Taking the sub-lexical route:
brain dynamics of reading in the semantic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia

Running title:
Brain dynamics of reading in semantic variant of PPA

V. Borghesani1, L.B. Hinkley2, K. G. Ranasinghe1, M. M. C. Thompson2,3, W. Shwe1, D.
Mizuiri2, M. Lauricella1, E. Europa1, S. Honma2, Z. Miller1, B. Miller1, K., Vossel4, J. F. Houde5,
M.L. Gorno-Tempini1,6* & S. S. Nagarajan2,5*
1

Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco
2
Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San Francisco
3
UC Berkeley-UC San Francisco Graduate Program in Bioengineering, University of
California, San Francisco
4
Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis
5
Department of Otolaryngology, University of California San Francisco
6
Department of Neurology, Dyslexia Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA
*

Contributed equally to this work

Corresponding Author
Valentina Borghesani, PhD, valentina.borghesani@ucsf.edu
Department of Neurology,
Memory and Aging Center,
University of California San Francisco
675 Nelson Rising Lane, Mission Bay Campus,
San Francisco, CA 94158, USA

Abstract: 368 words
Introduction: 1040 words
Discussion: 2135 words
Whole paper: 5769 words
Tables: 4
Figures: 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

50-word Abbreviated Summary:
Borghesani et al. investigate brain dynamics during irregular word reading using
magnetoencephalographic imaging in patients with semantic variant of primary progressive
aphasia. Due to anterior temporal lobe neurodegeneration, patients rely more on dorsal, occipitoparietal brain regions – providing novel evidence on the interplay between ventral and dorsal
reading routes.

Abstract
Reading aloud requires mapping an orthographic form to a phonological one. The mapping
process relies on sub-lexical statistical regularities (e.g., “oo” to |uː|) or on learned lexical
associations between a specific visual form and a series of sounds (e.g., yacht to /jɑt/).
Computational, neuroimaging, and neuropsychological evidence suggest that sub-lexical and
lexical processes rely on partially distinct neural substrates: a dorsal (occipito-parietal) and a
ventral (occipito-temporal) route, respectively.
Here, we investigated the spatiotemporal features of sub-lexical processes capitalizing the
time resolution of magnetoencephalography and the unique clinical model offered by patients with
semantic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (svPPA). Behaviorally, svPPA patients manifest
marked lexico-semantic impairments including difficulties in reading words with exceptional
orthographic to phonological correspondance (irregular words). Moreover, they present with focal
neurodegeneration in the anterior temporal lobe (ATL), affecting primarily the ventral, occipitotemporal, lexical route. Therefore, this clinical population allows for testing of specific hypotheses
on the neural implementation of the dual-route model for reading, such as whether damage to one
route can be compensated by over-reliance on the other. To this end, we reconstructed and
analyzed time-resolved whole-brain activity in 12 svPPA patients and 12 healthy age-matched
controls while reading irregular words (e.g., yacht) and pseudowords (e.g., pook).
Consistent with previous findings that the dorsal route is involved in sub-lexical processes,
in control participants we observed enhanced neural activity over dorsal occipito-parietal cortices
for pseudowords, when compared to irregular words. This activation was manifested in the betaband (13-20 Hz), ramping up slowly over 500 ms after stimulus onset and peaking at ~800 ms,
around response selection and production. This temporal pattern of neural activity was not
observed in svPPA patients. Furthermore, a direct comparison of neural activity between patients
and controls revealed a dorsal spatiotemporal cluster during irregular word reading. These findings
suggest that the sub-lexical route is involved in processing both irregular and pseudo- words in
svPPA.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Together these results provide further evidence supporting a dual-route model for reading
aloud - mediated by the interplay between lexical (ventral) and sub-lexical (dorsal) neuro-cognitive
systems. When the lexical route is damaged, as in the case of neurodegeneration affecting the ATL,
partial compensation appears to be possible by over-recruitment of the slower, serial attentiondependent, sub-lexical one.

Keywords: surface dyslexia, semantic variant Primary Progressive Aphasia, MEG, dual-model of
reading

Introduction
Reading aloud, the process by which a visual input is translated into an auditory output,
entails a series of steps involving different neural systems: from vision to motor control. Crucially,
this requires mapping an orthographic form to its corresponding phonological form. Languagespecific statistical regularities allow readers to spell out words never encountered before
(sometimes referred to as pseudowords or nonwords, e.g., pook) by selecting the most plausible
phonological representations. In non-transparent languages such as English, access to meaning is
necessary to correctly pronounce words with exceptional spelling-to-sound correspondence (i.e.,
irregular words, e.g., yacht). Computational models of reading assume that this process involves
both storage of the relationship between orthography and phonology (sub-lexical representations),
as well as the knowledge of learned words (lexico-semantic representations) (Perry et al., 2007).
The most widely accepted model, the dual-route cascaded model, posits an interplay of two
computationally distinct routes: a sub-lexical and a lexical one, needed to select the appropriate
phonological output for pseudowords and irregular words respectively (Coltheart et al., 1993,
2001).
The idea that these are two different cognitive mechanisms supported by two distinct neural
substrates originates in the neuropsychological evidence of a double dissociation, as two kinds of
acquired dyslexia have been isolated (Marshall and Newcombe, 1973). Phonological dyslexia is
characterized by a deficit in reading pseudowords, with relatively preserved reading of irregular
words, suggesting a selective disruption of the grapheme-to-phoneme conversion route (Coltheart,
2006). Typical errors are called lexicalization, where pseudowords are read as real words: e.g.,
pook read as hook. Conversely, in surface dyslexia a deficit with irregular words is paired with
relatively spared reading of pseudowords, and typical errors are called regularizations: e.g., yacht
read as /jætʃt/, instead of /jɑt/ (Coltheart, 2006). This profile suggests an impairment of the lexicosemantic system (Woollams et al., 2007).
Neuroimaging studies provide complementary observations indicating that sub-lexical and
lexical processes rely on partially different neural substrates. Sub-lexical processes have been

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

associated with dorsal structures in the inferior parietal lobe (i.e., supramarginal gyrus, angular
gyrus, and temporoparietal junction) and the posterior inferior frontal gyrus (IFG) by studies
investigating pseudoword reading, i.e., regular orthographic-to-phonological mappings (Jobard et
al., 2003; Mechelli et al., 2003; Graves et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2013; Sliwinska et al., 2015).
Lexical processes, which have proven harder to isolate, have been linked to ventral brain structures
in the temporal lobe, especially its anterior portion (ATL), which appears to be involved in
semantic-mediated reading of low-frequency irregular words (Graves et al., 2010; Wilson et al.,
2012; Taylor et al., 2013; Hoffman et al., 2015; Provost et al., 2016).
Computational models and behavioral evidence suggest key computational differences
between the two routes: while activated simultaneously for all word-like inputs, only the lexical
one can lead to the correct pronunciation of irregular words, while only the sub-lexical one allows
reading of pseudowords. To date however, little is known about the neural dynamics characterizing
these processes, although different temporal profiles have been suggested. On one hand, serial
effects have been associated with the sub-lexical route, arguably indicating a slow grapheme-bygrapheme conversion mechanism (e.g., Weekes, 1997). On the other hand, it has been suggested
that the ventral route operates in parallel, within a fast, automatic spreading of activation (Coltheart
et al., 2001). Hence, divergence of the two routes should be detected in a relatively late time frame,
after ~400 ms, close to response selection and production. Most studies of reading have focused
on event-related potential (ERPs), which capture stimulus-locked, phased-locked evoked activity
immediately following the presentation of written stimuli (for a review, Salmelin, 2007; Grainger
and Holcomb, 2009). These studies may have overlooked slower, later, not necessarily phasedlocked effects, which can be better captured by analyses of task-induced neural oscillatory
changes.
While neuroimaging studies can provide only correlational evidence, neuromodulation
techniques and neuropsychological findings have strengthened the evidence of a neural
dissociation between lexical and sub-lexical computations. For instance, recent evidence that
repetitive transcranial magnetic stimulation (rTMS) over left ventral ATL leads to regularization
errors has corroborated the critical role played by this region in irregular words reading (Ueno et
al., 2018). In this context, patients with semantic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (svPPA)
are an ideal clinical model for testing hypotheses on the interplay between dorsal (parietal) vs.
ventral (temporal) routes. SvPPA is associated with (relatively) focal atrophy of the ATL which,
in time, spreads towards the orbitofrontal cortex (Galton et al., 2001; Rosen et al., 2002, Brambati
et al., 2009b). Clinically, svPPA patients present with fluent speech and pervasive semantic
memory deficits (Hodges et al., 1992). It is well established that patients with svPPA manifest
surface dyslexia (Hodges et al., 1992, 1999; Neary et al., 1998) with a clear effect of word
frequency and length on performance accuracy in irregular word reading (Patterson and Hodges,
1992; Jefferies et al., 2004; Patterson et al., 2006). In particular, svPPA patients produce so-called
over-regularization errors, such as reading “sew” as “sue”, i.e., the application of legitimate
alternative correspondence between grapheme and phonemes (Woollams et al., 2007; Wilson et
al., 2009). Crucially, the severity of the reading deficit has been linked to the extent of the semantic

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

loss (Patterson and Hodges, 1992; Graham et al., 2000; Jefferies et al., 2004). Finally, irregular
word reading accuracy has been directly linked to the integrity of left ATL (vs. pseudowords to
left temporo-parietal structures, Brambati et al., 2009a). To date, only one study has attempt to
investigate the correlates of surface dyslexia in svPPA with a neuroimaging experiment: it has
been suggested that, given the damage to ATL, svPPA patients recruit the intraparietal sulcus to
read irregular words as if they were pseudowords (Wilson et al., 2009).
Here, we capitalize on high temporal resolution neuroimaging (magnetoencephalographic
imaging) in svPPA patients with clinical and neuro-anatomical features that enables us to
investigate the spatiotemporal dynamics supporting the interplay between ventral and dorsal
routes. We hypothesize that svPPA patients, given their ATL atrophy and subsequent lexicalsemantic deficit, would rely more on sub-lexical processes to read irregular words, subserved by
the relatively structurally intact dorsal, occipito-parietal cortices. Specifically, we predict an overrecruitment of the dorsal route during reading of irregular words in svPPA patients. Given the
posited serial and slower nature of the dorsal route computation, we expect this over-recruitment
to occur at later latencies.
Materials and methods
Subjects
Twelve svPPA patients (8 female, 67.92 ± 7.33 years old) and 12 healthy age-matched
controls (9 female, 72.17 ± 4.04 years old) were recruited through the University of California San
Francisco (UCSF) Memory and Aging Center (MAC). All participants were right-handed English
native speakers, had no history of developmental dyslexia, and no contraindications to MEG.
Patients met currently published diagnostic criteria for svPPA as determined by a team of
clinicians and physicians based on a detailed medical history, comprehensive neurological
assessment, and standardized neuropsychological and language evaluations (Kramer et al., 2003;
Gorno-tempini et al., 2011). All patients included in the study scored at least 15 out of 30 on the
Mini-Mental Status Exam (MMSE) and weresufficiently functional to be scanned. In addition,
each patient had left-predominant anterior temporal lobe atrophy to maximize our chances of
detecting surface dyslexia in a homogenous sample (Binney et al., 2016). Demographic
information and neuropsychological data are shown in Table 1 and 2 respectively. Two-sample ttests (two-tailed distributions, significance threshold set at p<0.05) were used to statistically assess
group differences between these svPPA patients and healthy controls published data (GornoTempini et al., 2004; Binney et al., 2016; Watson et al., 2018) (Table 2). Approved study protocols
by the UCSF Committee on Human Research were followed, and all subjects provided written
informed consent.
Stimuli and Experimental Design
Visual stimuli were projected into the magnetically shielded MEG scanner room. Subjects
were instructed to read aloud the string of letters immediately following its appearance on the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

screen, speaking their responses into a MEG-compatible microphone. The stimuli consisted of 40
regular words, i.e., words with regular grapheme-to-phoneme correspondence (e.g., fact), 40
irregular words, i.e., words with inconsistent grapheme-to-phoneme correspondence (e.g., choir),
and 70 pronounceable strings of letters with no semantic representation (e.g., pook). Real words
and pseudowords (n=20) were drawn from the Arizona reading list (Beeson and Rising, 2010). An
additional 50 pseudowords were generated using an established computerized multi-lingual
pseudo-word generator Wuggy (Keuleers and Brysbaert, 2010). Three sets of 50 pseudowords
each were generated by submitting a list of 50 real word nouns to the multilingual pseudoword
generator using the English language setting for sub-syllabic structures and transition frequencies.
The first 50 pseudowords set was checked by a native speaker informant, who suggested no
replacement from the backup second or third sets. Examples of stimuli from each category, along
with frequency and length measures, are shown in Table 3.
Words and pseudowords were presented in two separate runs. Words were presented twice
each in a fixed, sequential order (1 second display, 1.7-2.1 second inter-stimulus interval (ISI)).
Pseudowords were presented twice each in randomized order (2 second display, 1.7-2.1 second
ISI). Vocal responses were digitized on separate analog-to-digital channels (ADCs), marked
through amplitude threshold detection, and verified by hand through visual inspection manually in
each dataset. If the patient needed more time respond, duration of the ISI was extended to ensure
that responses were captured without interfering with the next trial.
Behavioral data
Responses were recorded with Audacity (www.audacityteam.org) and coded offline by
three independent raters as either correct, error, or missed. Reaction times and accuracy were
statistically analyzed using an analyss of variance (ANOVA) based on the three word types
(regular, irregular, and pseudo- words) and cohorts (controls vs. svPPA patients) using the Python
statistical library (statsmodels - www.statsmodels.org).
MRI protocol and analyses
Structural T1-weighted images were acquired on a 3T Siemens system (Siemens, Erlagen,
Germany) at the UCSF Neuroscience Imaging Center, equipped with a standard quadrature head
coil with sequences, previously described in (Mandelli et al., 2014). MRI scans were acquired
within 1 year of the MEG data acquisition. To identify regions of atrophy, svPPA patients were
compared to a separate set of 25 healthy controls collected using the same protocol (14 females,
mean age 66.2 ± 8.5) using voxel-based morphometry (VBM). Image processing and statistical
analyses were performed using the VBM8 Toolbox implemented in Statistical Parametric Mapping
(SPM8,
Wellcome
Trust
Center
for
Neuroimaging,
London,
UK,
http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm) running under Matlab R2013a (MathWorks). The images were
segmented into grey matter, white matter, and CSF, bias corrected, and then registered to the
Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI). The grey matter value in each voxel was multiplied by the
Jacobian determinant derived from spatial normalization in order to preserve the total amount of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

grey matter from the original images. Finally, to ensure the data were normally distributed and to
compensate for inexact spatial normalization, the modulated grey matter images were smoothed
with a full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) Gaussian kernel filter of 8x8x8 mm. A general linear
model (GLM) was then fit at each voxel, with one variable of interest (group), and three confounds
of no interest: gender, age, education, and total intracranial volume (calculated by summing across
the grey matter, white matter and CSF images). The resulting statistical parametric map (SPM)
was thresholded at p<0.001 with family wise error (FWE) correction voxel-wise and used to
visualize svPPA patients atrophy pattern (see Fig.1C), as well as build an exclusive mask for the
MEG source reconstruction analyses (see below).
MEG protocol and analyses
Neuromagnetic recordings were conducted using a whole-head 275 axial gradiometer
MEG system (CTF, Coquitlam, BC, Canada) at a sampling rate of 1200 Hz. Head position was
recorded before and after each block using three fiducial coils (nasion, left/right preauricular)
placed on the participant. After data acquisition, each dataset was visually inspected to identify
and remove noisy MEG sensors as well as trials with artifacts or missing responses that exceeded
1 pT fluctuations. Datasets were then epoched with respect to stimuli presentation onset (stimuluslocked trials) or vocal response onset (response-locked trials). In order to further remove excessive
noisy artifacts (e.g., dental work, gritting) from some trials, datasets were cleaned using dual signal
subspace projection (DSSP) and filtered between 4 and 115 Hz prior to souce reconstruction
(Sekihara et al., 2016; Cai et al., 2018).
We then reconstructed whole-brain oscillatory activity using the Neurodynamic Utility
Toolbox for MEG (NUTMEG; http://nutmeg.berkeley.edu), which implements a time–frequency
optimized adaptive spatial filtering technique to estimate spatiotemporal locations of neural
sources. A tomographic volume of source locations was computed through an adaptive spatial
filter (8 mm lead field) that weights each location relative to the signal of the MEG sensors (Dalal
et al., 2008). Data was reconstructed in the beta (12-30 Hz) range using partially overlapping time
windows (200 ms, 50 ms step size) optimized for capturing induced, non-phase locked changes in
the MEG signal generated by neural activity. Source power for each location was derived through
a noise-corrected pseudo-F statistic expressed in logarithmic units (decibels) comparing signal
magnitude during an active experimental time window (i.e., from 0, stimuli onset, to 900 ms)
versus a baseline control window (i.e., 250 ms preceding stimuli onset) (Robinson and Vrba,
1999).
We focused our analyses on beta band (12-30 Hz) activations during reading of irregular
words and pseudowords for three main reasons. First, we wished to overcome limitations of
previous studies by looking not only at evoked but also induced changes in brain activity (i.e.,
modulations of ongoing oscillatory processes that are not phased-locked). This is especially
relevant when the effects might occur later with respect to stimuli onset, as in the current setting,
where differences between controls and patients in early, low-level visual processes are not
expected, while divergence in later stages is predicted by both behavioral evidence and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

neuroanatomical findings. Furthermore, increased latency in response to linguistic stimuli have
been observed in svPPA patients, and analyses of oscillatory behavior might be more sensitive
than ERPs in detecting abnormalities in slow neural responses with increased trial-by-trial
variability and thus decreased phase-locking (Kielar et al., 2018). Second, we aimed at providing
functional interpretation of our findings. The beta band has been extensively related to cortical
activations. Specifically, desynchronization (i.e., beta band suppression) is a reliable indicator of
heightened neural activity (Yuan et al., 2010; Stevenson et al., 2011) and covaries with BOLD
signal in fMRI. Also, the beta band has been shown to capture predominantly left lateralized
language functions, such as reading, and svPPA is a strongly left lateralized neurodegenerative
disease (Wang et al., 2012; Hinkley et al., 2016). Moreover, beta band oscillations have been
reliably associated with both memory and motor components of spoken word production (Herman
et al., 2013; Piai et al., 2015). Third, in order to highlight the difference between the lexical and
sub-lexical route, the key conditions that we compared were irregular words (as they can be read
correctly only relying on lexical knowledge) and pseudowords (as they can be read only via sublexical processes). However, regular words can read using either route and thus do not offer any
clear insight on the neural processes underlying lexical and sub-lexical processes.
Single-subject beamformer reconstructions were spatially normalized by applying each
subject’s T1-weighted transformation matrix to their statistical map, and group analyses were
performed with statistical nonparametric mapping (SnPM). From each voxel, we obtained a
permuted distribution, then we estimated the significance of each pseudo-F value from its position
in this permuted distribution (Singh et al., 2003). Multiple-comparisons corrections were applied
using an adaptive two-step false discovery rate (FDR; (Benjamini and Hochberg, 2000)), wherein
both steps’ maps were thresholded at p<0.01, and the cluster extended spatio-temporal threshold
set to 200 voxels and two consecutive time windows. Finally, for visualization purposes, a
binarized image generated from patients’ group-level atrophy map was used as an exclusive mask
applied to the voxelwise statistics (see section MRI protocol and analyses). Figures 2-4 focus on
the left-hemiphere results, central to our investigation and main component of our results. For
completeness, Table 4 reports all statistically significant clusters in both hemispheres.
First, we examined the pattern of activation during irregular word and pseudoword reading
separately for controls and svPPA patients (SnPM one-sample t-test against baseline). Then, for
both groups, we generated within-subject contrast maps comparing pseudowords and irregular
words in order to identify spatiotemporal clusters of heightened activity due sub-lexical processes
(SnPM two-sample t-test). Next, we directly compared svPPA patients and controls during
irregular word reading in order to highlight spatiotemporal clusters of differential activity between
the two groups (SnPM two-sample t-test).
Finally, we conducted two post-hoc analyses. First, we sought to rule out the hypothesis
that the differences in neural activation could be explained by differences in reaction times. To
this end, the raw datasets were epoched with respect to the onset of vocal response (responselocked trials, from -400 ms before response to +400 ms after vocal response) and the same group
comparison (i.e., irregular word reading in controls vs. svPPA patients) was performed. Second,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

we directly compared, in the time window of interest, svPPA patients and controls during
pseudoword reading (SnPM two-sample t-test) to ascertain whether the observed difference
between groups was generalized or specific to irregular word reading.
Data Availability
The clinical and neuroimaging data used in the current paper are available from the
corresponding author, upon reasonable request. The sensitive nature of patients’ data and our
current ethics protocol do not permit open data sharing at this stage.
Results
Behavioral data and cortical atrophy
Two ANOVAs based on three word types (regular, irregular, and pseudo- words) and two
cohorts (controls vs. svPPA patients) were used to compare behavioral performance in the task
during the MEG scan. For overall accuracy (Fig. 1A), there was a significant main effect of cohort
(F(1)=16.9, p <0.001), but there was no main effect of word type (F(2)=2.75, p =0.07) nor
significant interaction (F(2)=0.49, p =0.6). For reaction times (Fig.1B), there was a significant
main effect of cohort (F(1)=11.64, p =0.001) and of word type (F(2)=16.04, p <0.001), but no
significant interaction (F(2)=0.01, p =0.9). Overall, these results are consistent with a clinical
diagnosis of svPPA and a pattern of surface dyslexia.
Distribution of cortical atrophy in the svPPA cohort is shown in Figure 1C. Patients present
the expected pattern of degeneration of the anterior temporal lobe. Unsurprisingly, given our
inclusion criteria, the atrophy appears strongly left-lateralized.
Neural dynamics during reading
Within-group analyses of brain activity (changes in beta power) during irregular word and
pseudoword reading are presented for both controls in Figure 2A and svPPA patients in Figure 2B.
Following stimuli presentation (0ms), for both groups and conditions we observed significant betapower suppression (a marker of functional activation) over occipital and parietal areas with a
progressive posterior-to-anterior shift in time. This result is coherent with classical findings from
both evoked-related fields (Marinkovic et al., 2003) and spectral (Borghesani et al., 2019)
analyses.
In order to localize changes in brain activity differential for sub-lexical vs. lexical
processes, we then contrasted pseudowords against irregular words separately for each group. In
controls, a significant increase in brain activity during pseudoword reading was observed over
bilateral occipito-parietal cortices, ramping up ~600 ms post stimulus onset and peaking at ~800
ms (Fig 3a). Table 4 summarizes the temporal windows, peaks of local maxima, and t-values of
all main sub-clusters that could be isolated using this comparison when corrected for multiple
comparisons. This included a cluster over the left precuneus, right posterior cingulate, and right

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

temporal and occipital gyri (Fig 3a). These changes in activation over these parieto-occipital
regions peaked during pseudoword reading (when compared to irregular word reading) over these
later (600-800ms) time windows, the time of response selection and execution. This finding
suggests that, in healthy controls, sub-lexical processes rely on the recruitment of the dorsal route.
In svPPA, using the same contrast, this effect was absent even at very lenient (uncorrected)
threshold (Fig 3b). Thus it appears that, while controls recruit the dorsal route for pseudowords
more than for irregular words, svPPA patients process the two types of stimuli in a similar way:
relying on the dorsal route.
Next, in order to confirm that this increase in activation during sub-lexical processing was
absent in svPPA, we directly contrasted irregular word reading in controls against svPPA patients.
This direct comparison is crucial as the failure to detect an effect in one of the two groups (i.e., a
difference in significance level) does not necessarily entail a significant difference between the
two groups (Gelman and Stern, 2006). As we predicted from the separate within-group analyses,
this between-group comparison revealed a large spatiotemporal cluster over bilateral occipitoparietal cortex where svPPA patients significantly manifested more brain activity than controls
(Fig 4a). As detailed in Table 4, four sub-clusters could be localized, peaking in the bilateral
precuneus and superior parietal lobule. The spatial topography and timing of these clusters are
highly similar to those described in the within-group analyses, strengthening the interpretation that
during irregular word reading, at the time of response selection, patients with svPPA over-recruit
the dorsal route. Critically, our post-hoc analysis contrasting the two cohorts in the time windows
of interest during pseudoword reading reveal no differences.
To correct for changes in reaction time between the two groups (which could potentially
influence our stimulus-locked analyses presented above) we conducted an additional analysis
reconstructing changes in brain activity in datasets aligned to the onset of the response (responselocked) when subjects read the word aloud. We conducted a between-group comparison for
irregular word reading between controls and svPPA for response-locked trials (Fig 4). Here, we
see increases in brain activity similar to the group comparison presented above. Around response
onset, significantly increased beta suppression is identifiable in the svPPA group over bilateral
occipito-parietal cortices (Fig 4b), in particular involving left precuneus, left superior parietal
lobule, and right precuneus (see Table 4 for details). This additional analysis confirms that, even
when differences in reaction time are taken into account, patients with svPPA still over-recruit
these regions of parieto-occipital cortex bilaterally.
Discussion
By comparing the spatiotemporal pattern of brain activity associated with reading aloud
irregular words and pseudowords in healthy subjects and patients with svPPA, we provide novel
evidence supporting a dual-route model. Healthy controls engaged the occipito-parietal cortex to
read pseudowords (more than with irregular words), corroborating the involvement of this dorsal
route in sub-lexical processes. Interestingly, svPPA patients, who present with surface dyslexia

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and left anterior temporal atrophy, appeared to recruit this dorsal cluster equally for irregular words
and pseudowords. Direct comparison of controls and patients during irregular word reading
highlighted the same spatiotemporal cluster. These results support the interpretation that svPPA
patients rely on the spared functions underpinned by the dorsal route (i.e., orthography-tophonology mapping following language-specific statistical regularities) to read in the context of
semantic impairment due to ventral route damage. Crucially, these effects were detected at the
time of response preparation and production, consistent with the idea that the dorsal sub-lexical
route is supporting serial, slow, attention-dependent processes, in contrast with the parallel, fast,
automatic ones underpinned by the ventral lexical route.
Dorsal, occipito-parietal cortices support sub-lexical processes
This is the first study investigating the spatiotemporal dynamics of reading in svPPA, a clinical
syndrome whose neuroanatomical (i.e., neurodegeneration of the ATL) and neuropsychological
(i.e., surface dyslexia) features allow scrutiny of the interplay (and dissociation) between lexical
and sub-lexical processes.
The first main result of our study is that reading pseudowords, as compared with irregular
ones, requires heightened recruitment of parietal cortex. This result is in line with previous
neuroimaging and neuropsychological evidence associating the dorsal path with sub-lexical
processes (Booth et al., 2003; Jobard et al., 2003; Mechelli et al., 2003; Wilson et al., 2009; Graves
et al., 2010; Taylor et al., 2013; Sliwinska et al., 2015). Our results also corroborate previous
findings that low-level visual processing of symbolic stimuli in primary and secondary visual areas
does not differ between words and orthographically regular pseudowords (Vinckier et al., 2007).
At these early stages of visual processing, no differences are detected between healthy controls
and svPPA patients, as predicted by the pattern of atrophy and the neuropsychological profile of
svPPA patients. However, as compared to healthy controls, svPPA patients do not show
heightened recruitment of parietal cortex when comparing pseudowords and irregular words. This
finding suggests that they are processing the two set of stimuli via the same neuro-cognitive
mechanism. This conclusion is supported by the observation that, during irregular word reading,
svPPA patients show greater activation (compared to controls) of a very similar parietal cluster.
Patients thus appear to rely on dorsal, sub-lexical processes to read both irregular words and
pseudowords.
The parietal cortex, in particular the inferior parietal lobule, has been associated with
various cognitive functions including pointing, grasping, attention orienting, saccades, calculation,
and phoneme detection (Simon et al., 2002). With respect to language, discrete areas preferentially
involved in orthography and attention, fluency and phonology, or semantic have been identified
(Battistella et al., 2019). Overall, bilateral posterior parietal regions appear to support an array of
visuo-spatial attentional processes including visual search and scanning of arrays of objects
(Corbetta and Shulman, 2002), endogenous orientation of attention to lateralized visual targets
(e.g. Gitelman et al., 1999; Peelen et al., 2004), and switching from global (word) to local (letters)
attention (Wilkinson et al., 2001). Readers can harness these specific forms of focused attention

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

to apply serial reading strategies if they are young and/or unskilled (Church et al., 2008; DehaeneLambertz et al., 2018), or to compensate for visual input degradation (Cohen et al., 2008), brain
damage causing word blindness (Cohen et al., 2004; Henry et al., 2005), or loss of lexico-semantic
information (Wilson et al., 2009). The role of the parietal cortex as the sub-lexical component of
the reading network is further supported by the observation of a correlation between its recruitment
and reading proficiency, likely mediated by its structural and functional connectivity profile
(Bouhali et al., 2019; Broce et al., 2019; Moulton et al., 2019). Our current investigation lacks
appropriate spatial resolution, but future studies deploying other techniques might be able to
topographically separate executive/attentional contributions from phonological ones (Oberhuber
et al., 2016).
Overall, our findings strengthen the topographical dissociation between (ventral) lexical
and (dorsal) sub-lexical processes while highlighting the important implications not only for
developmental (Pugh et al., 2000; Peyrin et al., 2011) but also acquired reading disorders (Aguilar
et al., 2018).
The latency of the dorsal activation indicates slow, serial processing
The dissociation between lexical and sub-lexical processes cannot be resolved in their
localization to temporal and parietal cortices respectively. Behavioral evidence suggests that the
two routes rely on different computational mechanisms and thus have different timing properties
(Paap and Noel, 1991; Coltheart and Rastle, 1994; Weekes, 1997). Both routes are activated by a
written stimulus yet the lexical route is characterized by fast, parallel processing while the sublexical route by slow, serial processing. The temporal resolution offered by our analyses of MEG
recordings corroborates the idea that the first steps of visual information processing do not differ
between irregular words and pseudowords, suggesting that both lexical and sub-lexical routes are
equally engaged. These early stages do not appear to differ between healthy controls and svPPA
patients, consistent with patient’s spared occipital areas and preserved basic visual functions
(Watson et al., 2018).
Differences between the two groups emerge at the time of response selection and production.
In these later, final stages, svPPA patients do not show the regularity effect detected in controls
(i.e., pseudowords recruiting the dorsal route more than with irregular words). Hence, svPPA
patients appear to rely on the same neuro-cognitive substrate to process both irregular words and
pseudowords. This result is strengthened by the detection of a similar spatiotemporal cluster when
directly comparing neural activity during irregular word reading across the two groups. These
findings were confirmed by both stimulus-locked and response-locked analyses, indicating that
the effects are stable in space and time, and cannot be ascribed to differences in reaction time.
Thus, in svPPA, surface dyslexia appears to be due to the failure of activating semantic
representations stored in the temporal lobe, and the need to rely on sub-lexical grapheme-tophoneme translation supported by the parietal lobe.
Our findings are in line with converging behavioral and neuroimaging evidence supporting the
idea that, while activated at the same time by the presentation of a written stimulus, the lexical

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(ventral) route and the sub-lexical (dorsal) one are characterized by different processing dynamics:
fast and parallel in the first case, slow and serial in the latter. For instance, the systematic length
effect detected for pseudowords is stronger than for real words (Weekes, 1997). Moreover, the
strength of the regularity effect declines as a function of the position of the irregular grapheme:
reaction times are longer when reading “chef” (i.e., irregular grapheme in first position), than
“tomb” (i.e., irregular grapheme in second position), than “glow” (i.e., irregular grapheme in third
position) (Coltheart and Rastle, 1994). Electroencephalography (EEG), magnetoencephalography
(MEG), and intracranial local field potentials (LFP) have been instrumental in illustrating how
basic visual feature analysis occurs within ~100 ms over the occipital midline, followed by a wordselective yet pre-lexical response peaking over the left occipital scalp around 150-200 ms (Bentin
et al., 1999; Tarkiainen et al., 1999; Gaillard et al., 2006). These initial sequential stages are
followed by parallel processing of nonvisual information in a distributed language network
allowing access to lexical, semantic and phonological features of the words (Vinckier et al., 2007;
Twomey et al., 2011; Thesen et al., 2012). On one hand, semantic effects are typically detected at
around 400-600 ms (e.g. N400) and localized to left ATL (Lau et al., 2008, 2016). On the other
hand, consistent with the role played by the parietal lobe in visual attention (Saalmann et al., 2007),
late sustained engagement of dorsal regions is observed in cases of effortful reading (Rosazza et
al., 2009).
The effects we observe occur close to response production and are strongest after response
onset - i.e., when the subjects are spelling out the word. The progressively heightened activity over
dorsal cortices suggests that, when relying on the sublexical route, articulation of the word starts
as the first grapheme-to-phoneme conversion has been performed and proceed serially grapheme
by grapheme. This is in contrast with the parallel processing taking place along the ventral lexical
route that allows spelling out once the stimulus has been decoded as a whole. Overall, our findings
corroborate the hypothesis that the dorsal sub-lexical, route supports serial and attention-dependent
processes, whose effects are most apparent at the time of response selection and production.
Over-recruitment of the dorsal route as the neural signatures of an imperfect compensation
Our results illustrate how a specific cognitive task can be performed via the deployment of
distinct cognitive and neural resources. The damage to the ATL in svPPA patients leads to a
profound impairment of the lexico-semantic system, whose functionality is needed to retrieve the
correct pronunciation of exceptional spelling-to-sound associations. As a compensatory strategy,
svPPA patients rely on sub-lexical processes underpinned by the dorsal route to read irregular
words. However, patients’ over-reliance on serial, slow, grapheme-to-phoneme conversion
mechanisms leads to overall slower responses and, in the case of words with atypical spelling,
increased number of regularization errors. Results from this study demonstrate that patients can
thus only partially, imperfectly compensate for their semantic loss via spared sub-lexical
processes.
Our findings align with recent evidence from task-free fMRI studies reporting alterations
in intrinsic functional connectivity networks in svPPA patients. Decreased connectivity in the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ventral semantic network (as expected given the atrophy pattern) is accompanied by spared
connectivity in the orthography-to-phonology conversion network and increased connectivity in
the dorsal articulatory-phonological one (Battistella et al., 2019; Montembeault et al., 2019).
Taken together, these results suggest that neurodegeneration leads to a dynamic reorganization of
the interplay between ventral and dorsal pathways, where the downregulation of specific neurocognitive systems is associated with the upregulation of other ones. Moreover, they exemplify how
studying the spatiotemporal dynamics of different language functions in clinical populations has
implications for both clinical practice (e.g., understanding patients’ symptoms) and basic science
(e.g., understanding the neural correlates of language). These studies also stress the need to shift
the focus of research in neurodegenerative populations from volume and structural connection loss
to also include alterations to regions’ functional profiles and temporal dynamics.
MEG has only been deployed recently to investigate PPA (e.g., Kielar et al., 2018), but has
already shown its potential as a tool to study the neurophysiological signatures of network-level
alterations due to neurodegenerative disorders. It can be instrumental in identifying syndromespecific changes in the spectral properties of oscillatory responses (Ranasinghe et al., 2017; Sami
et al., 2018). As suggested by task-free fMRI evidence, these functional alterations might precede
structural ones and may be key for early diagnosis (Bonakdarpour et al., 2017). Given the different
features of the signal that can be studied (e.g., delayed latencies, attenuated amplitude) and the
wide array of analysis methods available, MEG will provide a broad spectrum of complementary
insights into the neural underpinnings of neurodegenerative diseases.
Patients with stroke affecting the left hemisphere might exhibit a different neuropsychological
profile from svPPA ones: regularization errors do not appear to correlate with semantic
impairments and are associated with damage to the posterior half of the left middle temporal gyrus
rather than the ATL (Binder et al., 2016). This finding suggests that the neuro-cognitive profile of
svPPA patients (i.e., surface dyslexia, semantic deficits, and ATL damage) is not the only path to
over reliance on sub-lexical processes. Additional functional studies comparing stroke and
neurodegenerative patients are warranted to clarify whether the spatio-temporal dynamics of the
compensatory mechanisms implemented by the two clinical populations are similar.
Limitations and future perspectives
Our sample size is relatively small. However, svPPA is a rare disorder and only a fraction
of patients can surmount the difficulties inherent to MEG testing (e.g., percentage of dental work,
motion, fatigue). We optimized our analysis pipeline to investigate possible late effects of the key
contrast of interest (irregular vs pseudowords) as prior findings suggested a key role of dorsal, sublexical mechanisms in svPPA patients with surface dyslexia (Wilson et al., 2009). Follow-up
studies of other electrophysiological features (e.g., lower frequencies, evoked fields) might reveal
earlier, additional effects.
Conclusions

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Together these findings, combining a neuropsychological model and time-resolved MEG
imaging, provide further evidence supporting a dual-route model for reading aloud, mediated by
the interplay between lexical (ventral and parallel) and sub-lexical (dorsal and serial) neurocognitive systems. When the lexical route is damaged, as in the case of neurodegeneration affecting
the ATL, partial compensation appears to be possible by over-recruitment of the slower, serial
attention-dependent, sub-lexical one. This study also demonstrates how task-based MEG imaging
can be leveraged in clinical populations to study the functional interplay of different language
networks, with important implication for both models of language and clinical practice.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the patients and their families for the time and effort they dedicated to
this research.

Funding
This work was funded by the following National Institutes of Health grants
(R01NS050915, K24DC015544, R01NS100440, R01DC013979, R01DC176960, R01DC017091,
R01EB022717, R01AG062196). Additional funds include the Larry Hillblom Foundation, the
Global Brain Health Institute and UCOP grant MRP-17-454755. These supporting sources had no
involvement in the study design, collection, analysis or interpretation of data, nor were they
involved in writing the paper or the decision to submit this report for publication.

Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures and Tables

Table 1. Demographic characteristics of participants. All participants were right handed native
English speakers demographically matched across the two cohorts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2. Neuropsychological profile of svPPA patients. The patient group includes 12 cases of
semantic variant of Primary Progressive Aphasia (svPPA). Scores shown are mean (standard
deviation). *indicate values significantly different from controls (p<0.05). CDR = Clinical
Dementia Rating, MMSE = Mini-Mental State Exam. CVLT=California Verbal Learning Test,
BNT = Boston Naming Test, WAB = Western Aphasia Battery, PPVT = Picture Vocabulary Test.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3. Psycholinguistic characteristics of the stimuli. Values shown are mean (standard
deviation). All words (n=80) and a portion of the pseudowords (n=20) were taken from the Arizona
reading list. An additional set of 50 pseudowords were generated with Wuggy.

Table 4. Local maxima in MNI coordinates. Time window, MNI coordinates and t-value of the
local maxima of the different MEG whole-brain contrasts performed. The spatiotemporal
distribution of these clusters can be appreciated in Fig. 3 and 4.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Behavioral data and atrophy distribution in svPPA patients. (A) Percentage
accuracy and (B) reaction times in single word reading in each experimental conditions, in controls
and svPPA patients. (C) Voxel based morphometry (VBM)-derived atrophy pattern showing
significantly reduced grey matter volumes in the anterior temporal lobe for svPPA patients
(thresholded at p<0.001 with family wise error (FWE) correction). (D) Cartoon representation of
the dual route model: the dorsal sub-lexical route supports orthography -to-phonology mapping
based on language-specific statistical rules, while the ventral lexical route maps orthographic
forms to meaning thus allowing correct reading of irregular words.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Stimulus-locked (0 ms = written word onset) group analyses of changes in beta (12–
30 Hz) oscillatory power during single word reading. A) Pattern of beta suppression in healthy
controls for both irregular words (upper row) and pseudowords (lower row). Following stimuli
presentation, signifincantly heightened beta suppression tracks the time course of language
network activation from occipital towards temporo-parietal areas. B) Same as in A but for the
svPPA patients. Results of one-sample t-test.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Stimulus-locked (0 ms = written word onset) group analyses of the regularity effect:
pseudowords vs. irregular words. A) Results of the contrast between pseudowords and irregular
words in healthy controls. A large spatiotemporal cluster of heightened beta suppression for
pseudowords (vs. irregular words) is observed over the left parietal cortex from ~ 500ms to ~ 800
ms. B) Same as in A but for the svPPA patients: no supra-threshold cluster can be detected.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Contrast controls vs. svPPA. A) Results of the contrast between svPPA patients and
healthy controls during irregular word reading for stimulus-locked analyses (0 ms = written word
onset). A large spatiotemporal cluster of heightened beta suppression for pseudowords (vs.
irregular words) is observed over the left parietal cortex from ~ 700ms. B) Same as in A but for
response-locked analyses (0 ms = vocal response onset). A similar spatiotemporal cluster is
observed starting ~25 ms before stimulus onset.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Aguilar OM, Kerry SJ, Crinion JT, Callaghan MF, Woodhead ZVJ, Leff AP. Dorsal and ventral
visual stream contributions to preserved reading ability in patients with central alexia. Cortex
2018; 106: 200–212.
Battistella G, Henry M, Gesierich B, Wilson SM, Borghesani V, Shwe W, et al. Differential
intrinsic functional connectivity changes in semantic variant primary progressive aphasia.
NeuroImage Clin 2019; 22: 101797.
Beeson PM, Rising K. Arizona battery for reading and spelling. 2010
Benjamini Y, Hochberg Y. On the Adaptive Control of the False Discovery Rate in Multiple
Testing With Independent Statistics. J Educ Behav Stat 2000; 25: 60–83.
Bentin S, Mouchetant-Rostaing Y, Giard M, Echallier J, Pernier J. ERP manifestations of
processing printed words at different psycholinguistic levels: time course and scalp distribution.
J Cogn Neurosci 1999; 11: 235–260.
Binder JR, Pillay SB, Humphries CJ, Gross WL, Graves WW, Book DS. Surface errors without
semantic impairment in acquired dyslexia: A voxel-based lesion-symptom mapping study. Brain
2016; 139: 1517–1526.
Binney RJ, Henry ML, Babiak M, Pressman PS, Santos-Santos MA, Narvid J, et al. Reading
words and other people: A comparison of exception word, familiar face and affect processing in
the left and right temporal variants of primary progressive aphasia. Cortex 2016; 82: 147–163.
Bonakdarpour B, Rogalski EJ, Wang A, Sridhar J, Mesulam MM, Hurley RS. Functional
Connectivity is Reduced in Early-stage Primary Progressive Aphasia When Atrophy is not
Prominent. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord 2017; 31: 101–106.
Booth JR, Burman DD, Meyer JR, Gitelman DR, Parrish TB, Mesulam MM. Relation between
brain activation and lexical performance. Hum Brain Mapp 2003; 19: 155–169.
Borghesani V, Buiatti M, Eger E, Piazza M. Conceptual and Perceptual Dimensions of Word
Meaning Are Recovered Rapidly and in Parallel during Reading. J Cogn Neurosci 2019; 26:
194–198.
Bouhali F, Bézagu Z, Dehaene S, Cohen L. A mesial-to-lateral dissociation for orthographic
processing in the visual cortex. PNAS 2019; 116: 21936–21946.
Brambati SM, Ogar J, Neuaus J, Miller B, Gorno-Tempini M. Reading Disorders in Primary
Progressive Aphasia: a behavioral and neuroimaging study. Neuropsychologia 2009; 47: 1893–
1900.
Brambati SM, Rankin KP, Narvid J, Seeley WW, Dean D, Rosen HJ, et al. Atrophy progression
in semantic dementia with asymmetric temporal involvement: A tensor-based morphometry
study. Neurobiol Aging 2009; 30: 103–111.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Broce IJ, Bernal B, Altman N, Bradley C, Baez N, Cabrera L, et al. Fiber pathways supporting
early literacy development in 5–8-year-old children. Brain Cogn 2019; 134: 80–89.
Cai C, Xu J, Velmurugan J, Knowlton R, Sekihara K, Nagarajan SS, et al. Evaluation of a dual
signal subspace projection algorithm in magnetoencephalographic recordings from patients with
intractable epilepsy and vagus nerve stimulators. Neuroimage 2018; 188: 161–170.
Church JA, Coalson RS, Lugar HM, Petersen SE, Schlaggar BL. A developmental fMRI study of
reading and repetition reveals changes in phonological and visual mechanisms over age. Cereb
Cortex 2008; 18: 2054–2065.
Cohen L, Dehaene S, Vinckier F, Jobert A, Montavont A. Reading normal and degraded words:
Contribution of the dorsal and ventral visual pathways. Neuroimage 2008; 40: 353–366.
Cohen L, Henry C, Dehaene S, Martinaud O, Lehéricy S, Lemer C, et al. The pathophysiology of
letter-by-letter reading. Neuropsychologia 2004; 42: 1768–1780.
Coltheart M. Acquired dyslexias and the computational modelling of reading. Cogn
Neuropsychol 2006; 23: 96–109.
Coltheart M, Curtis B, Atkins P, Haller M. Models of reading aloud. Psychol Rev 1993; 100:
589–608.
Coltheart M, Rastle K. Serial Processing in Reading Aloud: Evidence for Dual-Route Models of
Reading. J Exp Psychol Hum Percept Perform 1994; 20: 1197–1211.
Coltheart M, Rastle K, Perry C, Langdon R, Ziegler J. DRC: a dual route cascaded model of
visual word recognition and reading aloud. Psychol Rev 2001; 108: 204.
Corbetta M, Shulman GL. Control of goal-directed and stimulus-driven attention in the brain.
Nat Rev Neurosci 2002; 3: 201–215.
Dalal SS, Guggisberg AG, Edwards E, Sekihara K, Findlay AM, Canolty RT, et al. Fivedimensional neuroimaging: Localization of the time-frequency dynamics of cortical activity.
Neuroimage 2008; 40: 1686–1700.
Dehaene-Lambertz G, Monzalvo K, Dehaene S. The emergence of the visual word form:
Longitudinal evolution of category-specific ventral visual areas during reading acquisition. 2018
Gaillard R, Naccache L, Pinel P, Clémenceau S, Volle E, Hasboun D, et al. Direct Intracranial,
fMRI, and Lesion Evidence for the Causal Role of Left Inferotemporal Cortex in Reading.
Neuron 2006; 50: 191–204.
Galton C, Patterson K, Graham K, Lambon-Ralph M, Williams G, Antoun N, et al. Differing
patterns of temporal atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease and semantic Differing patterns of temporal
atrophy in Alzheimer’s disease and semantic dementia. Neurology 2001; 57: 216–225.
Gelman A, Stern H. The difference between ‘significant’ and ‘not significant’ is not itself
statistically significant. Am Stat 2006; 60: 328–331.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Gitelman DR, Nobre AC, Parrish TB, LaBar KS, Kim YH, Meyer JR, et al. A large-scale
distributed network for covert spatial attention. Further anatomical delineation based on stringent
behavioural and cognitive controls. Brain 1999; 122: 1093–1106.
Gorno-Tempini M, Dronkers N, Rankin K, Ogar J, Phengrasamy L, Rosen H, et al. Cognition
and anatomy in three variants of primary progressive aphasia. Ann Neurol 2004; 55: 335–346.
Gorno-tempini ML, Hillis AE, Weintraub S, Kertesz A, Mendez M, Cappa S, et al. Classification
of primary progressive aphasia and its variants. Neurology 2011; 02: 1–10.
Graham NL, Patterson K, Hodges JR. The impact of semantic memory impairment on spelling:
Evidence from semantic dementia. Neuropsychologia 2000; 38: 143–163.
Grainger J, Holcomb PJ. Watching the Word Go by: On the Time-course of Component
Processes in Visual Word Recognition. Lang Linguist Compass 2009; 3: 128–156.
Graves WW, Desai R, Humphries C, Seidenberg MS, Binder JR. Neural systems for reading
aloud: A multiparametric approach. Cereb Cortex 2010; 20: 1799–1815.
Henry C, Gaillard R, Volle E, Chiras J, Ferrieux S, Dehaene S, et al. Brain activations during
letter-by-letter reading: A follow-up study. Neuropsychologia 2005; 43: 1983–1989.
Herman AB, Houde JF, Vinogradov S, Nagarajan SS. Parsing the phonological loop: Activation
timing in the dorsal speech stream determines accuracy in speech reproduction. J Neurosci 2013;
33: 5439–5453.
Hinkley LBN, Marco EJ, Brown EG, Bukshpun P, Gold J, Hill S, et al. The Contribution of the
Corpus Callosum to Language Lateralization. J Neurosci 2016; 36: 4522–4533.
Hodges J, Garrard P, Perry R, Patterson K, Bak T, Gregory C. The differentiation of semantic
dementia and frontal lobe dementia from early Alzheimer’s disease: a comparative
neuropsychological study. Neuropsychology 1999; 13: 31–40.
Hodges JR, Patterson K, Oxbury S, Funnell E. Semantic dementia. Progressive fluent aphasia
with temporal lobe atrophy. Brain 1992; 115: 1783–1806.
Hoffman P, Lambon Ralph MA, Woollams AM. Triangulation of the neurocomputational
architecture underpinning reading aloud. Proc Natl Acad Sci 2015; 112: E3719–E3728.
Jefferies E, Lambon-Ralph MA, Jones R, Bateman D, Patterson K. Surface dyslexia in semantic
dementia: A comparison of the influence of consistency and regularity. Neurocase 2004; 10:
290–299.
Jobard G, Crivello F, Tzourio-Mazoyer N. Evaluation of the dual route theory of reading: A
metanalysis of 35 neuroimaging studies. Neuroimage 2003; 20: 693–712.
Keuleers E, Brysbaert M. Wuggy: A multilingual pseudoword generator. Behav Res Methods
2010; 42: 627–633.
Kielar A, Deschamps T, Jokel R, Meltzer JA. Abnormal language-related oscillatory responses

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in primary progressive aphasia. NeuroImage Clin 2018; 18: 560–574.
Kramer JH, Jurik J, Sha SJ, Rankin KP, Rosen HJ, Johnson JK, et al. Distinctive
Neuropsychological Patterns in Frontotemporal Dementia, Semantic Dementia, and Alzheimer
Disease. Cogn Behav Neurol 2003; 16: 211–218.
Lau E, Phillips C, Poeppel D. A cortical network for semantics: (de)constructing the N400. Nat
Rev Neurosci 2008; 9: 920–933.
Lau E, Weber K, Gramfort A, Hämäläinen M, Kuperberg G. Spatiotemporal Signatures of
Lexical-Semantic Prediction. Cereb Cortex 2016; 26: 1377–1387.
Marinkovic K, Dhond RP, Dale AM, Glessner M, Carr V, Halgren E. Spatiotemporal dynamics
of modality-specific and supramodal word processing. Neuron 2003; 38: 487–497.
Marshall JC, Newcombe F. Patterns of paralexia: A psycholinguistic approach. J Psycholinguist
Res 1973; 2: 175–199.
Mechelli A, Gorno-Tempini ML, Price CJ. Neuroimaging Studies of Word and Pseudoword
Reading: Consistencies, Inconsistencies, and Limitations. J Cogn Neurosci 2003; 15: 260–271.
Montembeault M, Chapleau M, Jarret J, Boukadi M, Laforce R, Wilson MA, et al. Differential
language network functional connectivity alterations in Alzheimer’s disease and the semantic
variant of primary progressive aphasia. Cortex 2019; 117: 284–298.
Moulton E, Bouhali F, Monzalvo K, Poupon C, Zhang H, Dehaene S, et al. Connectivity
between the visual word form area and the parietal lobe improves after the first year of reading
instruction : a longitudinal MRI study in children. Brain Struct Funct 2019; 224: 1519–1536.
Neary D, Snowden JS, Gustafson L, Passant U, Stuss D, Black S, et al. Frontotemporal lobar
degeneration: A consensus on clinical diagnostic criteria. Neurology 1998; 51: 1546–1554.
Oberhuber M, Hope TMH, Seghier ML, Parker Jones O, Prejawa S, Green DW, et al. Four
Functionally Distinct Regions in the Left Supramarginal Gyrus Support Word Processing. Cereb
Cortex 2016; 26: 4212–4226.
Paap KR, Noel RW. Dual-route models of print to sound: Still a good horse race. Psychol Res
1991; 53: 13–24.
Patterson K, Hodges JR. Deterioration of word meaning: Implications for reading.
Neuropsychologia 1992; 30: 1025–1040.
Patterson K, Ralph MAL, Jefferies E, Woollams A, Jones R, Hodges JR, et al. ‘Presemantic’
cognition in semantic dementia: Six deficits in search of an explanation. J Cogn Neurosci 2006;
18: 169–183.
Peelen M V., Heslenfeld DJ, Theeuwes J. Endogenous and exogenous attention shifts are
mediated by the same large-scale neural network. Neuroimage 2004; 22: 822–830.
Perry C, Ziegler JC, Zorzi M. Nested incremental modeling in the development of computational

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

theories: the CDP+ model of reading aloud. Psychol Rev 2007; 114: 273–315.
Peyrin C, Démonet JF, N’Guyen-Morel MA, Le Bas JF, Valdois S. Superior parietal lobule
dysfunction in a homogeneous group of dyslexic children with a visual attention span disorder.
Brain Lang 2011; 118: 128–138.
Piai V, Roelofs A, Rommers J, Maris E. Beta oscillations reflect memory and motor aspects of
spoken word production. Hum Brain Mapp 2015; 36: 2767–2780.
Provost JS, Brambati SM, Chapleau M, Wilson MA. The effect of aging on the brain network for
exception word reading. Cortex 2016; 84: 90–100.
Pugh KR, Mencl WE, Jenner AR, Katz L, Frost SJ, Lee JR, et al. Functional neuroimaging
studies of reading and reading disability (developmental dyslexia). Ment Retard Dev Disabil Res
Rev 2000; 6: 207–213.
Ranasinghe KG, Hinkley LB, Beagle AJ, Mizuiri D, Honma SM, Welch AE, et al. Distinct
spatiotemporal patterns of neuronal functional connectivity in primary progressive aphasia
variants. Brain 2017; 140: 2737–2751.
Robinson S, Vrba J. Functional neuroimaging by synthetic aperture magnetometry (SAM). In:
Yoshimoto, editor(s). Recent advances in biomagnetism. Sendai, Japan: Tohoku University;
1999. p. 302–305
Rosazza C, Cai Q, Minati L, Paulignan Y, Nazir TA. Early involvement of dorsal and ventral
pathways in visual word recognition: An ERP study. Brain Res 2009; 1272: 32–44.
Rosen HJ, Gorno-Tempini ML, Goldman WP, Perry RJ, Schuff N, Weiner M, et al. Patterns of
brain atrophy in frontotemporal dementia and semantic dementia. Neurology 2002; 58: 198–208.
Saalmann YB, Pigarev IN, Vidyasagar TR. Neural Mechanisms of Visual Attention: How TopDown Feedback. Science (80- ) 2007: 1612–1616.
Salmelin R. Clinical neurophysiology of language: The MEG approach. Clin Neurophysiol 2007;
118: 237–254.
Sami S, Williams N, Hughes LE, Cope TE, Rittman T, Coyle-Gilchrist ITS, et al.
Neurophysiological signatures of Alzheimer’s disease and frontotemporal lobar degeneration:
Pathology versus phenotype. Brain 2018; 141: 2500–2510.
Sekihara K, Kawabata Y, Ushio S, Sumiya S, Kawabata S, Adachi Y, et al. Dual signal subspace
projection (DSSP): A novel algorithm for removing large interference in biomagnetic
measurements. J Neural Eng 2016; 13
Simon O, Mangin JF, Cohen L, Le Bihan D, Dehaene S. Topographical layout of hand, eye,
calculation, and language-related areas in the human parietal lobe. Neuron 2002; 33: 475–487.
Singh KD, Barnes GR, Hillebrand A. Group imaging of task-related changes in cortical
synchronisation using nonparametric permutation testing. Neuroimage 2003; 19: 1589–1601.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Sliwinska MW, James A, Devlin JT. Inferior Parietal Lobule Contributions to Visual Word
Recognition. J Cogn Neurosci 2015; 27
Stevenson CM, Brookes MJ, Morris PG. β-Band correlates of the fMRI BOLD response. Hum
Brain Mapp 2011; 32: 182–197.
Tarkiainen A, Helenius P, Hansen PC, Cornelissen PL, Salmelin R. Dynamics of letter string
perception in the human occipitotemporal cortex. Brain 1999; 122: 2119–2132.
Taylor JSH, Rastle K, Davis MH. Can cognitive models explain brain activation during word
and pseudoword reading? A meta-analysis of 36 neuroimaging studies. Psychol Bull 2013; 139:
766–791.
Thesen T, McDonald CR, Carlson C, Doyle W, Cash S, Sherfey J, et al. Sequential then
interactive processing of letters and words in the left fusiform gyrus. Nat Commun 2012; 3:
1284–1288.
Twomey T, Kawabata Duncan KJ, Price CJ, Devlin JT. Top-down modulation of ventral
occipito-temporal responses during visual word recognition. Neuroimage 2011; 55: 1242–1251.
Ueno T, Meteyard L, Hoffman P, Murayama K. The ventral anterior temporal lobe has a
necessary role in exception word reading. Cereb Cortex 2018; 28: 3035–3045.
Vinckier F, Dehaene S, Jobert A, Dubus JP, Sigman M, Cohen L. Hierarchical Coding of Letter
Strings in the Ventral Stream: Dissecting the Inner Organization of the Visual Word-Form
System. Neuron 2007; 55: 143–156.
Wang L, Jensen O, Van den Brink D, Weder N, Schoffelen JM, Magyari L, et al. Beta
oscillations relate to the N400m during language comprehension. Hum Brain Mapp 2012; 33:
2898–2912.
Watson CL, Possin K, Allen IE, Hubbard HI, Meyer M, Welch AE, et al. Visuospatial
Functioning in the Primary Progressive Aphasias. J Int Neuropsychol Soc 2018; 24: 259–268.
Weekes BS. Differential effects of number of letters on word and nonword naming latency. Q J
Exp Psychol Sect A Hum Exp Psychol 1997; 50: 439–456.
Wilkinson DT, Halligan PW, Marshall JC, Büchel C, Dolan RJ. Switching between the forest
and the trees: Brain systems involved in local/global changed-level judgments. Neuroimage
2001; 13: 56–67.
Wilson M, Joubert S, Ferré P, Belleville S, Ansaldo A, Joanette Y, et al. The role of the left
anterior temporal lobe in exception word reading: Reconciling patient and neuroimaging
findings. Neuroimage 2012; 60: 2000–2007.
Wilson SM, Brambati SM, Henry RG, Handwerker DA, Agosta F, Miller BL, et al. The neural
basis of surface dyslexia in semantic dementia. Brain 2009; 132: 71–86.
Woollams AM, Lambon-Ralph MA, Plaut DC, Patterson K. SD-squared: On the association
between semantic dementia and surface dyslexia. Psychol Rev 2007; 114: 316–339.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/847798; this version posted November 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Yuan H, Liu T, Szarkowski R, Rios C, Ashe J, He B. Negative covariation between task-related
responses in alpha/beta-band activity and BOLD in human sensorimotor cortex: An EEG and
fMRI study of motor imagery and movements. Neuroimage 2010; 49: 2596–2606.

