CASPASE-8 MODULATES ANGIOGENESIS BY REGULATING A CELL DEATH INDEPENDENT
PATHWAY IN ENDOTHELIAL CELLS

Nathalie Tisch1,2,3*, Aida Freire-Valls1,4*, Rosario Yerbes1,5*, Isidora Paredes1,2,3, Silvia La Porta2,6,
Xiaohong Wang1, Rosa Martín-Pérez7,8, Laura Castro1, Wendy Wei-Lynn Wong9, Leigh Coultas10,11,
Boris Strilic12, Hermann-Josef Gröne13, Thomas Hielscher14, Carolin Mogler15, Ralf Adams16, Peter
Heiduschka17, Lena Claesson-Welsh18, Massimiliano Mazzone7,8, Abelardo López-Rivas5,19, Thomas
Schmidt4, Hellmut G. Augustin2,6 and Carmen Ruiz de Almodovar1,2,3#
1

Biochemistry Center, University Heidelberg, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.
European Center for Angioscience (ECAS), Medical Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg University,
Mannheim, Germany.
3
Institute for Transfusion Medicine and Immunology, Medicine Faculty Mannheim, Heidelberg
University, Mannheim, Germany
4
Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg,
Germany.
5
Centro Andaluz de Biología Molecular y Medicina Regenerativa-CABIMER, CSIC-Universidad de
Sevilla-Universidad Pablo de Olavide, Spain.
6
Division of Vascular Oncology and Metastasis, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany.
7
Lab of Tumor Inflammation and Angiogenesis, VIB, Leuven, Belgium.
8
Lab of Tumor Inflammation and Angiogenesis, Department of Oncology, KU Leuven, Leuven,
Belgium.
9
Institute of Experimental Immunology, University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
10
Development and Cancer Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research,
Australia.
11
Department of Medical Biology, University of Melbourne, Australia.
12
Department of Pharmacology, Max Planck Institute for Heart and Lung Research, Germany.
13
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg,
Germany.
14
Division of Biostatistics, German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany.
15
Institute of Pathology, TUM School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany.
16
Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Department of Tissue Morphogenesis, and
University of Münster, Faculty of Medicine, Münster, Germany..
17
Research Laboratory, Department of Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Münster, Germany
18
Dept. of Immunology, Genetics and Pathology, Science for Life Laboratory, Uppsala University,
Sweden.
19
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red-Oncología (CIBERONC), Carlos III Health Institute,
Madrid, Spain.
2

* These authors share the first authorship position
#Corresponding author:
Carmen Ruiz de Almodovar (carmen.ruizdealmodovar@medma.uni-heidelberg.de)

ABSTRACT
During developmental angiogenesis blood vessels grow and remodel to ultimately build a hierarchical
vascular network. Whether and how cell death signaling molecules contribute to blood vessel formation
is still not well understood. Caspase-8 (Casp-8), a key protease in the extrinsic cell death-signaling
pathway, regulates both cell death via apoptosis and necroptosis. Here we show that expression of
Casp-8 in endothelial cells (ECs) is required for proper postnatal angiogenesis. EC specific Casp-8
knockout pups (Casp-8ECko) have reduced retinal angiogenesis, as the loss of Casp-8 reduced EC
proliferation, sprouting and migration independent of its cell death function. Instead, the loss of Casp-8
caused hyperactivation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) downstream of receptorinteracting serine/threonine- protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) and destabilization of VE-cadherin at EC
junctions. In a mouse model of oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR), resembling retinopathy of prematurity
(ROP), loss of Casp-8 in ECs is beneficial, as pathological neovascularization was reduced in Casp8ECko pups. Taken together, we identify that Casp-8 signals in a cell-death independent manner in ECs
during postnatal and pathological blood vessel formation.

2

INTRODUCTION
Functional blood vessels are of vital importance. Impaired vessel formation contributes to many
pathological situations, among others to ischemic or inflammatory disorders. Ischemic retinopathies are
the main causes of severe visual impairment and sight loss in premature children, diabetic adults and
the elderly population. For example, retinopathy of prematurity (ROP), an ocular neovascular disease
and the major cause of acquired blindness in preterm infants (1), is characterized by excessive
angiogenesis, breakdown of the endothelial barrier, vascular leakage, edema, hemorrhages, retinal
detachment and compromised vision (1). Although certain strategies to block excessive angiogenesis
exists (2), identification of other pathways that regulate physiological and pathological vessel growth is
of high interest in order to further develop better or complementary therapeutic treatments.
The formation of functional blood vessel networks starts with the initial formation of a primitive vascular
plexus from which new blood vessels sprout, coordinately expand and branch. Redundant vessel
branches are then selectively removed by vessel pruning to ultimately establish a hierarchical vascular
network (3, 4). Whereas apoptosis has been implicated in certain conditions of vessel remodeling (5-9)
and in the regulation of capillary vessel diameter (10), it is not known whether other forms of cell death
contribute to developmental angiogenesis or whether cell death signaling molecules have cell deathindependent functions in endothelial cells (ECs).
Caspase-8 (Casp-8) is the initiator caspase of the extrinsic apoptosis pathway that activates the effector
Caspase-3 (11). Cellular FLICE inhibitory protein (c-FLIP), an inactive homolog of Casp-8 that lacks its
catalytic activity, can heterodimerize with Casp-8, prevent its full activation, and thus inhibit apoptosis
(11). The c-FLIP/Casp-8 heterodimer still possesses a basal Casp-8 activity necessary to inhibit a
second type of programmed cell death, called necroptosis (a non-apoptotic cell death characterized by
swelling and rupture of the cell membrane) (12, 13). To do so, Casp-8 cleaves the receptor-interacting
serine/threonine- protein kinase 3 (RIPK3) and therefore blocks the activation of the ultimate effector of
necroptosis, the pseudokinase mixed-lineage kinase domain-like (MLKL), downstream of RIPK3 (13).
Therefore, Casp-8 is a central signaling node in the decision of whether a particular cell dies by
apoptosis or necroptosis. In addition to its role in cell death signaling, Casp-8 has been described to
3

regulate cell death-independent processes such as cell migration (14, 15), or proliferation (16) and to
act as DNA-damage sensor induced by cell proliferation (17).
Deletion of Casp-8 in mice is embryonically lethal. Interestingly, Casp-8 knockout mouse embryos die
at mid-gestation presenting a circulatory failure phenotype and damaged blood vessel capillaries (1820). Endothelial cell (EC) specific knockout of Casp-8 during embryonic development mimics the
severity of the full knockout (21), suggesting that Casp-8 in ECs is required for the formation of a proper
vascular system. However, whether Casp-8 is also required at later timepoints during vessel
development, and whether it plays a cell-death dependent or independent function, remains unknown.
In this regard, cell death-dependent and -independent functions of RIPK3 have been described in
pathological angiogenesis. In a mouse model of melanoma metastasis, it has been shown that RIPK3
is involved in tumor-induced EC necroptosis but also in vessel permeability via activation of p38 (22,
23). Whether RIPK3 is not only contributing to pathological vessel formation and function, but also to
vessel stability in physiological conditions of angiogenesis, is so far unknown.
Here, using a conditional inducible EC specific Casp-8 knockout mouse line, we show that the loss of
Casp-8 results in reduced postnatal angiogenesis. Most strikingly, we demonstrate that this phenotype
is independent of necroptosis, as the loss of Casp-8 on a MLKL-null background still results in vascular
defects. Instead, Casp-8 regulates EC proliferation, sprouting and migration, as well as the stability of
adherens and tight junctions. Mechanistically, we show that loss of Casp-8 leads to the constitutive
phosphorylation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) via RIPK3 and to defects in VEcadherin subcellular localization. Applying the oxygen induced retinopathy model (OIR), a model that
resembles the pathology of ROP, we show that the loss of Casp-8 in ECs is beneficial, as pathological
neovascularization in Casp-8 knockout mice is reduced.

4

RESULTS
Postnatal deletion of Casp-8 in ECs results in impaired angiogenesis in the retina
To explore the function of Casp-8 during developmental angiogenesis in vivo, we generated inducible
EC specific Casp-8 knockout mice. To do so, we crossed the tamoxifen inducible Cdh5-(PAC)-CreERT2
mouse line (24) , where Cre-recombinase is expressed under control of the EC specific Cdh-5 promoter,
with Casp-8fl/fl mice. Consistent with previously published data (21), therefore validating our generated
mouse line, knockout of Casp-8 in the endothelium during embryonic development resulted in yolk sac
and embryo vascular defects as well as in increased embryonic lethality and defects in the yolk sac
vasculature (Suppl. Fig. 1A,B).
To analyze the effect of loss of Casp-8 in ECs during postnatal vascular development, we induced Cre
recombination in newborn pups as previously described (25) (Fig. 1A) and checked the recombination
efficiency in isolated lung ECs (Suppl. Fig. 1C,D). Tamoxifen treatment resulted in 70% reduction of
Casp-8 mRNA levels in lung ECs from Casp-8ECko pups at postnatal (P) day 6 (Suppl. Fig. 1D). In
contrast to the lethal effects of loss of Casp-8 in the embryonic vasculature, postnatal knockout of Casp8 was not lethal during the time the mice were observed (until P15) and pups were indistinguishable
from Casp-8WT littermates (Suppl. Fig. 1E-G). As Casp-8 is expressed in ECs of developing blood
vessels in the retina (Suppl. Fig. 1H), and as this is a well-established model to postnatally study
developmental angiogenesis (26), we used the growing retina for our purposes. Analysis of the
vasculature (by staining with the endothelial marker IsoB4) in P6 retinas showed that the total area
covered by blood vessels and the vascular outgrowth were reduced in Casp-8ECko retinas compared to
Casp-8WT littermates (Fig. 1B-D). The number of vessel branches was also decreased (Fig. 1E,F),
indicating a reduced complexity of the vascular network in Casp-8ECko pups. In addition, we counted less
sprouts at the angiogenic front in Casp-8ECko pups (Fig.1 G,H).
Altogether, this data show that loss of Casp-8 in the endothelium results in vascular defects during
developmental angiogenesis.

5

Necroptosis does not contribute to the vascular defects in Casp-8ECko pups
During postnatal angiogenesis in the retina, the vascular network develops to its final mature stage via
a combination of different cellular processes such as EC proliferation, migration, vessel maturation and
vessel remodeling. As Casp-8 regulates cell death and survival, and as this contributes to vessel
remodeling and regression (5, 8, 9), we checked whether knockout of Casp-8 would result in EC death
due to activation of the necroptotic pathway. In vivo, an indirect way to assess cell death is the
quantification of regressing vessel branches, which leave a Collagen type IV (ColIV+) empty sleeves
behind (27). Therefore, we analyzed vessel regression by quantifying the number of CollV+ IsoB4sleeves and found no differences between genotypes (Fig. 2A,B). In line with these results, pericyte
coverage analyzed by co-staining of the pericyte marker Desmin and IsoB4 revealed no differences
between Casp-8ECko and Casp-8WT retinas, indicating that vessel maturation and stabilization were also
not affected (Fig. 2C, D). Interestingly, we noticed a small but significant decrease in the number of
cleaved Caspase-3+ (cCasp3+) and TUNEL+ ECs in Casp-8ECko pups (Fig. 2E-H), suggesting that Casp8 mediated apoptosis via the extrinsic cell death signaling pathway may have a small but significant
contribution to the physiological remodeling process, however without affecting overall vessel
regression. To further explore this hypothesis, we first analyzed the ability of ECs to die by necroptosis
in vitro. For this purpose, we counted the number of propidium iodide positive cells (PI+, which detects
apoptotic and necroptotic cells (28)) in wildtype (Casp-8WT) and Casp-8 knockdown (Casp-8KD) HUVECs
using a lentivirus–mediated shRNA knockdown system (29) (Suppl. Fig. 2A). Both Casp-8WT and Casp8KD HUVECs showed a slight, though not significant, increase in the number of PI+ cells upon TRAIL or
TNF stimulation (Suppl. Fig. 2B). As a positive control to demonstrate that HUVECs were not just
resistant to cell death, we knocked down c-FLIP (c-FLIPKD), the intrinsic inhibitor of Casp-8. c-FLIPKD
ECs presented a significant increase in cell death upon TNF or TRAIL stimulation (Suppl. Fig. 2B). As
vessel development in the retina is regulated by hypoxia (30), and hypoxia can be a modulator of cell
death (31), we also performed the same experiments under hypoxic conditions, which produced the
same results (Suppl. Fig. 2C).

6

Finally, to determine whether necroptosis could contribute to the observed phenotype in vivo, we
genetically deleted MLKL (the ultimate effector of necroptosis (13)) in the Casp-8ECko mice by crossing
Cdh5-(PAC)-CreERT2 x Casp-8fl/fl mice with a MLKLko mouse line. The vessel area and the number of
vessel branches at P6 were not affected in heterozygous or homozygous MLKLko pups compared to
wildtype littermates (Suppl. Fig. 3A-D), indicating that MLKL alone did not contribute to angiogenesis.
However, the vessel area and the number of vessel branches as well as the sprouts at the angiogenic
front were still reduced in Casp-8ECko/MLKLko pups (compared to Casp-8WT/MLKLko pups) (Fig. 2I-M),
showing that blocking necroptosis in Casp-8ECko pups did not rescue the vascular defects.
Our data indicate that the loss of Casp-8 in ECs during postnatal development does not induce cell
death via necroptosis. Even though we found a mild decrease in the number of cCasp-3+ and TUNEL+
ECs at P6 in Casp-8ECko pups, this did overall not affect the percentage of vessel regression, indicating
that extrinsic cell death is not an active driver of vessel pruning during postnatal vascular development.
Our data further suggest that Casp-8 regulates developmental angiogenesis in a cell death-independent
way.
Casp-8 regulates VEGF-induced EC sprouting, proliferation, and migration
It has been shown that Casp-8 has diverse cell death-independent functions, for example in the
regulation of cell migration (14, 32). Thus, to further characterize the EC phenotype and to understand
which processes are impaired upon loss of Casp-8, we analyzed the response of Casp-8KD ECs upon
VEGF stimulation. To do so, we analyzed EC sprouting in vitro using the bead sprouting assay (33).
While knockdown of Casp-8 (using a specific siRNA, Suppl. Fig. 4A) had no effect on unstimulated
conditions, Casp-8KD ECs failed to respond to VEGF stimulation (Fig. 3A,B). Additionally, we tested the
response of Casp-8KD ECs to VEGF stimulation using the tube formation assay. Consistently, the ability
of Casp-8KD ECs to form capillary-like tube structures upon VEGF stimulation was also significantly
attenuated (Suppl. Fig. 4B,C).
We next analyzed whether Casp-8 activity was required for the proper response of ECs to VEGF
stimulation. Using a luminescent Glo-assay, we first confirmed that ECs have a basal Casp-8 activity,
7

which could be blocked with the Casp-8 inhibitor Z-IETD-FMK (ZIETD, Suppl. Fig. 4D). As a positive
control for our assay, we treated ECs with a combination of cycloheximide (CHX) and TNF to induce
apoptosis, which strongly increased Casp-8 activity, as expected (Suppl. Fig. 4D). Functionally, blocking
Casp-8 activity in ECs resulted in the same defects as the knockdown of Casp-8, as ZIETD treated ECs
did not form sprouts upon VEGF stimulation (Suppl. Fig. 4E,F), indicating that Casp-8 activity was
required for proper angiogenesis.
To assess if changes in EC proliferation could contribute to the reduced vascular area in Casp-8ECko
retinas, we performed proliferation experiments. ShRNA-mediated Casp-8 knockdown in HUVECs
resulted in reduced proliferation upon stimulation with VEGF or FGF as determined by BrdU
incorporation (Suppl. Fig. 4G). Also, siRNA transfected Casp-8KD HUVECs had a reduced response to
VEGF stimulation in the WST-1 cell proliferation and viability assay (Suppl. Fig. 4H). In vivo, the total
number of ECs as determined by counting ERG+ nuclei per retina area (ERG is an EC specific
transcription factor (34)) was reduced (Fig. 3C,D,F). EdU labeling of proliferating cells in P6 retinas
showed significantly less EdU+/ERG+ cells per vessel area in Casp-8ECko pups compared to Casp-8WT
littermates (Fig. 3C,E,G), indicating that reduced EC proliferation could account for the reduced vessel
area.
EC migration is also required for proper expansion of the vascular network. We therefore checked
whether knockdown of Casp-8 in ECs could also affect this process. In a classical scratch wound assay,
VEGF stimulation of Casp-8WT ECs led to almost 80% closure of the wound, whereas knockdown of
Casp-8 reduced VEGF-induced wound closure (Suppl. Fig. 4I,J). To determine if Casp-8 affected
migration independent of its effects on proliferation, we performed live imaging experiments and tracked
the movement of non-dividing single Casp-8KD ECs. Indeed, the total migration distance of ECs after
12h of VEGF stimulation was reduced when Casp-8 was knocked down (Fig. 3H,I).
Altogether, these results show that Casp-8 regulates EC proliferation and migration, which contributes
to VEGF-induced sprouting.

8

Loss of Casp-8 affects the organization of adherens and tight junctions in ECs
Apart of being important for vascular homeostasis and vessel stability, dynamic turnover of vascular
endothelial cadherin (VE-cadherin) is crucial for proper vessel sprouting and elongation during
angiogenesis (35-39).
As both sprouting and migration were impaired in Casp-8ECko mice, and as Casp-8 has been shown to
regulate the stability of cell junctions in the epidermis (40), we analyzed the distribution of VE-cadherin
in vivo in the sprouting front and in the plexus of the growing vasculature of P6 retinas. By using an
established image software analysis and classification key (35, 41), we distinguished between
remodeling (‘active’) and stable (‘inhibited’) VE-cadherin patches. As expected, Casp-8WT retinas
presented a highly active VE-cadherin pattern in the sprouting front that was only slightly affected in
Casp-8ECko pups (Suppl Fig. 5A-C). More strikingly, Casp-8ECko retinas had a destabilized, more
discontinuous (‘active’) VE-cadherin staining in the back (plexus) of the retina, where Casp-8WT retinas
showed continuous (‘inhibited’) patches of VE-cadherin (Fig. 4A-C). Analysis of the distribution of
Claudin-5 in the plexus, one of the main transmembrane proteins found in tight junctions, showed the
same discontinuous pattern in the back of Casp-8ECko retinas (Fig. 4A).
Next, we confirmed the VE-cadherin phenotype in vitro. Consistent with previous studies (42), confluent
control shRNA transfected ECs (Casp-8WT ECs) showed a continuous (‘inhibited’) VE-cadherin staining
along the cell junctions (Fig. 5A), which became serrated with a rope-ladder pattern (‘active’) upon 30
or 60 min of VEGF stimulation (Fig. 5.B,C), as analyzed by measuring the average length of individual
VE-cadherin patches (Fig.5D). In contrast, the distribution of VE-cadherin in confluent Casp-8KD ECs
was already discontinuous/serrated in unstimulated conditions and VE-cadherin did not further
rearrange upon VEGF stimulation (Fig. 5A-D). Moreover, VE-cadherin at the cell perimeter were
reduced at basal conditions (Fig. 5E). However, total VE-cadherin protein levels were unchanged (Fig.
5F), indicating that VE-cadherin was not degraded, but only mislocalized.

9

Taken together, our data shows that the absence of Casp-8 in ECs affects the proper formation of
adherens and tight junctions in the postnatal retina, as well as the VEGF induced remodeling of VECadherin in vitro.
Loss of Casp-8 results in the basal activation of the p38 MAPK
We next pursued experiments aimed at identifying the signaling pathways involved in EC proliferation,
sprouting and migration that could be altered in Casp-8KD ECs. In the absence of Casp-8,
phosphorylation of Akt, ERK and FAK was neither affected at basal conditions, nor upon VEGF
stimulation (Suppl. Fig. 6A-D). However, knocking down Casp-8 or blocking its activity resulted in
increased basal p38 MAPK phosphorylation (Fig. 6A-C). Still, Casp-8KD ECs or HUVECs treated with
ZIETD were able to further activate p38 upon VEGF stimulation (Suppl. Fig. 6A, E-G). As increased
activation of p38 has been linked to the destabilization of VE-cadherin in the endothelium (43, 44), and
as VE-cadherin distribution was already altered in basal conditions in Casp-8KD ECs (Fig. 5A,D), we
explored whether the increased basal levels of p-p38 in Casp-8KD ECs were linked to the changes in
the distribution of VE-cadherin. For this, we blocked p38 activity in confluent ECs with the specific p38
inhibitor SB203580 (45). Even though the length of individual surface VE-cadherin patches was only
partially rescued (Fig. 6D,E), the total amount of VE-cadherin at the cell surface of Casp-8KD ECs was
fully recovered (Fig. 6F), indicating that indeed the basal activation of p38 was linked to VE-cadherin
localization.
To test whether the basal increase in p-p38 in Casp-8KD ECs was also sufficient to functionally block
VEGF-induced angiogenesis in Casp-8KD ECs, we performed the tube formation and bead sprouting
assays in the presence of the p38 inhibitor. Indeed, inhibition of p38 rescued the ability of Casp-8KD ECs
to respond to VEGF and to form both tubes (Fig. 6G and Suppl. Fig. 6H) and sprouts (Fig. 6H) of a
similar length as Casp-8WT ECs.
These results indicate that the loss of Casp-8 results in destabilization of EC junctions via an increased
basal phosphorylation of p38. They also indicate that the increased basal p38 activity is responsible for

10

the reduced response to VEGF, altogether resulting in overall impaired angiogenesis (see model in Fig.
7J).
Activation of p38 MAPK upon loss of Casp-8 is mediated by RIPK3
Casp-8 inhibits RIPK3 (12) and it has recently been shown that RIPK3 regulates vessel permeability via
p38 in ECs (22). Therefore, we asked whether RIPK3 could act downstream of Casp-8 to regulate p38.
Interestingly, we observed that Casp-8KD ECs expressed higher RIPK3 protein (Fig. 7A) and mRNA
levels (Fig. 7C), as also shown in epithelial Casp-8KO mice (46). To investigate whether p38 was
activated downstream of RIPK3 in Casp-8KD ECs, we additionally knocked down RIPK3 and analyzed
p38 phosphorylation. Knockdown of RIPK3 alone had no impact on either basal p-p38 nor on VEGFinduced p38 phosphorylation (Suppl. Fig 7A,B). However, the basal increase in p-p38 present in Casp8KD ECs was rescued to control levels in Casp-8KD/RIPK3KD ECs (Fig. 7A,B), indicating that RIPK3 was
responsible for the increased p-p38 levels observed in Casp-8KD cells.
Consistent with these effects on p-p38, knockdown of RIPK3 also rescued the ability of Casp-8KD ECs
to respond to VEGF and to form tube-like structures to a similar extent as seen for Casp-8WT and
RIPK3KD ECs (Fig. 7D, Suppl. Fig. 7C). In addition, proliferation induced by VEGF or FGF in Casp8KD/RIPK3KD ECs was also partially rescued compared to Casp-8KD ECs, as measured by BrdU
incorporation (Fig. 7E).
To confirm the role of RIPK3 in Casp-8ECko mice in vivo, we crossed our Cdh5-(PAC)-CreERT2 x Casp8fl/fl mice with a RIPK3ko mouse line (47). In line with our in vitro results, RIPK3 did not regulate
angiogenesis under physiological conditions, as neither the vessel area nor the number of branchpoints
(Suppl. Fig. 7D-G) in the retina of heterozygous or homozygous RIPK3ko pups was affected at P6
compared to wildtype littermates. In contrast, the vascular defects in Casp-8ECko mice were rescued in
Casp-8ECko/RIPK3ko mice as the vessel area (Fig. 7F-H) and number of branchpoints (Fig. 7I) were
similar to Casp-8WT/RIPK3ko mice.
In summary, these results show that in the absence of Casp-8, RIPK3 is mediating increased
phosphorylation of p38 in vitro and impaired developmental vascular growth in vivo. Together, we
11

propose that this RIPK3/p-p38 axis deregulates EC behavior resulting in impaired angiogenesis (Fig.
7J).
Casp-8ECko mice show reduced pathological angiogenesis in a model of oxygen-induced
retinopathy
So far, our results indicate that Casp-8 is required for proper developmental angiogenesis and when
absent, EC proliferation, migration and cell junction formation do not occur properly, resulting in reduced
vessel sprouting and growth. To analyze the impact of these vascular defects in Casp-8ECko mice at later
developmental stages, we extended our tamoxifen treatment protocol to the first two postnatal weeks
and analyzed Casp-8ECko mice at P15 and P42 (Suppl. Fig. 8). At both stages, Casp-8ECko mice did not
show differences in the vessel area (Suppl. Fig.8B, E) or number of branches (Suppl. Fig. 8C,F)
compared to control littermates. In addition, we analyzed vessel integrity by injecting 70kDa
fluorescently labeled Dextran and could not detect any obvious difference in vessel permeability (Suppl.
Fig. 8D, G) between genotypes. Taken together, this data suggests that compensatory mechanisms
overcome the loss of Casp-8 in ECs.
Despite the better control of oxygen administration to preterm infants, ROP persists in extremely low
gestational ages and birthweights and is still a clinical problem (48). ROP is characterized by two
phases. In phase 1, exposure of preterm infants to high extra-uterine oxygen levels causes cessation
of vessel growth. However, as the metabolic demand of the retina increases over time and as there is
a lack of proper tissue oxygenation, upregulation of VEGF induces pathological neovascularization,
consisting of extensive extra-retinal neovascular tufts in phase 2 of ROP (49). As our in vitro data
showed that Casp-8KD ECs were not able to respond to VEGF, we explored whether the loss of Casp-8
could also reduce pathological angiogenesis during ROP. We therefore applied the oxygen-induced
retinopathy (OIR) model, which resembles very well the two phases of ROP (50, 51). In this model, high
oxygen levels induce rapid vessel regression followed by upregulation of VEGF that causes pathological
vessel sprouting and formation of abnormal and leaky vascular tufts.

12

For this, we exposed pups to high oxygen levels (75%) to induce vessel regression from P7 to P10 (Fig.
8A), as previously described (35). Subsequently, pups were returned to normoxia until P15, causing the
now avascular retina to become hypoxic and upregulate VEGF, inducing the neovascular response. Cre
recombination and Casp-8 deletion was induced on return to normoxia from P10 to P14 to evaluate the
effect of Casp-8 loss on pathological neovascularization (Fig. 8A). Analysis of the retinal vasculature at
P15 showed that pathological neovascularization (quantified by measuring the neovascular tuft area
(52)) was strongly reduced in Casp-8ECko compared to Casp-8WT retinas (Fig. 8C, D), supporting the
concept that blocking Casp-8 is beneficial to prevent disease progression. In addition to pathological
neovascularization, normal angiogenesis gradually replaces the vessels lost from the central retina
following exposure to high oxygen. Analysis of the avascular area showed a slight increase in Casp8ECko pups compared to wildtype littermates (Fig. 8B, E). This result is probably a combination of reduced
pathological neovascularization and a reduced vessel regrowth, consistent with our finding that
angiogenesis and the response to VEGF were reduced in Casp-8KD ECs.
Finally, to examine vessel integrity and functionality of the newly formed vasculature, we analyzed
vessel perfusion by retro-orbital injection of IsolectinB4-A647 (which attaches to the vessel lumen and
hence, labels perfused vessels), as previously described (53, 54). Then, the isolated retinas were costained with IsoB4-A568 to determine the vessel area. Analysis of IsolectinB4-Alexa647 per vessel area
revealed efficient vessel perfusion in both genotypes (Figure 8F,H).
Taken together, targeting Casp-8 in ECs in a model of OIR, resembling ROP, could indeed be beneficial
as it reduces the severity of tuft formation without compromising the newly formed vasculature.

13

DISCUSSION
Components of both the intrinsic and extrinsic apoptosis signaling pathways have been described to be
active in ECs and involved in different processes during the formation of the vascular system. While the
intrinsic pathway of apoptosis (induced by the activation of Bax and Bak) is crucial for the regression
and cell death of ECs from hyaloid vessels in the retina (55-58), this pathway controls EC number (8,
10, 59-61), but is not an active driver of vessel remodeling/pruning in the postnatal retina vasculature.
On the other hand, activation of the extrinsic signaling machinery via activation of CD95 expressed in
retinal ECs contributes to vessel development by regulating EC proliferation instead of cell death (62).
Casp-8 is a key protease in the extrinsic cell death signaling pathway that has both cell death-inducing
and pro-survival functions (21). A basal Casp-8 activity is required for cell survival as it inhibits the
activation of RIPK3 and thus the subsequent phosphorylation of MLKL leading to necroptosis (63). In
pathological conditions, tumor-induced EC necroptosis has been described as a mechanism via which
tumor cells extravasate and metastasize (23). However, in the same tumor model it has also been
shown that RIPK3 regulates vessel permeability independent of EC necroptosis (22). Here we show
that necroptosis is not involved in postnatal developmental angiogenesis, as the vascular defects in
Casp-8ECko mice are still present in Casp-8ECko/MLKLko retinas. Notably, proper angiogenesis was
restored in Casp-8ECko/RIPK3ko pups, indicating that the vascular impairments in Casp-8ECko mice were
mediated by RIPK3, thus assigning a necroptosis-independent function for RIPK3 in ECs during
angiogenesis.
Cell death-independent functions of Casp-8 have been shown to be both activity dependent (16, 64)
and independent (acting as a scaffold protein (14, 32)). While we do not rule out that Casp-8 could also
act as a scaffold protein to regulate the angiogenic response of ECs, here we show that its activity is
required. The cellular substrate for Casp-8 in ECs during angiogenesis has yet to be identified. However,
as RIPK3 mRNA levels are upregulated in Casp-8KD ECs, similar as in epithelial cells without Casp-8
(46), transcriptional regulators might be involved.

14

Mechanistically, Casp-8 deletion in ECs results in EC proliferation, sprouting and VE-cadherin
subcellular distribution defects. Analysis of different signaling pathways revealed that Casp-8KD ECs had
increased basal activation of p38. Consistent with our findings, loss of Casp-8 in the epidermis has also
been shown to induce the upregulation of p-p38 (65). Despite the fact that VEGF stimulation activated
ERK, Akt, FAK and p38 in Casp-8KD ECs, this did not result in a functional angiogenic response in vitro.
However, when p38 activity was blocked, Casp-8KD ECs responded normally to VEGF stimulation in the
sprouting and tube formation assay. These findings indicate that the basal overactivation of p38 was
already enough to functionally inhibit the response of Casp-8KD ECs to VEGF and thus to impair
angiogenesis. It was previously reported that p38 activity induces EC migration (66). However, in our
experimental set-up, EC migration was not affected in Casp-8KD ECs under basal conditions, even
though p38 was already higher activated. As migration of Casp-8KD ECs does not change in basal
conditions, this suggests that p38-independent mechanisms might account for this phenotype. We could
also link RIPK3 to p38 hyperactivation, as in vitro knockdown of RIPK3 in Casp-8KD ECs rescued the
basal phosphorylation of p38 to control levels. Further studies are needed to investigate how RIPK3 is
regulating p38, and whether RIPK3 activity is required.
Specific loss of Casp-8 in the epidermis results in increased p38 phosphorylation (65) and loss of
junction integrity in epithelial cells, independent of cell death (40). Here we show that loss of Casp-8 in
ECs in vitro resulted in impaired distribution of VE-cadherin at the cell membrane, creating a serrated
pattern. Moreover, Casp-8KD ECs failed to induce VE-cadherin rearrangements required for proper
angiogenesis upon VEGF stimulation. This phenotype was rescued when p38 was inhibited in vitro. So
far, it is not very well understood how p38 regulates VE-Cadherin localization in physiological conditions.
However, tumor transendothelial cell migration studies suggest that p38 does not act directly on VECadherin, but rather promotes its internalization via the formation of stress fibers (67). We therefore
hypothesize that the activation of p38 in the absence of Casp-8 could cause the VE-Cadherin defects
via a similar mechanism.
In vivo, VE-cadherin stability was altered at the back of the retina of Casp-8ECko EC pups, suggesting
that EC-EC contacts fail to stabilize. Recent studies indicate that rather than its sole presence or
15

absence (35-37, 39), it is the dynamic and heterogeneous expression of VE-cadherin in different areas
of the developing vessel sprout that drives angiogenesis (38). Consistent with this current view, which
suggests that EC junctions in the back of the retina have to be stabilized in order to allow proper sprout
elongation in the front, we postulate that the increased number of vessel patches with serrated junctions
in the back of Casp-8ECko retinas blocks EC positional interchanges, ultimately resulting in a reduced
number of sprouts at the vascular front and thus reduced angiogenesis.
In many pathological conditions such as ROP, proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR) and retina vein
occlusion (RVO), among others, pathological retina neovascularization following tissue hypoxia is
characterized by excessive extra-retinal neovascular tufts (50, 68). In fact, it is the aberrant
neovascularization in these patients that causes the biggest clinical challenge (blindness), rather than
vessel regression itself (68). Here, by applying a model of oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR), resembling
ROP and producing neovascular lesions resembling those of PDR or RVO, we describe that Casp-8 is
mechanistically involved in the pathophysiology of ocular neovascular diseases, Indeed, Casp-8ECko
mice, were Casp-8 was deleted in ECs just during the neovascularization phase, presented reduced
aberrant vascular tufts. Consistent with our findings that Casp-8KD ECs have a reduced response to
VEGF stimulation and thus show reduced VEGF-induced angiogenesis, we also observed a slight
increase in the avascular area, suggesting that the newly regrowing vessels develop slower in Casp8ECko retinas compared to Casp-8WT ones (however, we cannot exclude that in this specific setting,
necroptosis contributes to the increased avascular area observed in Casp-8ECko mice). Nevertheless,
based on the fact that in physiological conditions Casp-8ECko retinas finally achieve a normal and
functional vasculature, we propose that inactivation of Casp-8 in an ischemic retinopathy pathological
setting, such as ROP, is beneficial as it will inhibit aberrant neovascularization, and, in a similar way as
in development, the avascular area will be finally recovered.

16

EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Mouse lines and treatment
Casp-8fl/fl mice (69) were crossed with Cdh5(PAC)-CreERT2 mice (24), to specifically delete Casp-8 in
the the endothelium upon tamoxifen treatment. MLKLko mice were provided by M. Pasparakis (CECAD,
Cologne). RIPK3ko mice (47) were provided by Genentech (South San Francisco, CA, USA). Pregnant
females were intraperitoneally injected with 2mg tamoxifen/30g body weight from E8.5 until E10.5.
Embryos were dissected at E13.5 and assessed for heart beat (alive), death or presence of
malformations such as bleedings or (cardiac) edema (Suppl. Fig. 1B). Recombination in pups was
induced by intragastric injection of 50µl tamoxifen (1mg/ml) at postnatal day (P)1– P3 and P5 as
described in Figure 1A. For analysis at P15 and P42, pups received additional tamoxifen injections (i.p.)
at P8, P11 and P14.

Oxygen induced retinopathy model
To induce retinal pathological angiogenesis in Casp-8ECko mice, the OIR model was used as previously
described (35). From P7 to P10, pups were placed in 75% oxygen (hyperoxia); at P10 pups were
returned to normal oxygen conditions (normoxia) until P15 (35). Cre recombination was induced by i.p.
injection of 50µl tamoxifen (2mg/ml) at P10 – P12 and P14. To analyze vessel perfusion, pups at P15
were retro-orbitally injected with IsoB4-Alexa 647 (5mg/kg body weight) as previously described (54)
and sacrificed after 5 min. Retinas were isolated and fixed in 4%PFA/PBS for 1h at room temperature
(RT). Conditions used for the retina staining are specified in the “Retina staining” section. Quantification
of the size of the avascular area and neovascular tufts was performed in Adobe Photoshop blind to
experimental conditions as previously described (52). To quantify vessel perfusion, mean fluorescent
intensity of injected IsoB4-Alexa 647 was normalized to the intensity of IsoB4-Alexa 568 stained
vasculature as previously described (54).

Analysis of EC proliferation in vivo
EdU (Thermo Scientific) was injected at a concentration of 100 µg/g body weight into P6 Casp-8ECko
pups as previously described (70) 2.5 h before culling. Eyes were fixed in 4%PFA for 1.5h at 4°C. EdU+
cells in the retina were detected with the Click-iT™ EdU Alexa Fluor™ 488 Imaging Kit (Thermo
Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. ECs were counterstained with ERG and IsoB4.
Eight pictures/pup of the angiogenic front were imaged at 20x magnification with a LSM 510 META.
Quantification was done blind to experimental conditions. The number of proliferating ECs is expressed
as EdU+/ERG+ cells normalized to the IsoB4+ vessel area per field of view.

Whole mount staining of the yolk sac vasculature
Yolk sacs were fixed overnight in 4% PFA/PBS at 4 °C. After permeabilization in 1% Triton X-100/PBS
for 1h at RT and blocking in 0.2% BSA, 5% normal donkey serum (Dianova), 0.3% TritonX-100 in PBS
for 2h at RT, primary antibody Endoglin (1:200, MAB1320, R&D Systems) was incubated overnight at 4
°C in blocking solution. The appropriate Alexa FluorTM-conjugated secondary antibody was incubated
overnight at 4°C. Whole mount images were acquired on a LSM 510 META confocal microscope.

Retina dissection, processing and staining
Eyes were collected and enucleated in PBS. For VE-Cadherin stainings, eyes were fixed in 2%
PFA/PBS for 1h at 4ºC. For all other stainings, eyes were fixed for 1.5h in 4% PFA/PBS at 4ºC. Retinas
were dissected, permeabilized with PBS containing 1% BSA, 0.3% Triton X-100 for 1h and incubated
with primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. Antibodies used were Alexa FluorTM 594-conjugated
IsolectinGS-IB4 (IsoB4) (1:250, ref.I21413, Thermo Scientific), Casp-8 (1:100, ref.4927, Cell Signaling),
ERG (1:200, ab92513, Abcam), Collagen IV (1:200, CO20451, Biozol), Desmin (1:200, ab15200,
Abcam), VE-cadherin (1:100, ref.555289, BD Bioscience), Claudin-5 (1:100, ref.34-1600, Thermo
Scientific), cCasp-3 (1:100, ref.661, Cell Signaling). After washing with PBS, retinas were incubated for
2h at RT with the respective secondary antibody. TUNEL assay (Roche) was performed according to
manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, retinas were fixed for 2h in 4% PFA/PBS at RT. Permeabilization
18

was done in 0.5% Triton X-100/0.1% citrate in PBS for 3h at RT. Then, labelling of TUNEL+ cells was
done for 1h at 37 °C. After washing, samples were stained with FITC- conjugated IsoB4 (1:250, ALX650-001F-MC05, Enzo Life Sciences) in 1% BSA, 0.3% Triton X-100/PBS for 1h at RT. Retinas were
flat-mounted and analyzed using a confocal fluorescence microscope (LSM 510 META or LSM800; Carl
Zeiss).

Analysis of VE-cadherin localization in ECs in vivo
For analysis of VE-Cadherin in the retina of P6 pups, high magnification pictures (63x) were acquired.
Two pictures from either the angiogenic front or the back of the retina were randomly taken in areas
adjacent either to a vein or an artery. Representative inset pictures show the most active or inhibited
pattern of VE-cadherin in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko pups. Quantification of the percentage of VEcadherin patches was done blind to experimental conditions in MATLAB as previously described (35).

In situ hybridization in the retina
In situ hybridization (ISH) was performed with minor modifications as previously described (71). In brief,
eyes of P6 pups were removed and fixed for 20 min in 4% PFA on ice. After isolation and dissection,
retinas were stored in methanol at -20°C overnight. Hybridization was performed at 66°C. Primer
sequences

to

generate

probes

to

detect

mouse

Casp-8

are:

Casp-8-Fwd

3’-

TTTCCACATCAGTCGGTGGG-5’ and Casp-8-Rev 3’-CTCTTGGCGAGTCACACAGT-5’. After color
development, retinas were extensively washed with PBS and counterstained with Alexa FluorTM 594conjugated IsoB4. Bright field and fluorescent images were acquired simultaneously using a Zeiss LSM
800 (20x objective). Bright field images were processed and background corrected with a rolling ball
algorithm in NIH ImageJ.

Lung endothelial cell isolation
Murine lung ECs were isolated by MACS® Technology (Miltenyi Biotec). Lungs of P6 mouse pups were
isolated and kept in ice-cold HBSS containing 10% FCS. Tissue from Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko pups
19

from the same litter were pooled and digested in collagenase I/DNAse I (0.1mg/ml, Roche) at 37°C. The
digested tissue was filtered, incubated with Red Blood Cell Lysis Buffer (Roche) and washed several
times with PEB buffer (0,5% BSA, 2 mM EDTA in PBS). Negative selection of CD45+ cells was
performed by incubation of the cell suspension with CD45 MicroBeads (1:10) for 15min at 4°C. Cell
suspensions were applied onto LS columns and unlabeled cells were collected on ice. Enrichment of
ECs was performed using CD31 MicroBeads (1:10) in PEB buffer for 15 min at 4°C and application on
MS columns. The positive cell fraction was eluted from the columns with PEB buffer and directly frozen
in RLT buffer (Qiagen) for RNA isolation.

Cell culture
Human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs; PromoCell) were cultured in Endopan 3 Kit for
endothelial cells (PAN-Biotech) supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml
streptomycin (both Gibco® by Life Technologies) in a 5% CO2 humidified incubator at 37ºC. Cells from
passages 2 to 5 were used for the experiments. When indicated, cells were starved in growth factorfree Endopan 3 supplemented with 2% FBS, 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 µg/ml streptomycin.

RNA extraction and quantitative Real-Time PCR analysis
RNA was extracted with the mini RNA extraction kit (Qiagen). RNA samples were transcribed to
complementary DNA using Maxima Reverse Transcriptase (Thermo Scientific) or SuperScript VILO
cDNA Synthesis Kit (Invitrogen). qRT-PCR was performed using Fast SYBR Green Master Mix (Thermo
Scientific). Either GAPDH or ActB were used as housekeeping genes. All qPCR results from cultured
cells were obtained from at least 3 independent experiments. Results from lung isolated ECs are from
4 independent litters.

siRNA transfection
HUVECs were seeded in a 6 well plate (9x104-11x104 cells/well). The next day, cells were transfected
with MISSION® siRNA Universal Negative Control (Sigma-Aldrich) or previously validated siRNAs for
20

Casp-8 (72) and/or RIPK3 (22) using Oligofectamin (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The final concentration of siRNA solution was 200nM.

Lentiviral vectors and virus production
For silencing experiments, previously used and validated lentiviral vectors to express shRNAs against
Caspase-8, c-FLIP or control (29, 73, 74) were used. Lentiviruses were produced by transfection of
HEK293-T cells with the calcium phosphate method with the corresponding vectors. Lentiviruscontaining

supernatants

were

collected

48/72

h

after

transfection

and

concentrated

by

ultracentrifugation at 22,000 rpm for 90 minutes at 4 ºC.

Analysis of VE-cadherin localization in ECs in vitro
For VE-cadherin staining in HUVECs, 1x105 infected cells (shCtrl or shCasp-8) were seeded and
allowed to attach overnight. Cells were starved overnight and stimulated with 50ng/ml VEGF for the
indicated time points. After fixation in 4% PFA/PBS for 30 min at RT and permeabilization in 0.5% Triton
X-100/PBS for 10 min, blocking in 1%BSA, 20% normal donkey serum (Dianova) in 0.2% Triton X100/PBS was done for 1h at RT. Samples were incubated with primary antibody (anti-VE-cadherin,
1:200, 610252, BD Bioscience) for 2h at RT followed by incubation with the appropriate Alexa FluorTMconjugated secondary antibody for 2h at RT. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (1:1000, D1306,
Invitrogen). After mounting, random fields of view were imaged with a Zeiss LSM 800 (63x objective).
VE-cadherin at the cell perimeter of single, non-adjacent cells was manually traced with ImageJ. Total
VE-cadherin at the cell perimeter was calculated as the sum of all individual VE-cadherin patches. At
least 15 cells per condition were quantified blind to the experimental condition from 3 independent
experiments.

In vitro BrdU incorporation
To analyze EC proliferation in vitro, 25x103 infected HUVECs (shCtrl or shCasp-8) were plated in 0.1%
gelatin/water coated coverslips. After overnight starvation, cells were treated with or without VEGF
21

(50ngml) or FGF (50n/ml), for 24 h. BrdU (10μM) was added and incubation of the cultures continued
for 4h at 37°C. Cells were fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 20min and permeabilized and blocked in 2% BSA
0.3% Triton X-100/PBS for 30min at RT. After unmasking with ice-cold HCl, neutralization with sodium
borate buffer (0.1M Na2B4O7 in water, pH 8.5) for 15min was done prior to primary antibody incubation.
An anti-BrdU antibody (1:250, OBT0030, Oxford Biotechnology) was incubated in blocking solution
overnight at 4 °C and an appropriate Alexa FluorTM-conjugated secondary antibody was incubated for
2h at RT. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI (1:1000, D1306, Invitrogen). Cells were mounted and
imaged in a wide field microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200) equipped with an Axiocam MRm camera (40x
objective). Around 100 cells per condition of 3 independent experiments were quantified blind to
experimental conditions.

WST-1 assay
The WST-1 cell proliferation and viability assay (Sigma-Aldrich) was done according to the manual as
previously described (33). Briefly, transfected HUVECs were plated in a 96 well plate and allowed to
attach overnight. Then, cells were starved overnight and stimulated with VEGF (50ng/ml) or control
vehicle for 24h.

Fibrin gel bead sprouting assay
Fibrin gel bead sprouting assay was performed as previously described (75). Briefly, cytodex 3
microcarrier beads (GE Healthcare) were coated with siRNA-transfected or shRNA-infected HUVECs
(mixed at 200 cells per bead), and embedded in 2 mg/mL fibrin gels ( 2 mg/mL fibrinogen (Calbiochem),
0.625 Units/mL thrombin (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.15 Units/mL aprotinin (Sigma-Aldrich)). Beads were
cultured in 2% FBS growth factor-free Endopan 3 medium, in presence or absence of 50ng/ml VEGF.
After 24 hours the culture was fixed with 4% PFA for 15min, blocked in 1% BSA, 0.2% TritonX-100-PBS
and incubated with 1µg/mL Phalloidin-fluo (94507, Sigma-Aldrich) for 2h. Confocal images were taken
with a Zeiss LSM 510 microscope and analyzed by NIH ImageJ. Quantification was done blind to

22

experimental conditions. Approximately 20 beads per condition were quantified from 4 independent
experiments.

Single endothelial cell tracings
Single EC tracings were performed as previously described (33). Infected ECs with shRNA control or
shCasp-8 were plated on 6 well plates and stimulated with 50ng/ml VEGF or control vehicle (after
overnight starvation). Phase contrast images of 10 fields of view per well were acquired every 10 min
over the course of 12h using an inverted NikonTi microscope (with a Nikon Plan Fluor 10x NA 0.3
objective) equipped with an environmental box from Oko Lab for temperature, CO2 and humidity control.
EC migration was traced automatically using NIS Elements 4.5 software. At least 30 cells per condition
were quantified blind to experimental conditions from 3 independent experiments.

Tube formation
Tube formation assays were performed in μ-Slide Angiogenesis wells (ibidi GmbH, Germany) as
previously described (33, 76) using 10 μl of growth factor-reduced Matrigel (BD Bioscience) per well. In
brief, siRNA transfected or lentivirus infected HUVECs resuspended in 2% FBS growth factor-free
Endopan 3 medium, with or without VEGF (50ng/ml), were seeded onto the polymerized matrigel.
Wherever indicated, prior to seeding on Matrigel, cells were pre-treated overnight with SB203580 (1µM).
Cells were incubated for 4h in a humidified chamber at 37°C, 5% CO2 before analysis. Images were
acquired with a wide field microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200) equipped with an Axiocam MRm camera and
a 5x objective. At least 3 fields of view per condition were acquired. Quantification of three independent
experiments was done blind to experimental conditions with the Angiogenesis analyzer tool of NIH
ImageJ.

Scratch assay
siRNA transfected HUVECs were seeded in a 6 well plate. When cells were confluent, they were starved
in 2%FBS growth factor-free Endopan 3 medium overnight. A wound was induced by scraping the cell
23

monolayer with a P200 pipet tip and cells were stimulated with or without VEGF (50ng/ml). A picture
was acquired at time-point zero and 12h after incubation at 37°C.The percentage of wound closure
between 0h and 12h of VEGF stimulation was analyzed with NIH ImageJ, blind to experimental
conditions. Results are from at least 3 independent experiments. For each treatment 8-10 fields of view
were analyzed.

In vitro cell death assay
Infected HUVECs (1x105 cells/well in 6 well plates) were treated with TNF-α (100ng/ml, Preprotech) and
TRAIL (100ng/ml, homemade) in normoxia or hypoxia (0,1% O2, BioSpherix, X2, Exvivo System) during
24h. After treatment, cells were washed with PBS, and stained with PI (40ug/ml) while treating with
RNase (100ug/ml). Quantitative analysis of PI+ cells was carried out in a FACSCalibur cytometer using
the Cell Quest software (Becton Dickinson).

Caspase-8 Glo assay
The Caspase-8 Glo® assay was performed in combination with the CellTiter-Fluor™ Cell Viability Assay
(both from Promega) according to the manual. In brief, 6x103 HUVECs per well were seeded in a 96well plate. After overnight starvation, cells were treated with Z-IETD-FMK (10µM) or TNF (100ng/ml) +
CHX (10µg/ml) for 4h before cell viability and Casp-8 activity were measured. Data is expressed as
relative units (RU) resulting from the Caspase-8-Glo [RLU]/ Cell Viability [RFU] ratio.

Immunoblotting
HUVECs were starved overnight and stimulated with VEGF (50ng/ml). When indicated, cells were
additionally treated with ZIETD (10µM) in starvation medium overnight. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer
(20mM Tris, 137mM NaCl, 2mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, Roche Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor
Cocktail). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and immunoblotted according to standard protocols.
GAPDH (1:10000, SC-47724, Santa Cruz), p-p38 (1:1000, ref.36-8500, Invitrogen), p38 (1:1000,
ref.9228, Cell Signaling), p-Akt Ser473 (1:1000, ref.4060, Cell Signaling), Akt (1:1000, ref.9272, Cell
24

Signaling), p-FAK Tyr397 (1:1000, ref.3283, Cell Signaling), FAK (1:1000, ref.3285, Cell Signaling), pERK p44/42 (1:1000, ref.9106, Cell Signaling), ERK (1:1000, ref.9102, Cell Signaling), RIPK3 (1:1000,
ref.13526, Cell Signaling), Casp-8 (1:1000, ALX-804-429, Enzo), c-FLIP (1:1000, AG-20B-0056,
AdipoGen).

Statistics
Results are expressed as mean ± SEM. To calculate statistical significance, the two tailed Student’s ttest, one sample t-test, one-way ANOVA or two-way ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s multiple
comparisons test were used and indicated in the appropriate figure legend. To calculate statistical
significance in Fig. 4 (analysis of VE-Cadherin distribution in vivo), Dirichlet regression model was
applied for the analysis of binned data. Additional Mann-Whitney tests for each state are reported to
indicate states with strong differences between groups. All calculations were performed using Prism
software.

Study approval
All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with European, national, and institutional
guidelines. Protocols were approved by local government authorities (Regierungspräsidium Karlsruhe,
Germany).

Author contributions
Conceptualization: N.T., A.F.V., R.Y., C.R.A.; Methodology: N.T., A.F.V., R.Y., C.R.A.; Investigation:
N.T., A.F.V., R.Y., I.P., S.L.P., X.W., R.M.P., L.C., W.W.W., L.C., B.S., H.J.G., T.H., C.M.,P.H., C.R.A.;
Resources: C.R.A., H.G.A., A.L.R.; Writing - Original draft: N.T., A.F.V., R.Y., T.S., C.R.A.; Writing –
Review & Editing: N.T., A.F.V., R.Y., I.P., S.L.P., X.W., R.M.P., W.W.W., L.C., B.S., H.J.G., L.C.W.,
M.M., A.L.R., T.S., H.G.A., T.H., C.M.,P.H., C.R.A.; Supervision: C.R.A., A.L.R., T.S., H.G.A.; Project
Administration: C.R.A.; Funding Acquisition: C.R.A.

25

Acknowledgements
We thank Manolis Pasparakis, Stephen Hedrick and the UCSD as well Bruno Köhler and Genentech
for providing MLKLko , Casp-8flox/flox and RIPK3ko mice, respectively. We thank Katie Bentley for her help
with the MATLAB image analysis for VE-Cadherin stainings in vivo. We thank the Nikon imaging Center
of the University of Heidelberg for their support. We thank Heike Adler and Melanie Richter for technical
assistant and the Ruiz de Almodovar lab for useful discussions. N.T. was supported by an HBIGS PhD
fellowship; I.P. was supported by Becas Chile. X.W. was supported by an Alexander Von Humboldt
postdoctoral fellowship. T.S. is supported by DFG SCHM 2560/3-1. CRA is supported by DFG grant RU
1990/1-1, ERC (ERC-StG-311367) and the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)-SFB873;
FOR2325 and SFB1366 (Project number 394046768-SFB 1366). L.C. is supported by an NHMRC
Project Grant (1125536) and the L.E.W Carty Charitable Fund.

26

REFERENCES:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.

Sapieha P, Joyal JS, Rivera JC, Kermorvant-Duchemin E, Sennlaub F, Hardy P, et al.
Retinopathy of prematurity: understanding ischemic retinal vasculopathies at an extreme of life.
Journal of Clinical Investigation. 2010;120(9):3022-32.
Mutlu FM, and Sarici SU. Treatment of retinopathy of prematurity: a review of conventional and
promising new therapeutic options. Int J Ophthalmol. 2013;6(2):228-36.
Potente M, Gerhardt H, and Carmeliet P. Basic and therapeutic aspects of angiogenesis. Cell.
2011;146(6):873-87.
Coultas L, Chawengsaksophak K, and Rossant J. Endothelial cells and VEGF in vascular
development. Nature. 2005;438(7070):937-45.
Korn C, and Augustin HG. Mechanisms of Vessel Pruning and Regression. Dev Cell.
2015;34(1):5-17.
Wietecha MS, Cerny WL, and DiPietro LA. Mechanisms of vessel regression: toward an
understanding of the resolution of angiogenesis. Curr Top Microbiol Immunol. 2013;367:3-32.
Kochhan E, Lenard A, Ellertsdottir E, Herwig L, Affolter M, Belting HG, et al. Blood flow changes
coincide with cellular rearrangements during blood vessel pruning in zebrafish embryos. PLoS
One. 2013;8(10):e75060.
Korn C, Scholz B, Hu J, Srivastava K, Wojtarowicz J, Arnsperger T, et al. Endothelial cell-derived
non-canonical Wnt ligands control vascular pruning in angiogenesis. Development.
2014;141(8):1757-66.
Cheng C, Haasdijk R, Tempel D, van de Kamp EH, Herpers R, Bos F, et al. Endothelial cellspecific FGD5 involvement in vascular pruning defines neovessel fate in mice. Circulation.
2012;125(25):3142-58.
Watson EC, Koenig MN, Grant ZL, Whitehead L, Trounson E, Dewson G, et al. Apoptosis
regulates endothelial cell number and capillary vessel diameter but not vessel regression during
retinal angiogenesis. Development. 2016;143(16):2973-82.
Hughes MA, Powley IR, Jukes-Jones R, Horn S, Feoktistova M, Fairall L, et al. Co-operative and
Hierarchical Binding of c-FLIP and Caspase-8: A Unified Model Defines How c-FLIP Isoforms
Differentially Control Cell Fate. Mol Cell. 2016;61(6):834-49.
Oberst A, Dillon CP, Weinlich R, McCormick LL, Fitzgerald P, Pop C, et al. Catalytic activity of
the
caspase-8-FLIP(L)
complex
inhibits
RIPK3-dependent
necrosis.
Nature.
2011;471(7338):363-7.
Sun L, Wang H, Wang Z, He S, Chen S, Liao D, et al. Mixed lineage kinase domain-like protein
mediates necrosis signaling downstream of RIP3 kinase. Cell. 2012;148(1-2):213-27.
Barbero S, Barila D, Mielgo A, Stagni V, Clair K, and Stupack D. Identification of a critical tyrosine
residue in caspase 8 that promotes cell migration. J Biol Chem. 2008;283(19):13031-4.
Scharner D, Rossig L, Carmona G, Chavakis E, Urbich C, Fischer A, et al. Caspase-8 Is Involved
in Neovascularization-Promoting Progenitor Cell Functions. Arteriosclerosis Thrombosis and
Vascular Biology. 2009;29(4):571-U268.
Liccardi G, Ramos Garcia L, Tenev T, Annibaldi A, Legrand AJ, Robertson D, et al. RIPK1 and
Caspase-8 Ensure Chromosome Stability Independently of Their Role in Cell Death and
Inflammation. Mol Cell. 2019;73(3):413-28 e7.
Boege Y, Malehmir M, Healy ME, Bettermann K, Lorentzen A, Vucur M, et al. A Dual Role of
Caspase-8 in Triggering and Sensing Proliferation-Associated DNA Damage, a Key Determinant
of Liver Cancer Development. Cancer Cell. 2017;32(3):342-59 e10.
Varfolomeev EE, Schuchmann M, Luria V, Chiannilkulchai N, Beckmann JS, Mett IL, et al.
Targeted disruption of the mouse Caspase 8 gene ablates cell death induction by the TNF
receptors, Fas/Apo1, and DR3 and is lethal prenatally. Immunity. 1998;9(2):267-76.
Yeh WC, Itie A, Elia AJ, Ng M, Shu HB, Wakeham A, et al. Requirement for Casper (c-FLIP) in
regulation of death receptor-induced apoptosis and embryonic development. Immunity.
2000;12(6):633-42.

27

20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.

Sakamaki K, Inoue T, Asano M, Sudo K, Kazama H, Sakagami J, et al. Ex vivo whole-embryo
culture of caspase-8-deficient embryos normalize their aberrant phenotypes in the developing
neural tube and heart. Cell Death Differ. 2002;9(11):1196-206.
Kang TB, Ben-Moshe T, Varfolomeev EE, Pewzner-Jung Y, Yogev N, Jurewicz A, et al.
Caspase-8 serves both apoptotic and nonapoptotic roles. J Immunol. 2004;173(5):2976-84.
Hanggi K, Vasilikos L, Valls AF, Yerbes R, Knop J, Spilgies LM, et al. RIPK1/RIPK3 promotes
vascular permeability to allow tumor cell extravasation independent of its necroptotic function.
Cell Death Dis. 2017;8(2):e2588.
Strilic B, Yang L, Albarran-Juarez J, Wachsmuth L, Han K, Muller UC, et al. Tumour-cell-induced
endothelial cell necroptosis via death receptor 6 promotes metastasis. Nature.
2016;536(7615):215-8.
Wang Y, Nakayama M, Pitulescu ME, Schmidt TS, Bochenek ML, Sakakibara A, et al. EphrinB2 controls VEGF-induced angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis. Nature. 2010;465(7297):4836.
Savant S, La Porta S, Budnik A, Busch K, Hu J, Tisch N, et al. The Orphan Receptor Tie1
Controls Angiogenesis and Vascular Remodeling by Differentially Regulating Tie2 in Tip and
Stalk Cells. Cell Rep. 2015;12(11):1761-73.
Pitulescu ME, Schmidt I, Benedito R, and Adams RH. Inducible gene targeting in the neonatal
vasculature and analysis of retinal angiogenesis in mice. Nat Protocols. 2010;5(9):1518-34.
Baffert F, Le T, Sennino B, Thurston G, Kuo CJ, Hu-Lowe D, et al. Cellular changes in normal
blood capillaries undergoing regression after inhibition of VEGF signaling. Am J Physiol Heart
Circ Physiol. 2006;290(2):H547-59.
Pietkiewicz S, Schmidt JH, and Lavrik IN. Quantification of apoptosis and necroptosis at the
single cell level by a combination of Imaging Flow Cytometry with classical Annexin V/propidium
iodide staining. J Immunol Methods. 2015;423:99-103.
Martin-Perez R, Yerbes R, Mora-Molina R, Cano-Gonzalez A, Arribas J, Mazzone M, et al.
Oncogenic p95HER2/611CTF primes human breast epithelial cells for metabolic stress-induced
down-regulation of FLIP and activation of TRAIL-R/Caspase-8-dependent apoptosis.
Oncotarget. 2017;8(55):93688-703.
Stone J, Itin A, Alon T, Peer J, Gnessin H, Chanling T, et al. Development of Retinal Vasculature
Is Mediated by Hypoxia-Induced Vascular Endothelial Growth-Factor (Vegf) Expression by
Neuroglia. Journal of Neuroscience. 1995;15(7):4738-47.
Lenihan CR, and Taylor CT. The impact of hypoxia on cell death pathways. (1470-8752
(Electronic)).
Barbero S, Mielgo A, Torres V, Teitz T, Shields DJ, Mikolon D, et al. Caspase-8 association with
the focal adhesion complex promotes tumor cell migration and metastasis. Cancer Res.
2009;69(9):3755-63.
Wang X, Freire Valls A, Schermann G, Shen Y, Moya IM, Castro L, et al. YAP/TAZ Orchestrate
VEGF Signaling during Developmental Angiogenesis. Dev Cell. 2017;42(5):462-78 e7.
Nikolova-Krstevski V, Yuan L, Le Bras A, Vijayaraj P, Kondo M, Gebauer I, et al. ERG is required
for the differentiation of embryonic stem cells along the endothelial lineage. Bmc Developmental
Biology. 2009;9.
Bentley K, Franco CA, Philippides A, Blanco R, Dierkes M, Gebala V, et al. The role of differential
VE-cadherin dynamics in cell rearrangement during angiogenesis. Nat Cell Biol. 2014;16(4):30921.
Vitorino P, and Meyer T. Modular control of endothelial sheet migration. Genes & development.
2008;22(23):3268-81.
Sauteur L, Krudewig A, Herwig L, Ehrenfeuchter N, Lenard A, Affolter M, et al. Cdh5/VE-cadherin
promotes endothelial cell interface elongation via cortical actin polymerization during angiogenic
sprouting. Cell Rep. 2014;9(2):504-13.
Cao J, Ehling M, Marz S, Seebach J, Tarbashevich K, Sixta T, et al. Polarized actin and VEcadherin dynamics regulate junctional remodelling and cell migration during sprouting
angiogenesis. Nat Commun. 2017;8(1):2210.
28

39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.
49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.

Perryn ED, Czirok A, and Little CD. Vascular sprout formation entails tissue deformations and
VE-cadherin-dependent cell-autonomous motility. Dev Biol. 2008;313(2):545-55.
Li C, Lasse S, Lee P, Nakasaki M, Chen SW, Yamasaki K, et al. Development of atopic
dermatitis-like skin disease from the chronic loss of epidermal caspase-8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A. 2010;107(51):22249-54.
Gordon EJ, Fukuhara D, Westrom S, Padhan N, Sjostrom EO, van Meeteren L, et al. The
endothelial adaptor molecule TSAd is required for VEGF-induced angiogenic sprouting through
junctional c-Src activation. Science signaling. 2016;9(437):ra72.
Sun Z, Li X, Massena S, Kutschera S, Padhan N, Gualandi L, et al. VEGFR2 induces c-Src
signaling and vascular permeability in vivo via the adaptor protein TSAd. J Exp Med.
2012;209(7):1363-77.
Nwariaku FE, Chang J, Zhu X, Liu Z, Duffy SL, Halaihel NH, et al. The role of p38 map kinase
in tumor necrosis factor-induced redistribution of vascular endothelial cadherin and increased
endothelial permeability. Shock. 2002;18(1):82-5.
Khanna P, Yunkunis T, Muddana HS, Peng HH, August A, and Dong C. p38 MAP kinase is
necessary for melanoma-mediated regulation of VE-cadherin disassembly. Am J Physiol Cell
Physiol. 2010;298(5):C1140-50.
Cuenda A, Rouse J, Doza YN, Meier R, Cohen P, Gallagher TF, et al. Sb-203580 Is a Specific
Inhibitor of a Map Kinase Homolog Which Is Stimulated by Cellular Stresses and Interleukin-1.
Febs Letters. 1995;364(2):229-33.
Gunther C, Martini E, Wittkopf N, Amann K, Weigmann B, Neumann H, et al. Caspase-8
regulates TNF-alpha-induced epithelial necroptosis and terminal ileitis. Nature.
2011;477(7364):335-9.
Newton K, Sun XQ, and Dixit VM. Kinase RIP3 is dispensable for normal NF-KBs, signaling by
the B-cell and T-cell receptors, tumor necrosis factor receptor 1, and toll-like receptors 2 and 4.
Molecular and Cellular Biology. 2004;24(4):1464-9.
Hellstrom A, Smith LE, and Dammann O. Retinopathy of prematurity. Lancet.
2013;382(9902):1445-57.
Hartnett ME. Pathophysiology and Mechanisms of Severe Retinopathy of Prematurity.
Ophthalmology. 2015;122(1):200-10.
Scott A, and Fruttiger M. Oxygen-induced retinopathy: a model for vascular pathology in the
retina. Eye (Lond). 2010;24(3):416-21.
Kim CB, D'Amore PA, and Connor KM. Revisiting the mouse model of oxygen-induced
retinopathy. Eye Brain. 2016;8:67-79.
Connor KM, Krah NM, Dennison RJ, Aderman CM, Chen J, Guerin KI, et al. Quantification of
oxygen-induced retinopathy in the mouse: a model of vessel loss, vessel regrowth and
pathological angiogenesis. Nat Protoc. 2009;4(11):1565-73.
Dubrac A, Kunzel SE, Kunzel SH, Li J, Chandran RR, Martin K, et al. NCK-dependent pericyte
migration promotes pathological neovascularization in ischemic retinopathy. Nat Commun.
2018;9(1):3463.
Zhang F, Prahst C, Mathivet T, Pibouin-Fragner L, Zhang J, Genet G, et al. The Robo4
cytoplasmic domain is dispensable for vascular permeability and neovascularization. Nature
Communications. 2016;7.
Mitchell CA, Risau W, and Drexler HC. Regression of vessels in the tunica vasculosa lentis is
initiated by coordinated endothelial apoptosis: a role for vascular endothelial growth factor as a
survival factor for endothelium. Dev Dyn. 1998;213(3):322-33.
Hahn P, Lindsten T, Tolentino M, Thompson CB, Bennett J, and Dunaief JL. Persistent fetal
ocular vasculature in mice deficient in bax and bak. Arch Ophthalmol. 2005;123(6):797-802.
Wang S, Park S, Fei P, and Sorenson CM. Bim is responsible for the inherent sensitivity of the
developing retinal vasculature to hyperoxia. Developmental biology. 2011;349(2):296-309.
Koenig MN, Naik E, Rohrbeck L, Herold MJ, Trounson E, Bouillet P, et al. Pro-apoptotic BIM is
an essential initiator of physiological endothelial cell death independent of regulation by FOXO3.
Cell death and differentiation. 2014;21(11):1687-95.
29

59.
60.
61.
62.
63.
64.
65.
66.
67.
68.
69.
70.
71.
72.
73.
74.
75.
76.

Dimmeler S, and Zeiher AM. Endothelial cell apoptosis in angiogenesis and vessel regression.
Circ Res. 2000;87(6):434-9.
Franco CA, Jones ML, Bernabeu MO, Geudens I, Mathivet T, Rosa A, et al. Dynamic endothelial
cell rearrangements drive developmental vessel regression. PLoS Biol. 2015;13(4):e1002125.
Hughes S, and Chang-Ling T. Roles of endothelial cell migration and apoptosis in vascular
remodeling during development of the central nervous system. Microcirculation. 2000;7(5):31733.
Chen S, Tisch N, Kegel M, Yerbes R, Hermann R, Hudalla H, et al. CNS Macrophages Control
Neurovascular Development via CD95L. Cell Rep. 2017;19(7):1378-93.
Rodriguez DA, Weinlich R, Brown S, Guy C, Fitzgerald P, Dillon CP, et al. Characterization of
RIPK3-mediated phosphorylation of the activation loop of MLKL during necroptosis. Cell Death
Differ. 2016;23(1):76-88.
O'Donnell MA, Perez-Jimenez E, Oberst A, Ng A, Massoumi R, Xavier R, et al. Caspase 8
inhibits programmed necrosis by processing CYLD. Nat Cell Biol. 2011;13(12):1437-42.
Lee P, Lee DJ, Chan C, Chen SW, Ch'en I, and Jamora C. Dynamic expression of epidermal
caspase 8 simulates a wound healing response. Nature. 2009;458(7237):519-23.
Rousseau S, Houle F, Landry J, and Huot J. p38 MAP kinase activation by vascular endothelial
growth factor mediates actin reorganization and cell migration in human endothelial cells.
Oncogene. 1997;15(18):2169-77.
Tremblay PL, Auger FA, and Huot J. Regulation of transendothelial migration of colon cancer
cells by E-selectin-mediated activation of p38 and ERK MAP kinases. Oncogene.
2006;25(50):6563-73.
Al-Shabrawey M, Elsherbiny M, Nussbaum J, Othman A, Megyerdi S, and Tawfik A. Targeting
Neovascularization in Ischemic Retinopathy: Recent Advances. Expert Rev Ophthalmol.
2013;8(3):267-86.
Beisner DR, Ch'en IL, Kolla RV, Hoffmann A, and Hedrick SM. Cutting edge: innate immunity
conferred by B cells is regulated by caspase-8. J Immunol. 2005;175(6):3469-73.
Neto F, Klaus-Bergmann A, Ong YT, Alt S, Vion A-C, Szymborska A, et al. YAP and TAZ regulate
adherens junction dynamics and endothelial cell distribution during vascular development. eLife.
2018;7:e31037.
Powner MB, Vevis K, McKenzie JA, Gandhi P, Jadeja S, and Fruttiger M. Visualization of gene
expression in whole mouse retina by in situ hybridization. Nat Protoc. 2012;7(6):1086-96.
Iurlaro R, Puschel F, Leon-Annicchiarico CL, O'Connor H, Martin SJ, Palou-Gramon D, et al.
Glucose Deprivation Induces ATF4-Mediated Apoptosis through TRAIL Death Receptors.
Molecular and Cellular Biology. 2017;37(10).
Wiznerowicz M, and Trono D. Conditional suppression of cellular genes: lentivirus vectormediated drug-inducible RNA interference. J Virol. 2003;77(16):8957-61.
Yerbes R, Palacios C, Reginato MJ, and Lopez-Rivas A. Cellular FLIP(L) plays a survival role
and regulates morphogenesis in breast epithelial cells. Biochim Biophys Acta.
2011;1813(1):168-78.
Nakatsu MN, Davis J, and Hughes CC. Optimized fibrin gel bead assay for the study of
angiogenesis. J Vis Exp. 2007(3):186.
Himmels P, Paredes I, Adler H, Karakatsani A, Luck R, Marti HH, et al. Motor neurons control
blood vessel patterning in the developing spinal cord. Nat Commun. 2017;8:14583.

30

FIGURE LEGENDS:

Figure 1. Postnatal EC specific knockout of Casp-8 results in impaired angiogenesis.
A) Scheme of tamoxifen administration in pups. B) Representative images of whole mount P6
retinas stained with IsoB4 (ECs) in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice. Dashed black lines highlight
the total retina area. C,D) Quantification of vessel area (C; n=22 WT, 21 ECko) and retina
vessel outgrowth (D; n=20 WT, 20 ECko). E) Representative higher magnifications of the retina
stained with IsoB4. F) Quantification of number of branches (n=18 WT, 16 ECko). G)
Representative images of the retina angiogenic front stained with IsoB4. Black arrows point to
EC sprouts. H) Quantification of the number of sprouts per front length showing reduced
number of sprouts in Casp-8ECko retinas (n=16 WT, 12 ECko). For C,D,F,H data represent mean
± SEM from 4 independent litters (* P <0.05, *** P <0.001; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test).
Scale bars: B) 100µm; E) 50µm; G) 20µm.
Figure 2. Loss of Casp-8 in ECs does not result in vessel regression nor necroptosis.
A) Retinas from P6 pups were co-stained with IsoB4 and Collagen IV (ColIV) in Casp-8WT and
Casp-8ECko retinas. B) Quantification of relative vessel regression shows no significant
differences between genotypes (n=19 WT, 11 ECko). C) Representative images of pericyte
coverage. Retinas were co-stained with Desmin (pericyte marker) and IsoB4. D) Quantification
of Desmin+ area per vascular area (%) shows no significant differences between genotypes
(n=12 WT, 8 ECko). E) Representative images of apoptotic ECs (white arrows), co-stained with
IsoB4 and cleaved caspase-3 (cCasp3). F) Quantification of cCasp-3+/IsoB4+ cells per vessel
area revealing fewer apoptotic ECs in Casp-8ECko retinas compared to Casp-8WT (n=6 WT, 7
ECko). G) Representative images of retinas co-stained with IsoB4 and TUNEL (black arrows
point to TUNEL+ ECs). Images of IsoB4 were transformed to grey colors with ImageJ for better
visualization. H) Quantification of relative amount of TUNEL+ ECs per vessel area also shows
decreased numbers of apoptotic ECs in Casp-8ECko retinas (n=15 WT, 10 ECko). I,J)
Representative images of the retinal vasculature stained with IsoB4 in Casp-8WT/MLKLko and
Casp-8ECko/MLKLko mice. Black arrows point to EC sprouts. K-M) Quantitative analysis showing
reduced vessel area (K; n=11 WT, 11 ECko), number of branches (L; n=6 WT, 8 ECko) and
reduced number of sprouts per front area (M; n=6 WT, 8 ECko) in Casp-8ECko/MLKLko retinas
compared to Casp-8WT/MLKLko littermates. For B,D,F,H,K-M data represent mean ± SEM at
least from 3 independent litters (* P <0.05, ns: not significant; two-tailed unpaired Student ttest). Scale bars: A,C,I) 100µm; E,G) 20µm; J) 50µm.
Figure 3. Loss of Casp-8 in ECs impairs sprouting, proliferation and migration.
A) Representative images of the bead-sprouting assay using HUVECs transfected with control
siRNA (siCtrl) or Casp-8 siRNA (siCasp-8) and treated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for 24h. B)
Quantitative analysis of total sprout length showing that VEGF is not able to induce vessel
sprouting in the absence of Casp-8. Approximately 20 beads per condition were quantified,
n=4. C) Representative images of the retinal vasculature co-stained with IsoB4, EdU (labels
proliferating cells) and ERG (labels ECs nuclei) in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice. IsoB4 single
channel was transformed to grey colors and inverted with ImageJ for better visualization. D,E)
Masks obtained by ImageJ of ERG+ cells (D) and of ERG+ EdU+ proliferating ECs (E). F,G)
Quantification of total number of ECs per retina area (F; n=7 WT, 12 ECko) and proliferating
ECs per vessel area (G; n=4 WT, 7 ECko), revealing lower absolute EC numbers and fewer
proliferating ECs in Casp-8ECko retinas compared to Casp-8WT littermates. Data from 2
independent litters. H) Single cell-motility tracks of HUVECs infected with a control (shCtrl) or
Casp-8 shRNA lentivirus (shCasp-8) and treated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for 12h. Migration origin
of each cell was overlaid at the zero-crossing point. I) Quantification of the total migration
31

distance of HUVECs in (H) showing that VEGF-induced migration was impaired in Casp-8KD
ECs. At least 30 cells per condition were quantified, n=3. For B,F,G,I data represent mean ±
SEM (for B,I * P <0.05, *** P <0.001; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons
test; for F,G * P <0.05; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test). Scale bars: A) 200µm; C) 50µm.
Figure 4. Casp-8 is necessary for maintaining EC junction stability at the retina plexus
in vivo.
A) Representative images of Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko retinas stained with IsoB4, VE-cadherin
and Claudin-5 (insets of left panels are shown on the adjacent right panels) showing that
junctions are more serrated and discontinuous at the retina plexus in Casp-8ECko compared to
Casp-8WT mice (yellow arrows). Images of VE-cadherin and Claudin-5 single channels were
transformed to grey colors with ImageJ for better visualization. B) Quantification of the
percentage of VE-cadherin patches showing a significant increase in the number of highly
active VE-cadherin patches and a lower number of highly inhibited patches in Casp-8ECko
compared to Casp-8WT mice. Each box shows the median percentage of patches of that type
(line), and upper and lower quartiles (box). The whiskers extend to the most extreme data within
1.5 times the interquartile range of the box. (* P <0.05, ** P <0.01; Dirichlet regression model
with two-tailed Mann Whitney test for each state; n=9 WT, 9 ECko). C) Average of the
differential distribution of the percentage of VE-Cadherin patches in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko
retinas. Scale bars: A) 20µm.
Figure 5. VE-cadherin distribution in ECs is affected in the absence of Casp-8 in vitro.
A-C) Representative images of VE-cadherin staining in confluent HUVECs infected with shCtrl
or shCasp-8 lentivirus (GFP+) with (B,C) or without (A) VEGF (50ng/ml) stimulation. Results of
tracing VE-cadherin staining of the single cells within orange dotted insets is shown in the
adjacent right panels. Yellow arrows point to empty VE-cadherin spots. D) Quantification of the
average length of VE-cadherin patches showing that VEGF-induced VE-cadherin
reorganization is impaired in Casp-8KD ECs (*** P <0.001, ns: not significant; two-way ANOVA
with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test). E) Quantification of the total amount of VEcadherin per cell perimeter showing less VE-cadherin in Casp-8KD ECs (*** P <0.001; two-tailed
unpaired Student t-test).. F) Western blot showing unchanged total VE-cadherin protein levels
in HUVEC infected with shCtrl or shCasp-8. For D,E at least 15 cells per condition were
quantified, n=3. Data represent mean ± SEM. Scale bars: A-C) 20µm.
Figure 6. Loss of Casp-8 results in basal activation of p38 MAPK, VE-cadherin instability
and defects in angiogenesis in vitro.
A) Western blots showing increased phospho-p38 (p-p38) at basal conditions in Casp-8KD
(shCasp-8) ECs compared to control (shCtrl). B) Quantification of p-p38 as in (A), n=5. C)
Quantification of p-p38 of HUVECs treated with ZIETD (10µM, 16h) at basal conditions,
showing that blocking Casp-8 activity also induces increased basal p-p38, n=3. D) Images of
VE-cadherin staining in shCtrl and shCasp-8 infected HUVECs treated with or without p38
inhibitor (SB203580, 1µM, 16h). Yellow arrows point to empty VE-cadherin spots. E)
Quantification of VE-cadherin average patch length from cells as in (H). F) Quantification of the
total amount of VE-cadherin per cell perimeter reveals that inhibition of p38 (SB203580) in
Casp-8KD ECs restores VE-cadherin to control levels. At least 15 cells per condition were
quantified, n=3. G) Quantification of total tube length of HUVECs treated as in (G) showing that
blocking p38 in Casp-8KD ECs restores VEGF-induced tube formation. 3 fields per condition
were quantified, n=4. H) Quantitative analysis of total sprout length showing that inhibition of
p38 rescues VEGF-induced EC sprouting in Casp-8KD ECs. Approximately 20 beads per
condition were quantified, n=3. For B,D,F,G,I-L data represent mean ± SEM (for B,C * P <0.05;
32

one sample t-test; for E-H * P <0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; two-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test). Scale bars: D) 20µm.
Figure 7. RIPK3 acts downstream of Casp-8 to regulate angiogenesis.
A) Western blot showing that knocking down RIPK3 in Casp-8KD ECs rescues the basal
hyperphosphorylation of p38. Notice that shCasp-8 HUVECs have increased RIPK3 protein
levels. B) Quantification of western blots at basal conditions as in (A), n=4. C) qPCR of shCtrl
or shCasp-8 infected HUVECs showing increased mRNA expression of Ripk3 in the absence
of Casp-8, n=4. D) Quantification of total tube length of shCtrl or shCasp-8 infected HUVECs
that were co-transfected with control siRNA or Ripk3 siRNA and treated with or without VEGF
(50ng/ml) for 4h. 10 fields per condition were quantified, n=3. E) BrdU+ cells were quantified in
control and Casp-8KD ECs transfected with Ripk3 siRNA and with or without VEGF (50ng/ml)
or FGF (50ng/ml) stimulation for 24h. Around 50 cells per condition were quantified, n=3. F,G)
Representative images of the retinal vasculature stained with IsoB4 in Casp-8WT/RIPK3ko and
Casp-8ECko/RIPK3ko mice. H,I) Quantitative analysis showing no differences on vessel area (H;
n=11 WT, 7 ECko) and number of branches (I; n=9 WT, 7 ECko). Data from 4 independent
litters. J) Working model summarizing the role of Casp-8 as a modulator of angiogenesis. Casp8 inhibits RIPK3 to allow the proper response of ECs to VEGF stimulation (Casp-8WT). If Casp8 is absent (Casp-8ECko), increased RIPK3 levels induce p38 hyperphosphorylation which in
turn leads to an impaired response to VEGF stimulation and reduced angiogenesis. For BD,E,H,I data represent mean ± SEM (for B,C * P <0.05, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; one
sample t-test; D,E * P <0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001; two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple
comparisons test; for H,I * P <0.05, ns: not signifcant; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test).
Figure 8: Loss of Casp-8 results in reduced neovascularization in the Oxygen Induced
Retinopathy (OIR) model.
A) Scheme showing the timeline of the used OIR protocol. Pups were placed in 75% oxygen
(hyperoxia) from P7 to P10, then placed back to normal oxygen conditions (normoxia) until P15.
Tamoxifen was injected at P10-12 and P14. B,C) Representative images of the retinal
vasculature stained with IsoB4 in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice. Filled red space indicate the
avascular area (B), red outlines indicate neovascular tufts (C). D,E) Pathological
neovascularization is reduced in Casp-8ECko mice (D) compared to Casp-8WT littermates, while
the avascular area was higher in Casp-8ECko mice (n=16WT, 8ECko). F,G) Retro-orbital
injection of IsoB4-647 did not reveal any difference in vessel perfusion among Casp-8ECko and
Casp-8WT mice (n=11WT, 10ECko), as quantified by measuring Alexa647 fluorescent intensity
in IsoB4-A568 labeled vessels. Data represent mean ± SEM from 3 independent litters (* P
<0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test). Scale
bars: B) 500µm; C) 250µm; F) 100µm.

33

Suppl Fig 1. Knockout of Casp-8 in ECs is lethal during embryonic, but not postnatal
development.
A) Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mouse embryos at E13.5. Upper and middle panels: embryo overview
showing developmental arrest or severe haemorrhages (white arrows) in Casp-8ECko embryos. Lower
panels: immunostaining for the EC marker Endoglin, showing impaired yolk sac vasculature in Casp8ECko embryos (E13.5). B) Table of embryonic lethality of Casp-8ECko embryos at E13.5. C) qRT-PCR of
isolated lung ECs showing purity of the CD31+ fraction. Values were normalized to the CD31- fraction.
D) qRT-PCR of isolated lung ECs showing knockout efficiency in Casp-8ECko pups (results from 3
independent litters; ** P <0.01; one-sample t-test). E) No differences between genotypes were observed
on mouse weight (n=25 WT, 22 ECko). F) Representative images from Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice.
G) No differences between genotypes were observed on survival (n=25 WT, 22 ECko). H) In situ
hybridization (mRNA) or immunofluorescence (protein) showing Casp-8 expression at the front and the
back (plexus) of P6 mouse retinas. Data represent mean ± SEM. Scale bars: A) 1cm (upper panel) and
100µm (lower panel); F) 5mm; H) 100µm.
Suppl Fig. 2. Knockdown of Casp-8 in ECs does not increase cell death in vitro.
A) Western blot showing protein knockdown efficiency after infecting HUVECs with a lentivirus carrying
shRNAs for c-FLIP or Casp-8. B,C) Quantification of apoptotic/necrotic HUVECs (PI+) in normoxia (B)
or hypoxia (C) showing that knockdown of c-FLIP (shFLIP), after the indicated treatments, increases
cell death while knockdown of Casp-8 (shCasp-8) does not, n=3. Data represent mean ± SEM (** P
<0.01, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test).
Suppl Fig. 3. MLKL knockout pups do not present impaired postnatal angiogenesis.
A,B) Representative images of whole mount P6 retinas of MLKLWT, MLKL heterozygous (MLKLHet) and
MLKLko mice stained with IsoB4 (ECs) (A) and higher magnifications of the retina front (B). Black dashed
lines highlight the total retina area. C,D) Quantification of vessel area (C; n=4 WT, 6 Het, 4 ko) and
number of branches (D; n=3 WT, 4 Het, 4 ko). For C,D data represent mean ± SEM from 2 independent
litters (ns: not significant; one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test). Scale bars: A)
100µm; B) 50µm.
Suppl Fig. 4. Knockdown of Casp-8 impairs VEGF-induced tube formation, EC proliferation and
migration in vitro.
A) Western blot showing the knockdown efficiency of the Casp-8 siRNA. B) Bright field representative
images of the tube formation assay. HUVECs were transfected with control siRNA (siCtrl) or Casp-8
siRNA (siCasp-8) and treated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for 4h. C) Quantification of the total tube length as
in (B) showing that Casp-8 knockdown inhibits VEGF-induced tube formation. 5 fields per condition were
quantified, n=3. D) Casp-8 activity was measured with a Casp-8 Glo kit. HUVECs’ basal Casp-8 activity
can be blocked with the Casp-8 inhibitor ZIETD (10µM) or induced by cycloheximide (CHX, 1µg/ml) plus
TNF (100ng/ml) for 4h, n=3. Data represent mean ± SEM (** P <0.01, *** P <0.001; two-tailed unpaired
Student t-test). E) Representative images of the bead-sprouting assay using HUVECs treated with
vehicle or ZIETD (10µM) with or without VEGF (50ng/ml) stimulation. F) Quantification of the total sprout
length shows that blocking Casp-8 activity impairs VEGF-induced sprouting. Approximately 10 beads
per condition were quantified, n=4. G) BrdU+ HUVECs were quantified in control and Casp-8KD ECs with
or without VEGF (50ng/ml) or FGF (50 ng/ml) stimulation (24h). Around 100 cells per condition were
quantified, n=3. H) WST-1 assay showing no response to VEGF-induced proliferation in Casp-8KD ECs
(24h), n=9. I) Representative bright field images of the scratch migration assay of HUVECs transfected
with siCtrl or siCasp-8. Wound closure is reduced in Casp-8KD ECs after 12h of VEGF (50ng/ml)
stimulation. J) Quantification of the gap closure from (I). 15 fields per condition were quantified, n=5.
For C,F-H,J data represent mean ± SEM (* P <0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001; two-way ANOVA with
Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test). Scale bars: B,E) 100µm; I) 200µm.
Suppl Fig. 5. Casp-8ECko mice show an active VE-cadherin staining at the junctions of the
sprouting front.
34

A) Representative images of the front of the retina stained with IsoB4 and VE-cadherin. Images of the
VE-cadherin single channel were transformed to grey colors with ImageJ for better visualization. B)
Quantification of the percentage of VE-cadherin patches in the sprouting front showing only a mild
reduction in Casp-8ECko mice in the number of highly inhibited VE-cadherin patches compared to Casp8WT. Each box shows the median percentage of patches of that type (line), and upper and lower quartiles
(box). The whiskers extend to the most extreme data within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the box.
( ** P <0.01; Dirichlet regression model with two-tailed Mann Whitney test for each state; n=9 WT, 9
ECko). C) Average of the differential distribution of the percentage of VE-Cadherin patches of Casp-8WT
and Casp-8ECko retinas. Data from 3 independent litters. Scale bars: A) 20µm.
Suppl Fig. 6. VEGF-induced phosphorylation of Akt, ERK, FAK and p38 is not affected by loss of
Casp-8 in ECs.
A) Western blot showing that the Akt, ERK, FAK and p38 signaling pathways are normally activated
upon VEGF stimulation in Casp-8KD ECs. B-E) Quantification of western blots shown in (A), n=3-5. F)
Western blot of HUVECs treated with ZIETD (10µM, 16h) and stimulated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for the
indicated times, showing that blocking Casp-8 activity also induces increased basal p-p38. Insets of pp38 at basal conditions (of the same blots) are shown in the upper panels. G) Quantification of p-p38
after VEGF stimulation, n=3. H) Bright field representative images of the tube formation assay quantified
in Fig. 6H. ShCtrl or shCasp-8 infected HUVECs were treated with or without p38 inhibitor (SB) and with
VEGF (50ng/ml) for 4h. For B-D, F,H data represent mean ± SEM (ns: not significant; repeated
measures two-way ANOVA). Scale bars: I) 100µm.
Suppl Fig. 7. Knockdown of RIPK3 alone has no impact on angiogenesis.
A) Western blot showing that the sole siRNA-mediated knockdown of RIPK3 in HUVECs does not affect
p38 activation. HUVECs were stimulated with VEGF for the indicated time points. B) Quantification of
western blots shown in (A), n=3. C) Bright field representative images of the tube formation assay
quantified in Fig. 7D. ShCtrl or shCasp-8 infected HUVECs were transfected with control or Ripk3 siRNA
and treated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for 4h. D,E) Representative images of whole mount P6 retinas of
RIPK3WT, heterozygous (RIPK3Het) and RIPK3ko mice stained with IsoB4 (ECs) (D) and higher
magnifications of the retina front (E). Black dashed lines highlight the total retina area. F,G)
Quantification of vessel area (F; n=5 WT, 10 Het, 5 ko) and number of branches (G; n=5 WT, 10 Het, 5
ko). Data represent mean ± SEM (ns: not significant; for B repeated measures two-way ANOVA; for F,G
one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test, data from 3 independent litters). Scale
bars: C-E) 100μm.
Suppl. Fig. 8: Vascular defects in Casp-8ECko mice are recovered at P15 and P42.
A) Scheme of the applied extended tamoxifen treatment protocol. B,C) Neither the vessel area (B), nor
the number of branches (C) are affected at P15 in Casp-8ECko mice (n=6WT, 4ECko). D) Retro-orbital
injection of 70kDa fluorescently labeled Dextran does not reveal qualitative differences in vessel
permeability in neither the superficial, intermediate or deep vascular layers in Casp-8ECko mice compared
to wildtype littermates. Representative pictures show Dextran localized inside, but not outside of IsoB4
labeled vessels. E-G) Consistently, no defects regarding vessel area (E), number of branches (F) or
vessel permeability (G) were observed in Casp-8ECko mice at P42 (n=5WT, 4ECko). For B,C,E,F data
represent mean ± SEM (* P <0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple
comparisons test) Scale bars: D,G) 100µm.

35

B

A

IsoB4

E

IsoB4

G

IsoB4

Casp-8WT

pup

P1
Tamoxifen

P2

P6 Dissection

D

Vessel area (%)

50

***

40
30
20
10
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

Vascular outgrowth (%)

C

F
100

***

80
60
40
20
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

H
15

***
***

10
5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

Sprouts / mm (fold change)

P5

No. of branches (103)

P4

Casp-8ECko

P3

1.5

*

1.0
0.5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

Figure 1. Postnatal EC specific knockout of Casp-8 results in impaired angiogenesis.
A) Scheme of tamoxifen administration in pups. B) Representative images of whole mount P6 retinas
stained with IsoB4 (ECs) in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice. Dashed black lines highlight the total retina
area. C,D) Quantification of vessel area (C; n=22 WT, 21 ECko) and retina vessel outgrowth (D; n=20 WT,
20 ECko). E) Representative higher magnifications of the retina stained with IsoB4. F) Quantification of
number of branches (n=18 WT, 16 ECko). G) Representative images of the retina angiogenic front stained
with IsoB4. Black arrows point to EC sprouts. H) Quantification of the number of sprouts per front length
showing reduced number of sprouts in Casp-8ECko retinas (n=16 WT, 12 ECko). For C,D,F,H data represent
mean ± SEM from 4 independent litters (* P <0.05, *** P <0.001; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test). Scale
bars: B) 100µm; E) 50µm; G) 20µm.

IsoB4 ColIV

C IsoB4 Desmin

E IsoB4 cCasp3

G IsoB4 TUNEL

D

F

H

1.0
0.5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

IsoB4

J

ns

40
20
0

15
10
5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

IsoB4

*

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

K

30
20
10
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko
MLKLko

M
1.5

1.5

*

1.0
0.5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

10

*

8
6
4
2
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko
MLKLko

*

Sprouts / mm
(fold change)

Casp-8ECko MLKLko

L

*

40

TUNEL+ EC (fold change)

1.5

60

cCasp3+ EC / mm2

ns

2.0

No. of branches (103)

Casp-8WT MLKLko

I

2.5

Vessel area (%)

+

ColIV empty sleeves
(fold change)

B

Pericyte coverage (%)

Casp-8ECko

Casp-8WT

A

1.0
0.5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko
MLKLko

Figure 2. Loss of Casp-8 in ECs does not result in vessel regression nor necroptosis.
A) Retinas from P6 pups were co-stained with IsoB4 and Collagen IV (ColIV) in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko retinas.
B) Quantification of relative vessel regression shows no significant differences between genotypes (n=19 WT, 11
ECko). C) Representative images of pericyte coverage. Retinas were co-stained with Desmin (pericyte marker)
and IsoB4. D) Quantification of Desmin+ area per vascular area (%) shows no significant differences between
genotypes (n=12 WT, 8 ECko). E) Representative images of apoptotic ECs (white arrows), co-stained with
IsoB4 and cleaved caspase-3 (cCasp3). F) Quantification of cCasp-3+/IsoB4+ cells per vessel area revealing
fewer apoptotic ECs in Casp-8ECko retinas compared to Casp-8WT (n=6 WT, 7 ECko). G) Representative images
of retinas co-stained with IsoB4 and TUNEL (black arrows point to TUNEL+ ECs). Images of IsoB4 were
transformed to grey colors with ImageJ for better visualization. H) Quantification of relative amount of TUNEL+
ECs per vessel area also shows decreased numbers of apoptotic ECs in Casp-8ECko retinas (n=15 WT, 10 ECko).
I,J) Representative images of the retinal vasculature stained with IsoB4 in Casp-8WT/MLKLko and Casp-8ECko/
MLKLko mice. Black arrows point to EC sprouts. K-M) Quantitative analysis showing reduced vessel area (K;
n=11 WT, 11 ECko), number of branches (L; n=6 WT, 8 ECko) and reduced number of sprouts per front area
(M; n=6 WT, 8 ECko) in Casp-8ECko/MLKLko retinas compared to Casp-8WT/MLKLko littermates. For B,D,F,H,K-M
data represent mean ± SEM at least from 3 independent litters (* P <0.05, ns: not significant; two-tailed unpaired
Student t-test). Scale bars: A,C,I) 100µm; E,G) 20µm; J) 50µm.

siCtrl

siCasp-8

B

no VEGF
VEGF

VEGF

Sprout length (fold change)

no VEGF

A

2.5

1.0
0.5

D

siCtrl

siCasp-8

E

ERG+ EdU+

ERG+

F

Casp-8WT

ERG+ EC / mm2
(x102)

IsoB4 EdU ERG

***

1.5

0

C

***

2.0

10

*

8
6
4
2
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

Casp-8ECko

ERG+ EdU+ cells /
vessel area (mm2)

G
100

*

80
60
40
20
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

H

shCtrl

shCasp-8

I
800
Migrated distance (µm)

VEGF

no VEGF

no VEGF
VEGF

*

*

600
400
200
0

shCtrl

shCasp-8

Figure 3. Loss of Casp-8 in ECs impairs sprouting, proliferation and migration.
A) Representative images of the bead-sprouting assay using HUVECs transfected with control siRNA (siCtrl) or
Casp-8 siRNA (siCasp-8) and treated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for 24h. B) Quantitative analysis of total sprout length
showing that VEGF is not able to induce vessel sprouting in the absence of Casp-8. Approximately 20 beads per
condition were quantified, n=4. C) Representative images of the retinal vasculature co-stained with IsoB4, EdU
(labels proliferating cells) and ERG (labels ECs nuclei) in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice. IsoB4 single channel
was transformed to grey colors and inverted with ImageJ for better visualization. D,E) Masks obtained by ImageJ
of ERG+ cells (D) and of ERG+ EdU+ proliferating ECs (E). F,G) Quantification of total number of ECs per retina
area (F; n=7 WT, 12 ECko) and proliferating ECs per vessel area (G; n=4 WT, 7 ECko), revealing lower absolute
EC numbers and fewer proliferating ECs in Casp-8ECko retinas compared to Casp-8WT littermates. Data from 2
independent litters. H) Single cell-motility tracks of HUVECs infected with a control (shCtrl) or Casp-8 shRNA
lentivirus (shCasp-8) and treated with VEGF (50ng/ml) for 12h. Migration origin of each cell was overlaid at the
zero-crossing point. I) Quantification of the total migration distance of HUVECs in (H) showing that VEGF-induced
migration was impaired in Casp-8KD ECs. At least 30 cells per condition were quantified, n=3. For B,F,G,I data
represent mean ± SEM (for B,I * P <0.05, *** P <0.001; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons
test; for F,G * P <0.05; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test). Scale bars: A) 200µm; C) 50µm.

A

Casp-8ECko

Claudin-5

VE-cad

IsoB4 Claudin-5
VE-cad

Casp-8WT

VE-cad patches (%)

40 **

*

**

30
20
10
0
Active

Inhibited

Casp8WT
Casp8ECko

VE-cad patches (%)

C

B

30

Casp8WT
Casp8ECko

20
10
0
Active

Inhibited

Figure 4. Casp-8 is necessary for maintaining EC junction stability at the retina plexus in vivo.
A) Representative images of Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko retinas stained with IsoB4, VE-cadherin and Claudin-5 (insets of
left panels are shown on the adjacent right panels) showing that junctions are more serrated and discontinuous at the
retina plexus in Casp-8ECko compared to Casp-8WT mice (yellow arrows). Images of VE-cadherin and Claudin-5 single
channels were transformed to grey colors with ImageJ for better visualization. B) Quantification of the percentage of
VE-cadherin patches showing a significant increase in the number of highly active VE-cadherin patches and a lower
number of highly inhibited patches in Casp-8ECko compared to Casp-8WT mice. Each box shows the median percentage
of patches of that type (line), and upper and lower quartiles (box). The whiskers extend to the most extreme data
within 1.5 times the interquartile range of the box. (* P <0.05, ** P <0.01; Dirichlet regression model with two-tailed
Mann Whitney test for each state; n=9 WT, 9 ECko). C) Average of the differential distribution of the percentage of
VE-Cadherin patches in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko retinas. Scale bars: A) 20µm.

B

60min VEGF

D

GFP VE-cad
30min VEGF

shCasp-8

shCasp-8

shCtrl

GFP VE-cad
no VEGF

shCtrl

A

C

no VEGF

shCtrl

30min VEGF

shCasp-8

VE-cad patches
average length (µm)

15

Surface VE-cad /
cell perimeter

F
1.0

***

0.5
0

***
***
***
***

10
**
5

0

E

60min VEGF

ns

ns

ns

***

shCtrl

shCasp-8

-8
trl hCasp
C
h
s
s
VE-cad

Casp-8
GAPDH

shCtrl shCasp-8

Figure 5. VE-cadherin distribution in ECs is affected in the absence of Casp-8 in vitro.
A-C) Representative images of VE-cadherin staining in confluent HUVECs infected with shCtrl or shCasp-8
lentivirus (GFP+) with (B,C) or without (A) VEGF (50ng/ml) stimulation. Results of tracing VE-cadherin
staining of the single cells within orange dotted insets is shown in the adjacent right panels. Yellow
arrows point to empty VE-cadherin spots. D) Quantification of the average length of VE-cadherin patches
showing that VEGF-induced VE-cadherin reorganization is impaired in Casp-8KD ECs (*** P <0.001, ns:
not significant; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test). E) Quantification of the
total amount of VE-cadherin per cell perimeter showing less VE-cadherin in Casp-8KD ECs (*** P <0.001;
two-tailed unpaired Student t-test).. F) Western blot showing unchanged total VE-cadherin protein levels
in HUVEC infected with shCtrl or shCasp-8. For D,E at least 15 cells per condition were quantified, n=3.
Data represent mean ± SEM. Scale bars: A-C) 20µm.

sh

B

8

p-

s
Ca

sh

C

p-p38
p38
Casp-8
GAPDH

D

*

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0

p=0.05

4

p-p38 (fold change)

rl
Ct

p-p38 (fold change)

A

3
2
1
0

shCtrl shCasp-8

DMSO ZIETD

E
SB203580

shCtrl

DMSO

***
***
***

40

VE-cad patches
av length (µm)

GFP VE-cad

10
shCtrl

shCasp-8

Surface VE-cad /
cell perimeter

F

20

**

***

shCtrl
shCasp-8

**

15
10
5

H
Av sprout length (µm)

Total tube length (mm)

G

1.0

3

*

DMSO
SB203580

0.5

0

shCtrl
***

**

shCasp-8
***
*** ns
***

5
4

SB203580

***

20

0

***
**

DMSO

30

shCasp-8
shCtrl
shCasp-8

*

*

2
1

0
DMSO +

+

+

+

-

-

-

-

0
DMSO +

+

+

+

-

-

-

-

SB203580 -

-

-

-

+

+

+

+

SB203580 -

-

-

-

+

+

+

+

VEGF -

-

+

+

-

-

+

+

VEGF -

-

+

+

-

-

+

+

Figure 6. Loss of Casp-8 results in basal activation of p38 MAPK, VE-cadherin instability and defects in angiogenesis in
vitro.
A) Western blots showing increased phospho-p38 (p-p38) at basal conditions in Casp-8KD (shCasp-8) ECs compared to control
(shCtrl). B) Quantification of p-p38 as in (A), n=5. C) Quantification of p-p38 of HUVECs treated with ZIETD (10µM, 16h) at basal
conditions, showing that blocking Casp-8 activity also induces increased basal p-p38, n=3. D) Images of VE-cadherin staining in
shCtrl and shCasp-8 infected HUVECs treated with or without p38 inhibitor (SB203580, 1µM, 16h). Yellow arrows point to empty
VE-cadherin spots. E) Quantification of VE-cadherin average patch length from cells as in (H). F) Quantification of the total amount
of VE-cadherin per cell perimeter reveals that inhibition of p38 (SB203580) in Casp-8KD ECs restores VE-cadherin to control levels.
At least 15 cells per condition were quantified, n=3. G) Quantification of total tube length of HUVECs treated as in (G) showing that
blocking p38 in Casp-8KD ECs restores VEGF-induced tube formation. 3 fields per condition were quantified, n=4. H) Quantitative
analysis of total sprout length showing that inhibition of p38 rescues VEGF-induced EC sprouting in Casp-8KD ECs. Approximately
20 beads per condition were quantified, n=3. For B,D,F,G,I-L data represent mean ± SEM (for B,C * P <0.05; one sample t-test;
for E-H * P <0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test). Scale
bars: D) 20µm.

-

+

B

shCasp-8

+
-

+
+

-

+

+
-

+
+

shCasp-8

siRipk3
VEGF

4
p-p38 (fold change)

p-p38
p38
RIPK3
Casp-8

3
2
1
0

siCtrl

E

shCtrl

25
20

*

*

25
*

10
5
+

siRipk3 -

-

VEGF -

-

Casp-8WT RIPK3ko

F

***

20

***

-

0
siCtrl +

+

-

-

+

+

+

+

siRipk3 -

-

+

+

-

-

+

+

VEGF -

-

FGF

-

-

IsoB4

***

***
**

**

-

+

+

+

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

+

-

-

-

-

+

+

-

-

-

+

+

-

-

-

-

+

+

15

+

I

ns

40
30
20
10
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko
RIPK3

J

ns

10
5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko
RIPK3ko

ko

VEGF
Casp-8WT EC

Casp-8ko RIPK3ko

***

5

-

IsoB4

0
shCtrl shCasp-8

10

-

H

1

15

-

G

*

2

***

***

+

+

3

***

shCasp-8

15

0
siCtrl +

siRipk3

shCtrl

BrdU+ cells (%)

*
***

Vessel area (%)

Total tube length (mm)

shCasp-8

ns

***

GAPDH

D

C

shCtrl

Ripk3 relative expression

shCtrl

No. of branches (103)

A

VEGF
Casp-8ECko EC

P

P

Casp-8
P

p38

RIPK3

Proper signaling
and VEGF response

proper angiogenesis

Casp-8
VE-Cadherin
mislocalization

P

p38

RIPK3

Impaired VEGF response resulting
in junction instability, reduced
proliferation and migration

impaired angiogenesis

Figure 7. RIPK3 acts downstream of Casp-8 to regulate angiogenesis.
A) Western blot showing that knocking down RIPK3 in Casp-8KD ECs rescues the basal hyperphosphorylation of p38. Notice that
shCasp-8 HUVECs have increased RIPK3 protein levels. B) Quantification of western blots at basal conditions as in (A), n=4. C) qPCR of
shCtrl or shCasp-8 infected HUVECs showing increased mRNA expression of Ripk3 in the absence of Casp-8, n=4. D) Quantification of
total tube length of shCtrl or shCasp-8 infected HUVECs that were co-transfected with control siRNA or Ripk3 siRNA and treated with or
without VEGF (50ng/ml) for 4h. 10 fields per condition were quantified, n=3. E) BrdU+ cells were quantified in control and Casp-8KD ECs
transfected with Ripk3 siRNA and with or without VEGF (50ng/ml) or FGF (50ng/ml) stimulation for 24h. Around 50 cells per condition
were quantified, n=3. F,G) Representative images of the retinal vasculature stained with IsoB4 in Casp-8WT/RIPK3ko and Casp-8ECko/
RIPK3ko mice. H,I) Quantitative analysis showing no differences on vessel area (H; n=11 WT, 7 ECko) and number of branches (I; n=9
WT, 7 ECko). Data from 4 independent litters. J) Working model summarizing the role of Casp-8 as a modulator of angiogenesis. Casp-8
inhibits RIPK3 to allow the proper response of ECs to VEGF stimulation (Casp-8WT). If Casp-8 is absent (Casp-8ECko), increased RIPK3
levels induce p38 hyperphosphorylation which in turn leads to an impaired response to VEGF stimulation and reduced angiogenesis.
For B-D,E,H,I data represent mean ± SEM (for B,C * P <0.05, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; one sample t-test; D,E * P <0.05, ** P
<0.01, *** P <0.001; two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s multiple comparisons test; for H,I * P <0.05, ns: not signifcant; two-tailed unpaired
Student t-test).

B

IsoB4

C

D

IsoB4

Neovascularization
(% of retina area)

A
pup

Avascular area
(% of retina area)

Casp-8ECko

Tamoxifen

P14

Normoxia

P10
P11
P12

40

Casp8WT Casp8ECko
*

30
20
10
Casp8WT Casp8ECko

Casp-8ECko

G
Perfused vessels
(fold change)

IsoB4-A568

Injected
Stained

IsoB4-647

Casp-8WT

F

10

0

P15 Dissection

***

20

0

E

Hyperoxia

P7

Casp-8WT

P1

30

2.0

ns

1.5
1.0
0.5
0

Casp8WT Casp8ECko

Figure 8: Loss of Casp-8 results in reduced neovascularization in the Oxygen Induced Retinopathy (OIR) model. 				
A) Scheme showing the timeline of the used OIR protocol. Pups were placed in 75% oxygen (hyperoxia) from P7 to P10, then placed back to normal
oxygen conditions (normoxia) until P15. Tamoxifen was injected at P10-12 and P14. B,C) Representative images of the retinal vasculature stained
with IsoB4 in Casp-8WT and Casp-8ECko mice. Filled red space indicate the avascular area (B), red outlines indicate neovascular tufts (C). D,E) Pathological neovascularization is reduced in Casp-8ECko mice (D) compared to Casp-8WT littermates, while the avascular area was higher in Casp-8ECko
mice (n=16WT, 8ECko). F,G) Retro-orbital injection of IsoB4-647 did not reveal any difference in vessel perfusion among Casp-8ECko and Casp-8WT
mice (n=11WT, 10ECko), as quantified by measuring Alexa647 fluorescent intensity in IsoB4-A568 labeled vessels. Data represent mean ± SEM from
3 independent litters (* P <0.05, ** P <0.01, *** P <0.001, ns: not significant; two-tailed unpaired Student t-test). Scale bars: B) 500µm; C) 250µm; F)
100µm.

