bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Ultrastructural details of mammalian chromosome architecture

Nils Krietenstein1, Sameer Abraham2,3, Sergey V. Venev1,4, Nezar Abdennur2,3, Johan
Gibcus1,4, Tsung-Han S. Hsieh5, Krishna Mohan Parsi6, Liyan Yang1,4, René Maehr6,
Leonid A. Mirny2,3, Job Dekker1,4,7, and Oliver J. Rando1†

1Department

of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA

2Insitute

for Medical Engineering and Sciences, and Department of Physics,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA

3Center

for 3D Structure and Physics of the Genome, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA

4Program

MA, USA

in Systems Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester,

5Department

of Molecular and Cell Biology, Li Ka Shing Center for Biomedical and
Health Sciences, CIRM Center of Excellence, University of California, Berkeley,
Berkeley, United States

6Program

in Molecular Medicine, Diabetes Center of Excellence, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA

7Howard

†

Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, MD 20815, USA

To whom correspondence should be addressed. Email: Oliver.Rando@umassmed.edu

ABSTRACT
Over the past decade, 3C-related methods, complemented by increasingly detailed
microscopic views of the nucleus, have provided unprecedented insights into
chromosome folding in vivo. Here, to overcome the resolution limits inherent to the
majority of genome-wide chromosome architecture mapping studies, we extend a
recently-developed Hi-C variant, Micro-C, to map chromosome architecture
at nucleosome resolution in human embryonic stem cells and fibroblasts. Micro-C maps
robustly capture well-described features of mammalian chromosome folding including

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

A/B compartment organization, topologically associating domains (TADs), and cis
interaction peaks anchored at CTCF binding sites, while also providing a detailed 1dimensional map of nucleosome positioning and phasing genome-wide. Compared to
high-resolution in situ Hi-C, Micro-C exhibits substantially improved signal-to-noise with
an order of magnitude greater dynamic range, enabling not only localization of domain
boundaries with single-nucleosome accuracy, but also resolving more than 20,000
additional looping interaction peaks in each cell type. Intriguingly, many of these newlyidentified peaks are localized along stripe patterns and form transitive grids, consistent
with their anchors being pause sites impeding the process of cohesin-dependent loop
extrusion. Together, our analyses provide the highest resolution maps of chromosome
folding in human cells to date, and provide a valuable resource for studies of
chromosome folding mechanisms.

RESULTS
In eukaryotes, the one-dimensional packaging of chromatin into nucleosomes is
understood in great detail, with genome-wide maps of nucleosome positions and
composition available for scores of organisms (1). Although our understanding of threedimensional folding of the genome somewhat lags the 1D picture, over the past decade,
a wide variety of technical approaches have provided impressively concordant views of
chromosome architecture in vivo, as for example chromosome compartments and TAD
organization are readily captured using microscopy-based methods (2, 3), chromosome
conformation capture (3C)-based methods (4-6), and orthogonal methods such as
genome-architecture mapping (7). The majority of genome-wide studies of chromosome
folding utilize 3C-based proximity ligation methods (8), in which genomic loci in physical
proximity are crosslinked to one another, chromatin is fragmented using restriction
enzymes, and interacting genomic loci are then identified following ligation and pairedend deep sequencing.
The fundamental resolution of chromosome conformation capture is largely
defined by the size and uniformity of chromatin fragmentation, with the coarseness of
genome fragmentation providing a lower limit to the resolution of 3C experiments. To
approach the maximum practical resolution to 3C methods, which is set by the ubiquitous
packaging of the genome into repeating nucleoprotein subunits known as nucleosomes
(9), we recently developed Micro-C, a Hi-C protocol in which chromatin is fragmented to
mononucleosomes using micrococcal nuclease (MNase), thereby increasing both
fragment density as well as uniformity of spacing (10, 11). Although a substantially
updated version of this protocol with improved signal-to-noise was originally named
Micro-C XL (11), given that this protocol completely supersedes the original one we will
simply refer to the updated protocol as Micro-C throughout. The Micro-C protocols were
developed in budding and fission yeast, and provide insight into chromosome folding at
scales ranging from single nucleosomes to the entire genome.
To extend our Micro-C analysis of chromosome folding from the relatively simple
yeast genome to the more complex chromosomal organization seen in mammals, we
generated deeply-sequenced Micro-C datasets (~2.6-4.4 billion uniquely mapped reads
per sample, ~150X coverage per nucleosome – Table S1) for two well-studied human
cell types: pluripotent human embryonic stem cells (H1-ESC) and differentiated human

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

foreskin fibroblasts (HFFc6). To benchmark our approach, we also generated Hi-C
datasets for these two cell types in parallel, following the in situ Hi-C protocol with a 4 bp
cutter (DpnII) (12). The increased signal-to-noise of Micro-C libraries was already
apparent at the initial data processing step, where Micro-C libraries yielded a far lower
fraction of trans-chromosomal interaction pairs (13.5% for Micro-C vs. 51.8% for Hi-C for
ESCs; 15.2% vs. 30.7% for HFFs), which are strongly enriched for random ligation
products, thus noise. To visually compare Hi-C and Micro-C views of human cells, we
plotted contact heatmaps for ESCs and HFFs in Fig. 1A-B at four scales arranged from
chromosome-scale (left) to single-gene resolution (right). Overall, Micro-C and Hi-C maps
reveal the same major classes of patterns that illuminate various features of chromosome
folding: at lower resolutions (e.g, ~100 kb bins) the coarse checkerboard pattern reflects
the compartmentalization of active and inactive chromatin, while zooming to higher
resolutions (e.g. <10 kb bins) reveals finer compartmental segmentation, TADs, and “offdiagonal” interaction peaks thought to result from a high frequency of CTCF-anchored
long-range looping interactions.
To broadly survey the performance of Micro-C relative to Hi-C methods, we
examined the scaling of contact frequency P(s) as a function of the distance between
two genomic loci. Comparing Hi-C and Micro-C, we find a similar decay in interactions
with increasing distance for length scales from ~20,000 bp to 1 Mb (Fig. 1C). However,
Micro-C exhibits an increased dynamic range of contact frequency, with improvements
at both small and large genomic separations. At large separations (>10 Mb), where
contacts are expected to be very rare, P(s) curves flatten to approximately the levels of
interchromosomal contact frequency (Fig. 1C), which is 2 to 4-fold lower in Micro-C than
in Hi-C. The average reduction in both interchromosomal and extremely long-range
intrachromosomal contact frequencies observed in Micro-C is likely due to lowering of
the “noise floor” of artifactual contacts (random ligations between nucleosomes) (11). At
shorter scales, Micro-C consistently recovers a higher fraction of close-range “neardiagonal” contacts, providing greater coverage of short-range chromosome folding
behaviors at the 1-100 nucleosome scale (fig. S1). This length scale includes the 1-5
nucleosome scale that is inaccessible to traditional Hi-C due to the longer average
fragment size (~256 bp on average for complete DpnII digestion, with actual fragment
sizes closer to ~1 kb in practice due to partial digestion) and the heterogeneity of
fragment lengths resulting from uneven spacing of restriction sites (fig. S2). Importantly,
this length scale has the potential to provide information about the arrangement and
interactions of nucleosomal arrays and about chromatin fiber structure (13).
At low and intermediate resolution, Micro-C data recapitulates the chromosome
organization seen in Hi-C maps. For example, A/B compartment calls are strongly
correlated (r=0.945 and 0.967 for ESCs and HFFs, respectively, at 100 kb resolution)
between Micro-C and Hi-C maps (Fig. 1D-F, fig. S3). Although many compartments
encompass relatively large (~1 Mb) genomic intervals, consistent with prior reports (14)
we also find many examples of extremely fine single-gene scale compartments (exhibiting
the “plaid” pattern typical of compartments and thus distinct from TADs) in both cell types
(fig. S3A). Intriguingly, we find a dramatic increase in compartment “strength” in
fibroblasts in both datasets (fig. S3B), presumably reflecting both the unusually short G1
phase of the ES cell cycle, as well as increased regulatory specialization observed as
cells differentiate. While Micro-C and Hi-C maps therefore provide highly concordant

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

views at the coarsest level of genomic organization, they are clearly distinct at higher
resolution, as for example a number of interaction peaks (“dots”) are apparent in the
Micro-C dataset that are absent in Hi-C, as can be seen in the right panels of Figs. 1AB.
One unique feature of the Micro-C protocol, compared to restriction enzyme-based
3C methods, is that all interacting chromatin fragments are mononucleosomes. As a
result, ignoring read pairs and treating the dataset as a single-end MNase-Seq dataset
provides a genome-wide map of nucleosomes for a given cell type “for free” (with the
possible caveat that it will miss nucleosomes that are crosslinking- or ligation-resistant).
To illustrate this feature and to explore the 1-dimensional landscape of ESC and HFF
chromatin, we extracted single-end sequencing data from our Micro-C datasets.
Consistent with genome-wide analyses of nucleosome positioning across a wide range
of species (15), aligning the Micro-C nucleosome mapping dataset at promoters confirms
the expected nucleosome depletion at active promoters, with nucleosome depletion
scaling with transcription rate (Fig. 2A). Similarly, we confirm the role for CTCF in
establishing local nucleosome patterning (16-18) (Fig. 2B-C), again validating the utility
of the unpaired single-end dataset as a high-quality nucleosome mapping dataset and
providing a valuable ultra-high depth resource for future studies investigating nucleosome
positioning in these widely used cell types.
Including the information contained in the proximity ligations between
nucleosomes allows us to use Micro-C to its full potential and capture local features of
the chromatin fiber that are beyond the fundamental resolution of Hi-C. Given the key
roles for CTCF and promoters in organizing local 1D chromatin, we started by exploring
the local nucleosome-nucleosome interactions around TSSs and CTCF binding sites.
Averaged read-level interaction maps centered at these elements (Fig. 2D) produce a
characteristic pattern of accumulation (“inverted egg-carton”), with two distinct banding
patterns: (i) a series of horizontal/vertical bands decaying from the center, reflecting the
coherent positioning of individual nucleosomes in the vicinity of a DNA-bound factor and
(ii) a series of bands parallel to and decaying away from the main diagonal, reflecting a
coherence in the interactions among neighboring nucleosomes throughout the fiber.
Importantly, this diagonal banding is locus-independent, as manifested in the oscillations
of the global interaction decay curves (fig. S1), indicating that nucleosomes are organized
into regularly spaced arrays genome-wide, regardless of how coherent the positioning of
such arrays may be from cell to cell at any given locus. In other words, although the +6
nucleosome in a coding region may exhibit “fuzzy” positioning, occupying different
positions in different cells in a population, the adjacent nucleosomes are consistently wellpositioned relative to this nucleosome.
To further explore local chromatin fiber behavior in our Micro-C maps, we focused
on the behavior of interaction decay curves at short (1-100 nucleosome) distances (fig.
S1). The behavior of the contact frequency decay at short distances allows us to discount
a solenoid-like organization as we find no enrichment of N/N+5 or N/N+6 ligation
products. In contrast, we find a subtle signature for a given nucleosome to interact with
similar efficiency with adjacent pairs of distal nucleosomes (eg N+2 and N+3, or N+4 and
N+5 – see fig. S1D). Thus, our data support the model that small (~3-10) “clutches” of
nucleosomes are organized in a 2-start or zig-zag orientation to form short tri- or
tetranucleosome zig-zag motif (10, 13, 19-24). Although the precise underlying structure

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

of the chromatin fiber cannot be directly extrapolated from our data, the interaction decay
curves provide strong experimental constraints to test theoretical models.
Next, we turn to the organization of domains and boundaries in human cells. TADs
are chromatin domains thought to emerge as the result of continuous ATP-dependent
extrusion of chromatin loops by cohesin. Simulations have shown that the stopping of
cohesin, e.g. by DNA-bound CTCF molecules, can create TAD boundaries, as well as
other patterns of contact enrichment observed in Hi-C maps (25, 26). These signatures
include a “square” or “box” on the diagonal of elevated contact frequencies delimited by
sharp boundaries (4, 6), “stripes” along the box edges (25) and “dots” at their far corners
(27). Stripes and dots are attributed to the stalling of extruded loops at one or two inwardoriented CTCF binding sites, respectively.
To leverage the enhanced resolution afforded by Micro-C to precisely identify
genomic correlates of boundary activity (Fig. 3A), we defined chromatin interaction
boundaries by scanning the genome for local minima in the number of crossing
interactions (normalized relative to the local interaction frequency at the same distance
(28)), i.e. insulation strength. Boundary calls were robust to three different parameter
choices (fig. S4). To identify genomic features associated with boundary activity, we
sorted boundaries by their insulation strength and searched for previously-mapped
factors (29) that were correlated with boundary activity (Figs. 3B-E). Consistent with prior
Hi-C analyses of domain folding (6, 27), we find architectural factors including RAD21,
CTCF, YY1, and ZNF143 enriched at strong boundaries. More generally, boundaries are
highly enriched for promoter marks and are localized precisely to nucleosome-depleted
regulatory elements, consistent with the prior identification of TSSs as boundary elements
in budding and fission yeast (10, 11). Boundary activity at CTCF binding sites and at
promoters is also readily apparent as clearing of interactions in the upper-right/lower-left
corners of the CTCF- and TSS-aligned heatmaps in Fig. 2D. Importantly, although
binding of CTCF and YY1 are both strongly positively-correlated with boundary scores
(Fig. 3B), these factors did not always co-occur at every boundary – Fig. 3E shows
successive classification of boundaries into CTCF-associated boundaries, CTCFnegative YY1-enriched boundaries, CTCF- and YY1-depleted promoter boundaries, and
a fourth class of weak boundaries largely depleted of all three features (fig. S5). Together,
these data precisely localize chromatin domain boundaries in human cells, emphasizing
the tight association between nucleosome depletion/dynamics (and/or the diverse set of
proteins that occupy various nucleosome-depleted regions) as key players in insulating
adjacent chromatin interaction domains from one another.
Among other TAD-associated structural features, we noted that the most apparent
difference between Hi-C and Micro-C maps is a profusion of dots in Micro-C that are
indistinct or absent in Hi-C maps (Figs.1A-B, Fig. 4A, fig. S6). This intuition is confirmed
computationally, as systematic identification of looping interaction peaks (Methods)
reveals a massive increase in the number of dots and dot anchor loci in Micro-C maps
relative to Hi-C (Fig. 4B). In general, the majority of dots detected in Hi-C libraries were
also detected with Micro-C (86.6% in ESC, 88.9% in HFF), although even for these HiC/Micro-C common dots the Micro-C dataset exhibited increased signal-to-noise (Fig.
4C, fig. S7). Conversely, averaging interaction maps for Micro-C-specific dots revealed a
low level of signal enrichment at these locations in the Hi-C dataset (Fig. 4C, fig. S7),
indicating that evidence for these interaction peaks is present in both datasets but that

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Micro-C resolves more dots as a consequence of the improved signal-to-noise of this
protocol.
Where are Micro-C-specific dots located? We noted that many examples of MicroC dots were found along extrusion-associated stripes at TAD borders (Fig. 4A),
suggesting the presence of multiple, relatively weak, pause sites that temporarily arrest
SMC extrusion complexes before these complexes reach the “hard stop” boundaries
previously observed at inwardly-oriented CTCF sites (27, 30). Moreover, we often
observed Micro-C-specific dots populating the interior of TAD boxes, located at the
intersection of the newly-identified weak pause sites found along TAD-bordering stripes.
What is the nature of the newly-identified genomic dot anchors? Consistent with the
central role for CTCF in blocking or pausing loop extrusion (27, 30), we find that the
majority of new dot anchors coincide with ChIP-Seq peaks of CTCF enrichment, with
~77% of all dot anchors linked to CTCF binding sites. To explore ultrastructural features
of CTCF-anchored looping interactions, we produced read-level pileup contact maps
averaging off-diagonal pairs of convergently-oriented CTCF binding sites (Fig. 4D). Two
salient features of these heatmaps are worth noting. First, the “beading” of the central
interactions reveals interactions between the well-positioned nucleosomes flanking CTCF
binding sites (Fig. 2B). Second, the horizontal and vertical lines on this heatmap are
consistent with the stripes that characterize the loop extrusion process in Hi-C heatmaps.
Importantly, the extension of these stripes beyond (above or to the right of) the anchor
points is consistent with many of these CTCF-mediated dots occurring in the middle of a
loop extrusion track, generalizing our observation that many Micro-C-specific dots are
identified along these extrusion stripes (see, e.g, Figs. 1A and 4A).
To explore the molecular features of these enriched looping interactions, we
calculated the enrichment of a variety of structural proteins and histone modifications at
dot anchors, then clustered dot anchors according to these features (Fig. 4E, fig. S8).
We find that multiple classes of genomic loci are involved in looping interaction peaks,
including: 1) Promoters (enrichment for H3K4me3, Pol2); 2) Enhancers (H3K4me1); 3)
Coding regions (H3K36me3, Pol2); 4) Polycomb chromatin (H3K27me3, SUZ12); 5)
“Quiescent” chromatin (depleted of distinguishing histone marks). Beyond the expected
enrichment of CTCF at dot anchors, we identify a number of CTCF-depleted dot anchors,
although interestingly these anchors were generally found at the same types of genomic
element as the CTCF-enriched anchors (fig. S9). Given that systematic identification of
dot anchors is somewhat inefficient – for instance, Micro-C-specific dots clearly exhibit
signal in Hi-C but are not called – we further explored CTCF-independent dots by
averaging interactions between various pairs of CTCF-depleted genomic loci (fig. S10).
These heatmaps reveal strong Micro-C signal enrichment for enhancer-promoter
interactions (fig. S10A), as well as dots occurring between paired binding sites for a wide
array of transcriptional and chromatin regulatory proteins (fig. S10B).
Finally, we noted that most of the new dots identified by Micro-C were relatively
weak interaction peaks occurring either at the intersection points of new anchor sites in
the interior of TADs, or along stripes associated with strong CTCF dots at TAD corners.
This suggests that a given genomic locus can participate in multiple distinct transient
loops across a cell population. To more systematically evaluate these qualitative
observations, we first plotted the number of dot interactions for each genomic location
involved in at least one dot. Consistent with visual examination, we find a significant

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

increase in the fraction of dot anchors that participate in more than one interaction in
Micro-C, relative to Hi-C (Fig. 4F, fig. S11). The implication of this finding is that Micro-C
reveals a more extensively interconnected network among genomic loci. Indeed,
visualization of connectivity networks derived from Hi-C and Micro-C data (Fig. 4G)
revealed a more densely connected structure for the Micro-C dataset. In graph theory
terms, this can be quantitated as node transitivity (31), with the Micro-C network exhibiting
significantly greater transitivity than the Hi-C network (0.46 vs. 0.29 for ESCs, 0.57 vs
0.48 for HFFs), confirming that Micro-C dot interactions form a more complete grid than
do Hi-C dots.
Taken together, our data reveal that the Micro-C protocol yields improved signalto-noise, as well as superior genomic resolution, relative to Hi-C. Biologically, our data
extend our understanding of chromosome folding in mammals in several ways. We
localize boundaries between contact domains precisely to nucleosome-depleted regions,
consistent with the location of contact domain boundaries in budding yeast (10), and
suggesting that multiple distinct factors can interfere with interactions between adjacent
chromatin domains. Our data also dramatically increase the list of genomic loci involved
in presumed looping interactions, updating our view of TADs as heterogeneous
populations made up of transient loops formed by multiple weak pause sites that slow or
stall SMC protein movement. This internal structure is “blurred out” by noise and the
coarser capture radius of restriction enzyme Hi-C, but is uniquely resolvable by Micro-C.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank A. Goloborodko for critical discussions. All authors acknowledge support from
the National Institutes of Health Common Fund 4D Nucleome Program (U54DK107980). NK is supported by HFSP grant LT000631/2017-L.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS
Materials and Methods
Figs. S1 to S11
Tables S1 to S4

FIGURE LEGENDS
Fig. 1. Micro-C of human pluripotent and differentiated cell types recovers coarse
features of chromosome folding.
(A-B) Chromosome contact maps for four successive zoom-ins across human
chromosome 3, for H1 ESCs (A) and HFFs (B). From left to right: Chr3:0-55MB, 0-22
MB, 1-6 MB, 3-5 MB. Each panel show Micro-C data above the diagonal, with Hi-C data
for the same cell line below the diagonal.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

(C) Interaction frequency is plotted for Micro-C and Hi-C on the y axis as a function of
genomic distance between interacting fragments (x axis), for ESCs and HFFs. Both
axes are in log10 scale. In both cases, dotted lines show the genome-wide average
interaction frequency between loci located on different chromosomes, an estimate of
nonspecific dataset noise. See also fig. S1.
(D) Micro-C robustly captures A/B compartment organization. Heatmap shows Hi-C and
Micro-C interaction maps (binned at 100 kb resolution) for Chromosome 2 in ESCs,
illustrating the nearly identical A/B “checkerboard” pattern captured by both methods.
See also fig. S3.
(E) Eigenvector scores for chromosome 2 in ESCs compared for the Hi-C dataset
(orange) vs. the Micro-C dataset (purple).
(F) Eigenvector scores are globally correlated between Hi-C and Micro-C maps.
Scatterplots show A/B scores for 100 kb genomic tiles in Hi-C (x axis) vs. Micro-C (y
axis) maps of ESCs and HFFs.
Figure 2. Nucleosome-resolution views of chromatin organization
(A-C) Micro-C recovers nucleosome-resolution chromatin organization. In these panels,
read pairing information was discarded, and single-end Micro-C reads (representing
nucleosome ends) were shifted 73 bp to the nucleosome dyad axis. (A-B) show
nucleosome occupancy profiles aligned according to TSSs (A) or CTCF binding sites
(B) and averaged according to quintiles of transcription rate or CTCF occupancy. Panel
(C) shows nucleosome occupancy and CTCF ChIP enrichment (29) at genes sorted
from high (top) to low (bottom) CTCF occupancy.
(D) Nucleosome resolution contact maps surrounding TSSs (left two panels) or CTCF
binding sites (right panel). Promoters and CTCF sites act as boundaries between
contact domains, as seen in the clearing of contacts in the upper right and lower left
quadrants. Also apparent at this resolution is the nucleosome phasing surrounding
these regulatory elements, manifest as a grid-like structure superimposed on the
contact maps.
Figure 3. High resolution identification of interaction boundaries
(A) Successive zooms into the HFF Micro-C dataset show a boundary between selfassociating domains, located at a promoter.
(B) Gross features of boundary elements in ESCs (all systematic comparisons are
performed in ESCs given the abundant ChIP-Seq data available in this cell type).
Boundaries were identified as described in Methods, and the strongest 100,000
boundaries (Methods) are sorted according to boundary score (left panel). See also fig.
S4. Right panels show ChIP-Seq enrichment for key boundary factors, DNase- and
MNase-Seq data, and GRO-Seq as a readout of active transcription.
(C) Survey of factors enriched at strong boundaries. For the indicated ChIP-Seq (and
DNase- and MNase- Seq) datasets, the peak to trough (ChIP signal at the central 500

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

bp vs. the baseline, 2 kb distant) ratio was calculated, and factors are ordered by
enrichment score.
(D) Examples of boundary-enriched (CTCF, etc.) and -depleted (H3K79me2) factors.
(E) Independence of key boundary elements. Boundaries were successively sorted by
CTCF, YY1, and Pol2 to group boundaries into four classes – CTCF-associated, CTCFnegative/YY1-positive, CTCF/YY1-depleted/Pol2-positive, and weak CTCF/YY1/Pol2depleted boundaries (see fig. S5).
Figure 4. TADs are composed of a heterogeneous network of internal looping
interactions
(A) Examples of Micro-C-specific peaks of looping interactions in HFFs. In each case
Micro-C contact map is shown above the diagonal, along with corresponding Hi-C
heatmap below the diagonal (see also fig. S6 for ESC examples).
(B) Venn diagrams show presumed looping interaction peaks (“dots”) identified by
Micro-C and Hi-C in ESCs and HFFs, as indicated.
(C) Heatmaps showing average contact frequency for dots called in both Hi-C and
Micro-C (top), or in Micro-C only. Number in the upper right hand corner represents the
signal strength at the loop base (heatmap center) above the nearby background (black
box, lower right corner). See also fig. S7 for HFF dataset.
(D) Heatmap showing average contact frequency, at nucleotide resolution, for all pairs
of CTCF ChIP-Seq peaks associated with convergently-oriented CTCF motifs at
separations between 100 kb and 1Mb.
(E) Global view of dot anchor sites. For all anchor sites, enrichment for various
chromatin proteins or histone modifications (29) was computed. Anchor sites are first
sorted according to chromatin state (broad chromatin types indicated at bottom, from
left: Transcription Start Sites, Transcribed chromatin, Enhancers, Heterochromatin,
Bivalent, Polycomb, and Quiescent), then sorted according to CTCF enrichment within
each subcluster. See also figs. S8-10.
(F) Micro-C identifies genomic loci with multiple looping interaction peaks. Histograms
show the number of looping interaction peaks for any given genomic locus, revealing a
clear shift towards multiple peaks in Micro-C compared to Hi-C datasets. See also fig.
S11.
(G) Grid completeness. Left panels show networks constructed from Hi-C (top) and
Micro-C (bottom) looping interaction peaks, while right panels show a zoom in from the
center of the network. Here, nodes represent genomic loci (anchors), while edges
represent interaction peaks between anchor sites (dots).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

N. Friedman, O. J. Rando, Epigenomics and the structure of the living genome. Genome research
25, 1482-1490 (2015).
A. N. Boettiger et al., Super-resolution imaging reveals distinct chromatin folding for different
epigenetic states. Nature 529, 418-422 (2016).
E. H. Finn et al., Extensive Heterogeneity and Intrinsic Variation in Spatial Genome Organization.
Cell 176, 1502-1515 e1510 (2019).
E. P. Nora et al., Spatial partitioning of the regulatory landscape of the X-inactivation centre.
Nature 485, 381-385 (2012).
E. Lieberman-Aiden et al., Comprehensive mapping of long-range interactions reveals folding
principles of the human genome. Science (New York, N.Y 326, 289-293 (2009).
J. R. Dixon et al., Topological domains in mammalian genomes identified by analysis of
chromatin interactions. Nature 485, 376-380 (2012).
R. A. Beagrie et al., Complex multi-enhancer contacts captured by genome architecture
mapping. Nature 543, 519-524 (2017).
J. Dekker, K. Rippe, M. Dekker, N. Kleckner, Capturing chromosome conformation. Science (New
York, N.Y 295, 1306-1311 (2002).
K. E. Van Holde, Chromatin. Springer series in molecular biology (Springer-Verlag, New York,
1989), pp. xii, 497 p.
T. H. Hsieh et al., Mapping Nucleosome Resolution Chromosome Folding in Yeast by Micro-C.
Cell 162, 108-119 (2015).
T. S. Hsieh, G. Fudenberg, A. Goloborodko, O. J. Rando, Micro-C XL: assaying chromosome
conformation from the nucleosome to the entire genome. Nature methods, (2016).
H. Belaghzal, J. Dekker, J. H. Gibcus, Hi-C 2.0: An optimized Hi-C procedure for high-resolution
genome-wide mapping of chromosome conformation. Methods 123, 56-65 (2017).
V. I. Risca, S. K. Denny, A. F. Straight, W. J. Greenleaf, Variable chromatin structure revealed by
in situ spatially correlated DNA cleavage mapping. Nature 541, 237-241 (2017).
M. J. Rowley et al., Evolutionarily Conserved Principles Predict 3D Chromatin Organization.
Molecular cell 67, 837-852 e837 (2017).
A. L. Hughes, O. J. Rando, Mechanisms Underlying Nucleosome Positioning in vivo. Annual
review of biophysics, (2014).
J. E. Phillips, V. G. Corces, CTCF: master weaver of the genome. Cell 137, 1194-1211 (2009).
Y. Fu, M. Sinha, C. L. Peterson, Z. Weng, The insulator binding protein CTCF positions 20
nucleosomes around its binding sites across the human genome. PLoS genetics 4, e1000138
(2008).
B. R. Carone et al., High-resolution mapping of chromatin packaging in mouse embryonic stem
cells and sperm. Developmental cell 30, 11-22 (2014).
S. A. Grigoryev, G. Arya, S. Correll, C. L. Woodcock, T. Schlick, Evidence for heteromorphic
chromatin fibers from analysis of nucleosome interactions. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106, 13317-13322 (2009).
F. Song et al., Cryo-EM study of the chromatin fiber reveals a double helix twisted by
tetranucleosomal units. Science (New York, N.Y 344, 376-380 (2014).
B. Dorigo et al., Nucleosome arrays reveal the two-start organization of the chromatin fiber.
Science (New York, N.Y 306, 1571-1573 (2004).
J. Yao, P. T. Lowary, J. Widom, Twist constraints on linker DNA in the 30-nm chromatin fiber:
implications for nucleosome phasing. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 90, 9364-9368 (1993).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/639922; this version posted May 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.

H. D. Ou et al., ChromEMT: Visualizing 3D chromatin structure and compaction in interphase and
mitotic cells. Science (New York, N.Y 357, (2017).
M. A. Ricci, C. Manzo, M. F. Garcia-Parajo, M. Lakadamyali, M. P. Cosma, Chromatin fibers are
formed by heterogeneous groups of nucleosomes in vivo. Cell 160, 1145-1158 (2015).
G. Fudenberg et al., Formation of Chromosomal Domains by Loop Extrusion. Cell reports 15,
2038-2049 (2016).
A. L. Sanborn et al., Chromatin extrusion explains key features of loop and domain formation in
wild-type and engineered genomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112, E6456-6465 (2015).
S. S. Rao et al., A 3D map of the human genome at kilobase resolution reveals principles of
chromatin looping. Cell 159, 1665-1680 (2014).
E. Crane et al., Condensin-driven remodelling of X chromosome topology during dosage
compensation. Nature 523, 240-244 (2015).
C. A. Davis et al., The Encyclopedia of DNA elements (ENCODE): data portal update. Nucleic acids
research 46, D794-D801 (2018).
E. P. Nora et al., Targeted Degradation of CTCF Decouples Local Insulation of Chromosome
Domains from Genomic Compartmentalization. Cell 169, 930-944 e922 (2017).
F. Harary, H. J. Kommel, Matrix measures for transitivity and balance. The Journal of
Mathematical Sociology 6, 199-210 (2010).

