bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Article

Molecular Diversity and Network Complexity in
Growing Protocells
Atsushi Kamimura 1,∗ and Kunihiko Kaneko 1,2,∗
1
2

*

Research Center for Complex Systems Biology, Universal Biology Institute, The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1,
Komaba, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan
Department of Basic Science, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 3-8-1, Komaba,
Meguro-ku, Tokyo 153-8902, Japan
Correspondence: kamimura@complex.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp(AK); kaneko@complex.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp(KK)

Received: date; Accepted: date; Published: date

Abstract: A great variety of molecular components is encapsulated in cells. Each of these components
is replicated for cell reproduction. To address an essential role of the huge diversity of cellular
components, we study a model of protocells that convert resources into catalysts with the aid of a
catalytic reaction network. As the resources are limited, it is shown that diversity in intracellular
components is increased to allow the use of diverse resources for cellular growth. Scaling relation
is demonstrated between resource abundances and molecular diversity. We then study how the
molecule species diversify and complex catalytic reaction networks develop through the evolutionary
course. It is shown that molecule species first appear, at some generations, as parasitic ones that do
not contribute to replication of other molecules. Later, the species turn to be host species that support
the replication of other species. With this successive increase of host species, a complex joint network
evolves. The present study sheds new light on the origin of molecular diversity and complex reaction
network at the primitive stage of a cell.
Keywords: Protocells; Diversity; Mutually Catalytic Networks; Resource Limitation

1. Introduction
Diversity is one of the fascinating features of life. Diverse molecule species are encapsulated and
coexist in cellular compartments. They are synthesized with the aid of catalysts for cell reproduction.
Then, why do cells have so many components? The question arises because such a great diversity
of molecule species is not a strict requirement for cell reproduction. Rather, it would not be fitted to
realize a higher growth of a cell. In fact, a simple cell consisting of fewer components is generally
expected to achieve a faster growth speed. This expectation is supported by several in vitro and in
silico models. A replicator system with few components drives out a complex system with diverse
components[1–5].
For self-sustaining reproduction, a minimum level of diversity is required to form an autocatalytic
set in collectively catalytic chemical reaction networks[6–13]. Still, diversification beyond the minimum
requirement will decrease the fitness (growth rate). A minimum cell with essential components would
achieve a higher reproduction rate than a complex cell with a huge diversity of molecules. Thus,
diversity would be evolutionarily selected out. The present cells, however, consist of a huge diversity
of molecules. This issue on diversity along with cell reproduction, then has to be addressed generally
also for protocells[14–18].
In considering that cells with fewer components have higher growth, one implicitly assumes that
resources used for synthesizing each component are sufficiently supplied and are always abundant. By
consuming the resources, cells with a minimum set of components increase their population. As the
population increases, however, the resources actually get limited. When the resources are limited, cells
with diverse components may have a potential to use different resources in the environment, which
could help them keep the growth of cells. Then, the diversification of cellular components may be
favorable. Still, if and how the diversification progresses remain elusive.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2 of 16

Recently, we have considered a protocell model in which catalytic molecules are replicated from
resources, catalyzed by each other [19,20]. In this paper, we first review the main findings of the model.
By taking the consumption of resources into account, protocells with diverse molecule species emerge
as they can utilize a variety of resources for their own growth. Under a selection pressure for the cells
to grow faster, diversification of the molecule species occurs when the resources are limited. We then
elucidate how the number of molecule species increases with the decrease in the resource abundances.
A scaling relation is derived between molecule diversity and resource uptake, as the optimum diversity
to achieve the maximum growth speed. The growth speed is maximized by a trade-off between the
utility of diverse resources and the concentration onto fewer species to increase the reaction rate.
In the model, the growth rate is maximized by optimizing the number of molecule species. How
the cells diversify their molecule species, however, is not explored in the previous study. In the present
paper, we investigate an evolutionary constraint for it. The question we address here is how a molecule
emerged by mutation can be fixed and increases its population.
In a cell that grows and divides, the fixation of new molecule species is highly probable if
replication of the species is catalyzed by the remaining species. Then, the diversification occurs by
adding the species one by one to the existing catalytic network. As a result, the number of species
increases in a cell, which constitutes a connected reaction network. In principle, such a complex
network is not essential for high fitness (growth rate), but the evolutionary constraint selects such a
connected network rather than disconnected ones.
Through the evolutional pathway of diversification, we highlight the potential importance of
parasitic molecule species. The diversity is increased by the appearance of parasitic molecule species
first and then that parasitic to such parasitic molecule species. Later they turn to be host species with a
further increase in the number of species. By this way, the “core" reaction network is shifted from a
simple to a complex one.
The paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we introduce a simplified cell model consisting of
a catalytic reaction network under multiple resources in the environment. First, we briefly provide a
mathematical condition for the coexistence of multiple replicators under resource limitation in section
3.1. In section 3.2, we review the diversification of intracellular components by resource limitation and
present a general scaling relation between molecular diversity and the uptake of resources. In section 4,
we discuss an evolutionary constraint for cells to satisfy the growth and diversification of components
simultaneously and point out the relevance of complex, connected catalytic reaction networks. In
section 5, we summarize and discuss our results. Details of simulation methods are given in section 6.
2. Model
We adopt a cell model which consists of K M species of molecules and resources [Figure 1A]. We
denote each molecule and resource species by Xi and Si (i = 1, .., K M ), respectively. The molecules
and resources are encapsulated in each of NC cells. Chemicals are well-mixed within a cell, so that
sets of the amount of Xi and Si for i = 1, ..., K M determine the internal state of each cell. Some of the
molecule species can have a null population. Inside each cell, the molecules Xi replicate by consuming
a corresponding resource Si , with the aid of other molecules X j as
Xi + X j + Si → 2Xi + X j .

(1)

For the replication of Xi by this reaction, one resource molecule of Si is needed, and the replication
reaction does not occur if the number of Si is less than 1. The reaction coefficient is given by a catalytic
activity c j of the molecule X j . The activity c j is randomly determined and fixed as c j ∈ [0, 1] for each
X j , throughout each set of simulations. Hence, a resource Si with highest c j is most efficient for the
replication.
At each replication, an error occurs with a probability µ. This error corresponds to changes
(replacement, insertion, or deletion) in the polymer sequence, which can alter the catalytic activity of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3 of 16

Figure 1. Schematic representation of our model. Our model is composed of NC cells. (A) Each of the
cells contains molecules Xk and resources Sk (k = 1, ..., K M ). The molecule species form a catalytic
reaction network to replicate each of Xk . For example, with the aid of the catalytic molecule X j , the
molecule Xi is replicated when at least one resource molecule Si is available in the cell. The resource
Si is consumed to replicate Xi . Each cell takes up resources Sk from the resource reservoir in the
environment with the rate D (Sk0 − Sk ). The concentration of each Sk0 in the environment is given by
a random number Sk0 ∈ [0, 10] and is set fixed. The parameter D controls the rate of the uptake. By
replicating Xk with the consumption of Sk , the number of molecules Xk increases in each cell. (B) A
cell divides when the total number of molecules exceeds a threshold of N. The content of the cell is
randomly distributed into two daughter cells. At the same time, one cell is randomly removed from
the system to fix the total number of cells at NC .

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4 of 16

the molecule. Here, for simplicity, for each replication of Xi , the molecule is replaced by a different
molecule Xk (k = 1, ..., K M ; k 6= i ) with equal probability µ/(K M − 1).
Each cell takes up resources (Si ) from its respective resource reservoir. From the external reservoir,
each resource (Si ) is supplied into each cell with the rate D (Si0 − Si ). The coefficient D controls the
degree of the uptake rate because the resource supply is reduced by decreasing D. Here, the resources
are supplied into each cell without competition among cells. We adopt this simplification since we
focus on compositional diversification rather than cellular diversification. We carry out stochastic
simulations of the model, as detailed in section 6.
The catalytic relation between Xi and X j , i.e., the catalytic reaction network, is determined by a
random assignment. For each pair of Xi and X j , the catalytic reaction path is assigned with probability
p (which was fixed at 0.1). Thus, each species has pK M reactions on average. The assignment excludes
autocatalytic and direct mutually catalytic reactions. In other words, the species Xi does not catalyze
the replication of itself and that of molecules which directly catalyze the replication of Xi .
Once the catalytic reaction network is determined, it does not change throughout each simulation
and is identical for all cells. Even if the underlying network is vast, each cell uses only a subset of
the reaction pathways because both Xi and X j must be present in the cell for the reaction (1) to occur,
whereas the number of molecules in a protocell is finite as will be given below.
The cell divides into two when the total number of molecules in the cell exceeds a given threshold
N [Figure 1B]. The molecules and resources within the cell are randomly partitioned into two daughter
cells. At the division event, one cell is randomly taken out from the system and removed, to fix the
total number of cells at NC . This leads to the selection of a protocell that can grow faster under a given
resource condition.
3. Diversification under resource limitation
3.1. Simple illustration of diversity transition
Before investigating the above cell model with a mutually catalytic network, we briefly review a
mathematical basis of diversification in an ensemble of simple replicators[6,21,22]. Here, the mutually
catalytic reaction in { Xi | i = 1, ..., K M } is not considered for mathematical simplicity. We consider
only replication of a molecule Ri by using itself as a template, by consuming a resource Si . Here, the
reaction is written as
Ri + Si → 2Ri ,
(2)
where Ri is a replicator (i = 1, ..., K R ) and Si is the corresponding resource needed for its replication.
By writing the concentration of Ri as ρi (i = 1, ..., K R ), the dynamics is written as
dρi
= ai Si ρi − ρi φ,
dt
dSi
= − ai Si ρi + Dr (Si0 − Si ),
dt

(3)
(4)

where ai denotes the rate constant, and φ = ∑ j a j S j ρ j . The term with φ is introduced to fix the total
population ∑ j ρ j = 1. The parameter Dr denotes the supply rate of the resource Si from the external
environment which has a constant concentration Si0 for each resource i. We consider the case that
replication rate of each molecule is not identical, i.e., ai Si 6= a j S j for i 6= j.
From the steady state condition of Eq. (4), dSi /dt = 0, one obtains S̄i = Dr Si0 /( ai ρi + Dr ). Thus,
the value of S̄i is written as
(
Si0
( Dr  ai ρi )
S̄i =
0
Dr Si /ai ρi ( Dr  ai ρi ).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5 of 16

By substituting S̄i into Eq. (3), one obtains
dρi
=
dt

(

ai Si0 ρi − ρi φ

( Dr  ai ρi )

Dr Si0

( Dr  ai ρi ).

− ρi φ

(5)

When Dr  ai ρi , the steady state condition of Eq. (5) gives ρi = 0 or ai Si0 = ∑ j a j S0j ρ j . If ρi = 0 for all i,
all the replicators were absent, and the condition ∑ j ρ j = 1 could not be satisfied. At least for some
replicators, the condition ai Si0 = ∑ j a j S0j ρ j has to be satisfied. For the condition, ai Si0 = ∑ j a j S0j ρ j , the
right-hand side is independent of the species i, whereas the left-hand side depends on the species i.
Therefore, the condition is satisfied only for a single species i0 , because ai Si 6= a j S j for i 6= j. All the
molecule species except i0 do not exist, i.e., ρi0 = 1 for a specific i0 and ρ j = 0 for j 6= i0 . Among these
0 is the largest is stable. In other words, the species
K R solutions, only such a case i0 = m such that am Sm
0 outcompetes the others. Thus, the Darwinian selection occurs and the fastest
with the highest am Sm
replicator wins.
On the other hand, when Dr  ai ρi in Eq. (5), the steady state condition gives Dr Si0 = ρi ∑ j Dr S0j .
Here, coexistence is possible (ρi = Si0 / ∑ j S0j ). Because the resource supply is limited, any replicator
cannot increase its population to outcompete the others. Thus, multiple replicators can coexist.
When the replicating molecules are encapsulated in growing cells, there are two distinct levels of
replicating entities. At the molecule level, Ri is a replicating molecule. At the cell population level, each
cell is a replicator. In the cell model of section 2, the replicating molecules are a set of molecules { Xi }.
In such a multi-level system, selections at both molecular and cellular levels have to be consistently
satisfied. A fast-replicating entity wins when resources are abundant. Only when resources are limited,
coexistence of multiple replicators is possible. As a result of the consistency of molecule replication
and cell reproduction, the diversification of the cellular components occurs when the resources are
limited. In the next section, we will show that diversification also occurs for the mutually catalytic
reaction in { Xi }, besides the diversification for Ri .
3.2. Negative scaling relation
In our previous publication[20], we investigate how diversity in cellular composition changes
with the uptake rate of the resources D by numerical simulations of the model in section 2.
When the cells uptake resources at a sufficiently rapid rate (e.g., for D = 1), three components
typically dominate most of the composition for N = 1000 (each representing approximately 1/3 of the
molecule population). The three components, say, X1 , X2 and X3 , configure a catalytic cycle such that
X1 → X2 → X3 → X1 , where Xi → X j means replication of X j is catalyzed by Xi . This catalytic cycle
warrants that each of the species has a catalyst for its own replication. Since we excluded the direct
mutual catalysis between i and j, this three-component hypercycle[6] is a minimum auto-catalytic set
(red nodes in Figure 2A). The hypercycle establishes a recursively growing state, where the composition
is robust against stochasticity in the reactions and the division events. Most of the other molecule
species are absent, while some species can appear by replication error from time to time. Some parasitic
species could increase their number on occasion (blue nodes in Figure 2A). They are catalyzed by
a member of the hypercycle but do not catalyze other members. However, cells dominated by the
parasitic molecules cannot continue growth1 . Hence, those cells will be eliminated by selection at a
cell level. All dividing cells adopt this three-component hypercycle, and there is no compositional
diversity; cells use the minimum reaction pathway to grow.

1

In our model, any molecule species is not junk because it works as a catalyst with the counterpart molecule in Eq. (1).
However, the molecule species is a parasite if no counterpart molecule is present to be catalyzed. We will return to this point
in section 4.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6 of 16

Figure 2. The catalytic network formed by major molecule species. The major molecule species
indicates that the copy number of the species is greater than ten. For each run of the simulations, almost
all dividing cells have the same composition and adopt the identical network. For the parameters
(A) D = 1 and (B) D = 0.001, such identical networks are shown obtained in five different underlying
networks. The nodes indicate the molecule species. The arrows from i to j indicate the species Xi
catalyzes replication of X j . By looking at the catalytic reaction network, the nodes are categorized into
three types: host, sub-host and parasite molecule species. The host species (red) belong to at least one
catalytic cycle so that the set of host species is auto-catalytic. Other than the host species, the sub-host
species (green) indicates that they catalyze the replication of at least one other species in the major
species (but does not belong to any autocatalytic hypercycle). The parasite species (blue) indicates that
their replication is catalyzed by the other species, but they do not catalyze the other in turn. Parameters
are NC = 100, N = 1000, K M = 200, µ = 0.01.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

7 of 16

By the cell-level selection shown in Figure 1B, cells with a faster growth rate outcompete those with
a slower one. The Darwinian selection occurs because the resources are abundant. By regarding a set
of { Xi } as a replicating entity Ri in the argument of section 3.1, cells consisting of the fastest-replicating
set of { Xi } will take over. The growth rate of cells is defined by the replicating rates of molecules.
With the abundant resources, the replication rate of each molecule is determined by the product of
concentrations of the reactants. This product increases as the chemical abundance is concentrated on a
fewer molecule species. Hence, cells without other components have a higher growth rate. Thus, the
three-component auto-catalytic hypercycle dominates as a result of selection at a cell level.
As D decreases below a certain threshold Dc ≈ 0.01, however, the number of molecule species
increases, where multiple reaction pathways are utilized. As in the three-component hypercycle, the
molecule species in this case also form a mutually catalytic hypercycle [red nodes in Figure 2B]. The
other molecule species are connected to the species in the auto-catalytic set to replicate themselves
[green and blue nodes in Figure 2B]. All dividing cells have approximately the same compositions. On
occasion, cells dominated by parasites appear, but they cannot survive.
With limited resources, cells diversify their content to increase the growth rate. In this case, each
replication rate is basically limited by the supply rate of its resource. Thus, cells grow fast if they utilize
more variety of resources for their own growth. With the catalytic reaction network, cells with diverse
molecule species can convert more variety of resources to replicate molecule species. Therefore, cells
with diverse molecule species can outcompete simpler cells.
Hence, the diversification in cellular composition is a result of resource limitation. Here whether
the resources are limited or not is determined by two relevant timescales, consumption and supply
rates of the resource Si for replicating Xi . The consumption rate is inherently proportional to the
product of concentrations of Xi and its catalyst X j . Thus, this consumption rate decreases as the
number of intracellular molecule species increases. On the other hand, the maximum supply rate is
given by a constant DS0j . The relative magnitude of the two timescales determines degree of resource
limitation.
To balance the amounts of consumption and supply of resources, the consumption rate should
decrease with the supply rate. When the consumption rate for the three-component hypercycle exceeds
the supply rate, the molecular diversity starts to increase beyond three. This condition gives a transition
point for D to diversification [see Figure 3]. With the further decrease in supply below the critical point
Dc , the optimal number of species for cell growth is expected to increase, as studied previously[20].
Below this optimum number, the consumption rate is faster than the supply rate. Thus, resources
are limited. Cells tend to diversify their contents to utilize more variety of resources for their own
growth. Above the optimum number, the consumption rate is slower than the supply rate. Thus, the
resources are abundant for the cell. Then, cells tend to simplify their content to increase the growth
rate. Therefore, given the supply rate of resources, one expects the existence of an optimum number of
molecule species to maximize the growth rate.
From this optimization for growth, one can expect a quantitative relation between the number
of molecule species and the supply rate. In fact, we found numerically that the number of molecule
species increases with the parameter D as D −α (α ≈ 0.5) [see Figure 3]. This negative scaling relation
is theoretically derived as follows. Let us denote the number of molecule species inside a cell by
K ∗M (0 < K ∗M ≤ K M ). In the catalytic reactions, the consumption of resource Si is written as ≈ Si ρi ρ j .
Because the concentration ρi is approximately written as ≈ 1/K ∗M , we obtain
dSi
≈ Si /K ∗M2 + Dr (Si0 − Si ).
dt

(6)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Average number of molecule species
(see the legend in details)

8 of 16

100

N = 1000
2000
5000
10000

10

-1/2

D

0.0001

0.001

0.01

0.1

1

D

Figure 3. The average number of molecule species (which have counterparts both as a catalyst and a
template at division) as a function of D for N = 1000, 2000, 5000, and 10000. To eliminate the species
that exist only as a result of mutation errors, we cut off the mutation errors after 2 × 104 division events
and then count the number of species after the cells repeated 105 divisions. The numbers have little
dependence on N: they are approximately equal to 3, i.e., the minimum hypercycle for D > Dc = 0.011
(indicated by an arrow), where Dc is estimated as the balance point between the maximum inflow and
consumption rates of resources for the three-components hypercycle. Below D ≈ Dc , the numbers
increase as D decreases. The deviation in the range below D = 0.001 for different N occurs mainly due
to the loss of some molecule species by division processes of the cells, in particular for N = 1000 and
2000, because as the diversity increases, each molecule species decreases its number to several tens of
copies at the division events. The slopes D −1/2 is also shown for reference.

Thus, the steady state condition of Eq. (6) is obtained as S̄i = Dr Si0 /(1/K ∗M2 + Dr ). As the growth rate
of the cells, G, is defined by the sum of replicating rates of molecules, it is approximately written as
G=

∑
i

dρi
≈
dt

Dr S0

∑ 1 + Dr iK∗2
i

M

≈

K ∗M DS0
,
1 + DK ∗M2

(7)
opt

where S0 denotes a typical value of Si0 . The value of optimum number of species K M to give the
opt

maximum of G is obtained by dG/dK ∗M = 0. Thus, from Eq. (7), one gets K M = D −1/2 . Hence, the
exponent −1/2 results from the second-order reactions of Xi and X j . The exponent changes with the
order of reactions, and may also depend on the structure of the reaction network (see [20]).
We emphasize here that the negative scaling relation is obtained as a result of the multi-level
selection between molecular replication and cellular growth. At a molecule level, the coexistence of
various species is possible when the resources are limited. However, the argument itself does not
claim that the system prefers diversification, as molecule species with a higher replication rate has
higher fitness at a molecular level. The diversification of molecule species occurs as a result of the
selection pressure at the cell population level. The selection for growth speed causes cells to increase
their components leading to the optimum level of diversity.
4. Evolutionary constraints of the catalytic reaction network
4.1. The number of species is essential for high growth rate

Cells with diverse species can increase their growth rates by utilizing a more variety of resources.
This mechanism explains the advantage of increasing the number of molecule species. However, how
the catalytic network expands its diversity over generations is not fully explored in our previous
publication[20].

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9 of 16

Figure 4. (A) Schematic representation of the simple model. We consider two types of reaction
networks, of which each contains four molecule species. In type 1, four species X1 to X4 undergo the
following reactions: X1 + X2 + S1 → 2X1 + X2 , X2 + X1 + S2 → 2X2 + X1 , X3 + X4 + S3 → 2X3 + X4 ,
X4 + X3 + S4 → 2X4 + X3 . In type 2, four species X5 to X8 undergo X5 + X8 + S5 → 2X5 + X8 ,
X6 + X5 + S6 → 2X6 + X5 , X7 + X6 + S7 → 2X7 + X6 , X8 + X7 + S8 → 2X8 + X7 . (B) Competition of
the two types of cells. Either of the two cells dominate the whole population. There is no selective
advantage for either of the two, and one of the two types remains by chance for each run. Different
colors indicate different simulation runs. In ten independent runs, type 1 dominates the population in
6 runs and type 2 dominates in 4 runs. Parameters are NC = 100, N = 1000, D = 0.001, ci = 1, Si0 = 10
for i = 1, .., 8.

Before investigating the process of diversification, we first note that the number of molecule
species is essential to convert a more variety of resources for cell growth. The network structure itself
is not relevant to the growth rate as far as every species has a catalyst for its replication.
When the resources are abundant, cells prefer to simplify their components for their growth rate.
Thus, the catalytic cycle is typically composed of the minimum number of species of three to four. If
there are multiple disjoint cycles, the cells select only a single cycle with the highest replication rate
and exclude the others. Accordingly, all the nodes are connected as a single network.
When the resources are limited, a single connected network itself is not essential for high growth
rate. To demonstrate this, we consider a simple model in Figure 4A. We consider two types of cells.
Both types are composed of four molecule species. In type 1, the molecule species form two sets of
mutually catalytic cycles. In type 2, the molecule species form a single cycle. The other parameters are
identical for the two types. Thus, type 1 has two independent cycles and type 2 has a single network.
For this simple illustration, the direct mutual catalytic relation (i → j, j → i) is allowed here, instead of
the three-component loop in the previous section. The same argument as presented here is applied for
a comparison between two disconnected three-component hypercycles and one six-component loop.
The growth rates of the two types are equal when the resources are limited. Because the number
of molecule species is essential for the growth rate, the structure of the catalytic network is not relevant.
Thus, there is no selective advantage for a single joint network. In fact, survival of the cell types is by
chance in direct competition between the two types [Figure 4B]. Even the stochastic reactions result
in the dominance of the population by either type, no difference is observed in selection preference
between the two types. The result of this simple model suggests that the joint network is not an
absolute requirement for the higher growth rate.
4.2. Cells diversify their molecule species by adding species one by one to the existing network
Even though the single joint network is not an absolute requirement for the growth rate, it is
generally observed as a result of diversification in which all the nodes (species) are connected [Figure
2B]. We argue here that the joint network is obtained as an outcome of the evolutionary pathway to
diversify their molecule species. In our simulation, a novel molecule species appears by errors in
replication (“mutation"). The appearance of the new species by error is not sufficient for it to be fixed.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10 of 16

The species has to increase its copy number. Otherwise, the species is diluted out by the growth of the
cell.
To successfully increase its copy number, the new species should have its catalyst in the cell. The
fixation of the new species, then, is possible if the remaining species can catalyze this new species.
Thus, the catalytic network diversifies its molecule species so that it connects the new species to the
existing catalytic network.
To attest this, we perform a simulation when the resources are limited (D = 0.001). In the initial
condition of the simulation, each of the NC cells has only three molecule species X1 , X2 and X3 .
The three species form the minimum hypercycle: X1 + X3 → 2X1 + X3 , X2 + X1 → 2X2 + X1 , and
X3 + X2 → 2X3 + X2 .
From the minimum hypercycle, we trace the content of cells as shown in Figure 5 to see how the
cells diversify their molecule species. At cell division, the content of a cell is taken over by the two
daughter cells [Figure 5A]. By coloring the daughter cells in red, we identify a single ancestor cell in
the initial condition from which all the NC cells at the final stage are originated. In Figure 5B, all the
cells are marked as red by the division events 3500. Here we also trace the content of cells along a
branch of such progeny cells from the ancestor cell [up to the 2500 division events; colored blue in
Figure 5B].
Figure 6A shows the number of major species in the cells along the branch. Other than the initial
three molecule species (X1 , X2 , X3 ), the major species is defined such that its copy number is greater
than ten. The total species (magenta) indicates the number of such species. It increases from the
beginning and eventually reaches a steady-state value (≈ 15 of this value of D). By looking at the
catalytic network formed by the major species, we also show the number of host (red), sub-host (green)
and parasite (blue) species. The host species indicate the member of an auto-catalytic hypercycle.
Other than the host species, the sub-host species are defined such that they catalyze the replication of
at least one other species in the major species, but do not belong to any auto-catalytic hypercycle. The
parasite species indicates that their replication is catalyzed by other species, but they do not catalyze
any other in turn.
Furthermore, the major molecule species in a cell are displayed in Figure 6B. Initially, the three
species 1, 2 and 3 are present (hereafter, we denote the species by its number i, instead of Xi ) and form
a minimum hypercycle. Thus, the three species work as hosts and they are marked by red points.
Shortly thereafter, the species 17 appears as a parasite (with a blue point). Then, the species 106 appears
also as a parasite. The third species 8 is fixed as a sub-host (with a green point) as it catalyzes the
replication of 17. Simultaneously, the species 106, originally a parasite species, changes its role to a
sub-host because it catalyzes the replication of 8 [the color of the points at species 106 changes from
blue to green by the appearance of the species 8 in Figure 6B].
As the diversity increases by fixing parasite and sub-host species, a change of host species occurs.
By the emergence of species 161, several species change their role to host species (around 500 division
events). Even though the initial three species are almost simultaneously lost from the cells, the number
of host species increases by successive transformation to host species from parasites. Then, most of the
new species afterward are fixed and keep their role [shown with red and blue arrows], whereas some
of them can be lost.
At the initial stage, all the new species start as a parasite or a sub-host species (as shown with
magenta and light-blue arrows). In fact, most of the new species initially emerged as parasites. To start
as a host species, the new species has to catalyze replication of the host species that exist. The diversity
of the host species, however, is initially low so that the probability that the new species catalyze the
host species is quite low. Hence, the new species has to start as a parasite species to the existing host
species, or a parasite to a sub-host species, i.e., a parasite to the original parasite species.
One can roughly estimate the probability with which a new species can be initially introduced as
a host species. The catalytic reaction path is assigned with probability p (which was fixed at 0.1) for
each pair of Xi and X j . Thus, the new species can catalyze one of the remaining host species with a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11 of 16

Figure 5. (A) The content of the cell is taken over by the two daughter cells. (B) By coloring the cells
in red, one can see that all the NC cells are originated from one cell in the initial condition. In this
sample, the initial cell at the position 20 (indicated by the arrow) is the ancestor cell. We investigate
how the number of molecule species increases by tracing the content of the progeny cells (up to the
2500 division events; colored in blue) from the ancestor cell. Parameters are NC = 100, N = 1000, and
D = 0.001.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

12 of 16

Figure 6. (A) The number of molecule species in the blue cells in Figure 5(B). Other than the initial
three species (1, 2, 3; here we denote the species by its number i, instead of Xi ), the number of the major
molecule species (its copy number of the species is greater than ten) in each cell is plotted against the
division events in the system. The total species (magenta) indicates the total of host (red), sub-host
(green) and parasite (blue) species. See Figure 2 for the definition of the species. (B) The indices of
major molecule species in (A) are displayed for each cell at the corresponding time. The color of the
points, red, green or blue, indicates a host, a sub-host or a parasite, respectively. Initially, the three
species 1, 2 and 3 are present in the cell. Other than the three species, twenty species appear and
are fixed as the major species, whereas some of them are lost. The arrows indicate the time when
such species appear. The red (blue) arrow indicates that the species appears and remains as a host
(parasite) in the time period. On the other hand, the magenta arrow indicates that the species that
initially appeared as a parasite (or a sub-host) changes its role to a host species (due to the appearance
of other species). In addition, the light-blue arrow indicates that the species that appeared as a parasite
changes its role to a sub-host species.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

13 of 16

Figure 7. The effective catalytic network is shown at the fixation of several molecule species in Figure
6B. The red, green and blue nodes correspond to the host, sub-host, and parasite species, respectively.
The absent species at each time are represented by white nodes. For (2) to (6), the number indicates the
index of the newly fixed molecule species.

probability p/2 on average (the factor 1/2 is added because only one of the two reactants works as
a catalyst). By denoting the number of remaining host species by K H , the probability that the new
species can catalyze at least one host species is estimated as pK H /2.
After the fixation of species 161 in Figure 6B, the number of host species (K H ) is approximately 5
or 6 between the division events 600 and 900. Thus, the probability pK H /2 is estimated as 0.25-0.3. In
fact, one species (78) is introduced as a host whereas three species (5, 85, 18) are introduced as parasites.
Thereafter, the fixation of 102 further increases the number of host species to eight, which increases the
probability of appearance of host species later.
To further visualize the process of diversification, we show the effective catalytic network by
coloring the existing molecule species in Figure 7. The underlying catalytic network is formed by the
total of potential 23 molecule species, which appeared at some generations in Figure 6B. Here, the
absent species at each generation are represented by white nodes.
As we explain above, the new species initially appear and work as parasite or sub-host species
[Figure 7(1) to (3)]. As the diversity increases, then, several species turn to be host species and a change
of the “core" network occurs [(4)]. With the successive increase of host species, the molecule species
further diversify and a complex joint network evolves [(5) to (6)].
From this example, one can see that the cells fix their new species one by one to meet the
requirements of growth and diversification simultaneously. This evolutionary constraint suggests a
potential of “parasitic" molecules. Typically, such species are considered as cheaters because they are

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

14 of 16

not beneficial for maintaining the “core" network. On the other hand, the species would be considered
as a steppingstone toward diversification when the resources are limited.
Here, the emergence of a new species is less plausible in a disjoint network. Such fixation requires
construction of another catalytic cycle from scratch. To keep the number of the new molecule against
the decreases by cell dilution, another mutation is necessary that catalyzes it, which hardly occurs.
Then, the mechanism of connecting the species is more plausible than constructing auto-catalytic cycle
from scratch. In other words, the single connected network is more evolutionary achievable than the
disjoint ones, even if the fitness (growth rate) is identical.
5. Discussion
Cells, in general, involve a huge variety of chemicals. For a given environment, in contrast, those
with few components can grow faster. To resolve this apparent contradiction, we investigate how the
cellular composition diversifies in a cell model consisting of the catalytic reaction network. As the
resources are limited, the number of coexisting molecule species increases with which a variety of
resources is converted to keep their growth. Evolutionarily the diversity is increased by the appearance
of parasitic species first and then parasites to the parasitic species. Later they turn to be host species
with further acquisition of novel molecule species.
Our model assumes that each molecule species Xi is replicated by consuming each resource
species Si . This diversity of resource species in the environment is the underlying basis for the diversity
of cellular components. In this sense, the model is similar to the GARD model[10]. The GARD model is
a kinetic model for homeostatic-growth and fission of an assembly of compositional lipids. It assumes
biased accretion kinetics of molecular assemblies in diverse environmental molecules. In the growth of
this assembly, the information of the composition (different types and quantities of molecules within
an assembly) is transferred throughout the generations. It will be then important to study the present
diversity transition and scaling relation also in the GARD model. The present result suggests the
increase in the compositional information under the resource limitation. Recall that the information
encoded in the composition is different from that encoded in RNA as the combinatorial diversity of
sequences. Still, it is interesting to note that, under a limited flow of monomer resources, the sequence
of catalytic polymers increases their complexity as has been shown recently[23].
In the present cells, all the diverse resources are not directly provided from the environment.
Instead, most substrates for each metabolic reaction are given by components which are products
of intracellular reactions. Typical bacteria only need a source of basic elements (Carbon, Nitrogen,
Phosphorus, Sulfur, ...) for their growth. Although the resource species are few, they are often
decomposed by catabolic reactions, leading to diverse internal components. Then, through multi-body
reactions, complex metabolic reactions follow with anabolic reactions. It will be interesting to extend
the present study to include such multi-body reactions of polymers, and to understand the relevance
of complex metabolic reaction networks to survival under resource-limited condition.
In addition to the limitation of resources, competition between cells also gives a driving force
for diversification of cell types, which was reported elsewhere[19]. Also, in this case, cells diversify
their molecule species in order to use a variety of limited resources for their own growth. In this case,
however, cells with different components can use less-competitive resources so that they can increase
their population. As a result, different types of cells appear in which different sets of molecules form
different catalytic networks, and they coexist in the cell population.
The diversification of molecule species in our study may remind of the niche differentiation in
the field of ecology[24,25]. When species differentiate to specialize for each niche, their competition is
relaxed, so that their coexistence is easier. There exists, however, one important difference. A cell is a
unit for selection, whereas an ecosystem itself is not a unit for selection as it does not reproduce. The
ecosystem does not have an explicit selection pressure to grow faster. In the present study, in contrast,
the diversification of molecules is a result of the multi-level selection favoring a higher growth of a cell

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15 of 16

and higher replication of molecules. The multi-level evolutionary pressure leads to the formation of
complex joint networks. This will be a unique feature of a cell system with multi-level evolution[26,27].
6. Materials and Methods
We carried out simulations as follows. We introduce discrete simulation steps. For each simulation
step, we repeat the following procedures. For each cell q (q = 1, ..., NC ), we choose two molecules
from the cell. If the pair of molecules, Xi and X j , are a replicator (Xi ) and a catalyst (X j ), the replication
q
q
of Xi occurs with the given probability (c j ) if Si ≤ 1. Si is a continuous variable denoting the amount
of the resource to replicate Xi in the cell q. When the replication occurs, we add a new molecule of Xi
q
q
into the cell. At the same time, we subtract one resource molecule of Si to make Si → Si − 1. With
q
a probability µ, we add a new molecule of Xl (l 6= i; Sl ≤ 1), instead of Xi . If the total number of
molecules in a cell exceeds the threshold N, the cell divides into two cells. We distribute the contents
q
randomly into the two cells. At the same time, we remove one cell to fix NC . We update each Si to
q
q
Si + D (Si0 − Si ) (i = 1, ..., K M ).
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, A.K. and K.K.; Methodology, A.K. and K.K.; Software, A.K.; Formal
Analysis, A.K.; Investigation, A.K.; Writing—Original Draft Preparation, A.K.; Writing—Review and Editing, A.K.
and K.K.; Visualization, A.K.; Supervision, K.K.; Funding acquisition, K.K.
Funding: This research was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (S) (15H05746) from the Japan
Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS).
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. The funders had no role in the design of the
study; in the collection, analyses, or interpretation of data; in the writing of the manuscript, or in the decision to
publish the results.

References
1.

2.

3.

4.
5.

6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.

Mills, D.R.; Peterson, R.L.; Spiegelman, S.
An extracellular Darwinian experiment with a
self-duplicating nucleic acid molecule. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 1967, 58, 217–224,
[https://www.pnas.org/content/58/1/217.full.pdf]. doi:10.1073/pnas.58.1.217.
Kacian, D.L.; Mills, D.R.; Kramer, F.R.; Spiegelman, S. A Replicating RNA Molecule Suitable for a Detailed
Analysis of Extracellular Evolution and Replication. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 1972,
69, 3038–3042, [https://www.pnas.org/content/69/10/3038.full.pdf]. doi:10.1073/pnas.69.10.3038.
Ichihashi, N.; Usui, K.; Kazuta, Y.; Sunami, T.; Matsuura, T.; Yomo, T. Darwinian evolution in a
translation-coupled RNA replication system within a cell-like compartment. Nature communications
2013, 4, 2494.
Fontana, W.; Buss, L.W. “The arrival of the fittest”: Toward a theory of biological organization. Bulletin of
Mathematical Biology 1994, 56, 1–64.
Ray, T.S. An approach to the synthesis of life. In Artificial Life II; Langton, C.; Taylor, C.; Farmer, J.D.;
Rasmussen, S., Eds.; Addison-Wesley: Redwood City, CA, 1991; Vol. XI, Santa Fe Institute. Studies in the
Sciences of Complexity, pp. 371–408.
Eigen, M.; Schuster, P. The hypercycle: a principle of natural self-organization; Springer, 1979.
Dyson, F. Origins of life; Cambridge University Press, 1985.
Kauffman, S.A. Autocatalytic sets of proteins. Journal of theoretical biology 1986, 119, 1–24.
Jain, S.; Krishna, S. Autocatalytic sets and the growth of complexity in an evolutionary model. Physical
Review Letters 1998, 81, 5684.
Segré, D.; Ben-Eli, D.; Lancet, D. Compositional genomes: Prebiotic information transfer in mutually
catalytic noncovalent assemblies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 2000, 97, 4112–4117,
[https://www.pnas.org/content/97/8/4112.full.pdf]. doi:10.1073/pnas.97.8.4112.
Furusawa, C.; Kaneko, K. Zipf’s law in gene expression. Physical review letters 2003, 90, 088102.
Kaneko, K. Recursiveness, switching, and fluctuations in a replicating catalytic network. Physical Review E
2003, 68, 031909.
Kamimura, A.; Kaneko, K. Reproduction of a protocell by replication of a minority molecule in a catalytic
reaction network. Physical review letters 2010, 105, 268103.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/611996; this version posted April 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

16 of 16

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.

Bedau, M.A.; Packard, N.H.; Rasmussen, S. Protocells: bridging nonliving and living matter; Mit Press, 2009.
Szostak, J.W.; Bartel, D.P.; Luisi, P.L. Synthesizing life. Nature 2001, 409, 387.
Gánti, T. The principles of life; Oxford University Press, 2003.
Luisi, P.L. The emergence of life: from chemical origins to synthetic biology; Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Ruiz-Mirazo, K.; Briones, C.; de la Escosura, A. Prebiotic systems chemistry: new perspectives for the
origins of life. Chemical Reviews 2013, 114, 285–366.
Kamimura, A.; Kaneko, K. Transition to diversification by competition for multiple resources in catalytic
reaction networks. Journal of systems chemistry 2015, 6, 5.
Kamimura, A.; Kaneko, K. Negative scaling relationship between molecular diversity and resource
abundances. Phys. Rev. E 2016, 93, 062419. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.93.062419.
Szathmáry, E. Simple growth laws and selection consequences. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 1991,
6, 366–370.
Kamimura, A.; Kaneko, K. Exponential growth for self-reproduction in a catalytic reaction network:
relevance of a minority molecular species and crowdedness. New Journal of Physics 2018, 20, 035001.
doi:10.1088/1367-2630/aaaf37.
Matsubara, Y.J.; Kaneko, K. Kinetic Selection of Template Polymer with Complex Sequences. Physical
review letters 2018, 121, 118101.
Chesson, P. Mechanisms of maintenance of species diversity. Annual review of Ecology and Systematics 2000,
31, 343–366.
Tilman, D. Resource competition and community structure; Princeton university press, 1982.
Hogeweg, P. Multilevel evolution: replicators and the evolution of diversity. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena
1994, 75, 275–291.
Kaneko, K. Life: an introduction to complex systems biology; Springer, 2006.

