bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

Chemosymbiotic bivalves contribute to the nitrogen budget of seagrass ecosystems
Ulisse Cardini1,2,*, Marco Bartoli3, Raymond Lee4, Sebastian Lücker5, Maria Mooshammer1,§, Julia Polzin1,
Miriam Weber6, Jillian M. Petersen1,*
1

Division of Microbial Ecology, Department of Microbiology and Ecosystem Science, Research Network Chemistry meets

Microbiology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria
2

Integrative Marine Ecology Department, Stazione Zoologica Anton Dohrn, National Institute of Marine Biology, Ecology and

Biotechnology, Napoli, Italy
3

Department of Life Sciences, University of Parma, Parma, Italy

4

School of Biological Sciences, Washington State University, Pullman WA, USA

5

Department of Microbiology, Radboud University, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

6

HYDRA Marine Sciences GmbH, Sinzheim, Germany and HYDRA Field Station Elba, Italy

§

Current address: Department of Environmental Science, Policy, and Management, University of California, Berkeley CA, USA

*

Corresponding authors: Ulisse Cardini, ulisse.cardini@szn.it; Jillian M. Petersen, petersen@microbial-ecology.net

ABSTRACT
In many seagrass sediments, lucinid bivalves and their sulfur-oxidizing symbionts are thought to underpin
key ecosystem functions, but little is known about their role in nutrient cycles, particularly nitrogen. We used
natural stable isotopes, elemental analyses, and stable isotope probing to study the ecological stoichiometry
of a lucinid symbiosis in spring and fall. Chemoautotrophy appeared to dominate in fall, when
chemoautotrophic carbon fixation rates were up to one order of magnitude higher as compared to the spring,
suggesting a flexible nutritional mutualism. In fall, an isotope pool dilution experiment revealed carbon
limitation of the symbiosis and ammonium excretion rates up to 10-fold higher compared to fluxes reported
for non-symbiotic marine bivalves. These results provide evidence that lucinid bivalves can contribute
substantial amounts of ammonium to the ecosystem. Given the preference of seagrasses for this nitrogen
source, lucinid bivalves’ contribution may boost productivity of these important blue carbon ecosystems.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

INTRODUCTION
Shallow-water chemosynthetic symbioses are widespread where decomposition of organic matter produces
sulfide [1]. However, their relevance for ecosystem functioning has received limited attention due to the
assumption that chemosynthesis plays a minor role in shallow-water ecosystems. Recent studies are
challenging this assumption [2-4]. In seagrass sediments, chemosymbiotic bivalves of the family Lucinidae
consume sulfide, allowing more plant growth while relying on the seagrass to stimulate sulfide production by
free-living sulfate-reducing microorganisms [3]. Still, we know little about nutrient cycling in lucinid
bivalves at both the organismal and the ecosystem scale. Most studies to date have focused on carbon (C)
fixation by the symbionts and transfer to the host [5, 6] or on the additional contribution of filter feeding to
host nutrition [7]. Nitrogen (N) metabolism has received far less attention until recently, when dinitrogen
(N2) fixation by chemosynthetic symbionts was shown to be possible in two lucinid species [8, 9].
Concurrently, chemosynthetic symbioses can, to varying degrees, gain their N from ammonium (NH4+),
nitrate, or dissolved free amino acids in their environment [10-12], with the symbionts being able to recycle
N waste compounds within the symbiosis [13]. Surprisingly, although these studies attest to the expanded N
metabolic versatility of chemosynthetic symbioses, the significance of lucinid bivalves in contributing to
their ecosystem N budget has been largely overlooked.
METHODS
We studied a lucinid bivalve (Loripes orbiculatus) in the seagrass (Posidonia oceanica) sediments of Elba
Island (Italy) during two field expeditions in April (spring) and October (fall) 2016. We analyzed porewater
inorganic nutrient concentrations (dissolved inorganic nitrogen – DIN and dissolved inorganic phosphorus –
DIP). Stable isotope probing with 13C-NaHCO3- and 15N-N2 was used to quantify C and N2 fixation by the
chemosynthetic symbionts. An isotope pool dilution experiment with 15N-NH4Cl, was conducted in October
to quantify gross and net NH4+ fluxes by the bivalve symbiosis. Finally, elemental and natural stable isotope
analyses were conducted to study the stoichiometric and isotopic niche of host and symbiont under the two
contrasting seasons. For details see the Supplementary Methods.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
C fixation by the symbionts was roughly 10-fold higher in October compared to April (p < 0.001; Fig. 1A).
N2 fixation, measured for the first time here in a chemosynthetic symbiosis using the
2

15

N-N2 method, also

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

increased in October, although not significantly (Fig. 1B).
The biogeochemistry of P. oceanica sediments is highly
influenced by the seagrass seasonal growth, leaf burial and
decay by microorganisms. P. oceanica growth shows a late
spring maximum and a fall minimum [14], when most
nutrients within the sediment are consumed and sulfide
accumulates [15]. Our porewater profiles confirm this
pattern, with higher DIN concentrations and DIN:DIP ratios
Figure 1. A) Carbon and B) dinitrogen fixation by the
microbial symbionts (nmol C (or N) g gill tissue-1 h-1 ±
SE, n = 5). Sampling points are color-coded in purple
(April) and cyan (October). Different lowercase letters
indicate significant differences.

in April compared to October (p < 0.01; Fig. S1). L.
orbiculatus is able to supplement its diet with filter feeding
on a seasonal basis [7]. Here we show that not only the host,

but also the chemoautotrophic symbionts may modulate their metabolic activities according to the
availability of external (or recycled) resources.
The increased C fixation rates drove the C:N ratio of the symbionts higher, but not of the host (p < 0.001;
Fig. 2A), attesting to the stoichiometric flexibility of the autotrophic partner in the symbiosis and the
homeostasis of the heterotrophic host [16]. However, the distribution of bi-variate Bayesian ellipses shows
that the natural isotopic niche of the sulfide-oxidizing symbionts was significantly larger in the samples
collected in October (Fig. S2), which may indicate a history of mixotrophic metabolism of the
endosymbionts, consistent with the presence of a complete tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and transporters
for uptake of organic compounds in their genome [8].
The proportion of symbiont-hosting gill biomass was lower in October (p < 0.05; Fig. 2B). At the same time,
there was a strong overlap in C isotopic niche of host and symbionts, while there was a mismatch in April
(Fig. 2C). This could be explained by a flexible nutritional mutualism. Under nutrient rich/high productivity
conditions in April, when labile organic matter in seagrass sediments is highest [17], the host relies more on
mixotrophy through filter feeding. Under nutrient depleted/low productivity conditions in October, the
symbiosis shifts towards relying more on the symbionts as a source of energy. Our observation that symbiont
C fixation rates were 10 times higher in October compared to April is consistent with this theory. Filterfeeding bivalves that do not host chemosynthetic symbionts enter a ‘dormant’ state in summer, possibly due
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

Figure 2. A) C:N ratio (± SE, n = 10) of symbiont-free (Symb-) and symbiont-hosting (Symb+) animal tissues; B) Symbiotic tissue
Mass Index – SMI (mg mm-1 ± SE, n = 10; see Supplementary Methods for details on how this index was calculated); C) Biplot of
the natural abundance of 13C and 15N isotopes showing the total amount of niche space occupied (Total Area, dashed polygons) and
the isotopic niche breadth (Standard Ellipse Area, solid ellipses) of symbiont-free (squares) and symbiont-hosting (triangles) animal
tissues. Sampling points are color-coded in purple (April) and cyan (October). Different lowercase letters indicate significant
differences.

to food limitation [18 and references therein]. The ability to harvest energy throughout the summer and fall
by relying on symbiont primary production when food availability is low would provide lucinid bivalves
with a distinct advantage over non-symbiotic filter-feeding bivalves. While more targeted approaches will be
needed to conclusively verify this hypothesis, gross NH4+ production and consumption measured in October
using isotope pool dilution (IPD) indicated that the symbiosis was indeed C limited, as bivalves consumed
NH4+ only when exposed to a source of labile organic C (Fig. S3).
The same experiments, using IPD on an invertebrate symbiotic animal for the first time to our knowledge,
allowed us to quantify gross and net excretion rates contributed by the symbiosis to its surroundings. Net
excretion by the bivalves was approximately 15 µmol NH4+ gSFDW-1 h-1 (Fig. S3), which is up to 10-fold
higher compared to NH4+ excretion rates reported for other non-symbiotic marine bivalves [19] and testifies

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

to the potential of these chemosynthetic symbioses to underpin ecosystem functioning by nitrogen
provisioning.
CONCLUSIONS
In this study, we show that L. orbiculatus likely has a flexible nutritional mutualism, in which host and
symbionts cycle between a looser trophic association and a tight chemoautotrophic partnership, changing
nutritional strategy according to the environmental conditions. Further, we report that under C-limiting
conditions these chemosymbiotic bivalves can excrete substantial amounts of NH4+ to the environment. In
seagrass sediments, lucinids and their endosymbionts are not only relevant for their role in sulfide
detoxification [3], but can also provide the plant’s preferred N form [20], thus contributing to the
productivity of these important blue carbon ecosystems.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank Margarete Watzka for her assistance with sample preparation for IRMS analyses, and
Alexandra Belitz, Nathalie Elisabeth, Christian Lott and the team of the HYDRA Field Station Elba for their
assistance during fieldwork and/or lab activities. Augusto Passarelli is kindly acknowledged for his help with
the inorganic nutrient analyses. The Petersen laboratory is supported by a Vienna Research Groups for
Young Investigators grant from the Vienna Science and Technology Fund (WWTF). U.C. and M.B. are
supported by the project INBALANCE (No. 09.3.3-LMT-K-712-01-0069), funded by the Research Council
of Lithuania (LMT) under the European Social Funds (ESF) programme.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
U.C. conducted the fieldwork and performed all the experiments, analyzed the data and wrote the
manuscript. M.B. conducted

15

N- NH4+ measurements at the membrane inlet mass spectrometer, and

provided critical input for data interpretation. R.L. conducted bulk stable isotope measurements on bivalve
tissues and provided critical input for data interpretation. S.L. provided guidance for GC-MS measurements
of 15N enrichments in seawater samples. M.M. assisted in designing the IPD experiment and provided critical
input for data interpretation. J.P. contributed to the project during fieldwork and sample analyses. M.W.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

assisted with the organization and conduction of all fieldwork activities. J.M.P. contributed to the design of
the research project, data interpretation, and manuscript production.

CONFLICT OF INTEREST
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

REFERENCES
1. Dubilier N, Bergin C, Lott C. Symbiotic diversity in marine animals: the art of harnessing chemosynthesis. Nat Rev
Microbiol 2008;6:725-740.
2. Higgs ND, Newton J, Attrill MJ. Caribbean spiny lobster fishery is underpinned by trophic subsidies from
chemosynthetic primary production. Curr Biol 2016;26:3393-3398.
3. van der Heide T, Govers LL, de Fouw J, Olff H, van der Geest M, van Katwijk MM, et al. A three-stage symbiosis
forms the foundation of seagrass ecosystems. Science 2012;336:1432-1434.
4. de Fouw J, Govers LL, van de Koppel J, van Belzen J, Dorigo W, Sidi Cheikh MA, et al. Drought, mutualism
breakdown, and landscape-scale degradation of seagrass beds. Curr Biol 2016;26:1051-1056.
5. Distel DL, Felbeck H. Pathways of inorganic carbon fixation in the endosymbiont-bearing lucinid clam Lucinoma
aequizonata. Part 2. Analysis of the individual contributions of host and symbiont cells to inorganic carbon assimilation.
J Exp Zool 1988;247:11-22.
6. Herry A, Diouris M, Le Pennec M. Chemoautotrophic symbionts and translocation of fixed carbon from bacteria to
host tissues in the littoral bivalve Loripes lucinalis (Lucinidae). Mar Biol 1989;101:305-312.
7. van der Geest M, Sall AA, Ely SO, Nauta RW, van Gils JA, Piersma T. Nutritional and reproductive strategies in a
chemosymbiotic bivalve living in a tropical intertidal seagrass bed. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 2014;501:113-126.
8. Petersen JM, Kemper A, Gruber-Vodicka H, Cardini U, van der Geest M, Kleiner M, et al. Chemosynthetic
symbionts of marine invertebrate animals are capable of nitrogen fixation. Nat Microbiol 2016;2:16195.
9. König S, Gros O, Heiden SE, Hinzke T, Thürmer A, Poehlein A, et al. Nitrogen fixation in a chemoautotrophic
lucinid symbiosis. Nat Microbiol 2016;2:16193.
10. Lee RW, Robinson JJ, Cavanaugh CM. Pathways of inorganic nitrogen assimilation in chemoautotrophic bacteriamarine invertebrate symbioses: expression of host and symbiont glutamine synthetase. J Exp Biol 1999;202:289-300.
11. Lee RW, Thuesen EV, Childress JJ. Ammonium and free amino acids as nitrogen sources for the chemoautotrophic
symbiosis Solemya reidi Bernard (Bivalvia : Protobranchia). J Exp Mar Biol Ecol 1992;158:75-91.
12. Hentschel U, Cary SC, Felbeck H. Nitrate respiration in chemoautotrophic symbionts of the bivalve Lucinoma
aequizonata. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 1993;94:35-41.
13. Kleiner M, Wentrup C, Lott C, Teeling H, Wetzel S, Young J, et al. Metaproteomics of a gutless marine worm and
its symbiotic microbial community reveal unusual pathways for carbon and energy use. Proc Natl Acad Sci
2012;109:E1173–E1182.
14. Alcoverro, T, Duarte, C M, Romero, J. Annual growth dynamics of Posidonia oceanica: contribution of large-scale
versus local factors to seasonality. Mar Ecol Prog Ser 1995;120:203-210.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/537746; this version posted February 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Lucinids contribute to the seagrass N budget

15. Abadie A, Borges AV, Champenois W, Gobert S. Natural patches in Posidonia oceanica meadows: the seasonal
biogeochemical pore water characteristics of two edge types. Mar Biol 2017;164:166.
16. Persson J, Fink P, Goto A, Hood JM, Jonas J, Kato S. To be or not to be what you eat: regulation of stoichiometric
homeostasis among autotrophs and heterotrophs. Oikos 2010;119:741-751.
17. Danovaro R, Fabiano M, Boyer M. Seasonal changes of benthic bacteria in a seagrass bed (Posidonia oceanica) of
the Ligurian Sea in relation to origin, composition and fate of the sediment organic matter. Mar Biol 1994;119:489-500.
18. Coma R, Ribes M. Seasonal energetic constraints in Mediterranean benthic suspension feeders: effects at different
levels of ecological organization. Oikos 2003;101:205-215.
19. Benelli S, Bartoli M, Racchetti E, Moraes PC, Zilius M, Lubiene I, et al. Rare but large bivalves alter benthic
respiration and nutrient recycling in riverine sediments. Aquat Ecol 2017;51:1-16.
20. Alexandre A, Hill PW, Jones DL, Santos R. Dissolved organic nitrogen: A relevant, complementary source of
nitrogen for the seagrass Zostera marina. Limnol Oceanogr 2015;60:1477-1483.

7

