bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CellGPS: Whole-body tracking of single cells by positron emission
tomography
Kyung Oh Jung1,2, Tae Jin Kim1,2, Jung Ho Yu2,3, Siyeon Rhee4, Wei Zhao1, Byunghang Ha1,2,
Kristy Red-Horse4, Sanjiv Sam Gambhir2,3, and Guillem Pratx1,2*
1. Department of Radiation Oncology, University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California, USA.
2. Molecular Imaging Program at Stanford (MIPS), Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
3. Department of Radiology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA.
4. Department of Biology, Stanford University, Stanford, California, USA

* Corresponding author: Guillem Pratx, PhD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Division of Medical Physics
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA, USA.
Tel: +1 (650) 724-9829; Fax: +1 (650) 723-7254; e-mail: pratx@stanford.edu

First author: Kyung Oh Jung, PhD
Department of Radiation Oncology
Division of Medical Physics
Stanford University School of Medicine
Stanford, CA, USA.
Tel: (650) 250-3193; Fax: 650-723-7254; E-mail: blpg86@stanford.edu

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Author contribution statement
KOJ performed in vitro and in vivo experiments. TJK performed physical tests and processed data.
JHY characterized nanoparticles and optimized their radiolabeling. SR imaged ex vivo specimens.
WZ reconstructed images. BH contributed to the design of the methods. GP reconstructed dynamic
cell trajectory data. KOJ and GP designed the study and wrote the manuscript. KRH, SSG and GP
supervised the study.

Conflict of interest statement: GP is listed as inventor on a US patent that covers the algorithm
used in this study for cell trajectory reconstruction (US9962136B2, awarded, held by Stanford
University). Other authors have no relevant conflicts of interest to disclose.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract: In vivo molecular imaging tools are critically important for determining the role played
by cell trafficking in biological processes and cellular therapies. However, existing tools measure
average cell behavior and not the kinetics and migration routes of individual cells inside the body.
Furthermore, efflux and non-specific accumulation of contrast agents are confounding factors,
leading to inaccurate estimation of cell distribution in vivo. In view of these challenges, we report
the development of a “cellular GPS” capable of tracking single cells inside living subjects with
exquisite sensitivity. We use mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSN) to concentrate

68

Ga

radioisotope into live cells and inject these cells into live mice. From the pattern of annihilation
photons detected by positron emission tomography (PET), we infer, in real time, the position of
individual cells with respect to anatomical landmarks derived from X-ray computed tomography
(CT). To demonstrate this technique, a single human breast cancer cell was tracked in a mouse
model of experimental metastasis. The cell arrested in the lungs 2-3 seconds after tail-vein
injection. Its average velocity was estimated at around 50 mm/s, consistent with blood flow rate.
Other cells were tracked after injection through other routes, but no motion was detected within 10
min of acquisition. Single-cell tracking could be applied to determine the kinetics of cell
trafficking and arrest during the earliest phase of the metastatic cascade, the trafficking of immune
cells during cancer immunotherapy, or the distribution of cells after transplantation in regenerative
medicine.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
In vivo molecular imaging tools are critically important to understand the role played by cell
trafficking in physiological and pathological processes1. Metastasis, for instance, is the single most
important factor for predicting cancer survival, and targeting the metastatic cascade could
significantly improve clinical outcomes2. Other incurable diseases have seen unprecedented
progress thanks to the development of cellular therapies3-5, using stem cells or immune cells to
target specific disease processes. In addition, many physiological processes such as hematopoiesis,
immunity and embryonic development rely on the precisely orchestrated migration of cells
throughout the body6,7.

Molecular imaging tools can be used to estimate distribution of cells non-invasively, however, the
information they provide relates to population averages and not individual cells. Unfortunately,
many biological properties of cells become lost once averaged in this manner, including specific
migration routes and kinetics of individual cells. Intravital microscopy methods can interrogate
single-cell processes in vivo, but not at the scale of the whole body, and only in shallow tissues8,9.
Additionally, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has demonstrated the capability to image single
cells in vivo10,11, but only in uniform-background anatomical sites such as the brain and the liver,
and without sufficient temporal resolution to track moving cells.

Positron emission tomography (PET) is the only non-invasive imaging modality capable of
detecting picomolar probe concentration in humans. Owing to its exceptional sensitivity, PET has
been applied to a variety of cell tracking applications12-14 but its potential for single-cell imaging
has yet to be demonstrated. The concept of tracking moving particles using PET data originates

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

from the field of chemical engineering, where the approach is used to estimate fluid and powder
flows in complex opaque systems15. Recently, we developed a mathematical framework to extend
this approach to the tracking of radiolabeled cells16, and validated the methodology experimentally
using radioactive droplets17.

Here, we report the in vivo feasibility of “CellGPS”, a methodology for tracking the trafficking of
single cells inside a living subject with exquisite sensitivity (Fig. 1). We use nanoparticles to stably
and efficiently ferry

68

Ga radioisotope into live cells, then isolate single radiolabeled cells for

injection into live mice. From the pattern of high-energy photons detected by PET, we infer, in real
time, the position of these single cells with respect to anatomical landmarks derived from X-ray
computed tomography (CT).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
Efficient method for cell radiolabeling
To radiolabel live cells with high efficiency, we harness the exceptional cargo-carrying capacity of
mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs). Due to the large surface area of their pores, these
nanoparticles can efficiently transfer radionuclides into cells for real-time cell tracking
applications. This study specifically considers

68

Ga, a radiometal used for PET imaging of

neuroendocrine tumors and metastatic prostate cancer. Despite is relatively short half-life (67
minutes), high-specific-activity 68Ga can be eluted from inexpensive 68Ge generators, making it an
increasingly popular isotope for clinical applications18. Here, we show that MSNs are able to carry
68

Ga into live cancer cells to achieve upwards of 100 Bq per single cell, an amount of radioactivity

sufficient for real-time tracking applications16,17. Although 100 Bq is truly a minute amount of
radioactivity (it is less than 1 millionth of a standard PET dose), in terms of concentration, 100
Bq/cell is equivalent to 50 GBq/mL, about 100 times the concentration of

68

medical generator. The use of MSNs is therefore required to concentrate

68

Ga eluted from a

Ga into cells and

achieve sufficient labeling.

MSNs were sourced from Sigma-Aldrich (St Louis, MO) and physically characterized to reveal a
spherical morphology with pore structure clearly visible on transmission electron micrographs
(Fig. 2a). Hydrodynamic size distribution was estimated as 100-300 nm diameter
(Supplementary Fig. 1a).

The MSNs were then labeled with

68

Ga according to a newly reported chelator-free method that

exploits the oxophilicity of most radiometals19. To optimize the method, MSNs were reacted with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(non-radioactive)

69

Ga under various conditions and the products were analyzed by electron

microscopy (Supplementary Fig. 1b). Energy dispersive spectroscopy measurements were used
to map the elemental composition of the labeled nanoparticles and found that 69Ga was uniformly
distributed within the silica matrix (Fig. 2b). Other elements such as oxygen could be detected
within the MSNs (Supplementary Fig. 1c).

The MSNs were then successfully labeled with clinical-grade

68

Ga and purified to achieve >95%

purity (thin-layer chromatography, Fig. 2c). Labeling efficiency, measured by gamma counting,
was found to be as high as 0.5 Bq/nanoparticle. To enhance cell loading and biocompatibility,
68

Ga-labeled MSNs were fused with a liposome-based transfection reagent20 to coat their surface

with a lipid bilayer, as confirmed by electron microscopy (Supplementary Fig. 1d).

Passive uptake of 68Ga-labeled MSNs was demonstrated in MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells. The
cells were incubated with 68Ga-labeled MSNs (~25 MBq/ml) for 40 min, washed, then imaged by
electron microscopy to reveal endocytosis of the particles into the cytosol (Fig 2d and
Supplementary Fig. 2a). The MSNs were further labeled using a fluorescent dye (FITC), and
their uptake was verified by fluorescence microscopy (Fig. 2e) and quantified by flow cytometry
(Fig. 2f). Higher cell uptake was observed for lipid-coated MSNs compared to uncoated MSNs
(Supplementary Fig. 2b). In quantitative terms, 95% of cells took up lipid-coated MSNs but only
20% took up uncoated MSNs (Supplementary Fig. 2c and Supplementary Fig. 2d).

Uptake of

68

Ga-labeled MSNs by adherent MDA-MB-231 cells was confirmed by

radioluminescence microscopy (RLM), a method with single-cell imaging resolution21. Areas of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

high radioactivity coincided with fluorescent nuclear staining (NucBlue) and brightfield cell
imaging, indicating localization of radioactivity within cells (Fig. 2g). Cell labeling with 68Ga was
more effective using lipid-coated MSNs than uncoated MSNs, and there was no detectable uptake
of free

68

Ga (Supplementary Fig. 3a). Furthermore, radiolabeling efficiency was relatively

heterogeneous when analyzed on a single-cell basis. A few cells presented no detectable signal
(Supplementary Fig. 3b). Radiolabel efflux by cells was measured by gamma counting and found
to reach 50% after two hours (Supplementary Fig. 4). Finally, cell labeling using

68

Ga-labeled

MSNs resulted in a small (5-15%) but significant (P<0.001) decrease in cell viability for
timepoints up to 24 h. At 48 h, cell damage was repaired, and no significant difference was
observed (Fig. 2h). Non-radioactive MSNs did not significantly alter cell proliferation and
viability.

Imaging weakly radioactive sources, such as single cells, is challenging because most PET
scanners contain a small amount of naturally occurring radioactivity in their scintillation
detectors22. Weak signals emitted by single cells may be drowned out by this intrinsic radioactivity
background. We optimized the acquisition protocol and set the lower energy discriminator to
425 keV to achieve an optimal trade-off between background noise and sensitivity
(Supplementary Fig. 5). With these settings, an Inveon PET/CT scanner achieved a background
coincidence rate of ~ 2.6 counts/s, equivalent to ~40 Bq distributed throughout the field of view.

To demonstrate the feasibility of imaging single cells using PET, radiolabeled MDA-MB-231 cells
were diluted and dispensed in Terasaki plates for enumeration (Fig. 2i). Wells containing 1, 2, 5,
and 10 cells were identified by fluorescence microscopy and their contents were transferred to a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

standard 96-well plate for PET imaging. The images, which were reconstructed using the standard
2D-OSEM algorithm, showed increasing PET signal with increasing cell number (Fig. 2j).
Importantly, a few single cells were clearly detectable by PET. Region-of-interest (ROI) analysis
of the images confirmed the significant increase in ROI intensity with increasing cell number (Fig.
2k). Additionally, we performed quantitative gamma counting on another set of samples and
measured a similar pattern of radioactivity uptake, with 30 Bq/cell on average and a range of 0-110
Bq/cell (Fig. 2l).

Static PET imaging of small cell populations in mice
To determine whether single cells could be imaged in vivo, approximately 100 MDA-MB-231
cells were labeled with

68

Ga-MSN (323 Bq in total) and DiO (fluorescent membrane dye), then

injected via tail vein into a mouse. PET/CT images, acquired immediately thereafter, showed
diffuse signal in both lungs (Fig. 3a) and little detectable signal in other organs (Supplementary
Fig. 6a). Ex vivo gamma counting confirmed significant radioactivity in the lungs compared with
liver and spleen (Supplementary Fig. 6b). To confirm the arrest of the cells in the lungs, lung
tissues were excised, and DiO-labeled cancer cells were visualized by fluorescence microscopy
(Supplementary Fig. 6c & 6d). The arrest of cancer cells in the lungs was confirmed in another
mouse injected with 106 DiO-labeled cells (Supplementary Fig. 6e).

Other injection routes were also investigated. A bolus of 10 radiolabeled cells (118 Bq in total) was
injected in right thigh of a mouse and imaged with PET/CT images to reveal focal signal at the
injection site (Fig. 3b), with no significant radioactivity elsewhere (Supplementary Fig. 7a).
Similarly, 10 cells were injected intraperitoneally in the abdomen (94 Bq; Supplementary Fig. 7b)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and in the footpad (84 Bq; Supplementary Fig. 7c). In all cases, the PET signal was confined to
the injection site.

Using the same workflow, we proceeded to image single cells in mice using PET. A set of
radiolabeled single cells was isolated in Terasaki plates through limiting dilution. Then, using a
portable radiation survey meter, we rapidly screened dozens of cells to find single cells with high
radioactivity that could be injected into mice. Because 68Ga-MSN uptake is variable, this screening
process is critical to ensure that the candidate cell has sufficient radioactivity for in vivo tracking.

In a first experiment, a single radiolabeled single cell (27 Bq) was injected into the footpad of a
mouse. PET/CT images, acquired minutes after injection, depicted strong focal signal near the
injection site (Fig. 3c), with no significant PET signal in other organs (Supplementary Fig. 7d).
These images show that PET can image single cells, which are much smaller than the resolution of
the scanner. Indeed, the diameter of the PET signal was approximately 1.7 mm, which is consistent
with the spatial resolution of the Inveon PET scanner.

Next, isolated single cells (20-70 Bq) were injected via a butterfly catheter into the tail vein of
mice (n=3). PET acquisition was started either before (n=2) or after (n=1) single-cell injection. All
injected mice presented a single locus of radiotracer accumulation in their lungs on PET/CT
images (Fig. 3d). The major organs were then removed and imaged again ex vivo (Fig. 3e).
Consistent with in vivo findings, focal uptake was observed in the lungs (Fig. 3f). Ex vivo gamma
counting further measured 7-35 Bq in the lungs and less than 2 Bq in other organs (Fig. 3g).
Finally, the lungs were dissected in an attempt to localize the arrested cancer cell. The tissue was

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

chopped into five pieces; of these, only one contained significant radioactivity (Supplementary
Fig. 8). We repeated this process until radioactive signal was confined to a piece of lung tissue
smaller than 1 mm. We then imaged the tissue sample by widefield fluorescence microscopy and
identified a single speck of enhanced red fluorescence (Fig. 3h). Finally, we imaged the area by
confocal microscopy and found a single locus positive for blue and red fluorescence, which we
attribute to NucBlue and DiI staining of the injected cell (Fig. 3i). Green fluorescence, imaged as a
negative control, was negative for the identified locus.

Dynamic tracking of single cells in mice
Cell trafficking is a dynamic process. Real-time tracking could help shed light on kinetics and
migration routes of trafficking cells. Here, we demonstrate that PET data can be used to
dynamically track the position of a single cell in vivo. By design, PET scanners record data in the
list-mode format, a datafile that contains, in a long list, the attributes of every photon coincidence
event detected by the scanner, including time of detection, photon energy, and position of the
detector elements involved. In the conventional PET workflow, list-mode data are binned into a
stack of 2D sinograms, then reconstructed to form a tomographic image using an algorithm called
OSEM (ordered-subset expectation-maximization). In general, this approach does not permit
dynamic tracking of single cells. Various particle tracking methods have been developed to
estimate the time-varying position of a moving source directly the raw list-mode data, but their
application has been limited to chemical engineering systems15. Our recent work modeled the
trajectory of the cell as a cubic B-spline and computed its time-varying position by solving a
convex optimization problem16.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The feasibility of tracking a moving cell was demonstrated first by enclosing a single radiolabeled
MDA-MB-231 cell (36 Bq) into a 1.5 ml conical tube. Static PET/CT imaging detected a
radioactive signal from the single cell inside the tube (Supplementary Fig. 9a). A list-mode
acquisition was then performed, during which the tube was slowly moved along the axis of the
scanner in one direction, then in the opposite direction, and finally removed from the scanner bore.
The algorithm was able to compute the position of the object, even as it was being moved
(Supplementary Fig. 9b and Supplementary Video 1). Furthermore, the count rate
(Supplementary Fig. 9c) dropped (from 6.4 to 4.7 counts/s) once the vial had been removed from
the scanner, suggesting that the cell contributed approximately 1.7 counts/s to the overall PET
count rate, equivalent to 24 Bq (assuming 7% coincidence detection sensitivity).

To further validate this approach, we coiled a length of plastic tubing around a 3D-printed cylinder
to form a helical test phantom (Fig. 4a). The phantom was placed in the bore of a PET scanner and
a single MDA-MB-231 cell (67 Bq) was flowed at a speed of 1.36 mm/s through the tubing using
a syringe pump. List-mode PET data were acquired for 10 min and then reconstructed into a 3D
spline trajectory. Unlike the conventionally reconstructed image, which showed no localized signal
(Supplementary Fig. 10a), the dynamically reconstructed trajectory matched the helical shape of
the phantom, including its pitch and diameter (Fig. 4b). The single cell could also be seen exiting
the scanner through the center of the phantom (Supplementary Video. 2). We quantified the
localization error (defined here as the root-mean square deviation from the ideal helical trajectory)
and found it to be less than 5 mm (Supplementary Fig. 10b). Finally, we estimated the velocity of
the cell according to its reconstructed trajectory (Fig. 4c). At its peak, the cell moved at the same
speed as the injected bolus, although, at times, the cell slowed down significantly, possibly

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

because it interacted with the walls of the plastic tubing.

We then applied this dynamic tracking methodology to single cells injected into live mice. First,
the trajectories of static cells were reconstructed. For the previous mouse injected in the footpad,
the single cell (27 Bq) remained at the injection site for the duration of the 10 min PET acquisition
(Supplementary Fig. 11 and Supplementary Video. 3). For another mouse injected intravenously
before the start of PET/CT acquisition, the radiolabeled cell (30 Bq) was correctly located in the
mouse lung and no significant motion was observed during the 10 min acquisition
(Supplementary Fig. 12 and Supplementary Video. 4), suggesting that the cell did not migrate
after its arrest in the lung. For these static cells, the 3D position reconstructed using the splinebased tracking algorithm matched the PET images reconstructed through conventional OSEM.

Finally, real-time tracking was demonstrated by tracking a single cell (70 Bq) continuously, from
its injection into the tail vein (via a catheter; Fig. 4d) to its arrest in the lungs. We monitored the
arrival of the radiolabeled cell into the field of view of the scanner by tracking the rate of
coincidence events as a function of time (Fig. 4e). Initially, the detected counts were due to natural
background radioactivity. Once the cell entered the bore of the scanner (at t = 85 s), the count rate
jumped from 2 cps to 21 cps, and cell tracking was initiated. To visualize the pattern of coincident
gamma ray detection, we charted the recorded coincidence events (shown as blue lines) and the
reconstructed cell trajectory (yellow curved line) over a cross-sectional CT image of the mouse
(Fig. 4f). The dynamic migration of the cell is also shown in Supplementary Video 5 and 6.
According to the reconstructed trajectory, the single cell arrested in the lungs within 3 s of
intravenous injection. The location of the arrested cell matched the focal signal seen on

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

conventional PET/CT imaging (Supplementary Fig. 13a). The reconstructed cell migration route
is also displayed as a transaxial view (Fig. 4g) and combined with a surface-rendered model of the
mouse bony anatomy (Fig. 4h). An analysis of the reconstructed trajectory estimated the velocity
of the cell at around 50 mm/s immediately post-injection (Supplementary Fig. 13c). For reference,
the velocity of venous blood in the inferior vena cava in mice is approximately 40 mm/s, according
to a previous study using magnetic resonance imaging23. Finally, as a control, PET data acquired
from ex vivo organs were reconstructed. The algorithm localized the single cell to the excised
lungs, and no motion was observed, apart from random fluctuations due to physical noise (rootmean-square error, RMSE <0.45 mm; Supplementary Fig. 13d and Supplementary Video 7).

Discussion
One of the major findings of this study is that PET is sufficiently sensitive to image static single
cells labeled with 20 Bq/cell or more of radioactivity. Standard OSEM reconstruction produced
surprisingly good images of single cells in vivo after 10 min of acquisition with an optimized
energy window that removes background noise. Labeled cells manifest in PET images as small hot
spots (diameter ~1.7 mm) in an otherwise blank background. One advantage of tracking individual
cells (as opposed to bulk populations) is that the presence of cells in an organ can be assessed
unambiguously because, unlike single cells, unbound tracer does not produce focal uptake.
Different numbers of cells could be imaged with this approach, but single-cell enumeration will
only be possible where cells are sufficiently distant from one another. More advanced image
reconstruction methods may provide advantages for single-cell imaging and should be investigated.

The second important finding of this study is that single migrating cells can be tracked

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dynamically directly from list-mode PET data. From a technical standpoint, dynamic cell tracking
is vastly more challenging than static cell imaging, especially at high velocities. Our approach
infers the position of the cell by fitting a 3D cubic B-spline to the dynamic pattern of gamma ray
interactions recorded by the PET scanner. The method is flexible and can be tuned to achieve
either high accuracy or high reactivity, which are two competing objectives. For instance, in Fig. 4
d-h, a single cell (70 Bq) was tracked from the tail vein to its arrest 3 s later in the lungs. During
the first 5 s of tracking, the algorithm was tuned to be highly reactive to cell motion to
accommodate the high velocity of the cell. Previous analyses indicate that robust tracking is
achievable on the condition that ratio of the cell velocity (V) to its activity (A) does not exceed 0.1
mm/s/Bq17. Physically, V/A represents the average distance traveled by the cell in between
radioactive decays. In this example, the initial velocity of the cell was estimated to be around 50
mm/s. Based on the V/A criterion, a single-cell activity of 500 Bq—considerably higher than 70
Bq–would be required for accurate tracking. The reconstructed trajectory of the cell during the first
5 s of tracking should therefore be interpreted as qualitative rather than quantitative. Once the cell
arrested in the lungs, the algorithm was adjusted to maximize localization accuracy. With these
settings, the variability in the estimated position of the cell over time was ~ 0.4 mm RMSE,
considerably better than the spatial resolution of the scanner. The phantom data (Fig. 4 a-c) also
illustrate the importance of the V/A criterion. In that experiment, a V/A ratio of 0.02 mm/s/Bq was
achieved, enabling robust dynamic tracking of the moving single cell.

For greater cell throughput, the CellGPS methodology could be extended to enable tracking of
multiple cells simultaneously. A previous study simultaneously tracked, in vitro, 16 yeast cells
labeled with 18F (32 Bq/cell). Individual cells could be resolved and slow diffusion of the cells in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the medium was observed24. Tracking multiple cells will likely be possible provided that the
following conditions are met: cells are separated from each other by at least 2-3 times the spatial
resolution of the scanner; at any given time, no more than one cell moves rapidly within the
imaged subject; and cells are administered one-by-one such that they can be individually tracked
from the injection site to the initial site of arrest. In the case of cellular therapies, where millions of
cells are injected, it may be possible to label and track a small subset of cells using the CellGPS
methodology.

Robust tracking of single cells using PET requires scanners with low background and high
sensitivity. Preclinical PET scanners have much higher sensitivity than human-sized scanners
because their bore almost completely surrounds the subject. However, almost all PET scanners
suffer from non-negligible background noise arising from natural radioactivity within their
lutetium oxyorthosilicate (LSO) detectors. Improved tracking performance can be achieved using
PET detectors built from scintillator materials that do not contain significant radioactivity, such,
for instance, bismuth germanate (BGO). In a previous study, we assessed that the amount of
radioactivity required per cell for tracking could be reduced three-fold through the use of lownoise BGO detectors17.

With a half-life of 67 minutes, 68Ga is suitable for short-term tracking applications. For long-term
tracking, MSNs can be labeled with other radiometals, such as 64Cu (12 h half-life) and 89Zr (78 h
half-life)19. However, these long-lived isotopes may cause higher radiotoxicity to the labeled cells
and they may also affect the biological fate of the labeled cells. Most of the biological damage is
wreaked by positrons, which upon emission move at relativistic speeds through cells and ionize

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

biomolecules along their path. Fortunately, the physical range of positrons is much greater than the
typical cell diameter, therefore, most of the damage is outside the labeled cells. To mitigate
radiotoxicity, biological radioprotectants could be loaded into cells prior to radiolabeling. These
compounds reduce oxidative damage by scavenging free radicals and reactive oxygen species.

In conclusion, CellGPS represents an entirely novel workflow for tracking individual cells in vivo.
The methodology was used to show that MDA-MB-231 cancer cells injected intravenously in
mice arrest in the lung within 3 s of their injection and travel at a velocity of up to 50 mm/s.

This novel workflow could have a number of significant applications. For instance, it could be
used to investigate the early stages of the metastatic cascade. Considerable evidence suggests that
tumor cells combine with platelets to form microemboli complexes in the vasculature and that
these complexes play a critical role in the formation of metastases25. Another significant
prognostic factor is the presence of clusters of circulating tumor cell (CTC) in the bloodstream26.
Given that CTC clusters migrate 10 times more slowly than single CTCs through peritumoral
vessels27, the CellGPS workflow could be used to determine patterns of cell arrest at the scale of
whole subjects for different types of metastatic dissemination. Cell velocity within blood vessels,
measured in vivo using PET, could become a novel biomarker linking cell arrest in specific organs
to the expression of cell adhesion molecules in the vascular bed.

Beyond the study of cancer metastasis, cellGPS could be used to measure routes and kinetics of
immune cell mobilization in response to injury. Finally, the method could help support clinical
trials of cellular therapies for cancer immunotherapy and regenerative medicine. In recent years,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

PET scanners with extended field of view have been developed for total-body human PET
imaging28. These highly sensitive systems could one day be used for translational applications
involving tracking of single cells in humans.

Acknowledgements
This work was funded in part by NIH grants 5R21HL127900 and T32CA1186810. Experiments
were performed at the small-animal imaging facility, the Stanford radiochemistry facility, and the
Stanford nano shared facility. The authors wish to gratefully acknowledge support and assistance
from the following individuals: Dr. Mirwais Wardak, Carmen Azevedo, Travis Shaffer, Hongquan
Li, Frezghi Habte, Arut Natarajan, Seung-Min Park, Tim Doyle, and Suyeon Lee. The ShowVol
package by Dirk-Jan Kroon was used for surface rendering.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Online Methods
Cell Line and Cell Culture
The MDA-MB-231 cell line (human invasive ductal carcinoma) was obtained from Cell Biolabs in
February 2016 and cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) medium
supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) and 1% antibiotic–antimycotic mix. The cells
were cultured at 37°C and 5% CO2 in a humidified environment, up to a passage number of 20.

Physical Characterization of MSNs
Propylamine-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA;
cat# 749265-1G) with 200 nm particle diameter and 4 nm pore size were physically characterized.
The particles were deposited on 300-mesh carbon/formvar coated copper grids for imaging with a
transmission electron microscope (JEM-1400 series 120kV, JEOL USA Inc., Pleasanton, CA, USA)
equipped with a LaB6 emitter and a Gatan Orius 10.7-megapixel CCD camera. The elemental
compositions of the MSNs after labeling with non-radioactive

69

Ga was validated by energy-

dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) and element mapping labeling using a transmission electron
spectroscopy instrument (FEI Tecnai G2 3F20X-Twin microscope at 200 keV) equipped with a
scanning TEM (STEM) unit with bright field/dark field detector, x-ray detector (EDS), and CCD
camera. Finally, the concentration and hydrodynamic size distribution of the MSNs were
determined by nanoparticle tracking analysis (NanoSight Ltd, Amesbury, UK).

MSN Radiolabeling
The MSNs were labeled with 68Ga using a chelator-free reaction method19. First, the nanoparticles
were activated in ethanol overnight. Then, 4.5 µg of MSNs were added to a 1.5 ml tube containing

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

100 µl of MES buffer (0.1 M, pH 7.3). Subsequently, MSNs were labeled with 68Ga by adding 1.5
ml of 68GaCl3 solution (~600 MBq) eluted with HCl (0.1 N) from a clinical generator. To maintain
a reaction pH of 7.3, 30 µl of amonium hydroxide solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA)
was added, and the mixture was incubated at 70oC for 20 min. The nanoparticles were then
washed three times with PBS and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 1 min to remove residual 68Ga. To
determine radiolabeling purity (% fraction of radioactivity bound to nanoparticles), the
radiolabeled MSNs (1.5 μl) were deposited on a silica-gel impregnated iTLC-SG paper and 50
mM EDTA (pH 5) was used as the elution solvent. The samples were then analyzed using a
Bioscan AR-2000 radio-TLC plate reader (BioScan Inc., Washington, DC, USA).

Lipid Coating of MSN
To enhance MSN uptake in cells, a cationic liposome transfection agent (Lipofectamine 2000,
Invitrogen, California, USA) was also used to coat the surface of MSNs with a lipid bilayer. Two
separate samples were prepared: one vial containing a mixture of 4.5 µg of MSN and 500 µl of
Opti-MEM (Invitrogen, California, USA), and the other containing a mixture of 20 µl of
Lipofectamine diluted in 500 µl of Opti-MEM. After 5 min of incubation at room temperature, the
two samples were mixed together and incubated for additional 15 min at room temperature. The
coated MSNs were then recovered by centrifugation.

Fluorescent Labeling of MSNs and Cells
The MSNs were labeled with FITC (fluorescein isothiocyanate isomer I; Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis,
MO, USA), via formation of thiourea bond with NH2 functional groups on the MSN surface.
Approximately 1 mg of MSNs were mixed with a solution of 1 ml FITC (0.1 mg/ml) and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

incubated at room temperature for 1 hr. The mixture was then washed three times with fresh PBS
and centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 1 min to remove excess FITC. For validation purpose, cells
were labeled by incubation at 37°C for 15 min with fluorescent lipophilic tracers such as DiO
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA; green fluorescence; Ex: 484 nm, Em: 501 nm) or DiI (Invitrogen,
Carlsbad, CA, USA; red fluorescence; Ex: 565 nm, Em: 594 nm). Additionally, nuclear staining
was performed by incubation with NucBlue Live (ReadyProbes; Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Waltham, MA, USA) for 5 min at 37°C.

Fluorescent Imaging and Flow Cytometry of MSN Uptake in Cells
MDA-MB-231 cells (2× 105 cells/plate) were incubated with MSNs or lipid-coated MSNs (4.5
g/mL) for 40 min. To characterize cell uptake of MSNs, the treated cells were fixed with 2%
glutaraldehyde. The cells were subsequently deposited on 300-mesh carbon/formvar-coated
copper grids and imaged by TEM as previously described. Similarly, the uptake of FITC-labeled
MSNs was imaged by fluorescence microscopy (EVOS FL, ThermoFisher Scientific, Santa Clara,
CA, USA) and further quantified by flow cytometry (BD FACSAria Fusion sorter, BD Bioscience,
San Jose, CA, USA).

Cell Viability Assay
MDA-MB-231 cells were seeded in 96-well plates (2.5 × 103 cells/well). To evaluate the
cytotoxicity of MSNs in cells, cell viability was determined at various time points, up to 48 h after
treatment with 4.5 g/mL of lipid-coated MSNs (with or without

68

Ga labeling). The cells were

incubated with CCK-8 (Cell Counting Kit-8) solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) and,
after 1 h, mean optical density (OD) was measured at 450 nm using a GloMax multi-detection

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

system (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Blank measurements were acquired and subtracted.

Radioluminescence Microscopy
A custom-built radioluminescence microscope (RLM) was used to image the uptake of

68

Ga-

labeled MSNs by cells. The construction and use of the microscope is described in a previous
publication21. Prior to the experiment, MDA-MB-231 cells (2× 105 cells) were seeded on a tissueculture-treated 35 mm glass-bottom dish (ibidi Labware GmbH, Germany) and incubated in a CO2
incubator for 24 h. The cells were then treated with 68Ga-labeled MSN or lipid-coated 68Ga-labeled
MSN (~25 MBq/ml, suspended in 3 ml DMEM) for 40 min at 37°C. The cells were rinsed three
times with PBS, then incubated with a nuclear fluorescent stain (NucBlue Live) for 5 min at 37°C.
To perform RLM imaging, a CdWO4 scintillator crystal (MTI Corp., Richmond, CA, USA) was
placed on top of the radiolabeled cells. Fluorescence images were first captured using the DAPI
channel (excitation/emission: 358 nm⁄461 nm) to image the nuclei of adherent cells. RLM images
were then acquired by setting the camera parameters to 1200 EM gain, 4×4 pixel binning, 150 ms
exposure time, and 24,000 camera frames. Radioluminescence images were reconstructed using
ORBIT (Optical Reconstruction of the Beta-ionization Track), a MATLAB toolbox developed inhouse29. Radioactivity of each cell is expressed as counts per minute (cpm) and is calculated by
enumerating the number of radioactive decays per cell throughout the hour-long acquisition.
Radioactivity per cell was determined by region-of-interest analysis in MATLAB.

Radioactivity Measurement using D-PET and Gamma Counter
Cells labeled with

68

Ga-MSN were manually sorted into single cells through limiting dilution in

Terasaki plates30. Fluorescence microscopy was used to enumerate the cells in each well. Wells

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

containing 1, 2, 5, and 10 cells were identified and their contents transferred to a 96-well plate for
PET imaging (Inveon D-PET, Siemens Preclinical Solutions, Knoxville, TN; 425-650 keV energy
window, 10 min acquisition time). The radioactivity of single wells was assessed by region of
interest (ROI) analysis using the Inveon Research Workplace (IRW) software. Another set of cells
was prepared and measured by gamma counting (AMG, Hidex, Turku, Finland) with a counting
time of 30 s per sample.

Radiolabel Efflux
MDA-MB-231 cells (2× 105 cells) were seeded on tissue-culture-treated 35-mm glass-bottom
dishes and incubated in a CO2 incubator for 24 h. The cells were then treated with lipid-coated
68

Ga-labeled MSNs (~25 MBq/ml, 3 ml in DMEM) for 40 min at 37°C, washed three times with

PBS, incubated for another 30, 60, 90, or 120 min at 37°C, then washed again three times with
PBS. Once all the cells had been washed, the radioactivity remaining in the samples was measured
using gamma counting.

Dynamic Cell Tracking in Helical Phantom using PET/CT
A cylindrical phantom with helical grooves was 3D printed (Z18; MakerBot Industries, Brooklyn,
New York, USA), and PEEK tubing was wrapped along the grooves (51 mm diameter, 27 mm
helical pitch). The phantom was placed inside the bore of a PET scanner (Inveon D-PET, Siemens
pre-clinical solutions, Knoxville, TN, US). Using a syringe pump, a single radiolabeled single cell
(67 Bq) was flown through the phantom at velocity of 1.36 mm/s while PET data were acquired
(425-650 keV energy window, 10 min acquisition time). The list-mode data, which contained
2,165 coincidence events, was imported into MATLAB and the cell trajectory was reconstructed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

using our previously reported algorithm16. This reconstruction algorithm models the trajectory of
the cell as a 3D cubic B-spline. The number of knots was set to have approximately 30 events per
spline knot, which resulted in 72 knots (or 1 knot every 8.3 s). Scatter and background event
rejection was achieved by establishing a distance threshold in the objective function of 7 mm. Cell
trajectory data were plotted using MATLAB.

In Vivo Cell Tracking with PET/CT
All in vivo procedures were approved by the Administrative Panel on Laboratory Animal Care at
Stanford University under protocol 28882. Female BALB/c nu/nu mice (6 weeks old; average
weight of 20 g) were used for in vivo studies. MDA-MB-231 cells were labeled with

68

Ga-MSN,

then different numbers of cells were injected into the animals through various routes, including
intravenous, subcutaneous, intraperitoneal, and footpad injection. Radiolabeled single cells were
screened using a portable radiation survey meter (Model 3 with GM detector, Ludlum, Sweetwater,
TX, USA), then loaded into a syringe. After injection, static PET images were acquired (Inveon
microPET/CT, Siemens pre-clinical solutions, Knoxville, TN, US; 425-650 keV energy window,
10 min acquisition). X-ray CT images were acquired using standard settings. Static PET images
were reconstructed using conventional 2D-OSEM.

For dynamic tracking of single cells, a butterfly catheter was inserted into the mouse tail vein, and
single radiolabeled cells were injected while PET data were acquired. The list-mode data file was
imported into MATLAB and analyzed to identify the time at which the cell entered the scanner.
The spline knots were then defined to achieve a higher density of knots during the initial migration
of the cell and a lower density of knots after its arrest. Spline knots were defined at T = 85, 86.3,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

87.7 and 90 s initially, then every 23 seconds thereafter. This protocol allowed us to track the cell
during its rapid migration while still achieving high tracking accuracy for the remainder of the
scan. Given the high density of knots in the initial phase of the trajectory, the position of the cell is
approximate and should be interpreted as a qualitative estimate (see Discussion).

Ex Vivo Validation Studies
To identify the organs in which single cells have arrested, ex vivo tissues were imaged using PET
(same parameters as for in vivo imaging) and radioactivity was measured using gamma counting.
Whole lungs were cut into small chunks and individually measured with the gamma counter.
Finally, the tissue chunks were imaged using a SteREO Discovery V20 microscope (Carl Zeiss,
Thornwood, CA, USA) and Zeiss LSM-700 confocal microscope (Carl Zeiss, Thornwood, CA,
USA) to confirm fluorescence of DiO/DiI-labeled cells in ex vivo tissues.

Statistical Analysis
All data are presented as mean ± standard deviation. P values < 0.05 were considered to be
statistically significant and were obtained using Student's t-test (two-tailed, unpaired samples).

Data availability
Raw PET/CT data (list-mode format) that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon request. All other data are available within the paper and its
supplementary information files.

Code availability

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Computer codes used to reconstruct cell trajectories from list-mode PET data are provided as
supplementary data.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

Kircher, M.F., Gambhir, S.S. & Grimm, J. Noninvasive cell-tracking methods. Nat Rev
Clin Oncol 8, 677-688 (2011).

2.

Eckhardt, B.L., Francis, P.A., Parker, B.S. & Anderson, R.L. Strategies for the discovery
and development of therapies for metastatic breast cancer. Nat Rev Drug Discov 11, 479497 (2012).

3.

Dimmeler, S., Burchfield, J. & Zeiher, A.M. Cell-based therapy of myocardial infarction.
Arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, and vascular biology 28, 208-216 (2008).

4.

Serup, P., Madsen, O.D. & Mandrup-Poulsen, T. Islet and stem cell transplantation for
treating diabetes. Bmj 322, 29-32 (2001).

5.

June, C.H., O’Connor, R.S., Kawalekar, O.U., Ghassemi, S. & Milone, M.C. CAR T cell
immunotherapy for human cancer. Science 359, 1361-1365 (2018).

6.

Kupperman, E., An, S., Osborne, N., Waldron, S. & Stainier, D.Y. A sphingosine-1phosphate receptor regulates cell migration during vertebrate heart development. Nature
406, 192 (2000).

7.

Wright, D.E., Wagers, A.J., Gulati, A.P., Johnson, F.L. & Weissman, I.L. Physiological
migration of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells. Science 294, 1933-1936 (2001).

8.

Lehr, H.-A., Leunig, M., Menger, M.D., Nolte, D. & Messmer, K. Dorsal skinfold chamber
technique for intravital microscopy in nude mice. The American journal of pathology 143,
1055 (1993).

9.

Thurber, G.M., et al. Single-cell and subcellular pharmacokinetic imaging allows insight
into drug action in vivo. Nat Commun 4, 1504 (2013).

10.

Heyn, C., et al. In vivo MRI of cancer cell fate at the single-cell level in a mouse model of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

breast cancer metastasis to the brain. Magn Reson Med 56, 1001-1010 (2006).
11.

Hinds, K.A., et al. Highly efficient endosomal labeling of progenitor and stem cells with
large magnetic particles allows magnetic resonance imaging of single cells. Blood 102,
867-872 (2003).

12.

Adonai,

N.,

et

al.

Ex

vivo

cell

labeling

with

64Cu–pyruvaldehyde-bis(N4-

methylthiosemicarbazone) for imaging cell trafficking in mice with positron-emission
tomography. P Natl Aacad Sci USA 99, 3030-3035 (2002).
13.

Doyle, B., et al. Dynamic tracking during intracoronary injection of 18F-FDG-labeled
progenitor cell therapy for acute myocardial infarction. J Nucl Med 48, 1708-1714 (2007).

14.

Keu, K.V., et al. Reporter gene imaging of targeted T cell immunotherapy in recurrent
glioma. Sci Transl Med 9, eaag2196 (2017).

15.

Parker, D., Broadbent, C., Fowles, P., Hawkesworth, M. & McNeil, P. Positron emission
particle tracking-a technique for studying flow within engineering equipment. Nucl Instrum
Meth A 326, 592-607 (1993).

16.

Lee, K., Kim, T.J. & Pratx, G. Single-Cell Tracking With PET Using a Novel Trajectory
Reconstruction Algorithm. IEEE Trans Med Imag 34, 994-1003 (2015).

17.

Ouyang, Y., Kim, T.J. & Pratx, G. Evaluation of a BGO-Based PET System for Single-Cell
Tracking

Performance

by

Simulation

and

Phantom

Studies.

Mol

Imag

15,

1536012116646489 (2016).
18.

Fani, M., Andre, J.P. & Maecke, H.R. 68Ga‐PET: a powerful generator‐based alternative to
cyclotron‐based PET radiopharmaceuticals. Contrast media & molecular imaging 3, 53-63
(2008).

19.

Shaffer, T.M., et al. Silica nanoparticles as substrates for chelator-free labeling of oxophilic

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

radioisotopes. Nano letters 15, 864-868 (2015).
20.

Liu, J., Jiang, X., Ashley, C. & Brinker, C.J. Electrostatically mediated liposome fusion and
lipid exchange with a nanoparticle-supported bilayer for control of surface charge, drug
containment, and delivery. Journal of the American Chemical Society 131, 7567-7569
(2009).

21.

Kim, T.J., Turkcan, S. & Pratx, G. Modular low-light microscope for imaging cellular
bioluminescence and radioluminescence. Nat. Protocols 12, 1055-1076 (2017).

22.

Freedenberg, M.I., Badawi, R.D., Tarantal, A.F. & Cherry, S.R. Performance and
limitations of positron emission tomography (PET) scanners for imaging very low activity
sources. Phys Medica 30, 104-110 (2014).

23.

Kaul, M.G., et al. Magnetic particle imaging for in vivo blood flow velocity measurements
in mice. Phys Med Biol 63, 064001 (2018).

24.

Langford, S.T., et al. Three-dimensional spatiotemporal tracking of fluorine-18
radiolabeled yeast cells via positron emission particle tracking. PLoS One 12, e0180503
(2017).

25.

Labelle, M. & Hynes, R.O. The initial hours of metastasis: the importance of cooperative
host–tumor cell interactions during hematogenous dissemination. Cancer discovery 2,
1091-1099 (2012).

26.

Aceto, N., et al. Circulating tumor cell clusters are oligoclonal precursors of breast cancer
metastasis. Cell 158, 1110-1122 (2014).

27.

Choi, J.W., et al. Urokinase exerts antimetastatic effects by dissociating clusters of
circulating tumor cells. Cancer Res 75, 4474-4482 (2015).

28.

Badawi, R.D., et al. First Human Imaging Studies with the EXPLORER Total-Body PET

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Scanner. J Nucl Med 60, 299-303 (2019).
29.

Pratx, G., et al. High-Resolution Radioluminescence Microscopy of 18F-FDG Uptake by
Reconstructing the beta-Ionization Track. J Nucl Med 54, 1841-1846 (2013).

30.

Yaron, J.R., Ziegler, C.P., Tran, T.H., Glenn, H.L. & Meldrum, D.R. A convenient,
optimized pipeline for isolation, fluorescence microscopy and molecular analysis of live
single cells. Biological procedures online 16, 9 (2014).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures

Figure 1. Overview of the CellGPS system. (a) Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) are used
to concentrate 68Ga, a clinical PET radioisotope with a 67 min half-life. (b) The nanoparticles are
transferred to cells to achieve upwards of 100 Bq / cell (less than 1 millionth of a standard PET
dose). (c) Isolated single cells are administered into mice. Gamma rays emitted from the single cell
are captured by a small-animal PET scanner and processed by an algorithm to estimate the location
of the moving cell in real time. In the example of human breast cancer cells administered IV, single
cells arrested in the lung, as confirmed by ex vivo dissection.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2.

68Ga-MSN

labeling method for sensitive cell tracking (a) Transmission electron

microscopy (TEM), showing MSN pore structure. (b) Energy dispersive spectroscopy and
elemental mapping of single MSN labeled with stable

69

Ga. (c) Radiochemical purity of

68

Ga-

MSN quantified using iTLC. (d) TEM showing uptake of lipid-coated MSNs by MDA-MB-231
cell. (e) Cellular uptake of FITC-labeled MSNs (green). Red is cell membrane and blue is nucleus.
(f) Cell uptake of FITC-labeled MSN quantified by flow cytometry analysis. (g) Fluorescence

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(NucBlue) and radioluminescence microscopy (RLM) of MDA-MB-231 cells after uptake of 68GaMSN. (h) Cell viability assay following treatment with non-radioactive MSN and

68

Ga-labeled

MSN. Experiment performed in triplicate. NS, not significant. (i) Cell enumeration in Terasaki
plates by fluorescence microscopy. (j) PET imaging of various numbers of 68Ga-MSN-labeled cells
(top: coronal view, bottom: sagittal view) and (k) region-of-interest image quantification. (l) Cell
uptake measured by in vitro gamma counting.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Static PET imaging of small cell populations in mice and ex vivo validation. (a)
MDA-MB-231 cells arrested in the lungs following IV injection of 100 radiolabeled cells. (b)
Visualization of a cluster of 10 cells after subcutaneous injection in the right thigh. (c) Single
radiolabeled cell detected after its injection in the right forepaw. (d) Single radiolabeled cell after
arrest in the left lung, following IV injection (n=3). (e) Photograph and PET/CT images of ex vivo
organs from the same mouse (from top to bottom: brain, heart, lung, liver, spleen, stomach,
kidney), and (f) magnified view of the lungs (ex vivo). (g) Gamma counting quantification of
radioactivity of ex vivo organs. (h) Brightfield and fluorescence imaging of ex vivo lung tissue
highlight single locus with high DiI fluorescence. (j) Confocal microscopy demonstrates dual
staining for nucleus (blue) and membrane (DiI, red) but no green fluorescence (negative control),
confirming the localization in the lung of the injected cancer cell.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745224; this version posted August 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Dynamic PET tracking of single cells. (a) A single radiolabeled cell is flowed through
a length of tubing coiled around a 3D-printed cylinder. (b) Cell trajectory reconstructed from listmode PET data (black line) and closest helical fit (red line). (c) Estimated cell velocity as a
function of time (black line), and average velocity of the cell medium (dashed red line). (d)
Butterfly catheter installed into the tail vein for simultaneous cell injection and PET imaging. (e)
Coincidence event rate recorded by the scanner. Events measured before cell arrival are due to
background noise. (f) Dynamic tracking of single cell in vivo, shown at three different time points.
The blue lines represent coincidence events detected by the scanner. The red circle is the estimated
location of the cell. The yellow line is the reconstructed trajectory. Coronal CT views are shown
for anatomical reference. (g) Reconstructed trajectory shown as a transaxial view, including crosssectional CT slice through cell arrest location. (h) Reconstructed trajectory shown relative to 3D
surface-rendered bony anatomy.

