bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Performance analysis of novel toxin-antidote CRISPR gene drive systems
Jackson Champer1,2*, Isabel Kim1,2, Samuel E. Champer1, Andrew G. Clark1,2, Philipp W.
Messer1
1
2

Department of Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853

*Corresponding author: JC (jc3248@cornell.edu)

ABSTRACT
Gene drives can potentially fixate in a population by biasing inheritance in their favor, opening
up a variety of potential applications in areas such as disease-vector control and conservation.
CRISPR homing gene drives have shown much promise for providing an effective drive
mechanism, but they typically suffer from the rapid formation of resistance alleles. Even if the
problem of resistance can be overcome, the utility of such drives would still be limited by their
tendency to spread into all areas of a population. To provide additional options for gene drive
applications that are substantially less prone to the formation of resistance alleles and could
potentially remain confined to a target area, we developed several designs for CRISPR-based
gene drives utilizing toxin-antidote (TA) principles. These drives target and disrupt an essential
gene with the drive providing rescue. Here, we assess the performance of several types of TA
gene drive systems using modeling and individual-based simulations. We show that ToxinAntidote Recessive Embryo (TARE) drive should allow for the design of robust, regionally
confined, population modification strategies with high flexibility in choosing drive promoters
and recessive lethal targets. Toxin-Antidote Dominant Embryo (TADE) drive requires a
haplolethal target gene and a germline-restricted promoter but should enable the design of both
faster regional population modification drives and even regionally-confined population
suppression drives. Toxin-antidote dominant sperm (TADS) drive can be used for population
modification or suppression. It spreads nearly as quickly as a homing drive and can flexibly use a
variety of promoters, but unlike the other TA systems, it is not regionally confined and requires
highly specific target genes. Overall, our results suggest that CRISPR-based TA gene drives
provide promising candidates for further development in a variety of organisms and may allow
for flexible ecological engineering strategies.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
A successful gene drive will rapidly spread through a population by biasing inheritance in favor
of the drive allele1–7. This can be used for population modification, or with an appropriate drive
arrangement, population suppression1–7. The potential applications of such drives are numerous,
with perhaps the most promising involving modification or suppression of mosquito populations
to prevent transmission of vector-borne diseases such as malaria or dengue1–3,5. Similar
techniques can potentially be used against invasive species or agricultural pests1–3,5.
Homing gene drive constructs based on CRISPR-Cas9 have been constructed in yeast8–11, flies12–
18
, mosquitoes19–21, and mice22. These constructs work by cleaving a wild-type allele, resulting in
copying of the drive allele during homology-directed repair. If cleavage is repaired by endjoining, however, mutations can be created at the guide RNA (gRNA) target site15. This often
results in the formation of a “resistance allele”, since the mutated target site prevents future
cleavage by the homing drive and thus impairs its spread. Such resistance alleles can form in the
germline as an alternative to homology-directed repair or during early embryo development by
maternally-deposited Cas9 and gRNA15. Some strategies for reducing resistance allele formation
have already been successfully tested, including gRNA multiplexing16, improved promoters16,23,
and selection of a highly conserved target site where mutations are not tolerated24. This latter
method, when combined with an improved promoter, recently resulted in the successful
suppression of Anopheles gambiae in population cages.
Though promising, such a strategy may be difficult to apply to population modification gene
drives. This is because it relies on changed resistance allele sequences rendering the target gene
non-functional, allowing them to contribute to the overall goal of population suppression, even if
they slow the spread of the drive. A population modification drive would only be able to remain
viable while removing resistance alleles if it targets an essential gene and itself has a recoded
version of the target that is fully functional. This requires targeting a site that can be recoded,
which allows the possibility of forming resistance alleles that do not disrupt the function of the
target gene. A homing drive with multiplexed gRNAs all targeting within a narrow window
could likely overcome this limitation while retaining high drive efficiency, but such drives may
still be vulnerable to formation of resistance alleles by partial homology-directed repair that
copies the recoded region but not the payload gene, essentially forming a functional resistance
allele. Aside from this limitation, all homing drives also require Cas9 cleavage specifically in the
germline to allow for homology-directed repair instead of end-joining, which otherwise
predominates, particularly when cleavage occurs in the embryo. This requires choosing a suitable
promoter, which may often be difficult to find in new species and could thereby prove to be a
barrier to development of homing drives.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Another inherent feature of homing gene drives that could limit their utility is that they are
rapidly spreading constructs that cannot be easily confined to a specific geographic region25. In
fact, the migration of only a few individuals could be sufficient to establish a homing drive in a
new population, which could be particularly undesirable when the goal is suppression of invasive
species or agricultural pests outside their native range26. Thus, new gene drive options are needed
that are effective, flexible, and can be regionally confined.
One possible strategy for developing an efficient drive is to avoid the need for homologydirected repair after cleavage by using a toxin-antidote (TA) drive system. This principle is often
seen in natural drives27 and has been successfully applied for the Medea system28. However,
Medea elements proved to be highly specific to Drosophila and difficult to transfer into other
species. CRISPR nucleases could in principle be used to create highly flexible systems, where
the “toxin” would consist of Cas9 and gRNAs targeting an essential gene. The “antidote” would
then be a recoded copy of the gene immune to drive cleavage. With both the toxin and antidote
as part of the drive allele, it would steadily convert wild-type alleles to disrupted alleles in the
population, which would systematically be removed from the population, thereby increasing the
relative frequency of the drive over time.
There are several potential variants of TA systems, including those based on recessive lethal
genes (TARE, Toxin-Antidote Recessive Embryo), haplolethal genes (TADE, Toxin-Antidote
Dominant Embryo), and genes with expression after meiosis I that is required for sperm
development (TADS, Toxin-Antidote Dominant Sperm). Recently, we developed a “same-site”
TARE drive capable of spreading through population cages29, and others constructed a “distantsite” TARE drive termed ClvR that was similarly successful30. Thus, such systems are highly
promising for further development. Here, we analyze the expected population dynamics of
TARE, TADE, TADS, and several variants of these strategies using modeling and simulations.
In different forms, such systems are capable of providing for highly efficient population
modification or suppression strategies, either of which could be global or regional, depending on
the specific system.

METHODS
Deterministic model. To analyze the dynamics of TA systems, we developed a deterministic,
discrete-generation modeling approach. These models were used to demonstrate frequency
trajectories and to calculate parameters such as introduction thresholds. Initially, drive/wild-type
heterozygotes are added to a population of wild-type individuals at a specified introduction
frequency. In each generation, frequencies were tracked for each genotype. Females select a
mate randomly, with each male’s chance of being selected being proportional to his fitness value.
Females then generate a number of potential offspring equal to twice their fitness value.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Individuals homozygous for a drive allele (or with a drive allele on the Y chromosome) carry a
fitness cost that reduces fecundity for females and the probability of being selected as a mate for
males. Drive heterozygotes are assumed to have a fitness equal to the square root of the fitness of
homozygous individuals (i.e. we assume that fitness costs of the drive allele are multiplicative).
Several events can take place in the model depending on the particular drive strategy, including
successful germline drive conversion for homing drive heterozygotes, removal of non-viable
sperm in males due to a TADS system or X-shredder, and successful disruption of the target
gene in the germline and embryo (such disruption does not take place for homing drives due to a
drive-optimized promoter, or in the embryo for TADE and X-shredder drives). Offspring with
non-viable genotypes due to toxin effects are then removed. Genotype frequencies are finally
renormalized to produce the population state for the following generation.
Gene drive simulations. To gain a better understanding of how our TA gene drive designs
would perform in more realistic models, we developed individual-based simulations that
incorporated a degree of stochastic variation to model the effects of genetic drift. These
simulations were used to determine average drive performance based on different initial
parameters (all heat maps shown in this study are based on these simulations).
All simulations were implemented in the forward-in-time population genetic simulation
framework SLiM version 3.2.131. Our basic model simulates a panmictic population with males
and females with discrete, non-overlapping generations. To obtain the individuals of the next
generation, each female randomly selects a mate, with drive males having a reduced probability
of being selected as in the deterministic model if the drive allele has a fitness cost. We then
calculate the number of offspring generated based on a binomial distribution with maximum of
50 and p = fitness/25, so that a female with fitness = 1 will have an average of two offspring.
Fitness is determined by genotype as described in the deterministic model and is multiplied by a
density dependent factor equal to 10/(1+9N/K) where N is the total population and K is the
carrying capacity. This density factor was selected to produce logistic dynamics and to smoothly
but quickly restore the population to carrying capacity after perturbation, unless a population
suppression system produces downward pressure on the population. At low densities, it produces
a maximum 10-fold population growth rate per generation, thus allowing for rapid growth when
individuals are not limited by competition.
The next step is to generate offspring. Each offspring randomly receives an allele from each
parent. If the target allele was wild-type and the parent also had a drive allele, then the wild-type
allele is converted to a disrupted allele with a probability equal to the germline cut rate. If the
offspring has any wild-type alleles after parental germline cutting and has a mother with at least
one drive allele, then any wild-type alleles are converted to disrupted alleles with a probability
specified by the embryo cut rate. For the TADS drive, if the offspring received a disrupted allele
from the male parent, the genotype of the child is redrawn, since such an allele would be

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

incapable of fertilizing an egg. Finally, offspring with non-viable genotypes are removed from
the population.
In our simulations, we assumed that drive individuals were first mated with wild-type individuals
to produce heterozygous offspring, which were then introduced at a frequency representing 20%
of the total population (for TADS Y-linked suppression drive, all introduced individuals were
males with the drive). Several drive performance parameters were fixed at standardized levels
inspired by laboratory gene drive mosquitoes20,24, unless otherwise specified. These include 99%
germline cut rate, 95% embryo cut rate (5% for TADE and TADE suppression drives, which are
intolerant of high embryo cut rates - such low embryo cut rates have also been achieved in gene
drive mosquitoes23,24), and 95% drive homozygote fitness compared to wild-type individuals.
These parameters are then varied in our analyses (individually or in combination) to study how
they affect drive dynamics. Each simulation had a starting population of 100,000 individuals and
was evaluated over 100 generations.
Data generation. Simulations were run on the computing cluster of the Department of
Computational Biology at Cornell University. Data processing, analyses, and figure preparation
of simulations were performed in Python and R. All SLiM configuration files for the
implementation of the simulations and all data are available on GitHub
(https://github.com/MesserLab/ToxinAntidoteSystems). All simulations were replicated a total
of ten times for each parameter setting, and the results were averaged.

RESULTS
General TA drive principles. TA drive alleles each contain a toxin and an antidote that will
rescue the effect of the toxin. We assume that the toxin is a CRISPR nuclease targeting an
essential gene that will get disrupted when the break is repaired by end-joining or homologydirected repair through introduced mutations at the cut sites, rendering it non-functional. The
antidote consists of a recoded version of the gene that no longer matches the gRNAs and
therefore, cannot be disrupted by the drive. Cells or individuals exposed to the toxin will thus
perish, unless rescued by a drive allele (Figure 1A), with details determined by the specific type
of drive. Various potential arrangements and targets can be conceived, depending on whether the
goal is population modification (Figure 1B) or population suppression (Figure 1C), which we
will describe in the individual sections below. TARE and Toxin-Antidote Double Dominant
Embryo (TADDE) drive systems are expected to reach all individuals quickly in idealized
population models (Figure S1). However, it can take an extended time for these constructs to
reach their maximum value (Figure 1B), dependent on the drive’s fitness cost (Figure 1D).
Additionally, most TA systems have introduction frequency thresholds below which the drive

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

will not spread at all (Figure 1D), except for the TADS drive, which should have a zerothreshold and rapidly spread through populations from even a small initial frequency.

Figure 1. Overview of TA systems and comparison to other drives. (A) The general principle behind TA systems
is disruption of wild-type alleles by the drive, which are eventually rendered non-viable. The drive remains viable,
increasing its relative frequency in the population. (B) Expected allele frequencies when drive heterozygotes are
released into a wild-type population at 20% starting frequency (10% starting drive allele frequency) in a discretegeneration, deterministic model. All drives are assumed to have no fitness cost and 100% drive efficiency, with no
resistance formation. (C) In some forms, TA drives can induce population suppression (model as in B). (D) TARE,
TADE, TADDE, and Medea drives have fitness-dependent introduction thresholds, above which the drive will
increase in frequency and below which it will decrease. TARE, TADDE, and Medea drives additionally have final
equilibrium frequencies that are dependent on fitness costs. At equilibrium, all individuals carry at least one copy of
the drive, but some carry disrupted alleles as well.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

TARE drive. TARE drives target a haplosufficient but recessive lethal gene, with the drive
providing rescue (Figure 2A). It is thus desirable that nuclease cleavage occurs not only in the
germline, but also in the early embryo due to maternally deposited Cas9 and gRNA. With a
highly efficient drive, female heterozygotes crossed with wild-type males will therefore have
only drive-carrying offspring. This is because offspring that don’t inherit a drive allele will
inherit a disrupted target allele from the mother and a wild-type allele from the father, which will
then typically become disrupted due to maternal Cas9 activity, rendering the individual nonviable. Because this drive does not work by increasing the number of drive alleles, but by
reducing the number of wild-type alleles (thus increasing the relative frequency of the drive), it
shows threshold-dependent dynamics (Figure 1B, Figure 1D, Figure 2B). This drive should be
highly tolerant of variation in expression from the nuclease promoter, with optimal performance
when both germline and embryo cut rates are high (Figure 2C). Indeed, the promoter need not
even be restricted to driving expression in the germline and early embryo. Constitutively active
promoters would presumably work equally well (though they may have a slightly higher fitness
cost), as long as there is expression in germline or germline precursor cells.
The TARE drive can be “same-site” as in Figure 2A or a “distant-site” drive in which the drive
allele is not located at the same genomic site as the target allele (Figure S2A). Successful samesite29, and distant-site30 systems have already been engineered with high germline and embryo
cut rates and little to no observable fitness costs. These systems have nearly equivalent
performance when cut rates are high (Figure S2B), but the distant-site drive retains higher
performance when both the germline and embryo cut rates are low (Figure S3C) since it often
has two wild-type alleles available to cleave rather than just one as for the same-site drive. On
the other hand, a same-site drive may be easier to engineer since the recoded region may be
smaller and the natural target gene promoter would still drive expression of the rescue allele. The
natural promoter and genomic site of the rescue element may also avoid the pitfall of incomplete
rescue that would be a more significant consideration for distant-site drives.
In our model, TARE systems reach all individuals quickly with a modest release size (Figure
S1), but their rate of increase becomes slowed at high frequencies (Figure 1B), which could be
an issue for a population modification strategy where the payload is substantially more effective
in homozygotes than heterozygotes. To avoid this, the target of a TARE system could be located
on the X-chromosome, which would make males with only one copy of the disrupted target gene
non-viable (Figure S3D). This would allow the drive allele to fixate substantially more quickly
than autosomal TARE systems (Figure S3E). However, X-linked TARE drives would not have
any cleavage activity in the germline of males and thus, have a slower rate of spread than
autosomal systems (Figure S3F), at least until the drive reaches all individuals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. TARE drive. (A) In the TARE drive, germline activity disrupts the target gene, followed by embryo
activity in the progeny of drive-carrying females. The target gene is recessive lethal, so any individuals inheriting
two disrupted target genes are non-viable. By contrast, all individuals with a wild-type or drive allele are viable. (B)
The speed at which the TARE drive reaches 99% of individuals in the population with varying introduction
frequency and drive fitness. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rates. Grey means that
the drive failed to reach 99% because it spread too slowly or was not able to spread at all.

TADE drive. TADE drives target a haplolethal gene, with the drive providing rescue (Figure
3A). Like TARE, such a drive is expected to show threshold-dependent dynamics (Figure 1B,
Figure 1D, Figure 3B). For a TADE drive, nuclease cleavage should occur only in germline
gametocytes. Otherwise drive/wild-type heterozygotes will not have two functioning copies of
the haplolethal gene in all cells, which will likely cause death, depending on the magnitude of
expression outside the germline. Similarly, embryo cleavage activity would render drive-carrying
individuals non-viable. Though the promoter is germline-restricted, it could still have expression
before or after the narrow window in early meiosis for homology-directed repair, allowing
somewhat more tolerance in the specificity of expression timing than for promoters used in
homing drives. With a suitable promoter, the offspring of both males and females that fail to
inherit the drive will perish. This allows the TADE drive to spread more rapidly than the TARE
drive and quickly reach fixation (Figure 1B). However, substantial embryo resistance would
likely prevent the drive from spreading (Figure 3C).
As with the TARE drive, the TADE drive can be “same-site” or “distant-site” (Figure S3A).
These are expected to have similar performance (Figure S3B), but the distant-site drive may

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

remain viable for higher embryo resistance rates when germline cleavage is low (Figure S3C).
This is because a low rate of embryo cleavage events can help remove wild-type alleles that were
not cleaved in the germline due to low germline cleavage rates. The drive alleles in this situation
should still remain viable in most instances, since the other wild-type target allele should often
remain undisrupted.

Figure 3. TADE drive. (A) In the TADE drive, germline activity disrupts the target gene, and the nuclease
promoter is selected to minimize embryo activity. The target gene is haplolethal, so any individuals inheriting one
disrupted target allele will be non-viable, even if the other allele is drive or wild-type. (B) The speed at which TADE
drives reach 99% of individuals in the population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness. (C) Same as
B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate.

TADE suppression drive. The TADE suppression drive is a form of distant-site TADE in which
the drive is located in a recessive female (or male, but not both) fertility (or viability) gene,
disrupting the gene with its presence (Figure 4A). Thus, female drive homozygotes are sterile. If
the germline cleavage rate is less than 100%, this drive would not fixate but instead impose a
suppression factor on the population (Figure 4B), which is the fold-reduction in the population
between generations after the drive reaches it maximum frequency, assuming no fitness effects
on individuals due to reduced competition at low densities. Complete suppression occurs when
the suppression factor is greater than the maximum population growth rate experienced by
individuals at lower densities with less competition, before Allee effects dominate32. For the
germline cut rates that have been observed experimentally in mosquito and Drosophila
systems12–21, this would likely be sufficient to cause complete suppression. High suppression

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

factors are also possible even if the target gene shows only partial haploinsufficiency (Figure
S4). Note that unlike homing-based drives and X-shredders, the TADE suppression system
shows threshold-dependent dynamics (Figure 1C, Figure 1D, Figure 4C), making it a regionally
confined system. In an effective TADE suppression drive, the parameter space for embryo and
germline cut rates is even more restricted than for TADE drive (Figure 4D), though still within
the range demonstrated in mosquito drives.

Figure 4. TADE suppression drive. (A) The TADE suppression drive is “distant-site’, so its target gene is unlinked
from the drive allele, which is located in a female (or male) fertility gene. The drive disrupts the fertility gene, so
female drive homozygotes are sterile. Germline activity disrupts the target gene, and the nuclease promoter is
selected to minimize embryo activity. The target gene is haplolethal, so any individuals inheriting less than two
wild-type target alleles and/or drive alleles are non-viable. (B) The ability of the TADE suppression drive to
suppress a population. If the germline cleavage rate is 100%, suppression will occur. Otherwise, suppression will
only occur if the suppression factor is greater than the fitness advantage of individuals at low population density. (C)
The speed at which the TADE suppression drive reaches 99% of individuals in the population with varying
introduction frequency and drive fitness. (D) Same as C, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

TADDE drive. TADDE drives are simply TADE drives in which the rescue element either has
two recoded copies of the haplolethal gene or a sufficiently altered promoter to increase
expression of the rescue element. Thus, a single drive allele is sufficient to provide rescue even if
paired with a disrupted allele (Figure 5A). TADDE thus allows for removal of wild-type alleles
immediately after disruption in both males and females, while preventing removal of drivecarrying individuals, which occurs in TADE drive offspring when two drive heterozygotes mate.
This should allow it to spread more quickly (Figure 2B) with a lower threshold (Figure 1D) than
TADE or TARE systems, while otherwise still retaining similar dynamics (Figure 5B). Because
drive alleles are not removed when paired with disrupted targets, embryo resistance can be fully
tolerated (as well as somatic expression, as in TARE), though embryo cleavage does not
significantly increase the rate of spread of this drive when germline cleavage is high (Figure 5C).
Same-site and distant-site configurations of TADDE drive should be very similar except when
both germline and embryo cleavage rates are exceptionally low (Figure S5).

Figure 5. TADDE drive. (A) In the TADDE drive, germline activity disrupts the target gene, and embryo activity is
optional (and preferred unless germline cleavage is 100%). The target gene is haplolethal, so any individuals
inheriting at least one disrupted target allele are non-viable unless they also inherit a drive allele, which encodes two
copies of the gene or provides sufficient expression of the target gene such that only one copy is needed for rescue.
(B) The speed at which the TADDE drive reaches 99% of individuals in the population with varying introduction
frequency and drive fitness. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

TADS drive. TADS drives target a gene that is expressed in gametocytes after meiosis I in
males, and this expression must be critical for successful spermatogenesis such that sperm with a
disrupted target allele are non-viable. Thus, only sperm with drive or wild-type alleles will
successfully fertilize eggs (Figure 6A). This is expected to directly increases the frequency of the
drive allele in the population, allowing for rapid spread of the drive (Figure 1B). However, the
rate of spread would be somewhat reduced if females can mate with multiple males and sperm
compete to fertilize eggs. Because the frequency of the drive allele directly increases, the drive
has a zero-introduction threshold (Figure 6B) and would therefore not be expected to remain
regionally confined. Somatic expression would likely be fully tolerated for such a drive, and it
should also allow for wide variety of promoters varying in both germline and embryo cut rates
(Figure 6C), yet finding a suitable target gene will likely be difficult. In distant-site configuration
(Figure S6A), TADS drive is similar to the same-site drive, although as with the other types of
drive, distant-site TADS should perform better than same-site TADS when both germline and
embryo cleavage rates are very low (Figure S6B-C).

Figure 6. TADS drive. (A) In the TADS drive, germline activity disrupts the target gene, followed by embryo
activity in the progeny of drive-carrying females. The target gene has expression in male gametocytes after meiosis
I, and such expression is necessary for development of a viable sperm. Thus, sperm with disrupted alleles are nonviable. All sperm with a wild-type or drive allele are viable. (B) The speed at which the TADS drive reaches 99% of
individuals in the population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness. (C) Same as B, but with varying
germline and embryo cleavage rate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

TADS suppression drive. A distant-site TADS drive can be configured for population
suppression by placement in a recessive male fertility (or viability) gene, disrupting the gene
with its presence (Figure 7A). Thus, male drive homozygotes would be sterile. Because the drive
works during spermatogenesis, it would be unable to provide any substantial suppression if
located in a female (or both-sex) fertility or viability gene. However, in a male fertility gene, it
would be expected to cause complete population suppression with zero introduction threshold
(Figure 7B) nearly as rapidly as homing drives and X-shredders (Figure 1C). The suppression
form of TADS is less tolerant of low embryo and germline cut rates than modification TADS
systems, but it can still achieve success over a wide range of values (Figure 7C).

Figure 7. TADS suppression drive. (A) The TADS suppression drive is “distant-site’, located in a male fertility
gene and with a target gene that is unlinked from the drive allele. The drive disrupts the fertility gene, so male drive
homozygotes are sterile. Germline activity disrupts the target gene, followed by embryo activity in the progeny of
drive-carrying females. The target gene has expression in male gametocytes after meiosis I, and such expression is
necessary for development of a viable sperm. Thus, sperm with a disrupted target allele are non-viable unless they
also have a drive allele. (B) The speed at which the TADS suppression drive reaches 99% of individuals in the
population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness. Full suppression would occur within a few
generations of this point. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate.

TADS Y-linked suppression drive. If a distant-site TADS drive is located on the Y
chromosome (with an autosomal target), it will bias inheritance in favor of males (Figure 8A).
This is expected to induce a germline cut rate-dependent suppression factor on a population
(Figure 8B) after the drive fixates. According to our deterministic models, the suppression factor
should be twice that of an X-shredder with a similar X-shredding rate. The dynamics of an ideal
TADS Y-linked suppression drive should otherwise be almost identical to that of an ideal X-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

shredder (Figure 1C). The drive has a zero-threshold introduction frequency and is highly
tolerant of both fitness costs (Figure 9C) and low germline cut rates (Figure 9D), though the
germline cut rate will still need to induce a sufficient suppression factor if complete suppression
is desired. A TADS suppression system could also be located on the X-chromosome, similarly
biasing inheritance in favor of females and eventually inducing population suppression.

Figure 8. TADS Y-linked suppression drive. (A) The TADS Y-linked suppression drive is “distant-site’. It is
located on the Y-chromosome and has a target gene that is not linked to the drive allele. Germline activity disrupts
the target gene, followed by embryo activity in the progeny of drive-carrying females. The target gene has
expression in male gametocytes after meiosis I, and such expression is necessary for development of a viable sperm.
Thus, sperm with a disrupted target allele are non-viable unless they also have a drive allele. (B) The ability of the
TADS Y-linked suppression drive to suppress a population. If the germline cleavage rate is 100%, suppression will
occur. Otherwise, suppression will occur only if the suppression factor is greater than the fitness advantage of
individuals at low population density. (C) The speed at which the TADS suppression drive reaches 99% of
individuals in the population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness. Full suppression or an
equilibrium state will be attained within a few generations of this point. (D) Same as C, but with varying germline
cleavage rate (the Y-linked drive can only be in males, so there would likely not be embryo cleavage - however, if
there was paternal activity due to unusually high nuclease/gRNA expression or stability, this would be expected to
further increase drive efficiency).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Resistance to TA systems. With a modest degree of multiplexing, TA systems should generate
substantially fewer resistance alleles than homing type drives without sacrificing drive
performance, since there is no need for homology-directed repair. To study the rates at which r1
alleles (those which preserve the function of the target gene) are expected to form in such
systems, we assumed that cleavage repair at a single site had a 10% probability of forming an r1
allele (instead of a disrupted allele), which appears to be near the upper end of the potential range
of this parameter based on experiments15–17 (and by careful targeting, a significantly lower rate
can be achieved24). The presence of a single disrupted site was considered to be sufficient to
render the target gene disrupted, so to form a complete r1 allele, it was necessary to form an r1
sequence at each gRNA target site.
In drives with this high r1 formation rate, 100% efficiency, and assuming that drive homozygotes
had a relative fitness of 95% compared to wild-type homozygotes, a single gRNA was not
sufficient to allow for success of TARE, TADE, TADDE, or TADS same-site modification
drives (Figure 9). Though all drives initially increased in frequency rapidly, the small fitness cost
of the drive coupled with the high rate of r1 formation resulted in elimination of most drive
alleles after 100 generations for TARE, TADE, and TADS. TADDE performed better, since r1
alleles would not be viable in the presence of a disrupted allele, while drive alleles would remain
viable. Nonetheless, the final frequency of r1 alleles was still high for a scenario with only one
gRNA. However, as the number of gRNAs increases, the number of r1 alleles that remain
decreases drastically (Figure 9), indicating that for even very large populations, a modest number
of gRNAs would likely be sufficient to preclude formation of resistance against the TA drives.
Indeed, our calculations may substantially overestimate the number of r1 alleles formed, perhaps
even greater than 100-fold. This is not only because we assumed a high proportion of repair
resulting in r1 sequences, but also because the possibility for simultaneous cutting was not
included in our deterministic model. However, such events should take place a substantial
fraction of the time, particularly as the number gRNAs increases, and even one instance of
simultaneous gRNA cleavage would likely cause a large enough deletion to prevent formation of
an r1 allele. Additionally, homology-directed repair of drive cleavage using disrupted alleles as a
template would likely preclude the formation of r1 alleles, which was also not taken into account
in our model. Highly spaced gRNAs would reduce the chance of this taking place, but also
increase the chance of successful disruption of the gene, making optimization of gRNA target
spacing a potentially important consideration when designing these drives.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure 9. Resistance to TA systems. Simulations were conducted for drive systems with 100% cleavage rates
(germline only for TADE) and 95% drive homozygote fitness. Each cleavage event was assumed to result in a
functional r1 allele instead of a disrupted target allele with 10% probability. The number of gRNAs was varied, and
a resistance allele was considered to be a functional “complete” r1 allele only if all gRNA cleavage sites possessed
r1 sequences. The complete r1 allele frequency after 100 generations is reported.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we have shown that TA gene drive systems should allow for the development of
robust population modification or suppression drives that can be global or regionally confined.
These systems have several major advantages over existing strategies (Table 1).
Most importantly, TA systems should be far less vulnerable to the formation of resistance alleles
than homing drives. Multiplexing can somewhat ameliorate the formation of the more critical r1
alleles in homing drives, but this comes at the cost of reduced drive efficiency due to a variety of
factors involved in homology-directed repair16. For population modification drives, it would
likely be necessary for a homing drive to also target essential genes to reduce the rate of r1
resistance allele formation, opening up the possibility for partial homology-directed repair to
continue to form r1 alleles, possibly at rates that would preclude success of the drive. TA drives
are not expected to suffer from any efficiency loss upon multiplexing, allowing for effective
elimination of r1 alleles given a sufficient number of gRNAs (Figure 9). Drive alleles are not
typically copied in the early embryo by homology-directed repair, and only resistance alleles can
form in this stage15–17. This gives homing drives a disadvantage compared to TARE, TADDE,
and TADS drives, where cleavage events in the embryo would actually be beneficial for the
drive. Medea avoids the formation of resistance by use of RNAi as the drive mechanism, and TA
type drives could presumably be engineered similarly to use shRNAs or other RNAi taking effect

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

during early embryo development, though this would somewhat limit the available array of
potential gene targets to those with critical function at a developmental stage before the maternal
RNAi is degraded.
Another potential advantage of TA systems, except TADS, is their threshold-dependent
dynamics. This would have the effect of preventing establishment of the drive by occasional
long-distance migration, thus confining the drives to a target region. While global drives may be
desirable for reduction of vector-borne disease, regional confinement could often be important
for political, economic, or conservation purposes1,2,26. TA systems allow for both regional
population modification and suppression, giving scientists and policy-makers increased
flexibility when considering the deployment of gene drives.
Table 1. Comparison of Drive Types.
Threshold*/
Drive Type
Speed
Confinement
Homing
High
Zero
Homing Suppression
High
Zero
X-Shredder
High
Zero
Medea
Medium
Low
Wolbachia/2L2T**
Low
Medium
Underdominance
Low
High
TARE
Medium
Low
TADE
Medium
Low
TADE Suppression
Medium
Medium
TADDE
Medium
Low
TADS
High#
Zero
TADS Suppression
High#
Zero
TADS Y Suppression
High#
Zero

Promoter
Germline
Germline
Germline
Specific
Any
Varies
Any
Germline
Germline
Any
Any
Any
Any

Potential for
Resistance
High
Moderate##
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low
Low

Engineering
Difficulty
Low
Low
High
High
Low?
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate?
High?
High?
High?

*Thresholds assume a small fitness cost for the drive. Threshold is an indirect measure for the degree of
confinement. Zero-threshold drives will potentially spread globally, low and medium levels of confinement will
constitute regional drives (possibly local for larger fitness costs), and high threshold systems should remain in a
local area, if they are able to successfully persist34.
**A 2-Locus 2-Toxin-antitoxin (2L2T) underdominance design with two TARE-like alleles.
#The speed of a TADS drive is reduced if target species females can mate multiple times and sperm from different
males compete to fertilize eggs.
##Moderate for formation of resistance, but effects of resistance have a more drastic impact for suppression drives
than other types of drives.

Aside from the configurations presented in this manuscript, the same principles could potentially
be applied to other designs. For example, to achieve a greater degree of local confinement (at the
costs of greater release sizes, as is usually the case with such systems), a 2-locus 2-toxin-antidote

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

system could be engineered by using two TARE systems, each of which providing rescue for the
target gene of the other system. Such a system could presumably be engineered quite easily and
combined with a tethered33 homing suppression drive. Note, however, that the germline-only
nuclease promoter needed for homing in this case may slow down the TA underdominance drive
due to lack of embryo activity. An alternative would be to use two different nucleases in the
underdominance TARE components. Local suppression could also be obtained with a similar 2locus TADE system, with one of the TADE alleles disrupting a sex-specific fertility gene, as in
TADE suppression. Indeed, a standard TADE suppression system with a promoter that has high
embryo activity could itself be a feasible method for local population suppression. Alternatively,
either of these TADE methods could be used for modification if not located in a fertility gene.
Indeed, a TARE drive with a target that is not fully haplosufficient might also constitute an
effective underdominance-type drive. Each of these systems should be possible to engineer with
current techniques and targets that are already available.
TA systems have a high degree of flexibility regarding target genes. TARE systems would likely
be most efficient when using recessive lethal targets that take effect in the early embryo, to
reduce competition for surviving drive-bearing offspring. However, other recessive lethal or
sterile targets (including sex-specific) could also be used. TADE targets should be haplolethal,
but a high degree of haploinsufficieny will usually also be tolerable, thus allowing for some
flexibility in target selection. On the other hand, TADS targets are highly specific, and this will
likely be the limiting factor in engineering these systems. Several genes have been found in
Drosophila melanogaster with post-meiosis I expression in males35–37, yet it remains to be seen
if a gene can be identified for which expression in this interval is necessary for successful
completion of spermatogenesis, thus making it a potential TADS target. It should also be noted
that while efforts to design a successful X-shredder system have been stymied by low transgene
expression from the Y chromosome, TADS Y-suppression systems may not suffer from this,
since they would only need to cleave a few targets in a single gene, rather than dozens of targets
simultaneously across an entire chromosome.
Overall, our study shows that TA systems can provide flexible and effective mechanisms for a
variety of potential gene drive applications. Their feasibility has already been demonstrated for
TARE in D. melanogaster for same-site29 and distant-site30 configurations. Future experiments
should investigate the feasibility and dynamics of the other TA drives we have proposed here
and how they can be brought to other species of interest such as mosquitoes. Modeling should
further explore how these proposed systems would behave in more realistic, spatially structured
populations.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This study was supported by the National Institutes of Health award R01GM127418 to P.W.M.,
National Institutes of Health award R21AI130635 to J.C., A.G.C., and P.W.M, and the National
Institutes of Health award F32AI138476 to J.C.

REFERENCES
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.

10.

11.

12.

13.

14.
15.

Esvelt KM, Smidler AL, Catteruccia F, Church GM. Concerning RNA-guided gene drives
for the alteration of wild populations. Elife, e03401, 2014.
Champer J, Buchman A, Akbari OS. Cheating evolution: engineering gene drives to
manipulate the fate of wild populations. Nat Rev Genet, 17, 146–159, 2016.
Burt A. Heritable strategies for controlling insect vectors of disease. Philos Trans R Soc L
B Biol Sci, 369, 20130432, 2014.
Unckless RL, Messer PW, Connallon T, Clark AG. Modeling the manipulation of natural
populations by the mutagenic chain reaction. Genetics, 201, 425–431, 2015.
Alphey L. Genetic control of mosquitoes. Annu Rev Entomol, 59, 205–224, 2014.
Noble C, Olejarz J, Esvelt K, Church G, Nowak M. Evolutionary dynamics of CRISPR
gene drives. Sci Adv, 3, e1601964, 2017.
Deredec A, Godfray HC, Burt A. Requirements for effective malaria control with homing
endonuclease genes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 108, E874-80, 2011.
DiCarlo JE, Chavez A, Dietz SL, Esvelt KM, Church GM. Safeguarding CRISPR-Cas9
gene drives in yeast. Nat Biotechnol, 33, 1250–1255, 2015.
Roggenkamp E, Giersch RM, Schrock MN, Turnquist E, Halloran M, Finnigan GC.
Tuning CRISPR-Cas9 gene drives in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. G3, 8, g3.300557.2017,
2018.
Basgall EM, Goetting SC, Goeckel ME, Giersch RM, Roggenkamp E, Schrock MN,
Halloran M, Finnigan GC. Gene drive inhibition by the anti-CRISPR proteins AcrIIA2
and AcrIIA4 in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Microbiology, 2018.
Shapiro RS, Chavez A, Porter CBM, Hamblin M, Kaas CS, DiCarlo JE, Zeng G, Xu X,
Revtovich A V., Kirienko N V., Wang Y, Church GM, Collins JJ. A CRISPR–Cas9-based
gene drive platform for genetic interaction analysis in Candida albicans. Nat Microbiol, 3,
73–82, 2018.
Oberhofer G, Ivy T, Hay BA. Behavior of homing endonuclease gene drives targeting
genes required for viability or female fertility with multiplexed guide RNAs. Proc Natl
Acad Sci, 115, E9343–E9352, 2018.
KaramiNejadRanjbar M, Eckermann KN, Ahmed HMM, Sánchez C. HM, Dippel S,
Marshall JM, Wimmer EA. Consequences of resistance evolution in a Cas9-based sexconversion suppression gene drive for insect pest management. Proc Natl Acad Sci,
201713825, 2018.
Gantz VM, Bier E. Genome editing. The mutagenic chain reaction: a method for
converting heterozygous to homozygous mutations. Science (80- ), 348, 442–444, 2015.
Champer J, Reeves R, Oh SY, Liu C, Liu J, Clark AG, Messer PW. Novel CRISPR/Cas9
gene drive constructs reveal insights into mechanisms of resistance allele formation and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

16.

17.
18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.
26.
27.
28.

29.
30.
31.

drive efficiency in genetically diverse populations. PLoS Genet, 13, e1006796, 2017.
Champer J, Liu J, Oh SY, Reeves R, Luthra A, Oakes N, Clark AG, Messer PW.
Reducing resistance allele formation in CRISPR gene drive. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 115,
5522–5527, 2018.
Champer J, Chung J, Lee YL, Liu C, Yang E, Wen Z, Clark AG, Messer PW. Molecular
safeguarding of CRISPR gene drive experiments. Elife, 8, 2019.
Champer J, Wen Z, Luthra A, Reeves R, Chung J, Liu C, Lee YL, Liu J, Yang E, Messer
PW, Clark AG. CRISPR gene drive efficiency and resistance rate is highly heritable with
no common genetic loci of large effect. Genetics, 2019.
Hammond AM, Kyrou K, Bruttini M, North A, Galizi R, Karlsson X, Kranjc N, Carpi
FM, D’Aurizio R, Crisanti A, Nolan T. The creation and selection of mutations resistant to
a gene drive over multiple generations in the malaria mosquito. PLOS Genet, 13,
e1007039, 2017.
Hammond A, Galizi R, Kyrou K, Simoni A, Siniscalchi C, Katsanos D, Gribble M, Baker
D, Marois E, Russell S, Burt A, Windbichler N, Crisanti A, Nolan T. A CRISPR-Cas9
gene drive system targeting female reproduction in the malaria mosquito vector Anopheles
gambiae. Nat Biotechnol, 34, 78–83, 2015.
Gantz VM, Jasinskiene N, Tatarenkova O, Fazekas A, Macias VM, Bier E, James AA.
Highly efficient Cas9-mediated gene drive for population modification of the malaria
vector mosquito Anopheles stephensi. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 112, E6736–E6743,
2015.
Grunwald HA, Gantz VM, Poplawski G, Xu X-RS, Bier E, Cooper KL. Super-Mendelian
inheritance mediated by CRISPR–Cas9 in the female mouse germline. Nature, 566, 105–
109, 2019.
Hammond AM, Kyrou K, Gribble M, Karlsson X, Morianou I, Galizi R, Beaghton A,
Crisanti A, Nolan T. Improved CRISPR-based suppression gene drives mitigate resistance
and impose a large reproductive load on laboratory-contained mosquito populations.
bioRxiv, 360339, 2018.
Kyrou K, Hammond AM, Galizi R, Kranjc N, Burt A, Beaghton AK, Nolan T, Crisanti A.
A CRISPR-Cas9 gene drive targeting doublesex causes complete population suppression
in caged Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. Nat Biotechnol, 2018.
Noble C, Adlam B, Church GM, Esvelt KM, Nowak MA. Current CRISPR gene drive
systems are likely to be highly invasive in wild populations. Elife, 7, 2018.
Esvelt KM, Gemmell NJ. Conservation demands safe gene drive. PLoS Biol, 15,
e2003850, 2017.
Burt A, Crisanti A. Gene Drive: Evolved and Synthetic. ACS Chem Biol, 13, 343–346,
2018.
Chen CH, Huang H, Ward CM, Su JT, Schaeffer L V, Guo M, Hay BA. A synthetic
maternal-effect selfish genetic element drives population replacement in Drosophila.
Science (80- ), 316, 597–600, 2007.
Champer J, Lee YL, Yang E, Liu C, Clark AG, Messer PW. A toxin-antidote CRISPR
gene drive system for regional population modification. bioRxiv, 2019.
Oberhofer G, Ivy T, Hay BA. Cleave and Rescue, a novel selfish genetic element and
general strategy for gene drive. Proc Natl Acad Sci, 201816928, 2019.
Haller BC, Messer PW. SLiM 3: Forward Genetic Simulations Beyond the Wright–Fisher
Model. Mol Biol Evol, 36, 632–637, 2019.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

32.
33.
34.
35.

36.
37.

Courchamp, Clutton-Brock, Grenfell. Inverse density dependence and the Allee effect.
Trends Ecol Evol, 14, 405–410, 1999.
Dhole S, Loyd AL, Gould F. Tethered homing gene drives: a new design for spatially
restricted population replacement and suppression. bioRxiv, 457564, 2018.
Champer J, Zhao J, Champer SE, Liu J, Messer PW. Population dynamics of
underdominance gene drive systems in continuous space. bioRxiv, 449355, 2018.
Barreau C, Benson E, White-Cooper H. Comet and cup genes in Drosophila
spermatogenesis: the first demonstration of post-meiotic transcription. Biochem Soc
Trans, 36, 540–542, 2008.
Barreau C, Benson E, Gudmannsdottir E, Newton F, White-Cooper H. Post-meiotic
transcription in Drosophila testes. Development, 135, 1897–1902, 2008.
Vibranovski MD, Chalopin DS, Lopes HF, Long M, Karr TL. Direct evidence for
postmeiotic transcription during Drosophila melanogaster spermatogenesis. Genetics,
186, 431–433, 2010.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Figure S1. Frequency of individuals with at least one drive allele. Drive heterozygote
individuals are released into a wild-type population at 20% starting frequency (10% starting
drive allele frequency) in a discrete-generation, deterministic model. All drives are assumed to
have no fitness cost and 100% drive efficiency. The frequency of individuals with at least one
drive allele is shown.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure S2. Distant-site and X-linked TARE. (A) In the distant-site TARE drive, the target
gene is unlinked from the drive allele. Individuals with two disrupted target alleles without any
drive alleles are not viable. (B) The speed at which the distant-site TARE drive reaches 99% of
individuals in the population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness compared to
the same-site drive. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate. (D) In
an X-linked TARE drive, males with only one disrupted copy of the target gene are not viable.
(E) This allows an X-linked drive to reach fixation substantially more quickly than and
autosomal TARE drive. (F) The speed at which the same-site X-linked TARE drive reaches 99%
of individuals in the population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness compared
to the autosomal same-site drive.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure S3. Distant-site TADE. (A) In the distant-site TADE drive, the target gene is unlinked
from the drive allele. Individuals with fewer than two wild-type target alleles plus drive alleles
not viable. (B) The speed at which the distant-site TADE drive reaches 99% of individuals in the
population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness compared to the same-site
drive. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure S4. Haploinsufficiency in TADE suppression. If the target allele is not haplolethal but
merely haploinsufficient, a TADE suppression drive will impose a suppression factor on the
population, which may not cause complete suppression, depending on species and ecological
parameters, as well as the degree of haoloinsufficiency.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure S5. Distant-site TADDE. (A) In the distant-site TADDE drive, the target gene is
unlinked from the drive allele. Individuals with at least one disrupted target allele are not viable
unless they have at least one drive allele. (B) The speed at which the distant-site TADDE drive
reaches 99% of individuals in the population with varying introduction frequency and drive
fitness compared to the same-site drive. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo
cleavage rate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/628362; this version posted May 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Figure S6. Distant-site TADS. (A) In the distant-site TADS drive, the target gene is unlinked
from the drive allele. Sperm with a disrupted target allele are not viable unless they also have a
drive allele. (B) The speed at which the distant-site TADS drive reaches 99% of individuals in
the population with varying introduction frequency and drive fitness compared to the same-site
drive. (C) Same as B, but with varying germline and embryo cleavage rate.

