bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

DNA barcoding reveals that injected transgenes are predominantly processed by
homologous recombination in mouse zygote

Alexander Smirnov1, Anastasia Yunusova1, Alexey Korablev1, Irina Serova1, Veniamin
Fishman1, 2, Nariman Battulin1, 2

1. Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS, Novosibirsk, Russia
2. Novosibirsk State University, Novosibirsk, Russia

Email addresses: AS hldn89@gmail.com; AY yunusova-nastya92@mail.ru; AK:
korablevalexeyn@gmail.com; IS irina_serova2004@mail.ru; V.F. minja-f@ya.ru; N.R.
battulin@bionet.nsc.ru;

AS and NB are corresponding authors.

Abstract
Mechanisms that ensure repair of double-stranded DNA breaks play a key role in the
integration of foreign DNA into the genome of transgenic organisms. After pronuclear
microinjection, exogenous DNA is usually found in the form of concatemer consisting of multiple
co-integrated transgene copies. Here we investigated contribution of various DSB repair
pathways to the concatemer formation. We injected a pool of linear DNA molecules carrying
unique barcodes at both ends into mouse zygotes and obtained 10 transgenic embryos with
transgene copy number ranging from 1 to 300 copies. Sequencing of the barcodes allowed us to
assign relative positions to the copies in concatemers and to detect recombination events that
happened during integration. Cumulative analysis of approximately 1000 integrated copies
revealed that more than 80% of copies underwent recombination when their linear ends were
processed by SDSA or DSBR. We also observed evidence of double Holliday junction (dHJ)
formation and crossing-over during the formation of concatemers. Additionally, sequencing of
indels between copies showed that at least 10% of the DNA molecules introduced into the zygote
are ligated by non-homologous end joining (NHEJ). Our barcoding approach documents high
activity of homologous recombination after exogenous DNA injection in mouse zygote.
Keywords: pronuclear microinjection; DNA barcoding; transgenic animals; DSB repair;
concatemer; DSBR; SDSA; NHEJ; mismatch repair; mouse zygotes; dHJ; somatic crossing-over.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Genetically modified organisms have become an important element of biomedical
research (1), production of pharmaceutical proteins (2), and in agriculture (3). Despite the
widespread use of transgenic organisms, many long-standing questions remain unanswered,
especially concerning molecular mechanisms involved in DNA integration. It is known that the
repair of double-stranded breaks (DSBs) plays an important role during genome editing and
integration of foreign DNA into the genome. Homologous recombination (HR) and
nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) are the two major pathways responsible for DSB repair in
eukaryotic cells. The majority of random DSBs in somatic cells are repaired by NHEJ (4), while
HR is necessary to resolve more specific problems such as rescuing a stalled replication fork or
providing recombination in meiosis (5). Homology-based pathways involve invasion of singlestranded DNA filaments originating from DSB ends into homologous template region, resulting in
formation of a D-loop and DNA synthesis. Different HR outcomes are possible, depending on the
D-loop processing (6). In synthesis-dependent strand annealing (SDSA), restored DNA end is
released after D-loop disruption, and anneals with the second DSB end. Break-induced replication
(BIR) initiates long-range DNA synthesis in the absence of a second DSB end (replication fork
collapse or telomere shortening). Double-strand break repair (DSBR) operates when the
displaced strand from template anneals to the second broken DNA end. This way, both invading
ends become physically linked in a double Holliday junction (dHJ) that could be resolved with or
without crossing-over (6). With the development of CRISPR-based genome editing, the focus has
shifted to other roles of DNA repair pathways: HR is exploited for precise genetic modifications,
such as transgene knock-ins, and NHEJ is used to knock-out genes (7, 8). The obvious
importance of these pathways for the field of genome editing serves as a driver for studying
activity of these pathways in different cells (9, 10); understanding crosstalk between NHEJ and
HR (11); and for developing new methods for the preferential activation of a particular pathway
(12). Modification of the genome at the zygote stage is an advantageous method for obtaining
genetically modified animals. However, in the literature there is no quantitative estimate of the
activity of these DNA repair pathways in the early mammalian embryogenesis.
We decided to test the activity of various ways of processing double-stranded breaks in
mouse zygotes after pronuclear microinjection of genetic constructs. In this method, exogenous
DNA solution is injected inside the pronucleus that contains genetic material of the sperm or egg
prior to fertilization (13). Usually, hundreds to thousands of DNA molecules are injected and
processed subsequently by cellular DNA repair machinery, resulting in a stable DNA integration.
Extensive work of many pioneer groups in the early years of transgenesis revealed several
prominent features of pronuclear microinjection (14, 15). For instance, transgenes always
integrate at one or few sites in the host genome and most of the transgene copies are prevalently
arranged into head-to-tail tandemly oriented copies (concatemers) (data aggregated in Sup.
Table 1). Here we investigated mechanisms of exogenous DNA molecule processing by

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

combining the classical approach of pronuclear microinjection with transgene barcoding
technique and next-generation sequencing (NGS). Barcoding strategy was initially applied to
address individual cell fates among heterogeneous cell population (16, 17) and could be extended
to trace transgene copies as well. Ten transgenic mouse embryos with varying amount of
barcoded transgenes were analyzed with NGS to read terminal barcodes of each integrated
transgene copy. Knowing initial barcode tags of the injected transgenes we could reconstitute
connections of most of the transgene copies in concatemers and found various signatures of
homology-based DNA repair pathways.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Materials and methods
Cloning of the barcoded vector library
Plasmid pcDNA3-Clover (Addgene #40259) was used as a base vector for cloning
barcodes. Vector was digested with PciI, dephosphorylated and ligated with short adapter
fragment, introducing SbfI and NheI recognition sites. These sites were used to insert 500 bp
PCR product amplified from human genome with primers carrying barcode sequences. Human
region was selected to avoid potential recombination of the transgene ends with mouse genome.
Sequences

of

the

barcoded

primers

were

as

5'- CCTGCAGGNNCGANNGCANNTGCNNCTTGAATGACAACTAGTGCTCCAGG -3'

follows:
(Primer

with Tail barcode), 5'- GCTAGCNNACTNNGATNNGGTNNCTATCCTGACCCTGCTTGGCT -3'
(Primer with Head barcode) (Sup. Fig. 1). Barcoded plasmid library was electroporated into Top10
cells, plated and extracted using GeneJET Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).
Number of colonies was estimated to be around 10000 individual clones.

Generation of the transgenic embryos by pronuclear microinjection and PCR genotyping
Barcoded plasmid library was linearized with type IIS BsmBI restriction enzyme to provide
incompatible 4bp overhangs (250bp distance from each barcode). Digested DNA was gel purified
and eluted from the agarose gel using Diagene columns (Dia-M, Russia) according to the
manufacturer’s recommendations. Eluate was additionally purified with AMPure XP magnetic
beads (Beckman Coulter, USA) and finally dissolved in TE microinjection buffer (0.01 M Tris–HCl,
0.25 mM EDTA, pH 7.4). Fertilized oocytes were collected from superovulated F1 (CBA x
C57BL/6) females crossed with C57BL/6 males. DNA was injected into the male pronuclei (1-2 pl
~ 1000-2000 copies) as described elsewhere (18). Microinjected zygotes were transferred into
oviducts of recipient pseudopregnant CD-1 females. Embryos were extracted at the 13.5 day of
development and PCR genotyped with primers for Clover backbone or transgene-transgene
junctions (same primers that we used for generating NGS PCR products) (Sup. Table 3). TAILPCR was performed as described earlier (19) with primers complementary to the 5’- or 3’-ends of
the transgene (Sup. Table 3). Conventional PCR reactions with Taq, Q5 or LongAmp
polymerases (NEB, USA) were set up to amplify various rearrangements in concatemer structure,
study copy order with barcode-specific primers and validate transgene-genomic borders (Sup.
Table 3).
All experiments were conducted at the Centre for Genetic Resources of Laboratory
Animals at the Institute of Cytology and Genetics, SB RAS (RFMEFI61914X0005 and
RFMEFI61914X0010). All experiments were performed in accordance with protocols and
guidelines approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee Federal Research Centre of the
Institute of Cytology and Genetics, SB RAS operating under standards set by regulations
documents Federal Health Ministry (2010/708n/RF), NRC and FELASA recommendations.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Experimental protocols were approved by the Bioethics Review Committee of the Institute of
Cytology and Genetics.

Copy number quantification by ddPCR
Droplet Digital PCR (ddPCR) was performed using ddPCR Supermix for Probes (No
dUTP)

and

QX100

ddPCR

Systems

(Bio-Rad,

USA)

according

to

manufacturer’s

recommendations. The 20 μl reaction contained 1× ddPCR Supermix, 900 nM primers, 250 nM
probes and 3-60 ng digested genomic DNA. We adjusted input DNA quantity for each embryo to
account for tissue mosaicism and transgene copy number variation which affected
transgene:control relative dilutions in every embryo. We tested various restriction digestion
conditions in order to reliable separate all transgene copies (Sup. Fig. 3) and decided to perform
overnight digestions with HindIII-HF or DpnII (NEB, USA) in CutSmart buffer. Transgene copy
number (Clover gene) was normalized to Emid1 control gene (Codner et al., 2016) or the unique
transgene-genome border region (identified for four embryos). PCR was conducted according to
the following program: 95 °C for 10 min, then 40 cycles of 95 °C for 30 s and 61 °C for 1 min, with
a final step of 98 °C for 7 min and 20 °C for 30 min. All steps had a ramp rate of 2 °C per second.
ddPCR was performed in two independent technical replicates. Sequences for primers and
probes are available in Sup. Table 3. Data were analyzed using QuantaSoft (Bio-Rad, USA).

DNA library preparation for NGS
NGS library 1 (original barcoded plasmids): barcoded plasmid library was digested with
NheI and SbfI (Fig. 1A). 640 bp DNA fragment with a pair of barcodes was gel purified, eluted in
TE buffer and sequenced.
NGS library 2 (PCR of the barcoded transgene-transgene junctions): Concatemer
junctions containing barcodes were PCR amplified using Q5 polymerase (Fig. 1C). PCR
conditions were tested to avoid accumulation of PCR artifacts in late cycles and to account for
copy number variation between embryos (range of 0.2 copies to 300 copies). PCR program: 98°C
for 30 s, then 25-30 cycles of 98°C for 15 s, 64°C for 30 s, 72°C for 1 min, with 3 min of final
extension at 72°C. 25 µl of PCR reaction were purified using AMPure XP magnetic beads
(Beckman Coulter, USA), eluted in TE buffer and sequenced. In order to obtain additional
information about transgene-transgene junctions we also sought to sequence PCR products
corresponding to the internal junctions (100 bp from BsmBI cut site) in three multicopy lines
(embryos #2, 3, 7). To stay in the range of acceptable read length (~150 bp) we used one primer
close to the junction and another one flanking barcode (primer pairs 2+14 and 1+13 at Sup. Fig.
6). PCR products were generated for both orientations. This way, a unique signature of the
trimmed junction could be assigned to specific barcodes (Fig. 6).
NGS library 3 (inverse PCR of the barcoded transgene ends): Genomic DNA from
transgenic embryos was digested overnight with excess of PciI enzyme that cuts 87 bp away from

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

one of the barcodes, inside the junction (Fig. 1B). Digested DNA was purified with AMPure XP
magnetic beads. To avoid incomplete digestion, sticky ends generated with PciI were filled-in with
Klenow enzyme to produce blunt ends. This signature was later used for filtering during sequence
analysis. After heat inactivation of Klenow enzyme (20 min at 75°C), 300 ng of digested DNA
were ligated overnight at 16°C in a large reaction volume (100 µl) to facilitate self-ligation of
transgene monomers. Terminal barcodes of self-ligated DNA fragments were PCR amplified with
Q5 polymerase with the same primers and conditions as were used for NGS library 2 generation.
To remove PCR fragments originating from undigested DNA, Illumina prepared adapter-ligated
PCR products were additionally treated with PciI, gel purified and used for sequencing. We have
prepared 10 libraries corresponding to 10 embryos and one control library representing a 1:1 mix
of self-ligated DNA from embryos #1 and #4 under the same conditions (150 ng + 150 ng of
digested genomic DNA in 100 µl ligation). Control library served as a quantitative measurement
of random transgene ligation as opposed to self-ligation.
DNA fragments from three libraries were prepared with NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep
Kit for Illumina (NEB, USA), pooled together and sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq 2500 platform
(Illumina, USA). Libraries were assessed using an Agilent 2100 bioanalyzer (Agilent, USA) and a
Qubit dsDNA HS assay kit (Life Technologies, USA).
All of the above experiments were performed using Q5 polymerase (NEB) to avoid PCR
artifacts (barcode mutations or switching), as it was shown that other polymerases have much
higher rate of strand conversion (20).

Computational data analysis
Overview of data processing pipeline
NGS data processing contained four steps. First, reads were trimmed using cutadapt to
remove constant sequences flanking barcodes. Second, read pairs were searched for complete
or partial match of barcode pattern (NN CGA NN GCA NN TGC NN for tail barcode, NN ACT NN
GAT NN GGT NN for head barcode) and pairs sharing identical barcodes were merged. This
results in initial set of barcode pairs, which was further filtered at the third step of the pipeline to
produce final set of pairs. These resulting pairs were visualized using Network module of the vis.js
framework (http://visjs.org/). All computations were performed using nodes of Novosibirsk State
University high-throughput computational cluster.

Reads trimming
We used cutadapt v. 1.15 (21) to perform reads trimming. For NGS Library 1 (initial
plasmid library) we ran cutadapt independently on each of two mates from the read pair, and then
combined obtained results. For NGS Library 2 (Junction PCR) we ran cutadapt in paired-end
mode using –G option, which allowed us to distinguish PCR products containing barcodes and
PCR products containing internal junction sequences. Each read pair may have one of two

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

orientations. In the Forward-Reverse orientation, first mate corresponds to the 5’-end of the PCR
product and the second mate corresponds to the 3’-end. In the Reverse-Forward orientation first
mate corresponds to the 3’-end and second mate to the 5’-end. To account for both orientations,
we ran cutadapt on the input data twice, each time searching for one of these two scenarios (see
Sup. Table 4), and combined obtained results. For NGS Library 3 (Inverse PCR), we first ran
cutadapt with adapter sequences, which include inverse PCR ligation junctions (cutadapt’s first
pass in the Sup. Table 4). We considered reads where inverse PCR ligation junction was present
as inverse PCR products, whereas reads with intact site of PciI enzyme were discarded, as they
represented junction between two adjacent transgene molecules. Since PciI site is located far
from barcode sequence, we ran cutadapt again on the reads, which, according to the first pass,
contained inverse PCR ligation junctions (second pass in the Supplementary Table 2). During
second pass, reads were trimmed immediately before barcode sequence, in a same manner as
we did for Library 1. Both first and second passes of cutadapt were executed independently for
each of two read mates, and obtained results were combined together. Details of cutadapt run
parameters are presented in Supplementary Table 2.

Barcode identification and reads merging
We used custom python script to analyze cutadapt output and count identical read pairs.
At this stage, we discarded reads which were too short (read length after trimming < 18 bp) and
reads with too low quality. As a quality threshold, we required that within 21 base pairs at the 5’end of the read, which presumably represent barcode sequence, all base calls had mapQ values
above 20.
Resulting dataset of read pairs was further analyzed using python regular expression
module to find barcode sequences within each read. Although all barcodes were supposed to
share similar pattern (NN CGA NN GCA NN TGC or NN ACT NN GAT NN GGT NN), we expected
that some of them might be slightly different due to errors, which may occur during oligonucleotide
synthesis. Thus, we composed a set of regular expressions covering both exact and partial
matches of barcode pattern (Sup. Table 5). Here, it is pertinent to note, that vast majority of
identified barcodes (~96%) perfectly matched expected pattern. Once barcode sequences were
identified in each read, we collapsed those read pairs, which have identical barcode sequence
followed by same or different 3’-endings. After the merging, we obtained dataset of pairs
hereinafter referred as barcode pairs, each characterized by 5’- and 3’-barcode sequences and
number of reads, supporting the pair.

Pairs filtering
PCR amplification may introduce mutations which can be interpreted as “novel” barcodes.
One can suppose that original sequences will be supported by higher number of reads than their
counterparts containing mutations introduced by PCR. However, it is not clear how to select the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

read count threshold reflecting this difference between correct and erroneous sequences. To
solve this problem, we employed the fact that correct barcode sequences should be shared
between embryo data (NGS Libraries 2 and 3) and initial plasmid library (NGS Library 1). For
each data, we gradually increased read count threshold and monitored increase of the overlap
between embryo’s and plasmid barcode sequences, and selected the point when overlap size
jumps. An example of such jump for the embryo #3 data is shown in Sup. Fig. 21. Note that for
some embryos these approach was not efficient, as overlap size gradually increases and there
was no defined jumping point. Thus, we always performed additional visual inspection of read
counts distribution to define optimal threshold. For Library 1 (initial plasmid library) analyses, we
used relaxed threshold of 8 reads.
After read counts filter, we removed all barcodes identified in embryo data, which were not
found in original barcoded plasmid data. At this filtering step, we made exception for those
barcodes that were within top 5% by read count in current dataset.
Next, we applied empirical thresholds for pair counts. As barcode pairs maybe shuffled by
the cellular DNA repair machinery, and thus pairs observed in embryo may not correspond to
pairs determined in initial plasmid library, we could not apply same strategy to find threshold count
as we did for barcodes. Thus, we manually selected thresholds for each sample based on read
counts distribution (provided in Sup. Table 6). Moreover, if barcode was observed in several pairs
in one embryo, we discarded pairs accounting for less than 1% of all paired reads containing this
barcode sequence. When processing initial plasmid library, we raised this threshold to 5%.

Availability of data and materials
The sequencing results will be available in the NCBI GEO database upon article acceptance.
Processed data (transgene “subway maps” in web-browser file format) are available in
supplementary (Sup. Files 1-10) and at http://icg.nsc.ru/ontogen/

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results
Generation of the barcoded concatemers by pronuclear microinjection
We decided to replicate conditions of a typical microinjection experiment. In order to
investigate the mechanisms leading to formation of concatemers we injected zygotes with a library
of transgene molecules labeled with unique DNA barcodes. The strategy for introducing barcodes
is shown in Figure 1A. A 7 Kb plasmid vector expressing Clover was tagged with two barcodes,
280 bp from the future ends (Sup. Fig. 1). We sought to find compromise between the length of
the DNA ends precluding barcodes, as longer fragments would preserve barcodes from
exonuclease trimming, while shorter ends are more suitable for generating PCR products for NGS
sequencing (about 700 bp in our case). We sequenced the DNA of the barcodes in the plasmids
and estimated that our library consists of 12,657 different molecules (Fig. 1A). This barcoded
plasmid library was linearized with BsmBI which cuts between two barcodes to generate
incompatible 4 nt 5’-overhangs. Linear DNA was subsequently injected into pronuclei following
standard protocol (each zygote received around 1000-2000 DNA molecules) and zygotes were
transferred into pseudopregnant foster mothers. Embryos were collected at the day E13.5 of
development and their DNA analyzed by PCR genotyping (Sup. Fig. 2). Out of 50 embryos, 10
turned out to be positive for the transgene integration (20%), constituting a normal outcome for
this method.

Determination of the transgene copy number
First, we quantified transgene copy number using droplet digital PCR (ddPCR). A pair of
probes was designed for multiplex ddPCR: (1) transgene-specific probe for the Clover gene in
the middle of the vector, and (2) standard reference probe for the gene Emid1 at chromosome 11
as control (tested in (22)). As seen in Sup. Fig. 4, transgene copy numbers varied greatly between
embryos. In some cases, this number was less than one copy due to mosaicism of the embryo
tissues (embryos #5 and #6) which resulted in dilution of the transgenic alleles with wild-type
alleles. Fortunately, we managed to obtain genomic localization information for some embryos,
using TAIL-PCR. Transgene-genomic border is a unique site that could be used as a probe target
region for ddPCR to implement mosaicism correction (Sup. Fig. 3). Thus, replacing the standard
reference Emid1 gene with a transgene-genome border specific probe allowed us to clarify copy
number for four of the embryos (Sup. Fig. 4). For example, embryo #4 had 23 copies corrected
to 45 (roughly 50% mosaicism), embryo #5 - 0.4 to 1, embryo #9 - 5 to 22, embryo #10 - 3.5 to 4.
In summary, we obtained 10 transgenic embryos with a broad distribution of transgene copy
numbers, ranging from 1 to ~300 copies, as expected in typical pronuclear microinjection
experiments (23).
Next-generation sequencing of DNA barcodes in the concatemers

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In order to understand internal structure and origin of concatemers, we sequenced
barcodes at the ends of the individual transgene copies. We performed two alternative
sequencing experiments. First, we applied the inverse PCR method to determine the head and
tail barcodes for each of the molecule in concatemer (Fig. 1B). This was important, considering
transgene recombination that may take place prior to integration. Genomic DNA from transgenic
embryos was digested with PciI endonuclease that makes a single cut inside transgenetransgene junctions (Fig. 1B). Ligation was performed in a highly diluted solution of digested DNA.
Such conditions favor self-ligation of individual transgenes - as a result, terminal barcodes come
close at a distance of about 700 bp, and they can be PCR amplified and sequenced using pairedend NGS. DNA sequencing of the inverse PCR library made it possible to establish genuine pairs
of barcodes at the ends of each transgene that constitute concatemers. Additionally, we directly
PCR amplified and sequenced barcodes at the transgene-transgene head-to-tail junctions to get
information about relative positions of molecules in concatemers (barcodes of adjacent copies)
(Fig. 1C).

Combining NGS information from all sequencing experiments (initial plasmid library +
inverse PCR + junction PCR) allowed us to collect comprehensive data on which transgene
molecules were injected into pronuclei, how each molecule changed during end processing, and
their relative positions inside concatemers. We visualized the structure of concatemers as a
graph, with nodes representing individual barcodes and edges corresponding to connections
(based on the NGS data for each of the transgenic embryos) (Fig. 2A) (Sup. Fig. 7-16) (Sup. Files
1-10). Figure 2A illustrates organization of all connections between barcodes of the embryo #9,
taken as an example. For clarity, each type of barcode connection was assigned one of three
colors. Green color – connection between two barcodes located on different ends of individual
molecule within concatemer (based on the inverse PCR data); red color - shorter connections that
correspond to the transgene-transgene junctions; blue color – copies that retained combinations
of barcodes that were present in the injected plasmid. We named these colored schemes
“transgene subway maps”. Counting of unique barcode connections in 10 embryos revealed more
than 1000 individual copies of barcoded transgenes (summed up in Table 1 and Sup. Fig. 4).
Amongst noteworthy map features are discontinuities in connection chains (embryo #1
and #9 are prominent examples) (Sup. Fig. 7, 15). The gaps obviously indicate lack of PCR
product connecting barcodes in our sequence reads. This could happen for two reasons. First,
transgene-genome borders are not subjects for PCR with our NGS primers, thus at least two
detached barcodes are ensured for any map. In addition, we cannot exclude multiple integration
events that will increase number of connection gaps. Partial transgene deletions and inversions
are another source of discontinuity: most of the gaps are certainly caused by NGS primer site
loss at the concatemer junctions. As expected, we detected many transgene deletions and
complex rearrangements with conventional PCR and TAIL-PCR. Number of transgene

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

rearrangements correlated with copy number for each embryo. Embryos #2, 3, 7, 8 have
hundreds of copies and plethora of rearrangements (Sup. Fig. 5). On the contrary, remaining
embryos had few (#4, 6, 9) or zero (#1, 5, 10) abnormal transgene junctions. The list of some
sequenced deletions and rearrangements is available in Supplementary material next to the
corresponding concatemer maps. Some interesting cases (embryos #9 and #10) are highlighted
in Discussion section (Sup. Fig. 15, 16).
Next, we inspected our NGS sequence data presented in a form of transgene “subway
map” to understand molecular mechanisms that lead to concatemer emergence.

De novo amplification does not contribute to concatemer formation
One of the motivations for our work was to test the hypothesis that rolling circle replication
or analogs can take part in the formation of a tandem of head-to-tail oriented copies (24). This
mechanism is used by some viruses of eukaryotes to amplify their genome (25), and is suspected
to participate in telomere maintenance (t-circles) (26) and in yeast mitochondria replication (27).
It is established that after microinjection some DNA copies can be circularized by NHEJ (28).
Such circular molecule could probably undergo rolling circle replication with the involvement of a
BIR-like mechanism and strand displacement, for example. Conceptually, this mechanism can be
a good candidate for the role of the constructor of tandemly oriented concatemers. However, in
our data we did not find any evidence supporting this hypothesis, since the number of unique
barcoded molecules found in concatemers was in good agreement with the estimates obtained
by the ddPCR method (Sup. Fig. 4), even in multicopy embryos (70-300 copies). Nevertheless,
in order to assess whether individual transgenes were amplified, we analyzed distribution of the
sequence read counts for each of the unique transgene copies (green connections). Although we
found several transgenes that had increased read counts, in most of these cases the shift was
explained by deletions in the transgene-transgene junction regions, resulting in shorter PCR
products which altered PCR kinetics. Still, there are several copies for which this technical
explanation does not work. Apparently, these are genuine examples of molecules that have
doubled their copy number (embryo #3 (Fig. 2B)). Although our data do not allow us to suggest a
non-contradictory mechanism for this phenomenon, it is worth noting that in our analysis there
were more than 1000 molecules in concatemers, of which only around 10 could be suspected of
amplification. Thus, we can conclude that the concatemers are formed by direct linkage of injected
molecules, rather than by de novo amplification mechanism.

HR is essential for concatemer formation
Our transgene “subway maps” illustrate high recombination activity that assembles
transgenes into concatemers, including barcode “switching” (green connections without paired
blue connections) and “branching” of the barcode nodes in the multicopy lines. We identified
several typical connection patterns in the transgene “subway maps” and proposed which of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

known DNA repair pathways could led to their formation. Of these, we examined NHEJ and two
sub pathways of HR - SDSA and DSBR (Sup. Fig. 17). First, it is important to note that identical
linear copies of DNA cannot be combined by HR mechanism without template region bridging two
copies. Therefore, the formation of any concatemer undoubtedly begins with non-homologous
end joining. However, aside from initial ligation, NHEJ plays only a minor role in assembling
concatemers (see estimates in next chapters). For example, as seen in Figure 2A, in embryo #9
only 9 out of 20 copies preserved initial combination of barcodes that were observed in the
injected plasmid library (coinciding blue and green connections) while the other 11 contain the
head barcode from one molecule, and the tail one from the other (therefore they do not have blue
connection). Such an exchange of genetic information between molecules is a characteristic
signature of homologous recombination and strikingly differs from the simple combination of intact
(with the exception of small indels at the junction) molecules produced by NHEJ mechanism. In
our total sample of 1066 copies, only 20% (212) retained the original combination of barcodes
(Table 1). Thus, it can be concluded that at least 80% of the molecules in the concatemers were
processed by the homologous recombination mechanism. Most likely, this is an underestimation,
because in our experimental system barcodes are located almost 300 bp from the ends and
resection might not always reach barcode sequence to change it through recombination (Sup.
Fig. 17).

Recombination mechanisms devised from connection patterns
To make comprehensive analysis of the connection patterns, it is important to discuss how
the structures could be formed. We planned to use terminal barcodes as mere informative tags
for concatenation analysis, but their location at the ends unexpectedly turned them into an
indicator of recombination activity. Figure 4 shows possible mechanisms explaining the formation
of recombined copies. In DSBR, after 3’-end resection and homologous duplex invasion, the Dloop synthesis reaches the barcode and forms a mismatch on one of the strands. This mismatch
is a substrate for the mismatch repair system, which removes the fragment of the strand
containing the mismatch and completes the gap on the template of the remaining strand. It is
known that during recombination strand discrimination removes information from the invading
strand rather than from the repair template, resulting in gene conversion (29, 30). Thus, mismatch
repair leads to the copying of the donor barcode into the invading transgene. Simply put, the
exchange of barcodes between the copies is a typical example of gene conversion. Interestingly,
our assumption about the active participation of the mismatch repair system was confirmed by
the analysis of embryo #1. Here we found two chains of transgenes consisting of 3 and 11 copies.
As can be seen in Fig. 3A, some barcode connections form an unusual structure with a fork at
one end (bottom part of the map). We assumed that the embryo #1 is a mosaic, whose cells
contain one of two barcodes in a given position of concatemer in equal proportions. This is
possible if, for some reason, the mismatch that was formed during recombination was not repaired

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

before replication and daughter cells received two different barcode variants (Fig. 3B) (Sup. Fig.
18). These separated barcodes have about half the number of reads than the other copies in
concatemer (Fig. 3C). We did not observe this pattern in any other embryo, so it must represent
a unique event.
Copying barcodes from a donor template explains why in many cases concatemer maps
look like a web of branched nodes (embryos #2, #3, #4, #7, #8) (Sup. Fig. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14).
Whenever the junctions that were originally linked together by HR or NHEJ serve as a donor
template, they can share their barcode (one or both) with invading copy causing it to switch
barcodes (Fig. 4). This way, one barcode will be connected with two partners at independent
junctions even if these regions lie at distant positions in concatemer. Abundance of these nodes
demonstrates intensive HR process that sometimes copies one junction 3-5 times with different
invading ends (404 counts overall, Table 1), but also greatly complicates the “subway map” for
visual inspection. Note that, as stated earlier, most of the original transgenes (blue connections)
fail to be incorporated into the concatemers even if they provide recombination templates for other
copies.
Evidence of dHJ formation
In the schemes described above, SDSA products are indistinguishable from noncrossover DSBR products (Fig. 4 and Sup. Fig. 17). However, we found three connection patterns
that strongly support the fact of dHJ resolution with crossing-over. dHJ pattern 1: If both ends of
a single transgene molecule invade one junction, dHJ is formed and can be resolved with the
formation of crossover products. This leads to the integration of the “attacking” copy between the
two original ones, and both of the “attacking” copy’s barcodes are overwritten by those in the
junction (Fig. 5A). On our concatemer maps, this is represented by paired green and red
connections. For example, there are two such connections in the embryo #1 (Sup. Fig. 7) and 32
in total (Table 1). Interestingly, if dHJ is resolved without formation of crossover products, then
the attacking molecule becomes circularized. Such circles are either lost during cell division or
serve as templates for other linear transgene copies.
dHJ pattern 2: Another crossover scenario occurs when a single circular copy is attacked
by the ends of two other molecules (Fig. 5B). In this case, dHJ resolution with the formation of
crossover products leads to the joining of all three copies, while the “attacking” molecules copy
barcodes from the circular template. This outcome appears as two barcodes linked by three
connections at once. There are five such structures in our maps (Table 1). In addition, even if the
“attacking” molecules copy barcodes from the template without crossing-over and physical
integration of the circular copy, we would still see such events (Fig. 5B). On our maps, such
barcodes are connected by red and blue connections (dHJ pattern 3). This pattern is characteristic
of a circularized copy as well. However, these are only a few (11 of 1066 total molecules in our
analysis), which says that the closure of a single molecule in a ring is a rare event (Table 1). This

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

is important, because according to the initial theories, circularization and subsequent random
breakage were considered one of the key stages of the formation of concatemers (28).
We would like to emphasize that although we found only sparse evidence of crossing-over
(5% of the copies) (dHJ patterns in Table 1), all of these were simple, categorizable cases which
are just a tip of the iceberg, as many simultaneous recombination events must have created
higher order patterns. For instance, crossovers could be formed by multicopy tandems that are
incorporated into junctions (this would result in a side loop on transgene “subway map”). As many
of the individual transgenes also switch barcodes by junction invasions, this side loop would be
connected to multiple nodes in other concatemer regions, thus vanishing in the complex “subway
map” (like in embryos #2, 3, 4, 7, 8) (Sup. Fig. 8, 9, 10, 13, 14).

Role of NHEJ in concatemer formation
Our data suggests that HR plays a leading role in the formation of tandemly oriented
copies, but as noted earlier, initially HR requires template junctions created by NHEJ. Since the
typical signatures of NHEJ are small indels at the repair sites (4), we decided to explore the
repertoire of indels at the transgene-transgene junctions in multicopy embryos (#2, 3, 7). In total,
we analyzed the sequences of junctions adjacent to 1803 barcodes. We found almost a hundred
possible variants for the structure of ligation sites between copies (Fig. 6A). However, the
frequency of sequence variants was distributed very unevenly, so that the three most frequent
variants were found in 80% of the junctions (Fig. 6B). These top 3 variants were the same in all
examined embryos. These variants were clippings of the protruding 4 nt 5’-ends: -5 nt (Var1), -5
nt (Var2), -7 nt (Var3). Remarkably, other deletions of the same or even smaller size were rare
(Fig. 6A). The fact that identical indels appeared in three independently injected zygotes confirms
that NHEJ has preferred ligation products. In our case, processing of the 5’-overhangs might have
revealed complementary nucleotides (GA in Var1 and AG in Var3), hence favoring ligation of
these variants over others. Recent rigorous analysis of NHEJ patterns in mouse ES cells (31)
demonstrated that 5’-protruding ends are repaired by either NHEJ or TMEJ (polymerase thetamediated end-joining). In our case, sequence variants Var1-3 did not have any additional
insertions or SNPs and formed uniform clusters, thus TMEJ activity could be excluded (Fig. 6B).
Unfortunately, the fact that NHEJ favored few junction variants disrupted our initial idea to
estimate the total number of transgene molecules, which were independently joined by NHEJ and
served as template for HR. Nevertheless, information about sequence of the junctions made it
possible to check our prediction that the result of the joining of molecules by HR mechanism would
be an exact copying of the template junction. For example, different copies with the same
barcodes in dHJ patterns (Fig.5) should also have the same variant of junction. We checked it
and this is true for most of the cases. Only in 8% of cases, the barcode had not one, but two
different variants of the junction (data not shown).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We can roughly estimate efficiency of NHEJ-mediated ligation: the number of independent
NHEJ-ligated molecules should be no less than the number of unique junction variants from the
embryos. According to our data, this corresponds to 1 event per 10 injected copies. Obviously,
this is the lower estimate and the real value is several times higher. We also did not analyze other
copy orientation variants (head-to-head or tail-to-tail), because their sequencing was impossible
due to technical reasons (see Discussion section and Sup. Fig. 6). In general, we can conclude
that NHEJ plays a prominent role during initial ligation of exogenous DNA in zygote.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Discussion
Concatemers are a prominent feature of pronuclear microinjection method (Sup. Table 1).
To our knowledge, the only paper that addressed the mechanism of concatemer formation was
published by Mario Capecchi group more than 35 years ago (14). In this seminal experiment,
albeit performed on cultured mammalian cells, nuclei were injected with 2-500 copies of DNA
molecules (linear or circular). In addition to clarifying various technical aspects, the group also
devoted a part of the report to investigating how concatemers are formed. They injected nuclei
with a mixture of two similar transgenes, A- and B-molecules, - plasmid backbones with HSV
thymidine kinase gene in two orientations. Southern blot analysis with specific restriction enzymes
showed that transgene concatemers consisted of interspersed tandemly oriented A/B copies. This
elegant effort challenged transgene amplification hypothesis, but authors were cautious about low
copy number integrations and random fluctuations due to the presence of only two transgene
versions. Our data unequivocally confirm that concatemers are formed by recombination of
individual transgenes without de novo amplification.
We also managed to obtain decisive evidence that head-to-tail tandems are mostly formed
by HR between linear copies. We base this conclusion on the lack of red+blue double connections
(self-circularized copies). SDSA and DSBR are two main ways of repairing double-stranded DNA
breaks by homologous recombination (5). These pathways have similar initial stages and usually
resolve into indiscernible non-crossover products, evident in the form of barcode “switching” in
our assay (green connections without blue connection from initial plasmid library). However,
DSBR sometimes manifests itself in the formation of crossover products after dHJ resolution. We
found several convincing examples of crossovers leaving traces at the concatemer “subway map”
(5% copies) (Table 1). As far as we know, this is the first described case of somatic crossing-over
in early mammalian embryos. Apparently, the formation of crossovers is quite dangerous for
somatic cells as it can lead to the loss of heterozygosity of a large chromosome fragment (32).
The fact that crossing-over is not completely suppressed in early embryos is of interest and
expands our scarce knowledge of DNA repair at this stage.
In addition to crossovers and barcode “switching”, we also noticed another indication of
HR activity. Analysis of junctions and transgene-genome integration sites revealed that
sometimes transgene copies contain junction sequences, corresponding to the D-loop disruption
intermediates (33). One can imagine that resected transgene’s 3’-end invades homologous
template at the transgene-transgene junction, copies a portion of junction, and then, after D-loop
disruption, it gets incorporated into concatemer or genome by NHEJ or MMEJ (Sup. Fig. 19). We
also noticed similar pattern in some published transgene integration models (34, 35). We have
two reasons to suspect SDSA involvement, instead of traditionally accepted random breakage
explanation. First of all, junctions which border these fragments lack blue barcode connection and
does not originate from a self-ligated copy. Second, these fragments are frequently terminated at
the barcode sequence, which hints that synthesized displaced strand probably could not reinvade

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

homologous duplex, because of barcode heterogeneity. These cases demonstrate that HR
intermediates could be processed by NHEJ at par with fragmented copies. It is also worth
mentioning, that we couldn’t directly detect activity of alternative HR pathways, such as singlestrand annealing (SSA) and break-induced replication (BIR). SSA might potentially link randomly
broken transgene circles (formed after initial circularization) and therefore result in red + blue
connections, which were in fact very rare. BIR would manifest itself as amplification of contiguous
regions of concatemers, and, indeed, we found one region encompassing 3 transgene molecules
with double read counts (embryo #3) (Fig. 2B), but this was a single event. We deduced that these
pathways do not contribute to the concatemer formation, probably because long-range resection
is prevented by competition with SDSA (36).
The real proportion of NHEJ-processed copies in concatemers has always remained
enigmatic. Southern blot estimations from many transgenic mouse lines (Sup. Table 1) confirm
that head-to-tail orientation is dominant (>90% of copies vs 50% in case of random ligation).
Likewise, our transgene “subway maps” display contiguous tandem head-to-tail chains (>10
copies) with no gaps (e.g. in embryos #1 (Sup. Fig. 7), #4 (Sup. Fig. 10A) or #9 (Sup. Fig. 15A)).
Unfortunately, studying complex rearrangements in concatemers is nearly impossible at present,
because PCR is not suitable for detection of palindromic junctions (our experience; (37)), and
repetitive nature of concatemers complicates NGS-based methods (38, 39). However, it is well
established that NHEJ often contributes to concatemer emergence with fragmented and truncated
copies arranged in random orientation (38, 40). We ourselves detected truncated copies in most
of transgenic embryos and their abundance correlated with transgene copy number (Sup. Fig.
5A,B).
Why is there no perfect palindromic head-to-head or tail-to-tail junctions then? Palindromic
sequences are quite stable in mammalian cells (41), thus palindromes are likely wiped out at the
initial step, during extrachromosomal recombination. We documented high activity of HR
recombination between ends (>80% of copies) and it made us believe that frequent strand
invasion and D-loop formation could provoke secondary structures such as hairpins and
cruciforms in template palindromic junctions (Sup. Fig. 20). Another possible HR-related
mechanism is folding back of the single-stranded resected end of a linear transgene after copying
fragment of the palindromic junction (42). These hairpin structures are next recognized and
removed by cell repair systems.
Ultimately, we aimed to utilize barcode connections to figure out unequivocal transgene
order in concatemers. The closest we achieved this goal was in embryo #1 (only 1 gap
unresolved) (Sup. Fig. 7), embryo #9 (Sup. Fig. 15A) and embryo #10 (Sup. Fig. 16). In embryo
#9, tandemly oriented chains of variable lengths are presumably separated by inverted copies
(full-sized or truncated). We sequenced some of them (Sup. Fig. 15B). Lastly, embryo #10
puzzled us with complex barcode distribution pattern. As seen in Sup. Fig. 16, transgene “subway
map” in this embryo has quite peculiar plan with four transgene copies but only 2 unique barcode

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pairs (8 barcodes total). We validated duplication of each barcode with ddPCR (Sup. Table 2).
We employed long-distance PCR with barcode-specific primers to position all copies and their
respective barcodes in the four-copy concatemer (Sup. Fig. 16). It appears that two initially ligated
copies with unique barcode pairs underwent recombination and assimilated two other copies. It
definitely was not a simple duplication event, because barcodes were shuffled between copies.
Concluding remarks
Using DNA barcodes helped us to explain some of the long-standing questions in the field
of transgenesis. First of all, we showed that hundreds of copies are joined together independently
without contribution of long range de novo synthesis. Terminal barcodes were also useful to track
self-ligated copies and we found no concatemer contribution from such rings, although it had been
frequently proposed that concatemers are formed by recombination of overlapping fragments of
broken circular copies. In theory, injection of circular copies that go through random breakage
and recombine with backbone regions must lead to complete disappearance of barcode
“switching” in our assay. Clearly, understanding HR regulation in zygote will be of great
importance for implementation of revolutionary transgenesis methods such as newly designed
gene drivers (43) or contiguous DNA assembly by overlaps (44), and might help finetune HR to
prevent unwanted recombination that complicates CRISPR/Cas9 knock-in experiments (45).

Funding. This work was supported by Russian Science Foundation [grant #16-14-00095],
NGS libraries preparation was partially performed using experimental equipment of the
Resource Center of the Institute of Cytology and Genetics SB RAS (state project No. 03242019-0041).

Authors Contribution. AS and NB initiated the study. AY constructed barcoded plasmid
library. AK and IS carried out the mouse experiments. AS performed the experiments. AS, VF
and NB analyzed data. AS and NB wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final version of the manuscript.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1. Savić,N. and Schwank,G. (2016) Advances in therapeutic CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing.
Transl. Res., 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.09.008.
2. Bertolini,L.R., Meade,H., Lazzarotto,C.R., Martins,L.T., Tavares,K.C., Bertolini,M. and
Murray,J.D. (2016) The transgenic animal platform for biopharmaceutical production.
Transgenic Res., 10.1007/s11248-016-9933-9.
3. Kamthan,A., Chaudhuri,A., Kamthan,M. and Datta,A. (2016) Genetically modified (GM)
crops: milestones and new advances in crop improvement. Theor. Appl. Genet.,
10.1007/s00122-016-2747-6.
4. Chang,H.H.Y., Pannunzio,N.R., Adachi,N. and Lieber,M.R. (2017) Non-homologous DNA
end joining and alternative pathways to double-strand break repair. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol., 10.1038/nrm.2017.48.
5. Ranjha,L., Howard,S.M. and Cejka,P. (2018) Main steps in DNA double-strand break repair:
an introduction to homologous recombination and related processes. Chromosoma,
10.1007/s00412-017-0658-1.
6. Piazza,A. and Heyer,W.D. (2019) Homologous Recombination and the Formation of Complex
Genomic Rearrangements. Trends Cell Biol., 10.1016/j.tcb.2018.10.006.
7. Low,B.E., Kutny,P.M. and Wiles,M. V. (2016) Simple, efficient CRISPR-cas9-mediated gene
editing in mice: Strategies and methods. Methods Mol. Biol., 10.1007/978-1-4939-36618_2.
8. Jiang,F. and Doudna,J.A. (2017) CRISP[1] F. Jiang und J. A. Doudna, „CRISPR–Cas9
Structures and Mechanisms“, Annu. Rev. Biophys., Bd. 46, Nr. 1, S. 505–529, Mai 2017.R–
Cas9 Structures and Mechanisms. Annu. Rev. Biophys., 10.1146/annurev-biophys-062215010822.
9. Ben Jehuda,R., Shemer,Y. and Binah,O. (2018) Genome Editing in Induced Pluripotent Stem
Cells using CRISPR/Cas9. Stem Cell Rev. Reports, 10.1007/s12015-018-9811-3.
10. Nishiyama,J. (2018) Genome editing in the mammalian brain using the CRISPR–Cas system.
Neurosci. Res., 10.1016/j.neures.2018.07.003.
11. Pawelczak,K.S., Gavande,N.S., VanderVere-Carozza,P.S. and Turchi,J.J. (2018) Modulating
DNA Repair Pathways to Improve Precision Genome Engineering. ACS Chem. Biol.,
10.1021/acschembio.7b00777.
12. Charpentier,M., Khedher,A.H.Y., Menoret,S., Brion,A., Lamribet,K., Dardillac,E., Boix,C.,
Perrouault,L., Tesson,L., Geny,S., et al. (2018) CtIP fusion to Cas9 enhances transgene
integration by homology-dependent repair. Nat. Commun., 10.1038/s41467-018-03475-7.
13. Auerbach,A.B. (2004) Production of functional transgenic mice by DNA pronuclear

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

microinjection. Acta Biochim. Pol.
14. Folger,K.R., Wong,E.A., Wahl,G. and Capecchi,M.R. (1982) Patterns of integration of DNA
microinjected into cultured mammalian cells: evidence for homologous recombination
between injected plasmid DNA molecules. Mol. Cell. Biol., 2, 1372–1387.
15. Brinster,R.L., Chen,H.Y., Trumbauer,M.E., Yagle,M.K. and Palmiter,R.D. (1985) Factors
Affecting the Efficiency of Introducing Foreign DNA into Mice by Microinjecting Eggs.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 10.1073/pnas.82.13.4438.
16. Lu,R., Neff,N.F., Quake,S.R. and Weissman,I.L. (2011) Tracking single hematopoietic stem
cells in vivo using high-throughput sequencing in conjunction with viral genetic barcoding.
Nat. Biotechnol., 29, 928–33.
17. Yunusova,A.M., Fishman,V.S., Vasiliev,G. V. and Battulin,N.R. (2017) Deterministic versus
stochastic model of reprogramming: New evidence from cellular barcoding technique. Open
Biol., 10.1098/rsob.160311.
18. Clarke,A.R., Brown,G.A.J. and Corbin,T.J. (2003) Oocyte Injection in the Mouse. In
Transgenesis Techniques.
19. Serova,I.A., Dvoryanchikov,G.A., Andreeva,L.E., Burkov,I.A., Dias,L.P.B., Battulin,N.R.,
Smirnov,A. V. and Serov,O.L. (2012) A 3,387 bp 5′-flanking sequence of the goat alphaS1-casein gene provides correct tissue-specific expression of human granulocyte colonystimulating factor (hG-CSF) in the mammary gland of transgenic mice. Transgenic Res.,
10.1007/s11248-011-9547-1.
20. Potapov,V. and Ong,J.L. (2017) Examining sources of error in PCR by single-molecule
sequencing. PLoS One, 10.1371/journal.pone.0169774.
21. Martin,M. and N,T. (2011) Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput
sequencing reads. EMBnet.journal.
22. Codner,G.F., Lindner,L., Caulder,A., Wattenhofer-Donzé,M., Radage,A., Mertz,A.,
Eisenmann,B., Mianné,J., Evans,E.P., Beechey,C. V., et al. (2016) Aneuploidy screening of
embryonic stem cell clones by metaphase karyotyping and droplet digital polymerase chain
reaction. BMC Cell Biol., 10.1186/s12860-016-0108-6.
23. Burkov,I.A., Serova,I.A., Battulin,N.R., Smirnov,A. V., Babkin,I. V., Andreeva,L.E.,
Dvoryanchikov,G.A. and Serov,O.L. (2013) Expression of the human granulocytemacrophage colony stimulating factor (hGM-CSF) gene under control of the 5′-regulatory
sequence of the goat alpha-S1-casein gene with and without a MAR element in transgenic
mice. Transgenic Res., 10.1007/s11248-013-9697-4.
24. Rohan,R.M., King,D. and Frels,W.I. (1990) Direct sequencing of PCR-amplified junction
fragments from tandemly repeated transgenes. Nucleic Acids Res., 10.1093/nar/18.20.6089.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

25. Krupovic,M. and Forterre,P. (2015) Single-stranded DNA viruses employ a variety of
mechanisms for integration into host genomes. Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., 10.1111/nyas.12675.
26. Tomaska,L., Nosek,J., Kramara,J. and Griffith,J.D. (2009) Telomeric circles: Universal
players in telomere maintenance. Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 10.1038/nsmb.1660.
27. Chen,X.J. and Clark-Walker,G.D. (2018) Unveiling the mystery of mitochondrial DNA
replication in yeasts. Mitochondrion, 10.1016/j.mito.2017.07.009.
28. Bishop,J.O. (1996) Chromosomal insertion of foreign DNA. Reprod Nutr Dev,
S0926528797818850 [pii].
29. Stone,J.E., Ozbirn,R.G., Petes,T.D. and Jinks-Robertson,S. (2008) Role of proliferating cell
nuclear antigen interactions in the mismatch repair-dependent processing of mitotic and
meiotic recombination intermediates in yeast. Genetics, 10.1534/genetics.107.085415.
30. Chakraborty,U., George,C.M., Lyndaker,A.M. and Alani,E. (2016) A delicate balance
between repair and replication factors regulates recombination between divergent DNA
sequences in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Genetics, 10.1534/genetics.115.184093.
31. Schimmel,J., Kool,H., van Schendel,R. and Tijsterman,M. (2017) Mutational signatures of
non‐homologous and polymerase theta‐mediated end‐joining in embryonic stem cells.
EMBO J., 10.15252/embj.201796948.
32. Daley,J.M., Gaines,W.A., Kwon,Y. and Sung,P. (2014) Regulation of DNA Pairing in
Homologous Recombination. Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol.,
10.1101/cshperspect.a017954.
33. Wright,W.D., Shah,S.S. and Heyer,W.D. (2018) Homologous recombination and the repair
of DNA double-strand breaks. J. Biol. Chem., 10.1074/jbc.TM118.000372.
34. Hamada,T., Sasaki,H., Seki,R. and Sakaki,Y. (1993) Mechanism of chromosomal integration
of transgenes in microinjected mouse eggs: sequence analysis of genome-transgene and
transgene-transgene junctions at two loci. Gene, 10.1016/0378-1119(93)90563-I.
35. Yan,B., Li,D. and Gou,K. (2010) Homologous illegitimate random integration of foreign
DNA into the X chromosome of a transgenic mouse line. BMC Mol. Biol., 10.1186/14712199-11-58.
36. Verma,P. and Greenberg,R.A. (2016) Noncanonical views of homology-directed DNA
repair. Genes Dev., 10.1101/gad.280545.116.
37. Masumura,K., Sakamoto,Y., Kumita,W., Honma,M., Nishikawa,A. and Nohmi,T. (2015)
Genomic integration of lambda EG10 transgene in gpt delta transgenic rodents. Genes
Environ., 10.1186/s41021-015-0024-6.
38. Chiang,C., Jacobsen,J.C., Ernst,C., Hanscom,C., Heilbut,A., Blumenthal,I., Mills,R.E.,
Kirby,A., Lindgren,A.M., Rudiger,S.R., et al. (2012) Complex reorganization and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

predominant non-homologous repair following chromosomal breakage in karyotypically
balanced germline rearrangements and transgenic integration. Nat. Genet.,
10.1038/ng.2202.
39. Lutz,C., Davis,T.L., Urban,R., Chesler,E.J., He,H., Murray,S.A., Ndukum,J., Braun,R.E.,
van Min,M., Goodwin,L.O., et al. (2019) Large-scale discovery of mouse transgenic
integration sites reveals frequent structural variation and insertional mutagenesis. Genome
Res., 10.1101/gr.233866.117.
40. MATSUDA,J., YAMAMOTO,Y., NOGUCHI,Y., TAKEKAWA,N., KOURA,M., HATA,T.,
SUZUKI,O., TAKANO,K. and UCHIO-YAMADA,K. (2006) Transgene Insertion Pattern
Analysis Using Genomic Walking in a Transgenic Mouse Line. Exp. Anim.,
10.1538/expanim.55.65.
41. Akgun,E., Zahn,J., Baumes,S., Brown,G., Liang,F., Romanienko,P.J., Lewis,S. and Jasin,M.
(1997) Palindrome resolution and recombination in the mammalian germ line. Mol. Cell.
Biol., 10.1103/PhysRevSTAB.14.060703.
42. Chen,H., Lisby,M. and Symington,L. (2013) RPA Coordinates DNA End Resection and
Prevents Formation of DNA Hairpins. Mol. Cell, 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.04.032.
43. Grunwald,H.A., Gantz,V.M., Poplawski,G., Xu,X.R.S., Bier,E. and Cooper,K.L. (2019)
Super-Mendelian inheritance mediated by CRISPR–Cas9 in the female mouse germline.
Nature, 10.1038/s41586-019-0875-2.
44. Tacken,P.J., Zee,A. V.D., Beumer,T.L., Florijn,R.J., Gijpels,M.J.J., Havekes,L.M.,
Frants,R.R., Dijk,K.W.V. and Hofker,M.H. (2001) Effective generation of very low density
lipoprotein receptor transgenic mice by overlapping genomic DNA fragments: High testis
expression and disturbed spermatogenesis. Transgenic Res., 10.1023/A:1016682520887.
45. Skryabin,B. V., Gubar,L., Seeger,B., Kaiser,H., Stegemann,A., Roth,J., Meuth,S.G.,
Pavenstadt,H., Sherwood,J., Pap,T., et al. (2019) Pervasive head-to-tail insertions of DNA
templates mask desired CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genome editing events. bioRxiv,
10.1101/570739.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Tables
Table 1. Frequencies of various connection patterns in transgenic embryos.

Percentage is estimated in relation to total copies (total green connections including those
with other paired colors) for each embryo.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures

Figure 1. Schematic overview of the experimental design. (A) The main stages of generation of
the barcoded plasmid library (NGS library 1) and pronuclear microinjection of barcoded
molecules. (B) Determining barcodes at the ends of concatenated copies by inverse PCR. DNA
was digested with PciI and ligated in conditions favoring self-ligation (NGS library 3). (C)
Determining barcodes of adjacent copies (NGS library 2). (D) Element of a transgene «subway
map» - our visualization approach that combined NGS data from three sequencing experiments.
Colors indicate different barcode connections: green – actual transgene copy in concatemer from
the inverse PCR data; red - transgene-transgene junctions; blue – copies that retained
combinations of barcodes which were present in the injected plasmids.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. Concatemer structure. (A) Transgene “subway map” for embryo #9.Transgenes are
oriented in head-to-tail fashion: green and gray colored ellipses designate head and tail barcodes
respectively. Gaps between transgene chains are either due to deletions or alternative junction
orientations. (B) Box plots represent the distributions of relative copy number for each terminal
barcode combinations (green connections) in transgenic embryos. Relative copy numbers were
calculated as read counts divided by median. Most of the outliers (relative copy number >1) were
tied to deletions that create shorter PCR product. N indicates copy number (green connections)
analyzed for each embryo.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. (A) Transgene «subway map» for embryo #1. Copies B and C have two alternative
head barcodes. (B) The scheme explaining the emergence of mosaic embryo consisting of two
cell populations in case the barcode mismatches were not repaired in time before DNA replication
(more details in Sup. Fig. 18). (C) Copies B and C have roughly half as many reads as the other
copies in the embryo #1.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Principle of recombination between transgene copies causing barcode
“switching”. Stages common to all pathways of homologous recombination (A) and stages
characteristic of DSBR (B) and SDSA (C). The numbers denote barcodes. Outcomes of
recombination are shown as elements of the transgene “subway map”. The mismatch
repair steps are shown in the box.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. Resolution of dHJs during DSBR leads to characteristic connection patterns.
(A) Crossing-over between copies could result in assimilation of another copy (“attacker”)
into junction with loss of the “attacker”’s barcodes (green + red pattern). (B) DSBR
between linear ends and a circular copy can have two detectable outcomes: circular copy
donates barcodes without crossing-over (red + blue pattern) or gets incorporated into
“attacking” molecule while also donating barcodes (green + red + blue pattern). Outcomes
of recombination are shown as elements of the transgene “subway map”.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/603381; this version posted April 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. Sequence variants of indels at the junctions. (A) 4 nt 5’-protruding ends were
generated by BsmBI digestion prior to microinjection. Sequence variants of the
transgene-transgene head-to-tail junction region (Var1-Var93) are aligned below the
original sequence. In most of the junctions, end processing removed only 5’-overhangs.
(B) We calculated junction variant frequency for all detected mutations. Diagram shows
distribution of the top three variants (Var1, 2, 3) and remaining variants (“all other”) in
analyzed embryos.

Supplementary Figure 1. Schematic representation of the barcoded plasmid. Plasmid
contains two barcodes separated by a pair of BsmBI restriction sites (blue) producing
incompatible ends. NGS primers were used to amplify transgene-transgene junctions
and self-ligated copies (inverse PCR). Not to scale.

A
Embryos (1-12)
M

-

wt

pl

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

M

11

12

M

1500 1000 800 700 600 500 400 300 -

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9

B
Embryos (1-12)
M

-

wt

pl

1

2

#5

#6

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

1500 1000 800 700 600 500 400 300 -

#7

#8

#9

Supplementary Figure 2. PCR genotyping of the 12 embryos from one of the foster
mothers. (A) PCR with primers for the Clover gene (product size - 350bp). (B) PCR
with NGS primers (Sup. Fig. 1) to detect head-to-tail transgene-transgene junctions
(product size - ~700bp). Legend: M – DNA ladder 100bp; wt – wild-type DNA; pl –
barcoded plasmid library (arrow indicates corresponding PCR product with BsmBI
linker still present); #5-9 – transgenic embryos selected for concatemer sequencing.

Ch1: FAM probe (Emid1 gene)

A

Ch1+/Ch21788

Ch1+/Ch2+
2063

Ch1-/Ch23130

Ch1-/Ch2+
3625

Ch2: HEX probe (pClover transgene)

B

Restriction enzyme
digestion conditions
No restriction enzyme
added
HindIII-HF digestion,
20 min in PCR mix
HindIII-HF overnight
digestion (CutSmart
Buffer)

DpnII overnight digestion
(DpnII buffer)

C

FAM

Copy number (relative to Emid1
gene), ± standard error
6.3 ± 0.3
12,7 ± 0.5
14,7 ± 0.8

14,4 ± 0.9

Probe:
Emid1 gene
(2 copies per genome)

HEX
Probe:
pClover transgene
(X copies)

FAM
Probe:
Transgene-genome
border (1 copy per genome)

Supplementary Figure 3. Droplet digital PCR (ddPCR) analysis of transgene copy
number. (A) Two-dimensional plot of the transgene (pClover) vs control (Emid1 gene)
droplet measurement. (B) Evalution of the restriction enzyme digestion conditions for
optimal separation of the copies in concatemers (DNA from embryo #1). (C) Scheme of
the ddPCR analysis with probes against transgene-genome border (to exclude mosaicism).

Supplementary Figure 4. Comparison of transgene copy numbers derived from ddPCR
(ivory area), mosaicism-corrected ddPCR (light blue area) and NGS data (green column).

1

2

3 4

5

6 7

8

bc

9

10

1Kb

2Kb

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

3Kb

#7

#8

4Kb

M

#9 #10
3000 2000 1500 -

1000 750 -

1000 750 -

500 -

500 -

250 -

250 -

-

12 + 13: head-to-tail junction with large deletion
-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

6Kb

6.7Kb

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9 #10

7 + 13: head-to-head junction with deletion
M

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

5Kb

2 + 3: tail-to-tail junction with small deletion

3000 2000 1500 -

M

14

bc

11 + 13: head-to-head junction with small deletion
-

12 13

backbone

0

M

11

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 -

1000 -

750 -

750 -

500 500 250 250 -

8 + 13: head-to-tail junction with large deletion

2 + 4: tail-to-tail junction with large deletion
M

3000 2000 1500 1000 750 500 250 -

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

M

#9 #10

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

#9

#10

3000 2000 1500 1000 750 500 250 -

Supplementary Figure 5A. PCR detection of various rearrangements at transgene-transgene
junctions. Different primer pairs (positions shown on the transgene map at the top) were used to
amplify transgene-transgene junctions. Arrows indicate expected PCR product lengths for intact
junctions. Legend: M – Marker (1Kb); - – H2O; wt – wild-type DNA; #1-10 – transgenic DNA.
Black frames highlight multicopy embryos #2, 3, 7, 8.

1

2

3 4

5

6 7

bc

8

9

10

1Kb

2Kb

3Kb

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

14

bc
4Kb

5Kb

6Kb

6.7Kb

6 + 7: head-to-tail junction with large deletion

5 + 11: head-to-tail junction with large deletion
-

12 13

backbone

0

M

11

M

#9 #10

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 1000 -

1000 750 -

750 -

500 -

500 250 250 -

3 + 13: head-to-tail junction with small deletion
M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6

#7

#8

6 + 10: head-to-head junction with deletion
M

#9 #10

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7 #8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 750 -

1000 750 -

500 -

500 -

250 -

2 + 9: head-to-tail junction with large deletion
M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 1000 750 500 250 -

Supplementary Figure 5B. PCR detection of various rearrangements at transgene-transgene
junctions. Different primer pairs (positions shown on the transgene map at the top) were used to
amplify transgene-transgene junctions. Arrows indicate expected PCR product lengths for intact
junctions. Legend: M – Marker (1Kb); - – H2O; wt – wild-type DNA; #1-10 – transgenic DNA.
Black frames highlight multicopy embryos #2, 3, 7, 8.

13
Tail-to-tail palindromic junction

14

14

13

bc

bc

backbone

backbone

13 + 13: tail-to-tail junction (single primer)

M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

M

#9 #10

-

wt #1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6 #7

#8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 -

1000 -

750 -

750 -

500 -

500 -

250 -

250 -

Taq

Q5

14 + 14: tail-to-tail junction (internal single primer)
M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4 #5

#6

#7

#8

#9 #10

M

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 -

1000 -

750 -

750 -

500 -

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4 #5

#6

#7

#8

#9 #10

500 -

250 250 -

Q5

Taq

13 + 14: tail-to-tail junction (two primers)
M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5

#6 #7

#8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 1000 750 -

M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 1000 -

*

*

500 -

750 500 -

250 -

*
250 -

Taq

Q5

Supplementary Figure 6A. PCR detection of the tail-to-tail palindromic junctions with Taq and Q5
polymerases. Either single primers or primer pairs were used to amplify transgene-transgene tail-totail junctions. Expected PCR product size for the perfect palindromic junctions – 734 bp (13+13),
282 bp (14+14). Legend: M –Marker (1Kb); - – H2O; wt – wild-type DNA; #1-10 – transgenic DNA.
Black frames highlight multicopy embryos #2, 3, 7, 8.

2
Head-to-head palindromic junction

1

1

2
bc

bc

backbone

backbone

2 + 2: head-to-head junction (single primer)

M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

M

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 750 -

1000 -

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6 #7

#8

#9 #10

750 -

500 -

500 250 250 -

Taq

Q5

1 + 1: head-to-head junction (internal single primer)
M

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4 #5 #6

#7

#8

M

#9 #10

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 -

1000 -

750 -

750 -

500 -

-

wt

#1

#2

#3

#4 #5

#6

#7

#8

#9 #10

500 -

250 -

250 -

Q5

Taq

1 + 2: head-to-head junction (two primers)
M

-

wt #1

#2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7 #8

#9

M

#10

-

wt

#1 #2

#3

#4

#5 #6

#7

#8

#9

#10

3000 2000 1500 -

3000 2000 1500 -

1000 750 -

1000 750 -

500 -

500 -

250 250 -

Taq

Q5

Supplementary Figure 6B. PCR detection of the head-to-head palindromic junctions with Taq and
Q5 polymerases. Either single primers or primer pairs were used to amplify transgene-transgene
head-to-head junctions. Expected PCR product size for the perfect palindromic junctions – 708 bp
(2+2), 214 bp (1+1). Legend: M –Marker (1Kb); - – H2O; wt – wild-type DNA; #1-10 – transgenic
DNA. Black frames highlight multicopy embryos #2, 3, 7, 8.

Embryo #1 (15 copies)

Supplementary Figure 7. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #1 (File 1). This embryo
has 15 transgene copies according to ddPCR. Types of connections: red (head-to-tail
junction); blue + green (transgene from original library); only green (recombined transgene
with “switched” barcodes); red + green (dHJ pattern 1 – incorporation of the transgene
copy). Note branched structure at the bottom region – product of unsynced mismatch repair
(see Fig. 3 in main text for explanation).

Embryo #2 (~175 copies)

Supplementary Figure 8. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #2 (File 2). This embryo
has around 175 transgene copies according to ddPCR. Types of connections: red (head-totail junction); blue + green (transgene from original library); only green (recombined
transgene with “switched” barcodes); red + green (dHJ pattern 1 – incorporation of the
transgene copy); red + blue (dHJ pattern 3 – transfer of junction barcodes into another
junction, but could indicated self-ligated junction as well).

Embryo #3 (~180 copies)

Supplementary Figure 9. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #3 (File 3). This embryo
has around 180 transgene copies according to ddPCR. Types of connections: red (head-totail junction); blue + green (transgene from original library); only green (recombined
transgene with “switched” barcodes); red + green (dHJ pattern 1 – incorporation of the
transgene copy); red + blue (dHJ pattern 3 – transfer of junction barcodes into another
junction, but could indicated self-ligated junction as well), red + blue + green (dHJ pattern
2 – incorporation of a circular copy into junction with preservation of invading barcodes).

Embryo #4 (~45 copies)

Supplementary Figure 10A. Transgene «subway map» for embryo #4 (File 4). This
embryo has around 45 copies and one sequenced rearrangement (deletion + inversion).
Types of connections: red (head-to-tail junction); blue + green (transgene from original
library); only green (recombined transgene with «switched» barcodes); orange (head-tohead connection with inverted truncated copy) (added manually); pink (transgene-genome
borders) (added manually).

-2.0Kb of
backbone

-4bp
#5644

backbone

backbone

^
CTAACTCCGC:TGTACAATTT

Orientation

-2bp

#11974

backbone

ChrX:21129081>21129859

^

ATTGTACAGA:TGATGAATCC
Orientation

ChrX:21129091>21128294
-3bp

#6037

backbone

ATCTACAGAT:GGGAGACGGA
Orientation

Supplementary Figure 10B. Scheme of the rearranged junction (top) and transgenegenome borders in embryo #4. Triangle indicates PciI site. Blue letters – microhomologies
between ends. Chromosome locus did not lose any nucleotides, since broken ends were
directly ligated to concatemer by microhomology mediated end-joining.

Embryo #5 (1 copy)

A

B
~ -2.5Kb of
backbone

-6.3Kb of
backbone

Unknown

Chr2:135140267>135139613

-1bp
backbone

#146569

#1828

^
TAGGCTCCGC:TAATATGCCT

Orientation

Supplementary Figure 11. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #5 (File 5). This embryo
has 1 truncated copy, which, at first sight, could have probably originated from randomly
broken circular copy, but lack of blue connection signifies recombined junction. (A) Type
of connection: red (head-to-tail junction). (B) Scheme of the transgene-transgene junction
and transgene-genome border. Triangle indicates PciI site. Green letter – insertion of 1 bp
at the transgene-genome junction.

Embryo #6 (0.3 copies - mosaic)
A

-12bp

B
backbone

-0.5Kb of
backbone
backbone

#145629

CTAGATTCCT:CCGCCTCTCC
Orientation

-130bp
backbone

junction

#147460

#4460

backbone

270bp
duplicated
fragment
Orientation

Supplementary Figure 12. Transgene «subway map» for embryo #6 (File 6). This embryo
has 2 copies and two rearrangements. (A) Type of connection: red (head-to-tail junction);
only green (recombined transgene with “switched” barcodes); red + green (dHJ pattern 1 –
incorporation of the transgene copy). (B) Two sequenced rearrangements in embryo #6:
deletion (top) and duplication of the junction fragment (below). Triangle indicates PciI site.
Blue letters – microhomologies between ends.

Embryo #7 (~280 copies)

Supplementary Figure 13. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #7 (File 7). This embryo
has around 280 transgene copies according to ddPCR. Types of connections: red (head-totail junction); blue + green (transgene from original library); only green (recombined
transgene with “switched” barcodes); red + green (dHJ pattern 1 – incorporation of the
transgene copy); red + blue (dHJ pattern 3 – transfer of junction barcodes into another
junction, but could indicated self-ligated junction as well), red + blue + green (dHJ pattern
2 – incorporation of a circular copy into junction with preservation of invading barcodes).

Embryo #8 (~72 copies)

Supplementary Figure 14. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #8 (File 8). This embryo
has around 72 transgene copies according to ddPCR. Types of connections: red (head-totail junction); blue + green (transgene from original library); only green (recombined
transgene with “switched” barcodes); red + green (dHJ pattern 1 – incorporation of the
transgene copy); red + blue (dHJ pattern 3 – transfer of junction barcodes into another
junction, but could indicated self-ligated junction as well).

Embryo #9 (~22 copies)

Supplementary Figure 15A. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #9 (File 9). This
embryo has around 22 transgene copies according to ddPCR. Types of connections: red
(head-to-tail junction); blue + green (transgene from original library); only green
(recombined transgene with “switched” barcodes); orange (head-to-head or tail-to-tail
connection with inverted copy) (added manually); pink (transgene-genome borders) (added
manually).

Embryo #9 (~22 copies)
-175bp
-83bp
backbone

#8662

#145071

^

backbone

TCTGTGTCCA:CATGCTGTCT
Orientation

-0.6Kb of
-1bp backbone
backbone

backbone

#152431

CCTCCGTCTC:ACTCATTAGG
Orientation

-10bp
backbone

Chr5:82108017>82109208

#146121

AGATTCCTCC:GGCTTTCCTT
Orientation

Alternative
junction variant
backbone

-3bp

#10067

#491

^

backbone

CACACCTGGG:CTGTACAATT
Orientation

-4bp
backbone

-1.6Kb of
backbone

#148496

backbone

CTCCGTCTCC:GTAAGATGCT
Orientation

Supplementary Figure 15B. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #9 (File 9). This embryo
has several inverted and truncated junctions. Triangle indicates PciI site. Blue letters –
microhomologies between ends. Note that in one case, alternative junction variant was
introduced in plasmid backbone during cloning (orange fragment). This “palindromic” junction
is readily amplified by PCR, because junction fragments are different and introduce
asymmetry. Other embryos also have this “quasi-palindromic” junctions (Sup. Fig. 6)

Embryo #10 (4 copies)

A

B

Supplementary Figure 16. Transgene “subway map” for embryo #10 before and after
PCR validation (File 10). This embryo has 4 transgene copies according to ddPCR. (A)
Types of connections: red (head-to-tail junction); blue + green (transgene from original
library); only green (recombined transgene with “switched” barcodes); pink (transgenegenome borders) (added manually). (B) Simplified representation of concatemer in embryo
#10, showing transgene-genome borders that have microhomologies directly at barcode
sequences.

Supplementary Figure 17. Joining of transgene copies in concatemer by DSB repair
pathways. (A) Homologous recombination is initiated by end resection of two linear
transgenes (1/2 and 3/4 barcodes). At the second step, filaments invade into homologous
template region, a head-to-tail junction between transgenes (5/6 and 7/8). (B, D)
Depending on the pathway choice, both ends could be either captured into dHJ (DSBR) or
independently anneal complementary ends after strand displacement (SDSA). (C) NHEJ
directly ligates two copies after end processing. Note that in the cases shown here, DSB
repair does not lead to barcode “switching”, because resection does not reach barcodes (in
reality most of barcodes are copied into the invading copy).

Supplementary Figure 18. Detailed scheme of the unsynced mismatch repair in embryo
#1 (see Fig.3 in main text). (A) Transgene “subway map” for embryo #1. Alternative
barcodes are present in the copies B and C. (B) Several rounds of strand annealing could
led to accumulation of unrepaired mismatches at two regions of newly formed concatemer
(copies B and C).

“Flanking fragment” pattern
short transgene
fragment
transgene copy

genome

#1

#2

#3
5’-end

5’-end

3’-end

3’-truncated end

SDSA-based model

transgene copy

#1

#2
#3

transgene copy

#1

junction

#2

Strand invasion in the typical
head-to-tail-junction

transgene copy

#3

D-loop disruption and failure to reinvade template
(could be provoked by barcode mismatching)

#3

NHEJ/MMEJ ligation with genomic end
(or other transgene copy)
and fill-in synthesis

junction

#1

#2
junction

Supplementary Figure 19. Model for “flanking fragment” pattern emergence. This pattern
is frequently observed in concatemers (our data; Hamada et al., 1993; Yan et al., 2010;
other reports). For example, short 5’-terminal fragment of transgene could be found near
3’-end of another full-size copy. This is especially prominent at the transgene-genome
borders (internal transgene-transgene junctions are more difficult to interpret). We have
detected 2 independent cases of this pattern at genome borders (embryos #5, #10) and
several cases of small duplication of internal concatemer junction fragments (embryos #2,
#6).

Supplementary Figure 20. HR-based model for selective palindrome wiping out.
Destabilization of a palindromic junction by filament invasion leads to exposure of ssDNA
and hairpin formation.

% of barcodes found in plasmid sequencing data

Embryo #3
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
0

50

100

150

200

250

Read count threshold

Supplementary Figure 21. Setting threshold for barcode filtering based on the plasmid
library/embryo data overlap (embryo #3) (see Methods for explanation).

Supplementary Table 1. List of publications documenting pronuclear microinjection outcomes, with focus on transgene copy number and copy
orientations.
Publication
Westendorf et
al., 2016

Harkins,
Whitton, 2016

Transgene
B6·Cg-Tg(Cd4-cre)1Cwi
(Cre recombinase under Cd4promoter)
Transgene size – 15,6Kbp
MerCreMer (tamoxifeninducible Cre recombinase
under Myh6-promoter)
Transgene size – 6,5Kbp

Methods

Copy number and orientation (H/T
– head or tail junction)

WGS

15-16 copies, 10 copies lack 3’-end
region
No data about orientation

SKYFISH
Genome
Walking

Single copy, but with multiple
flanking transgene fragments at both
5’- and 3’-end (attributed to the
“transgene chromotripsis”)

Masumura et
al., 2015

gpt delta (Lambda phage shuttle
vector EG10), two transgenic
lines: mouse and rat
Transgene size – 48Kb

WGS
Southern Blot
FISH

Mouse line: ~41 H-T, 1 H-H, 1 T-T,
~14 fragmented copies
Rat line: ~15 H-T, 1 T-T, ~4
fragmented copies

Yong et al.,
2015

WAP-Her2
Linearized with HindIII
Transgene size – 7Kb

WGS

~162 H-T; H-H or T-T not observed

Yan et al., 2013

7 different transgenes
38 integration sites
Transgene size – 2-6Kb

TAIL-PCR

Not examined

Chiang et al.,
2012

HTT: 2 transgenes in mouse
(1,9Kb) and sheep (11,6Kb)

Biotin Target
Enrichment +
NGS

2 mouse lines
5 sheep lines

Integration site structure (transgene-genome
borders)
1. Genomic deletion (5,6Kb) (chr3:6033569360341285)
2. Small flanking inversion at the 5’-end
(chr3:60335695- 60335808)
Genomic deletion (19,5Kb) (chr19:3185289231872391)
Mouse line:
1. Integration at Chr17:40878810-40878879
2. Duplication of the flanking genomic region
(69bp)
3. 5'-border: 2bp microhomology; 3'-border: 5 bp
microhomology
4. Inverted flanking transgene copies
Rat line:
1. Integration at Chr4:79828427-79900397
2. Genomic deletion (72Kb)
3. 5'-border: no homology; 3'-border: 14 bp
insertion (10bp microhomology)
4. Inverted flanking transgene copies
1. Integration at Chr5:150719804–150719794
2. Duplication of the flanking genomic region
(10bp)
1. Frequent integration in the coding regions (17 of
38 sites)
2. Frequent microhomologies (1-19bp) at the
borders (76% in 30 mouse lines)
Extensive information about 7 genomic loci
(deletions, translocations)

Multiple rearrangements and mostly
random orientation of copies
Shwed et al.,
2010

MutaMouse lgt10-lacZ
(Lambda phage shuttle vector)
Transgene size – 48Kb

qPCR Southern
Blot

~30 H-T, several inverted copies

Not examined

Yan et al., 2010

CMV-CBA-fad2
Linearized with SalI and
BamHI Transgene size – 3,6Kb

TAIL-PCR

H-T (not examined in detail)

1. Integration at ChrX: 87462177-87507732
2. Genomic deletion (45,6Kb)
3. 5'-border: 3bp microhomology + 330 bp insertion
(transgene fragment); 3'-border: 7bp
microhomology + 29 bp insertion (transgene
fragment)

Suzuki et al.,
2006

Ganglioside GM1 synthase
cDNA (pCAGGS backbone)
Linearized with SalI and
HindIII Transgene size – 2,5Kb

Genome
Walking

At least 3 copies + fragments in
random orientation: 2 H-T, 1 T-T

1. Integration at Chr1
2. 5'-border: 11 bp lost; 3'-border: 7 bp lost
3. Inverted flanking transgene copies

Licence et al.,
2003

VpreB1-CD122
Linearized with HindIII
Transgene size – 3,7Kb

qPCR
Southern Blot

11 mouse lines: 6 lines - 2-7 copies; 3
lines - 10-12 copies, 1 line - 33
copies
All copies have H-T orientation

Not examined

Suemizu et al.,
2002

Tg-rasH2
Linearized with BamHI
Transgene size – 7Kb

Southern Blot

3 H-T, no deletions between copies
(religated at BamHI site)

1. Genomic deletion (1,8Kb)
2. 5'-border: 4bp microhomology + 148 bp
transgene deletion; 3'-border: 10bp microhomology
+ 24 bp transgene deletion

Tacken et al.,
2001

VLDLR gene
Linearized with NotI
Transgene size – 35Kb + 40Kb
(overlapping cosmid inserts)

Southern Blot
Fiber-FISH

Line 1: >44 copies, (>90% H-T)
Line 2: >64 copies (>90% H-T)

Not examined

Koetsier et al.,
1996

pAd2E2AL-CAT
Linearized with NdeI + XmnI
Transgene size – 3,3Kb

Southern Blot

Line 7-1: 4 H-T and 6 H-T at separate
sites
Line 5-8: 4 H-T
Line 8-1: 20 copies

Not examined

McFarlane,
Wilson, 1996

PyLMP
Linearized with BamHI +
EcoRI
Transgene size – 3,8Kb

9 mouse lines: 2-10 copies H-T

One of the lines (2 H-T copies) was examined:
1. No deletion in genome
2. 5'-border: 7 bp at transgene end lost; 3'-border:
no loss
3. Transgene-transgene junction with 4 bp loss
(EcoRI site)

Southern Blot

Pawlik et al.,
1995

HS2/beta-globin
Linearized with KpnI + SalI
Transgene size – 5,2Kb

Hamada et al.,
1993

Metallothionein-I mouse
promoter + human TTR gene
(pUC backbone)
Linearized with blunt ends
Transgene size – 10,8Kb

Southern Blot
Inverse PCR

Line MPA434: single copy, with
short 3’-end fragment at the 5’-end of
the full-sized copy
MPA551 2: 3 H-T

Mark et al.,
1992

LambdaRbetaG2
Transgene size – 50Kb

Southern Blot
Phage Library

6-8 H-T

qPCR

6 lines: 3-10 H-T

Not examined

Southern Blot
Phage Library

10-20 H-T

1. Genomic deletion (2-3Kb)
2. Cointegration of a small genomic fragment

Burdon et al.,
1991
Radice et al.,
1991

WAP gene
Linearized with EcoRI
Transgene size – 7,2Kb
Human B- globin gene
Linearized with HindIII
Transgene size – 7,7Kb

Southern Blot

8 mouse lines: 10-100 mostly H-T,
but many lines also have T-T
junctions

8 lines:
6 lines - only fragments (0 copies)
1 line - 2-5 H-T
1 line - 25 H-T (but only two variants
of junctions)
9 lines:
2 lines - only fragments (0 copies)
4 lines - 2-13 H-T
3 lines - 31-180 H-T

1. Many transgene-transgene junctions sequenced:
minor deletion or fill-in synthesis of restricted ends
Line MPA434:
1. Genomic deletion (32bp)
2. 5'- and 3’-borders: 3bp microhomology
Line MPA551:
1. Genomic deletion (10Kb)
2. 5'- and 3’-borders: 1-2bp microhomology
3. 2-3bp deletions at transgene-transgene junctions
1. Genomic deletion (22Kb)
2. 5'-border: 21bp unknown sequence cointegration;
3'-border: 57bp fragment of lambda vector

Rohan et al.,
1990

RSVcat gene
Linearized with PstI + NdeI
Transgene size – 2,7Kb

Southern Blot

Mahon et al.,
1988
Overbeek et al.,
1986

pRSV-CAT

Southern Blot
FISH

Wilkie,
Palmiter, 1987

pMK fusion gene in pBR322
Linearized with BamHI
Transgene size – ~7Kb

Southern Blot
Phage Library

4 copies: 2 T-T + 2 fragmented
copies

1. Duplication 5Kb at the borders
2. Cointegration of 525bp genomic fragment

Covarrubias et
al., 1986
Wagner et al.,
1983

phGH plasmid
Transgene size – 4,3Kb

Southern Blot

2-5 H-T, some copies fragmented

1. Genomic deletion (10Kb)

Khillan et al.,
1985

pPi25.1 (Drosophila P-element)
Linearized with XbaI
Transgene size – ~9Kb

Southern Blot

Line 1: single copy
Lines 2-3: 25-30 H-T

1. In Line 1 self-ligated transgene was linearized
again at random point before integration

1. Nibbled ends at the transgene-transgene junctions
(1-62bp)
1. В одной из линий (50 копий) интеграция
привела к транслокации большого фрагмента
плеча 6 хромосомы на 17.

van der Putten
et al., 1984
Brinster et al.,
1983

McKnight et al,
1983

Wagner et al.,
1983
Palmiter et al.,
1982
Palmiter et al.,
1982

pHIGfbRI
Circular DNA
Transgene size – ~17Kb
Immunoglobulin gene VkM.21
Linearized with BglI + XhoI
Transgene size – ~15Kb
Chicken transferrin gene
Linearized with BglI + XhoI or
circular
Transgene size – ~17Kb
phGH plasmid
Transgene size – 4,3Kb
MT-1 promoter + HSV TK
Linearized with BamHI
Transgene size – ~7Kb
MT-1 promoter + rat GH
Linearized with BamHI
Transgene size – ~5Kb

Southern Blot

3 H-T, 1 H-H, 1T-T

Not examined

Southern Blot

3 lines: 20, 50, 95+40 (two sites) HT

Not examined

Southern Blot
Dot Blot

Southern Blot

Circular transgene - 3 lines (1, 11, 12
copies)
Linearized transgene - 4 lines (2, 11,
11, 14 copies)+ 4 lines with
fragments only
Of 6 lines analyzed all are H-T
6 lines: 0, 1, 4, 4, 8, 20 H-T with
flanking fragments

Not examined

Not examined

Southern Blot
Dot Blot

7 lines: 1, 2, 2, 8, 32, 100, 150 H-T

Not examined

Southern Blot

7 lines: 1, 2, 2, 8, 10, 20, 35 H-T

Not examined

Supplementary Table 2. Calculating barcodes in embryo #10. Barcode flagged with asterisk actually has two copies, but one of them is
unaccounted by PCR due to deletion of the primer site.
Barcode Restriction
#
enzyme
6409
4523
146980
149645

HindIII
HindIII
HindIII
HindIII

Copy number ddPCR (relative
to #10 transgene-genome
border), ± standard error
1.85 ± 0.08
1.93 ± 0.1
1.9 ± 0.1
0.9 ± 0.2

Copy number (NGS
and PCR data)
2
2
2
1*

Supplementary Table 3. PCR primers and ddPCR probes used in the study.
Primer (Sup. Fig. 5)
1
2a
2b
2c
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13a
13b
13c
14a
14b

Sequence (5’-3’)
TCCAAAACTGAAAGTCTGTGTCCA
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTG
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCA
TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACG
GATAGTTACCGGATAAGGCGC
GCCCCAGTGCTGCAATGATA
GCTGAAGATCAGTTGGGTGCAC
CGCAAAACGCCTAACCCTAAG
ACATCAATGGGCGTGGATAG
GAACTTCAGGGTCAGCTTGC
GTCCAGGAGCGCACCATCTC
ATGTGTGTCAGTTAGGGTGTGG
CCGCTTTTCTGGATTCATCGAC
GCGAGTCAGTGAGCGAGGAA
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGG
ACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGG
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGT
AGGGCAGCAATGGGAAGTAGAAC
ATCGAAGGGTGAGGAAAGAGC

PCR purpose
NGS, rearrangements
NGS, TAIL-PCR
NGS
NGS, rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements, ddPCR
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
Rearrangements
NGS, rearrangements, TAIL-PCR
NGS
NGS
Rearrangements
NGS

LAD1
LAD2
LAD3
LAD4
LAD5
LAD6
AC1

ACGATGGACTCCAGAGCGGCCGCVNVNNNGGAA
ACGATGGACTCCAGAGCGGCCGCBNBNNNGGTT
ACGATGGACTCCAGAGCGGCCGCVNVNNNTATG
ACGATGGACTCCAGAGCGGCCGCBDNBNNNCGGT
ACGATGGACTCCAGAGNNNNNNNGTAC
ACGATGGACTCCAGAGNNNNNNNAATT
ACGATGGACTCCAGAG

TAIL-PCR (random primers)
TAIL-PCR (random primers)
TAIL-PCR (random primers)
TAIL-PCR (random primers)
TAIL-PCR (random primers)
TAIL-PCR (random primers)
TAIL-PCR (random primers)

Clover F
Clover R
Clover Pr
Emid1 F
Emid1 R
Emid1 Pr

GTCCAGGAGCGCACCATCTC
AGCTCGATGCGGTTCACCAG
ACGGTACCTACAAGACCCGCGCCGA (HEX-BHQ)
GCCAGGACTGGGTAGCAC
AGGAGGCTCCTGAATTTGTGACAAG
CCTGGGTCATCTGAGCTGAGTCC (FAM-BHQ)

ddPCR (Clover) F
ddPCR (Clover) R
ddPCR (Clover) Probe
ddPCR (Emid1) F
ddPCR (Emid1) R
ddPCR (Emid1) Probe

N4 F
N4 R
N4 Pr
N5 F
N5 R
N5 Pr
N9 F
N9 R
N9 Pr
N10 F
N10 R
N10 Pr
N10 bc F
N10 bc R
N10 bc 6409 Pr
N10 bc 4523 Pr
N10 bc 146980 Pr
N10 bc 149645 Pr

CTGGGAGAAGTGGAGCAAGA
GCACAGACTGAAGGAAAGGC
CCAGGGACTGTCCCACCTAGGG (FAM-BHQ)
GCCAGCAAAAGGCCAGGAA
CATTTCATGCTAATCTCCCCG
TCCATAGGCTCCGCTAATATGCCTGCTAAA (FAMBHQ)
TCCAAAACTGAAAGTCTGTGTCCA
CTAAACTGACCCCAGGTGGG
TCCTCCGTCTCCCTGGCTTTCCTTG (FAM-BHQ)
ATGGCTAAAATGGCTGAGAGGT
CCAGGGATGCAGGGATGGT
AGGGTCAGGATAGATACCGAAGGGTTTGTTTA
(FAM-BHQ)
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGG
CCCTGGAGCACTAGTTGTCAT
CAGGTTCGATTGCATGTGCCACTT (HEX-BHQ)
CAGGTTCGACTGCATATGCACCTT (HEX-BHQ)
CATGGCTAGCTAACTCCGATGGGGTTACTATCC
(HEX-BHQ)
CATGGCTAGCTTACTACGATTCGGTATCTATCC
(HEX-BHQ)

ddPCR (Emb#4 border) F
ddPCR (Emb#4 border) R
ddPCR (Emb#4 border) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#5 border) F
ddPCR (Emb#5 border) R
ddPCR (Emb#5 border) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#9 border) F
ddPCR (Emb#9 border) R
ddPCR (Emb#9 border) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#10 border) F
ddPCR (Emb#10 border) R
ddPCR (Emb#10 border) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#10 barc) F
ddPCR (Emb#10 barc) R
ddPCR (Emb#10 barc 6409) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#10 barc 4523) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#10 barc 146980) Probe
ddPCR (Emb#10 barc 149645) Probe

Supplementary Table 4. Cutadapt options used for reads trimming.
-a L=CTTGAATGACAACTAGTGCTCCAGG
-a R=CTATCCTGACCCTGCTTGGCT
--trimmed-only

NGS Library 1
(original
barcoded
plasmids)

Cutadapt first pass

For all
samples
Embryo 1

Embryo 2

NGS Library 2
(PCR of the
barcoded
concatemer
junctions)

Embryo 3

Embryo 4

Embryo 5

Cutadapt second pass
-e 0.2
--trimmed-only
-g
-g
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCA
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCA
CAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCT
CATGGCTA
GCA
-G
-G
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAAT
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTT CAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
GCTCACATGGCTA
-g
-g
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCA
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGT
CAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCT
TCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA -G
GCA -G
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAAT
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTT
CAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
ACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATG
GCTA
-g
-g
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCA
TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCC
CAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCT
TTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA -G
GCA -G
TATCAGCTCACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAAT
TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGTTC
CAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
CTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA
-g
-g
ACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAA CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCA
GAACATGCCTGCA
CATGGCTA
-G
-G
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTT ACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACA
GCTCACATGGCTA
TGCCTGCA
-g
-g
ACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAA TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCC
GAACATGCCTGCA
TTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA

Embryo 6

Embryo 7

Embryo 8

Embryo 9

Embryo 10

NGS Library 3
(Inverse PCR)

For all
samples

-G
TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGTTC
CTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA
-g
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAG
GGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-G
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTT
ACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATG
GCTA
-g
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAG
GGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-G
TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGTTC
CTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA
-g
GCATGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGG
ATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-G
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTT
GCTCACATGGCTA
-g
GCATGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGG
ATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA -G
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTT
ACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATG
GCTA
-g
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAG
GGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-G
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTT
GCTCACATGGCTA
Cutadapt first pass

-a Lpci=AATCACATGCATGT

-G
ACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGATAACGCAGGAAAGAACA
TGCCTGCA
-g
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGT
TCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA
-G
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGAT
AACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-g
TGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCC
TTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA
-G
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGAT
AACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-g
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCA
CATGGCTA
-G
GCATGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGATAAC
GCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
-g
GAGCCTATGGAAAAACGCCAGCAACGCGGCCTTTTTACGGT
TCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCACATGGCTA -G
GCATGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGATAAC
GCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA

-g
CGGCCTTTTTACGGTTCCTGGCCTTTTGCTGGCCTTTTGCTCA
CATGGCTA
-G
ACTCAAAGGCGGTAATACGGTTATCCACAGAATCAGGGGAT
AACGCAGGAAAGAACATGCCTGCA
Cutadapt second pass (for reads where correct ligation junction
was found)
--overlap 11 -e 0.2 --trimmed-only
-a L=TGAATGACAACTAGTGCTCCAGG

-a R=ATCCTGACCCTGCTTGGCT

Supplementary Table 5. Barcode patterns.
Pattern description
Pattern 1
Exact match
Pattern 2
+/- 1 redundant base

Python RE-pattern (5’-barcode sequence)
[ATGC]{2}CGA[ATGC]{2}GCA[ATGC]{2}TGC[ATGC]{2}
Example of matching pattern:
AT CGA AG GCA GG TGC CC
[ATGC]{1,3}CGA[ATGC]{1,3}GCA[ATGC]{1,3}TGC[ATGC]{1,3}
Example of matching patter:
AT CGA ACG GCA GG TGC CC

Python RE-pattern (3’-barcode sequence)
[ATGC]{2}ACT[ATGC]{2}GAT[ATGC]{2}GGT[ATGC]{2}

[ATGC]{1,3}ACT[ATGC]{1,3}GAT[ATGC]{1,3}GGT[ATGC]{1,3}

Pattern 3
SNP (1 bp insertion,
deletion or substitution)
in constant bases

75 different patterns
Example of matching pattern:
AT CGGA AG GCA GG TGC CC

74 different patterns

Both pattern 2 and
pattern 3

75 different patterns
Example of matching pattern:
AT CGGA AG GCA G TGC CC

74 different patterns

Supplementary Table 6. Barcode pair thresholds for filtering.
Library
NGS Library 1 (original barcoded
plasmids)

NGS Library 2 (PCR of the
barcoded concatemer junctions)

NGS Library 3 (Inverse PCR)

Sample
Original
barcoded
plasmids
Embryo 1
Embryo 2
Embryo 3
Embryo 4
Embryo 5
Embryo 6
Embryo 7
Embryo 8
Embryo 9
Embryo 10
Embryo 1
Embryo 2
Embryo 3
Embryo 4
Embryo 5
Embryo 6
Embryo 7
Embryo 8
Embryo 9
Embryo 10

Count of reads
supporting pair
threshold
1
1
50
250
2 000
500
3 000
2
5 000
200
1
10 000
300
500
10 000
1
30 000
300
3000
10 000
5000

REFERENCES
Westendorf K, Durek P, Ayew S, Mashreghi MF, Radbruch A. Chromosomal localisation of the CD4cre transgene in B6·Cg-Tg(Cd4-cre)1Cwi
mice. J Immunol Methods. 2016 Sep;436:54-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2016.06.005. Epub 2016 Jun 23.
Harkins S, Whitton JL. Chromosomal mapping of the αMHC-MerCreMer transgene in mice reveals a large genomic deletion. Transgenic Res.
2016 Oct;25(5):639-48. doi: 10.1007/s11248-016-9960-6. Epub 2016 May 10.
Masumura K, Sakamoto Y, Kumita W, Honma M, Nishikawa A, Nohmi T. Genomic integration of lambda EG10 transgene in gpt delta
transgenic rodents. Genes Environ. 2015 Dec 1;37:24. doi: 10.1186/s41021-015-0024-6.
Yong CS, Sharkey J, Duscio B, Venville B, Wei WZ, Jones RF, Slaney CY, Mir Arnau G, Papenfuss AT, Schröder J, Darcy PK, Kershaw MH.
Embryonic Lethality in Homozygous Human Her-2 Transgenic Mice Due to Disruption of the Pds5b Gene. PLoS One. 2015 Sep
3;10(9):e0136817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0136817.
Yan BW, Zhao YF, Cao WG, Li N, Gou KM. Mechanism of random integration of foreign DNA in transgenic mice. Transgenic Res. 2013
Oct;22(5):983-92. doi: 10.1007/s11248-013-9701-z.
Chiang C, Jacobsen JC, Ernst C, Hanscom C, Heilbut A, Blumenthal I, Mills RE, Kirby A, Lindgren AM, Rudiger SR, McLaughlan CJ, Bawden
CS, Reid SJ, Faull RL, Snell RG, Hall IM, Shen Y, Ohsumi TK, Borowsky ML, Daly MJ, Lee C, Morton CC, MacDonald ME, Gusella JF,
Talkowski ME. Complex reorganization and predominant non-homologous repair following chromosomal breakage in karyotypically balanced
germline rearrangements and transgenic integration. Nat Genet. 2012 Mar 4;44(4):390-7, S1. doi: 10.1038/ng.2202.
Shwed PS, Crosthwait J, Douglas GR, Seligy VL. Characterisation of Muta™Mouse λgt10-lacZ transgene: evidence for in vivo rearrangements.
Mutagenesis. 2010 Nov;25(6):609-16. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geq048. Epub 2010 Aug 19.
Suzuki O, Hata T, Takekawa N, Koura M, Takano K, Yamamoto Y, Noguchi Y, Uchio-Yamada K, Matsuda J. Transgene insertion pattern
analysis using genomic walking in a transgenic mouse line. Exp Anim. 2006 Jan;55(1):65-9.
Licence S, Persson C, Mundt C, Mårtensson IL. The VpreB1 enhancer drives developmental stage-specific gene expression in vivo. Eur J
Immunol. 2003 Apr;33(4):1117-26.
Suemizu H, Muguruma K, Maruyama C, Tomisawa M, Kimura M, Hioki K, Shimozawa N, Ohnishi Y, Tamaoki N, Nomura T. Transgene
stability and features of rasH2 mice as an Embryo model for short-term carcinogenicity testing. Mol Carcinog. 2002 May;34(1):1-9.

Tacken PJ, van der Zee A, Beumer TL, Florijn RJ, Gijpels MJ, Havekes LM, Frants RR, van Dijk KW, Hofker MH. Effective generation of very
low density lipoprotein receptor transgenic mice by overlapping genomic DNA fragments: high testis expression and disturbed spermatogenesis.
Transgenic Res. 2001 Jun;10(3):211-21.
Koetsier PA, Mangel L, Schmitz B, Doerfler W. Stability of transgene methylation patterns in mice: position effects, strain specificity and
cellular mosaicism. Transgenic Res. 1996 Jul;5(4):235-44.
McFarlane M, Wilson JB. A model for the mechanism of precise integration of a microinjected transgene. Transgenic Res. 1996 May;5(3):1717.
Pawlik KM, Sun CW, Higgins NP, Townes TM. End joining of genomic DNA and transgene DNA in fertilized mouse eggs. Gene. 1995 Nov
20;165(2):173-81.
Hamada T, Sasaki H, Seki R, Sakaki Y. Mechanism of chromosomal integration of transgenes in microinjected mouse eggs: sequence analysis
of genome-transgene and transgene-transgene junctions at two loci. Gene. 1993 Jun 30;128(2):197-202.
Mark WH, Signorelli K, Blum M, Kwee L, Lacy E. Genomic structure of the locus associated with an insertional mutation in line 4 transgenic
mice. Genomics. 1992 May;13(1):159-66.
Burdon T, Sankaran L, Wall RJ, Spencer M, Hennighausen L. Expression of a whey acidic protein transgene during mammary development.
Evidence for different mechanisms of regulation during pregnancy and lactation. J Biol Chem. 1991 Apr 15;266(11):6909-14.
Radice G, Lee JJ, Costantini F. H beta 58, an insertional mutation affecting early postimplantation development of the mouse embryo.
Development. 1991 Mar;111(3):801-11.
Rohan RM, King D, Frels WI. Direct sequencing of PCR-amplified junction fragments from tandemly repeated transgenes. Nucleic Acids Res.
1990 Oct 25;18(20):6089-95.
Wilkie TM, Palmiter RD. Analysis of the integrant in MyK-103 transgenic mice in which males fail to transmit the integrant. Mol Cell Biol.
1987 May;7(5):1646-55.
Covarrubias L, Nishida Y, Mintz B. Early postimplantation embryo lethality due to DNA rearrangements in a transgenic mouse strain. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A. 1986 Aug;83(16):6020-4.

Wagner EF, Covarrubias L, Stewart TA, Mintz B. Prenatal lethalities in mice homozygous for human growth hormone gene sequences
integrated in the germ line. Cell. 1983 Dec;35(3 Pt 2):647-55.
Khillan JS, Overbeek PA, Westphal H. Drosophila P element integration in the mouse. Dev Biol. 1985 May;109(1):247-50.
van der Putten H, Botteri F, Illmensee K. Developmental fate of a human insulin gene in a transgenic mouse. Mol Gen Genet. 1984;198(2):12838.
Brinster RL, Ritchie KA, Hammer RE, O'Brien RL, Arp B, Storb U. Expression of a microinjected immunoglobulin gene in the spleen of
transgenic mice. Nature. 1983 Nov 24-30;306(5941):332-6.
McKnight GS, Hammer RE, Kuenzel EA, Brinster RL. Expression of the chicken transferrin gene in transgenic mice. Cell. 1983 Sep;34(2):33541.
Wagner EF, Covarrubias L, Stewart TA, Mintz B. Prenatal lethalities in mice homozygous for human growth hormone gene sequences
integrated in the germ line. Cell. 1983 Dec;35(3 Pt 2):647-55.
Palmiter RD, Chen HY, Brinster RL. Differential regulation of metallothionein-thymidine kinase fusion genes in transgenic mice and their
offspring. Cell. 1982 Jun;29(2):701-10.
Palmiter RD, Brinster RL, Hammer RE, Trumbauer ME, Rosenfeld MG, Birnberg NC, Evans RM. Dramatic growth of mice that develop from
eggs microinjected with metallothionein-growth hormone fusion genes. Nature. 1982 Dec 16;300(5893):611-5.

