bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The RNA Atlas, a single nucleotide resolution map of the human
transcriptome
Lucia Lorenzi1,2*, Hua-Sheng Chiu3*, Francisco Avila Cobos1,2, Stephen Gross4, Pieter-Jan
Volders1,2, Robrecht Cannoodt1,2,5,6, Justine Nuytens1,2, Katrien Vanderheyden1,2, Jasper
Anckaert1,2, Steve Lefever1,2, Tine Goovaerts7, Thomas Birkballe Hansen8, Scott Kuersten4,
Nele Nijs9, Tom Taghon10, Karim Vermaelen11, Ken R. Bracke12, Yvan Saeys5,6, Tim De Meyer7,
Nandan Deshpande13, Govardhan Anande14,15, Ting-Wen Chen16, Marc R. Wilkins13, Ashwin
Unnikrishnan14,15, Katleen De Preter1,2, Jørgen Kjems8, Jan Koster17, Gary P. Schroth4, Jo
Vandesompele1,2, Pavel Sumazin3, Pieter Mestdagh1,2.
1. Center for Medical Genetics, Ghent University, Belgium
2. Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent, Belgium
3. Texas Children’s Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, USA
4. Illumina, San Diego, California, USA
5. Data Mining and Modelling for Biomedicine group, VIB Center for Inflammation Research,
Ghent, Belgium
6. Department of Applied Mathematics, Computer Science, and Statistics, Ghent University,
Ghent, Belgium
7. Department of Data Analysis and Mathematical Modelling, Ghent University, Belgium
8. Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
9. Biogazelle, Zwijnaarde, Belgium
10. Department of Diagnostic Sciences, Ghent University, Belgium
11. Department of Pulmonary Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium
12. Department of Respiratory Medicine, Ghent University, Belgium
13. University Systems Biology Initiative, School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular
Sciences, UNSW Sydney, Sydney, NSW, 2052, Australia
14. Adult Cancer Program, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052,
Australia.
15. Prince of Wales Clinical School, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
16. Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems Biology, National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
17. Academisch Medisch Centrum (AMC), University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
* Shared first authors

Abstract
The human transcriptome consists of various RNA biotypes including multiple types of noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). Current ncRNA compendia remain incomplete partially because they
are almost exclusively derived from the interrogation of small- and polyadenylated RNAs.
Here, we present a more comprehensive atlas of the human transcriptome that is derived
from matching polyA-, total-, and small-RNA profiles of a heterogeneous collection of nearly
300 human tissues and cell lines. We report on thousands of novel RNA species across all
major RNA biotypes, including a hitherto poorly-cataloged class of non-polyadenylated single-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

exon long non-coding RNAs. In addition, we exploit intron abundance estimates from total
RNA-sequencing to test and verify functional regulation by novel non-coding RNAs. Our study
represents a substantial expansion of the current catalogue of human ncRNAs and their
regulatory interactions. All data, analyses, and results are available in the R2 web portal and
serve as a basis to further explore RNA biology and function.

Main
The introduction and constant improvement of RNA-sequencing technologies have enabled
us to interrogate the human transcriptome at nucleotide resolution, exposing distinct RNA
biotypes beyond protein-coding messenger RNAs (mRNAs). A plethora of regulatory noncoding RNAs, including microRNAs (miRNA), long intergenic non-coding RNAs (lincRNAs),
antisense RNAs (asRNAs) and circular RNAs (circRNAs) have been identified and are actively
explored as novel players in human development and disease including cancer1–3. Several
consortium-based efforts have contributed to the discovery and quantification of these RNA
biotypes in heterogeneous sample collections4–12. The resulting transcriptome landscapes are
serving as crucial community resources to study RNA biology, mechanism, function, and
biomarker potential13–16. However, these studies have mostly applied RNA-sequencing
technologies that profile the small- and polyadenylated-RNA transcriptomes. As a result, a
systematic survey of the non-polyadenylated transcriptome and the circularized
transcriptome, and their relationship to other RNA biotypes, is currently missing. To capture
a more complete diversity of the human transcriptome, we applied three complementary
RNA-seq methods on a heterogeneous collection of 300 human samples, including 45 tissues,
162 cell types, and 93 cell lines (Figure 1A, Supplemental Table 1). From these samples, we
generated strand-specific small RNA (298 samples), polyA (295 samples) and total RNA (296
samples) libraries that were sequenced at a median depth of 13 M, 60 M paired-end, and 125
M paired-end reads respectively, resulting in a total of 125 Billion reads (Figure S1). By
integrating these datasets, we assembled transcripts representing five major RNA biotypes,
including mRNAs, lincRNAs, asRNAs, circRNAs and miRNAs, culminating in a stringently
selected transcriptome and its matching expression atlas. Broad intron-coverage from the
total RNA-sequencing data enabled data-driven prediction of transcriptional and posttranscriptional modulation of gene expression by non-coding RNAs, all of which are available
through the R2 web portal.

Results
Assembling a comprehensive human transcriptome reveals numerous single-exon lincRNAs
The basis of the RNA Atlas transcriptome was created by newly assembled mRNAs, lincRNAs,
and asRNAs after rigorous filtering and merging with known transcripts from Ensembl
annotation (v86)17 (Figure S2, Figure 1B, Supplemental Table 2, see Methods for details). To
gather independent evidence supporting the transcriptional activity of these genes, we
integrated public cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE) sequencing data (FANTOM6) and
various chromatin states associated with transcription or with enhancer activity from
comprehensive cell and tissue collections (Epigenomics Roadmap18). The majority of known
(88%) and novel (62%) genes were closely associated—within 500 base pairs of transcription
start sites (TSSs)—with a CAGE-peak or relevant chromatin state (Figure 1C). Non-coding RNA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

genes, and novel genes in general, were mainly supported by chromatin states while known
mRNAs were supported by both CAGE-peaks and chromatin states. Genes supported by a
CAGE-peak or chromatin state were retained in what we refer to as the stringent RNA Atlas
transcriptome (Figure 1D). An additional 754 genes without CAGE-peak or chromatin state
support, but with supra-median expression level (details in Methods), were also included.
This transcriptome consists of 19,107 mRNA genes (of which 188 (0.9%) are novel), 18,387
lincRNAs (of which 13,175 (71%) are novel) and 7,309 asRNAs (of which 2,519 (34%) are
novel). From the total RNA-sequencing data, we subsequently identified 38,023 circRNAs with
more than 4 back-spliced reads (Supplemental Table 3). Of these, 37,140 were derived from
stringent RNA Atlas genes and thus retained in the stringent RNA Atlas transcriptome. The
majority (60%) of the circRNAs did not match previously annotated species in circBase19 and
almost all (98%) were processed from mRNA host genes, with a median of 3 circRNAs per host
gene (Figure 1E-G). In line with previous reports, circRNAs had a median number of 4 exons
and were flanked by introns that were significantly longer than introns not flanking circRNAs
(P < 1 x 10-10, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) (Figure S3). Finally, we identified 5,427 candidate
mature miRNAs from the small RNA sequencing data, 70% of which were novel (Figure 1H,
Supplemental Tables 4 and 5). Precursor transcripts for these miRNAs were predominantly
located in intronic and intergenic regions and the fraction of precursors giving rise to both a
3p and 5p mature form was slightly lower for novel miRNAs (30%) compared to known (41%)
miRNA genes (Figure 1 I-J). Precursor miRNAs are processed from larger primary miRNA
transcripts whose transcription start sites are not easily defined (for instance, 1,196
precursors are located in intergenic regions). Therefore, we did not integrate CAGE-seq data
or chromatin states to define a stringent set of miRNAs. Instead, we used expression-based
relationships between the candidate mature miRNAs and their predicted targets to enrich for
small RNA sequences that effectively show miRNA-like behavior. Further details on these
analyses are presented in the penultimate section of the results (Figure 5).
Unsurprisingly, the majority of novel expressed loci in the stringent RNA Atlas transcriptome
were annotated as lincRNAs. In contrast to mRNAs and asRNAs, most novel lincRNAs (65%)
were single-exon genes (Figure 2A). Single-exon lincRNA genes are often removed from
transcriptome assemblies as they are thought to derive from contaminating DNA. As we
applied a stranded RNA-sequencing workflow, DNA fragments that get incorporated in the
library would result in reads mapping to both strands in a nearly equal ratio. The mean exonic
strandedness for single-exon lincRNAs was 96% and similar to that of multi-exon lincRNAs
(94%) or mRNAs (95%), suggesting they do not originate from DNA fragments contaminating
the RNA sample (Figure S4). This was further validated experimentally by qPCR for 110 singleexon lincRNA genes (48 novel ubiquitously expressed, 32 novel specifically expressed in one
of 2 cell lines used for validation and 30 known) on RNA samples either or not reverse
transcribed into cDNA. For those genes that were successfully amplified (Cq < 35, n=101), we
observed a significant fold increase of qPCR signal in the RT versus no-RT samples (Wilcoxon
signed-rank test, P < 1 x 10-10), further confirming that these single-exon lincRNAs originate
from RNA and not residual DNA fragments (Figure 2B, Figure S5). The fact that all single-exon
lincRNAs in the stringent RNA Atlas transcriptome have a CAGE peak (13%) or chromatin
state(s) indicative for active transcription (98%) close to their TSS also favors this
interpretation. Unlike multi-exon mRNAs or lincRNAs, and similar to single-exon mRNAs,
single-exon lincRNAs are not flanked by canonical splice sites (Figure 2C, Figure S6 A).
Moreover, the genomic distance between single-exon lincRNAs and the nearest up- or

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

downstream exon is significantly larger (median 2.3 kb) compared to the genomic distance
between consecutive exons in multi-exon mRNAs (median 0.511 kb, P < 1 x 10-10) or lincRNAs
(median 1.17 kb, P < 1 x 10-10, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) (Figure S6 B). These observations
support that the single-exon lincRNA genes are not part of multi-exon genes that we failed to
assemble because of missing junction reads.
While most novel genes were identified among the ncRNA biotypes, our workflow also
revealed a handful of novel candidate mRNAs. Based on in silico predictions, 188 novel genes
showed high coding potential (Supplemental Table 6). The coding potential of these novel
mRNAs was further substantiated through re-analysis of mass spectrometry data from the
Human Proteome Map20, revealing peptides matching 33 (18%) of these novel mRNA genes
(FDR < 0.01). We identified peptides whose expression profile across tissues correlated with
that of their template mRNAs, underscoring the validity of the results. These include a novel
heart-specific peptide whose template mRNA is specifically expressed in heart tissues (Figure
2D-F) and a peptide with high abundance in T-cells and B-cells whose template mRNA shows
highest expression in spleen and lymph node (Figure S7). Protein domain analysis of the heartspecific protein sequence revealed a TLV_coat domain, also present in human syncytin genes.
Homology to syncytin was further validated through BLAST analysis. Syncytin proteins
mediate cell fusion during placental development, a process also occurring in muscle and
cardiac tissue21.
Integrating polyA and total RNA-seq data reveals thousands of non-polyadenylated genes
We then took advantage of our matching polyA and total RNA-sequencing data to establish
the polyadenylation status of the stringent RNA Atlas genes. We reasoned that, after scaling
count data from both libraries for differences in coverage, polyadenylated genes should show
equal coverage in both polyA and total RNA libraries while coverage for non-polyadenylated
genes should be low or absent in polyA libraries (Figure 3A). Indeed, the distribution of log2
count ratios (polyA/total RNA) for known polyadenylated genes is centered around zero and
significantly higher than that of known non-polyadenylated genes (Figure 3B, Figure S8,
Supplemental Table 7). For each of 291 samples for which matching polyA and total RNA data
was available, we calculated the log2 ratio cut-off that most accurately classified known
polyadenylated (n=5,987) and non-polyadenylated (n=117) genes22 and subsequently applied
it to establish the polyadenylation status of the stringent RNA Atlas genes (Supplemental
Table 2, see Methods for details). Only genes with at least 10 counts were included in the
analysis. As expected, most mRNAs (90%) were classified as polyadenylated (majority vote
across all samples, Figure 3C). For lincRNAs and asRNAs, the fraction of polyadenylated genes
was 48% and 63% respectively. Notably, up to 75% of the novel single-exon lincRNAs were
classified as non-polyadenylated (Figure 3D), demonstrating the added value of total RNAsequencing to detect this specific RNA biotype. To empirically validate our polyA-status
assessment methodology, we established a polyA-minus RNA-sequencing protocol by
depleting polyadenylated transcripts from total RNA libraries and applied it to two RNA Atlas
cell lines. Non-polyadenylated genes showed significantly higher polyA-minus/polyA count
ratios than polyadenylated genes (P < 1 x 10-10, Wilcoxon signed-rank test) supporting our
proposed classifications (Figure 3E).
To study potential changes in gene polyadenylation status across samples, we focused our
analysis on genes with at least 100 counts in 20 or more samples. Log2 count ratio
distributions across samples suggested shifts from a polyadenylated to a non-polyadenylated
state for a subset of genes in each biotype category (Figure 3F). Genes that were classified at

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

least twice as non-polyadenylated and at least twice as polyadenylated were enriched among
the lincRNA (59%) and asRNA (64%) biotypes compared to the mRNA biotype (43%). To
evaluate what may be driving these shifts, we selected the more extreme cases based on log2
count ratios in each class (< -4 in at least 2 non-polyadenylated samples, > 0 in at least 2
polyadenylated samples). This selection included 83 mRNAs, 36 lincRNAs and 39 asRNAs
(Figure 3G, Supplemental Table 8). We found that variable polyadenylation status was driven
by differential expression of alternatively polyadenylated isoforms in 57 (36%) of these genes.
One example is the histone gene HIST1H2BD that is transcribed into a single exon nonpolyadenylated mRNA in the ALL-SIL cell line and a two-exon polyadenylated mRNA in
prostate tissue (Figure 3H). Of note, the remaining 103 genes did not show any obvious
changes in isoform usage, suggesting the existence of also other mechanisms causing
differences in polyadenylation status (Figure S9).
RNA biotype expression reflects sample ontology
After establishing and annotating a stringent transcriptome that covers the five primary RNAbiotypes, we analyzed RNA biotype expression data in relation to sample ontology and
transcriptome biology. We first validated that the RNA Atlas expression data reflects a
number of well-established features of the transcriptome such as non-coding RNA expression
specificity, imprinting and cancer fusion gene expression. As expected, we observed a strong
enrichment of mRNA fusion genes in cancer cell lines compared to non-malignant cell types
and tissues (Figure S10) and detected 20 known imprinted genes that featured consistent
mono-allelic expression over the large majority of samples (Figure S11, Supplemental Table
9). When evaluating expression-specificity for the various biotypes, the RNA Atlas expression
data verified that non-coding RNAs were expressed in a more tissue-specific manner than
mRNAs (Figure S12). Notably, when correcting for differences in expression abundance
between RNA biotypes, lincRNAs and asRNAs remained more specific than mRNAs while
circRNAs showed similar specificity (Figure S12). When selecting 1,320 tissue-specific RNAs
from external datasets23, 96.14% were cross-validated in the RNA Atlas dataset,
independently validating the RNA Atlas gene expression profiles (Figure S13). Based on these
observations, we concluded that the RNA Atlas expression data indeed reflects the known
characteristics of the transcriptome.
We then calculated expression-based distances between samples to evaluate associations
between expression data and sample ontology for each of the biotypes. With this analysis,
we evaluate if the large collection of novel genes that were identified (such as the single exon
lincRNAs and novel miRNAs) are expressed in a non-random manner, and thus reflect
underlying sample-ontology relationships. We first focused our analysis on 4 major cellular
subtypes, i.e. epithelial cells (n=21), endothelial cells (n=25), fibroblasts (n=33) and
mesenchymal cells (n=8). We reasoned that the transcriptional profiles of cells within each
subtype should be closely related, and distinct from transcriptional profiles of the other cell
types in the RNA Atlas dataset. Two-dimensional clustering of all cell types based on mRNA
expression data confirmed that cell types within each subtype were indeed more closely
associated (Figure 4A).
Consequently, mRNA expression-based distances between samples within a subtype (intradistance) were significantly smaller than expression-based distances between these samples
and all other samples in the dataset (inter-distance, P < 0.05, paired T-test, Figure 4B). This
was observed for all 4 subtypes and was most pronounced for endothelial cells for which the
median inter-distance was 2.3-fold higher than the median intra-distance. When calculating

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

intra- and inter-distances for the other RNA biotypes, lincRNAs, asRNAs and miRNAs all
showed inter-distances that were significantly higher than intra-distances (Figure 4C). More
importantly, when calculating these distances using the novel miRNAs or single-exon
lincRNAs, we observed similar patterns, suggesting these genes are also expressed in a
coordinated manner (Figure 4D-E). This is supported by the fact that a subset of novel miRNAs
(n=68) and single exon lincRNAs (n=197) are significantly upregulated (log2 fold change of at
least 3 and a Benjamini-Hochberg based FDR lower than 0.01) in individual cell subtypes and
demonstrate subtype-specific expression profiles (Figure 4F-I). Surprisingly, for circRNAs, we
did not observe a substantial difference between inter- and intra-distances (Figure 4C). To
further validate these findings, we repeated our analysis, focusing on the cancer cell lines
within each cancer type. Inter-distances (expression distances between cell lines from the
same cancer-type and cell lines from other cancer-types) were significantly higher than intradistances (expression distances among cell lines from the same cancer-type) for mRNAs,
asRNAs, lincRNAs and miRNAs but not for circRNA (Figure S14). Significant differences were
also observed for the novel miRNAs and single-exon lincRNAs (Figure S14), confirming our
observations on the biological subtypes. Moreover, we identified several novel miRNAs
(n=154) and single-exon lincRNAs (n=1,006) that were significantly overexpressed in
individual cancer types (Figure S14).
These results indicate that the genes in the RNA Atlas transcriptome, and more specifically
the novel miRNAs and single-exon lincRNAs, show expression patterns that closely reflect
sample ontology relationships. Furthermore, these non-random expression patterns again
support that the single-exon lincRNAs do not derive from DNA fragments contaminating the
RNA-sequencing libraries.
Both for the cell subtypes and the cancer types, circRNA based expression distances did not
differ between related and unrelated samples (Figure 4C and Figure S14C). Because of
technical limitations (circRNAs can only be quantified using reads spanning the back-spliced
junction), the number of available reads that quantify circRNA expression is typically low, and
thus inherently more variable compared to linear RNAs. When focusing our analysis on more
abundant circRNAs, we indeed observed an increase in the difference between the inter and
intra-distance (Figure S15). That increase was proportional to the abundance of the selected
circRNAs and only the 1% most abundant circRNAs produced results similar to those observed
for the linear RNAs. Overall, 34 and 108 circRNAs were significantly upregulated (log2 fold
change of at least 3 and a Benjamini-Hochberg based FDR lower than 0.01) in one of the 4
major cell subtypes or 10 cancer types, respectively (Figure S15).
Total RNA transcriptomes facilitate the use of intron expression profiles to study regulatory
modalities
Our total RNA sequencing profiles provide broad coverage of expressed pre-mRNA introns
(Figure 5A). Consequently, we were able to estimate both intronic and exonic expression for
most widely expressed transcripts, and we used these profiles as surrogates for pre-mRNA
and mRNA expression profiles, respectively (Supplemental Tables 10-12). Analysis of these
pre-mRNA and mRNA expression profile estimates suggested a universally significant but less
than a perfect concordance for most transcripts (Figure 5B). Interestingly, pre-mRNA and
mRNA expression deviated significantly more for genes with longer 3’ UTRs (P < 8 x 10-37),
which can be explained by tighter 3’UTR-mediated post-transcriptional regulation24. Namely,
transcriptional regulation is expected to affect both pre-mRNA and mRNA expression profiles
while post-transcriptional regulation should be evidenced by deviations between these

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

profiles. To further study the effects of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation, we
collected verified transcription factor (TF) and miRNA targets for 210 TFs and 226 miRNAs
(Supplemental Table 13). TF expression had significantly higher correlations with both the
target pre-mRNA and mRNA expression than with the target mRNA/pre-mRNA-ratio (further
referred to as the m/p-ratio). In contrast, and as expected, miRNA expression had significantly
higher correlations with the target m/p-ratio than with pre-mRNA and mRNA expression of
the target (Figure 5C-D). These observations verify that mRNA and pre-mRNA estimates can
be exploited to study transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. Moreover, they
provide a means to evaluate the miRNA-like behavior of the novel miRNAs identified in this
study in relation to their predicted targets. However, extending this observation to predicted
TF and miRNA targets required accurate and dataset-specific regulator-target predictions
(Supplemental Table 14) because sequence-based target predictions alone showed little
evidence of differences between pre-mRNA and m/p-ratio correlations (Figures 5E and S16).
Indeed, analyses focusing on miRNAs with predicted targets by LongHorn25 suggested that
m/p-ratio correlations for miRBase miRNAs were significantly higher than pre-mRNA
correlations. Note that LongHorn uses mRNA expression estimates to predict interactions,
and, consequently, LongHorn-predicted regulator and target mRNA profiles—but not m/pratios—are expected to be correlated. Similar to miRBase miRNAs, novel RNA Atlas miRNAs
had significantly higher m/p-ratio than pre-mRNA correlations (Figure 5F, P < 6 x 10-8,
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test).
We set out restrictive criteria to identify individual miRNAs with significantly better m/pratio than mRNA and pre-mRNA profiles. Namely, only miRNAs with at least one predicted
target with adequate pre-mRNA expression profiles in all the RNA Atlas samples were
included in the analysis. In total, 719 miRBase miRNAs and 512 novel RNA Atlas miRNAs
satisfied this requirement. Of these, 672 miRBase miRNAs (93%) and 436 novel RNA Atlas
miRNAs (85%) had at least one target for which we observed a higher correlation between
its expression profile and its target’s m/p-ratio profiles than its target’s mRNA and premRNA profiles. However, to test that the expression profiles of miRNAs are significantly
more likely to have stronger correlation with their target’s m/p-ratios, we required that a
significantly greater number of predicted targets have higher miRNA to m/p-ratio
correlations (P < 0.05 by t test). In total, of the 699 miRBase miRNAs and 485 RNA Atlas
miRNAs that had multiple interactions with target pre-mRNA expression available, 198
miRBase miRNAs (28%) and 99 RNA Atlas miRNAs (20%) satisfied this requirement
(Supplemental Table 4). Our analysis suggests that these 198 miRBase miRNAs and 99 RNA
Atlas miRNAs are functionally regulating multiple post-transcriptional targets across
multiple samples in our dataset. The identity of these miRNAs and their targets in given in
Supplemental Table 15.
Evidence for transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation by long noncoding RNAs
Our ability to distinguish transcriptional from post-transcriptional regulation could also
provide insight into lncRNA function. We first applied LongHorn25 to infer regulatory networks
downstream of RNA Atlas lncRNAs, including single- and multi-exon lincRNAs, asRNAs and
circRNAs. LongHorn (Figure 6A) predicts lncRNA targets by evaluating them as modulators of
either transcriptional regulation - where lncRNAs are modeled to alter TF regulation as cofactors, guides, or decoys - or of post-transcriptional regulation as miRNA and RNA-binding
protein decoys26–29 We then evaluated whether LongHorn predictions were supported by the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

expected correlations between regulator expression (i.e. TF or miRNA) and target mRNA, premRNA, and m/p-ratio estimates. For each LongHorn prediction, we selected TF-target
interactions based on ENCODE ChIP-seq30 and TF binding motifs and miRNA-target
interactions based on sequence analysis25. Analogously to verified TF-target interactions
(Figure 5C) and for all types of lncRNA modulators considered, pre-mRNA and mRNA
correlations were consistently higher than m/p-ratio correlations for predicted TF-target
interactions (Figure 6B). Note that predicted TF-target interactions with no evidence of
lincRNA modulations did not have substantial differences between pre-mRNA and m/p-ratio
correlations (Figure S16). Similarly, all types of lncRNA mediated miRNA-target interactions
showed higher m/p-ratio correlations than mRNA or pre-mRNA correlations (Figure 6C); see
Supplemental Tables 16-17 for the complete data.
These observations thus suggest that all lncRNA biotypes, including single-exon lincRNAs, are
effectively altering TF and miRNA regulation. In addition, for many lncRNA species, the
analysis pointed to lncRNA specialization as either transcriptional or post-transcriptional
regulators. In total, we predicted 506,659 lncRNA-mediated interactions and targets included
in 230,623 of these (Figure 6D) had pre-mRNA, mRNA, and m/p-ratio expression estimates in
all samples. Nearly half of these interactions showed significant differences between premRNA and m/p-ratio correlations. However, there were fewer significant differences for
interactions that were modulated by circRNAs and for post-transcriptional decoys (Figure 6E).
Indeed, an analysis of lncRNA regulatory models inferred by LongHorn suggested that
circRNAs are predominantly post-transcriptional decoys, while other lncRNAs predominantly
modulate transcription (Figure 6F). These results are in line with earlier observations
demonstrating the enrichment of circRNAs in the cytoplasm and lincRNAs in the nucleus31–33.
In total, 981 single-exon lincRNAs (75% of lncRNAs that modulated at least one interaction for
which a m/p-ratio was computed) had significant differences between pre-mRNA and m/pratio. An additional 2,305 multi-exon lincRNAs showed similar behavior.
Nearly 4000 lncRNAs were associated with ten or more LongHorn-inferred targets, and the
majority of these lncRNAs were never previously cataloged. Our analysis suggests that many
of these lncRNAs preferentially target key pathways in disease and development (FDRadjusted Fisher Exact Test FDR-FET<0.01). To analyze this further, we cataloged lncRNAs
according to their predicted targets’ enrichment in hallmark pathways34 and their
specialization as transcriptional or post-transcriptional modulators. In total, 15 pathways
were enriched in targets from at least five lncRNAs (Figure 6G). Our analysis suggests that,
overall, lncRNAs preferentially target proliferation and signaling pathways. The full analysis is
given in Supplemental Table 18 and pathway enrichments for twenty-five known and novel
lncRNAs are depicted in Figure S17. The full lncRNA-target prediction data is available for
download and analysis on the R2 platform (r2.amc.nl). R2 allows for comparing profiles across
technologies, visualizing lncRNA expression across samples, and studying regulatory network
modules predicted by LongHorn, including analyzing correlations between lncRNAs, TFs,
miRNAs, and predicted targets. Figure 6H depicts an example of the R2 analysis modules using
the lncRNA SAMMSON15.

Discussion

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

By applying three complementary RNA-sequencing technologies on a heterogeneous
collection of tissues, cell types and cell lines, we assembled a very comprehensive human
transcriptome covering all major RNA biotypes. While our effort complements other
consortium-based efforts aimed at generating human expression atlases4–12, it also vastly
extends beyond their scope in various ways. This is mainly achieved through the integration
of a total RNA-sequencing methodology, providing a layer that is missing in the hitherto
available compendia, on top of polyA enriched sequencing. Not only did the total RNA
sequencing component of the RNA Atlas dataset reveal novel non-polyadenlylated lincRNAs
and circRNAs, it also enabled us to determine alternative transcript polyadenylation status
and quantify intronic RNA abundance levels. The latter is crucial to distinguish transcriptional
from post-transcriptional regulation, a concept we have exploited in various ways. First of all,
we have used it to reduce the more than 3000 newly assembled miRNAs into a stringent set
of 99 miRNAs with strong evidence of post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression in
multiple samples in our dataset. While we imposed minimal abundance criteria for the novel
miRNAs, we did not implement other criteria defined in the miRBase high-confident
checklist35 as opposed to a similar effort published earlier by the FANTOM consortium8.
Notably, several miRBase miRNAs have validated target genes but do not adhere to the highconfident criteria, which are mainly related to sequence characteristics. We therefore
reasoned that miRNA-like behavior (i.e. post-transcriptional regulation of target gene
expression) outweighs sequence characteristics when defining stringent miRNAs. Second, we
have integrated total RNA-sequencing intron and exon expression levels with the LongHorn
algorithm25 to infer non-coding RNA regulatory interactions.
The integration of miRNA and whole-transcriptome profiling across a variety of tissues
enabled unique analyses that, in turn, allowed us to evaluate RNA Atlas predicted ncRNA
species for functional evidence. Consequently, in addition to identifying new miRNAs and
lncRNAs, we were also able to collect multiple lines of evidence for their functional relevance
in human cells and to interpret their function through both transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulatory interactions. The resulting RNA Atlas dataset and analysis products
serve as a resource to mine the expression and regulatory landscapes of multiple RNA
biotypes and contains a unique collection of non-coding RNAs together with their functional
interpretation. Dedicated experimental validation studies based on genetic perturbations
coupled to phenotypic or molecular readouts should follow to evaluate ncRNA function36 in
each studied context. Moreover, we envision that the non-coding RNA regulatory interactions
that are presented will serve as a starting point for follow up studies to gain insights into the
mode-of-action of hundreds of ncRNAs.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. RNA Atlas transcriptome generation and annotation. (A) A heterogeneous collection
of tissues, cell types and cell lines was sequenced through complementary strand-specific
RNA-sequencing methods to profile the major RNA-biotypes in the human transcriptome. (B)
Number and fraction of known and novel mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA genes in the complete
RNA Atlas transcriptome. (C) Fraction of known and novel genes with independent evidence
for transcriptional activity at the DNA level (chromatin states, green), RNA level (CAGE-peak,
blue) and both levels (orange) or genes without independent evidence (white). (D) Number
and fraction of known and novel mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA genes in the stringent RNA Atlas

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

transcriptome. (E) Fraction of known and novel circRNA isoforms produced from genes in the
stringent RNA Atlas transcriptome. (F) Number of stringent mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA host
genes with expressed circRNA isoforms. (G) Histogram of expressed circRNA isoforms per host
gene. (H) Fraction of known and novel candidate mature miRNAs. (I) Annotation of miRNA
precursors based on location relative to genes in the stringent RNA Atlas transcriptome. (J)
Fraction of known and novel pre-miRNAs with expressed mature miRNAs from both arms
(blue) or one arm (white) of the precursor.
Figure 2. The RNA Atlas transcriptome reveals novel mRNAs and single-exon lincRNAs. (A)
Fraction of single- and multi-exon genes in the mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA biotypes. (B) qPCR
validation of novel single-exon lincRNAs in two RNA Atlas cell lines. The distributions of fold
enrichment between RT and no-RT reactions are shown for ubiquitously expressed known
and novel single-exon lincRNAs (dark blue, light blue, respectively) and for novel single-exon
lincRNAs specifically expressed in each the cell line (orange). (C) Sequence motif analysis of
the exon/intron boundary (exon/intergenic boundary for single-exon genes) for multi-exon
mRNAs, multi-exon lincRNAs and single-exon lincRNAs. The y-axis shows the information
content measured in bits. (D) Example of a novel heart-specific mRNA with matching peptides
from public mass spectrometry data. Expression of this gene is specific for heart-tissue
samples (blue bars) both at RNA (E) and peptide (F) level.
Figure 3. Analysis of polyadenylation status. (A) Read coverage profiles from polyAsequencing and total RNA-sequencing libraries for a known polyadenylated gene (upper
panel) and a known non-polyadenylated gene (lower panel). (B) Distribution of the
normalized log2 ratio of counts from polyA-sequencing versus total RNA-sequencing in an
individual sample (human umbilical vein endothelial cell) for known polyadenylated (orange)
and non-polyadenylated genes (blue). (C) Number of polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated
genes for the different RNA biotypes (majority vote across samples). Only genes in the
stringent set, with 10 or more counts in at least one sample and with an uneven majority vote
across samples are shown. (D) Fraction of polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated lincRNA
genes (known and novel, single- and multi-exon). (E) Validation of non-polyadenylated genes
through polyA-minus sequencing in two RNA Atlas cell lines. Boxplots show the log2 counts
ratio between polyA-minus and polyA sequencing for genes classified as non-polyadenylated
(blue) and polyadenylated (orange). (F) Heatmaps showing polyadenylation status of genes
across samples. Only genes with 100 or more counts in at least 20 samples are shown. For the
selected genes, all samples with at least 100 counts were sorted based on normalized log2
ratio and binned in a total of 20 bins (min samples per bin=1). For each bin, the mean
normalized log2 ratio is plotted. (G) Selection of genes with varying polyadenylation across
samples (see methods for definition of these genes). The number of samples in each category
is shown, with values in log10 scale. Genes are sorted by evenness (i.e difference in number
of samples in each category) and by number of polyadenylated samples (H) Example of a gene
(HIST1H2BD) whose varying polyadenylation across samples can be explained by differential
expression of alternatively polyadenylated isoforms. Coverage profiles from total RNAsequencing and polyA-sequencing are shown for a non-polyadenylated sample (ALL-SIL cell
line, left panel) and a polyadenylated sample (prostate tissue, right panel).
Figure 4. Association between sample ontology and expression-distance. (A) t-SNE plot of the
RNA atlas cell types based on mRNA expression. Samples are colored according to the 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

biological cell subtypes of interest (epithelial, mesenchymal, fibroblast, endothelial). (B) For
each biological cell subtype, the median mRNA expression-based distances between pairs of
samples within a subtype (intra-distances) and between each sample from the subtype and
all other samples (inter-distances) are shown. (C) Distribution of fold changes between
median inter- and intra-distances calculated based on expression of the different RNA
biotypes. (D) Median intra- and inter-distances based on expression of novel miRNAs. (E)
Median intra- and inter-distances based on expression of single-exon lincRNAs. (F) Expression
heatmap for novel miRNAs significantly upregulated in each of the cell subtypes. (G)
Expression heatmap for single-exon lincRNAs significantly upregulated in each of the cell
subtypes. (H) Example of an endothelial-specific single-exon lincRNA. (I) Example of an
epithelial-specific novel miRNA.
Figure 5. Total RNA transcriptomes facilitate the use of intron expression profiles to study
regulatory modalities. (A) Distribution of protein-coding transcripts whose exonic (mRNA,
left) and intronic (pre-mRNA, right) expression estimates are supported by at least 24 unique
reads in 0, >0%, >25%, >50%, >75%, or 100% of RNA Atlas profiled samples. (B) Distribution
of Spearman’s correlations between pre-mRNA and mRNA expression profiles (n=7,289, log2
transformed). (C) Adjusted distance correlation (dCor) between TF or miRNA expression
profiles and their verified target’s pre-mRNA and mRNA expression profiles and the ratio
between them (m/p-ratio); p-values are the geometric mean of the p-values for the
differences between pre-mRNA - m/p-ratio and mRNA - m/p-ratio correlations. (D)
Correlation with verified targets. On average, the adjusted distance correlations between the
profiles of regulators and their verified target’s mRNA and pre-mRNA showed no significant
difference, however, correlations between regulator and target m/p-ratio profiles were
significantly lower and higher for TFs and miRNAs, respectively. (E) Sequence-based miRNAtarget predictions by TargetScan did not exhibit improved miRNA-target m/p-ratio
correlations. However, (F) LongHorn-inferred direct targets of miRBase and RNA Atlasidentified miRNAs did have improved regulator-target m/p-ratio correlations; p-values were
estimated by the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The number of regulators and
interactions tested is given in parentheses. Only miRNAs with at least 10 targets are shown.
Figure 6. Evidence for regulation by lncRNAs. (A) LongHorn inferred interactions by evaluating
four distinct models for lncRNA regulation, including transcriptional regulation (TR) by
lncRNAs as co-factors, guides, or TF decoys, and post-transcriptional regulation (PTR) as
decoys for miRNAs and RNA-binding proteins. (B) Predicted TF-target interactions with no
supporting evidence from expression did not show correlation differences between TF-target
pre-mRNA and m/p-ratio, see Figure S16. However, evidence for lncRNA regulation, including
regulation by single- and multi-exon lncRNAs, antisense, intergenic, and circular lncRNAs,
resulted in TF-target pre-mRNA profiles that were significantly better correlated than TFtarget m/p-ratio profiles; the number of tested TFs and interactions for each lncRNA biotype
is given in parentheses. Similarly, (C) miRNA-target interactions modulated by single- and
multi-exon lncRNAs, antisense, intergenic, and circular lncRNAs showed higher miRNA-target
m/p-ratio correlations. (D) LongHorn predicted 506K lncRNA-target interactions, and among
these, 46% had sufficient intronic and exonic read counts to evaluate m/p-ratio in all profiled
samples. (E) Proportion of interactions for which regulator-target m/p-ratio correlations were
significantly different from regulator-target pre-mRNA correlations. Results are shown by the
biotype of modulating lncRNAs (left) and the type of regulation for these interactions (right).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The regulators were either TF or miRNAs mediating the lncRNA-target interactions. p-values
were estimated using the two-sample student’s t-test. (F) LongHorn identified lncRNAs that
are enriched for predicted transcriptional or post-transcriptional interactions, or for both,
relative to other lncRNA species. asRNAs and lincRNAs were more likely to be identified as
transcriptional regulators, while circRNAs were more likely to be identified as posttranscriptional regulators; each of these lncRNA was required to have at least ten LongHorninferred targets; the number of lncRNAs included in each category is given in parenthesis. (G)
Fifteen MsigDB’s Hallmark Gene Sets were predicted to be significantly regulated by at least
five lncRNAs (FDR-adjusted Fischer Exact Test FDR-FET<0.01). In particular, lncRNAs, the
majority of which are RNA Atlas predicted, were predicted to target proliferation and
signaling pathways; the total number of regulating lncRNAs in each pathway is provided in
parentheses. (H) The full lncRNA-target prediction data is available for download and analysis
on the R2 platform. R2 also allows the analysis and visualization of lncRNA abundance and
regulatory network modules predicted by LongHorn. We show an example of an R2 analysis
for the lncRNA SAMMSON.

Methods
Sample cohort
A total of 300 human samples were used in this study, including 45 tissues, 162 cell types and
93 cell lines, of which 89 are cancer cell lines derived from 13 different types of cancer
(Supplemental Table 1). RNA of individual cell types was obtained from ScienCell Research
Laboratories or isolated from cell types collected at Ghent University Hospital. RNA from
collected cell types and (cancer) cell lines was isolated using the miRNeasy kit (Qiagen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. RNA samples from normal human tissues were
obtained from Ambion and Biochain.
Library prep and sequencing
For each RNA sample, three different strand-specific RNA libraries were prepared. Small RNA
libraries were generated using the TruSeq Small RNA library prep kit (Illumina) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions, using 750 ng input RNA. Library size selection was performed
using a Pippin Prep device (Sage Science). Total RNA libraries were generated using the TruSeq
stranded Total RNA library prep kit with Ribo-Zero Gold (Illumina) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions using 1 µg of input RNA. PolyA RNA libraries were generated
using the TruSeq Stranded mRNA library prep kit (Illumina) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions using 1 µg of input RNA. Small RNA libraries were pooled (volume-based pooling,
48 libraries per pool) and pools were quantified using the High Sensitivity dsDNA assay on a
Bioanalyzer device (Agilent). Poly A and total RNA library pools were quantified using the
Standard Sensitivity NGS Fragment Kit (Catalog #DNF-473) on a Fragment Analyzer (Advanced
Analytical, Ankeny IA, USA). Small RNA library pools were sequenced on a NextSeq500
instrument (Illumina) using a high output flow cell, 76 cycles. Pooled PolyA and Total RNA
libraries were sequenced on a HiSeq 4000 instrument (Illumina) with paired-end 76
cycle reads.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Transcriptome assembly from polyA and total RNA-sequencing libraries
PolyA and total RNA reads were mapped to the hg38 reference genome (primary assembly,
canonical chromosomes, repeats from RepeatMasker and Tandem Repeats Finder soft
masked http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/bigZips/) with TopHat37 v2.1.0
(Bowtie238 v2.2.6) using the --no-coverage-search option and --library-type=fr-firststrand.
The Ensembl17 transcriptome (v86) was provided to guide the mapping of reads to known
transcripts first. All other parameters were set to default values. Transcriptomes were
assembled in each sample and each library type separately using StringTie39 (v1.3.3). Default
parameters were used and the Ensembl17 reference annotation (v86) was supplied to guide
the assembly.
All individual transcriptomes were merged together with the reference Ensembl
transcriptome (v86) using StringTie merge applying a cutoff of 1 TPM and minimum transcript
length of 200 nucleotides, with all other parameters set to default values.
Cuffcompare40 (v2.2.1) was used to compare the newly assembled transcripts with the
reference annotation. Novel transcripts with classification codes other than ‘x’, ‘u’,’j’ or ‘=’
were removed, (this included 20,539 transcripts with codes ‘c’, ‘e’, ‘I’, ‘o’, ‘p’ or ‘s’) as well as
transcripts spanning 2 or more known, non-overlapping, adjacent loci.
We then calculated the overlap of all known and novel exons with repetitive elements in the
genome using BEDTools41 (intersect). The repeats regions were retrieved from the UCSC Table
Browser42 (Group: Repeats; Track: RepeatMasker). The fraction of exonic sequence
overlapping repeats was computed for each gene. Novel non-coding single-exon genes with
less than 200 consecutive non-repeat nucleotides were filtered out. Regions overlapping
repeats within the remaining non-coding single-exon genes were hard-masked (bases were
converted to Ns) using BEDTools41 (v2.27.1, maskfasta). After these filtering steps, the
polyA/total RNA-sequencing derived transcriptome contained 422,083 transcripts including
all transcripts in Ensembl v86 annotation. This transcriptome was quantified using Kallisto
quant43 (flag --rf-stranded and all other parameters set to default values) across all polyA and
total RNA-sequencing libraries.
After quantification, novel genes and Ensembl genes belonging to the biotypes
‘protein_coding’, ‘antisense’ and ‘lincRNA’ were retained. Because of previous filtering steps
at transcript level, novel genes are either intergenic (lincRNA) or antisense (asRNA) to
reference genes. Known and novel genes with expression levels below 0.1 TPM in all samples
were removed.
Selection of the stringent RNA Atlas transcriptome
Independent evidence for transcription of the mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA genes in the RNA
Atlas transcriptome was obtained by integrating results from cap analysis of gene expression
(CAGE) sequencing from the FANTOM consortium6 and various chromatin states from the
Roadmap Epigenomics Project18. The following chromatin states, indicative for active
transcription, were considered: active transcription start site (1_TssA), transcription (5_Tx5,
6_Tx and 7_Tx3), transcribed and regulatory (9_TxReg), transcribed and enhancer (10_TxEnh5
and 11_TxEnh3), active_enhancer (13_EnhA1 and 14_EnhA2) and bivalent_promoter
(23_PromBiv)18. For each TSS of genes with expression values greater or equal to 0.1 TPM in
at least one tissue from the RNA Atlas and not being part of chromosome Y (chromatin states
did not include information for that chromosome), we used the Zipper plot approach44 to
retrieve the closest CAGE-seq6 and chromatin state18 peak across all samples from the
FANTOM5 and Roadmap Epigenomics project, respectively. We defined the stringent gene

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

set based on presence of the aforementioned peaks within 500 nucleotides upstream or
downstream the TSS and further classified the genes across the different RNA biotypes into
four categories: 1) evidence at both DNA (chromatin state) and RNA (CAGE-seq) level, 2)
evidence at RNA level only, 3) evidence at DNA level only, 4) no evidence. Only genes
belonging to one of the first 3 categories were retained in the stringent RNA Atlas
transcriptome.
We also included 754 genes in the stringent set that do not present close association to any
CAGE-peak or chromatin state peaks but whose expression levels are higher than the median
expression levels for genes that present both levels of evidence. In more detail, we retained
genes with no independent evidence if their mean expression across samples in polyA or total
RNA was higher than the median value of the mean expression across samples for genes with
both levels of evidence (4.67 TPM and 2.20 TPM, for polyA and total RNA data, respectively),
or if their maximum expression across samples in polyA or total RNA was higher than the
median value of the maximum expression across samples for genes with both levels of
evidence (58.63 TPM and 30.23 TPM, for polyA and total RNA data, respectively). This set
includes 510 mRNAs (508 known and 2 novel), 27 asRNAs (17 known and 10 novel) and 208
lincRNAs (95 known and 113 novel).
Evaluation of coding potential
To assess the protein-coding potential of the new transcripts, two algorithms were used: The
Coding-Potential Assessment Tool45 (CPAT, version 2.0.0) and PhyloCSF46 (obtained from
https://github.com/mlin/PhyloCSF January 18, 2015). The CPAT code was slightly modified so
that the predicted ORF sequence is returned in the output. CPAT was run using the provided
hexamer table and logit model. The recommended probability cutoff of 0.364 was used to
identify putative coding ORFs.
Since the PhyloCSF pipeline is based on the GRCh37/hg19 reference genome, all genomic
coordinates were first converted using the liftOver tool on the UCSC Genome Browser
website42. To run PhyloCSF, whole-genome alignments of 46 species are obtained from the
UCSC Genome Browser website42 and processed using the Phylogenetic Analysis with
Space/Time Models package47 (PHAST, v1.4) into the required input format. PhyloCSF was run
in 3 reading frames using the ATGStop setting, all ORFs of at least 10 codons were considered.
A cutoff score of 60.7876, based on benchmarking with Ensembl (v90)48 transcripts, was used
to identify putative coding ORFs. In total, 242 novel genes (188 novel stringent) had at least
one isoform scored as protein-coding by both tools. We labeled these genes as novel proteincoding. All other novel genes were annotated as lincRNA or antisense.
Mass spectrometry validation
Mass spectrometry validation of the novel predicted proteins was conducted on the draft
map of the human proteome dataset49. Briefly, this dataset consists of deep proteomic
profiling of 17 adult tissues, 7 fetal tissues, and 6 purified primary hematopoietic cells. Raw
files were obtained from the PRoteomics IDEntifications (PRIDE) database50 (project
PXD000561) and converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the msconvert tool in the
ProteoWizard package51.
Analysis of the tandem mass spectrometry data is performed using Ionbot (unpublished,
based on the work of C Silva et al.52, https://ionbot.cloud), a sequence database search tool
based on machine learning capable of performing rapid open modification and open mutation
searches. Ionbot was used under a beta-tester version supplied by Sven Degroeve and Lennart

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Martens (Ghent University, VIB). Briefly, peptide databases are created as a full in silico
trypsin digestion (allowing up to one missed cleavage) of the protein sequence dataset
consisting of all human proteins in the Uniprot in the UniProtKB database53 (Swiss-Prot
subset, 21,008 proteins) and the CPAT and PhyloCSF predicted proteins. Decoy peptides are
obtained by applying the same digestion on the reversed target proteins. Ionbot was run in
the open modification and open mutation mode. In addition, carbamidomethylation of
cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The false
discovery rate (FDR) was estimated with the target-decoy approach. Only peptide-spectrum
matches with an estimated FDR below 1% were retained.
Identification and quantification of circRNAs
CircRNAs where identified from total RNA-sequencing data using two independent
workflows, find_circ254 (n=85,470) and CIRCexplorer255 (n=204,857) using genome build
hg19. For downstream analysis, the mean circRNA count across methods was used. Only
circRNAs identified by both tools (n=62,832) and with mean counts between tools higher than
4 in at least one sample were retained (n=38,030). A circRNA was annotated as known if its
back-splice position was present in the circBase database19. Genomic positions of 38,023
circRNAs were successfully converted to hg38 coordinates using the liftOver tool (UCSC)42.
The back-splice acceptor and donor sites from each circRNA were annotated relative to other
linear-splice sites and gene coordinates from mRNAs, asRNAs and lincRNAs. CircRNAs with a
back-splice acceptor and donor site overlapping genes in the stringent RNA Atlas
transcriptome were retained as stringent circRNAs (n=37,140).
Flanking intron length analysis
We compared the length of the introns (both upstream and downstream) which flanked the
circRNAs, to introns from genes that do not produce a circRNA isoform. The flanking introns
were found to be unusually long when compared to the non-circRNA introns as shown in
Figure S3). The median length for the flanking introns was 6304 bp compared to the median
value for non-circRNA introns which was observed to be 1041 bp. Statistical significance of
the difference was assessed with the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Box plots were drawn in R to
display the results.
miRNA identification and quantification
Reads from small RNA-sequencing libraries were processed with the FASTX-Toolkit56 (v0.0.14)
to remove adapters, filter reads by quality (a quality score of at least 20 in 80% of the
sequence was required) and collapse non-unique reads. Processed reads were then mapped
against the hg38 genome with Bowtie57 (v1.1.2) allowing no mismatches in the first 25 bases
of the read (-n = 0 and l = 25) and using the “--best” option to force reporting of up to 10 (k =
10) best alignments (all other parameters were set to default values). Novel miRNAs were
predicted with miRDeep258 (v2.0.0.8), using mapped reads per sample and all human miRNAs
in miRBase35 v22 as input. Novel miRNA predictions with non-zero estimated probability were
aggregated across samples, retaining only the prediction with maximum counts from both
mature forms in a given sample in cases of predictions with partially overlapping coordinates.
Reads mapped to the aggregated newly predicted miRNAs and human miRNAs from miRbase
v22 were then quantified across all samples. For each miRNA, counts from the canonical
mature form and non-canonical mature forms (isoMiRs) were aggregated. Only miRNAs with
10 or more counts in at least one sample were retained. Filtered miRNAs and their precursors

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

were assigned unique names (RNAATLAS(p)MIR prefix followed by sequential numbers from
1 to 6740, which is the number of unique filtered sequences including both mature and
precursor miRNAs). Known and predicted precursors were annotated based on their overlap
with exonic and intronic regions of mRNAs, asRNAs and lincRNAs or to intergenic regions.
Genomic analyses of single-exon lincRNAs
The distance from each unique RNA atlas exon to its closest up- or downstream exon was
retrieved with BEDTools41 (v2.27.1, bedtools closest -io -D a -s). A two-sample Wilcoxon
signed-ranked test was used to compare the distances between single-exon lincRNAs and
multi-exon lincRNA exons. Sequence motifs at the exon-intron boundary of multi-exon genes
and exon-intergenic boundary of novel single-exon genes were determined by calculating the
frequency of each nucleotide at each position of the region starting 3 bases upstream and
ending 3 bases downstream of the boundary. This was done for multi-exon mRNA exons,
multi-exon lincRNA exons and single-exon lincRNA exons. The information content was
computed for each position and the relative frequencies of each base in each position were
represented as a sequence logo with the R package ggseqlogo59. For strandedness analyses,
we selected unique exons with no overlap with any feature on the opposite strand. Only
exons with 10 or more counts on the correct strand in at least 1 sample were considered. The
strandedness for each selected exon was defined using the sample with maximum normalized
expression on the correct strand, as the percentage of reads mapping to the exon on the
correct strand relative to all reads mapping to the exon regardless of the strand.
RT-qPCR validation of single-exon genes
We performed qPCR validation of single-exon genes using RNA from two RNA Atlas cell lines,
SK-N-BE(2)-C and IMR-32. We designed specific forward and reverse primers for the
amplification of a total of 110 genes, including 80 novel single-exon genes, of which 48 were
ubiquitously expressed, 17 specifically expressed in SK-N-BE(2)-C and 15 specifically
expressed in IMR-32, as well as 30 known single-exon genes included as a control. Primers
were designed using primerXL60 (Supplemental Table 19). For each gene in each sample, two
qPCR reactions were performed, one on cDNA and one on RNA (to assess amplification of
contaminating DNA). cDNA was produced using the iScript Advanced kit (Bio-Rad) with a mix
of random primers and oligo-dT primers on 2 µg of input RNA and a reaction volume of 20 µl.
All qPCR reactions were performed in a total volume of 5 µl containing 2.5 µl of SsoAdvanced
mastermix (Bio-Rad), 2 µl of forward and reverse primers (5 µM) and 0.5 µl of cDNA (10 ng/ul)
or the equivalent mass of RNA. Reactions were run on a LightCycler 480 (Roche) in 384 wellplates using the following thermal cycling protocol: 2 minutes enzyme activation at 95.0°C
(temperature ramp rate of 4.8°C/s), followed by 45 cycles of 5 s at 95°C (temperature ramp
rate of 4.8°C/s) and 30 s at 60°C (temperature ramp rate of 2.5°C/s). For melting curve
analysis, denature was performed at 95°C for 5 s (temperature ramp rate of 4.8°C/s), followed
by cooling to 60°C for 1 min (temperature ramp rate of 2,5°C/s), and then heating to 95°C at
a ramp rate 0.11°C/s with 5 acquisitions/°C. Final cooling was performed during 3 minutes at
37.0°C (temperature ramp rate of 2.5°C/s).
Analysis of polyadenylation status
For these analyses we used read count expression data obtained with HTSeq-count61 (v
0.11.0) from TopHat bam files. 291 samples for which we have expression data from both
polyA and total RNA-sequencing libraries were used. Samples "RNAAtlas249" and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

"RNAAtlas251" were not included in these analyses because they had a very high fraction of
mitochondrial reads in polyA RNA-sequencing libraries. First, we generated a list of known
polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated genes based on Yang et al. (2011)22 by selecting
those genes that were annotated as either polyadenylated or non-polyadenylated in both cell
lines used in that study. To normalize counts between matching polyA and total RNAsequencing libraries for differences in library size and library complexity, we calculated the
mean count of the 900 most abundant known polyadenylated mRNAs in both libraries, and
used the mean count ratio between libraries (polyA/total RNA) as a scaling factor. For most
samples this ratio was below 1 and was thus used to scale counts in the total RNA library. In
cases where this ratio was higher than 1, we used the inverse of this ratio to scale the polyA
library. Scaling was done by subsampling counts from the relevant library to obtain similar
counts for polyadenylated genes in both libraries. Polyadenylation status was determined as
follows: Only genes with at least 10 counts in total RNA libraries were classified, otherwise
their polyadenylation status was considered as ‘undetermined’ (n=3,071). Genes with 0
counts in polyA and at least 10 counts in total RNA were classified as non-polyadenylated. For
genes with non-zero counts in polyA and at least 10 counts in total RNA libraries a
classification approach was taken, based on the log2 ratio of counts between polyA and total
RNA libraries. First, a sample-specific log2 ratio cutoff was determined based on the
distributions of known polyadenylated and known non-polyadenylated genes22. From these,
only polyadenylated genes with at least 10 counts in the polyA library and only nonpolyadenylated genes with at least 10 counts in the total RNA library were retained. A samplespecific log2 ratio cutoff was determined by taking the value that maximizes the accuracy
(number of true polyadenylated genes + number of true non-polyadenylated genes)/(total
number of genes)) of the classification of known genes into non-polyadenylated (log2 ratio
below the cutoff) and polyadenylated (log2 ratio above the cutoff). Because the set of known
polyadenylated genes is much larger than the set of known non-polyadenylated genes, we
subsampled the polyadenylated genes to match the number of non-polyadenylated genes in
order to obtain a balanced dataset. We repeated this approach 100 times, and took the mean
selected cutoff across iterations. We then derived a general classification for each gene in the
stringent set, by taking the majority vote across samples.
Heatmaps of gene polyadenylation across samples were plotted per biotype (mRNA, lincRNA
and antisense). For this, the samples were first sorted based on a normalized log2 ratio
obtained by subtracting the sample specific cutoff from the log2 ratios (to make them
comparable across samples). Sorted samples were then binned in a total of 20 bins, and the
mean corrected ratio for each bin was calculated and plotted in the heatmap.
To select genes with changing polyadenylation status across samples, we considered genes
that are expressed in at least 2 samples with a corrected log2 ratio below -4 and a read count
of at least 100 in total RNA, and expressed in at least 2 samples with a corrected log2 ratio
above 0 and read counts of at least 100 in both total RNA and polyA. This resulted in 160
genes. To get insights into the factors driving the observed changes in polyadenylation status
at gene level, we analyzed changes in expression levels of individual transcripts from these
genes. Specifically, we retrieved the dominant transcripts in each library from the most
extreme polyadenylated sample (i.e with highest log2 normalized ratio) and the most extreme
non-polyadenylated sample (i.e with lowest log2 normalized ratio). We computed the fraction
of total gene expression represented by the dominant transcripts and evaluated differences
in dominance and fraction of expression between the polyadenylated and nonpolyadenylated samples (Supplemental Table 8). By analyzing these parameters, we defined

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

two cases in which the variability in gene-level polyadenylation across samples can be
explained by differential expression of alternatively polyadenylated isoforms: (a)those genes
that present a different dominant transcript in total RNA datasets from the polyadenylated
and the non-polyadenylated samples, while presenting the same dominant transcript in the
polyA and the total RNA datasets from the polyadenylated sample (n=48) or (b)those genes
that present the same dominant transcript in total RNA datasets from the polyadenylated and
the non-polyadenylated samples but whose fraction of total gene expression is lower in the
polyadenylated sample compared to the non-polyadenylated sample, besides, the dominant
transcript for the polyadenylated sample in its polyA dataset is not the same as the dominant
transcript in its total RNA dataset (n=9).
PolyA-minus sequencing
PolyA-minus libraries were generated for two RNA Atlas cell lines, SK-N-BE(2)-C and IMR-32
in duplicates. In brief, 500 ng of RNA was first depleted for rRNA using the Ribo-Zero Gold
approach (Illumina) followed by the polyA selection procedure as implemented in the TruSeq
mRNA library prep protocol (Illumina). Rather than discarding the polyA-minus fraction, 2
additional rounds of polyA selection were performed on that fraction, each time maintaining
the polyA-minus fraction as input for the polyA selection step. The final polyA-minus fraction
was concentrated using RNA Clean XP beads (Agencourt) before proceeding with library prep
(according to the TruSeq mRNA library prep manual). In parallel, the polyA-plus fraction,
obtained after the first polyA selection step, was also processed for library prep and
sequencing. Libraries were quantified using qPCR (Kappa) and equimolarly pooled for
sequencing on a NextSeq 500, high output flow cell, paired-end sequencing, 75 cycles per
read (Illumina). Sequencing reads were mapped to the hg38 reference genome (primary
assembly, canonical chromosomes, repeats from RepeatMasker and Tandem Repeats Finder
soft masked http://hgdownload.soe.ucsc.edu/goldenPath/hg38/bigZips/) with TopHat37
v2.1.0 (Bowtie238 v2.2.6) using the --no-coverage-search option and --library-type=frfirststrand. The Ensembl transcriptome (v86)17 was provided to guide the mapping of reads
to known transcripts first. All other parameters were set to default values. Read count
expression data was then derived from the mapped reads using HTSeq-count61 (v0.11.0).
Genes with at least 10 mean counts between replicates in either polyA-minus or polyA-plus
libraries were selected and the ratio of polyA-minus versus polyA-plus counts scaled by library
size was calculated. This ratio was then compared between genes that were previously
classified as polyadenylated or non-polyadenylated in the corresponding sample based on the
ratio of counts from polyA and total RNA libraries.
Expression specificity
Expression specificity was computed for each RNA biotype and each sample type (cell types,
cell lines and tissues) separately, using a specificity score based on the Jensen-Shannon
divergence metric62. For mRNAs, asRNAs and lincRNAs, specificity was calculated using TPM
values, for miRNAs and circRNAs, we used RPM values (reads per million).
These expression metrics are not directly comparable, because they come from library
preparations that capture different sets of RNAs or, in the case of circRNAs, from reads
mapping to one particular location in the transcript (i.e. the back-spliced junction) rather than
the entire transcript (as is the case for mRNAs, lincRNAs and asRNAs). In order to directly
compare expression levels between these biotypes, we quantified mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA
expression based on junction reads. We compared the specificity score distributions of back-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

spliced junctions (circRNAs) and linear junctions (mRNAs, lincRNAs, asRNAs) before and after
correcting for differences in expression abundance between these biotypes. For this, we
subsampled subsets of splice junctions from each biotype so that the subsampled
distributions of maximum expression values matched a common normal-like distribution with
mean equal to the median of the mean values for the different biotype distributions and
standard deviation equal to the mean minus one third of the smallest absolute extreme value
(i.e. minimum and maximum values of the distributions) among all biotype distributions.
Validation of tissue-specific RNAs from external datasets
Expression data from 23 tissues with matched RNA atlas tissues was retrieved from the
Human Protein Atlas (HPA)23 . 1,320 tissue-specific genes with an expression value of at least
5 TPM and a fold change of at least 10 between the first and the second tissue with highest
expression values were selected within the HPA dataset. The selected HPA markers were
considered as cross-validated in RNA atlas if they presented the highest expression in the
same tissue. For all selected biomarkers the log2 fold-change between the expression in the
matching tissue and the highest expression among the remaining 22 tissues was calculated.
Fusion genes.
Fusion genes were identified with FusionCatcher63 across all polyA-seq samples. In each
sample, fusions labelled as probable false positives and fusions known to occur in healthy
samples (Supplemental Table 20, codes 0 and 1) were filtered out. Also, the fusion transcripts
were required to have zero 'counts of common mapping reads', i.e. reads that map on both
partners, and a minimum of 4 unique reads mapping on the fusion junction. Finally, within
each sample, transcript fusions were collapsed at gene level, i.e. if multiple junctions occurred
at different joint points or reciprocally between the same pair of genes, they were counted
only once, and the distribution of number of junctions per sample was compared between
cell lines, cell types and tissues using two-sample Wilcoxon signed-ranked tests.
Imprinting
To detect imprinting, data was first further processed according to64 which relies on Samtools
(v0.1.19) for initial variant calling and genotyping (and sequencing error estimation) by SeqEM
(v.1.0). Only variants present in dbSNP (version 150) were retained and insertions, deletions
and loci corresponding with mutations from the Human Gene Mutation Database were
removed. Detection of imprinting and other statistical analyses were performed in R (v3.3.2).
Used filters were: coverage > 4, number of samples ≥ 75, minor allele frequency > 0.15,
estimated sequencing error rate ≤ 0.035. As outlined earlier64, for the detection of imprinting
across tissues per SNP, a mixture model of homozygous and heterozygous samples was fit to
the RNA-seq data, with weights derived from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium (HWE). The
mixture model takes into account sequencing errors and partial imprinting. Unpublished
before, also the degree of inbreeding in the underlying population is taken into account when
estimating the fractions of heterozygous and homozygous loci, i.e. the weights of the mixture
model. The degree of inbreeding is estimated as a hyperparameter, i.e. the median degree of
inbreeding over all SNPs passing the quality filters (further described in64), leading to an
estimate of 0.102. A likelihood-ratio-test is used to assess whether the model supports the
absence of apparently heterozygous loci (which feature, on average, a 1:1 ratio of both
alleles).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

This methodology was applied on the Total RNA-seq samples from 203 tissue and cell type
samples, excluding cancer/cell line samples given their frequent loss of imprinting64. Next to
using Total RNA-seq, also the mRNA-seq dataset was queried (177 samples), whereas the
coverage of the sRNA sequencing was too low to apply the methodology (data not shown).
Other used filters were: goodness-of-fit > 1.2, symmetry > 0.05, median imprinting ≥ 0.8,
estimated î ≥ 0.6, for more details, see64. Additionally, as we aimed to identify consistently
imprinted loci, we focused on SNPs featuring a minimal difference between expected and
observed heterozygous samples (based on SeqEM RNA-seq genotyping) of 30. A false
discovery rate of 0.05 was used to call imprinting significant. We relied on RNA Atlas
annotation, complemented by Ensembl annotation where relevant. In case of overlapping
genes, the gene in which the SNP was located in an exonic region or UTR was selected. For
additional validation, genotyping data from Illumina Human1M-Duo BeadChip for 10 cell lines
(HEK-293T, SK-N-SH, A549, HL-60, K562, MCF-7, OVCAR-3, T-47D, JURKAT, H1 hESC), were
downloaded from ENCODE for validation of imprinting in de cell lines. Note that these data
had not been used during the screening phase. For virtually all sufficiently covered
sample/gene combinations featuring heterozygous SNPs, at least one sample-SNP
combination showed allelic expression patterns compatible with imprinting/mono-allelic
expression.
Expression-based distances and differential expression analysis
t-Distributed Stochastic Neighbor Embedding (t-SNE)65 was applied on the mRNA expression
data for all cell types or cancer cell lines and the two first dimensions were used to plot a
visual representation of the clustering. Weighted expression correlations (w_cor) for all pairs
of samples were calculated for all RNA biotypes (using the cov.wt function in R66), using counts
normalized by variance stabilizing transformation (VST, DESeq2)67 as input and the average
of sigmoid transformations of VST normalized counts for both samples as weights. Expression
distances (expr_dist) were derived from these values as: expr_dist = 1 - (w_cor + 1) / 2.
Expression distances were compared between cell types from 4 biological subtypes (epithelial
cells (n=21), endothelial cells (n=25), fibroblasts (n=33) and mesenchymal cells (n=8)) or
cancer cell lines from 12 cancer types (B-ALL (n=8), Breast cancer (n=6), Central Nervous
System cancer (n=6), Colon cancer (n=7), Leukemia (n=6), Melanoma (n=9), Neuroblastoma
(n=11), Non-Small Cell Lung cancer (n=9), Ovarian cancer (n=7), Prostate cancer (n=2), Renal
cancer (n=8), T-ALL (n=8)) to measure inter- and intra-group distances. Paired t-tests were
performed over the median intra and inter distances for each group.
Differential gene expression analyses (DESeq2)67 were performed to identify novel miRNAs,
single-exon lincRNAs and circRNAs with a significant differential expression between cell
subtypes or cancer types (Prostate Cancer and Leukemia were excluded from this analysis,
for having only 2 cell lines belonging to the cancer type and for including a rather
heterogeneous collection of cell lines, respectively). Those genes with a log2 fold change of
at least 3 and a Benjamini-Hochberg based FDR lower than 0.01 where selected and
expression data was visualized in heatmaps. For circRNAs, we repeated the previous analyses
on cell types and cancer cell lines by using sequential subsets of top expressed circRNAs. For
this, we sorted the circRNAs based on their mean back-spliced counts across samples within
the sample sets used in each case and took the top 20, 10, 5, 3, 2, or 1 percent expressed
circRNAs to calculate sample-sample distances and compared the results between subsets.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Expression estimation of exons (mRNA), introns (pre-mRNA), and their ratios from total
RNA-seq data.
We sought to estimate the exonic (mRNA surrogate) and intronic (pre-mRNA surrogate)
expressions of protein-coding transcripts. For each total RNA-seq BAM file profiled in RNA
Atlas, the featureCounts v1.6.0 program68 was applied to enumerate read counts in each exon
and intron regions.
Exon annotations were downloaded from the UCSC Genome Browser42 in December 2017
(track: NCBI RefSeq, table: refGene, assembly: GRCh38). We further extended exon
boundaries by 10 base pairs to prevent exonic reads boundaries near the exon junctions from
being considered as intronic reads24. After extension, regions that were within two
consecutive exons of a protein-coding transcript but did not overlap with any exons of other
coding- and non-coding transcripts were defined as intronic. We recorded exon and intron
boundaries of each protein-coding transcript.
featureCounts was ran on exons and introns separately, with reads summarized at feature
level, i.e., single exon or intron (argument: -f) and only primary alignments were counted
(argument: --primary). Duplicate reads were excluded from the counting process (argument:
--ignoreDup). Reads mapped to multiple genes (discordant reads) or locations (multi-mapping
reads) were discarded.
Counts of reads matching entire exons and introns of the same transcript were used to
represent its exonic (mRNA) and intronic (pre-mRNA) abundance, respectively. We required
transcripts whose log2-transformed exonic and intronic expressions, after adding a pseudocount of 8 to their raw read counts, are at least 5, i.e., 24 counts, in every RNA Atlas sample24.
In total, 7,289 RefSeq transcripts—corresponding to 3,556 genes—were kept for analysis. To
calculate exon/intron ratios (mRNA/pre-mRNA ratios or m/p-ratios in short), we used the
following formula for each protein-coding transcript:
Exon/intron ratio (or m/p-ratio) = log2(exonic read counts+8) - log2(intronic read counts+8)
Each type of expression matrix, namely, mRNA, pre-mRNA, and m/p-ratio, was then
separately normalized using quantile normalization over multiple RNA Atlas samples using
quantilenorm routine in MATLAB; note that we used the median of the ranked values rather
than the mean to perform normalization.
Experimentally verified TF- and miRNA-targets.
We compiled 6,535 experimentally verified TF-target pairs from three places including
HTRIdb69 (version: 03/20/2014), TRANSFAC Professional70 (version: February 2013), and Table
3 from Whitfield et al.71 For pairs deposited at HTRIdb, we only included those verified by
small and mid-scale techniques. To err on the conservative side and reduce false-positive
predictions, we removed protein-DNA candidate interactions whose proteins are co-factors
rather than TFs in TRANSFAC database. The list of 4,662 verified miRNA-targets with strong
experimental evidence, such as western blot or reporter assay, were selected from
miRecords72 (4/27/2013), TarBase73 v7, and TRANSFAC Professional 70(version: February
2013), miRTarBase74 v4.5, and Grosswendt et al., Table S275. We can only keep a proportion
of these interactions whose targets had sufficient exonic and intronic expression across all
profiled RNA Atlas samples. In total, 2,349 and 3,306 TF- and miRNA-target transcripts were
included for analysis. Note that each miRNA was required to express in at least 20 RNA Atlas
profiled samples.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Regulatory regions and regulator sequences.
We predicted TF and lncRNA binding sites on 22,057 proximal promoters of 17,495 proteincoding genes. Each promoter is of length 2kbps, [+1kbp:-1kb] relative to the transcription
start site. About one-third of protein-coding genes had multiple proximal promoters. The 3’UTRs were used to predict miRNA or RBP binding sites. In total, we have compiled 38,183 3’UTRs corresponding to 17495 protein-coding genes. The median length of all 3’-UTRs is 1004
bps. More than two-thirds of protein-coding genes had multiple 3’-UTRs.
While identifying lncRNAs act as miRNA, RBP, and TF decoys, we searched for binding sites of
these regulators throughout the whole lncRNA transcript sequence. Similarly, we identified
lncRNA binding sites in promoters that match any potential binding domains of lncRNAs
without consideration to their potential structures. We applied triplexator76 v1.3.2 and
TargetScan77 v6.0 to predict sequence-based triple-helix (or triplex) structures and miRNA
binding sites, respectively. In total, we considered sequences of 11,799 mature miRNAs,
71,950 lncRNA transcripts (or 38,008 genes), and 33,956 circRNAs. We note that in
subsequent analyses only RNA species that were expressed in at least 50% of samples were
considered. Their sequences, including asRNAs, lincRNAs, and circRNAs, were extracted from
the human genome assembly GRCh38 stored at the UCSC Genome Browser using
twoBitToFa42.
Prediction of TF-targets.
We predicted targets for 641 human TFs based on both sequence and expression evidence.
First, each predicted TF-target was required to have significant binding evidence from either
751 ENCODE ChIP-seq30,78 profiles or 1,631 human TF PWMs for 108 and 641 TFs, respectively.
Second, we required each TF-target pair to exhibit significant co-expression pattern across
RNA Atlas profiles samples.
ENCODE ChIP-seq data sets were profiled in 37 immortal cell lines and >60% of them are in
K562 (n=121 for 61 TFs), GM12878 (n=113 for 64 TFs), HepG2 (n=97 for 51 TFs), A549 (n=67
for 27 TFs), and H1-hESC (n=62 for 36 TFs). More than one-third of TFs had at least 2 replicates
in the same cell line. Human TF PWMs were collected from five sources including motifs
annotated in Factorbook79 (see Table S2 in their paper; n=86 for 76 TFs), motifs of quality AD in HOCOMOCO v980 (n=429 for 397 TFs), high-confidence motifs in HumanTF81 (see Table
S3 in their paper; n=659 for 361 TFs), JASPAR82 v5_alpha (n=104 for 100 TFs), and
SwissRegulon83 downloaded on 03/18/2014 (n=353 for 333 TFs). To avoid matrix entries of
value 0, a pseudo-count 1 was added to each entry before calculating the relative occurrence
frequencies of nucleotides at each position.
We interrogated each of 22,057 proximal promoters to see if there is a significant ChIP-seq
peak (Q-value<1E-10) or PWM-based binding site (P < 1x10-5). The significance of motif scores
on either forward or reverse strand of the proximal promoters were compared to 5’-flanking
regions of length 2kbps of their cognate proximal promoters using the CREAD84,85 package.
Binding site evidence across multiple promoters associated with the same gene were
aggregated to produce gene-level binding evidence. For any protein-coding gene that
satisfied this sequence-based constraint, we further required significant distance correlation
(dCor)86 at P < 1x10-9, as calculated using expression profiles of their regulating TFs and
cognate protein-coding targets profiled in RNA Atlas. Note that only TFs and target genes of
non-zero median absolute deviation (MAD) score were included for analysis. We applied

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

permutation testing to estimate the significance of dCor by shuffling TF’s expression 100K
times and then calculated the randomized dCor values. These values were used to fit
parameters for a generalized extreme value (GEV) distribution using the MATLAB gevfit
routine to obtain a non-parametric p-value lower than 1E-5 from the cumulative density of
the resulting GEV distribution. For TF-targets passed both sequence and expression
constraints were investigated for transcriptional lncRNA modulation. We predicted 115,565
TF-target genes significantly modulated by lncRNAs. Moreover, 160,227 TF-target
interactions had target transcripts of adequate exonic and intronic coverage to compute m/pratio profiles.
Prediction of miRNA- and RBP-targets
We predicted targets of both types of post-transcriptional regulators through a two-step
approach by requiring both sequence- and expression-based evidence. Specifically, 3’-UTRs
of protein-coding transcripts and whole lncRNA transcripts were scanned for miRNA binding
sites conserved across species (context score < -0.2) by TargetScan77 v6.0 and significant RBP
binding peaks at P < 1x10-10. ENCODE eCLIP87 datasets for 115 RBPs profiled in two human
cancer cell lines, i.e., K562 and HepG2, were downloaded from UCSC Genome Browser.
Among them, 66 and 49 RBPs were available in either one or two cell lines, respectively. Each
RBP-cell line pair was performed in duplicates. Binding site evidence across multiple 3’ UTRs
associated with the same gene were aggregated to produce gene-level binding evidence. We
then asked if any pair of gene, either coding or non-coding, shared a significantly large
common regulator program at adjusted pFET < 0.01. For each qualified gene pair and their
common regulators, we measured if correlation changes between a common miRNA/RBP and
any of these two genes had evidence for being modulated by lncRNA expressions using delta
dCor; see the section “lncRNA target predictions using LongHorn.” below. A pair of regulatortarget significantly modulated by at least one lncRNA at P < 0.05 was finally selected.
miRNA/RBP-targets that passed both sequence and expression constraints were investigated
for post-transcriptional lncRNA modulation. In total, 371,591 predicted miRNA-target
interactions were identified as significantly modulated by lncRNAs and, among them, 33,602
miRNA-target transcripts had adequate exonic, intronic, and m/p-ratio reads and could be
included in further analyses to compare correlations of regulator and target mRNA and premRNA expression profiles. Note that, similar to experimentally verified miRNA targets, each
miRNA, including both miRBase-annotated and RNA Atlas-identified miRNAs, was required to
be expressed in at least 20 RNA Atlas profiled samples. RBPs were required to have a nonzero MAD score.
Distance correlation.
For each experimentally-verified and LongHorn-inferred TF- and miRNA-target, we applied
distance correlation (dCor)86 to measure coexpression patterns between a regulator, namely,
a TF, RBP, or miRNA, and its target using the target’s mRNA (exonic), pre-mRNA (intronic), or
m/p-ratio profiles. Distance correlation is able to capture nonlinear relationship between two
variables, which is a common scenario in the biological world. The dCor value is always nonnegative and zero means that two variables are completely independent86. To better
incorporate intrinsic noise of each type of expression, we randomly selected 10K pairs of TFand miRNA-targets from all profiled genes without replacement, and then calculated their
averaged dCor estimates (or baseline) using target’s mRNA, pre-mRNA, and m/p-ratio
profiles. Dependent on the expression type used for computing the dCor between a regulator-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

target pair, the corresponding dCor baseline was taken from the computed dCor to become
the adjusted dCor.
lncRNA target predictions using LongHorn.
LongHorn25 predicts lncRNA interactions through respectively integrating statistical evidence
from modulation of transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation by TFs, miRNAs, and
RBPs. Transcriptional lncRNAs can physically interact with either proximal promoters
(TR:Guide and TR:Co-factor) or TFs (TR:Guide and TR:Decoy) to alter their target pre-mRNA
abundance. Guide and Co-factor lncRNAs form RNA-DNA triple-helix structures (triplex in
short) with proximal promoters76. The former recruit TFs to bind their transcript’s promoter
regions and synergistically enhance the transcription rates of their targets. The latter can
either activate or inhibit the regulatory activities of TFs, which have their own binding sites
on the same promoter. Decoy lncRNA, in turn, influences target pre-mRNA transcription and
expression by altering the amount of TF and miRNA/RBP molecules available to target
proximal promoters and 3’-UTRs. In our model, lncRNAs can regulate target pre-mRNA
(TR:Decoy) and mRNA (PTR:Decoy) abundances in nucleus and cytoplasm. Note that, while
predicting lncRNAs acting as guides or decoys of TFs, we used PWMs to scan TF binding sites
from on lncRNA transcript sequences.
LongHorn reverse-engineers transcriptional and post-transcriptional interactions on a
genome-wide basis at first; see above sections of “Prediction of TF-targets” and “Prediction
of miRNA- and RBP-targets”. To estimate the significance of modulation, we calculated delta
dCor for each triplet that is consist of an lncRNA, a regulator (TF/miRNA/RBP), and a proteincoding target. According to the lncRNA expression in each triplet, we partitioned RNA Atlas
samples into four quartiles, from the lowest to the highest, and required this lncRNA to satisfy
two constraints including 1) it was not correlated with the regulator (P > 0.1) (independence
constraint) and 2) its expression fold change was > 2x between the fourth and the first
quartiles of the samples (range constraint). Then, comparing the first and the fourth sample
quartile, we required a nonparametric P < 0.05 for the delta dCor between the regulator and
the target against a bootstrapping-based null hypothesis. For significant triplets that are
associated with the same lncRNA-target pair, we integrated their p-values across their
common regulators using either the Fisher’s method88 (transcriptional) or the weighted
Brown’s method89 (post-transcriptional). While combining significance from multiple tests,
the Brown’s method takes into account miRNAs and RBPs in the same genomic cluster, which
are often co-expressed, to avoid inflating the integrated p-values. TargetScan context scores
were used to sort predicted miRNA binding sites from lowest to highest; we then used their
percentile ranks as weights for integrating p-values of significant triplets. After integration,
we set a cutoff of adjusted p<0.01 for significant lncRNA-target pairs. Note that, both lncRNAs
and their protein-coding targets were required to have a non-zero MAD score across profiled
RNA Atlas samples.
Stringent lncRNA-target set.
We defined a stringent lncRNA-target set by evaluating the deviations of the adjusted dCor
between each mediating regulator and the target pre-mRNA or m/p-ratio expression profiles.
Specifically, LongHorn predicted lncRNA-target pairs by providing 1) target identities, 2)
regulation model including transcriptional or post-transcriptional interactions, and 3) the list
of regulators that are predicted to mediate the interactions. Each lncRNA-target interaction
was associated with two distributions of the adjusted dCor: one was using pre-mRNA and the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

other using m/p-ratio expression profiles of the target. We anticipated that posttranscriptional targets of lncRNAs will have higher adjusted dCor values with their mediating
regulators while using m/p-ratio than pre-mRNA expression profiles of targets. Yet, for
transcriptional targets of lncRNAs, the relationships were expected to be in in the opposite
direction—with m/p-ratio less correlated than the pre-mRNA expression profiles. We
evaluated differences between these two distributions by the Student’s T test and required
significance at p<0.05.
Transcriptional and post-transcriptional specialists.
To identify lncRNA specialists with unusual number of transcriptional or post-transcriptional
interactions, we first normalize the size of LongHorn-inferred transcriptional and posttranscriptional interactomes to obtain a scaling ratio (σ). In RNA Atlas, LongHorn predicted
488,403 and 18,256 targets whose regulators’ activities were transcriptionally and posttranscriptionally modulated by lncRNA, respectively. Namely, the scaling ratio is 26.753 for
transcriptional interactions. For each RNA Atlas profiled lncRNA, including asRNAs, lincRNAs,
and circRNAs, with at least 10 predicted targets, we calculated the adjusted fold change
(adjFC) using the following formula to determine if it is a specialist:
adjFC =

(# 𝑜𝑓 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠/σ)
# 𝑜𝑓 𝑝𝑜𝑠𝑡−𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠𝑐𝑟𝑖𝑝𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑎𝑙 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠

The lncRNA is a transcriptional or post-transcriptional specialist if the adjFC is larger than 2 or
smaller than 0.5, respectively. By calculating this statistic, we revealed lncRNAs extensively
involved in pathways of transcriptional or post-transcriptional gene regulation.
Hallmark Gene Set enrichment analysis.
We sought to study if lncRNAs regulate key biological pathways through searching for
significant overlaps between their LongHorn-inferred targets and 50 MSigDB Hallmark Gene
Sets34, which can be broken into 8 basic categories including Cellular Component,
Development, DNA Damage, Immune, Metabolic, Proliferation, and Signaling Pathways. We
calculated p values for the significance of overlap using Fisher’s Exact Test and adjusted for
multiple comparisons based on Bonferroni correction. For each lncRNA-gene set pair, an
adjusted p-value lower than 0.01 was considered to be a significant association.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Data availability
All types of RNA entities can be readily explored via the online R2: Genomics analysis and
visualization platform (http://r2.amc.nl), and via a dedicated accessible portal
(http://r2platform.com/rna_atlas). This portal includes Genome browser profiles for the total
RNA as well as polyA tracks for all samples. All samples can also be used for correlations,
differetntial signals and many more analyses. In addition, the LongHorn results, described in
this manuscript can be explored.
The raw data (fastq files) and processed expression measurement tables from all RNA
biotypes across samples have been deposited in NCBI's Gene Expression Omnibus90 and are
accessible through GEO Series accession number GSE138734
(ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/query/acc.cgi?acc=GSE138734).

Author contributions
P.M., J.V. and P.S. conceived the idea, designed and supervised the project. L.R. and H.-S.C.
contributed to the implementation and design of most bioinformatic analyses. H.-S.C., T. W.C. and P.S. performed the analyses related to regulatory interactions of non-coding RNAs.
F.A.C. and K.D.P. performed the analyses to select a stringent set of genes and contributed
to quality validation of the transcriptome. S.G., S.K. and G.P.S. generated and sequenced the
polyA and total RNA libraries. P.-J.V. performed the evaluation of coding potential and
analyses of mass spectrometry data. R.C. and Y. S. contributed to the analyses of RNA
biotype expression and sample ontology associations. J.N. performed the polyA-minus
sequencing and the qPCR experiments. K.V. and J.N. generated and sequenced the small
RNA libraries,. J.A. implemented the identification of novel miRNAs and sequence motifs
analysis. S.L. designed the primers for the qPCR experiments. T.G. and T.D.M. performed the
imprinting analyses. T.B.H. and J. Kjems implemented the circRNA identification workflow.
N.N. developed the polyA-minus sequencing protocol. T.T., K.V. and K.R.B. provided immune
system-related cell lines and cell types. N.D., G.A., M.R.W. and A.U. performed analyses and
annotation of circRNAs. J. Koster developed dedicated tools to analyze RNA atlas data and
results and implemented them in the online portal R2. P.M. led the writing of the
manuscript in collaboration with L.R., H.-S.C. and P.S. L.R., H.-S.C., G.P.S., J.V., P.S. and P.M.
contributed to the conceptualization, interpretation and discussion of results. All authors
commented on the manuscript and contributed to the presentation of the data and results.

Acknowledgements
F.A.C. is supported by Special Research Fund (BOF) scholarship of Ghent University
(BOF.DOC.2017.0026.01). A.U. is supported by research funding from the NHMRC (Australia)
and Leukemia & Lymphoma Society, Leukemia Foundation and Snowdome Foundation. G.A.
is supported by a postgraduate scholarship from the Translational Cancer Research
Network. M.R.W. and N.D. acknowledge support from the Australian Government NCRIS
program, administered by Bioplatforms Australia. We thank Angelica Barr, Smita Pathak,
Lisa Way, Anthony Mai for their contribution in library preparation, and Allison Yunghans,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Erich Jaeger and Ali Moshrefi for their assistance in library organization and
sequencing/tracking/data management. This project was funded by the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under grant agreements 668858 and
826121 to P.M., P.S., and J.Koster.

Supplemental Tables
Table S1. RNA atlas samples.
Table S2. Annotation of filtered known and novel mRNA, lincRNA and asRNA genes
assembled from all polyA and total RNA libraries.
Table S3. Annotation of known and novel filtered circRNAs identified across all total RNA
libraries.
Table S4. Annotation of known and novel filtered mature miRNAs identified across all small
RNA libraries.
Table S5. Annotation of known and novel filtered miRNAs precursors identified across all
small RNA libraries.
Table S6. Novel candidate mRNAs with matching peptides from mass spectrometry data in
the Human Proteome Map.
Table S7. Table of known polyadenylated and non-polyadenylated genes used as reference
for the polyadenylation status classification. This list was generated based on Yang et al.
(2011).
Table S8. List and annotation of 160 genes with variable polyadenylation status across
samples.
Table S9. Overview of significantly imprinted genes in 203 tissue and cell type samples.
Table S10-12. mRNA, pre-mRNA, and m/p-ratio expression profiles of protein coding
transcripts (quantile-normalized and log2-transformed). (Related to Figure 5)
Table S13. Experimentally-verified targets of canonical regulators including TFs and miRNAs.
(Related to Figure 5)
Table S14. LongHorn-inferred targets of canonical regulators including TFs and miRNAs.
(Related to Figure 5)
Table S15. The stringent set of miRBase and RNA-Atlas miRNAs and their LongHorn-inferred
targets. (Related to Figure 5)
Table S16. lncRNA network predicted by LongHorn using RNA-Atlas expression profiles.
(Related to Figure 6)
Table S17. Significance of correlation deviations for LongHorn-inferred lncRNA targets.
(Related to Figure 6)
Table S18. Significant lncRNAs in Hallmark Gene Set enrichment analysis. (Related to Figure
6)
Table S19. qPCR validation experiment with 110 single-exon genes.
Table S20. Annotation of fusion genes labels retrieved by FusionCatcher and criteria used
for filtering false positives.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.
2.
3.

4.

5.

6.
7.
8.

9.

10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.

17.
18.

Esteller M. Non-coding RNAs in human disease. 2011. doi:10.1038/nrg3074
Chen L-L. The Biogenesis and Emerging Roles of Circular RNAs. Vol 17.; 2016.
doi:10.1038/nrm.2015.32
Lorenzi L, Avila Cobos F, Decock A, et al. Long noncoding RNA expression profiling in
cancer: Challenges and opportunities. Genes, Chromosom Cancer. January 2019.
doi:10.1002/gcc.22709
Ardlie KG, DeLuca DS, Segrè A V., et al. The Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) pilot
analysis: Multitissue gene regulation in humans. Science (80- ). 2015;348(6235):648660. doi:10.1126/science.1262110
Barretina J, Caponigro G, Stransky N, et al. The Cancer Cell Line Encyclopedia enables
predictive modelling of anticancer drug sensitivity. Nature. 2012;483.
doi:10.1038/nature11003
Forrest ARR, Kawaji H, Rehli M, et al. A promoter-level mammalian expression atlas.
Nature. 2014;507(7493):462-470. doi:10.1038/nature13182
Hon CC, Ramilowski JA, Harshbarger J, et al. An atlas of human long non-coding RNAs
with accurate 5′ ends. Nature. 2017;543(7644):199-204. doi:10.1038/nature21374
Derek de Rie, Imad Abugessaisa , Tanvir Alam3, Erik Arner1, 4, Peter Arner5, Haitham
Ashoor3, Gaby Åström5, Magda Babina6, Nicolas Bertin1, 4, 7 , A Maxwell
Burroughs1, 4, 8, Ailsa J Carlisle9, Carsten O Daub1, 4 , Michael Detmar10 , Ruslan
Deviatiia 21 & Michiel J L de Hoon1. An integrated expression atlas of miRNAs and
their promoters in human and mouse MicroRNAs. Nat Biotechnol. 2017.
Pertea M, Shumate A, Pertea G, et al. CHESS: a new human gene catalog curated
from thousands of large-scale RNA sequencing experiments reveals extensive
transcriptional noise. Genome Biol. 2018;19(1):208. doi:10.1186/s13059-018-1590-2
Iyer M, Niknafs Y, Malik R, et al. The landscape of long noncoding RNAs in the human
transcriptome. Nat Genet. 2015;47(3):199-208. doi:10.1038/ng.3192
Abstract G. The Landscape of Circular RNA in Cancer. 2019.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.12.021
Regev A, Teichmann SA, Lander ES, et al. The human cell atlas. Elife. 2017;6.
doi:10.7554/eLife.27041
Melé M, Ferreira PG, Reverter F, et al. The human transcriptome across tissues and
individuals. Science (80- ). 2015;348(6235).
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/348/6235/660/tab-pdf. Accessed July 30,
2017.
Arun G, Diermeier SD, Spector DL. Therapeutic Targeting of Long Non-Coding RNAs in
Cancer. 2018. doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2018.01.001
Leucci E, Vendramin R, Spinazzi M, et al. Melanoma addiction to the long non-coding
RNA SAMMSON. 2016. doi:10.1038/nature17161
Hosono Y, Niknafs YS, Prensner JR, et al. Oncogenic Role of THOR, a Conserved
Cancer/Testis Long Non-coding RNA. Cell. 2017;171(7):1559-1572.e20.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.11.040
Cunningham F, Amode MR, Barrell D, et al. Ensembl 2015. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015.
doi:10.1093/nar/gku1010
Roadmap Epigenomics Consortium, Kundaje A, Meuleman W, et al. Integrative
analysis of 111 reference human epigenomes. Nature. 2015;518(7539):317-329.
doi:10.1038/nature14248

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

19.
20.
21.

22.

23.
24.

25.

26.
27.

28.
29.
30.
31.

32.
33.
34.

35.

36.
37.

Glažar P, Papavasileiou P, Rajewsky N. CircBase: A database for circular RNAs. RNA.
2014. doi:10.1261/rna.043687.113
Kim M-S, Pinto SM, Getnet D, et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature.
2014;509(7502):575-581. doi:10.1038/nature13302
Frese S, Ruebner M, Suhr F, et al. Long-Term Endurance Exercise in Humans
Stimulates Cell Fusion of Myoblasts along with Fusogenic Endogenous Retroviral
Genes In Vivo. Kumar A, ed. PLoS One. 2015;10(7):e0132099.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0132099
Yang L, Duff MO, Graveley BR, Carmichael GG, Chen LL. Genomewide characterization
of non-polyadenylated RNAs. Genome Biol. 2011;12(2). doi:10.1186/gb-2011-12-2r16
Uhlén M, Fagerberg L, Hallström BM, et al. Tissue-based map of the human
proteome. Science (80- ). 2015;347(6220). doi:10.1126/science.1260419
Stadler MB, Gaidatzis D, Burger L, Florescu M. Analysis of intronic and exonic reads in
RNA-seq data characterizes transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. 2015.
doi:10.1038/nbt.3269
Chiu HS, Somvanshi S, Patel E, et al. Pan-Cancer Analysis of lncRNA Regulation
Supports Their Targeting of Cancer Genes in Each Tumor Context. Cell Rep.
2018;23(1):297-312.e12. doi:10.1016/j.celrep.2018.03.064
Karreth FA, Pandolfi PP. CeRNA cross-talk in cancer: When ce-bling rivalries go awry.
Cancer Discov. 2013. doi:10.1158/2159-8290.CD-13-0202
Poliseno L, Salmena L, Zhang J, Carver B, Haveman WJ, Pandolfi PP. A codingindependent function of gene and pseudogene mRNAs regulates tumour biology.
Nature. 2010. doi:10.1038/nature09144
Salmena L, Poliseno L, Tay Y, Kats L, Pandolfi PP. A ceRNA hypothesis: The rosetta
stone of a hidden RNA language? Cell. 2011. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2011.07.014
Tay Y, Rinn J, Pandolfi PP. The multilayered complexity of ceRNA crosstalk and
competition. Nature. 2014. doi:10.1038/nature12986
Dunham I, Kundaje A, Aldred SF, et al. An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in
the human genome. Nature. 2012. doi:10.1038/nature11247
Salzman J, Gawad C, Wang PL, Lacayo N, Brown PO. Circular RNAs are the
predominant transcript isoform from hundreds of human genes in diverse cell types.
PLoS One. 2012. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0030733
Jeck WR, Sorrentino JA, Wang K, et al. Circular RNAs are abundant, conserved, and
associated with ALU repeats. RNA. 2013. doi:10.1261/rna.035667.112
Djebali S, Davis CA, Merkel A, et al. Landscape of transcription in human cells. Nature.
2012. doi:10.1038/nature11233
Liberzon A, Birger C, Thorvaldsdóttir H, Ghandi M, Mesirov JP, Tamayo P. The
Molecular Signatures Database Hallmark Gene Set Collection. Cell Syst. 2015.
doi:10.1016/j.cels.2015.12.004
Kozomara A, Griffiths-Jones S. MiRBase: Annotating high confidence microRNAs using
deep sequencing data. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42(D1):68-73.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1181
Ramilowski JA, Yip CW, Agrawal S, et al. Functional Annotation of Human Long NonCoding RNAs via Molecular Phenotyping. bioRxiv. 2019:700864. doi:10.1101/700864
Trapnell C, Pachter L, Salzberg SL. TopHat: Discovering splice junctions with RNA-Seq.
Bioinformatics. 2009. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btp120

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

38.
39.

40.

41.
42.
43.
44.
45.

46.

47.
48.
49.
50.

51.

52.

53.
54.
55.
56.
57.

Langmead Ben, Steven S. Fast gapped-read alignment with Bowtie 2. Nat Methods.
2013;9(4):357-359. doi:10.1038/nmeth.1923.Fast
Pertea M, Pertea GM, Antonescu CM, Chang TC, Mendell JT, Salzberg SL. StringTie
enables improved reconstruction of a transcriptome from RNA-seq reads. Nat
Biotechnol. 2015. doi:10.1038/nbt.3122
Trapnell C, Williams BA, Pertea G, et al. Transcript assembly and quantification by
RNA-Seq reveals unannotated transcripts and isoform switching during cell
differentiation. Nat Biotechnol. 2010. doi:10.1038/nbt.1621
Quinlan AR, Hall IM. BEDTools: A flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic
features. Bioinformatics. 2010;26(6):841-842. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq033
Haeussler M, Zweig AS, Tyner C, et al. The UCSC Genome Browser database: 2019
update. Nucleic Acids Res. 2019;47(D1):D853-D858. doi:10.1093/nar/gky1095
Bray NL, Pimentel H, Melsted P, Pachter L. Near-optimal probabilistic RNA-seq
quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;34(5):525-527. doi:10.1038/nbt.3519
Cobos FA, Anckaert J, Volders P-J, et al. Zipper plot: visualizing transcriptional activity
of genomic regions. doi:10.1186/s12859-017-1651-7
Wang L, Park HJ, Dasari S, Wang S, Kocher JP, Li W. CPAT: Coding-potential
assessment tool using an alignment-free logistic regression model. Nucleic Acids Res.
2013. doi:10.1093/nar/gkt006
Lin MF, Jungreis I, Kellis M. PhyloCSF: a comparative genomics method to distinguish
protein coding and non-coding regions. Bioinformatics. 2011;27(13):i275-82.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btr209
Hubisz MJ, Pollard KS, Siepel A. PHAST and RPHAST: phylogenetic analysis with
space/time models. Brief Bioinform. 2011;12(1):41-51. doi:10.1093/bib/bbq072
Zerbino DR, Achuthan P, Akanni W, et al. Ensembl 2018. Nucleic Acids Res.
2018;46(D1):D754-D761. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1098
Kim MS, Pinto SM, Getnet D, et al. A draft map of the human proteome. Nature.
2014. doi:10.1038/nature13302
Vizcaíno JA, Côté RG, Csordas A, et al. The Proteomics Identifications (PRIDE)
database and associated tools: status in 2013. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;41(D1):D1063D1069. doi:10.1093/nar/gks1262
Kessner D, Chambers M, Burke R, Agus D, Mallick P. ProteoWizard: open source
software for rapid proteomics tools development. Bioinformatics. 2008;24(21):25342536. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btn323
C. Silva AS, Palmer A, Kovalev V, et al. Data-Driven Rescoring of Metabolite
Annotations Significantly Improves Sensitivity. Anal Chem. 2018;90(19):11636-11642.
doi:10.1021/acs.analchem.8b03224
UniProt Consortium T. UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase. Nucleic Acids
Res. 2018;46(5):2699-2699. doi:10.1093/nar/gky092
Memczak S, Jens M, Elefsinioti A, et al. Circular RNAs are a large class of animal RNAs
with regulatory potency. Nature. 2013. doi:10.1038/nature11928
Zhang XO, Dong R, Zhang Y, et al. Diverse alternative back-splicing and alternative
splicing landscape of circular RNAs. Genome Res. 2016. doi:10.1101/gr.202895.115
Gordon A, Hannon GJ, Gordon. FASTX-Toolkit. [Online] http://hannonlab cshl
edu/fastx_ toolkit http://hannonlab cshl edu/fastx_ toolkit. 2014.
Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient
alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol. 2009.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

58.

59.
60.

61.

62.

63.
64.

65.
66.
67.
68.

69.

70.
71.

72.
73.

74.

75.

doi:10.1186/gb-2009-10-3-r25
Friedländer MR, MacKowiak SD, Li N, Chen W, Rajewsky N. MiRDeep2 accurately
identifies known and hundreds of novel microRNA genes in seven animal clades.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2012;40(1):37-52. doi:10.1093/nar/gkr688
Wagih O. ggseqlogo: a versatile R package for drawing sequence logos. Hancock J, ed.
Bioinformatics. 2017;33(22):3645-3647. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btx469
Lefever S, Pattyn F, De Wilde B, et al. High-throughput PCR assay design for targeted
resequencing using primerXL. BMC Bioinformatics. 2017. doi:10.1186/s12859-0171809-3
Anders S, Pyl PT, Huber W. HTSeq-A Python framework to work with high-throughput
sequencing data. Bioinformatics. 2015;31(2):166-169.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu638
Cabili M, Trapnell C, Goff L, et al. Integrative annotation of human large intergenic
noncoding RNAs reveals global properties and specific subclasses. Genes Dev. 2011.
doi:10.1101/gad.17446611
Nicorici D, Satalan M, Edgren H, et al. FusionCatcher - a Tool for Finding Somatic
Fusion Genes in Paired-End RNA-Sequencing Data.; 2014. doi:10.1101/011650
Goovaerts T, Steyaert S, Vandenbussche CA, et al. A comprehensive overview of
genomic imprinting in breast and its deregulation in cancer. Nat Commun. 2018.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06566-7
Van Der Maaten L, Hinton G. Visualizing data using t-SNE. J Mach Learn Res. 2008.
R Development Core Team R. R: A Language and Environment for Statistical
Computing.; 2011. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74686-7
Love MI, Huber W, Anders S. Moderated estimation of fold change and dispersion for
RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biol. 2014. doi:10.1186/s13059-014-0550-8
Liao Y, Smyth GK, Shi W. FeatureCounts: An efficient general purpose program for
assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics. 2014.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt656
Bovolenta LA, Acencio ML, Lemke N. HTRIdb: an open-access database for
experimentally verified human transcriptional regulation interactions. BMC
Genomics. 2012. doi:10.1186/1471-2164-13-405
Matys V. TRANSFAC(R) and its module TRANSCompel(R): transcriptional gene
regulation in eukaryotes. Nucleic Acids Res. 2006. doi:10.1093/nar/gkj143
Whitfield TW, Wang J, Collins PJ, et al. Functional analysis of transcription factor
binding sites in human promoters. Genome Biol. 2012;13(9):R50. doi:10.1186/gb2012-13-9-r50
Xiao F, Zuo Z, Cai G, Kang S, Gao X, Li T. miRecords: An integrated resource for
microRNA-target interactions. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009. doi:10.1093/nar/gkn851
Vlachos IS, Paraskevopoulou MD, Karagkouni D, et al. DIANA-TarBase v7.0: Indexing
more than half a million experimentally supported miRNA:mRNA interactions. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2015. doi:10.1093/nar/gku1215
Hsu S Da, Tseng YT, Shrestha S, et al. MiRTarBase update 2014: An information
resource for experimentally validated miRNA-target interactions. Nucleic Acids Res.
2014. doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1266
Grosswendt S, Filipchyk A, Manzano M, et al. Unambiguous Identification of miRNA:
Target site interactions by different types of ligation reactions. Mol Cell. 2014.
doi:10.1016/j.molcel.2014.03.049

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

76.

77.

78.
79.

80.

81.
82.

83.

84.

85.
86.
87.

88.
89.
90.

Buske FA, Bauer DC, Mattick JS, Bailey TL. Triplexator: Detecting nucleic acid triple
helices in genomic and transcriptomic data. Genome Res. 2012.
doi:10.1101/gr.130237.111
Garcia DM, Baek D, Shin C, Bell GW, Grimson A, Bartel DP. Weak seed-pairing stability
and high target-site abundance decrease the proficiency of lsy-6 and other
microRNAs. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010. doi:10.1038/nsmb.2115
Landt SG, Marinov GK, Kundaje A, et al. ChIP-seq guidelines and practices of the
ENCODE and modENCODE consortia. Genome Res. 2012. doi:10.1101/gr.136184.111
Wang J, Zhuang J, Iyer S, et al. Sequence features and chromatin structure around the
genomic regions bound by 119 human transcription factors. Genome Res. 2012.
doi:10.1101/gr.139105.112
Kulakovskiy I V., Vorontsov IE, Yevshin IS, et al. HOCOMOCO: Towards a complete
collection of transcription factor binding models for human and mouse via large-scale
ChIP-Seq analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1106
Lambert SA, Jolma A, Campitelli LF, et al. The Human Transcription Factors. Cell. 2018.
doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.01.029
Khan A, Fornes O, Stigliani A, et al. JASPAR 2018: Update of the open-access database
of transcription factor binding profiles and its web framework. Nucleic Acids Res.
2018. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx1126
Pachkov M, Balwierz PJ, Arnold P, Ozonov E, Van Nimwegen E. SwissRegulon, a
database of genome-wide annotations of regulatory sites: Recent updates. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2013. doi:10.1093/nar/gks1145
Smith AD, Sumazin P, Xuan Z, Zhang MQ. DNA motifs in human and mouse proximal
promoters predict tissue-specific expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0508169103
Smith AD, Sumazin P, Das D, Zhang MQ. Mining ChIP-chip data for transcription factor
and cofactor binding sites. Bioinformatics. 2005. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bti1043
Székely GJ, Rizzo ML, Bakirov NK. Measuring and testing dependence by correlation
of distances. Ann Stat. 2007. doi:10.1214/009053607000000505
Van Nostrand EL, Pratt GA, Shishkin AA, et al. Robust transcriptome-wide discovery of
RNA-binding protein binding sites with enhanced CLIP (eCLIP). Nat Methods. 2016.
doi:10.1038/nmeth.3810
Lury DA, Fisher RA. Statistical Methods for Research Workers. Stat. 1972.
doi:10.2307/2986695
Brown MB. 400: A Method for Combining Non-Independent, One-Sided Tests of
Significance. Biometrics. 1975. doi:10.2307/2529826
Edgar R. Gene Expression Omnibus: NCBI gene expression and hybridization array
data repository. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002. doi:10.1093/nar/30.1.207

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

45 tissues

160 cell types

strand-specific RNA-seq

polyA + total RNA + small RNA
125 B reads

20,000

0.50

10,000

0.25
0.00

10,000
circRNA host genes

circRNAs (37,140)
known
novel (60%)

10,00
100
10

I

A

A

A
N
R
1,500

median= 3.000
mean= 4.856

1,000
500

A

0

N

A

2,000

R

N

2,500

1

10
30
20
circRNAs per gene

as

cR

1.00

fraction of pre-miRNAs

2,000

0.75

1,500

5p or 3p
5p and 3p

0.50

1,000

0.25

500

0.00

0

in
tro
n
in
te ic
rg
en
ic
ex
on
ic

pre-miRNAs

novel (70%)

J

2,500

miRNAs (5,427)
known

lin

m

R

N

A

1

H

m

G
circRNA host genes

m
R
lin NA
cR
N
A
as
R
N
A

F

E

0

m
R
lin NA
cR
as NA
R
N
A
m
R
lin NA
cR
as NA
R
N
A

0

N

10,000

0.75

novel
known

30,000

R

genes

20,000

D

as

fraction of genes

1.00

RNA
DNA
novel

N

novel
known

30,000

none
both
known

cR

C

lin

B

genes

93 cell lines

Figure 1

known novel

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

1.00

SK-N-BE(2)-C IMR-32

B

C

10,000

known

lincRNA

novel
known

asRNA

1,000

2.0

100

0.0

10

novel
multi-exonic

0.0

llincRNA
(ME)
bits

novel

0.04

llincRNA
(SE)
bits

mRNA

1

single-exonic

0.0

specific novel SE
ubiquitous known SE
ubiquitous novel SE

D
23.52

Mb

23.53

-3 -2 -1
exon

0 1 2
intron

-3 -2 -1
exon

0 1 2
intergenic

(876 AA)
(115 AA)
KGSSQPR (n=10)
DEEVKDR (n=5)

Figure 2

2.0

-3 -2 -1 0 1 2
intron exon

0.0

0.04

-3 -2 -1 0 1 2
intron exon

0.0

-3 -2 -1 0 1 2
intergenic exon

left ventricle

1.5

0.0

MSTRG.24286.2

0.0

2.0

0.5

30

CPAT predicted ORF
PhyloCSF predicted ORF
detected peptides (at FDR=0.01)

0 1 2
intron

1.0

0

0

-3 -2 -1
exon

RNA expression
(TPM total RNA)

23.51

F

protein expression
(nr PSMs)

total RNA

80

poly A

left ventr. expr. (TPM)

E
chr 13

2.0

2.0

bits

known

bits

0.75

bits

0.50

bits

0.25

mRNA
(ME)

fraction of genes

0

fold enrichment

A

6

left atrium

right
atrium

right
ventricle

tissue
adult heart

4
2
0

fetal heart

tissue

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

B

known non-polyA genes
known polyA genes

20,000

total RNA-seq

0
20,000

0.6

0

FTL

ENST00000331825

chr 19

48.9655

48.9660

48.9665

Mb

1,000

total RNA-seq

0.4

density

polyA-seq

0.2

0
1,000

chr 6

C

0.0

0

26.0454

non-polyA
polyA

15,000

−10

ENST00000612966

26.0456

D

26.0458

0.25

known

0.75

1.00

SE

genes

ME

novel

SE
polyA

non-polyA

12

4
0
−4

R
m

5
0

−5

non-polyA

lincRNA

IMR-32
P < 1x10-10

10

8

lin

mRNA

5

polyA

non-polyA

polyA

G

asRNA

genes

F

0

SK-N-BE(2)-C
P < 1x10-10

N
A
cR
N
A
as
R
N
A

0

0.50

ME

10,000
5,000

E

fraction of lincRNA genes
0

−5

log2(counts ratio)
polyA / total RNA

Mb

log2(polyA-minus/polyA)

HIST1H3C

log2(polyA-minus/polyA)

polyA-seq

100
10
0 0
10
100
non-polyA samples polyA samples

Binned samples
normalized log2 ratio
non-polyA
polyA
-10 -5 0 5 10

H

non-polyA sample - ALL-SIL cell line

polyA sample - prostate tissue

1,000
total RNA-seq
0
1,000
polyA-seq
0
HIST1H2BD

total RNA-seq
polyA-seq
ENST00000377777

chr 6 26.16

ENST00000289316

26.165

1,000
0
1,000
0

HIST1H2BD
26.17 Mb

Figure 3

ENST00000377777

chr 6 26.16

ENST00000289316

26.165

26.17 Mb

−5

0
dim 1

D

intra

5

E

expression distance

0.12
0.11
0.10
0.09

0.10
0.08
0.07
0.06

inter

novel SE lincRNA
MSTRG.85505

1,000

intra

I

inter

novel miRNA
RNAATLASMIR04288
60
40

0

0

en ot
do he
th r
e
ep lia
ith l
e
m fibr lial
es ob
en la
ch st
ym
al

20

en ot
do he
th r
e
ep lia
ith l
e
m fibr lial
es ob
en la
ch st
ym
al

500

1.0

G
lincRNA SE

novel miRNAs
4
2
0
-2
-4

0.09

0.05
intra

H

lincRNA SE

normalized counts

expression distance

0.13

inter

F

novel miRNAs

normalized counts

0.04

ci
rc
R
N
as A
R
N
lin A
cR
N
A
m
iR
N
A
m
R
N
A

−10

FC expression dist

expression distance

dim 2

A

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
B under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International
C license.
available
10
endothelial
epithelial
mRNAs
fibroblast
mesenchymal
0.12
5
other
2.5
0.10
endothelial
0
epithelial
2.0
0.08
fibroblast
mesenchymal
0.06
−5
1.5

Figure 4

5
0
-5

B
pre-mRNA profiles

4%
14%

10%
27%
(10,479)

8%
8%

24%
(9,250)

14%
7%
7%

39%

36%

expressed samples (%) (read count>24)
100

>75

>50

>25

>0

0

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

>99%
FDR<.01

mRNA profiles

protein-coding transcripts (%)

A

0

.32 .5

1

Spearman’s
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint
(which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

D

verified interactions

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

TF

miRNA

(210 TFs, 2,349 targets)

(226 miRNAs, 3,306 targets)

mRNA
pre-mRNA
m/p-ratio

.12

50

adjusted dCor

targets (%)

C

40
30

P<1x10-8

20

P<5x10-10

10
.1

.2

.3

.10

P<2x10-12
P<4x10-20
n.s.

.08
.06

P<1x10-7

.04

P<3x10-4
n.s.

.02
0

0
0

ρ

.4

0

.1

.2

.3

TF

.4

miRNA

mRNA
pre-mRNA
m/p-ratio

adjusted distance correlation (dCor)

F

E

LongHorn-inferred miRNA-targets

TargetScan-inferred
miRNA-targets

miRBase miRNA

(1,524 miRNAs, 10K targets)

40
30
20

P<2x10-2

10
0
0

.1

.2

.3

30

50

mRNA
pre-mRNA
m/p-ratio

targets (%)

targets (%)

50

.4

RNA Atlas miRNA

(724 miRNAs, 23,406 targets) (264 miRNAs, 8,994 targets)
mRNA
pre-mRNA
m/p-ratio

40
30

25
20
15

20

P<3x10-104

10

10

P<6x10-8

5

0

0
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

adjusted distance correlation (dCor)

Figure 5

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

A
(a) TR:Co-factor
asRNA or
lincRNA

TSS

TF

5’
3’

3’
5’
protein-coding gene

(b) TR:Guide

TF
asRNA or
lincRNA

TSS

5’
3’

3’
5’
protein-coding gene

(c) TR:Decoy

(d) PTR:Decoy

asRNA or lincRNA

TF

asRNA
or lincRNA

circRNA

miRNA
RBP

TSS

5’

’
AAA 3

3’

5’
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this 3’version posted October 17, 2019.
holder for this preprint (which
5’ The copyright
gene
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has grantedprotein-coding
bioRxiv a license
to display protein-coding
the preprinttranscript
in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B

targets (%)

modulated TF-targets by lncRNAs (inferred)

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

single-exon

multi-exon

asRNA

lincRNA

circRNA

(274 TFs, 91,101 targets)

(290 TFs, 151,375 targets)

(274 TFs, 96,991 targets)

(290 TFs, 152,852 targets)

(44 TFs, 330 targets)

mRNA
Exonic
pre-mRNA
Intronic
m/p-ratio
Ratio

P<5x10-324

0

.1

.2

.3

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

.4

P<5x10-324

0

.1

.2

.3

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

.4

P<5x10-324

0

.1

.2

.3

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

P<5x10-324

.4

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

P<6x10-5

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

adjusted distance correlation (dCor)
C

modulated miRNA-targets by lncRNAs (inferred)
single-exon

multi-exon

lincRNA

asRNA

circRNA

(214 miRNAs, 1,015 targets) (1,235 miRNAs, 33,017 targets) (1,016 miRNAs, 17,216 targets) (1,138 miRNAs, 23,095 targets)
mRNA
pre-mRNA
m/p-ratio

40
30
20

P<6x10-5

10

50

50

50

50

40

40

40

40

30

30

30

30

20

20

P<3x10-97

10

0

0
0

.1

.2

.3

.4

20

P<4x10-62

10
.1

.2

.3

.4

20

P<2x10-67

10

0
0

0
0

.1

.2

.3

P<8x10-4

10
0

.4

0

.1

.2

.3

.4

0

.1

.2

.3

adjusted distance correlation (dCor)
D

E

F

Significant (P<0.05)

Figure 6...

90%
(21)

(2,761)

lincRNA

(1,020)

0%

circRNA

10%

25%
asRNA

25%

PTR:Decoy

(62,190)

TR:Decoy

(32,014)

TR:Guide

Non-significant

(4,146)

43%
(132,273)

TR:Co-factor

(130)

circRNA

(184,707)

0%
lincRNA

0%

7%

88%

25%

50%

82%

25%

lncRNA (%)

50%
44%

50%

50%

75%

34%

75%

44%

75%

45%

100%

(45,786)

506K total

100%

asRNA

Available
(46%)

100%

13%

lncRNA specialists
lncRNA-target pair (%)

targets (%)

50

(132 miRNAs, 588 targets)

PTR (adjFC<0.5)
Mixed
TR (adjFC>2)

.4

G
biotype

Hallmark gene sets (15)

APICAL_JUNCTION (5)
DNA_REPAIR (19)
OXIDATIVE_PHOSPHORYLATION (11)
APOPTOSIS (5)
PROTEIN_SECRETION (18)
UNFOLDED_PROTEIN_RESPONSE (12)
E2F_TARGETS (308)
G2M_CHECKPOINT (317)
MITOTIC_SPINDLE (97)
MYC_TARGETS_V1 (216)
MYC_TARGETS_V2 (17)
MTORC1_SIGNALING (6)
PI3K_AKT_MTOR_SIGNALING (13)
TGF_BETA_SIGNALING (6)
TNFA_SIGNALING_VIA_NFKB (81)

Process category:

annotation

exonic type

control type

84%

100%
89%

0%
0%

64%

73%

100%

0%

80%

100%

100%

0%

94%
100%

61%
58%

89%
75%

78%
75%

11%
0%

79%

50%

85%

94%

2%

80%

55%

88%

94%

2%

80%
83%

52%
55%

89%
81%

83%
95%

12%
1%

94%

53%

71%

94%

0%

67%

83%

50%

100%

0%

80%

10%

50%

85%
83%

57%

86%

83%
79%

17%
14%

100%
95%

80%
53%

91%
60%

62%
50%

62%

80%

asRNA

known

80%

single-exon

PTR

Mixed
lincRNA
novel
multi-exon
Cellular component
Pathway
TR
DNA damage
Proliferation
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/807529; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
Signaling
was not certified by peer review) is theMetabolic
author/funder, who has
granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

H

SAMMSON in SK-MEL-28 (melanoma)

RNA Atlas samples in 25 tissues (N=296)

polyA RNA-seq
total RNA-seq

SAMMSON in 25 tissues
SAMMSON vs. SOX10
SOX10

including melanoma

r = 0.498
(P<7x10-20)

SAMMSON

Subnetwork graph of cell cycle checkpoint genes regulated by SAMMSON

rLow : 0.021 (P<0.9)
rHigh: -0.386 (P<7x10-4)

target
mediator (PTR:Decoy)

High 25% (N=75)

SAMMSON

mediator

BRCA2

Low 25% (N=75)

mediator (TR:Co-factor)

Figure ...6

SAMMSON (chr3:69,998,743-70,016,300)

