bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/620971; this version posted April 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A new approach to automated CBMN scoring following high doses
Mikhail Repin1, David J. Brenner1 and Guy Garty1,2
1

Center for Radiological Research, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA

2

Radiological Research Accelerator Facility, Columbia University, Irvington, NY, USA

E-mail: gyg2101@cumc.columbia.edu

Abstract
In recent years we have automated the CBMN assay using microvolumes of blood, processed in multiwell plates.
We have seen that at doses above 6 Gy the detected yield of micronuclei actually declines with dose, likely because
of mitotic delay, preventing cells from forming micronuclei and also, when using one color imaging, resulting in many
false binucleated cells, consisting of two randomly-adjacent nuclei. By using the inverse mitotic index (the ratio of
mononuclear to binuclear cells) to adjust the micronucleus yield we were able to obtain a monotonic increasing dose
response curve at doses of up to at least 10 Gy from the same samples which generated dose-response curve with a
peak near 6 Gy, when scored using the traditional micronucleus yield.

Introduction
Following a large scale radiological event there will be an immediate need to locate individuals who
were exposed to high doses and would benefit from medical treatment. Over the past years the Center for
High Throughput Minimally Invasive Radiation Biodosimetry at Columbia University has focused on
development of robotic platforms for high throughput processing of cytogenetic bioassays like the
Cytokinesis Blocked Micronucleus assay (CBMN)(1) and the Dicentric Chromosome Assay (DCA). The
Robotic Automated Biodosimetry Technology (RABiT II)(2)we have developed makes use of commercially
available High Throughput Screening platforms to perform these assays in 96-well microplates, using 2030μl of whole blood per sample.
In the traditional CBMN assay(3, 4) lymphocytes are cultured to division and cytokinesis is blocked,
forming binucleated cells. Chromosomes or chromosomal fragments which were damaged by the radiation
are ejected from the daughter nuclei and manifest as micronuclei within the same cytoplasm, with the
average number of micronuclei per binucleated cell (Mni/Bi)increasing with dose.
A major issue we(5), and others(6) have encountered with the CBMN assay is a decreasing yield of
micronuclei at high doses, resulting in essentially the same assay readout for low and high doses and
preventing the assay from being reliably used without further knowledge.
Using the conventional micronucleus assay, a few ml of blood is cultured and several microscope slides
prepared and manually scored per sample. In this case micronucleus yields are monotonically increasing
up to about 10 Gy(6) – a different endpoint must be used for dose reconstruction if a high dose is suspected.
This problem becomes more severe when performing automated scoring. When scoring manually, the
cells are typically stained with Giemsa and the cellular boundaries are obvious. Automated scoring more
commonly utilizes DAPI which only stains nuclei. While it is possible to add a second stain to identify the
boundaries of each cell, this is rarely done, as it significantly reduces throughput. More commonly, nuclei
are associated into cells by proximity. In our prior work(5) we developed an advanced algorithm for efficient
detection of micronuclei, using high resolution (40x objective lens) imaging of sparsely-plated lymphocytes
on microscope slides prepared from 1 ml blood samples. In that work, the turnover was observed at doses
of 6-8 Gy, depending on the donor. Simultaneously, we had seen that the ratio of mononucleated to

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/620971; this version posted April 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

binucleated cells (Mo/Bi; related to the mitotic index) is monotonically increasing at high doses but fairly
constant at low doses. Our solution was to implement a two-step scoring procedure where if Mo/Bi is large
it is used for dose reconstruction, otherwise the conventional Mni/Bi is used.
More recently, we have developed a fully automated micronucleus assay, starting from 20-30 μl of
whole blood, cultured and imaged at lower resolution (20x) in 96-well plates(1, 7) with a fully automated
image analysis routine. As can be seen below, the ratio Mni/Bi, traditionally used as a biomarker, reproduces
the previously observed turnover at a dose of 6 Gy using these analysis conditions, and thus cannot be used
for dose prediction of higher doses.
We present here a modified phenomenological micronucleus parameter that utilizes a combination of
the traditional micronucleus yield and the mitotic index so that it is monotonically increasing with dose up
to at least 10 Gy, using our microculture assay, and is thus useful as a biomarker for high, survivable, doses.

Materials and Methods
Following informed consent (Columbia Institutional Review Board protocol # AAAF2671), blood from
8 volunteers was obtained by venipuncture. The blood was split into 20 μl aliquots and two aliquots per
donor were irradiated to each of 0, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 Gy, using a Gammacell 40 137Cs irradiator (Atomic Energy
of Canada Ltd, Chalk River, ON, Canada) at a dose rate of 0.7 Gy/min.

Automated CBMN Assay
The Automated CBMN assay was performed as described in(1) using a cell::explorer system
(PerkinElmer, Waltham, MA). Briefly, PB-MAX karyotyping medium (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.,
Waltham, MA) was added to the samples in 96-well plate for a total volume of 250 μl/well. All samples
were placed in the incubator at 37°C with 5% CO2. After 44 h of incubation, cytochalasin-B (Thermo
Fisher) was added to the final concentration of 6 µg/ml and samples were cultured for another 26 h. After
completion of culturing, cells were fixed and DAPI-stained as described before(1).

Automated Imaging
Prepared imaging microplates were scanned on an IN Cell Analyzer 2000 system(8) (General Electric,
Boston, MA). This automated imager is equipped with a large sensor CCD camera (2048 x 2048 pixel
resolution) that is capable of whole-well imaging in 96- or 384-well microplates at high sensitivity. For this
work, eighty one 20x fields, covering an area of 60 mm2 were captured per well, using an exposure of 300
msec/image.

Automated Image Analysis
Image analysis was performed by using our custom software FluorQuant (v6.1)(9), written in Visual
C++ using the OpenCV computer vision libraries (Version 3.1, www.opencv.org). The software accepts a
set of 16 bit grayscale images, directly from the RABiT II imaging system. The images are reduced to 8 bit
by locating the brightest pixel value, V, in the image and dividing all other pixels by f=V/255. They are then
binarized using an adaptive threshold algorithm, which assigns each pixel a value of 1 if its value is larger
than pixels in a 25x25 pixel neighborhood and zero otherwise. Nuclei are then located as Binary Large
Objects (BLOBs), using the algorithm of Suzuki and Abe(10). Round BLOBS within a size range of 5001000 pixels (corresponding to 70-140 µm2) are identified as nuclei and grouped into cells based on
proximity – if two similarly sized nuclei are within 3 radii of each other, they belong to the same cell. Cells
with two nuclei having dissimilar size (20% difference) or brightness (5% difference) are scored as two
mononucleated cells, rather than as a binucleated cell. Micronuclei are identified as BLOBS, within the
inferred cell, having an area 1/5 to 1/256 of the area of the main nuclei. The yield of Mononucleated,
Binucleated, Trinucleatedr and Quadrinucleated cells and the total number of micronuclei in each category
are reported in a Microsoft Excel file. Yields from the two aliquots were summed and plotted below.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/620971; this version posted April 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results

Figure 1: Yield of micronuclei per binucleated cell in irradiated samples from 8 healthy donors. The dots correspond
to the yield scored for each donor. The line is the average of all samples, processed concurrently, in the same 96-well
plate.

Figure 1 shows the yield of micronuclei per binucleated cell in blood samples from 8 donors irradiated
at doses of up to 10 Gy after fully automated image analysis. It is evident that the yield of micronuclei is a
good biomarker for doses up to about 6 Gy. At higher doses the detected yield of micronuclei declines and
a dose reconstruction would yield an erroneously low dose.

Figure 2: Ratio of mononucleated to binucleated cells in irradiated samples from 8 healthy donors. The dots
correspond to the yield scored for each donor. The line is the average of all samples, processed concurrently, in the
same 96-well plate.

Figure 2 shows the ratio of the mononuclear cells to binucleated cells. This marker provides a good dose
response at high doses but is generally considered to perform poorly at low doses(5), where it is almost flat
and suffers large variations between donors.

Discussion
Many labs use semi-automated imaging to perform the micronucleus assay(11). Briefly, an automated
microscope acquires images of cells from a slide and classifies them into binucleated cells and binucleated
cells with 1 or more micronuclei, providing a gallery of images of candidate cells. A trained scorer then

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/620971; this version posted April 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reviews the gallery and rejects or reclassifies the incorrectly classified cells. This is obviously a slow
process limiting the number of samples scored. Once the misclassified cells are removed the measured
micronucleus yield increases(12) and the high dose turnover in the curve is reduced or eliminated.
It is extremely difficult to train software to perform this screening automatically and usually results in
either insufficient rejection of misclassified cells or over-rejection and poor statistics. This is particularly
severe when performing the assay in microculture, where there are not many binucleated cells to begin
with. Another problem at high doses is that the yield of Binucleated cells decreases, mainly due to mitotic
delay. Thus the sample contains many mononucleate cells which, due to the high density plating, may be
misidentified as binucleated cells.
In prior work(5) we have seen that the ratio of mononuclear (undivided) to binucleated cells is a good
biomarker at high doses (above 3- 4 Gy) at lower doses the response tends to be flat and there is large
variation between individuals, although the use of better culture media seems to reduce this variation. The
goal of combining these two markers into a single unified parameter is to get response similar to the yield
of micronuclei at low doses and yet monotonically increasing.
𝑀𝑛𝑖

1 𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑜

A simple way to do that is to provide a weighted sum of the two, 𝑓𝛼 = 𝐵𝑖 + 𝛼 𝐵𝑖 , with α set such
that the first term dominates at low doses and the second term dominates at high doses. Ideally we would
also want f to be linear with dose, which simplifies dose reconstruction. By fitting f to a linear curve, using
the built in routines in Microsoft Excel, we found that the best R2 was obtained for an α value of 45±5.

Figure 3: Dose dependence of f45(see text) in irradiated samples from 8 healthy donors. The dots correspond to the
yield scored for each donor. The line is the average of all samples, processed concurrently, in the same 96-well plate.

Summary
We present a novel approach, based on the use of phenomenological parameter – the classical yield of
micronuclei corrected by mitotic index component – as a dose indicator. The new parameter is characterized
by a linear dose response curve in a wide dose range from 0 up to 10 Gy and can be used for automated
high dose prediction based on the automated micronucleus assay in microculture, where the more traditional
micronucleus yield fails. By using mitotic index to correct the yield of micronuclei, a near linear dose
response curve can be obtained. Thus it is possible to identify individuals who were exposed to higher doses
and provide the appropriate care.
Considering that in most radiological scenarios(13), the majority of individuals seeking treatment will
either not be exposed or will have received low doses (“Worried Well”). It is thus crucial to be able to
separate individuals who received a high dose from the rest of the population without requiring a trained

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/620971; this version posted April 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

specialist to review a gallery of micronucleus images for each individual, as is currently recommended. By
using our approach, the dose can either be predicted automatically or a gallery of cell images can be
generated for review by a specialist only for those individuals suspected of having received a high dose.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by grant number U19 AI067773, the Center for High-Throughput MinimallyInvasive Radiation Biodosimetry, from the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National
Institutes of Health. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent
the official views of National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of
Health.

References
1.
Repin, M., Pampou, S., Karan, C., Brenner, D. J. and Garty, G. RABiT-II: Implementation of a HighThroughput Micronucleus Biodosimetry Assay on Commercial Biotech Robotic Systems. Radiat Res.
187(4), 502-508 (2017).
2.
Repin, M., Turner, H. C., Garty, G. and Brenner, D. J. Next generation platforms for highthroughput biodosimetry. Radiat Prot Dosimetry. 159(1-4), 105-110 (2014).
3.

Fenech, M. Cytokinesis-block micronucleus cytome assay. Nat Protoc. 2(5), 1084-1104 (2007).

4.
International Atomic Energy Agency. Cytogenetic dosimetry: applications in preparedness for and
response to radiation emergencies. IAEA Emergency Preparedness and Response Series. IAEA (2011). IAEA
(2011).
5.
Lyulko, O. V., Garty, G., Randers-Pehrson, G., Turner, H. C., Szolc, B. and Brenner, D. J. Fast image
analysis for the micronucleus assay in a fully automated high-throughput biodosimetry system. Radiat
Res. 181(2), 146-61 (2014).
6.
Muller, W. U. and Rode, A. The micronucleus assay in human lymphocytes after high radiation
doses (5-15 Gy). Mutat Res-Fund Mol M. 502(1-2), 47-51 (2002).
7.
Repin, M., Pampou, S., Garty, G. and Brenner, D. J. RABiT-II: A Fully-Automated Micronucleus
Assay System with Shortened Time to Result. Radiat Res. 191(3), 232-236 (2019).
8.
Radu, C., Adrar, H. S., Alamir, A., Hatherley, I., Trinh, T. and Djaballah, H. Designs and concept
reliance of a fully automated high-content screening platform. J Lab Autom. 17(5), 359-69 (2012).
9.
Garty, G., Bigelow, A. W., Repin, M., Turner, H. C., Bian, D., Balajee, A. S., Lyulko, O. V., Taveras,
M., Yao, Y. L. and Brenner, D. J. An Automated Imaging System for Radiation Biodosimetry. Microsc Res
Tech. 78(7), 587-598 (2015).
10.
Suzuki, S. and Abe, K. Topological structural analysis of digitized binary images by border
following. Computer Vision, Graphics, and Image Processing. 29(3), 396 (1985).
11.
Depuydt, J., Baeyens, A., Barnard, S., Beinke, C., Benedek, A., Beukes, P., Buraczewska, I.,
Darroudi, F., De Sanctis, S., Dominguez, I. et al. RENEB intercomparison exercises analyzing micronuclei
(Cytokinesis-block Micronucleus Assay). Int J Radiat Biol. 93(1), 36-47 (2017).
12.
Romm, H., Barnard, S., Boulay-Greene, H., De Amicis, A., De Sanctis, S., Franco, M., Herodin, F.,
Jones, A., Kulka, U., Lista, F. et al. Laboratory intercomparison of the cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay.
Radiat Res. 180(2), 120-8 (2013).
13.

Homeland Security Council. National planning scenarios (final version 21.3) (2006).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/620971; this version posted April 30, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

