bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Structural basis for divergent and convergent evolution of catalytic
machineries in plant AAAD proteins

Michael P. Torrens-Spence1, Ying-Chih Chiang2†, Tyler Smith1,3, Maria A. Vicent1,4, Yi Wang2,
and Jing-Ke Weng1,4*

1

Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

2

Department of Physics, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong.

3

Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts

02139, USA.
4

Department of Biology, Williams College, Williamstown, Massachusetts 01267, USA.

†Present address: School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ,
UK.

*Corresponding Author: Jing-Ke Weng
Email: wengj@wi.mit.edu, Tel.: +1 617 324 4921

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The radiation of pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase
(AAAD) family in plants has yielded an array of paralogous enzymes exhibiting divergent
substrate preferences and catalytic mechanisms. Plant AAADs catalyze either the
decarboxylation or decarboxylation-dependent oxidative deamination of aromatic L-amino acids
to produce aromatic monoamines or aromatic acetaldehydes, respectively. These compounds
serve as key precursors for the biosynthesis of several important classes of plant natural
products, including indole alkaloids, benzylisoquinoline alkaloids, hydroxycinnamic acid
amides, phenylacetaldehyde-derived floral volatiles, and tyrosol derivatives. Here, we present the
crystal structures of four functionally distinct plant AAAD paralogs. Through comparative
structural and functional analyses, we identify variable structural features of the substratebinding pocket that underlie divergent evolution of substrate selectivity toward indole, phenol, or
hydroxyphenol amino acids in plant AAADs. Moreover, we uncover two mechanistic classes of
independently arising mutations in numerous AAAD paralogs led to the convergent evolution of
the derived aldehyde synthase activity. Applying knowledge learned from this study, we
successfully engineered a shortened benzylisoquinoline alkaloid pathway to produce (S)norcoclaurine in yeast. This work highlights the pliability of the AAAD fold that allows change
of substrate selectivity and access to alternative catalytic mechanisms with only a few mutations.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Significance
Plants biosynthesize their own proteinogenic aromatic L-amino acids, namely L-phenylalanine,
L-tyrosine and L-tryptophan, not only for building proteins but also for the production of a
plethora of aromatic-amino-acid-derived natural products. Pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)dependent aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase (AAAD) family enzymes play important roles
in channeling various aromatic L-amino acids into diverse downstream specialized metabolic
pathways. Through comparative structural analysis of four functionally divergent plant AAAD
proteins followed by biochemical characterization and molecular dynamics simulations, we
reveal the structural and mechanistic basis for the rich divergent and convergent evolutionary
development within the plant AAAD family. Knowledge learned from this study aids our ability
to engineer high-value aromatic-L-amino-acid-derived natural product biosynthesis in
heterologous chassis organisms.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Plants are sessile organisms that produce a dazzling array of specialized metabolites as adaptive
strategies to mitigate multitudes of abiotic and biotic stressors. Underlying plants’ remarkable
chemodiversity is the rapid evolution of the requisite specialized metabolic enzymes and
pathways (1). Genome-wide comparative analysis across major green plant lineages has recently
revealed pervasive and progressive expansions of discrete enzyme families mostly involved in
specialized metabolism, wherein new enzymes emerge predominantly through the mechanism of
gene duplication followed by subfunctionalization or neofunctionalization (2). Newly evolved
enzyme functions usually entail altered substrate specificity and/or product diversity without
changes in the ancestral catalytic mechanism. In rare cases, adaptive mutations occur in a
progenitor protein fold—either catalytic or non-catalytic—that give rise to new catalytic
machineries and novel biochemistry (3, 4). Resolving the structural and mechanistic bases for
these cases is an important step towards understanding the origin and evolution of functionally
disparate enzyme families.
Aromatic amino acid decarboxylases (AAADs) are an evolutionary ancient group of
pyridoxal 5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzymes with primary functions associated with amino
acid metabolism. Mammals possess a single AAAD, 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase
(DDC), responsible for the synthesis of monoamine neurotransmitters, such as dopamine and
serotonin from their respective aromatic L-amino acid precursors (5). In contrast, the AAAD
family in plants has undergone extensive radiation to yield a large number of paralogous
enzymes with variation in both substrate preference and catalytic mechanism (6). While Ltryptophan decarboxylases (TDCs) and L-tyrosine decarboxylases (TyDCs) are canonical
AAADs that supply the aromatic monoamine precursors tryptamine and tyramine for the
biosynthesis of monoterpene indole alkaloids (MIAs) and benzylisoquinoline alkaloids (BIAs)
respectively, phenylacetaldehyde synthases (PAASs) and 4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

synthases (4HPAASs) are mechanistically divergent aromatic aldehyde synthases (AASs). They
catalyze the decarboxylation-dependent oxidative deamination of L-phenylalanine and Ltyrosine, respectively, to produce the corresponding aromatic acetaldehydes necessary for the
biosynthesis of floral volatiles and tyrosol-derived natural products (Fig. 1A) (7–10). Canonical
AAAD or AAS enzymes thus play a gate-keeping role in channeling primary metabolites into a
variety of plant specialized metabolic pathways. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying
the functional divergence of AAAD-family proteins in plants remain largely unresolved.
In this work, we seek to understand the evolutionary trajectories that led to functional
divergence and convergence within the plant AAAD family. Through comparative analysis of
four representative plant AAAD crystal structures followed by mutant characterization and
molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, we identify key structural features that dictate substrate
selectivity and the alternative AAAD versus AAS catalytic mechanisms. Using this newly
learned knowledge, we identify a new type of independently evolved AASs from myrtle plants
that contain an unusual mechanistic mutation distinct from that of the previously described plant
AASs (10). These findings suggest that nature has explored at least two mechanistically distinct
trajectories to reconfigure an ancestral AAAD catalytic machinery to catalyze AAS chemistry.
Furthermore, we show the feasibility of engineering a shortened BIA biosynthetic pathway in
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by harnessing the 4HPAAS activity, highlighting the role of a
neofunctionalized enzyme in rewiring ancestral metabolic network during plant specialized
metabolic evolution.

Results
Plants AAADs have radiated to yield multiple monophyletic groups
To probe into the evolutionary history of plant AAADs, we performed phylogenetic analysis
using a panel of AAAD protein sequences collected from green algae, all major lineages of land
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

plants, and select eubacteria. This analysis revealed that the bacterial and chlorophyte AAADs
form a monophyletic clade, whereas the plant AAADs split into three distinct clades, annotated
as the basal, TyDC and TDC clades, respectively (Fig. 1B and Fig. S2). The basal clade contains
AAAD sequences from the full taxonomic breadth of the surveyed plants, including basal
bryophyte and lycophyte lineages, and is mostly closely related to the bacterial and chlorophyte
clade (Fig. 1C). Enzymes from this clade cover the full suite of known AAAD activities, which
include the functionally characterized A. thaliana PAAS (9), A. thaliana TyDC (11), Capsicum
annuum TDC (12), and Oryza sativa TDC (13). Mapping the AAAD protein family phylogeny to
green plant taxonomy, we noted that the TyDC and TDC clades are present only in flower plants
and appear to be associated with more stringent biochemical functions (Fig. 1C). TDC-clade
enzymes from O. sativa (13), Camptotheca acuminate (14), C. annuum (12), Ophiorrhiza pumila
(15), and C. roseus (16) have been shown to exhibit strict indolic substrate preference. On the
contrary, previously characterized TyDC-clade enzymes Petroselinum crispum 4HPAAS (17),
Rosa hybrid PAAS (18), Petunia hybrida PAAS (18), Rhodiola rosea 4HPAAS (10), Thalictrum
flavum TyDC (17), Brachypodium distachyon TyDC (19) and P. somniferum TyDC (8) all
exhibit phenolic substrate preference. It was noted that the indolic versus phenolic substrate
preference of the TDC and TyDC clades are closely correlated with a predicted active-site-lining
residue, which is conserved as a glycine within TDC clade but substituted to a serine or
threonine within the TyDC clade (20). In contrast, AAADs of the basal clade naturally contain
glycine, serine or threonine at this position.
Previous studies have also associated the evolutionarily new AAS activity with various
substitutions found at the catalytic tyrosine located on a dynamic loop region essential for the
canonical AAAD activity in both the basal and TyDC clades (18, 21, 22). Naturally occurring
substitutions at this position include valine, leucine, isoleucine, methionine and phenylalanine. It
was proposed that replacing the catalytic tyrosine with a hydrophobic amino acid alters the
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

canonical decarboxylase catalytic machinery to yield aromatic acetaldehyde products instead,
although the detailed mechanism is unknown (18, 21, 23). AAS activity likely emerged
repeatedly via independent evolution as substitutions at the catalytic tyrosine have been observed
sporadically in AAAD homologs across green plants as well as in other domains of life (24, 25).

The overall structures of four divergent plant AAAD proteins
To understand the structural basis for the functional divergence of plant AAAD proteins, we
determined the X-ray crystal structures of the paralogous Catharanthus roseus TDC (CrTDC),
Papaver somniferum TyDC (PsTyDC), Arabidopsis thaliana PAAS (AtPAAS), and Rhodiola
rosea 4HPAAS (Rr4HPAAS) (Fig. 2A, Fig. S3 and Table S1). All four enzymes purify and pack
in the crystal lattice as homodimers, and share the typical type II PLP-dependent decarboxylase
fold (Table S2). Each monomer contains three distinct segments previously described as domains
in the homologous mammalian DDC structure (5) (Fig. S4). These segments are unlikely to be
stable as autonomously folding units, and rather function as stretches of topologically associated
constituents necessary for the overall architecture of the α2 dimer. As represented by the Ltryptophan-bound CrTDC structure, the N-terminal segment (CrTDC1-119) comprises three
antiparallel helices that interlock with the reciprocal helices of the other monomer to form the
primary hydrophobic dimer interface (Fig. 2B and Fig. S5). The middle (CrTDC120-386) and Cterminal (CrTDC387-497) segments harbor a conserved Lys319 with its ζ-amino group covalently
linked to the coenzyme PLP (termed as LLP hereafter), and collectively form two symmetric
active sites at the dimer interface (Fig. 2C).

Structural features that control substrate selectivity in plant AAADs
The substrate-binding pocket of plant AAADs is principally composed of conserved
hydrophobic residues (Trp92, Phe100, Phe101, Pro102, Val122, Phe124, His318 and Leu325as in CrTDC)
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in addition to three variable residues (Ala103, Thr369 and Gly370 as in CrTDC) that display
sequence divergence across the major AAAD clades (Fig. 3A, B). Comparison of the CrTDC and
PsTyDC ligand-bound structures rationalizes the role of glycine-versus-serine variation at
position 370 (numbering according to CrTDC) in dictating the size and shape of the substratebinding pocket to favor indolic versus phenolic amino acid substrate in CrTDC and PsTyDC,
respectively (Fig. 3C) (20). This observation is consistent with previous observation that the
CrTDCG370S mutant exhibited enhanced affinity for the nonnative substrate L-DOPA as
compared to wild-type CrTDC (20). To test how the G370S mutation would impact CrTDC
activity in vivo, we compared the monoamine product profiles of yeast strains expressing
CrTDCG370S or wild-type CrTDC measured by liquid chromatography high-resolution accuratemass mass-spectrometry (LC-HRAM-MS). Compared to the CrTDC-expressing yeast, the
CrTDCG370S-expressing yeast showed little changes in tryptamine level (Fig. 3D) but elevated
accumulation of phenylethylamine (Fig. 3E), supporting the role of residue at position 370 in
gating indolic versus phenolic substrate.
In the CrTDC structure, the second variable residue Thr369 is adjacent to the indolicselective Gly370 residue, which is mostly conserved as a leucine in the basal and TyDC clades but
varies more widely as a threonine, valine, or phenylalanine in the TDC clade (Fig. 3A). The
variable nature of this residue in the TDC clade suggests a potential role of this residue in
substrate selectivity. However, transgenic yeast expressing the CrTDCT369L G370S double mutant
showed a general decrease in aromatic monoamine production but no significant difference in
relative abundance of each monoamine product compared to yeast strain expressing the
CrTDCG370S single mutant (Fig. 3E-F). This observation thus did not support a direct correlation
of the identity of this second variable residue with substrate selectivity.
The third variable residue at position 103 (numbering according to CrTDC) is
represented only as a serine or alanine in the TDC clade but varies as serine, threonine, alanine,
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

methionine, phenylalanine, or cysteine in the basal and TyDC clades (Fig. 3A). In the L-tyrosinebound PsTyDC structure, the p-hydroxyl of the tyrosine substrate is coordinated by PsTyDC
Ser101 (corresponding to CrTDC Ala103) together with a nearby water through hydrogen bonding
(Fig. 3C), suggesting the role of this residue in gating hydroxylated versus unhydroxylated
aromatic amino acid substrates. Indeed, transgenic yeast expressing the CrTDCA101S G370S double
mutant accumulated an approximately 64-fold increase in tyramine level and a significant
decrease in phenylethylamine production as compared to the CrTDCG370S-expressing strain (Fig.
3E-F). The residue variation at this position in the TyDC and basal clades likely plays a role in
discerning various phenolic substrates, namely L-phenylalanine, L-tyrosine and L-DOPA, with
varying ring hydroxylation patterns. Serine or alanine substitution at this position in the TDC
clade may likewise distinguish 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan versus L-tryptophan substrate for
entering the plant melatonin and indole alkaloid biosynthetic pathways, respectively.
Together, these results suggest that the phylogenetically restricted sequence variations at
position 103 and 370 (numbering according to CrTDC) were likely selected to control the
respective substrate preferences of the TyDC and TDC clades as they diverged from the basalclade AAAD progenitors .

The PLP-dependent catalytic center of plant AAADs
PLP, the active form of vitamin B6, is a versatile coenzyme employed by approximately 4% of
all known enzymes to catalyze a diverse array of reactions, including elimination, addition,
racemization, and aldol cleavage, in addition to decarboxylation and decarboxylation-dependent
oxidative deamination of amino acids as discussed in this study. The active site of canonical
AAADs constrains the reactivity of PLP to specifically catalyze decarboxylation of the α-carboncarboxyl group of aromatic L-amino acids (26). The active site of plant AAADs, as represented
in the CrTDC structure, is located at the dimer interface, and features the characteristic prosthetic
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

group LLP in the form of an internal aldimine at resting state (Fig. S6). The phosphate moiety of
LLP is coordinated by Thr167, Ser168 and Thr369, while the pyridine-ring amine forms a salt bridge
with the side-chain carboxyl of Asp287, supporting its conserved role in stabilizing the
carbanionic intermediate of the PLP external aldimine (22). Evident from the L-tryptophanbound CrTDC structure, the aromatic L-amino acid substrate is oriented in the active site to
present its labile Cα-carboxyl bond perpendicular to the pyridine ring of the internal aldimine
LLP (Fig. S7) as predicted by Dunathan's hypothesis (26). Upon substrate binding,
transaldimination then occurs that conjugates the α-amino group of the substrate to PLP through
a Schiff base to yield the external aldimine (Fig. S8), as likely captured by one of the active sites
of the L-tyrosine-bound PsTyDC structure (Fig. S9). The resultant external aldimine
subsequently loses the α-carboxyl group as CO2 to generate a quinonoid intermediate (Fig. 4A,
reaction step 1). Through an as-yet-unknown mechanism, the nucleophilic carbanion of the
quinonoid intermediate is protonated to yield the monoamine product and a regenerated LLP,
ready for subsequent rounds of catalysis (Fig. 4A, reaction steps 2-3) (27). Despite the
availability of several animal DDC crystal structures, several aspects of the full catalytic cycle of
the type II PLP decarboxylases remain speculative. Comparative structural analysis of our four
plant AAAD structures sheds new light on the mechanistic basis for the canonical
decarboxylation activity as well as the evolutionarily new decarboxylation-dependent oxidative
deamination activity, which are detailed below.

Structural features of the two catalytic loops dictate divergent catalytic fates
Previous structural studies of the mammalian AAADs identified a large loop that harbors a
highly conserved tyrosine residue essential for catalysis (28). However, this loop is absent from
the electron density map of all the previously resolved animal DDC structures. We provide the
first direct electron-density support for this large loop that adopts different conformations
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

relative to the active site in different plant AAAD crystallographic datasets (Fig. 4B and
Supplementary Note 1). In the CrTDC structure, the large loop (CrTDC342-361) of monomer A
adopts an open conformation, revealing a solvent-exposed active site. Conversely, in the
PsTyDC structure, a crankshaft rotation puts the large loop over the bound L-tyrosine substrate
to seal the active-site pocket. In this closed conformation, the p-hydroxyl of the catalytic tyrosine
located on the large loop (Tyr350-A) is in close vicinity with the Cα of the L-tyrosine substrate and
LLP (Fig. 4C). These structural observations suggest that Tyr350 (as in PsTyDC) serves as the
catalytic acid that protonates the nucleophilic carbanion of the quinonoid intermediate at the
substrate Cα position, which is preceded by an open-to-closed conformational change by the
large loop.
Comparative structural analysis of our four plant AAAD structures identified another
small loop (CrTDC200-205-B), which harbors a conserved histidine residue (His203-B as in CrTDC)
and cooperatively interacts with the large loop from the opposite monomer. For instance, the
small loop in the CrTDC structure is rotated outward from the active-site LLP (Fig. 4D).
Conversely, in the AtPAAS, PsTyDC and Rr4HPAAS structures, the small loop adopts a closed
conformation with its histidine imidazole forming pi stacking with the LLP pyridine ring. Such
pi stacking between PLP and an active-site aromatic residue has been observed previously as a
common feature within AAADs and the broader α-aspartate aminotransferase superfamily (29–
31). Moreover, in the PsTyDC structure, the τ-nitrogen of the small-loop histidine is in
hydrogen-bonding distance with the p-hydroxyl of the large-loop catalytic tyrosine, suggesting a
potential catalytic role of this histidine. Previous studies of the pH dependence of AAADs
suggested that this small-loop histidine can not function directly as the catalytic acid to protonate
the carbanionic quinonoid intermediate (32–34). Based on our structural observations, we
propose a catalytic mechanism where the small-loop histidine (CrTDC His203-B) facilitates the
proton transfer from the p-hydroxyl of the large-loop tyrosine (CrTDC Tyr348-A) to the quinonoid
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intermediate (Fig. 4A, reaction steps 2) by serving as a direct or indirect proton source for
reprotonation of the Tyr348-A p-hydroxyl. Mechanistically similar Tyr-His side-chain interaction
that facilitates protonation of a carbanionic intermediate has also been recently proposed for the
Catharanthus roseus heteroyohimbine synthase, which is a medium-chain
dehydrogenase/reductase-family enzyme (35).

Molecular dynamics simulations reveal the dynamic nature of the two catalytic loops
Considering the various alternative conformations observed in our plant AAAD structures, we
sought to examine the flexibility and cooperativity of the two loops that harbor the key catalytic
residues (CrTDC Tyr348-A and His203-B) by MD simulation. We began with 36 sets of 100-ns
simulations on six CrTDC systems with LLP and the substrate L-tryptophan in different
protonation states (Fig. S10 and Supplementary Note 2). These simulations revealed
considerable flexibility of both loops, with one simulation capturing a dramatic closing motion of
the open large loop. Upon extending this simulation to 550 ns (Fig. S11 and Video S1), the large
loop was found to reach a semi-closed state characterized by a minimal Cα RMSD of 4.3Å with
respect to the modeled CrTDC closed-state structure (Supplementary Note 3). The catalytic
Tyr348-A was found to form stacking interactions with His203-B, with a minimal distance of
approximatley 2 Å between the two residues (Fig. S12). Interestingly, a large-loop helix
(CrTDC346-350A) that unfolded at the beginning of this simulation appeared to ‘unlock’ the large
loop from its open state. To further examine the correlation between the secondary structure of
this helix and the large-loop conformation, we artificially unfolded this short helix and initiated
72 sets of 50-ns simulations from the resulting structure. Similar conformations to that identified
in Fig. S11 were observed in all six systems (Fig. S13C) with minimal Cα RMSD ranging from
~5 to 8 Å with respect to the modeled CrTDC closed-state structure. These results suggest that
the initial closing motion of the large loop is independent of the coenzyme and substrate
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

protonation states and that the unfolding of the aforementioned helix can significantly accelerate
such motion. This is further substantiated by three sets of 600-ns simulations of CrTDC in an
apo state with neither PLP nor L-tryptophan present (Fig. S14 and Supplementary Note 2). It is
noted, however, that the fully closed state of CrTDC was not achieved in our sub-microsecond
simulations. For instance, in the trajectory shown in Fig. S11 and Video S1, L-tryptophan left the
active site at around t=526 ns, shortly after which the simulation was terminated. Overall, while
the transition from the semi-closed to the fully closed state can be expected to occur beyond the
sub-microsecond timescale, the MD results support our hypothesis that Tyr348-A can form close
contact with His203-B, readying the latter residue to stabilize pyridine ring resonance and direct
proton transfer from the former residue to the carbanionic quinonoid intermediate.

Convergent evolution of two mechanistic classes of AASs
Our new insights into the structural and dynamic basis for the canonical AAAD catalytic
mechanism predicts that mutations to the large-loop tyrosine or the small-loop histidine would
likely derail the canonical AAAD catalytic cycle and potentially may yield alternative reaction
outcomes. Indeed, the canonical large-loop tyrosine is substituted by phenylalanine in AtPAAS.
We propose that absence of the proton-donating p-hydroxyl of the catalytic tyrosine and a
slightly enlarged active-site cavity with the Tyr-to-Phe substitution in AtPAAS permit molecular
oxygen to enter the active site and likely to occupy where the tyrosine p-hydroxyl would be for
proton transfer (Fig. 4A, reaction steps 4-5, *). Instead of protonation, the nucleophilic carbanion
of the quinonoid intermediate attacks molecular oxygen to generate a peroxide intermediate,
which subsequently decomposes to yield ammonia, hydrogen peroxide and the aromatic
acetaldehyde product.
The rapid expansion of plant genomic resources in recent years enabled us to mine
additional plant AAADs with potentially neofunctionalized activities. Bearing in mind the
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

aforementioned residues that control substrate selectivity and catalytic mechanism, we queried
all plant AAAD homolog sequences that were identifiable by BLAST searches within NCBI and
the 1KP transcriptome database (36). Interestingly, this search identified a number of TyDCclade AAAD homologs from the Myrtaceae and Papaveraceae plant families that harbor unusual
substitutions at the small-loop histidine (Fig. S15). Several Myrtaceae plants contain a group of
closely related and likely orthologous AAAD proteins with a His-to-Asn substitution at the
small-loop histidine. In Papaveraceae, on the other hand, we noticed a His-to-Leu substitution in
the previously reported P. somniferum tyrosine decarboxylase 1 (PsTyDC1) (8) and a His-to-Tyr
substitution in another Papaver bracteatum AAAD homolog. While the small-loop histidine is
typically conserved among type II PLP decarboxylases and the broader type I aspartate
aminotransferases, the same His-to-Asn substitution was previously observed in select insect
AAAD proteins involved in 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde production necessary for insect
soft cuticle formation (37, 38). These sequence observations together with the proposed catalytic
role of the small-loop histidine implicate that AAADs that carry substitutions at this highly
conserved residue position may contain alternative enzymatic functions.
To test this hypothesis, we first generated transgenic yeast strains expressing either wildtype PsTyDC, PsTyDCY350F, or PsTyDCH205N, respectively, and assessed their metabolic profiles
by LC-HRAM-MS (Fig. 5A-B). The PsTyDC-expressing yeast exclusively produces tyramine,
whereas the PsTyDCY350F-expressing yeast exclusively produces tyrosol (reduced from 4HPAA
by yeast endogenous metabolism). This result suggests that mutating the large-loop tyrosine to
phenylalanine in a canonical TyDC sequence background is necessary and sufficient to convert it
to an AAS. Interestingly, the PsTyDCH205N-expressing yeast produces both tyramine and tyrosol,
suggesting that mutating the small-loop histidine to asparagine alone in PsTyDC turned it into an
AAAD-AAS bifunctional enzyme. In vitro enzyme assays using recombinant wild-type
PsTyDC, PsTyDCY350F, or PsTyDCH205N against L-tyrosine as substrate yielded similar results
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that corroborated the observations made in transgenic yeast (Fig. 5C). Collectively, these results
reinforce the essential role of the large-loop catalytic tyrosine for the canonical AAAD activity,
and support the proposed assisting role of the small-loop histidine in quinonoid intermediate
protonation for the canonical AAAD activity. The full AAAD catalytic cycle could still proceed
with reduced efficiency when the small-loop histidine is mutated to asparagine, although a
significant fraction of the carbanionic quinonoid intermediate undergoes the alternative oxidative
deamination chemistry similarly as proposed for AtPAAS (Fig. 4A, reaction steps 4-5, **).
To assess the function of plant AAAD homologs that naturally contain substitutions at
the small-loop histidine, we cloned one of such genes from Eucalyptus grandis (EgPAAS,
MG786260, Fig. 1B), starting from total mRNA extracted from the host plant. We then produced
its encoded protein recombinantly in E. coli. In vitro enzyme assays of EgPAAS against a panel
of aromatic L-amino acids demonstrated an exclusive AAS activity with an apparent substrate
preference towards L-phenylalanine (Fig. 5D and Fig. S16). It is worth noting that
phenylacetaldehyde has been previously identified as a major fragrance compound present in the
essential oil and honey of numerous Myrtaceae plants (39–41), which may be attributed to the
activity of EgPAAS. Unlike the PsTyDCH205N mutant, EgPAAS shows no detectable ancestral
AAAD activity, suggesting that in addition to the small-loop His-to-Asn substitution other
adaptive mutations must have contributed to the specific PAAS activity. Despite our interest in
the other two AAAD sequences from Papaveraceae plants harboring alternative substitutions at
the small-loop histidine, they could not be cloned from their respective host plants, raising the
possibility that these genes could potentially be derived from sequencing or assembly errors.
Thus, we did not pursue functional characterization of these genes further.

Metabolic engineering of a shortened BIA biosynthetic pathway in yeast with 4HPAAS

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

To examine the role of adaptive functional evolution of a single AAAD protein in the larger
context of specialized metabolic pathway evolution, we attempted a metabolic engineering
exercise to build a shortened BIA biosynthetic pathway in yeast S. cerevisiae using AAS. In the
proposed plant BIA pathway, the key intermediate 4HPAA is reportedly derived from L-tyrosine
through two consecutive enzymatic steps catalyzed by L-tyrosine aminotransferase (TAT) and an
unidentified 4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate decarboxylase (4HPPDC) (42) (Fig. 6A). However, in the
recently resolved salidroside biosynthetic pathway in Rhodiola rosea, 4HPAA is directly
converted from L-tyrosine by a single Rr4HPAAS enzyme (10) (Fig. 6A). We therefore reasoned
that 4HPAA activity could be utilized to reroute the 4HPAA branch of the BIA pathway. In our
metabolic engineering scheme, either Rr4HPAAS or the PsTyDCY350F mutant was used as the
4HPAAS enzyme, while wild-type PsTyDC was used as a control. Moreover, Pseudomonas
putida DDC (PpDDC) and Beta vulgaris L-tyrosine hydroxylase (BvTyH) were used to generate
the other key intermediate dopamine from L-tyrosine. Lastly, Papaver somniferum NCS
(PsNCS) was added to stereoselectively condense 4HPAA and dopamine to form (S)norcoclaurine.
Coexpression of PsTyDCY350F with PpDDC, BvTyH and PsNCS resulted in the highest
accumulation of (S)-norcoclaurine among various engineered transgenic yeast strains, whereas
replacing PsTyDCY350F with Rr4HPAAS gave approximately 7-fold less (S)-norcoclaurine
production (Fig. 6B). Control experiment using wild-type PsTyDC produced tyramine but not
(S)-norcoclaurine as expected (Fig. 6B and Fig. S17). This metabolic engineering exercise
illustrates that, when provided with the right metabolic network context, the birth of an
evolutionarily new AAS (achievable through a single mutation) can lead to rewiring of the
ancestral specialized metabolic pathway. This may in turn enhance the metabolic efficiency for
producing the same downstream products or yield alternative downstream products. Moreover,
the various AAAD proteins together with an in-depth mechanistic understanding of the structure16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

function relationship of the versatile plant AAAD family add to the current toolset for metabolic
engineering of high-value aromatic-amino-acid-derived natural products in heterologous hosts.

Discussion
Selective pressures unique to plants’ ecological niches have shaped the evolutionary trajectories
of the rapidly expanding specialized metabolic enzyme families in a lineage-specific manner.
The AAAD family is an ancient PLP-dependent enzyme family ubiquitously present in all
domains of life. While AAAD proteins mostly retain highly conserved primary metabolic
functions in animals, e.g. monoamine neurotransmitter synthesis, they have undergone extensive
radiation and functional diversification during land plant evolution. We show that the major
monophyletic TDC and TyDC clades of AAADs emerged from the ancestral basal clade, each
acquiring divergent active-site structural features linked to substrate specificity. Moreover, the
ancestral AAAD catalytic machinery has also been modified repeatedly through two types of
mechanistic mutations to converge on the evolutionarily new AAS activity in numerous AAAD
paralogs. The rich evolutionary history of the plant AAAD family therefore affords a prism for
understanding how plants capitalize their ability to biosynthesize proteinogenic aromatic Lamino acids to use them as precursors for further developing taxonomically restricted specialized
metabolic pathways (43). Some of these downstream pathways, such as the tryptophan-derived
MIA pathway in plants under the order of Gentianales and the tyrosine-derived BIA pathway in
plants under the order of Ranunculales, give rise to major classes of bioactive plant natural
products critical not only for host fitness but also as a source for important human medicines.
PLP in isolation can catalyze almost all of the reactions known for PLP-dependent
enzymes, including transamination, decarboxylation, 0- and y-elimination, racemization and
aldol cleavage (44). In the context of PLP-dependent enzymes, PLP reactivity is confined by its
encompassing active site to elicit specific catalytic outcome with defined substrates (44).
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Evolutionary analysis suggests that major functional classes of PLP-dependent enzymes likely
established first, followed by divergence in substrate selectivity (44, 45). Four evolutionarily
distinct PLP-dependent decarboxylases exist in nature (45). The largest and most diverse group
(Group II) consists of AAADs, histidine decarboxylases, glutamate decarboxylases, aspartate
decarboxylases, serine decarboxylases, and cysteine sulfinic acid decarboxylases, implicating a
deep divergence of amino acid substrate selectivity among Group II AAADs. Within plant
AAADs, the substrate selectivity has continued to evolve to arrive at extant enzymes with
exquisite substrate selectivity towards various proteinogenic and non-proteinogenic aromatic Lamino acids. This is largely achieved by fixing specific mutations at the substrate-binding pocket
as revealed in this study.
Oxygenation is one of the most common chemical reactions in plant specialized
metabolism. The triplet ground electron state of molecular oxygen necessitates a cofactor to
facilitate single-electron transfer, evident from several major oxygenase families involved in
plant specialized metabolism, including cytochrome P450 monooxygenases (P450s), iron/2oxoglutarate-dependent oxygenases (Fe/2OGs), and flavin-dependent monooxygenases (FMOs)
(46). Evolutionarily new AASs represent a unique class of plant oxygenases that exploit a
carbanionic intermediate to facilitate oxygenation (Fig. 4A, reaction steps 4-5). This catalytic
mechanism is reminiscent of the paracatalytic photorespiratory reaction catalyzed by ribulose1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO); Instead of CO2, molecular oxygen can
enter RuBisCO active site and react with a ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate-derived carbanionic
enediolate intermediate to form a peroxide intermediate, which subsequently decomposes to
yield 3-phosphoglycerate and 2-phosphoglycerate (47). Furthermore, several carbanionstabilizing enzymes, including PLP-dependent enzymes DDC, glutamate decarboxylase and
ornithine decarboxylase, are also capable of catalyzing similar paracatalytic oxygenation
reactions (47–50). Whereas oxygenation reactions observed in these carbanion-stabilizing
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

enzymes are mostly deemed as paracatalytic activities due to the intrinsic reactivity of the
carbanion intermediate, the plant AASs evolved by harnessing such latent paracatalytic activity
and turned it into dedicated activities for producing aromatic acetaldehydes and their derived
secondary metabolites (10, 17, 18, 24, 51). We show that, by understanding the structural and
mechanistic basis for convergent evolution of two mechanistic classes of AAS in plant AAADs,
PsTyDC could be converted to a dedicated 4HPAAS with a single large-loop Tyr-to-Phe
mutation, whereas the small-loop His-to-Asn mutation turned PsTyDC into a AAAD-AAS
bifunctional enzyme. Several aspects of the neofunctionalization of the AAS activities remain
unclear and are topics for future investigation. For example, the exact chemical mechanism
underlying decomposition of the peroxide intermediate that yields aromatic acetaldehyde,
ammonium, hydrogen peroxide and the regenerated active-site LLP is yet to be defined.
Moreover, ammonium and hydrogen peroxide are highly reactive and potentially toxic side
products, which may require additional adaptive metabolic and cellular processes for their
clearance in AAS-expressing cells. It is also interesting to explore other mutations in addition to
the small-loop His-to-Asn substitution that are necessary to arrive at dedicated AAS activity,
such as in EgPAAS.
Co-opting progenitor enzymes to synthesize novel and adaptive metabolites is a universal
mechanism underscoring metabolic evolution (52). Most specialized metabolic enzymes present
in extant plants evolved through the recruitment of malleable ancestral enzyme folds followed by
neofunctionalization of substrate specificity, product diversity, or, in much rarer cases,
alternative catalytic mechanisms (53–56). The plant AAAD family illustrates all these
evolutionary mechanisms. Applying the learnt knowledge about AAAD evolution has further
enabled metabolic engineering of a shortened BIA pathway to produce (S)-norcoclaurine in
yeast, using a natural or an evolved 4HPAAS . The use of an insect L-DOPA-specific AAS in
engineering of tetrahydropapaveroline biosynthesis was recently reported in E. coli (57),
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

highlighting another example of using AAS in metabolic engineering. It is noted that the free
aldehydes produced by AASs readily react with amino acids or other free amines to produce
iminium-conjugation products via non-enzymatic aldehyde-amine condensation chemistry as
seen in E. coli (57) or plant betacyanin and betaxanthin biosynthesis (58). The use of PsNCS that
catalyzes the enantioselective Pictet-Spengler condensation of 4HPAA and dopamine (59)
therefore helps to channel the reactive 4HPAA towards (S)-norcoclaurine production in
engineered yeast. The successful engineering of a shortened (S)-norcoclaurine biosynthetic
pathway using 4HPAAS also hints an alternative hypothesis to the currently unresolved plant
BIA pathway regarding the origin of 4HPAA (42).

Materials and Methods
Reagents
L-tryptophan, tryptamine, L-tyrosine, tyramine, tyrosol, L-phenylalanine, phenylacetaldehyde,
phenylethyl alcohol, L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, dopamine, (S)-norcoclaurine, PLP, and
sodium borohydride were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. 4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde was
purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology.

Multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis
ClustalW2 was used to generate the protein multiple sequence alignments with default settings
(60). The phylogeny was inferred using the Maximum Likelihood method based on the JTT
matrix-based model. The bootstrap consensus unrooted trees were inferred from 500 replicates to
represent the phylogeny of the analyzed enzyme families. The phylogenetic analysis encompases
AAAD homolog sequences from all sequenced plant genomes available at Phytozome V12 as
well as previously characterized AAAD proteins from plants and select bacteria (61). Initial trees
for the heuristic search were obtained automatically by applying Neighbor-Join and BioNJ
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

algorithms to a matrix of pairwise distances estimated using a JTT model, and then selecting the
topology with superior log likelihood value. All phylogenetic analyses were conducted in
MEGA7 (62). ESPript 3.0 was used to display the multiple sequence alignment (63).
Conservation of the active site residues between various AAAD clades was displayed using
WebLogo (64).

Plant materials
E. grandis seeds were purchased from Horizon Herbs. Seeds were stratified at 4 °C for three
days, and germinated in potting soil. Plants were grown under a 16-h-light/8-h-dark photoperiod
at 23 °C in a local greenhouse.

cDNA production and molecular cloning
Leaf tissue of seventy-day-old E. grandis plants were harvested for total RNA extraction using
Qiagen’s RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen). Total RNA for A. thaliana, P. somniferum, C. roseus and
R. rosea were produced as previously reported (65, 66). First-strand cDNAs of were synthesized
by RT-PCR using total RNA sample as template. The coding sequences (CDS) of candidate
genes were amplified from cDNAs by PCR using gene-specific primers (Table S3). PpDDC
(NP_744697.1), PsNCS2 (AKH61498), and BvTyH (AJD87473) were synthesized as gBlocks
(IDT) with S. cerevisiae codon optimization. Gibson assembly was used to ligate the CrTDC,
PsTyDC, AtPAAS and Rr4HPAAS PCR amplicons into pHis8-4, a bacterial expression vector
containing an N-terminal 8xHis tag followed by a tobacco etch virus (TEV) cleavage site for
recombinant protein production. EgPAAS was alternatively cloned though Gibson assembly into
pTYB12, a commercially available N-terminal intein/chitin domain fusion vector designed for
affinity chromatography purification. Ectopic expression of various AAADs in S. cerevisiae was
achieved through the use of p423TEF, a 2-µm plasmid with the HIS3 auxotrophic growth marker
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

for constitutive expression (67). Golden Gate assembly was used to generate the multi gene
vectors for engineering (S)-norcoclaurine production in S. cerevisiae (68). PCR amplicons or
gBlocks were ligated into the entry vector pYTK001 and subsequently assembled into 2-µm,
pTDH3, tTDH1, HIS3 multigene vectors for constitutive expression in S. cerevisiae (68). A
second multigene vector, containing the S. cerevisiae tyrosine-metabolism feedback-resistant
mutants ARO4K229L and ARO7G141S, was additionally used to boost tyrosine flux into (S)norcoclaurine production in S. cerevisiae. This construct was built using the 2-µm, pTDH3,
tTDH1, HIS3 multigene vector as previously described (66).

Recombinant protein production and purification
BL21(DE3) E. coli containing the pHis8-4 or pTYB12 AAAD constructs were grown in terrific
broth (TB) at 37 °C to OD600 of 0.9 and induced with 0.15 mM isopropyl-β-D-thiogalactoside
(IPTG). The cultures were cooled to 18 °C and and shaken for an additional 20 hours. Cells were
harvested by centrifugation, washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) (137 mM NaCl, 2.7
mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4 and 1.8 mM KH2PO4), resuspended in 150 mL of lysis buffer (50
mM Tris pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole, and 0.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), and lysed
with five passes through a M-110L microfluidizer (Microfluidics). The resulting crude protein
lysate from the CrTDC, PsTyDC, AtPAAS, and Rr4HPAAS cultures were clarified by
centrifugation prior to Qiagen Ni-NTA gravity flow chromatographic purification. After loading
the clarified lysate, His-tagged recombinant protein-bound Ni-NTA resin was washed with 20
column volumes of lysis buffer, and eluted with 1 column volume of elution buffer (50 mM Tris
pH 8.0, 0.5 M NaCl, 250 mM imidazole and 0.5mM DTT). 1 mg of His-tagged TEV protease
was added to the eluted protein, followed by dialysis at 4 °C for 16 h in dialysis buffer (50 mM
Tris pH 8.0, 0.1 M NaCl, 20 mM imidazole and 2 mM DTT). After dialysis, the protein solutions
were passed through Ni-NTA resin to remove uncleaved protein and His-tagged TEV. The
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

EgPAAS enzyme was unable to be soluble expressed using the pHis8-4 N-terminal polyhistidine
tag and was therefore expressed using the Intein/Chitin Binding Protein pTYB12 vector.
EgPAAS expressing frozen cell pellets were homogenized and in a similar manner, albeit in an
imidazole free lysis buffer. The resulting crude protein lysate was applied to a column packed
with chitin beads, washed with 1 L of buffer and subsequently hydrolyzed under reducing
conditions as per the manufacturer's instructions. Recombinant proteins were further purified by
gel filtration on a fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) system (GE Healthcare Life
Sciences). The principle peaks were collected, verified for molecular weight by SDS-PAGE,
stored in storage buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 25 mM NaCl, 200 µM PLP and 0.5 mM DTT) at a
protein concentration of 10 mg/mL and flash frozen for subsequent investigation. Despite the use
of a solubilizing domain from the pTYB12 vector in the expression and purification of EgPAAS
this enzyme was ultimately only partly purified with significant E. coli protein contamination.

Protein Crystallization and Structural Determination
Crystals for the various plant AAADs were grown at 4 °C by a hanging-drop vapor diffusion
method with the drop containing 0.9 µl of protein sample and 0.9 µl of reservoir solution at a
reservoir solution volume of 500 µl. The crystallization buffer for the AtPAAS contained 0.16 M
ammonium sulfate 0.8M HEPES:NaOH pH 7.5 and 20%w/v PEG 3350. Crystals were soaked in
well solution containing 15 mM L-phenylalanine for six hours and cryogenized with an
additional 10% weight/volume ethylene glycol. PsTyDC crystals were formed in 1.2 M
ammonium Sulfate 0.1 Bis Tris pH 5.0 and 1% w/v PEG 3350. Crystals were soaked in the
presence of 4mM L-tyrosine for twelve hours 12 hours and cryoprotected with an additional 25%
weight/volume ethylene glycol. 0.22M calcium chloride and 12% w/v PEG 3350 formed the
CrTDC crystals which were subsequently soaked with 10mM L-tryptophan for 16 hours and
then cryogenized with an additional 18% weight/volume ethylene glycol. Finally, to form the
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Rr4HPAAS crystals, protein solution was mixed with a reservoir buffer of 0.21 M potassium
thiocyanate and 22% w/v PEG 3350. Ligand soaks for this crystal proved unsuccessful and
ultimately the crystals were cryoprotected with an additional 13% weight/volume PEG 3350 in
the absence of ligand. The structure of PsTyDC was determined first though molecular
replacement with the insect DDC structure (69) using Molrep (70).The resulting model was
iteratively refined with Refmac 5.2 (71) and the manually refined with Coot 0.7.1 (72). Solvent
molecules were added and refined with Refmac 5.2 and Coot 0.7.1.

Enzyme assays
The in vitro decarboxylation and aldehyde synthase activities of the wild-type PsTyDC,
PsTyDCH205N and PsTyDCY350 enzymes were assayed in 100 µL of 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0
containing 20 µg of recombinant enzyme, 100 µM PLP and 0.5 mM L-tyrosine. Reactions were
incubated at 30 degrees for various time points and subsequently stopped with 200 µL methanol.
After clarification, the soluble fraction was analyzed by LC-MS-UV. Chromatographic
separation and measurement of absorption at 280 nm were performed by an Ultimate 3000 liquid
chromatography system (Dionex), equipped with a 150 mm C18 Column (Kinetex 2.6 µm silica
core shell C18 100 Å pore, Phenomenex) and coupled to an UltiMate 3000 diode-array detector
(DAD) in-line UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Dionex). Compounds were separated through the use
of an isocratic mobile phase as previously described (66). The reduction of aldehyde products
was achieved by the addition of ethanol containing a saturating concentration of sodium
borohydride. The EgPAAS enzyme assays were started by adding 2 µg of recombinant protein
into 200 µL of 50 mM tris pH 8.0 and 2mM L-phenylalanine. Reactions were incubated for
various time points at 30 degrees and reactions were stopped with equal vol of 0.8 M formic
acid, extracted with 150ul of ethyl acetate and analyzed by gas chromatography–mass
spectrometry (GC-MS) as previously described against an analytical phenylacetaldehyde
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

standard (66). The initial substrate selectivity was measured through the detection of the
hydrogen peroxide co-product using Pierce Quantitative Peroxide Assay Kit (Pierce) and a
standard curve of hydrogen peroxide. Reactions were conducted as described using reaction
mixtures containing 0.5 mM amino acid substrate concentrations. Triplicate reactions were
stopped after five minutes of incubation at 30 degrees with an equal volume of 0.8 M formic acid
and measured by absorbance at 595 nm.

Metabolomic profiling by LC-HRAM-MS
Individual 2-micron TEF-promoter expression plasmids containing various AAAD family
enzymes were generated to test the in vivo activity of AAAD family enzymes. 15 mL cultures of
transgenic S. cerevisiae BY4743 strains were grown in 50ml mini bioreactor tubes for 24 hours
with shaking at 30 °C. The cultured cells were subsequently pelleted, washed and flash frozen as
previously described (65). Frozen yeast pellets were suspended in 50% methanol (500 µL per
100 mg fresh weight), disrupted using a tissuelyser (Qiagen) and zirconia-silicate beads, and
clarified for LC-HRAM-MS analysis. S. cerevisiae lines were additionally transformed with
various multi gene vectors to assay ectopic (S)-norcoclaurine production. Here, clarified media
extracts from bioreactor cultures were diluted with an equal volume of 100% methanol and
analyzed directly. Raw MS data was processed and analyzed using MZmine2 (73).

Molecular dynamics simulation and analysis
All simulations were performed using GROMACS 5.1.4 (74) and the CHARMM36 force field
(75). The non-standard residue LLP was parameterized using Gaussian (76) and the Force Field
Toolkit (FFTK) (77) implemented in VMD (78) based on the initial parameters provided by the
CGenFF program (79–82). A number of CrTDC residues buried deeply within the protein or at
the monomer-monomer interface were modeled in their neutral forms based on PROPKA (83,
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

84) calculation results: Asp268-A/B, Asp287-A/B, Asp397-A/B, Lys208-A/B, and Glu169-A. All the
histidines were kept neutral, with a proton placed on the ε-nitrogen except for His203 and His318,
for which the proton was placed on the ẟ-nitrogen to optimize hydrogen bond network. All
simulation systems were constructed as a dimer solvated in a dodecahedron water box with 0.1
M NaCl (Fig. S10) and a total number of atoms of ~124,000. Prior to the production runs listed
in Table S4, all systems were subjected to energy minimization followed by a 100-ps NVT and a
100-ps NPT runs with the protein heavy atoms constrained. In all simulations the van der Waals
interactions were smoothly switched off from 10 Å to 12 Å. The electrostatic interactions were
computed with the Particle-Mesh-Ewald (PME) method (85) with a grid spacing of 1.5 Å, a PME
order of 6, and a cutoff of 12 Å in real space. The system temperature was kept at 300 K using
the velocity-rescaling thermostat (86), and the system pressure was kept at 1 bar with the
Parrinello-Rahman barostat (87, 88). All bonds were constrained using LINCS (89, 90) to allow
an integration timestep of 2 fs. The helix-unfolding simulation was performed using the
metadynamics method (91) as implemented in PLUMED (92). A 10-ns metadynamics simulation
was performed on System 1 by placing gaussian potentials (height=35 kJ/mol, sigma=0.35 rad)
every 500 steps on the collective variables, which were chosen as the backbone dihedral angles
Ψ and Φ of residues 346 to 350. We should emphasize that this simulation was not intended for
an accurate free energy calculation and instead was only used to generate an unfolded structure
of the short helix (residues 346-350). The resulting unfolded large loop structure was then used
in all systems, each of which was subjected to 12 replicas of 50-ns MD simulations listed in
Table S4. Clustering analysis was performed using gmx cluster over all simulated trajectories
with a RMSD cutoff of 3.5 Å. 3D occupancy maps were created at a resolution of 1 Å3 using the
VMD VOLMAP plugin. DSSP calculations (93) were performed with gmx do_dssp
implemented in GROMACS. An output of H (ɑ-helix), I (𝜋-helix) or G (310-helix) was
considered as a helix and the corresponding residue was assigned a helical content of 1;
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

otherwise a helical content of 0 was assigned. Clustering and occupancy analysis as well as the
average helical content calculations were performed on the combined trajectories of all
simulation replicas for a given CrTDC system. The two monomers of a CrTDC dimer were
treated equivalently in these analyses. All simulation figures were made using VMD.

Accession codes
The sequences of P. somniferum, C. roseus, E. grandis genes reported in this article are
deposited into NCBI GenBank under the following accession numbers: PsTyDC (MG748690),
CrTDC (MG748691), EgPAAS (MG786260). The atomic coordinates and structure factors for
PsTyDC, CrTDC, Rr4HPAAS , and AtPAAS have been deposited in the Protein Data Bank
under the accession numbers 6EEM, 6EEW, 6EEQ and 6EEI , respectively.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Pew Scholar Program in the Biomedical Sciences (J.K.W.),
the Searle Scholars Program (J.K.W.), the National Science Foundation (CHE-1709616, J.K.W.),
the Keck Foundation (J.K.W.), and direct grants from the Chinese University of Hong Kong
(Y.W.). This work is based on research conducted at the Northeastern Collaborative Access
Team (NE-CAT) beamlines, which are funded by the National Institute of General Medical
Sciences from the National Institutes of Health (P41 GM103403). The Pilatus 6M detector on
NE-CAT 24-ID-C beam line is funded by a NIH-ORIP HEI grant (S10 RR029205). This
research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. Department of Energy (DOE)
Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National
Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

Author Contributions
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

M.P.T.S. and J.K.W. conceived the idea and designed the research. M.P.T.S., T.S, and M.A.V.
performed cloning and phylogenetic analysis. M.P.T.S. conducted enzyme purification, enzyme
assays, crystallization, and structural elucidation. Y.C and Y. W performed the molecular
dynamic simulations and data interpretation. M.P.T.S., Y.C, Y.W., and J.K.W. wrote the paper.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures

Fig. 1. Function, phylogeny, and taxonomic distribution of plant AAADs. (A) Biochemical
functions of four representative plant AAADs in the context of their native specialized metabolic
pathways. The dotted arrows indicate multiple catalytic steps. (B) A simplified maximum
likelihood (ML) phylogenetic tree of bacteria, chlorophyte, and plant AAADs. A fully annotated
tree is shown in Fig. S2. The bacterial/chlorophyte, basal, TyDC, and TDC clades are colored in
yellow, green, blue, and pink, respectively. Functionally characterized enzymes are labeled at the
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tree branches. The four AAADs for which their crystal structures were resolved in this study are
denoted in bold. The EgPAAS identified and characterized in this study is underlined. * and **
denote two mechnisitic classes of AASs that harbor naturally occurring substitutions at the largeloop catalytic tyrosine or the small-loop catalytic histidine, respectively. (C) Taxonomic
distribution of plant AAADs across major lineages of green plants. The tree illustrates the
phylogenetic relationship among Phytozome V12 species with sequenced genome. The presence
of yellow, green, blue or pink circles at the tree branches indicates the presence of one or more
AAAD sequences from the bacterial/chlorophyte, basal, TyDC or TDC clades, respectively.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 2. The overall structure of plant AAADs. (A) An overlay of the the CrTDC (orange),
PsTyDC (green), AtPAAS (pink), and Rr4HPAAS (cyan) structures. All four structures exist as
highly similar homodimers, but for visual simplicity, the structural alignment was only displayed
for the left monomer. The right monomer of CrTDC is displayed in gray cartoon and surface
representation. The dotted circle highlights the CrTDC active site which contains the Ltryptophan substrate and the prosthetic group LLP. (B) The CrTDC N-terminal segments from
the two monomers (colored in salmon and blue), respectively, form the principle hydrophobic
dimer interface. The remainder of the homodimer is displayed in gray. (C) The relative
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

configuration of the CrTDC middle (colored in teal and brown) and C-terminal segments
(colored in light blue and pink) from the two monomers. The N-terminal segments are displayed
in transparent gray cartoons, and the prosthetic LLPs (circled) at the two symmetric active sites
are displayed as spheres.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 3. Active site pocket composition and residues that dictate substrate selectivity in plant
AAADs. (A) Active site pocket residues from plant AAADs were identified and queried for
conservation against all AAAD homologs identified from the 93 Phytozome V12.1 annotated
green plant genomes. The height of the residue label displays the relative amino acid frequency,
excluding sequence gaps, in the basal, TyDC, and TDC clades. The position of the active site
pocket residues from each clade are referenced against the AtPAAS, PsTyDC and CrTDC
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

respectively. Polar amino acids are colored in green, basic amino acids are colored in blue, acidic
amino acids are colored in red, and hydrophobic amino acids are colored in black. Residues
highlighted in blue and dark orange boxes denote residues involved in hydroxylated vs.
unhydroxylated and phenolic vs. indolic substrate recognition, respectively. The conserved
lysine residues, represented as the LLP prosthetic group in several crystal structures, is marked
by a light orange box. (B) The CrTDC active-site pocket is composed of residues from both
chain A and B, colored in beige and white, respectively. The pocket is composed of conserved
nonpolar residues (Pro102, Val122 and Leu325), aromatic residues (Trp92, Phe100, Phe101, Phe124,
His318), and a polar residue (Thr262). Additionally, the active site contains three variable residues
(Ala103, Thr369 and Gly370), which differ across different AAAD clades. (C) Superimposition of
the substrate-complexed CrTDC and PsTyDC structures. CrTDC Chain A and Chain B are
displayed in beige and white, respectively, while relevant portions of the PsTyDC Chain A and
Chain B are displayed in green and deep teal, respectively. The L-tryptophan ligand from the
CrTDC structure is rendered in pink while the PsTyDC L-tyrosine ligand is colored in blue.
Relative in vivo L-tryptophan decarboxylase (D), L-phenylalanine decarboxylase (E), and Ltyrosine decarboxylase activity (F) of wild type and various mutants of CrTDC as measured in
transgenic yeast. Tryptamine, phenylethylamine and tyramine were measured as biological
triplicates from transgenic yeast. The error bars indicate standard error of the mean (SEM).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 4. Catalytic mechanisms and conformational changes of plant AAAD proteins. (A) The
proposed alternative PLP-mediated catalytic mechanisms for the canonical decarboxylase and
derived aldehyde synthase in plant AAAD proteins. After transaldimation of the CrTDC internal
aldimine to release the active-site Lys319, the PLP-amino-acid external aldimine loses the αcarboxyl group as CO2 to generate a quinonoid intermediate stabilized by the delocalization of
the paired electrons (1). In a canonical decarboxylase (e.g., CrTDC), the carbanion at Cα is
protonated by the acidic p-hydroxyl of Tyr348-B located on the large loop, which is facilitated by
its neighboring His203-A located on the small loop (2). The CrTDC LLP319 internal aldimine is
regenerated, accompanied by the release of the monoamine product (3). In an evolutionarily new
aldehyde synthase, the Cα protonation step essential for the canonical decarboxylase activity is
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

impaired, when the large-loop catalytic tyrosine is mutated to phenylalanine (* as in AtPAAS), or
when the small-loop catalytic histidine is mutated to asparagine (** as in EgPAAS), allowing the
Cα carbanion to attack a molecular oxygen to produce a peroxide intermediate (4). This peroxide
intermediate decomposes to give aromatic acetaldehyde, ammonia, and hydrogen peroxide
products and regenerate the LLP internal aldimine (^ as in AtPAAS) (5). Aro represents the
aromatic moiety of an aromatic L-amino acid. (B) An overlay of the PsTyDC structure with its
large loop in a closed conformation (green) upon the CrTDC structure with its large loop in an
open conformation (beige). (C) The closed conformation of PsTyDC active site displaying the
catalytic machinery in a configuration ready to engage catalysis. Chain A is colored in white,
chain B is colored in green, and the L-tyrosine substrate is displayed in dark pink. (D) Open and
closed small loop conformations observed in the CrTDC and PsTyDC structures. The PsTyDC
small loop with the catalytic histidine is in a closed conformation (green), while the CrTDC
structure exhibits its small-loop histidine in an open conformation (white).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 5. Two alternative molecular strategies to arrive at aldehyde synthase chemistry from
a canonical AAAD progenitor Transgenic yeast strains expressing PsTyDC H205N and PsTyDC
Y350F

display reduced tyramine production (A) but elevated levels of tyrosol (B) (reduced from

4HPAA by yeast endogenous metabolism) in comparison to transgenic yeast expressing wildtype PsTyDC. Cultures were grown and metabolically profiled in triplicate, and the error bars in
the bar graphs indicate standard error of the mean (SEM). (C) LC-UV chromatograms showing
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the relative decarboxylation and aldehyde synthase products produced by purified recombinant
PsTyDC, PsTyDCY350For PsTyDCH205N enzyme against L-tyrosine as substrate in in vitro
enzyme assays. After enzymatic reaction, the 4HPAA aldehyde product was chemically reduced
by sodium borohydride to tyrosol prior to detection. (D) Phenylacetaldehyde formation from the
incubation of purified recombinant EgPAAS with L-phenylalanine measured by GC-MS.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. 6. The utility of 4HPAAS in metabolic engineering of a shortened BIA pathway for (S)norcoclaurine production in yeast. (A) Canonically proposed (S)-norcoclaurine biosynthetic
pathway (black arrows) rerouted by the use of an 4HPAAS (red arrows). 4HPPA, 4hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde. (B) Engineering of (S)-norcoclaurine production in yeast using two
AAAD proteins with the 4HPAAS activity. All multigene vectors used to transform yeast
contain BvTyH, PpDDC, and PsNCS in addition to either PsTyDC, PsTyDCY350F or Rr4HPAAS.
Cultures were grown and measured in triplicate, and the error bars in the bar graph indicate
standard error of the mean (SEM). n.d., not detected.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

J.-K. Weng, R. N. Philippe, J. P. Noel, The rise of chemodiversity in plants. Science 336, 1667–1670
(2012).

2.

L. Chae, T. Kim, R. Nilo-Poyanco, S. Y. Rhee, Genomic signatures of specialized metabolism in
plants. Science 344, 510–513 (2014).

3.

H. Kries, et al., Structural determinants of reductive terpene cyclization in iridoid biosynthesis. Nat.
Chem. Biol. 12, 6–8 (2016).

4.

M. Kaltenbach, et al., Evolution of chalcone isomerase from a noncatalytic ancestor. Nat. Chem.
Biol. 14, 548–555 (2018).

5.

P. Burkhard, P. Dominici, C. Borri-Voltattorni, J. N. Jansonius, V. N. Malashkevich, Structural
insight into Parkinson’s disease treatment from drug-inhibited DOPA decarboxylase. Nat. Struct.
Biol. 8, 963–967 (2001).

6.

P. J. Facchini, K. L. Huber-Allanach, L. W. Tari, Plant aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylases:
evolution, biochemistry, regulation, and metabolic engineering applications. Phytochemistry 54,
121–138 (2000).

7.

W. Noé, C. Mollenschott, J. Berlin, Tryptophan decarboxylase from Catharanthus roseus cell
suspension cultures: purification, molecular and kinetic data of the homogenous protein. Plant Mol.
Biol. 3, 281–288 (1984).

8.

P. J. Facchini, V. De Luca, Differential and tissue-specific expression of a gene family for
tyrosine/dopa decarboxylase in opium poppy. J. Biol. Chem. 269, 26684–26690 (1994).

9.

M. Gutensohn, et al., Role of aromatic aldehyde synthase in wounding/herbivory response and
flower scent production in different Arabidopsis ecotypes. Plant J. 66, 591–602 (2011).

10. M. P. Torrens-Spence, T. Pluskal, F.-S. Li, V. Carballo, J.-K. Weng, Complete Pathway Elucidation
and Heterologous Reconstitution of Rhodiola Salidroside Biosynthesis. Mol. Plant 11, 205–217
(2018).
11. T. Lehmann, S. Pollmann, Gene expression and characterization of a stress-induced tyrosine
decarboxylase from Arabidopsis thaliana. FEBS Lett. 583, 1895–1900 (2009).
12. S. Park, et al., Induction of serotonin biosynthesis is uncoupled from the coordinated induction of
tryptophan biosynthesis in pepper fruits (Capsicum annuum) upon pathogen infection. Planta 230,
1197–1206 (2009).
13. S. Kang, K. Kang, K. Lee, K. Back, Characterization of rice tryptophan decarboxylases and their
direct involvement in serotonin biosynthesis in transgenic rice. Planta 227, 263–272 (2007).
14. W. Noé, C. Mollenschott, J. Berlin, Tryptophan decarboxylase from Catharanthus roseus cell
suspension cultures: purification, molecular and kinetic data of the homogenous protein. Plant Mol.
Biol. 3, 281–288 (1984).
15. Y. Yamazaki, H. Sudo, M. Yamazaki, N. Aimi, K. Saito, Camptothecin biosynthetic genes in hairy
roots of Ophiorrhiza pumila: cloning, characterization and differential expression in tissues and by
stress compounds. Plant Cell Physiol. 44, 395–403 (2003).

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

16. V. De Luca, C. Marineau, N. Brisson, Molecular cloning and analysis of cDNA encoding a plant
tryptophan decarboxylase: comparison with animal dopa decarboxylases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 86, 2582–2586 (1989).
17. M. P. Torrens-Spence, et al., Biochemical evaluation of a parsley tyrosine decarboxylase results in a
novel 4-hydroxyphenylacetaldehyde synthase enzyme. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 418, 211–
216 (2012).
18. Y. Kaminaga, et al., Plant phenylacetaldehyde synthase is a bifunctional homotetrameric enzyme
that catalyzes phenylalanine decarboxylation and oxidation. J. Biol. Chem. 281, 23357–23366
(2006).
19. S. Noda, et al., Evaluation of Brachypodium distachyon L-Tyrosine Decarboxylase Using LTyrosine Over-Producing Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PLoS One 10, e0125488 (2015).
20. M. P. Torrens-Spence, M. Lazear, R. von Guggenberg, H. Ding, J. Li, Investigation of a substratespecifying residue within Papaver somniferum and Catharanthus roseus aromatic amino acid
decarboxylases. Phytochemistry 106, 37–43 (2014).
21. M. P. Torrens-Spence, et al., Biochemical evaluation of the decarboxylation and decarboxylationdeamination activities of plant aromatic amino acid decarboxylases. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 2376–2387
(2013).
22. J. Günther, et al., Separate Pathways Contribute to the Herbivore-Induced Formation of 2Phenylethanol in Poplar. Plant Physiol. 180, 767–782 (2019).
23. M. Bertoldi, M. Gonsalvi, R. Contestabile, C. B. Voltattorni, Mutation of tyrosine 332 to
phenylalanine converts dopa decarboxylase into a decarboxylation-dependent oxidative deaminase.
J. Biol. Chem. 277, 36357–36362 (2002).
24. M. P. Torrens-Spence, C.-T. Liu, T. Pluskal, Y. K. Chung, J.-K. Weng, Monoamine Biosynthesis via
a Noncanonical Calcium-Activatable Aromatic Amino Acid Decarboxylase in Psilocybin
Mushroom. ACS Chemical Biology 13, 3343–3353 (2018).
25. C. Vavricka, et al., From L-dopa to dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde: a toxic biochemical pathway
plays a vital physiological function in insects. PLoS One 6, e16124 (2011).
26. H. C. Dunathan, Conformation and reaction specificity in pyridoxal phosphate enzymes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 55, 712–716 (1966).
27. J. N. Jansonius, Structure, evolution and action of vitamin B6-dependent enzymes. Curr. Opin.
Struct. Biol. 8, 759–769 (1998).
28. G. Giardina, et al., Open conformation of human DOPA decarboxylase reveals the mechanism of
PLP addition to Group II decarboxylases. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 20514–20519 (2011).
29. R. A. Vacca, P. Christen, V. N. Malashkevich, J. N. Jansonius, E. Sandmeier, Substitution of apolar
residues in the active site of aspartate aminotransferase by histidine. Effects on reaction and substrate
specificity. Eur. J. Biochem. 227, 481–487 (1995).
30. P. K. Mehta, T. I. Hale, P. Christen, Aminotransferases: demonstration of homology and division
into evolutionary subgroups. Eur. J. Biochem. 214, 549–561 (1993).
31. H. Zhu, et al., Crystal structure of tyrosine decarboxylase and identification of key residues involved
in conformational swing and substrate binding. Sci. Rep. 6, 27779 (2016).

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

32. S. Ishii, H. Mizuguchi, J. Nishino, H. Hayashi, H. Kagamiyama, Functionally important residues of
aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase probed by sequence alignment and site-directed mutagenesis.
J. Biochem. 120, 369–376 (1996).
33. P. Dominici, B. Tancini, C. Borri Voltattorni, Chemical modification of pig kidney 3,4dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase with diethyl pyrocarbonate. Evidence for an essential histidyl
residue. J. Biol. Chem. 260, 10583–10589 (1985).
34. H. Hayashi, H. Mizuguchi, H. Kagamiyama, Rat liver aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylase:
spectroscopic and kinetic analysis of the coenzyme and reaction intermediates. Biochemistry 32,
812–818 (1993).
35. A. Stavrinides, et al., Structural investigation of heteroyohimbine alkaloid synthesis reveals active
site elements that control stereoselectivity. Nat. Commun. 7, 12116 (2016).
36. N. Matasci, et al., Data access for the 1,000 Plants (1KP) project. Gigascience 3, 17 (2014).
37. J. Liang, Q. Han, H. Ding, J. Li, Biochemical identification of residues that discriminate between
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde synthase-mediated
reactions. Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol. 91, 34–43 (2017).
38. C. Liao, A. Upadhyay, J. Liang, Q. Han, J. Li, 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde synthase and
cuticle formation in insects. Dev. Comp. Immunol. 83, 44–50 (2018).
39. M. do C. Pereira, et al., Chemical Composition and Antimicrobial Activity of the Essential Oil
fromMicrolicia crenulata. Journal of Essential Oil Bearing Plants 18, 18–28 (2015).
40. T. Özek, B. Demirci, K. H.C. Baser, Chemical Composition of Turkish Myrtle Oil. J. Essent. Oil
Res. 12, 541–544 (2000).
41. B. R. D’Arcy, G. B. Rintoul, C. Y. Rowland, A. J. Blackman, Composition of Australian Honey
Extractives. 1. Norisoprenoids, Monoterpenes, and Other Natural Volatiles from Blue Gum
(Eucalyptusleucoxylon)and Yellow Box (Eucalyptus melliodora)Honeys. J. Agric. Food Chem. 45,
1834–1843 (1997).
42. J. M. Hagel, P. J. Facchini, Benzylisoquinoline Alkaloid Metabolism: A Century of Discovery and a
Brave New World. Plant Cell Physiol. 54, 647–672 (2013).
43. H. Maeda, N. Dudareva, The shikimate pathway and aromatic amino Acid biosynthesis in plants.
Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 63, 73–105 (2012).
44. M. D. Toney, Controlling reaction specificity in pyridoxal phosphate enzymes. Biochim. Biophys.
Acta 1814, 1407–1418 (2011).
45. E. Sandmeier, T. I. Hale, P. Christen, Multiple evolutionary origin of pyridoxal-5’-phosphatedependent amino acid decarboxylases. European Journal of Biochemistry 221, 997–1002 (1994).
46. A. J. Mitchell, J.-K. Weng, Unleashing the Synthetic Power of Plant Oxygenases: From Mechanism
to Application. Plant Physiol. 179, 813–829 (2019).
47. W. L. Ogren, G. Bowes, Ribulose diphosphate carboxylase regulates soybean photorespiration. Nat.
New Biol. 230, 159–160 (1971).
48. L. M. Abell, J. V. Schloss, Oxygenase side reactions of acetolactate synthase and other carbanionforming enzymes. Biochemistry 30, 7883–7887 (1991).

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

49. M. Bertoldi, P. Dominici, P. S. Moore, B. Maras, C. B. Voltattorni, Reaction of Dopa Decarboxylase
with α-Methyldopa Leads to an Oxidative Deamination Producing 3,4-Dihydroxyphenylacetone, an
Active Site Directed Affinity Label†. Biochemistry 37, 6552–6561 (1998).
50. M. Bertoldi, V. Carbone, C. Borri Voltattorni, Ornithine and glutamate decarboxylases catalyse an
oxidative deamination of their alpha-methyl substrates. Biochem. J 342 Pt 3, 509–512 (1999).
51. M. Sakai, et al., Production of 2-Phenylethanol in Roses as the Dominant Floral Scent Compound
fromL-Phenylalanine by Two Key Enzymes, a PLP-Dependent Decarboxylase and a
Phenylacetaldehyde Reductase. Bioscience, Biotechnology, and Biochemistry 71, 2408–2419 (2007).
52. J.-K. Weng, J. P. Noel, The remarkable pliability and promiscuity of specialized metabolism. Cold
Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. 77, 309–320 (2012).
53. Y. Yoshikuni, T. E. Ferrin, J. D. Keasling, Designed divergent evolution of enzyme function. Nature
440, 1078–1082 (2006).
54. J. G. Kopycki, et al., Biochemical and structural analysis of substrate promiscuity in plant Mg2+dependent O-methyltransferases. J. Mol. Biol. 378, 154–164 (2008).
55. R. Huang, et al., Enzyme functional evolution through improved catalysis of ancestrally
nonpreferred substrates. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 109, 2966–2971 (2012).
56. M. B. Austin, M. E. Bowman, J.-L. Ferrer, J. Schröder, J. P. Noel, An aldol switch discovered in
stilbene synthases mediates cyclization specificity of type III polyketide synthases. Chem. Biol. 11,
1179–1194 (2004).
57. C. J. Vavricka, et al., Mechanism-based tuning of insect 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde synthase
for synthetic bioproduction of benzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Nat. Commun. 10, 2015 (2019).
58. W. Schliemann, N. Kobayashi, D. Strack, The decisive step in betaxanthin biosynthesis is a
spontaneous reaction1. Plant Physiol. 119, 1217–1232 (1999).
59. A. Ilari, et al., Structural basis of enzymatic (S)-norcoclaurine biosynthesis. J. Biol. Chem. 284, 897–
904 (2009).
60. J. D. Thompson, T. J. Gibson, D. G. Higgins, Multiple sequence alignment using ClustalW and
ClustalX. Curr. Protoc. Bioinformatics Chapter 2, Unit 2.3 (2002).
61. D. M. Goodstein, et al., Phytozome: a comparative platform for green plant genomics. Nucleic Acids
Res. 40, D1178–86 (2012).
62. S. Kumar, G. Stecher, K. Tamura, MEGA7: Molecular Evolutionary Genetics Analysis Version 7.0
for Bigger Datasets. Mol. Biol. Evol. 33, 1870–1874 (2016).
63. P. Gouet, X. Robert, E. Courcelle, ESPript/ENDscript: Extracting and rendering sequence and 3D
information from atomic structures of proteins. Nucleic Acids Res. 31, 3320–3323 (2003).
64. G. E. Crooks, WebLogo: A Sequence Logo Generator. Genome Res. 14, 1188–1190 (2004).
65. M. P. Torrens-Spence, et al., Biochemical evaluation of the decarboxylation and decarboxylationdeamination activities of plant aromatic amino acid decarboxylases. J. Biol. Chem. 288, 2376–2387
(2013).
66. M. P. Torrens-Spence, T. Pluskal, F.-S. Li, V. Carballo, J.-K. Weng, Complete Pathway Elucidation
and Heterologous Reconstitution of Rhodiola Salidroside Biosynthesis. Mol. Plant 11, 205–217

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(2018).
67. D. Mumberg, R. Müller, M. Funk, Yeast vectors for the controlled expression of heterologous
proteins in different genetic backgrounds. Gene 156, 119–122 (1995).
68. M. E. Lee, W. C. DeLoache, B. Cervantes, J. E. Dueber, A Highly Characterized Yeast Toolkit for
Modular, Multipart Assembly. ACS Synth. Biol. 4, 975–986 (2015).
69. Q. Han, H. Ding, H. Robinson, B. M. Christensen, J. Li, Crystal structure and substrate specificity of
Drosophila 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase. PLoS One 5, e8826 (2010).
70. A. Vagin, A. Teplyakov, MOLREP: an Automated Program for Molecular Replacement. J. Appl.
Crystallogr. 30, 1022–1025 (1997).
71. G. N. Murshudov, et al., REFMAC5 for the refinement of macromolecular crystal structures. Acta
Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 67, 355–367 (2011).
72. P. Emsley, B. Lohkamp, W. G. Scott, K. Cowtan, Features and development of Coot. Acta
Crystallogr. D Biol. Crystallogr. 66, 486–501 (2010).
73. T. Pluskal, S. Castillo, A. Villar-Briones, M. Oresic, MZmine 2: modular framework for processing,
visualizing, and analyzing mass spectrometry-based molecular profile data. BMC Bioinformatics 11,
395 (2010).
74. M. J. Abraham, et al., GROMACS: High performance molecular simulations through multi-level
parallelism from laptops to supercomputers. SoftwareX 1-2, 19–25 (2015).
75. R. B. Best, et al., Optimization of the additive CHARMM all-atom protein force field targeting
improved sampling of the backbone φ, ψ and side-chain χ(1) and χ(2) dihedral angles. J. Chem.
Theory Comput. 8, 3257–3273 (2012).
76. M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G.
Scalmani, V. Barone, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, X. Li, M. Caricato, A. Marenich, J. Bloino, B.
G. Janesko, R. Gomperts, B. Mennucci, H. P. Hratchian, J. V. Ortiz, A. F. Izmaylov, J. L.
Sonnenberg, D. Williams-Young, F. Ding, F. Lipparini, F. Egidi, J. Goings, B. Peng, A. Petrone, T.
Henderson, D. Ranasinghe, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. Gao, N. Rega, G. Zheng, W. Liang, M. Hada, M.
Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai,
T. Vreven, K. Throssell, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E.
Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, T. Keith, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A.
Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, C. Adamo, R.
Cammi, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, O. Farkas, J. B. Foresman, and D. J. Fox,
Gaussian 09 (2016).
77. C. G. Mayne, J. Saam, K. Schulten, E. Tajkhorshid, J. C. Gumbart, Rapid parameterization of small
molecules using the Force Field Toolkit. J. Comput. Chem. 34, 2757–2770 (2013).
78. W. Humphrey, A. Dalke, K. Schulten, VMD: Visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol. Graph. 14, 33–38
(1996).
79. K. Vanommeslaeghe, A. D. MacKerell Jr, Automation of the CHARMM General Force Field
(CGenFF) I: bond perception and atom typing. J. Chem. Inf. Model. 52, 3144–3154 (2012).
80. K. Vanommeslaeghe, E. P. Raman, A. D. MacKerell Jr, Automation of the CHARMM General
Force Field (CGenFF) II: assignment of bonded parameters and partial atomic charges. J. Chem. Inf.
Model. 52, 3155–3168 (2012).

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

81. K. Vanommeslaeghe, et al., CHARMM general force field: A force field for drug-like molecules
compatible with the CHARMM all-atom additive biological force fields. J. Comput. Chem., NA–NA
(2009).
82. W. Yu, X. He, K. Vanommeslaeghe, A. D. MacKerell, Extension of the CHARMM general force
field to sulfonyl-containing compounds and its utility in biomolecular simulations. J. Comput. Chem.
33, 2451–2468 (2012).
83. C. R. Søndergaard, M. H. M. Olsson, M. Rostkowski, J. H. Jensen, Improved Treatment of Ligands
and Coupling Effects in Empirical Calculation and Rationalization of pKa Values. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 7, 2284–2295 (2011).
84. M. H. M. Olsson, C. R. Søndergaard, M. Rostkowski, J. H. Jensen, PROPKA3: Consistent
Treatment of Internal and Surface Residues in Empirical pKa Predictions. J. Chem. Theory Comput.
7, 525–537 (2011).
85. T. Darden, D. York, L. Pedersen, Particle mesh Ewald: An N⋅log(N) method for Ewald sums in large
systems. J. Chem. Phys. 98, 10089–10092 (1993).
86. G. Bussi, D. Donadio, M. Parrinello, Canonical sampling through velocity rescaling. J. Chem. Phys.
126, 014101 (2007).
87. M. Parrinello, A. Rahman, Polymorphic transitions in single crystals: A new molecular dynamics
method. J. Appl. Phys. 52, 7182–7190 (1981).
88. S. Nosé, M. L. Klein, Constant pressure molecular dynamics for molecular systems. Mol. Phys. 50,
1055–1076 (1983).
89. B. Hess, H. Bekker, H. J. C. Berendsen, Johannes G E, LINCS: A linear constraint solver for
molecular simulations. J. Comput. Chem. 18, 1463–1472 (1997).
90. B. Hess, P-LINCS: A Parallel Linear Constraint Solver for Molecular Simulation. J. Chem. Theory
Comput. 4, 116–122 (2008).
91. A. Laio, M. Parrinello, Escaping free-energy minima. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 12562–
12566 (2002).
92. G. A. Tribello, M. Bonomi, D. Branduardi, C. Camilloni, G. Bussi, PLUMED 2: New feathers for an
old bird. Comput. Phys. Commun. 185, 604–613 (2014).
93. W. Kabsch, C. Sander, Dictionary of protein secondary structure: pattern recognition of hydrogenbonded and geometrical features. Biopolymers 22, 2577–2637 (1983).

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Information for
Structural basis for divergent and convergent evolution of
catalytic machineries in plant AAAD proteins

Michael P. Torrens-Spence​1​, ​Ying-Chih Chiang,​2​†,​ ​Tyler Smith​1,3​,​ ​Maria A. Vicent​1,4​, Yi Wang​2​,
and Jing-Ke Weng​1,4​*

1​

Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

2​

Department of Physics, the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong.

Department​ ​of​ ​Biology,​ ​Massachusetts​ ​Institute​ ​of​ ​Technology,​ Cambridge, Massachusetts

3​

02139, USA.
Department of Biology, Williams College, ​Williamstown, ​Massachusetts ​01267, USA.

4​

†Present address: School of Chemistry, University of Southampton, Southampton, SO17 1BJ,
UK.

*Corresponding author: ​wengj@wi.mit.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table of contents
Table of contents
Supplementary Fig. S1-17
Supplementary Video Information
Supplementary Note S1-3
Supplementary Table S1-4
Supplementary References

2
3-19
20
21-22
23-27
28

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figures

Fig. S1. Diverse specialized metabolic pathways downstream of various plant AAADs. ​In
plants,​ ​the​ ​three proteinegic L-aromatic amino acids, L-tryptophan, L-tyrosine, and
L-phenylalanine are all downstream of chorismate derived from the shikimate pathway. From
these primary metabolites, plant AAADs catalyze the first biotransformation in divergent
specialized metabolic pathways. The TDC enzyme and some downstream products are shown in
blue, the PAAS and several downstream products are shown in red, the TyDC and select
downstream products are shown in green, and the 4HPAAS and a few downstream products are
shown in purple. Solid arrows represent single enzyme catalyzed reactions while the dotted
arrows indicate multiple enzymatic steps.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S2. A Neighbor-Join phylogenetic tree of AAADs. ​This tree is populated with sequences
from all Phytozome V12 species, all attainable characterized NCBI plant AAAD sequences and
select eubacteria NCBI sequences. Bootstrap values are indicated at the tree nodes. The scale
measures evolutionary distances in substitutions per amino acid. Green, pink and blue branches
correspond to the basal, TDC and TyDC clades, respectively. The yellow branches correspond to
the chlorophytes and bacterial AAAD sequences. The plant AAAD clades were annotated
according to their relation to ancestral sequences (the basal clade is most closely related to
bacterial and chlorophyte AAADs) and their apparent substrate selectivity (the TDC clade
contains a number of characterized enzymes with exclusive indolic substrate specificity, while
the TyDC clade is represented by characterized enzymes with phenolic substrate selectivity).
While the basal and TyDC clades contain substitutions impliciative of AAS chemistry, these
mutations appear independently and sporadically through plant taxonomy.
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S3. Multiple sequence alignment of four crystallized plant AAADs. ​The short catalytic
loop is highlighted and underlined in green and the large catalytic loop is highlighted and
underlined in orange. The substrate selectivity residues are marked with pink stars and the
catalytic mechanism dictating residues are marked with blue stars.​ ​The multiple sequence
alignment was generated with ClustalW2 ​(1)​ and displayed with ESPript 3.0 ​(1)​.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S4. Topology of plant AAADs as observed in ​Cr​TDC. ​(​A)​ Plant AAAD segments as
displayed by the ​Cr​TDC structure. Each monomer is composed of the N-terminal ​Cr​TDC​1-119
​
​
(beige), middle ​Cr​TDC​120-386 (maroon)
and C-terminal ​C​rTDC​387-497 (salmon)
segments. (​B)​
Topology diagram for each of the three ​CrT
​ DC segments. The segment diagrams were generated
though Pro-origami using DSSP secondary structure program ​(2)​.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S5. Intermonomer association of N-terminal segments from two ​Cr​TDC chains. ​Side
(​A)​ and top (​B​) views of the aromatic and hydrophobic residues forming the intermolecular
interaction of the ​Cr​TDC homodimer. One monomer is colored in orange with maroon
hydrophobic or aromatic residues, whereas the second monomer is colored in white with pink
hydrophobic or aromatic residues. (​C)​ Sequence of the ​Cr​TDC N-terminal segment with
hydrophobic or aromatic helices residues marked in red.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S6. Coordination of LLP by the ​Cr​TDC active-site residues.​ A cartoon and stick
representation of LLP coordination in ​CrT
​ DC. Chain A is colored in beige and chain B is
colored in white.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S7. Orientation of the alpha carbon carbonyl bond relative to the plane of the
pyridoxal imine system. ​As per the Dunathan hypothesis, PLP enzymes exhibit stereospecific
cleavage of bonds orthogonal to the pyridine ring pi-system electrons (shown as black ring and
arrow) ​(3)​. In the case of PLP decarboxylases, the alpha carbon carbonyl bond of the substrate is
positioned perpendicular to the plane of the pyridine ring (shown as red arrow).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S8. Schematic of the formation of PLP internal and external aldamines. ​First, the
internal aldimine is formed when the aldehyde group of the PLP coenzyme forms an imine with
the conserved active site lysine. Second, ​the external aldimine is formed upon ​the imine
exchange between the ζ-amino group of the lysine and the ​α-carbon amine of the substrate.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S9. ​Transaldimination as captured by two active sites of the ​Ps​TyDC homodimer​. ​(​A​)
The PLP-Lys​321​ internal aldimine as modeled in one of the​ active sites of the ​Ps​TyDC
homodimer. (​B)​ ​The PLP-​L-tyrosine external aldimine as captured by​ the other active site of the
Ps​TyDC homodimer. The Chain A and Chain B are colored in green in gray, respectively, and
the |2​Fo – Fc​| electron density map is contoured at 2 σ.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S10. ​MD simulation systems of holo- ​Cr​TDC with LLP and L-tryptophan in different
protonation states. ​(​A​) The dodecahedron simulation box with the two monomers of ​CrT
​ DC
colored in red and blue, respectively. Water molecules are shown as transparent surfaces. (​B)​ Six
holo- ​CrT
​ DC systems simulated in this work.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S11. ​Cr​TDC MD semi-closed conformation.​ A snapshot from the MD simulation of
Cr​TDC System 1 at t=398 ns, exhibiting a semi-closed loop conformation. The open and closed
conformations of the loops observed from the crystal structures are shown in blue and pink tubes,
respectively.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S12. Large loop conformation as measured by RMSD and atomistic distances in the
550-ns simulation of ​Cr​TDC system 1. ​(​A)​ RMSD of large loop C​α​ atoms with respect to the
modeled closed-state ​Cr​TDC. (​B)​ The minimal distance between Tyr​348-B​ and His​203-A​. Black
curves represent running averages (window size: 101) performed on data colored in gray.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S13. ​Large loop conformations revealed by MD simulations of holo- ​Cr​TDC.​ (​A​)
Clustering analysis and occupancy calculation results performed on the six replicas of 100-ns
simulations of each ​Cr​TDC system. Centroid structure of the largest cluster from clustering
analysis is shown in Cartoon representation, where a short helix (residues 346-350) is seen
across all systems. Isosurfaces of 30% and 1% occupancy are shown in wireframes and
transparent surfaces, respectively. (​B​) Average helical content of the large loop in the
simulations described in (​A​). Error bars indicate standard deviations. (​C)​ Snapshots from selected
50-ns simulations of ​Cr​TDC systems 1-6 initiated with the short helix in an unfolded state (Table
S4). ​Initial structure of the large loop in this unfolded state is shown in black thin tube, with the
closed conformations of the loops from crystal structure shown in pink thin tubes.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S14​. ​Large loop conformations revealed by a 600-ns MD simulation of apo- ​CrT
​ DC.
348-B​
203-A​
(​A-E​) Simulation snapshots with residues Tyr​
and His​
highlighted. Loop conformations
in the open and the modeled closed-state ​Cr​TDC are colored in blue and red, respectively. (​F​)
Helical content of the large loop during the 600-ns apo- simulation. Note that the loss of helical
content precedes the large-scale loop closing motion shown in (​A-E​). (​G​) Minimal distance
between His​203-A​ and Tyr​348-B​. (​H​) C​ɑ​ RMSD of the large loop with respect to the modeled
closed-state ​CrT
​ DC.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S15. Multiple sequence alignment of plant and insect AASs together with ​PsT
​ yDC
highlighting naturally occurring substitutions at the small-loop histidine. ​The short catalytic
loop is highlighted and underlined in green. The small-loop histidine conserved among canonical
decarboxylases is labeled with a blue star. Variation in this residue may be implicative of
alternative reaction mechanisms. The large loop is highlighted and underlined in orange.
Although all the sequences display the red-stared catalytic tyrosine typically conserved in
decarboxylation chemistry, ​Eg​AAS and ​Drosophila melanogaster
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde synthase (​Dm​DHPAAS) ​(4)​ display confirmed aldehyde
synthase activity. ​Ps​TyDC is crystallized in this study, while ​PsT
​ yDC1 (NCBI accession
P54768) displays a small-loop histidine substitution but was previously annotated as a
decarboxylase ​(5)​. P
​ apaver bracteatum​ scaffold TMWO-2021544 (​PbA
​ AS)​, B​egonia sp​.
scaffold OCTM-2012326 (​BsA
​ AS)​, ​Medinilla magnifica​ scaffold WWQZ-2007373 (​Mm​AAS),
and ​Lagerstroemia indica ​scaffold RJNQ-2017655 (​LiA
​ AS) all contain small-loop His-to-Asn
substitution. ​The multiple sequence alignment was generated using ClustalW2 ​(1)​ and displayed
with ESPript 3.0 ​(1)​.
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S16. ​Relative selectivity of ​EgP
​ AAS towards various aromatic L-amino acid substrates.
Acetaldehyde synthesis activity of the ​Eg​PAAS was measured against various L-aromatic amino
acid substrates, at 0.5 mM substrate concentrations, through the detection of the hydrogen
peroxide co-product via Pierce Quantitative Peroxide Assay Kit (Pierce) at 595 nm. ​Error bars
indicate standard error of the mean (SEM) based on biological triplicates.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig. S17. Relative ​in vivo​ L-tyrosine decarboxylase activity of various multi gene vectors in
in transgenic yeast. ​Multi gene vector containing the wild-type ​PsTyDC​ generates tyramine
rather than (S)-norcoclaurine. The multigene vectors used to transform yeast contain the requisite
PpDDC​, ​PsNCS ​and ​BvTyH​ in addition to either ​PsTyDC,​ ​PsTyDC​Y350F​ ​or ​Rr4HPAAS ​genes.
Error bars indicate standard error of the mean (SEM) based on biological triplicates.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Video. Trajectory of a 550-ns simulation of ​CrT
​ DC System 1. ​The large loop
348-B​
reached a semi-closed state during this simulation, with Tyr​
and His​203-A​ in frequent contact.
For visualization clarity, water molecules and a large part of ​CrT
​ DC were not shown. Image
smoothing was performed with a window size of 5 frames, which may have produced slight
distortion of certain structures.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Notes
Supplementary Note 1
The residue range defined for the catalytic loops covers the area lacking significant secondary
structure in the final ​Cr​TDC model. The homologous sequence for the large loop in ​Cr​TDC,
Ps​TyDC, ​AtP
​ AAS and ​Rr4​ HPAAS corresponds to residues 342-361, 344-363, 332-351 and
337-352, respectively. The small loop is represented in the ​CrT
​ DC, ​PsT
​ yDC, ​At​PAAS and
Rr​4HPAAS sequences by residues 200-205, 202-207,190-195 and 195-200, respectively. In the
CrTDC structure, the open conformation large loop lies on top of the upstream anchoring helix
(​CrT
​ DC residue range 335-341). This is particularly notable as the open conformation of this
loop has not been observed in previously solved homologs. The large loop structure includes a
single two turn helix containing the catalytic tyrosine. This loop helix interacts minimally with
the preceding helix displaying tentative ionic interactions with Arg​340​. A similar two turn helix is
not observed in the large loop of the closed conformation ​Ps​TyDC structure, possibly due to the
missing electron density of ​PsT
​ yDC residues 354-359. The paralogous human HDC, however,
displays a homologous two turn helix in the closed conformation suggest that the secondary
structure of this loop may be important throughout the conformational change. The B-chain of
the ​At​PAAS structure displays a partially modeled catalytic loop in the open conformation.
Residues 339-445 were not built into this catalytic loop as this sequence range displayed poor
electron density. Likewise, the majority of the large loop was not modeled in the ​Rr4​ HPAAS
structure as there was poor electron density support.
Supplementary Note 2
The lysine-conjugated coenzyme PLP is simulated in either the enolimine (systems 1-2) or the
ketoenamine form (systems 3-6) shown in Fig. S10. In aqueous solution, PLP aldimine is known
to undergo reversible proton tautomerism between these two forms ​(6–8)​. Although when
conjugated with an enzyme, the ketoenamine form is believed to dominate ​(6, 7)​, we decided to
simulate both forms for the sake of completeness. The electron density map of ​CrT
​ DC suggests
an electron shared between the pyridine nitrogen of LLP and Asp287. While PROPKA
calculation supports a protonated Asp287, a deprotonated Asp287 is known to stabilize LLP with
its pyridine nitrogen protonated ​(9–11)​. Therefore, while we modeled the enolimine form of LLP
with Asp287 protonated (systems 1-2), both states of this residue were modeled in the
ketoenamine form of the coenzyme (systems 3-6). The substrate L-tryptophan, which is a
zwitterion at pH=7, is expected to lose the proton on its amine group prior to the formation of the
external aldimine. Given that it is unclear when such deprotonation process occurs, we simulated
L-tryptophan in both forms (Fig. S10). Taken together, six holo-​CrT
​ DC systems were
constructed (Table S4) and six replicas of 100-ns simulations were initially launched for each
system. Analysis of these simulation trajectories reveals highly similar dominating conformation
of the large loop, represented by the centroid structure from the largest cluster shown in Fig.
S13​A.​ The cartesian space visited by loop residues as enclosed by the occupancy isosurfaces
(Fig. S13​A)​ as well as the average helical content of the large loop measured by the program
DSSP (Fig. S13​B)​ are also similar across all six systems. These results suggest that in its initial
transition from an open to a semi-closed state, conformational change of the large loop is not
dictated by LLP and L-tryptophan protonation states. Indeed, in one of the three replicas of
600-ns apo ​Cr​TDC simulations where neither PLP nor L-tryptophan was present, we observed a
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

loop closing motion resembling that shown in Fig. S11. While interactions with LLP and
L-tryptophan are certainly expected to be relevant upon the large loop reaching its fully closed
state and establishing canonical contacts with these molecules, our results shown above
demonstrate that the initial loop closing motion is largely decoupled from the chemical details of
the coenzyme and the substrate.
Supplementary Note 3
The model of the closed-state ​CrT
​ DC was constructed by superimposing the ​Cr​TDC structure
onto the closed conformation of ​Ps​TyDC and subsequently threading the ​CrT
​ DC loops on the
Ps​TyDC structure. The thus generated ​CrT
​ DC model was used as a reference for MD results so
that the difference between the structures can be measured via RMSD calculations.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 1. Data collection and structure refinement statistics.
Statistics for the highest-resolution shell are shown in parentheses.
Ps​TyDC

Cr​TyDC

Rr​4HPAAS

AtPAAS

Wavelength
Resolution range

0.9793 Å
69.04 - 2.61 (2.703 2.61)

0.9793 Å
0.9793 Å
0.9793 Å
133.2 - 2.05 (2.123 - 78.54 - 2.1 (2.175 - 59.18 - 2.6 (2.693 2.05)
2.1)
2.6)

Space group
Unit cell
Total reflections

P 41 21 2
122.77 122.77 167.00
90 90 90
332655 (33114)

P 1 21 1
107.61 69.61 133.47
90 93.778 90
851987 (82988)

P 21 21 21
78.06 106.79 115.90
90 90 90
623771 (61394)

P 43 21 2
118.36 118.36 67.04
90 90 90
387791 (39193)

Unique reflections

39480 (3848)

123215 (9909)

57211 (5641)

15164 (1489)

Multiplicity

8.4 (8.6)

6.9 (6.8)

10.9 (10.9)

25.6 (26.3)

Completeness (%)

99.95 (99.74)

89.01 (80.54)

97.11 (99.47)

99.95 (99.66)

Mean I/sigma(I)

9.16 (1.59)

10.79 (0.58)

15.14 (2.26)

29.05 (2.97)

Wilson B-factor

34.24

42.66

41.06

60.13

R-merge

0.3504 (1.789)

0.1475 (2.547)

0.5252 (1.322)

0.3799 (1.006)

R-meas

0.373 (1.902)

0.1593 (2.763)

0.5515 (1.388)

0.3884 (1.025)

R-pim

0.1267 (0.644)

0.05974 (1.06)

0.1665 (0.4192)

0.07923 (0.1962)

CC1/2

0.978 (0.558)

0.996 (0.362)

0.93 (0.909)

0.906 (0.909)

CC*

0.995 (0.846)

0.999 (0.729)

0.982 (0.976)

0.975 (0.976)

Reflections used in
refinement

39464 (3847)

110319 (9907)

55587 (5620)

15158 (1484)

Reflections used for
R-free
R-work

1979 (175)

1991 (175)

1994 (207)

1518 (149)

0.1872 (0.2909)

0.2201 (0.4525)

0.2011 (0.2932)

0.2108 (0.3298)

R-free

0.2345 (0.3360)

0.2557 (0.4525)

0.2022 (0.3093)

0.2686 (0.4258)

CC(work)

0.954 (0.769)

0.960 (0.635)

0.916 (0.891)

0.770 (0.637)

CC(free)

0.926 (0.680)

0.964 (0.627)

0.934 (0.882)

0.876 (0.537)

Number of
non-hydrogen atoms
macromolecules
ligands
solvent
Protein residues
RMS(bonds)
RMS(angles)
Ramachandran
favored (%)
Ramachandran
allowed (%)
Ramachandran
outliers (%)
Rotamer outliers (%)
Clashscore
Average B-factor
macromolecules
ligands
solvent

7985

15428

7655

3705

7670
63
252
975
0.004
0.69
95.10

15194
4
230
1882
0.006
0.85
97.03

7443
10
202
939
0.005
0.70
96.51

3694
0
11
467
0.006
0.75
95.43

4.38

2.75

3.17

3.91

0.52

0.22

0.33

0.65

2.64
11.59
37.54
37.31
83.57
32.91

1.25
12.28
63.45
63.63
76.38
51.43

0.25
9.37
61.76
61.94
131.64
51.57

0.00
10.87
67.80
67.84
0
54.73

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 2. Pairwise sequence identity between select AAAD proteins and the
root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) between their monomeric structures.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 3 | Cloning primers.
Gene

Vector/direction

Sequence

At​PAAS

pHis8-4 Forward

GAAAACTTGTACTTCCAGGCCCATGGCATGGAAAATGGAA
GCGGGAAGGTG

At​PAAS

pHis8-4 Reverse

CTCGAATTCGGATCCGCCATGGTTACTTGTGAAGCAAGTAA
GATGCTTCTTCCTG

Ps​TyDC

pHis8-4 Forward

GAAAACTTGTACTTCCAGGCCCATGGCATGGGAAGCCTTCC
GACTAATAACCTTG

Ps​TyDC

pHis8-4 Reverse

CTCGAATTCGGATCCGCCATGGCTAGGCACCAAGTATGGCA
TCTGTATG

CrT
​ DC

pHis8-4 Forward

GAAAACTTGTACTTCCAGGCCCATGGCATGGGCAGCATTGA
TTCAACAAATGTAGC

CrT
​ DC

pHis8-4 Reverse

CTCGAATTCGGATCCGCCATGGTCAAGCTTCTTTGAGCAAA
TCATCGG

Rr​4HPAAS

pHis8-4 Forward

GAAAACTTGTACTTCCAGGCCCATGGCATGGGCAGCTTGCC
TTCTCCTAATG

Rr​4HPAAS

pHis8-4 Reverse

CTCGAATTCGGATCCGCCATGGCTAAGACACGATGCTTTGA
GCTGTTTCTTG

EgP
​ AAS

pTYB12 Forward

GTTGTTGTACAGAATGCTGGTCATATGACTAGTATGAACCC
TCTCGATCCTGGAGAG

EgP
​ AAS

pTYB12 Reverse

CCGTCGACTCGCGAACTAGTTTATGCGGAATGTTGCTCACT
GGC

Ps​TyDC

H204N Forward

GTTTATGCTTCTAATCAAACCAACTGTGCACTTCAAAAAGC
TG

Ps​TyDC

H204N Reverse

CAGCTTTTTGAAGTGCACAGTTGGTTTGATTAGAAGCATAA
AC

Ps​TyDC

Y350F Forward

GCATTATCAACAAGTCCAGAATTCTTGAAGAACAAAGCAA
CGG

Ps​TyDC

Y350F Reverse

CCGTTGCTTTGTTCTTCAAGAATTCTGGACTTGTTGATAATG
C

CrT
​ DC

G370S Forward

CAAATCGCAACGAGCCGAAAATTTCGG

CrT
​ DC

G370S Reverse

CCGAAATTTTCGGCTCGTTGCGATTTG

Ps​TyDC

p423TEF Forward

GCATAGCAATCTAATCTAAGTTTTCTAGAACTAGTATGGGA
AGCCTTCCGACTAATAACC

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ps​TyDC

p43TEF Reverse

CAGCCCGGGGGATCCACTAGTCTAGGCACCAAGTATGGCAT
CTGTATG

CrT
​ DC

p423TEF Forward

GCATAGCAATCTAATCTAAGTTTTCTAGAACTAGTATGGGC
AGCATTGATTCAACAAATGTAGC

CrT
​ DC

p423TEF Reverse

CAGCCCGGGGGATCCACTAGTTCAAGCTTCTTTGAGCAAAT
CATCGG

Ps​TyDC

pYTK001 Forward

GCATCGTCTCATCGGTCTCATATGGGAAGCCTTCCGACTAA
TAACC

Ps​TyDC

pYTK001 Reverse

ATGCCGTCTCAGGTCTCAGGATCTAGGCACCAAGTATGGCA
TCTGTATG

Rr​4HPAAS

pYTK001 Forward

GCATCGTCTCATCGGTCTCATATGGGCAGCTTGCCTTCTCCT
AATG

Rr​4HPAAS

pYTK001 Reverse

ATGCCGTCTCAGGTCTCAGGATCTAAGACACGATGCTTTGA
GCTGTTTCTTG

PpD
​ DC

pYTK001 Forward

GCATCGTCTCATCGGTCTCATATGACGCCCGAGCAATTCAG
ACAG

PpD
​ DC

pYTK001 Reverse

ATGCCGTCTCAGGTCTCAGGATCTATCCCTTAATAACGTCCT
GAAGTCTAGCCC

Ps​NCS2

pYTK001 Forward

GCATCGTCTCATCGGTCTCATATGAGGAAAGTCATAAAATA
CGATATGGAGGTTGC

Ps​NCS2

pYTK001 Reverse

ATGCCGTCTCAGGTCTCAGGATTTACAAAAGCCTGGGAATA
TCTGGGC

BvT
​ yH

pYTK001 Forward

GCATCGTCTCATCGGTCTCATATGGACAACACGACGTTAGC
ATTG

BvT
​ yH

pYTK001 Reverse

ATGCCGTCTCAGGTCTCAGGATTTACTTCCTTGGGACCGGG
ATTACC

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Table 4. List of MD production runs performed in this work. ​Simulations
marked with * were initiated from the end structure of a metadynamics run where the short helix
(residues 346-350) on the large loop was forced to unfold (see Methods).
Cr​TDC state

LLP and
L-tryptophan
protonation states

Holo

System 1

MD simulations performed

6 replicas of 100-ns runs with one run extended to 550 ns
12 replicas of 50-ns runs*

System 2

6 replicas of 100-ns runs
12 replicas of 50-ns runs*

System 3

6 replicas of 100-ns runs
12 replicas of 50-ns runs*

System 4

6 replicas of 100-ns runs
12 replicas of 50-ns runs*

System 5

6 replicas of 100-ns runs
12 replicas of 50-ns runs*

System 6

6 replicas of 100-ns runs
12 replicas of 50-ns runs*

Apo

-

Aggregated simulation time

3 replicas of 600-ns runs
~9.5 μs

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/404970; this version posted November 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary References
1.

P. Gouet, X. Robert, E. Courcelle, ESPript/ENDscript: Extracting and rendering sequence and 3D
information from atomic structures of proteins. ​Nucleic Acids Res.​ ​31​, 3320–3323 (2003).

2.

A. Stivala, M. Wybrow, A. Wirth, J. C. Whisstock, P. J. Stuckey, Automatic generation of protein
structure cartoons with Pro-origami. ​Bioinformatics​ ​27​, 3315–3316 (2011).

3.

H. C. Dunathan, Conformation and reaction specificity in pyridoxal phosphate enzymes.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences​ ​55​, 712–716 (1966).

4.

J. Liang, Q. Han, H. Ding, J. Li, Biochemical identification of residues that discriminate between
3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine decarboxylase and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetaldehyde synthase-mediated
reactions. ​Insect Biochem. Mol. Biol.​ ​91​, 34–43 (2017).

5.

P. J. Facchini, V. De Luca, Differential and tissue-specific expression of a gene family for
tyrosine/dopa decarboxylase in opium poppy. ​J. Biol. Chem.​ ​269​, 26684–26690 (1994).

6.

M. Chan-Huot, ​et al.​, NMR Studies of Protonation and Hydrogen Bond States of Internal Aldimines
of Pyridoxal 5′-Phosphate Acid–Base in Alanine Racemase, Aspartate Aminotransferase, and
Poly-l-lysine. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​135​, 18160–18175 (2013).

7.

B. G. Caulkins, ​et al.​, Protonation states of the tryptophan synthase internal aldimine active site from
solid-state NMR spectroscopy: direct observation of the protonated Schiff base linkage to
pyridoxal-5’-phosphate. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​136​, 12824–12827 (2014).

8.

S. Sharif, ​et al.​, 15N Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies of Acid−Base Properties of
Pyridoxal-5‘-Phosphate Aldimines in Aqueous Solution. ​J. Phys. Chem. B​ ​111​, 3869–3876 (2007).

9.

P. J. Facchini, K. L. Huber-Allanach, L. W. Tari, Plant aromatic L-amino acid decarboxylases:
evolution, biochemistry, regulation, and metabolic engineering applications. ​Phytochemistry​ ​54​,
121–138 (2000).

10. A. C. Eliot, J. F. Kirsch, Pyridoxal phosphate enzymes: mechanistic, structural, and evolutionary
considerations. ​Annu. Rev. Biochem.​ ​73​, 383–415 (2004).
11. D. T. Major, J. Gao, A Combined Quantum Mechanical and Molecular Mechanical Study of the
Reaction Mechanism and α-Amino Acidity in Alanine Racemase. ​J. Am. Chem. Soc.​ ​128​,
16345–16357 (2006).

28

