bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A role for EP3 and its associated G protein, Gz, in negatively regulating beta-cell function and
mass in the context of insulin resistance and obesity.
Austin Reuter1,2, Jaclyn A. Wisinski1,2, Darby Peter1,2, Michael D. Schaid1,3, Rachel J. Fenske1,3,
and Michelle E. Kimple1,2,3,4,5*
1, Research Service, William S. Middleton Memorial VA Hospital, Madison, WI, 53705.
2, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, 3,
Interdepartmental Graduate Program in Nutritional Sciences, 4, Department of Academic
Affairs, and 5, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI, 53705.
*Corresponding Author
Michelle E. Kimple, PhD
Research Health Scientist
William S. Middleton Memorial VA Hospital
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism
Director of the Basic Science Selective, Department of Academic Affairs
Faculty Affiliate, Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology
University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health
4148 UW Medical Foundation Centennial Building
1685 Highland Ave.
Madison, WI 53705
608-265-5627
mkimple@medicine.wisc.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Objective: Black and Tan Brachyury (BTBR) mice have underlying defects in insulin sensitivity
and beta-cell function, even when lean. When homozygous for the LeptinOb mutation (BTBROb), hyperphagia leads to morbid obesity, and by 10 weeks of age, a type 2 diabetes (T2D)
phenotype is fully penetrant. The second messenger molecule, cyclic AMP (cAMP), promotes
glucose-stimulated and incretin-potentiated insulin secretion, beta-cell proliferation, and betacell survival. We have previously shown that a key player in the loss of functional beta-cell mass
in the BTBR-Ob strain is Prostaglandin EP3 receptor (EP3); dysfunctionally up-regulated in the
islet by the pathophysiological conditions of T2D. EP3 transmits a signal from its ligand,
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), to the unique cAMP-inhibitory G protein alpha-subunit, Gαz, reducing
beta-cell cAMP production. Our objective in this study was to study the effect of beta-cell EP3
and Gαz loss on the metabolic phenotype of both BTBR-lean and -Ob mice, providing support
for targeting this pathway in a genetically-susceptible population before and after the
progression to frank T2D.
Methods: EP3 or Gαz-floxed BTBR mice were bred with BTBR mice expressing Cre recombinase
under the control of the rat insulin promoter in order to design beta-cell-specific knockout
mice. A final cross into the BTBR-Ob strain provided both lean and obese experimental animals.
To our surprise, the EP3 deleted allele was transferred via the germline, making full-body EP3null mice, as confirmed by qPCR. Beta-cell-specific Gαz loss in Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice (Gαz βKO)
was confirmed; yet, these mice were poor breeders, particularly in the context of the LeptinOb
mutation; therefore, only BTBR-lean mice were phenotyped. Full-body metabolic and ex vivo
islet assays were conducted in wild-type and EP3-null BTBR-lean and Ob mice and wild-type and
Gαz βKO BTBR-lean mice, linking any islet phenotype with observed effects on glucose
homeostasis.
Results: Systemic EP3 loss accelerated the early T2D phenotype of BTBR-Ob mice and caused
insulin resistance and glucose intolerance in BTBR-lean mice, likely due to the extra-pancreatic
effects described previously in other mouse models. Even so, islets from EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice
had significantly increased insulin-positive pancreas area, supportive of an increased
proliferation response. Gαz βKO BTBR-lean mice, on the other hand, had significantly improved
glucose tolerance due to elevated glucose-stimulated and incretin-potentiated insulin
secretion, with no apparent effect of beta-cell Gαz loss on beta-cell proliferation. Combined,
our findings suggest a divergence in signaling downstream of EP3/Gαz depending on the
(patho)physiologic conditions to which the islet is exposed.
Conclusions: Our work sheds light on G protein-mediated mechanisms by which beta-cells
compensate for systemic insulin resistance and how these become dysfunctional in the T2D
state.
Keywords: EP3 receptor; G protein signaling; insulin secretion, beta-cell compensation;
prostaglandin E2; signal transduction

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2D) occurs after a failure of the insulin-secreting pancreatic betacells to compensate for peripheral insulin resistance and its often-associated glucolipotoxic and
inflammatory conditions. Underlying defects in both beta-cell function and the ability of the
beta-cells to increase and maintain their mass are key factors in the susceptibility to T2D and
can be genetically encoded. The Black and Tan Brachyury (BTBR) mouse is an excellent mouse
model to mimic the natural course of T2D development in susceptible individuals. As a strain
characteristic, BTBR mice are more insulin resistant than the more commonly used C57BL/6
sub-strains[1], but their T2D susceptibility is beta-cell centric. The BTBR strain has an underlying
deficit in insulin granule exocytosis[2, 3], and, coupled with a failure of BTBR mice homozygous
for the LeptinOb mutation (BTBR-Ob) to up-regulate an islet cell cycle gene module early in the
compensation response[4, 5], BTBR-Ob mice rapidly and reproducibly develop severe obesity
and insulin resistance, ultimately succumbing to frank T2D by 10 weeks of age[1].
The second messenger molecule, cyclic AMP (cAMP), has been well-characterized as a
potentiator of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS), and has been linked with the
compensatory functional, proliferative and survival responses to insulin resistance,
glucolipotoxicity, and inflammation. A multitude of changes in the beta-cell highly
compensating for insulin resistance converge on the conservation of cAMP levels, including upregulation of signaling mediated by cAMP-stimulatory Gs-coupled G protein coupled receptors
(GPCRs) (e.g., the glucagon-like peptide 1 receptor: GLP1R), down-regulation of signaling
mediated by cAMP-inhibitory Gi-coupled GPCRs (e.g., the somatostatin receptors: SSTRs), and
altered expression and activity of cAMP-degrading phosphodiesterase enzymes. Islets from T2D
BTBR-Ob mice have a deficit in the ability to increase cAMP production in response various
stimuli; an effect correlated with reduced glucose-stimulated and incretin-potentiated insulin
secretion [6]. Prostaglandin EP3 receptor (EP3) is a Gi-coupled receptor for E series
prostaglandins such as prostaglandin E2 (PGE2): its most abundant natural ligand. Islets from
BTBR-Ob mice and T2D human organ express more EP3 and produce more PGE2 than islets
from lean and/or non-diabetic controls, suggesting that up-regulation of PGE2-mediated EP3
signaling is a dysfunctional consequence of the T2D condition itself that might be able to be
therapeutically targeted. In support of this concept, when islets isolated from BTBR-Ob mice
and T2D human organ donors are treated with the specific EP3 receptor antagonist, L798,106,
their insulin secretion response to glucose and GLP1R agonists is at least partially restored [6].
In previous work from our laboratory using INS-1 (832/13) rat insulinoma cells and islets
isolated from T2D C57BL/6J-Ob mice, we demonstrated beta-cell EP3 is specifically coupled to
the unique Gi subfamily member, Gz[7, 8]. The catalytic alpha subunit of Gz, Gαz, has many
unique biochemical properties, including an extremely slow deactivation rate, meaning that it
has the potential for partial tonic activity. Gαz tissue distribution is also quite limited, with
protein only being found in brain, platelets, retina, and islets. Gαz is an important endogenous
regulator of beta-cell cAMP production, as islets from Gαz-null Balb/c mice produce more cAMP
and secrete more insulin in response to glucose, consistent with reduced fasting glucose levels
and accelerated glucose tolerance [9]. Gαz-null mice are resistant to diabetes in a number of
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mouse models of the disease. In T1D models, Gαz-null mice display increased insulin secretion
in reponse to glucose and the GLP1R agonist, exendin-4, an accelerated beta-cell replication
rate, and improved beta-cell survival [10, 11). Of direct relevance to this work, when fed a highfat diet, Gαz-null C57BL/6N mice are protected from glucose intolerance due to a significant
enhancement of beta-cell replication and mass, increasing the insulin secretory capacity of the
islet {Kimple, 2012 #7]. Considering beta-cell EP3 acts specifically through Gαz, HFD-fed EP3-null
mice should phenocopy the protection from glucose intolerance observed with Gαz-null mice.
Yet, in contrast to Gαz, EP3 is highly expressed in other tissues, including white adipose tissue,
where it limits lipolysis via Gz-independent mechanisms. Therefore, EP3-null mice become more
dyslipidemic, insulin resistant, and, ultimately, glucose intolerant than wild-type controls [12].
Even so, when islets are isolated from HFD-fed EP3-null mice and studied ex vivo, their
proliferative rate is significantly higher than those of wild-type HFD-fed controls, supporting the
concept that if beta-cell EP3 could be specifically targeted, these mice would exhibit the same
T2D protective phenotype of Gαz-null mice [12].
In this work, we aimed to confirm the beta-cell autonomy of the protective phenotype of Gαznull mice against T2D, and validate beta-cell EP3 as a putative target for beta-cell-targeted
therapies in T2D-susceptible individuals by generating beta-cell-specific Gαz- and EP3-null mice
in the BTBR background, recording effects on metabolic phenotype in both lean and genetically
obese mice. Challenges in generating and breeding the mouse models necessitated a change in
approach, and, ultimately, we were able to determine the in vivo metabolic and ex vivo islet
phenotype of full-body EP3-null mice in the BTBR-lean and -Ob backgrounds, as well as that of
beta-cell-specific Gαz-null mice in the BTBR-lean background. Combined, our results lend
support to targeting beta-cell Gαz signaling as a therapeutic strategy to improve glucose
tolerance, particularly in a T2D-susceptible population.

Materials & Methods
Materials and Reagents
Sodium chloride (S9888), potassium chloride (P3911), magnesium sulfate heptahydrate
(M9397), potassium phosphate monobasic (P0662), sodium bicarbonate (S6014), HEPES
(H3375), calcium chloride dehydrate (C3881), exendin-4 (E7144) and RIA-grade bovine serum
albumin (A7888) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Anti-insulin
antibodies (Insulin + Proinsulin Antibody, 10R-I136a; Insulin + Proinsulin Antibody, biotinylated,
61E-I136bBT) were from Fitzgerald Industries (Acton, MA, USA). The 10 ng/ml insulin standard
(8013-K) and assay buffer (AB-PHK) were from Millipore. RPMI 1640 medium (11879–020: no
glucose), penicillin/streptomycin (15070–063), and fetal bovine serum (12306C: qualified, heat
inactivated, USDA-approved regions) were from Life Technologies (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Dextrose
(D14–500) was from Fisher Scientific (Waltham, MA). Humulin R® was from Eli Lilly and Co.
Guinea pig anti-insulin, antibody diluent with background reduction, EnVisionTM
diaminobenzidine (DAB) reagents, and and serum-free blocking agent were from Dako.
Superfrost® Plus microscope slides were from Fisher Scientific (Hampton, NH, USA), and
fluorescence quality 1.5-mm coverslips were from Corning Life Sciences (Lowell, MA, USA). The
rat/mouse insulin ELISA kit was from Crystal Chem Inc. (Downers Grove, IL, USA). Glucose
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Oxidase Reagent was from Pierce. The RNeasy Mini Kit and RNase-free DNase set were from
Qiagen. High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit was from Applied Biosystems. FastStart
Universal SYBR Green Master mix was from Roche.
Mouse husbandry
Breeding colonies were housed in a limited-access, pathogen-free facility where all cages,
enrichment, and water were sterilized before use (University of Wisconsin-Madison, Biotron)
on a 12-hour light/12-hour dark cycle with ad libitum access to water and irradiated breeder
chow (Teklad 2919).
Upon weaning, mice were housed five or fewer per cage of mixed genotypes with ad libitum
access to lower-fat chow in the Madison VA Animal Resource Facility (LabDiet 5001,
nonirradiated). All procedures were performed according to approved protocols in accordance
with the principles and guidelines established by the University of Wisconsin and Madison VA
institutional animal care and use committees.
Mouse model generation and validation
C57BL/6J mice in which Cre expression is driven by the rat insulin promoter (RIP-CreHerr: “InsPrCre” in [13]) were obtained from Pedro Herrera as described in [11]. As compared to other RIPCre driver lines, RIP-CreHerr shows the least hypothalamic Cre expression and does not contain
the human growth hormone minigene, which has been shown in previous studies to produce
full-length, active hGH that artificially enhances mouse beta-cell proliferation through the
prolactin receptor[14].
B6/129 mice in which the first coding exon of the Ptger3 gene is flanked by LoxP sites (EP3floxed) were obtained from The Jackson Laboratory (Ptger3tm1Csml; stock 008349, deposited by
Michael Lazarus). These mice were bred with RIP-CreHerr to generate a mixed-background EP3flox-RIP-Cre mouse, which was then backcrossed into the BTBR T+ Itpr3tf/J (BTBR) background
more than 10 generations by Alan Attie’s group at UW-Madison to generate the EP3-flox-RIPCre BTBR strain. In order to transfer the EP3-flox-RIP-Cre BTBR colony to our SPF breeding core,
founder mice were re-derived from clean embryos implanted into pseudopregnant BTBR
females. As a strain characteristic, the outcome of in vitro fertilization in the BTBR background
is quite poor[15], and only four live pups were born, with only one containing the floxed allele
(see Table 1 for genotyping primer sequences). This mouse was bred with BTBR mice ordered
from The Jackson Laboratories to increase colony size, and then a final cross was performed
with BTBR.Cg-Lepob/WiscJ heterozygous for LepOb to generate the EP3-flox-RIP-Cre BTBR-Ob
colony. Experimental mice were generated by breeding EP3-flox+/-Ob+/-Cre-/- animals with EP3flox+/-Ob+/-Cre+/- animals.
During the course of our study, and to reconcile disparate results, we designed genotyping
primers to detect the deleted alleles in tail tissue samples (a full list of genotyping primer
sequences can be found in Table 1). In every case, only the wild-type or deleted allele was
detected, independent of Cre expression (Supplemental Figure 1A). Upon re-genotyping of tail
DNA from the single founder mouse, only the deleted allele was detected, indicating germline
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

transmission of the mutation. To confirm our EP3-flox-RIP-Cre mice were actually full-body
knockouts, we performed qPCR on adipose and kidney RNA samples (chosen because of high
endogenous EP3 expression), and found no amplification of Ptger3 PCR product in knock-out
tissues (Supplemental Figure 1B,C) (no antibody exists that specifically detects EP3 protein,
whether endogenous or over-expressed).
The generation and tissue-specific validation of the Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre line in the C57BL/6J
background has been described previously [11]. These mice were backcrossed into the BTBR
background more than 10 generations, with a final cross into BTBR-Ob to generate the Gαz-floxRIP-Cre BTBR-Ob line. Experimental mice were generated by breeding Gαz-flox+/-Ob+/-Cre-/animals with Gαz-flox+/-Ob+/-Cre+/- animals. As with the EP3-null mice described above, Gαz-floxRIP-Cre BTBR mice, whether in the BTBR background or C57BL/6J background, were similarly
genotyped for the deleted allele, which was observed occasionally in genotyping reactions
(Supplemental Figure 2A,B). All Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre experimental mice described in this and our
previous manuscript [11] are confirmed to be beta-cell-specific Gαz-null, with no deleted allele
detected upon tail tissue genotyping1. Genotyping primer sequences are listed in Table 1.
In certain experiments, we also utilized full-body Gαz-null mice the BTBR background, which
were generated from a previously-described and validated Gαz-null C57BL/6N line by
backcrossing into the BTBR background more than 10 times [7].
Mouse metabolic phenotyping and tissue collection
Except for BTBR-lean and BTBR-Ob females being lighter than males at 6 weeks of age, and
BTBR-lean females lighter than males at 8 weeks of age, no differences in random-fed blood
glucose or 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels were observed as a sex characteristic
(Supplemental Figure 3A-C). Therefore, in BTBR studies, both male and female mice were used.
Oral glucose tolerance tests (OGTTs) were performed at 6 weeks of age after a 4-6 h fast in
clean cages. 1 mg/kg sterile dextrose solution was administered via gavage needle at 6 weeks of
age, with blood glucose levels recorded at various timepoints by blood glucose meter
(AlphaTRAK) and rat/mouse–specific test strips reading of a blood droplet obtained via tail nick,
as previously described[10, 16, 17]. The OGTT on Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice in the C57BL/6J
background was performed similarly, except that mice were 10-week-old males. In some cases,
blood was collected in EDTA-coated microcapillary tubes at baseline and 5 or 15 min after
glucose injection to generate plasma samples for insulin assay. Insulin tolerance tests (ITTs)
were performed similarly to OGTTs, except that 0.75 mg/kg Humulin-R was IP injected. As BTBR
mice regularly have a glucose spike after insulin injection, the percent change in blood glucose
was normalized to the blood glucose level 5 min after insulin injection. Mice were sacrificed
1

Based on our extensive experience with genotyping Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice in the NOD, C57BL/6J, and BTBR
backgrounds, the germline transmission of the deleted allele appears related to the underlying insulin sensitivity of
the mouse strain, as tail samples from Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre NOD mice (a highly insulin sensitive strain) amplify the
deleted allele at a rate of 0.65% of total alleles genotyped; Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre C57BL/6J mice at a rate of 3.88%; and
BTBR (an insulin resistant strain) at a rate of 5.38%. This may be an important factor for researchers to consider
when making beta-cell-specific knockout mice using any constitutive Cre reporter strain.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

between 9 and 10 weeks of age for terminal islet, blood, or tissue collection. To isolate
pancreatic islets, mice were anesthetized by 2,2,2 tribromoethanol until unresponsive,
exsanguinated by cutting the descending aorta, and the bile duct ligated and cannulated,
followed by injection of ice-cold collagenase solution to inflate the pancreas as described
previously[18]. For terminal blood collection in order to generate plasma samples, mice were
fasted 4-6 h in clean cages and anesthetized by 2,2,2 tribromoethanol until unresponsive, and
mice were exsanguinated by retro-orbital puncture with an EDTA-coated microcapillary tube,
followed by secondary euthanasia by cervical dislocation. Whole pancreases were harvested
upon necropsy and fixed in formalin at 4 degrees C overnight, and then cryo-preserved.
Pancreas section histochemical staining and insulin immunohistochemistry
Hematoxylin and eosin staining (for islet morphology) and insulin immunohistochemistry with
hematoxylin counterstain (for measurement of beta-cell fractional area) were performed as
previously described for paraffin-embedded pancreas sections [7, 10, 11]. Adipose tissue and
kidney were harvested upon necropsy and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen for future isolation of
total RNA. GSIS assays were performed using a single-islet microplate GSIS assay, and total islet
insulin content and secreted insulin quantified via an in-house sandwich ELISA as previously
described[19].
Plasma insulin, glucose, and PGE metabolite measurements
The insulin concentration of 4-6 h fasting plasma samples and plasma samples from OGTTs was
determined using a Crystal Chem high-sensitivity insulin ELISA as previously described[11].
Plasma glucose was recorded via Pierce glucose oxidase assay according to the manufacturers’
directions. Plasma PGE metabolite concentrations were determined by PGE metabolite EIA
according to the manufacturer’s protocol, as previously described[6, 17].
Ex vivo islet insulin secretion and cAMP production assays
Mouse islets were purified from exocrine tissue of inflated pancreases using collagenase
digestion and centrifugation through Histopaq as previously described[20]. Isolated human
islets were obtained from the Integrated Islet Distribution Program (IIDP) between 2013 and
2015. Single-islet GSIS assays were performed with the indicated compounds using tissueculture-treated 96-well V-bottom dishes as previously described[19].
Quantitative PCR assays
150-200 islets from each mouse islet preparation were washed with PBS and used to generate
RNA samples via Qiagen RNeasy Mini Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Copy DNA
(cDNA) was generated and relative qPCR performed via SYBR Green assay using primers
validated to provide linear results upon increasing concentrations of cDNA template, as
previously described[11]. A list of qPCR primer sequences can be found in Table 2.
Statistical analysis
Data are expressed as mean ± standard error of the mean (SEM) unless otherwise noted. Data
were analyzed as appropriate for the experimental design and as indicated in the text and

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

figure legends. P-values < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. Statistical analyses were
performed with GraphPad Prism version 7 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA).

Results
Full-body EP3 loss may accelerate the early T2D phenotype of BTBR-Ob mice. We generated
mice lacking Gαz specifically in the beta-cells in the BTBR-lean and BTBR-Ob backgrounds in
order to test the impact of beta-cell Gαz loss on metabolic parameters in the healthy and T2D
state. The penetrance of Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice was lower than the expected Mendelian ratio in
both the lean and Ob background, but particularly so in the Ob background. Therefore,
completing a full metabolic characterization of beta-cell-specific Gαz loss in the BTBR-Ob
background became prohibitively expensive. Therefore, we focused solely on characterizing the
impact of full-body EP3 loss in the BTBR-Ob background.
At 6 weeks of age, there were no significant differences in mean body weight between wildtype and EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice (Fig. 1A) (while the weights of all mice were included in the
analysis, those suspected of low weight due to end-stage T2D are indicated in grey circles).
There were also no significant differences in mean random-fed blood glucose levels between
the groups (Fig. 1B) (blood glucose levels above the range of the glucometer—750 mg/dl—also
suggesting end-stage T2D, were recorded as 750 mg/dl and are indicated by grey circles). Mice
not suspected of end-stage T2D were fasted 4-6 h before performing OGTTs, and, per our
approved animal protocol, if a fasting blood glucose measurement exceeded 450 mg/dl
(indicating little functional beta-cell mass), mice were excluded from OGTT. Although the 4-6 h
fasting blood glucose levels of mice excluded from OGTT were not recorded, 50% of wild-type
BTBR-Ob mice (7 of 14) and 70% of EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice (7 of 10) were excluded from OGTT,
suggesting the EP3-null mutation accelerated T2D development in the BTBR-Ob strain. Among
those mice subjected to OGTT, there were no significant differences in mean 4-6 h fasting blood
glucose levels or glucose tolerance between EP3-null and wild-type BTBR-Ob mice, with both
groups displaying fasting hyperglycemia (mean 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels ≈ 325-375
mg/dl) and severe glucose intolerance (peak blood glucose levels ≈ 550-600 mg/dl) (Fig. 1C,D).
At 8 weeks of age, when insulin tolerance tests were performed, there were no differences in
body weight of BTBR-Ob mice by genotype (Fig. 1E). Similar to OGTTs, mice were fasted for 4-6
h prior to insulin tolerance tests. Neither mean random-fed blood glucose levels nor 4-6 h
fasting blood glucose levels were significantly different between groups as a factor of genotype
(Fig. 1F,G). Both wild-type and EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice were severely insulin resistant, with zero
effect of insulin on reducing blood glucose levels at any time point after insulin injection (Fig.
1H). Combined, these results indicate that, although EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice may have had a
stronger T2D phenotype at 6 weeks of age, by 8 weeks of age, there was no additional impact
of EP3 loss on the BTBR-Ob T2D phenotype.
Full-body EP3 loss and beta-cell-specific Gαz loss have opposing effects on the early metabolic
phenotype of BTBR-lean mice. In order to confirm the Gαz-floxed mutation had no impact on
metabolic parameters of interest, allowing direct comparisons between EP3-null and Gαzfloxed-RIP-Cre mice to the same wild-type control group, we performed a pilot study with wild8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

type Cre-negative, wild-type Cre-positive, and Gαz-floxed Cre-negative mice at 6 weeks of age.
There was no effect of the Gαz-floxed mutation on body weight or 4-6 h fasting blood glucose
as compared to either control group (Supplemental Figure 4A-C), and the mean OGTT curves
nearly overlaid each other (Supplemental Figure 4G). Similar results were found with ITTs
performed at 8 weeks of age (Supplemental Figure 4D-F,H).
At 6 weeks of age, there were no significant differences in body weight among wild-type, EP3null, or Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre BTBR-lean mice (Fig. 2A), and after a 4-6 h fast, there were no
significant differences in blood glucose levels (Fig. 2B). Upon oral glucose challenge, EP3-null
BTBR-lean mice had significantly delayed glucose clearance as compared to wild-type controls,
with significantly higher blood glucose levels 30 and 45 min after glucose challenge as
compared to wild-type lean controls and a 2-3-fold higher mean 2 h glucose area-under-thecurve (8819 ± 3694 mg/dl glucose, EP3-null BTBR-lean vs. 5612 ± 1966 mg/dl glucose, wild-type
BTBR-lean; mean ± SEM) (Fig. 2C). In contrast, the glucose clearance of Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice
was accelerated as compared to wild-type controls, with significantly lower blood glucose levels
15, 30, and 45 min after glucose challenge (Fig. 2C). The effect of beta-cell-specific Gαz loss is
strain-specific, as both the fasting blood glucose and oral glucose tolerance of 10-week-old
wild-type and beta-cell-specific Gαz-null male mice in the C57BL/6J background are nearly
identical (Supplemental Figure 5A,B). Finally, data from a separate cohort of 10-week-old Gαzflox-RIP-Cre BTBR-lean mice and wild-type Cre-positive controls revealed no significant
differences in body weight, 4-6 h fasting plasma glucose, 4-6 h fasting plasma insulin, or islet
insulin content by genotype, supportive of a lack of effect of the Gαz-null mutation on GSIS in
the BTBR-lean mice in the absence of glucose/incretin stimulation (Supplemental Figure 5D-F).
Consistent with their decreased glucose tolerance, 8-week-old EP3-null BTBR-lean mice had
significantly reduced insulin sensitivity as compared to wild-type controls, with significantly
elevated blood glucose levels 60 and 120 min after insulin injection, and a 1.5-fold decrement in
2 h glucose area-under-the curve in response to insulin (2946 ± 765.9 mg/dl glucose, EP3-null
BTBR-lean vs. 4668 ± 698.5 mg/dl glucose, wild-type BTBR-lean; mean ± SEM) (Fig. 3C). This
decreased insulin sensitivity was in the absence of any effect of the EP3-null mutation on body
weight or 4-6 h FBG at 8 weeks of age (Fig. 3A,B). We did not perform a full ITT characterization
in Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice, as full-body Gαz loss has never been shown to have any impact on
insulin sensitivity in any mouse model, consistent with the lack of Gαz expression in liver,
adipose tissue, and skeletal muscle. Yet, one Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mouse subjected to ITT exhibited
a similar decrement in blood glucose after insulin injection as those in any of the control groups
(Supplemental Fig. 6).
EP3 loss increases beta-cell fractional area of BTBR-Ob mouse pancreas sections. Between 9
and 10 weeks of age, pancreases were collected from wild-type and EP3-null BTBR mice, both
lean and obese, and fixed for paraffin-embedding and sectioning. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
staining of pancreas sections from 9-10-week-old BTBR-Ob mice, whether wild-type or EP3-null,
revealed a clear destruction of normal, spherical, mouse islet architecture in many wild-type
and EP3-null BTBR-Ob pancreas sections, with a number of elongated, poorly circumscribed
islets and islet remnants near pancreatic ducts observed (Fig. 4A-F: example islets are circled in
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

red, with arrowheads indicating those considered to have poor morphology). Insulin IHC was
performed on pancreas sections from both lean and obese wild-type and EP3-null BTBR mice
counterstained with hematoxylin to calculate fractional beta-cell area (see representative
images in Fig. 5A-D). Although the mean insulin positive pancreas area trended towards being
greater in islets from wild-type BTBR-Ob mice as compared to lean at 9-10 weeks of age, this
difference was not statistically significant (Fig. 5E). Interestingly, though, the insulin-positive
pancreas area of EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice was significantly enhanced as compared to their lean
controls. Although beta-cell replication was not specifically measured in our study, this result is
consistent with the increased beta-cell replication rate of EP3-null mice fed a high-fat diet as
compared to wild-type controls [12].
Islets were isolated from wild-type and EP3-null mice, both lean and obese, and subjected to
single-islet GSIS assays in response to low glucose (2.8 mM), high glucose (16.7 mM), and high
glucose plus 10 nM exendin-4 (Ex-4): an agonist for the GLP1R, which signals through a
stimulatory Gs protein to augment cAMP production. GSIS was recorded as the total insulin
secreted per islet in 45 min, normalized or not to the total islet insulin content. Statistical
analyses were performed in both datasets; yet, normalizing secreted insulin to islet insulin
content produced the most distinguishing results. Islets isolated from wild-type BTBR-lean mice
secreted more insulin in response to 16.7 mM glucose than 2.8 mM glucose, whether reported
as percent secreted or total secreted (Fig. 6A,B, grey vs. white bars). Adding Ex-4 had no
additional effect on wild-type BTBR-lean islet GSIS (Fig. 6A,B, black vs. grey bars). Islets isolated
from lean EP3-null mice had basally elevated GSIS, secreting over 50 times more glucose as a
percent of content than wild-type BTBR-lean mice in 2.8 mM glucose, with no additional effect
of 16.7 mM glucose (Fig. 6A, gray vs. white bars); yet, on average, secreted more insulin as a
percent of content in response to Ex-4 (Fig. 6A, black vs. gray bars). In order to better compare
the GSIS response of wild-type and EP3-null BTBR islets to stimulatory glucose and Ex-4, the
stimulation index (SI) was calculated by the ratio of GSIS as a percent of content in 16.7 mM
glucose to that in 2.8 mM glucose for each islet, while the incretin response (IR) was similarly
calculated by normalizing GSIS as a percent of content in 16.7 mM glucose plus Ex-4 to that in
16.7 mM glucose alone. Islets from wild-type BTBR-lean mice had a mean SI of approximately
4.5, vs. approximately 1 for those from EP3-null BTBR-lean mice (Fig. 6C, white vs. light gray
bars). Conversely, islets from wild-type BTBR-lean mice had a mean IR of approximately 1, while
those from EP3-null BTBR-lean islets had an IR of approximately 1.5 (Fig. 6D, white vs. light gray
bars).
Islets from both EP3-null and wild-type BTBR-Ob mice had elevated GSIS in low glucose (both ≈
15-20-fold above that in wild-type BTBR-lean islets) (Fig. 6A,B) and responded more strongly to
high glucose than low (SI ≈ 2) (Fig. 6C); yet, only islets from wild-type BTBR-Ob mice responded
to Ex-4 to potentiate GSIS (IR ≈ 2.2) (Fig. 6D). Both BTBR-Ob groups had significantly lower
insulin content than wild-type BTBR-lean mice, consistent with their hyperglycemia (Fig. 6E).
Interestingly, though, islet insulin content was reduced in islets from both EP3-null BTBR-lean
and BTBR-Ob mice as compared to their wild-type controls, consistent with an insulin
hypersecretion phenotype (Fig. 6E).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Beta-cell loss of Gαz improves BTBR-lean islet function and incretin responsiveness.
As mentioned previously, our experimental cohort of Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mice was limited due to
challenges in breeding; therefore, we were only able to complete islet GSIS assays from one 910-week old Gαz-null-RIP-Cre mouse. Yet, as our GSIS assays are performed on single islets, and
individual islets from the same animal are biologically distinct. Similar to the results described
above for our wild-type vs. EP3-null BTBR-lean islet assays, islets from a wild-type Cre-positive
control secreted significantly more insulin in response to stimulatory glucose than low glucose,
with Ex-4 having no addition effect on GSIS, as represented by total insulin secreted in 45 min
(Fig. 7A, black bars). In contrast, islets from a mouse lacking Gαz specifically in the beta-cells had
no change in GSIS in response to stimulatory glucose as compared to those from lean controls,
yet had a strong potentiation of GSIS with the addition of Ex-4 (Fig. 7A, grey bars). Islets from
the Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mouse had a much higher SI than those from the wild-type Cre-positive
control; yet, this effect was due almost exclusively to a lower secretion of insulin in basal
glucose (Fig. 7B). The incretin response of islets from the Gαz-flox-RIP-Cre mouse was
approximately 1.5, vs. 1 for islets from the wild-type Cre-positive control (Fig. 7C).
Unfortunately, we were not able to normalize secreted insulin to percent of islet insulin
content, as this insulin ELISA failed due to a technical error. Yet, the lack of a difference in mean
islet insulin content in a separate cohort of wild-type and Gαz-floxed Cre-positive BTBR-lean
mice (Supplemental Figure 5D) supports any differences in insulin secretion in response to
various stimuli being due to a direct effect on secretion and not as due to a secondary effect on
insulin content.
A potential defect in BTBR islet proliferation and relevance to Gαz.
While all of our ex vivo islet assays, combined with our previous results from full-body Gαz-null
mice in young, lean backgrounds are supportive of an effect of loss of EP3/Gαz signaling on
insulin secretion and not beta-cell mass, a failure of BTBR-Ob islets to up-regulate key cell cycle
genes as compared to those from euglycemic C57BL/6J-Ob mice has been previously
published[5]. By qCPR, FoxM1 and its target genes cyclin A2 (Ccna2), cyclin B1 (Ccnb1), cyclindependent kinase 1a/P21 (Cdkn1a) cyclin-dependent kinase 1b/p27 (Cdkn1b), Nek2, polo-like
kinase 1 (Plk1), aurora kinase B (Aurkb), and centromere protein A (CenpA) were all significantly
up-regulated (2-4-fold) in islets isolated from 10-week-old B6-lean vs. B6-Ob mice, but showed
little-to-no change in islets isolated from BTBR-lean as compared to BTBR-Ob[4]. Thus,
expression of FoxM1 and its targets predicts the metabolic phenotype of BTBR-Ob vs. B6-Ob
mice[4]. We used a publicly-available microarray database of islet gene expression in C57BL/6J
and BTBR mice, both lean and LeptinOb, at 4 and 10 weeks of age (diabetes.wisc.edu, [5]), to
search for expression changes in key cell cycle genes between islets isolated from lean C57BL/6J
and BTBR mice at both ages. In contrast to the results described above for C57BL/6J-Ob vs.
BTBR-Ob mice, there was little difference among the relative gene expression of FoxM1 or any
of its targets in islets from lean mice, whether from animals 4 or 10 weeks of age (Fig. 8A,B).
Exceptions were Ccna2, which was ~50% higher in BTBR-lean islets as compared to C57BL/6J at
4 weeks of age, and Cdkn1a, which was ~15% higher in islets from BTBR-lean mice as compared
to C57BL/6J at 10 weeks of age. Thus, an underlying defect in FoxM1 transcriptional regulation
does not appear responsible for the phenotype of islets from BTBR lean mice.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Next, we looked at expression levels of a panel of other cell-cycle genes: ki67 (mki67), cyclin D2
(Ccnd2), cyclin-dependent kinase 2a (Cdkn2a), cyclin A1 (Ccna1), and cyclin D1 (Ccnd1). Again,
there were few significant changes in gene expression observed (Fig. 8C,D). At 4 weeks of age,
mki67 abundance was increased approximately two-fold in islets isolated from BTBR-lean mice
as compared to C57BL/6J-lean mice; this difference had disappeared by 10 weeks of age. In
islets isolated from 10-week-old BTBR-lean mice, Ccnd1 expression was enhanced ~20% as
compared to islets from C57BL/6J mice. Yet, the strongest and most consistent change between
BTBR and C57BL/6J islet expression of any of the cell cycle genes probed was cyclin D1 (Ccnd1),
whose expression was approximately 3-fold lower in islets isolated from lean BTBR mice as
compared to C57BL/6J mice, at both 4 and 10 weeks of age.
Cyclin D1 expression is absolutely required for the G1-to-S transition of the cell cycle, and its
expression can be stimulated by activation of the cAMP-response element binding protein
(CREB) transcription factor. To determine a potential impact of Gαz loss on BTBR-lean islet
proliferation as a contributor to their improved glucose tolerance, we isolated islets from 10week-old C57BL/6J-lean mice and wild-type or Gαz-null BTBR-lean mice, purified RNA, and
generated cDNA samples for qPCR. Although the mean cycle time is reduced in BTBR-lean mice
as compared to B6-lean, this difference is not statistically-significant (by calculating relative
mRNA expression using 2ΔΔCt, expression of cyclin D1 mRNA is reduced, on average, 12-fold in
wild-type BTBR-lean mice as compared to B6-lean). In comparing the mean mRNA expression
normalized to β-actin of Gαz-null BTBR-lean islets as compared to wild-type BTBR-lean, we did
not find a significant enhancement of Ccnd1 expression when islet Gαz is lost, and relative
Ccnd1 abundance was only increased approximately 2-fold as compared to BTBR-lean (Fig. 9).
Therefore, we conclude that loss of islet Gαz and enhancement of cAMP production does not
have a significant impact on cyclin D1 expression, at least in young, lean BTBR mice, further
supporting a secretion-centric model of the mechanisms behind Gαz loss on enhanced glucose
tolerance of BTBR-lean mice.
Mouse islet EP3 mRNA expression is correlated with insulin resistance and T2D status:
differential expression of the constitutively-active EP3g variant in the BTBR strain.
Neither islets from C57BL/6N, C57BL/6J, nor BTBR mice respond to the EP3 agonists PGE1 or
sulprostone to reduce insulin secretion[6, 7, 10, 17]. Yet, islets isolated from T2D C57BL/6J-Ob
and BTBR-Ob mice have a strong inhibitory GSIS response to EP3 agonists[6, 7, 17]. In the case
of BTBR-Ob mice, islet expression of the gene encoding EP3, Ptger3, is up-regulated over 400fold as compared to that of islets from BTBR-lean mice[6]. In theory, this argues against the EP3
receptor as playing a role in the secretion defect of BTBR-lean mice. Yet, a direct comparison of
islet Ptger3 expression between the B6 and BTBR strains, whether lean or obese, has never
been performed. qPCR for Ptger3 using a primer set that detects all three mouse EP3 splice
variants (α, β, and ɣ) using islet cDNA samples from C57BL/6N, C57BL/6J, non-diabetic
C57BL/6J-Ob, T2D C57BL/6J-Ob, BTBR lean, and BTBR-Ob mice demonstrates a 90-fold upregulation of islet Ptger3 in T2D C57BL/6J-Ob as compared islets from lean C57BL/6N mice, and
a 400-fold upregulation in islets from T2D BTBR-Ob mice as compared to C57BL/6N (Fig. 10A).

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Interestingly, Ptger3 expression was up-regulated approximately 6-fold in islets from BTBR-lean
mice as compared to islets isolated from lean C57BL/6N mice.
Of the mouse EP3 splice variants, EP3ɣ is constitutively-active, meaning it signals to Gαz in an
agonist-independent manner [21, 22]. Quantitative PCR using primers specific for mRNA of the
EP3ɣ splice variant revealed a 43.3-fold increase in EP3ɣ mRNA in islets from BTBR-lean mice as
compared to C57BL/6N, and a 1024-fold increase in BTBR-Ob islets (Fig. 10B).

Discussion
The central role of the beta-cell in the progression to T2D can be found in a number of
population studies. Women who develop gestational diabetes have up to a 70% risk of
developing T2D later in life, even if they are lean and normoglycemic before pregnancy [23]. As
pregnancy is an insulin-resistant state, just as often associated with obesity or aging, the insulin
secretory capacity must increase in order to maintain euglycemia[24]. The strong link between
gestational diabetes and T2D later in life supports an underlying beta-cell defect being
genetically encoded. More support for an underlying beta-cell defect as contributing to T2D
comes from studies on individuals from the Pima Indian tribe, who have a high lifetime risk of
developing T2D, twin studies, and studies of lean, normoglycemic individuals of two parents
with T2D. While skeletal muscle insulin resistance has been identified as the primary defect in
these populations, the progression to T2D is dependent on the beta-cell [25-29]. The BTBR
strain used in this study is an excellent model of the natural course of T2D in a geneticallysusceptible population. BTBR mice are more insulin resistant than C57BL/6 substrains, as
measured by adipocyte glucose uptake or hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp[1]. Lean BTBR
mice have fasting hyperinsulinemia and elevated plasma C-peptide levels as compared to B6
mice[1]. Yet, BTBR islets secrete less insulin in response to glucose ex vivo[6]. In essence, BTBR
beta-cells are working harder than those of B6 mice to maintain euglycemia, even when lean.
Yet, even in the background of an underlying genetic susceptibility, if beta-cells continue to be
able to maintain high function and mount a compensatory increase in mass, euglycemia will
persist. The beta-cell compensates for the chronic pathophysiological changes of obesity and/or
insulin resistance through adaptive metabolic, functional, proliferative, and survival
mechanisms. Many of the signaling pathways used converge on maintaining or increasing betacell cAMP levels, highlighting the critical role of cAMP in the beta-cell adaptive response.
PGE2, an eicosanoid derived from arachidonic acid incorporated into plasma membrane
phospholipids, is the most abundant natural ligand for the EP3 receptor. High glucose, free fatty
acids, and/or pro-inflammatory cytokines all have been shown to upregulate enzymes involved
in the PGE2 synthetic pathway—most notably, the rate-limiting enzyme, cyclooxygenase 2 or
Cox-2 (a.k.a. prostaglandin-endoperoxidase synthase 2: Ptgs2). Culturing islets isolated from
lean BTBR mice in conditions mimicking a glucolipotoxic environment—high glucose, palmitate,
and pro-inflammatory cytokines—significantly up-regulates Cox-2 expression and PGE2
production [17]. The sequentially increasing insulin resistance in 10-12 week-old C57BL/6N
mice, 35-40-week-old C57BL/6N mice fed a low-fat control diet for 25-29 weeks, and 35-40week old C57BL/6N mice fed a HFD for 25-29 weeks is directly correlated with their plasma PGE
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

metabolite levels [7], suggesting PGE2-mediated EP3 signaling may contribute to the beta-cell
pathology of pre-diabetes. Yet, islets isolated from non-diabetic mice or human organ donors
have no functional response to either EP3 agonists or antagonists[8, 12, 17]. It is not until islets
have been exposed to the frank T2D state that islet EP3 expression is significantly enhanced [6,
17]. Recent work from our laboratory using a panel of islets isolated from non-diabetic human
organ donors of varying BMI reveals that enhanced COX-2 mRNA expression is correlated with
significantly elevated islet insulin content, as well as with the expression of the pro-survival
factor IL-6[30]. These results suggest that islet PGE2 signaling may be an important contributor
to the beta-cell compensatory response.
Islets isolated from T2D mice and humans exhibit significantly elevated PGE2 production and
EP3 expression as compared to islets from lean and/or non-diabetic controls, and treatment
with an EP3 antagonist, L798,106, augments their GSIS response[6]. These findings suggest EP3
actively contributes to beta-cell dysfunction and loss of functional beta-cell mass in T2D. In the
beta-cell, EP3 is specifically coupled to the unique inhibitory G protein subfamily member, Gz [7,
8]. The catalytic alpha subunit of Gz, Gαz, is a canonical Gαi subfamily member, in that, when
active, it binds to adenylate cyclase (AC) and inhibits the conversion of ATP to cAMP. Yet, Gαz
has many characteristics that distinguish it from all of the other non-sensory-cell Gαi/o
subfamily members. Notably, the GTP hydrolysis (i.e., inactivation) rate of Gαz is incredibly slow
(t1/2 ≈ 10 min)[31]. It has been estimated that up to 30% of Gαz molecules are active at any one
time[31, 32]. In addition, of the 10 mammalian AC isoforms, Gαz has only been proven to have
inhibitory activity towards AC1 and AC5, with activity towards AC6 being demonstrated in
vitro[33]. Of note, AC1, AC5, and AC6 have all been shown as critical in GSIS and/or the adaptive
response to obesity and insulin resistance[34-38]. Increased EP3 receptor expression, coupled
with increased PGE2 production, would set up a cycle where Gαz is chronically active, negatively
influencing downstream GSIS and proliferation/survival pathways. The translational relevance
of this concept is highlighted by recent work from our laboratory showing that over-expression
of human Gαz in human donor islets reduces both insulin content and the insulin secretion
response to stimulatory glucose, phenocopying results from islets isolated from T2D human
organ donors[6, 30].
EP3-null BTBR-lean mice have normal 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, but are significantly
more glucose intolerant than wild-type mice, even at 6 weeks of age (Fig. 2). Two previous
studies have metabolically-phenotyped EP3-null mice. Ceddia and colleagues used a 16-week
high-fat-diet regimen, initiated at 4 weeks of age, revealing a diet-dependent decrement in
insulin sensitivity that was correlated with unregulated lipolysis, dyslipidemia, and systemic
inflammation[12]. At 20 weeks of age, high-fat-diet fed EP3-null mice were significantly less
glucose tolerant than their wild-type counterparts[12]. Sanchez-Alavez and colleagues
maintained wild-type and EP3-null mice on breeder chow (approximately 20 kcal% fat, as
compared to 10 kcal% fat in normal rodent chow) for 40 weeks, revealing EP3-null mice
gradually became heavier than wild-type controls, developing hyperinsulinemia,
hyperleptinemia, and worsening glucose tolerance between 3 and 6 months of age[39]. In both
of these studies, the effect of EP3 loss on glucose tolerance was gradual and required a
metabolic challenge. If one considers the underlying insulin resistance phenotype of the BTBR
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

strain, coupled with the exacerbation of insulin resistance resulting from systemic loss of EP3
(Figure 3), the rapid and significant effect of EP3 loss on lean BTBR mouse glucose tolerance is
not unexpected.
Two underlying beta-cell defects have been previously identified in the BTBR mouse: a
secretion defect and a proliferation defect. A SNP in the BTBR version of the Stxbp5l gene,
encoding tomosyn-2, was found to be responsible for a diabetes susceptibility QTL in an F2
intercross between the BTBR-Ob and C57BL/6J Ob lines[2]. Tomosyn-2 is a negative regulator of
SNARE complex formation and insulin granule exocytosis and is normally rapidly degraded after
the beta-cell is exposed to stimulatory glucose. The BTBR tomosyn-2 variant appears relatively
insensitive to this glucose-stimulated proteolytic degradation, significantly blunting secondphase GSIS[3]. Yet, tomosyn-2 protein degradation is also promoted by cAMP-stimulated
phosphorylation, among other metabolic signals. In this study, we found expression of the
constitutively-active EP3ɣ variant was also significantly up-regulated in islets BTBR-lean mice as
compared to B6-lean (Figure 10B). The mechanism behind this up-regulation remains
undetermined; yet, loss of Gαz in the BTBR beta-cell and relief of a tonic brake on cAMP
production could certainly compensate for an underlying secretion defect, either through the
classical mechanism(s) of PKA- and Rap1-mediated recruitment of insulin granules to the
plasma membrane; targeting of tomosyn-2 for degradation; or both. The other beta-cell defect
in BTBR mice is abnormal regulation of an islet gene module strongly associated with the cell
cycle when mice are genetically obese[5]. This module is related to FoxM1 and its target genes,
which have been linked with a proliferative response to pro-inflammatory cytokine stress[4].
With regards to an intrinsic, strain-specific proliferation defect in BTBR-lean islets, by
interrogating a pre-existing microarray dataset, we found few changes in gene expression of
FoxM1 or its target genes (Figure 8A,B), yet, we found cyclin D1 gene expression was
significantly lower in BTBR islets than B6 islets at both 4 and 6 weeks of age (Figure 8C,D). Cyclin
D1 expression is regulated by mitogenic and proliferative stimuli, and its expression is
absolutely required in order for the cell to make the G1-to-S transition. One of the major
transcriptional regulatory pathways for cyclin D1 is mediated by CREB. Upon consideration of
the underlying insulin resistance of lean BTBR mice as a strain characteristic and a clear deficit
in cyclin D1 expression at an age critical for “setting” baseline beta-cell mass, it is possible loss
of Gαz and elevated cAMP production allows a proliferative response to mount, not only to
classical beta-cell mitogens of the post-natal period, but also to insulin resistance itself. Our
results of Ccnd1 qPCR in islets from B6-lean, BTBR-lean, and Gαz-null BTBR-lean mice were not
strong enough to confirm the microarray results, but the lack of a significant effect of Gαz loss
on BTBR-lean islet Ccnd1 expression argues against increased proliferation as responsible for
improved glucose tolerance (Fig. 9). This result does not exclude the possibility loss of beta-cell
Gαz might up-regulate proliferation in conditions of severe glucolipotoxicity, where the ability
of the beta-cell to replicate and survive becomes critical in maintaining euglycemia; yet, in this
study, we were unable to test this hypothesis.
When islets are isolated from young, lean Gαz-null mice or EP3-null mice, their islets secrete
more insulin in response to stimulatory glucose, have a stronger incretin response, or both,
with no effects of Gαz on beta-cell proliferation, whether measured directly (e.g., percentage of
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

nuclear Ki67-positive beta-cells; 3H-thymidine incorporation) or by surrogate measurements
(e.g., DNA content; protein content; insulin content; beta-cell fractional area; cyclin D1 mRNA
expression) (Figures 6, 7 and [7, 9, 10]). A role for Gαz as a normal “check” on insulin secretion
is highlighted by studies in 9-week-old wild-type and Gαz-null BALB/c female mice. In the
absence of Gαz, BALB/c females have reduced blood glucose levels and accelerated glucose
clearance[9]. Their islets secrete more insulin in response to stimulatory glucose, both in vivo
and ex vivo, with no effect on islet protein content, DNA content, or insulin-positive area of
pancreas sections[9]. When C57BL/6N or C57BL/6J mice lack Gαz throughout the body or
specifically in the beta-cells, fasting blood glucose and glucose tolerance are unaffected ([7] and
Supplemental Figure 5A,B). Yet, Gαz-null C57BL/6N islets are more responsive to glucose and
exendin-4 ex vivo, with no impact on insulin content or beta-cell fractional area [7]. When
young, lean BTBR mice lack Gαz specifically in the beta-cells, they have no change in 4-6 h
fasting blood or plasma glucose (Figure 2A and Supplemental Figure 5D) or fasting plasma
insulin (Supplemental Figure 5E), but they are more responsive to glucose challenge (Figure 2C),
and their islets secrete more insulin in response to exendin-4 (Figure 7). A pure secretion effect
is supported by the lack of effect of beta-cell-specific Gαz loss on islet insulin content
(Supplemental Figure 5F) or cyclin D1 mRNA expression (Figure 9). Finally, although EP3-null
BTBR-lean mice are more insulin resistant than their wild-type controls (Figure 3), the major
effect of EP3 loss on the islet phenotype is best explained by effects on secretion (Figure 6A-D).
While EP3-null islets have lower insulin content (Figure 6E), this is consistent with their
hypersecretory phenotype, and not a change in islet size, as quantified by insulin IHC (Figure 5).
The effect of Gαz (or EP3) loss on beta-cell phenotype is different than that observed in the
lean, healthy state when mice are fed a HFD to induce obesity and insulin resistance. Gαz-null
C57BL/6N mice fed a high-fat-diet for 25-29 weeks, beginning at 11 weeks of age, secrete more
insulin from their islets in response to stimulatory glucose, both in vivo and ex vivo, than wildtype controls, and are fully protected from developing diet-induced glucose intolerance[7]. Yet,
this phenotype appears due solely to an increased replication response: islets from HFD-fed
Gαz-null C57BL/6N mice have the same deficits in GSIS as a percent of content as those from
their wild-type counterparts—their islets secrete more insulin simply because they are
bigger[7]. Both HFD-feeding and Gαz loss increase the percentage of Ki67-positive beta-cells as
compared to wild-type C57BL/6N mice fed a control diet, but the loss of Gαz and HFD feeding is
synergistic, suggesting the absence of Gαz removes a brake on the ability of the beta-cells to
mount a compensatory replication response to HFD-induced insulin resistance and
glucolipotoxicity[7]. Although studying the impact of HFD-feeding on the beta-cell phenotype of
EP3-null C57BL/6J mice is compounded by the increased insulin resistance, inflammation, and
glucolipotoxicity to which the beta-cells are exposed, islets from EP3-null C57BL/6J mice fed a
HFD for 16 weeks, beginning at 4 weeks of age, similarly show no change in GSIS as a percent of
content, yet have enhanced proliferation as compared to those from wild-type HFD-fed
controls[12]. Taken together, the published results on the impact of EP3/Gαz loss on beta-cell
function and beta-cell replication/mass in non-diabetic and T2D/glucolipotoxic mouse models
fully supports both the importance of EP3 and Gαz in regulating key beta-cell signaling events
that impact beta-cell biology and a divergence in these downstream signaling events depending
on the physiologic conditions to which the beta-cell is exposed.
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

One explanation for the differing downstream effects of Gαz loss in the young, lean state vs. the
T2D/glucolipotoxic state is that tonically-active Gαz and EP3 receptor-activated Gαz are two
completely different molecules differing in three-dimensional structure based on the
conformational change transmitted to Gαz by activated EP3. Gαz is unique in that, in its GTPbound state, it can bind to Rap1GAP, a negative regulator of the small G protein, Rap1—a wellknown contributor to the cAMP-mediated amplification pathway of GSIS and stimulator of cell
proliferation pathways[40, 41]. Binding of Gαz to Rap1GAP and AC are mutually-exclusive[41].
In the classic model of G protein signaling, the Gα subunit, when GDP-bound and inactive, is
complexed with Gβɣ and associated with a GPCR. When an agonist binds to the receptor, a
conformational change occurs, allowing Gα to exchange GDP for GTP, releasing it from Gβɣ and
the receptor, allowing both Gα and Gβɣ to signal to downstream effectors. The finding that
mouse and human islet EP3 expression and/or function are primarily only up-regulated in the
context of frank T2D/glucolipotoxicity provides circumstantial evidence for a model in which
tonically-active Gαz and EP3 receptor-activated Gαz are two distinct molecules that
preferentially bind either to AC isozymes or Rap1GAP, but not both. Yet, while Gβɣ is critical for
regulating receptor-dependent Gα signaling, the Gα interaction with other proteins, including
activator of G protein signaling (AGS) proteins, regulator of G protein signaling (RGS) proteins,
myotubulin, and others, promotes receptor-independent Gα signaling. Furthermore, the
function, activity, and/or abundance of Gαz, Rap1GAP and other proteins involved in the
EP3/Gαz signaling pathway are all altered by post-translational modifications (primarily
phosphorylation) stimulated by cAMP- and/or inflammation-mediated signaling pathways[32,
42, 43]. Gαz phosphorylation status is activation-state-dependent and impacts its binding
affinity for effector molecules[43]. With the importance of cAMP and inflammation in
mediating beta-cell compensation, and, ultimately, beta-cell dysfunction and loss of functional
beta-cell mass, it is likely that Gαz has preferential downstream signaling effects in different
physiological milieus, not because of some intrinsic change in Gαz protein conformation when
tonically-active vs. EP3 receptor-activated, but due to post-translational modifications
promoted in these physiological milieus that impact Gαz’s affinity for Gβɣ and other
effectors/regulators. This overarching model is consistent not only with the results described in
this manuscript, but with our entire previous body of work regarding the phenotype of Gαz-null
mice in various strain backgrounds; the physiological conditions (i.e., inflammatory,
glucolipotoxic, or toxin-induced) behind development of hyperglycemia in wild-type mice; and
the biological mechanisms (i.e., function, proliferation, and survival) underlying why Gαz-null
mice are protected from developing diabetes[7, 10, 11]. Proving this model is the subject of
much current work.
Because we were not able to test the T2D resistance of a beta-cell-specific EP3-null mouse in
the BTBR-Ob background, coupled with the importance of systemic EP3 in regulating lipolysis,
the question remains open as to whether or how EP3 might be targeted therapeutically once an
individual develops frank T2D, particularly as any constitutively-active EP3 isoform would be
insensitive to traditional competitive antagonists. We also suspect, but cannot confirm, betacell Gαz loss and amplification of cAMP production corrects and/or compensates for underlying
molecular defects that prohibit the BTBR beta-cell from mounting an appropriate insulin
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

secretion response, and that, were the islets to be stressed by severe insulin resistance,
possibly underlying replication defects as well. Yet, even in the absence of this confirmation,
our current results provide strong support for more research into how beta-cell Gαz, either
tonically-active or EP3-activated, might be targeted in individuals in the pre-diabetic state,
whether this state is caused by an underlying genetic susceptibility or by the development of
obesity and its often-associated systemic inflammation and insulin resistance.
5. Acknowledgements
We wish to thank the many present and former members of the Kimple Laboratory who
contributed technical assistance or scientific discussion during the course of these experiments.
This work was supported in part by Merit Review Award I01 BX003700-01A1 from the United
States (U.S.) Department of Veterans Affairs Biomedical Laboratory Research and Development
Service (BLR&D) (to M.E.K). The contents do not represent the views of the U.S. Department of
Veterans Affairs or the United States Government. Further support was provided by ADA Grant
1-16-IBS-212 (to M.E.K.) and NIH Grant R01 DK102598 (to M.E.K). The funding bodies had no
role in any aspect of the work described in this manuscript.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.

11.
12.
13.
14.

Clee, S.M., S.T. Nadler, and A.D. Attie, Genetic and genomic studies of the BTBR ob/ob
mouse model of type 2 diabetes. Am J Ther, 2005. 12(6): p. 491-8.
Bhatnagar, S., A.T. Oler, M.E. Rabaglia, D.S. Stapleton, K.L. Schueler, N.A. Truchan, et al.,
Positional cloning of a type 2 diabetes quantitative trait locus; tomosyn-2, a negative
regulator of insulin secretion. PLoS Genet, 2011. 7(10): p. e1002323.
Bhatnagar, S., M.S. Soni, L.S. Wrighton, A.S. Hebert, A.S. Zhou, P.K. Paul, et al.,
Phosphorylation and degradation of tomosyn-2 de-represses insulin secretion. J Biol
Chem, 2014. 289(36): p. 25276-86.
Davis, D.B., J.A. Lavine, J.I. Suhonen, K.A. Krautkramer, M.E. Rabaglia, J.M. Sperger, et
al., FoxM1 is up-regulated by obesity and stimulates beta-cell proliferation. Mol
Endocrinol, 2010. 24(9): p. 1822-34.
Keller, M.P., Y. Choi, P. Wang, D.B. Davis, M.E. Rabaglia, A.T. Oler, et al., A gene
expression network model of type 2 diabetes links cell cycle regulation in islets with
diabetes susceptibility. Genome Res, 2008. 18(5): p. 706-16.
Kimple, M.E., M.P. Keller, M.R. Rabaglia, R.L. Pasker, J.C. Neuman, N.A. Truchan, et al.,
Prostaglandin E2 receptor, EP3, is induced in diabetic islets and negatively regulates
glucose- and hormone-stimulated insulin secretion. Diabetes, 2013. 62(6): p. 1904-12.
Kimple, M.E., J.B. Moss, H.K. Brar, T.C. Rosa, N.A. Truchan, R.L. Pasker, et al., Deletion of
GalphaZ protein protects against diet-induced glucose intolerance via expansion of betacell mass. J Biol Chem, 2012. 287(24): p. 20344-55.
Kimple, M.E., A.B. Nixon, P. Kelly, C.L. Bailey, K.H. Young, T.A. Fields, et al., A role for G(z)
in pancreatic islet beta-cell biology. J Biol Chem, 2005. 280(36): p. 31708-13.
Kimple, M.E., J.W. Joseph, C.L. Bailey, P.T. Fueger, I.A. Hendry, C.B. Newgard, et al.,
Galphaz negatively regulates insulin secretion and glucose clearance. J Biol Chem, 2008.
283(8): p. 4560-7.
Brill, A.L., J.A. Wisinski, M.T. Cadena, M.F. Thompson, R.J. Fenske, H.K. Brar, et al.,
Synergy Between Galphaz Deficiency and GLP-1 Analog Treatment in Preserving
Functional beta-Cell Mass in Experimental Diabetes. Mol Endocrinol, 2016. 30(5): p. 54356.
Fenske, R.J., M.T. Cadena, Q.E. Harenda, H.N. Wienkes, K. Carbajal, M.D. Schaid, et al.,
The Inhibitory G Protein alpha-Subunit, Galphaz, Promotes Type 1 Diabetes-Like
Pathophysiology in NOD Mice. Endocrinology, 2017. 158(6): p. 1645-1658.
Ceddia, R.P., D. Lee, M.F. Maulis, B.A. Carboneau, D.W. Threadgill, G. Poffenberger, et
al., The PGE2 EP3 Receptor Regulates Diet-Induced Adiposity in Male Mice.
Endocrinology, 2016. 157(1): p. 220-32.
Herrera, P.L., Adult insulin- and glucagon-producing cells differentiate from two
independent cell lineages. Development, 2000. 127(11): p. 2317-22.
Oropeza, D., N. Jouvet, L. Budry, J.E. Campbell, K. Bouyakdan, J. Lacombe, et al.,
Phenotypic Characterization of MIP-CreERT1Lphi Mice With Transgene-Driven Islet
Expression of Human Growth Hormone. Diabetes, 2015. 64(11): p. 3798-807.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.

Baan, M., K.J. Krentz, D.A. Fontaine, and D.B. Davis, Successful in vitro fertilization and
generation of transgenics in Black and Tan Brachyury (BTBR) mice. Transgenic Res, 2016.
25(6): p. 847-854.
Fenske, R.J. and M.E. Kimple, Targeting dysfunctional beta-cell signaling for the
potential treatment of type 1 diabetes mellitus. Exp Biol Med (Maywood), 2018. 243(6):
p. 586-591.
Neuman, J.C., M.D. Schaid, A.L. Brill, R.J. Fenske, C.R. Kibbe, D.A. Fontaine, et al.,
Enriching Islet Phospholipids With Eicosapentaenoic Acid Reduces Prostaglandin E2
Signaling and Enhances Diabetic beta-Cell Function. Diabetes, 2017. 66(6): p. 1572-1585.
Neuman, J.C., N.A. Truchan, J.W. Joseph, and M.E. Kimple, A method for mouse
pancreatic islet isolation and intracellular cAMP determination. J Vis Exp, 2014(88): p.
e50374.
Truchan, N.A., H.K. Brar, S.J. Gallagher, J.C. Neuman, and M.E. Kimple, A single-islet
microplate assay to measure mouse and human islet insulin secretion. Islets, 2015. 7(3):
p. e1076607.
de Souza, A.H., L.R.B. Santos, L.P. Roma, M. Bensellam, A.R. Carpinelli, and J.-C. Jonas,
NADPH oxidase-2 does not contribute to β-cell glucotoxicity in cultured pancreatic islets
from C57BL/6J mice. Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology, 2017. 439: p. 354-362.
Neuman, J.C. and M.E. Kimple, The EP3 Receptor: Exploring a New Target for Type 2
Diabetes Therapeutics. J Endocrinol Diabetes Obes, 2013. 1(1).
Ichikawa, A., Y. Sugimoto, and S. Tanaka, Molecular biology of histidine decarboxylase
and prostaglandin receptors. Proc Jpn Acad Ser B Phys Biol Sci, 2010. 86(8): p. 848-66.
Kampmann, U., L.R. Madsen, G.O. Skajaa, D.S. Iversen, N. Moeller, and P. Ovesen,
Gestational diabetes: A clinical update. World J Diabetes, 2015. 6(8): p. 1065-72.
Butler, A.E., L. Cao-Minh, R. Galasso, R.A. Rizza, A. Corradin, C. Cobelli, et al., Adaptive
changes in pancreatic beta cell fractional area and beta cell turnover in human
pregnancy. Diabetologia, 2010. 53(10): p. 2167-76.
Lillioja, S. and C. Bogardus, Obesity and insulin resistance: lessons learned from the Pima
Indians. Diabetes Metab Rev, 1988. 4(5): p. 517-40.
Ling, C., P. Poulsen, E. Carlsson, M. Ridderstrale, P. Almgren, J. Wojtaszewski, et al.,
Multiple environmental and genetic factors influence skeletal muscle PGC-1alpha and
PGC-1beta gene expression in twins. J Clin Invest, 2004. 114(10): p. 1518-26.
Maeda, R., I. Raz, F. Zurlo, and J. Sommercorn, Activation of skeletal muscle casein
kinase II by insulin is not diminished in subjects with insulin resistance. J Clin Invest,
1991. 87(3): p. 1017-22.
Poulsen, P., J.F. Wojtaszewski, I. Petersen, K. Christensen, E.A. Richter, H. Beck-Nielsen,
et al., Impact of genetic versus environmental factors on the control of muscle glycogen
synthase activation in twins. Diabetes, 2005. 54(5): p. 1289-96.
DeFronzo, R.A. and D. Tripathy, Skeletal muscle insulin resistance is the primary defect in
type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care, 2009. 32 Suppl 2: p. S157-63.
Truchan, N.A., H. Sandhu, R.J. Fenske, R. Buchanan, J. Moeller, A. Reuter, et al.,
Differential Effects of Prostaglandin E2 Production and Signaling through the
Prostaglandin EP3 Receptor on Human Beta-cell Compensation. bioRxiv, 2019.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

31.
32.
33.
34.

35.
36.
37.

38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

Casey, P.J., H.K. Fong, M.I. Simon, and A.G. Gilman, Gz, a guanine nucleotide-binding
protein with unique biochemical properties. J Biol Chem, 1990. 265(4): p. 2383-90.
Kimple, M.E., R.C. Hultman, and P.J. Casey, Signaling through Gz, in Handbook of Cell
Signaling, 2nd Edition, R.A. Bradshaw and E. Dennis, Editors. 2009. p. 1649-1653.
Kimple, M.E. and D. Manning, G protein alpha z. UCSD Nature Molecule Pages, 1999.
Guenifi, A., G.M. Portela-Gomes, L. Grimelius, S. Efendic, and S.M. Abdel-Halim, Adenylyl
cyclase isoform expression in non-diabetic and diabetic Goto-Kakizaki (GK) rat pancreas.
Evidence for distinct overexpression of type-8 adenylyl cyclase in diabetic GK rat islets.
Histochem Cell Biol, 2000. 113(2): p. 81-9.
Halls, M.L. and D.M. Cooper, Regulation by Ca2+-signaling pathways of adenylyl
cyclases. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 2011. 3(1): p. a004143.
Hodson, D.J., R.K. Mitchell, L. Marselli, T.J. Pullen, S. Gimeno Brias, F. Semplici, et al.,
ADCY5 couples glucose to insulin secretion in human islets. Diabetes, 2014. 63(9): p.
3009-21.
Parton, L.E., P.J. McMillen, Y. Shen, E. Docherty, E. Sharpe, F. Diraison, et al., Limited role
for SREBP-1c in defective glucose-induced insulin secretion from Zucker diabetic fatty rat
islets: a functional and gene profiling analysis. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab, 2006.
291(5): p. E982-94.
Portela-Gomes, G.M. and S.M. Abdel-Halim, Overexpression of Gs proteins and adenylyl
cyclase in normal and diabetic islets. Pancreas, 2002. 25(2): p. 176-81.
Sanchez-Alavez, M., I. Klein, S.E. Brownell, I.V. Tabarean, C.N. Davis, B. Conti, et al.,
Night eating and obesity in the EP3R-deficient mouse. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 2007.
104(8): p. 3009-14.
Meng, J. and P.J. Casey, Activation of Gz attenuates Rap1-mediated differentiation of
PC12 cells. J Biol Chem, 2002. 277(45): p. 43417-24.
Meng, J., J.L. Glick, P. Polakis, and P.J. Casey, Functional interaction between Galpha(z)
and Rap1GAP suggests a novel form of cellular cross-talk. J Biol Chem, 1999. 274(51): p.
36663-9.
Hallak, H., L.F. Brass, and D.R. Manning, Failure to myristoylate the alpha subunit of Gz is
correlated with an inhibition of palmitoylation and membrane attachment, but has no
affect on phosphorylation by protein kinase C. J Biol Chem, 1994. 269(6): p. 4571-6.
Fields, T.A. and P.J. Casey, Phosphorylation of Gz alpha by protein kinase C blocks
interaction with the beta gamma complex. J Biol Chem, 1995. 270(39): p. 23119-25.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1: Primer Sequences and expected PCR product sizes for genotyping RIP-Cre-EP3-null
and RIP-Cre-Gαz-null lean and LeptinOb mice
Reaction
EP3-floxed

Gαz-floxed

Cre Transgene
LepOb mut.

Primer Sequences
F: TCAACCTGCTAATCCCGCTG
R: CAGTACCCGGCTTCTTAGGG
ΔF: ACGTAACCCAAAGGCTGATGAG
F: AAGGAACATCAGGGCCAGAG
R: CAGCACTACGGTTCAGCAAC
ΔR: GGTCTTATGAACTGATGGCGAG
F: TGGTTTCCCGCAGAACCTGAAG
R: GAGCCTGTTTTGCACGTTCACC
F: GGGCTTCACCCCATTCTGAG
R: GGGAGCAGCTCTTGGAGAAG

22

Band Size
424
304
194
581
461
281
220
none
104,44,14
144,14

allele
deleted
floxed
wild-type
floxed
wild-type
deleted
carrier
non-carrier
mutant
wild-type

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2: Quantitative PCR primer sequences
Protein
Prostaglandin EP3 receptor
(EP3)
EP3ɣ splice variant

Gene
Symbol
Ptger3

Cyclin D1

Ccnd1

β-actin

Actb

Primer Sequences
F: GCTATCCCGCAGCTGAG
R: CGCAGTCGTCGGTAGTAC
F: AGTTCTGCCAGGTAGCAAACG
R: GCCTGCCCTTTCTGTCCAT
F: CTGACACCAATCTCCTCAACGAC
R: GCGGCCAGGTTCCACTTGAGC
F: TCTTGGGTATGGAATCCTGTGGCA
R: TCTCCTTCTGCATCCTGTCAGCAA

23

Species
Selectivity
mouse
mouse
mouse
mouse

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

F

50
40
30
20

WT

EP3KO

WT

G

800
600
400
200
0

WT

300
200
100
0

EP3KO

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

200
0

EP3KO

60

400

400

WT

H

800
600
400
200
0

EP3KO

WT

EP3KO

600

WT Ob

EP3-null Ob

500
400
300
200

EP3KO

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

WT

600

D 700

500

4-6 h fasting
blood glucose (mg/dl)

30

C

800

4-6 h fasting
blood glucose (mg/dl)

Body weight (g)

Random-fed
blood glucose (mg/dl)

40

20

E

B

50

Random-fed
blood glucose (mg/dl)

Body weight (g)

A

700
600

0 15 30 45 60
Time (min)

120

WT Ob

EP3-null Ob

500
400
300

0 15 30 45 60
Time (min)

120

Figure 1: Full-body EP3 loss may accelerate the early T2D phenotype of BTBR-Ob mice. Male
and female BTBR LeptinOb (Ob) mice were subjected to OGTT at 6 weeks of age and ITT at 8
weeks of age and relevant parameters recorded. A-D: 6-week body weights, random-fed blood
glucose levels, 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, and glucose excursion after oral glucose
challenge, respectively. In ‘C’ and ‘D,’ only mice without evidence of end-stage T2D and with 4-6
h FBG readings less than 450 mg/dl are reported. E-F: 8-week body weights, random-fed blood
glucose levels, 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, and glucose excursion after IP insulin
challenge, respectively. Grey circles in ‘A’ indicate mice that had begun losing weight,
presumably as a factor of end-stage T2D. Grey circles at 750 mg/dl in ‘B’ and ‘F’ indicate blood
glucose readings above the range of the glucometer. Body weights and fasting blood glucose
were compared by t-test. Blood glucose levels over time were compared by 2-way paired
ANOVA, with Sidak test post-hoc to correct for multiple comparisons. No significant differences
between means were found with any comparison.

24

EP

W
T
le
3an
nu
ll
le
G
an
zF
/F
C
re
+

0

200
100
0

500

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

10

300

C

WT lean

**

400

EP3-null lean

**

GzF/F Cre+

300
200

**
*

100

T
le
3an
nu
ll
le
G
an
zF
/F
C
re
+

20

400

W

30

B

*

0 15 30 45 60
Time (min)

120

EP

40

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

A
Body weight (g)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Full-body EP3 loss promotes glucose intolerance in 6-week-old BTBR-lean mice,
while beta-cell-specific Gαz loss accelerates glucose clearance. Male and female BTBR-lean
mice were subjected to OGTT at 6 weeks of age and relevant parameters recorded. A-C: 6-week
body weights, 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, and glucose excursion after oral glucose
challenge, respectively. The WT lean and EP3-null lean groups contained both Cre-negative and
Cre-positive animals, as Cre expression had no impact on metabolic parameters of interest (see
Supplemental Figure 4). Body weights and fasting blood glucose were compared by t-test.
Blood glucose levels over time were compared by 2-way paired ANOVA, with Sidak test posthoc to correct for multiple comparisons. *, p < 0.05 and **, p < 0.01 vs. the wild-type lean
control group. If no p value is indicated, the difference in means was not statistically significant.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ul
ll
ea
n

3n
EP

W

T

le
an

20

Blood Glucose
(% Change from Baseline)

30

200
180
160
140
120

20
0
-20

WT lean
EP3-null lean

**

-40
-60
0 15 30 45 60

T
le
an
EP
3nu
ll
le
an

40

C

220

120

Minutes

W

B

50

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

Body weight (g)

A

Figure 3: Full-body EP3 loss promotes insulin resistance in 8-week-old BTBR-lean mice. Male
and female wild-type and EP3-null BTBR lean mice were subjected to ITT at 8 weeks of age and
relevant parameters recorded. A-C: 8-week body weights, 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels,
and percent change in blood glucose levels from baseline after IP insulin challenge. Body
weights and fasting blood glucose were compared by t-test. Percent decrement in blood
glucose over time was compared by 2-way paired ANOVA, with Sidak test post-hoc to correct
for multiple comparisons. **, p < 0.01 vs. the indicated control group. If no p value is indicated,
the difference in means was not statistically significant.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

C

E

F

WT Ob

D

EP3-null Ob

Figure 4: Loss of normal pancreatic islet architecture in 9-10-week old wild-type and EP3-null
BTBR-Ob mice. Paraffin-embedded, fixed pancreas sections from 9-10-week old wild-type and
EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice were stained with hematoxylin and eosin for morphometric
visualization of islet architecture. Three representative images per genotype are shown (wildtype BTBR-Ob, panels A-C; EP3-null BTBR-Ob, panels D-F). In each image, an islet or islet
remnant is circled in red. While islet morphology was not quantified, qualitative analysis
suggested more islets with poor morphology in EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice (white arrowheads).
Scale bars = 1000 µm.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

WT Lean

WT Ob

E

D

Insulin Positive Area
(% Pancreas Are)

C

0.6

**

0.4

0.2

Lean

O

W
T

3K

EP

KO Ob

EP

KO Lean

W
T
3K
O

0.0

Ob

Figure 5: Insulin-positive pancreas area is not significantly affected by the EP3-null mutation
in BTBR-lean or BTBR-Ob mice. Paraffin-embedded, fixed pancreas sections from 9-10-week
old wild-type and EP3-null BTBR-Ob mice were subject to insulin immunohistochemical staining,
followed by hematoxylin counter-staining in order to quantify insulin-positive pancreas area as
a function of total pancreas area. Representative images from wild-type (WT) BTBR-lean, WT
BTBR-Ob, EP3-null (KO) BTBR-lean, and KO BTBR-Ob are shown in panels A-D, respectively. E:
Quantification of results from two pancreas sections separated by 200 µm least 3 mice of each
genotype. Data in E were compared by two-way ANOVA with Tukey’s test post-hoc. **, p< 0.01.
Scale bars = 1000 µm.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A
#

##
#

2
0

** *
WT

EP3KO

WT

BTBR-lean

D

6

4
### ###

2

****
0

50

**

0

EP3KO

WT

*
EP3KO

WT

BTBR-lean

E

3

#

**
2

**

1

O
W
EP T
3K
O

W
T

Lean

EP3KO

BTBR-Ob

8000
6000
4000

**
####

2000
0

3K

O
W
EP T
3K
O

W
T

3K

EP

Obese

**

100

0

Lean

#

BTBR-Ob

Incretin Response
(vs. high glucose)

Stimulation Index
(vs. low glucose)

C

#

#

4

150

Islet Insulin Content
(µg/islet)

6

Insulin Secretion
(µg/islet/45 min)

8

low glc.
high gluc.
high + Ex4

200

*
**,#

####

***

WT EP3KO WT EP3KO
BTBR-lean

EP

GSIS
(% total insulin content)

10

B

low glc.
high gluc.
high + Ex4

BTBR-Ob

Obese

Figure 6: Pancreatic islets from EP3-null mice have dysfunctional insulin secretion in response
to non-stimulatory and stimulatory concentrations of glucose. Islets were isolated from at
least 3 mice of each genotype and subjected to single-islet GSIS assays in 1.7 mM glucose (low),
16.7 mM glucose (high), and 16.7 mM glucose plus 10 nM exendin-4 (high + Ex4). Data are
represented as the percent insulin secreted as normalized to islet insulin content (A), µg of
insulin secreted per islet over 45 min (B) GSIS in high glucose over low glucose (stimulation
index) (C), GSIS in high glucose + Ex4 over high glucose (incretin response) (D) and average islet
insulin content (E). For ‘A’ and ‘B’, within-group data analysis (groups: BTBR-lean and BTBR-Ob)
was first performed by ordinary one-way ANOVA with Sidak test post-hoc to correct for
multiple comparisons. *, p < 0.05 and **, p < 0.01 vs. the insulin secreted in 1.7 mM glucose
within each group. #, p < 0.05 and ##, p < 0.01 vs. the appropriate stimulation condition in WTlean islets. In ‘C,’ ‘D,’ and ‘E,’ both intra-group and inter-group analyses were performed by
unpaired t-test. **, p < 0.01, ***, p < 0.001, and ****, p < 0.0001 to WT control within groups.
#
, p < 0.05, ###, p < 0.001, and ###, p < 0.0001 vs. the value for WT BTBR-lean between groups. N
≥ 5 independent measurements in ‘A’ through ‘D.’ N ≥ 32 independent measurements in ‘E.’ If a
p-value is not indicated, the difference in means was not statistically significant.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

**

80

##

ns

***

40
20

8
6
4
2

C

1.0
0.5

C
re
G +
α
zF
C /F
re
+

T

+ Ex4
high glucose

***

1.5

W

-

2.0

0.0

0
low
glucose

C
r
G e+
α
zF
C /F
re
+

0

**

T

60

***

10

W

(ug/islet/45 min)

100

GαzF/F Cre+

Incretin Response
(vs. high glucose)

B

WT Cre+

Stimulation Index
(vs. low glucose)

A

Figure 7. Pancreatic islets from a BTBR lean mouse lacking beta-cell Gαz have significantly
increased responsiveness to exendin-4. Islets were isolated from one RIP-Cre- Gαz-floxed
BTBR-lean mouse and one wild-type Cre-positive control and subject to single-islet GSIS assays
in 1.7 mM glucose (low), 16.7 mM glucose (high), and 16.7 mM glucose plus 10 nM exendin-4
(high + Ex4). Data are represented as the µg of insulin secreted per islet over 45 min (A), ratio of
insulin secreted in high glucose over low glucose (stimulation index) (B), and ratio of insulin
secreted in high glucose + Ex4 over high glucose (incretin response) (C) In ‘A,’ within-group and
inter-group data analyses were performed by ordinary one-way ANOVA with Sidak test posthoc to correct for multiple comparisons. *, p < 0.05, **, p < 0.01, and ***, p < 0.001 vs. the
indicated control. ##, p < 0.01 vs. insulin secreted in wild-type Cre-positive islets in high glucose
+ exendin 4. In ‘B’ and ‘C,’ analyses were performed by unpaired t-test. **, p < 0.01 and ***, p <
0.001 vs. wild-type control islets. Data are representative of measurements from at least 12
islets per group per treatment condition. If a p-value is not indicated, the difference in means
was not statistically significant.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B6-lean 4 wks
BTBR-lean 4 wks

*

1

*

1

BTBR-lean 10 wks

***

6
4

67
ki
m

1
nd
cc

na
cc

kn
cd

nd
cc

ki
m

1

0.00
2a

0.00

2

0.08

67

0.08

cc
nd
1

****

2

a1

****

2

8

cn

**

B6-lean 10 wks

C

6

D

2a

BTBR-lean 4 wks

4

2

kn

8

4

cd

B6-lean 4 wks

Intensity (RU)

Intensity (RU)

C

BTBR-lean 10 wks

0

Fo
xm
C 1
cn
a
C 2
cn
b
cd 1
kn
1
ck a
dn
1b
N
ek
2
Pl
k1
A
ur
k
C b
en
pA

0

B6-lean 10 wks

6

2

2

***

8

nd

4

Intensity (RU)

6

B

cc

8

Fo
xm
C 1
cn
a
C 2
cn
b
cd 1
kn
1
ck a
dn
1b
N
ek
2
Pl
k1
A
ur
k
C b
en
pA

Intensity (RU)

A

Figure 8. Few changes in expression of cell cycle regulatory genes are observed in BTBR-lean
vs. B6-lean islets at 4 or 10 weeks of age. We interrogated a publicly-available microarray
database of islet gene expression in C57BL/6J and BTBR mice at 4 and 10 weeks of age
(diabetes.wisc.edu, [5]), to search for expression changes in key cell cycle genes by strain
background. The intensity data from each biological replicate (N=5/group) was downloaded and
plotted in GraphPad Prism in order to perform statistical analyses. A and B: FoxM1 and select
target genes. D and E: Other select cell cycle genes not regulated by FoxM1. Statistical analyses
were performed by t-test. *, p < 0.05, **, p < 0.01, ***, p < 0.001, and ****, p < 0.0001 vs. B6lean. If a p-value is not indicated, the difference in means was not statistically significant.

31

ΔCT (normalized to Actb)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

-5

Ccnd1

-7
-9
-11
-13
-15

2.18

0.23

B/6J-lean WT

Fold-Δ
0.53
Gαz-null

BTBR-lean

Figure 9. BTBR-lean islet Cyclin D1 mRNA expression is unaffected by Gαz loss. qPCR was
performed in cDNA samples from islets of 10-week-old B6-lean and BTBR-lean (both wild-type
and Gαz-null) using primers specific for β-actin mRNA (Actb) and cyclin D1 mRNA (Ccnd1). Data
are represented as ΔCT as normalized to Actb, and the fold-change in mRNA abundance as
compared to B6-lean (as calculated via the 2ΔΔCt method indicated above the X-axis labels (FoldΔ). ΔCT values were compared by both one-way ANOVA (all three groups) and t-test (WT vs.
Gαz-null BTBR-lean). No significant differences among any of the means were observed.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ptger3
(common α,β,ɣ)

****

****

-5

*

****

0

Ptger3 (ɣ)

-5

***

-10

b
-O

R

R
TB

l/6
B
57

1024

B

-20

43.3

TB

415

Fold-Δ
1.47

C

B

6.30

TB
R
B
TB
R
-O
b

81.9

B

1.75

57

L/

C

B
57

1.87

L/
6J
no
ndi
ab
.
di
ab
et
ic

2.14

-15

B

Fold-Δ

-15

N

-10

C

B
Delta Ct
(normalized to Actb)

0

6N

Delta Ct
(normalized to Actb)

A

C57BL/6J-Ob

Figure 10. Total EP3 mRNA and EP3ɣ splice variant mRNA abundance are differentially
expressed in isolated islets by strain background and T2D status. A) qPCR was performed in
cDNA samples of islets isolated from 10-week-old C57Bl/6N, C57Bl/6J, C57BL/6J-Ob (both
euglycemic and T2D: 4-6 h FBG > 450 mg/dl), BTBR, and BTBR-Ob (all T2D) using a primer set
that recognizes all three mouse EP3 splice variants (Ptger3 α, β, ɣ), and CT values normalized to
those of β-actin (Actb). While T2D status significantly up-regulates Ptger3 expression regardless
of C57BL/6J or BTBR strain background, of the lean mouse strains, only islets from BTBR mice
have significantly enhanced Ptger3 expression as compared to C57BL/6N controls. B) Primers
specific for the constitutively-active EP3ɣ splice variant were used in a subset of strains from
‘A,’ revealing significantly increased EP3ɣ mRNA expression in islets from BTBR-lean mice as
compared to C57BL/6N, with an even greater increase in islets isolated from T2D BTBR-Ob
mice. In both ‘A’ and ‘B,’ ΔCT values were compared by one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni’s test
post-hoc using C57BL/6N islets as the control group. The fold-change in mRNA abundance as
compared to C57Bl/6N was determined via the 2ΔΔCt method and is indicated above the X-axis
labels (Fold-Δ). *, p < 0.05, ***, p < 0.001, and ****, p < 0.0001 vs. C57BL/6N. If a p-value is not
indicated, the difference in means was not statistically significant.

33

C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
+/ e +
Δ
C
r
+/ e +
+
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
+/ e +
Δ
C
re
+

+/
Δ

+/
+

A

ne
+/ g
+
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
+/ e +
+
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
+/ e +
+
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
ne
Δ/ g
Δ
C
r
+/ e +
+
C
r
Δ/ e+
Δ
C
re
+

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Δ
WT
Floxed

0

C

Ptger3: Kidney

-5
-10
-15

ND

WT

EP3null

BTBR-lean

ND

WT

EP3null

BTBR-Ob

ΔCT (normalized to Actb)

B

ΔCT (normalized to Actb)

Cre
(+/-)

0

Ptger3: Adipose

-5
-10
-15

ND

WT

EP3null

BTBR-lean

ND

WT

EP3null

BTBR-Ob

Supplemental Figure 1. Confirmation of germline transmission of the EP3-floxed deleted
allele and generation of a full-body EP3-null BTBR mouse. A: Genotyping results from ear
punches showing only the wild-type or deleted allele, and not the floxed allele, in all genotyping
reactions, regardless of Cre expression. B and C: qPCR results using primers specific for all three
mouse EP3 splice variants in kidney and adipose tissue: two tissues with high endogenous EP3
expression. In neither case was Ptger3 detected in EP3-null mouse tissue samples.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

+/
+

ne
+/ g
F
C
r
+/ e +
F
C
r
+/ e +
F
C
r
+/ e +
+
ne
F/ g
F
C
r
F/ e+
F
C
r
+/ e +
F
ne
F/ g
F
ne
+/ g
+
ne
Δ/ g
F
C
r
+/ e +
F
C
re
+

A
Floxed
WT
Δ

C
r
+/ e +
F
ne
g

+/
F

+/
F

Δ/
+

ne

g

B

C
+/ re+
+
C
r
+/ e +
+
ne
g

Cre
(+/-)

Floxed
WT
Δ
Cre
(+/-)

Supplemental Figure 2. Confirmation of non-germline transmission of the Gαz-floxed deleted
allele in the BTBR and C57BL/6J line. Genotyping results from ear punches from (A) BTBR mice
and (B) C57BL/6J mice showing the occasional appearance of the Gαz-floxed deleted allele,
which is easily distinguished from the wild-type and floxed alleles. Progeny showing a deleted
allele were humanely euthanized.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

****
20

M

F

D

60

Body weight (g)

BTBR-lean

50

M

40

20

**
M

F

BTBR-lean

200

BTBR-Ob

M

F Sex

BTBR-Ob

M

F

BTBR-lean

E

30

400

0

F Sex

4-6 h fasting
blood glucose (mg/dl)

30

C

600

M

400

200

F

BTBR-lean

200
100

M

F Sex

BTBR-Ob

M

F

BTBR-lean

F

M

300

BTBR-Ob

600

0

400

0

F Sex

4-6 h fasting
blood glucose (mg/dl)

*

40

Random-fed
blood glucose (mg/dl)

B

50

Random-fed
blood glucose (mg/dl)

Body weight (g)

A

M

F Sex

BTBR-Ob

600

400

200

0

M

F

BTBR-lean

M

F Sex

BTBR-Ob

Supplemental Figure 3. Although females are lighter, sex has no impact on random-fed or 4-6
h fasting blood glucose levels at 6 or 8 weeks of age in the BTBR strain, whether lean or
obese. A-C: 6-week body weights, random-fed blood glucose levels, or 4-6 h fasting blood
glucose levels, respectively, of BTBR-lean or BTBR-Ob mice segregated by sex. D-E: 8-week body
weights, random-fed blood glucose levels, or 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, respectively, of
BTBR-lean or BTBR-Ob mice segregated by sex. Male and female data within groups were
compared by t-test. *, p < 0.05, **, p < 0.01, and ****, p < 0.0001 vs. male.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

-

+

BTBR-lean

ns
30

+

Cre

-

+

-

Cre-neg Ob
Cre+ Ob

300

Cre-neg lean
Cre+ lean

0 15 30 45 60
Time (min)

120

+

ns

200
100
0

-

+

BTBR-lean

F

ns

0

ns

300

Cre

400

200

400

BTBR-Ob

-

+

Cre

BTBR-Ob

600
ns
400

ns

200

0

Cre

BTBR-Ob

H

500

+

ns

BTBR-lean

BTBR-Ob

-

600

700

100

+

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

Body weight (g)

40

-

-

BTBR-lean

ns

+

ns

200

BTBR-Ob

50

-

400

0

Cre

E

BTBR-lean

Blood glucose (mg/dl)

+

60

20

G

-

C

ns

4-6 h fasting
blood glucose (mg/dl)

ns

30

20

D

Random-fed
blood glucose (mg/dl)

ns
40

600

4-6 h fasting
blood glucose (mg/dl)

B

50

Random-fed
blood glucose (mg/dl)

Body weight (g)

A

-

+

BTBR-lean

-

+

Cre

BTBR-Ob

600
500
Cre-neg Ob

400

Cre+ Ob

300
Cre-neg lean

200

Cre+ lean

100
0 15 30 45 60

120

Time (min)

Supplemental Figure 4. Beta-cell Cre expression has no impact on metabolic parameters of 6or 8-week-old BTBR lean or Ob mice. A-C: 6-week body weights, random-fed blood glucose
levels, or 4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, respectively, of BTBR-lean or BTBR-Ob mice
segregated by Cre expression. D-E: 8-week body weights, random-fed blood glucose levels, or
4-6 h fasting blood glucose levels, respectively, of BTBR-lean or BTBR-Ob mice segregated by
Cre expression. G: Blood glucose excursion curves after oral glucose challenge of 6-week-old
BTBR-lean or Ob mice, both Cre-negative and Cre-positive. H: Blood glucose excursion curves
after IP insulin challenge of 8-week-old BTBR-lean or Ob mice, both Cre-negative and Crepositive. In A-F, Cre-negative and Cre-positive data within groups were compared by t-test. In G
and H, Cre-negative and Cre-positive data within groups were compared by two-way ANOVA
with Sidak’s test post-hoc. None of the statistical analyses revealed any significant differences
in means as a factor of beta-cell Cre expression.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B
Blood glucose (mg/dL)

ns

100

C

40

Body weight (g)

0

30

WT Cre+

GαzF/F Cre+

D

20
10
0

WT GzFlox
Cre+ Cre+

WT Cre+

400

GαzF/F Cre+

300
200
100

0

30

45

60

90

Minutes

E

350
300
250
200
150

15

Plasma Insulin (pg/ml)

200

500

WT GzFlox
Cre+ Cre+

F

6

Islet Insulin Content
(µg/islet)

300

Plasma glucose (mg/dl)

Blood glucose (mg/dL)

A

4

2

0

WT GzFlox
Cre+ Cre+

1500

1000

500

0

WT GzFlox
Cre+ Cre+

Supplemental Figure 5. Beta-cell-specific Gαz loss has no impact on glucose tolerance of 10week-old C57BL/6J mice, and does not impact baseline metabolic/islet parameters of 10week-old BTBR-lean mice. A and B: 10-week-old male C57BL/6J mice (N=10/group), either wildtype Cre-positive or RIP-Cre-Gαz-floxed, were fasted 4-6 h prior to oral glucose challenge. 4-6 h
fasting blood glucose levels are shown in ‘A’ and glucose excursion after OGTT in ‘B.’ C-F: 10week-old BTBR-lean mice, either wild-type Cre-positive or RIP-Cre-Gαz-floxed, were fasted 4-6 h
prior to terminal blood collection and islet harvest. There were no differences by genotype in
body weight (A), plasma glucose (B), plasma insulin (C), or mean islet insulin content (F). In A
and C-F, statistical analyses were performed by t-test. In B, statistical analyses were performed
by 2-way paired ANOVA, with Sidak test post-hoc to correct for multiple comparisons. In all
panels, if no p value is indicated, the difference in means was not statistically significant.

Blood Glucose
(% Change from Baseline)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/671289; this version posted June 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

WT CreWT Cre+

-20

GzFlox CreGzFlox Cre+

-40
-60
-80

0 15 30 45 60

120

time (min)

Supplemental Figure 6. Beta-cell-specific Gαz loss likely has no impact on insulin sensitivity of
8-week-old BTBR-lean mice. 8 week-old male and female BTBR-lean mice, either wild-type Crenegative (N=4), wild-type Cre-positive (N=5), Gαz-floxed Cre-negative (N=2) or Gαz-floxed Crepositive (N=1) were fasted for 4-6 h prior to insulin challenge and blood glucose levels recorded
over time. Data are represented as the percent decrease in blood glucose levels from their
baseline value. Although with only one Gαz-floxed Cre-positive mouse, a statistical analysis was
not performed, all of the mean insulin tolerance curves essentially overlay each other.

