bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

A Systematic Assessment Of Current Genome-Scale Metabolic Reconstruction Tools.
Mendoza, S. N.1., Olivier, B. G1,2., Molenaar, D1., Teusink, B1*.
1

Systems Bioinformatics, AIMMS, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
BioQUANT/COS, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

2

* Corresponding author
E-mail: b.teusink@vu.nl
Key words: genome-scale metabolic reconstruction; systematic evaluation; genome-scale
metabolic models

Abstract
Several genome-scale metabolic reconstruction software platforms have been developed
and are being continuously updated. These tools have been widely applied to reconstruct
metabolic models for hundreds of microorganisms ranging from important human pathogens
to species of industrial relevance. However, these platforms, as yet, have not been
systematically evaluated with respect to software quality, best potential uses and intrinsic
capacity to generate high-quality, genome-scale metabolic models. It is therefore unclear
for potential users which tool best fits the purpose of their research. In this work, we
performed a systematic assessment of the current genome-scale reconstruction software
platforms. To meet our goal, we first defined a list of features for assessing software quality
related to genome-scale reconstruction, which we expect to be useful for the potential users
of these tools. Subsequently, we used the feature list to evaluate the performance of each
tool. In order to assess the similarity of the draft reconstructions to high-quality models, we
compared each tool’s output networks with that of the high-quality, manually curated, models
of Lactobacillus plantarum and Bordetella pertussis, representatives of gram-positive and
gram-negative bacteria, respectively. We showed that none of the tools outperforms the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

others in all the defined features and that model builders should carefully choose a tool (or
combinations of tools) depending on the intended use of the metabolic model.

Author Summary
Metabolic networks that comprise biochemical reactions at genome-scale have become very
useful to study and predict the phenotype of important microorganisms. Several software
platforms exist to build these metabolic networks. Based on different approaches and
utilizing a variety of databases it is, unfortunately, unclear what are the best scenarios to
use each of these tools. Hence, to understand the potential uses of these tools, we created
a list of relevant features for metabolic reconstruction and we evaluated the tools in all these
categories. Here, we show that none of the tools is better than the other in all the evaluated
categories; instead, each tool is more suitable for particular purposes. Therefore, users
should carefully select the tool(s) that best fit the purpose of their research. This is the first
time these tools are systematically evaluated and this overview can be used as a guide for
selecting the correct tool(s) for each case.

Introduction
Genome-scale metabolic models (GSMM’s) have been a successful tool in Systems Biology
during the last decades [1,2], largely due to the wide range of areas for which the scientific
community have found an application. GSMMs, for example, predict cellular behavior under
different biological conditions, or can be used to design drug targets for important
pathogens; they help to design improved strains through metabolic engineering strategies
or to predict metabolic interactions in microbial communities; they have been used to study
evolutionary processes or to give a rationale to lab experiments (see excellent reviews [3,4]).
The reconstruction process that forms the basis of a GSMM is very time consuming. Usually,
this process starts with the annotation of a genome and the prediction of candidate metabolic

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

functions at a genome-scale. The draft reconstruction is then refined by the user in an
iterative manner though an exhaustive review of each reaction, metabolite and gene in the
network. After curation, the genome-scale metabolic reconstruction is transformed into a
mathematical structure, an objective function is given, constraints are set to account for
specific media conditions and the resulting GSMM is evaluated to try to reproduce the
experimental data. This iterative process of manual refinement is the limiting step of the
whole process because it continues until the GSMM achieves a desired performance
determined by the model builder. Hundreds of GSMMs have been reconstructed using this
procedure, for which protocols have been described [5] and reviews are available [6,7].
Several genome-scale reconstruction tools have been developed over the last 15 years to
assist researchers in the reconstruction process [8,9]. These tools are designed to speed
up such process by automating several tasks that otherwise should be performed manually,
such as draft network generation or gap-filling, and/or by providing useful information to the
user to curate the reconstruction. There has been an outstanding increase in the number of
new tools for genome-scale reconstruction which reflects the increasing interest to create
high-quality GSMMs [10]. Consequently, there is a need for a systematic assessment of the
performance of these tools, as many researchers are uncertain which tool to choose when
they want to reconstruct their favorite organisms.
In this work, we installed and applied the most promising genome-scale reconstruction tools
to provide a systematic evaluation of their performance and outputs. With each tool we
reconstructed draft networks for Lactobacillus plantarum [11] and Bordetella pertussis [12],
representatives of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, respectively, and for which
high-quality GSMMs already exist. We used the manually curated GSMMs as a benchmark
to assess the features of the tool-generated draft models.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Current state of genome-scale reconstruction tools
Here we provide a brief description of the current reconstruction tools (see also S1 Table).
AutoKEGGRec (2018). AutoKEEGRec [13] is an easy-to-use automated tool that uses the
KEGG databases to create draft genome-scale models for any microorganism in that
database. It runs in MATLAB and is compatible with COBRA Toolbox v3 [14]. One of the
advantages of this tool is that multiple queries (microorganisms) can be processed in one
run making it appropriate for cases where several microorganisms need to be reconstructed.
The main limitation of this tool, which is directly related to the use of the KEGG database, is
the lack of a biomass reaction, transport and exchange reactions in the draft genome-scale
models.
AuReMe (2018). AuReMe [15] (Automatic Reconstruction of Metabolic Models) is a
workspace that ensures a good traceability of the whole reconstruction process, a feature
that makes this tool unique. A Docker image is available for AuReMe, so users are easily
able to run AuReMe in any platform without having to pre-install required packages
(Windows, Linux or Mac). AuReMe creates GSMMs with a template-based algorithm [16]
but it is also designed to incorporate information from different databases such as MetaCyc
[17] and BIGG [18] .
CarveMe (2018). CarveMe [19] is a command-line python-based tool designed to create
GSMMs, ready to use for Flux Balance Analysis (FBA), in just a few minutes. Its unique topdown approach involves the creation of models from a BIGG-based manually curated
universal template. The implementation of its own gap-filling algorithm allows this tool to
prioritize the incorporation into the network of reactions with higher genetic evidence. The
authors of this tool showed that the performance of the generated models is similar to the
manually curated models.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

MetaDraft (2018). MetaDraft [20,21] is a Python-based user-friendly software designed to
create GSMMs from previously manually curated ones. It contains in its internal database
BIGG models ready to be used as templates although any other model can be used as
template. Users can define a specific order of templates in order to prioritize the
incorporation of information related to reactions if there is a reaction match in two or more
templates. One of the advantages of Metadraft is that it supports the latest features of the
current SBML standards, i.e. SBML Level 3 [22] including the FBC Version 2 [23] and
Groups packages [24].
RAVEN version 2 (2018). RAVEN [25] (Reconstruction, Analysis and Visualization of
Metabolic Networks) is a tool for genome-scale metabolic reconstruction and curation that
runs in MATLAB is compatible with COBRA Toolbox v3 [14]. In contrast to the first version
which only allowed reconstruction using the KEGG database [26], this evaluated version
also allows the novo reconstruction of GSMMs using MetaCyc and from template models.
Additionally, algorithms to merge network from both databases are provided inside RAVEN.
The addition of MetaCyc allows the incorporation of transporters and spontaneous reactions
to the reconstructed networks.
ModelSEED version 2.2 (2018). ModelSEED [27] is a web resource for genome-scale
reconstruction and analysis. This tool allows creation of GSMMs, not only for
microorganisms but also for plants. The first step of its pipeline for genome-scale
reconstruction is the genome annotation which is performed by RAST [28]. Users can select
or even create a media to be used for gap-filling. In contrast to the first version, the second
version allows creation of models in less than ten minutes (including annotation) and it
provides aliases/synonyms of reactions and metabolites in other databases.
Pathway Tools version 22.0 (2018). Pathway tools [29] is a software environment that
support creation and curation of organism-specific databases. One of the most useful

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

features is that users can interactively explore, visualize and edit different components of
the created databases such as genes, operons, enzymes (including transporters),
metabolites, reactions and pathways. Also, visualization of the whole network is possible by
using Cellular Overview diagrams, in which experimental data such as gene expression can
be mapped using different colors depending on the expression level.
Merlin version 3.8 (2018). Merlin [30] is a java application for genome-scale reconstruction
based on the KEGG database. One of the most useful resources of Merlin is the reannotation of genomes though the online service of BLAST (EBI) or HMMER. Several
parameters in the annotation algorithms such as the expected value threshold and the
maximum number of hits can be changed by the user if required, which makes this tool very
flexible. The interface allows to compare gene function agreement between the annotation
and UniProt providing information to the user for manual curation.
Kbase (2018). Kbase [31] (The United States Department of Energy Systems Biology
Knowledgebase) is an open-source software that allows, among a variety of functions, the
reconstruction and analysis of microbes, plants and communities. Kbase is a platform that
integrates several tasks such as annotation, reconstruction, curation and modeling, making
suitable for the whole process of reconstruction. One of the unique features of this software
is the use of narratives which are tutorials where users can interactively learn particular
topics and reproduce previous results.
CoReCO (2014). CoReCo [32] (Comparative Reconstruction) is a novel approach for the
simultaneous reconstruction of multiple related species. The pipeline of CoReCo includes
two steps: First, it finds proteins homologous to the input set of protein-coding sequences
for each species. Second, it generates gapless metabolic networks for each species based
on KEGG stoichiometry data. Thus, CoReCo allows a direct comparison between the
reconstructed models, e.g. to study evolutionary aspects.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

MEMOSys version 2 (2014). MEMOSys [33] (Metabolic Model Reseach and development
System) is a database for storing and managing genome-scale models, rather than a
reconstruction tool. This tool allows tracking of changes during the development of a
particular genome-scale model. 20 genome-scale models are publicly available for exporting
and modifying. Child models can be created from the 20 available models and then modified
and compared with parent models. All the differences between different version of the
models can be listed to track changes in the networks.
FAME (2012). FAME [34] (Flux Analysis and Modeling Environment) is a web-based
application for creating and running GSMMs. This tool can reconstruct genome-scale
models for any microorganism in KEGG database. One of the most interesting features of
FAME is that analysis results can be visualized on familiar KEGG-like maps. It is foremost
a tool for running and analyzing models and is used -by us- for educational purposes. One
of the limitations of FAME is that models cannot be generated for microorganisms which are
not in KEGG database.
GEMSiRV

(2012).

GEMSiRV

[35]

(Genome-scale

Metabolic

Model

Simulation,

Reconstruction and Visualization) is a software platform for network drafting and editing. A
manually curated model is used as template to generate a draft network for the species
under study. Among the tools inside the toolbox, MrBac [36] can be used to generate
reciprocal orthologous-gene pairs which are then used by GEMSiRV to generate the draft
model. One of the limitations of this tool is that only one template can be used per run.
Other tools. Microbes Flux (2012) [37], Subliminal (2011) [38] and GEMSystem (2006) [39]
are no longer maintained, as confirmed by the authors of the corresponding articles.

Results
To assess the reconstruction tools, we performed both a qualitative and quantitative
evaluation. As a first step, we created a list of relevant features for genome-scale

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

reconstruction and software quality and we scored each tool depending on the performance
(1: poor, 5: outstanding). These features are related to software performance, ease of use,
similarity of output networks with regard to manually-curated models and adherence to
common data standards. The criteria to assign a particular score in each feature is specified
in S2 Table. Many of these features have not been assessed in previous reviews [8,9].
Subsequently, to assess how similar the generated draft networks are to high-quality
models, we reconstructed with different reconstruction tools the metabolic networks of two
bacteria for which high-quality manually-curated genome-scale models already were
available. We chose to reconstruct the metabolic network of Lactobacillus plantarum and
Bordetella pertussis, representatives of gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria,
respectively. These microorganisms were selected because the corresponding GSMMs are
not stored in the BIGG database, so tools that are able to use the BIGG database (AuReMe,
CarveME, MetaDraft, RAVEN) in the reconstruction process cannot use the specific
information for these microorganisms. If E. coli or B. subtilis would have been chosen instead
we would have favored these tools because high-quality models for E. coli or B. subtilis
already exist in the BIGG database and they would have been used as templates or inputs.
The networks were generated using seven tools: AuReMe, CarveMe, Merlin, MetaDraft,
ModelSEED, Pathway Tools and RAVEN. These cover most of the freely available software
platforms. The general features of these tools are listed in Table 1.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table 1. List of selected genome-scale metabolic reconstruction tools and their main
features
Reconstruction
tool
AuReMe

CarveMe
Merlin

MetaDraft
ModelSEED
Pathway Tools
RAVEN

Mapping method
Pantograph
(Inparanoid
and
OrthoMCL)
Diamond, eggNOGmappera
Mapping
from
annotation
with
BLAST or HMMER
Autograph
(Inparanoid)
Annotation ontology
map from RAST data
Pathologic
Autograph-type
method from BLASTP
and
Bidirectional
BLASTPb

Reactions are
inherited from
Template
model(s)

Associated
databases
BIGG-MetaCyc

1.2.1

Type of
software
Command line

Template
model
Database

BIGG

1.2.1

Command line

KEGG

3.8

Standalone
inferface

Template
model(s)
Template
model
Database

BIGG

0.8.1

ModelSEED

2.2

Standalone
inferface
Online service

MetaCyc

22.0

DatabaseTemplate
model(s)

KEGG-MetaCyc

2.0.1

Version

Standalone
inferface
Command line

a

eggNOG-mapper should be run externally by the user
Bidireactional BLASTP is used with template models and BLASTP with databases (KEGG
and Metacyc)
b

General assessment overview
None of the tools got a perfect score for all of the evaluated features and usually, strengths
in some tools are weaknesses in others (Fig 1, S3 table to see detailed evaluation). For
example, on the one hand, ModelSEED and CarveMe were evaluated as outstanding when
we checked whether the whole reconstruction process is automatic; Merlin was evaluated
as poor because users should interfere more to get a network ready to perform FBA. On the
other hand, we consider Merlin as outstanding with respect to a workspace for manual
refinement and information to assist users during this step; CarveMe and ModelSEED do
not provide further information for manual refinement nor a workspace for manual curation,
so they were evaluated as poor in this category.
In some cases, all the tools got the maximum score possible. For instance, all the tested
tools are properly supported by specialist teams and also maintain up-to-date databases. In
other cases, none of the tools got the maximum score. This was the case for automatic
refinement of networks using experimental data. Some of the tools, such as ModelSEED

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and CarveMe can use media composition to gap-fill the network. AuReMe and Pathway
Tools also can use, in addition to media composition, known metabolic products to gap-fill
the network. In spite of that, none of the tools can also use Biolog phenotype arrays, knockout experiments and different types of omics data (transcriptomic, proteomic, metabolomic,
etc.) to automatically curate the network. Although some efforts have been done in this area
[40–43], this seems like a major challenge for future tool development that should lead to
improved metabolic reconstructions.
Compliance with the latest SBML standards has been pointed as one of the critical points to
share and represent models [44]. Consequently, we evaluated if the tools use the latest
SBML features in the import (inputs) and export (outputs) of networks. For inputs, we
checked if the tools were able to read networks in SBML Level 3 [22]. We additionally
checked if the output networks satisfy the following three features: use of SBML Level 3 [22]
with FBC annotations [23], SBML Groups [24] and MIRIAM compliant CV annotations
[22,45]. These features are used, for example, for models in the BIGG database and they
ensure that the information is stored in a standard way. For inputs, we found that among the
tools that are able to import and use networks (AuReMe, MetaDraft, RAVEN) MetaDraft and
RAVEN are able to use SBML Level 3 while AuReMe is not. For outputs, MetaDraft and
Merlin and RAVEN were the only ones that exported the networks with all the three features.
However, the networks created with RAVEN only had MIRIAM fields in the MAT files and
they lack MIRIAM compliant CV annotations in the SBML files. In addition, AuReMe and
CarveMe lack MIRIAM compliant CV annotations and SBML Groups, and Pathway Tools
and ModelSEED exported the networks in SBML Level 2.

Network comparison
We reconstructed draft networks for both Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1 and Bordetella
pertussis Tohama I with each reconstruction tool. L. plantarum is a lactic acid bacterium

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(LAB), used in the food fermentation industry and as a probiotic [46–48]. Its GSMM
comprises 771 unique reactions, 662 metabolites and 728 genes, and it has been used to
design a defined media for this LAB [49], to explore interactions with other bacteria [50] and
as a reference for reconstructing other LAB [51]. In contrast to this LAB, B. pertussis is a
gram-negative bacterium, and the causative agent of the Whooping cough, a highlycontagious respiratory disease [52]. The metabolic network of this pathogen was recently
reconstructed and it comprises 1672 unique reactions, 1255 metabolites and 770 genes.
In total, 29 networks were created for L. plantarum and 27 for B. pertussis. The specific
inputs and parameters for creating each network can be found in S1 File. Genes, metabolites
and reactions were extracted from the SBML files and compared with those in the manually
curated model. For convenience, the manually curated model of L. plantarum will be called
hereafter iLP728, and the manually curated model of B. pertussis, iBP1870

Comparison of gene sets. Genes are the basis from which genome-scale model are
reconstructed. When a gene is included in a metabolic reconstruction, there is at least one
biochemical reaction associated with that gene. When a gene is not in the reconstruction,
either the reconstruction tool couldn’t find an orthologous gene in the reference database or
an orthologous gene was found but no biochemical reaction is associated to that gene.
Genes sets are interesting to compare because if a gene present in the manually-curated
model is absent in a draft reconstruction, that could explain why some biochemical reactions
are missing in the draft. Alternatively, if a gene is absent in the manually-curated model but
present in a draft reconstruction, that could explain the presence of reactions that should not
be in the reconstruction. Moreover, gene sets are simple to compare among reconstructions
because gene identifiers in all the cases are the same (the locus tag in the genome
annotation) and so, in contrast to metabolites and reactions, there is no mapping-related
bias in the comparison.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

To assess how similar the draft networks were to the corresponding manually curated
networks we calculated the Jaccard Distance (𝐽𝐷) as well as the ratio between the
percentage of covered genes and the percentage of additional genes (𝑅) (S4-S7 Tables).
The 𝐽𝐷 has been used before to measure distance between genome-scale metabolic
reconstructions, based on reaction sets [53]; here we also applied it to compare
reconstructions in terms of genes and metabolites. We called 𝐽𝐷𝑔 , 𝐽𝐷𝑟 and 𝐽𝐷𝑚 to the 𝐽𝐷
between two reconstructions when they are compared in terms of genes, reactions and
metabolites, respectively. Analogously, we called 𝑅𝑔 , 𝑅𝑟 and 𝑅𝑚 to the 𝑅 when
reconstructions are compared in terms of genes, reactions and metabolites, respectively. In
general terms, a value of 0 in the 𝐽𝐷 means that the networks are identical and a value of 1
means that the networks are totally different. For the 𝑅, higher values reflect a higher
similarity to the original network and lower values reflect a lower similarity with the original
network.
The values in the 𝐽𝐷𝑔 ranged from 0.38 to 0.60 in L. plantarum and from 0.45 to 0.67 in B.
pertussis (S4 and S5 Tables), while values in the 𝑅𝑔 ranged from 1.19 to 13.16 in L.
plantarum and from 0.84 to 3.54 in B. pertussis (S6 and S7 Tables). Although the similarity
of the generated draft networks seems slightly better for L. plantarum than for B. pertussis,
we found that it depends on which metric is analyzed. With the exception of one network,
the 𝑅𝑔 showed that all the draft networks of L. plantarum were more similar to iLP728 than
the draft networks of B. pertussis to iBP1870, using the analog parameter settings. In
contrast, the 𝐽𝐷𝑔 showed that AuReMe, ModelSEED, RAVEN and Merlin generated draft
networks of L. plantarum which are more similar to iLP728 than the draft networks of B.
pertussis with regard to iBP1870, and that CarveMe, MetaDraft and Pathway Tools
generated draft networks slightly more similar for B. pertussis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Additionally, when sorting the values of both metrics, we noticed that the 𝐽𝐷𝑔 order does not
correspond to that made with the 𝑅𝑔 . The lowest 𝐽𝐷𝑔 among the draft reconstructions for L.
plantarum was obtained in the network generated with AuReMe when the gram-positive set
of templates was used; for B. pertussis, it was obtained with MetaDraft. In contrast, the
highest 𝑅𝑔 among the draft reconstructions for L. plantarum was obtained in the network
generated with AuReMe when only Lactococcus lactis was used as template; for B.
pertussis, it was obtained with MetaDraft when Escherichia coli template was used.
Although the similarity scores for both metrics are not entirely consistent, some trends were
observed. The networks more similar, in terms of genes, to the manually curated models
were generated by MetaDraft, AuReMe and RAVEN (Fig 2). However, since parameters
settings and inputs have a big effect on the similarity scores, the usage of these tools does
not automatically ensure obtaining a draft network similar, in terms of genes, to a manually
curated model. This is particularly true for RAVEN which also generated some networks with
high 𝐽𝐷𝑔 and low 𝑅𝑔 scores.
We further analyzed the percentage of genes covered in the manually curated models and
the percentage of genes not in the manually curated models to explain differences in 𝑅𝑔 .
For both species we observed a wide variation in both variables (Figs 3 and 4). Among the
five networks of L. plantarum with the highest coverage, two were created with AuReMe and
three with RAVEN; for B. pertussis, four were created with RAVEN and one with CarveMe.
However, the networks created with RAVEN that recovered the highest percentages of
genes also added an important number of genes which were not present in the manually
curated models, decreasing the values in the 𝑅𝑔 . In addition, AuReMe and MetaDraft
created conservative draft networks with the lowest number of additional genes, which
explains the higher values in the 𝑅𝑔 . Finally, tools such as ModelSEED, Pathway Tools and
Merlin consistently created reconstructions with gene coverages not ranging in the highest

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

values (in comparison with other networks) and adding a relatively large number of genes
not present in the manually curated models, which explains why they had lower values in
the 𝑅𝑔 .
For L. plantarum we found 1608 different genes in total with all the tools, of which 880 were
not present in iLP728. For B. pertussis, 1887 different genes were found, of which 1117
were not present in iBP1870. In addition, 92 genes were correctly predicted in all the draft
networks for iLP728; for iBP1870 this was 121 genes. The distribution of metabolic pathways
associated to those genes is wide for both species, with carbohydrate metabolism and
amino acid metabolism accounting for more than 50% of the metabolic processes (S8 and
S9 Tables). Additionally, 35 and 41 genes were not recovered in any network for iLP728
and iBP1870, respectively. The metabolic functions associated to those genes were very
specific, with polysaccharide biosynthesis (63%) and transport (20%) top in the list for L.
plantarum and with transport (41%) and ferredoxin/thioredoxin related reactions (26%) for
B. pertussis. Finally, one gene in L. plantarum, which was associated to riboflavin
biosynthesis, was recovered by all the networks but it was not present in iLP729. For B.
pertussis, three such genes were found. These genes were associated to alternate carbon
metabolism and cell envelope biosynthesis.

Comparison of reaction sets. Genes and biochemical reactions are connected within a
reconstruction though gene-protein-reaction (GPR) associations. However, genes and
reactions relationships are ultimately represented in reconstructions as boolean rules known
as gene-reaction rules. With the exception of exchange, sink, demand, spontaneous and
some transport reactions (e.g. those governed by diffusion), each reaction has a defined
gene-reaction rule in the reference database used by each reconstruction tool. During the
process of reconstruction, if orthologous genes are found that satisfy the gene-reaction rule
of a particular reaction, that reaction is included in the draft reconstruction. Other reactions

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

may be added to the draft reconstruction based on others criteria, such the probability of a
particular pathway to exist in the microorganism under study or the need to fill particular
gaps in the network in order to produce biomass. Nonetheless we expect that networks
which are more similar in terms of genes will also be more similar in terms of reactions.
In contrast to genes, however, reactions are labeled with different identifiers in different
databases. Thus, the same reaction can be stored with two different identifiers in two
different databases. During the reconstruction process, reactions are added from the
reference database to the draft reconstruction and tools using different databases will
generate reconstructions comprising reactions with different identifiers. We therefore used
MetaNetX [54] to map reactions among reconstructions built with different databases. In this
approach, reactions were compared using their identifiers (case sensitive string
comparison). In addition, we compared networks using reaction equations, i.e., we
compared reactions using their attributes instead of their identifiers. In this second approach,
we considered that two reactions were the same if they had the same metabolites with the
same stoichiometric coefficients. Some exceptions were made to also match reactions that
differ only in proton stoichiometry (due to differences in metabolites charge) or to catch
reactions which are written in the opposite direction (reactants in the side of products).
For most networks, comparison through reaction identifiers resulted in a lower percentage
of coverage than through reaction equation comparison (S10 and S11 Tables). This lower
coverage was due to some missing relationships between different databases in MetaNetX,
which we discovered when comparing with the reaction equations. In total, 264 new unique
reaction synonyms pairs were automatically discovered for both species with the second
approach (S12 Table). To further overcome the missing relationships in MetaNetX, a semiautomatic algorithm was developed to assist the discovery of new metabolite synonyms. In

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

total, 174 new metabolites synonyms were discovered (S13 Table) which led to the
discovery of 319 additional reaction synonyms (S14 Table).
The comparison through reaction equations showed a wide variation in reaction coverage
and percentage of additional reactions for both species (Figs 5 and 6). In addition, for those
networks created with RAVEN (KEGG), ModelSEED and Merlin we observed a large
number of reactions with a partial match with the manually curated model. These partial
matches emerge from differences in proton stoichiometry, which indicates the existence of
an important number of metabolites with different charge than those found in the manually
curated models. In contrast to the gene sets comparison, where the coverage was as high
as 88% and 83%, we only observed a maximum coverage of 72% and 57%, for L. plantarum
and B. pertussis, respectively, even when considering partial matches. For both species, on
average, around 50% of the reactions that were not recovered in the manually-curated
models don’t have gene-reaction associations. If we take all the unique genes associated to
the remaining 50% of the reactions, on average, around 40% of those are not in the draft
models, which can explain why we observed an important decrease in the coverage of
reactions.
We again calculated the 𝐽𝐷𝑟 and the 𝑅𝑟 to assess how similar the networks were, in this
case in terms of reactions. The first observation we made is that, independent of the metric
and for both species, each reconstruction was less similar in terms of reactions than in terms
of genes, which is consistent with the decrease in coverage. In addition, as in the gene
comparison, the order of scores for the 𝑅𝑔 and the 𝑅𝑟 by magnitude, was not the same. If
we compare the similarity scores for reactions sets with the ones for genes sets, we see
almost the same trend but with one difference. AuReMe and MetaDraft are still the tools with
the best similarity scores but now CarveMe goes up in the list of scores and RAVEN goes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

down (Fig 7, S4-S7 Tables). This was particularly true for B. pertussis where two networks
reconstructed with CarveMe got the two first places in the 𝐽𝐷𝑟 list.
Although RAVEN generated some reconstructions with high genes sets similarity to the
manually curated models, it did not for reactions sets similarity. We therefore analyzed one
of the networks reconstructed with RAVEN in more detail, one that was consistently in the
top-5 list for both species for both metrics. We found two reasons for the decrease in
performance. First, the analyzed network was created based on KEGG, so metabolites were
not labelled as intracellular or extracellular. Hence no transport or exchange reactions were
present. Although there are functions to incorporate this kind of reactions in RAVEN, that is
considered as manual curation because users must specify which compounds should be
transported, and we here only tested how much work would it take to transform these draft
networks into high-quality reconstructions. Second, due to some not intuitive duplicated
entries in the BIGG database, the translation of metabolites though MetaNetX dit not always
result in a match with the manually curated model. For example, the reaction R04534 in the
draft created with RAVEN was never mapped to the reaction HDER4 in iLP728 because in
MetaNetX R04534 is associated with 3OAR100, a duplicated reaction of HDR4 in BIGG. It
was also not recovered when comparing reaction equations because the metabolites in
R04534 were mapped to those in 3OAR100, not to those in HDR4.
We further analyzed reactions that were present and absent in all the reconstructions to
understand to which kind of metabolic processes they were related. 71 reactions in iLP728
and 91 in iBP1870 were always found in all the draft networks. In agreement with the genes
sets analysis, the associated metabolic processes are mainly amino acid metabolism,
nucleotide metabolism and carbohydrate metabolism (S15 and S16 Tables). Additionally,
168 reactions in iLP1870 and 609 in iBP1870 were not found by any tool. In both species,
around 10% of those reactions were biomass-related reactions and from the rest, most of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

them were exchange reactions, transport reactions without gene associations and reactions
in other categories that were not in the BIGG database (S17 and S18 Tables). Only one
reaction, associated to amino acid metabolism, was found in all the draft networks of L.
plantarum but not in iLP728; four reactions, associated mainly to carbohydrate metabolism,
were found in all the draft networks but not in iBP1870.

Comparison of metabolite sets. Other important elements within metabolic
reconstructions are metabolites. When a biochemical reaction is added to the draft network
during the reconstruction process, all the reactants and products are added to the network
too. As the draft metabolic networks were created with different tools, each of which using
its own set of databases, they had different identifiers for the same metabolite. For those
networks whose identifiers were different from BIGG, we again used MetaNetX and our own
additional dictionary to map metabolites.
We calculated the 𝐽𝐷𝑚 and the 𝑅𝑚 to assess the metabolite sets similarity. For almost all
the draft networks in both species, the values in the 𝐽𝐷𝑚 were between the 𝐽𝐷𝑔 and the 𝐽𝐷𝑟 ;
we found the same for the 𝑅𝑚 (S4 – S7 Tables). Again, when sorting the networks according
to their metric scores, we found the same trends than for reactions sets. The first position in
the lists were networks either reconstructed with MetaDraft, AureMe or CarveMe. Moreover,
independently of the metric and the species, MetaDraft reconstructed 40% of the networks
among those in the top-5.
208 metabolites in iLP728 and 266 in iBP1870 were correctly predicted in all the draft
networks. These metabolites were in both cases mainly associated to carbohydrate
metabolism and amino acid metabolism (S19 and S20 Tables). 86 metabolites in iLP728
and 312 in iBP1870 were not recovered in any network. Of those, 16 were related to the
biomass of L. plantarum and 20 others were not in the BIGG database. For iBP1870, 47
were biomass-related and 127 others were not in the BIGG database. Finally, 9 and 13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

metabolites were recovered in all the networks but they were not present in iLP728 and
iBP1870, respectively. Mainly, they were associated to metabolism of cofactors and vitamins
and amino acid metabolism in the case of L. plantarum and carbohydrate metabolism and
glycan biosynthesis in the case of B. pertussis (S21 and S22 Tables).

Topological Analysis. To compare the topological features of each network, we
calculated the number of dead-end metabolites, the number of orphan reactions, the number
of unconnected reactions and other metrics (S23 and S24 Tables).
iLP728 has 113 dead-end metabolites while iBP1870 has 60. This is consistent with the
observation that many pathways are disrupted in L. plantarum leading for example to wellknown auxotrophies for many amino acids [49,55]. With the exception of CarveMe, all the
tools generated networks with a high number of dead-end metabolites, ranging from 237
and 996, and from 379 to 976, for L. plantarum and B. pertussis, respectively. The low
number of dead-end metabolites in CarveMe is caused by the use of a manually curated
universal model as a template which lacks dead-end metabolites.
Without considering exchange and demand/sink reactions, 128 and 449 reactions without
gene associations (called orphan reactions) were found in iLP728 and iBP1870,
respectively. These reactions are mainly associated to transport reactions, amino acid
metabolism and biomass formation. AuReMe and RAVEN returned metabolic networks with
no orphan reactions. These tools only include reactions with genomic evidence and others
lacking this support, such as exchange reactions, are not included. MetaDraft and
ModelSEED returned networks with a low amount of orphan reactions, which are related in
the case of MetaDraft to duplicated reactions and in the case of ModelSEED, to exchange
reactions. In contrast, CarveMe, Pathway Tools and Merlin returned networks with a
significantly larger number of orphan reactions (ranging from 66 to 345 in L. plantarum and
from 115 to 736 in B. pertussis). For CarveMe, this is due to the inclusion of transport and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

spontaneous reactions as well as reactions needed to create biomass (from gap-filling); for
Pathway tools it is because of the addition of reactions to complete probable pathways and
spontaneous reactions; for Merlin, this is solely due to spontaneous reactions.

Discussion
In this work, we reviewed the current state of all the reconstruction tools we could find in the
literature and performed a systematic evaluation of seven of them. None of the tools
performed well in all the evaluated categories so users should carefully select the tool(s)
that suit the purpose of their investigation. For example, if a high-quality draft is required and
models are available for a phylogenetically close species, MetaDraft or AuReMe could be
selected, reducing thus the time needed to obtain a high-quality manually-curated model. Of
these, MetaDraft was the most robust for handling models and since it has a graphical user
interface, it is also suitable for non-specialists. AuReMe, on the contrary, offered a
command-line workspace where the traceability is the priority. Although we were not able to
use RAVEN in the template mode, this tool allowed us to automate the generation of several
reconstructions, it had a high flexibility with parameters and it offered integration with the
KEGG and MetaCyc databases which makes it very appropriate for less studied species.
ModelSEED, CarveMe and Pathway Tools were the fastest tools to generate
reconstructions having a great potential for large-scale studies how is has been proven in
previous works [53,56]. The first two tools provided networks which are ready to perform
FBA, however presumably because of the automatic gap-filling procedure, too many
reactions that should be manually verified must be expected. Pathway Tools and Merlin
provided a platform suitable for manual curation which nicely guide the user though the
whole reconstruction process.
The list of features that we defined not only can be used by model builders to select the best
tool(s) but also by developers as a guide for improving them. We highlight four features,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

which are in accordance with the FAIR guiding principles for scientific data management
and stewardship [57], that should be considered as a priority by developers to ensure
management of reconstructions in a standard way: 1) To be findable: All the genes,
metabolites and reaction in a reconstruction should be assigned with unique and persistent
identifiers, and synonyms or aliases in other databases should be provided whenever
possible 2) To be accessible: exhaustive control of versions should be implemented so users
will be able to submit small but significant changes to draft reconstructions, to trace changes
made during the reconstruction process, or to retrieve a particular version if desired. 3) To
be interoperable: output (and input if applied) reconstructions should be written with the
latest features of the SBML standards 4) To be reusable: In relationship with providing a
detailed provenance, transparency of decisions through the whole reconstruction process
should be ensured so users can see why a particular reaction was added and at which stage
(draft network generation, gap-filling, refinement, etc.).
Genome-scale reconstructions are usually evaluated after they are converted into genomescale models [5] i.e., mathematical structures where simulations can be performed under
constraints that describe specific experimental conditions. Thus, GSMMs are tested by their
accuracy to predict experimental data such as knock-outs, nutritional requirements and
growth rates on different conditions. However, most of the drafts we generated were not
suitable to perform FBA, mainly due to the lack of biomass-related, transport and exchange
reactions. Thus, we limited the evaluation of the drafts to the comparison with manuallycurated, genome-scale reconstructions. The later are valuable by themselves as
knowledgebases because they contain extensive information from literature. Here, we
prescribed that the manually-curated reconstructions are the gold standard, which implies
that they cannot be improved and that is obviously not true. Many reconstructions of for
example, E. coli, S. cerevisiae and H. sapiens have gone through multiple rounds of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

improvements during the years [58–60]. As reference databases used by reconstruction
tools increase in size and quality, so will the reconstructions which are based on them.
Therefore, some of the reactions which were suggested by the tools and which are not in
the manually-curated models could indeed be reactions which would improve the quality of
the reconstructions. Whether one of those reactions should be in the reconstruction or not
will depend not only on the genomic evidence but also on the scope and context of the
reconstruction. Many reactions are usually not incorporated because they are not needed
for modeling purposes [5]. Thus, similarity scores shouldn’t be taken alone to assess the
quality of draft reconstructions. Indeed, additional reconstructions of Lactobacillus plantarum
that we made with CarveMe and ModelSEED and which were gap-filled using a modified
version of CDM (S2 File), a media that support the growth of this microorganism in vivo [49],
showed a general performance close to the manually curated model, suggesting that
although the networks are not so similar as others created with different tools, the core
metabolism remains similar. Despite that, the performance of these networks is dependent
on the media composition which is used for the gap-filling (S1 Fig), and therefore if there is
no experimentally determined media, some false positive and false negative predictions
could emerge. For example, if very accurate predictions regarding nutritional requirement
are needed to design a microbial community, automatic reconstructions for which an
experimentally determined media composition is not provided during gap-filling could result
in false predictions.
A correct mapping of identifiers among different databases is crucial to perform a proper
comparison between metabolic networks. Important efforts such as MetaNetX [54] and
Borgifier [61] have been done to facilitate this titanic task. The first of those tools allowed us
to map most of the metabolites and reactions among the different reconstructions but
naturally some relationships were missing. To overcome this limitation, we implemented an

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

algorithm to search reaction equations, even when they have differences in proton
stoichiometry due to different protonation states or even if the reactions are written in the
opposite direction. As a second step to further reduce the fraction of metabolites which were
not mapped and though a semi-automatic and iterative process, we determined 174 new
relationships. In spite of our efforts, still some relationships were missing which evidence
the complexity of the problem. Since recent efforts have made clearer the type of issues
arising in different databases [62], we emphasize the importance of standards, which could
make easier the identification of synonyms because of the presence of high-quality
information, and the need of an outstanding mapping system.
Systematic assessments of tools for systems biology have become very popular [63,64] due
to the great impact they have in the community of potential users who certainly are searching
the best tool to apply in their research. Knowing the strengths and limitations of each tool
allow users to select the best tool(s) for their case, to save time in preliminary tests and to
focus more on the analysis and modelling using those reconstructions. Moreover, to provide
genome-scale models of high quality, in terms of usability and standards, has become a
priority during the last years. Efforts such as those done by Memote [44] highlight the need
for suites that test the quality of genome-scale models to ensure high-quality outputs, not
only in terms of their content as knowledgebases but also in terms of standards.

Conclusions
All the assessed reconstruction tools showed strengths and weaknesses in different areas
and none of the tools outperformed the others in all the categories. In particular, templatebased reconstruction tools such as AuReMe, MetaDraft and CarveMe generated networks
with a higher reactions sets similarity to manually curated networks than other tools. In
addition, tools such as Pathway Tools and Merlin provide a proper workspace and useful
information for manual refinement which could be suited for cases where much time can be

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

dedicated to this step. RAVEN provides a platform in which biochemical information from
different databases and approaches can be merged, which could be useful for less
characterized species. Finally, tools such as CarveMe and ModelSEED provide ready-touse metabolic networks which can be useful for a fast generation of model-driven hypothesis
and exploration but users will have to be aware of potential false results.
There seems to be a trade-off between coverage and similarity, and it remains to be seen
how much room for improvement there is. We see three clear features that would improve
any tool: better standards that would allow easier integration of the best of tools, exhaustive
version control during the reconstruction process, and algorithms that can use experimental
data for inclusion of genes and reactions into the models.

Materials and Methods
Protein sequences
We used the protein sequences or the GenBank files of the different microorganisms as
input to generate the genome-scale metabolic reconstructions with each of the selected
tools. All the protein sequences were downloaded from NCBI. For Lactobacillus plantarum
strain WCFS1 and Bordetella Pertussis strain Tohama I we used the protein sequences
deposited under the NCBI accession numbers NC_004567.2 and NC_002929.2
respectively.

Reconstruction
The specific parameters and inputs used to reconstruct the draft networks with each tool
can be found in S1 file.

AuReMe. We used AuReMe version 1.2.1, which was downloaded using Docker
Toolbox, to generate the draft reconstructions.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

To generate the genome-scale metabolic reconstructions of Lactobacillus plantarum
we used three different set of templates from the BIGG database: 1) Lactococcus
lactis (iNF517). 2) Lactococcus lactis (iNF517), Bacillus subtilis (iYO844),
Staphylococcus

aureus

(iSB619),

Clostridium

ljungdahlii

(iHN637)

and

Mycobacterium Tuberculosis (iNJ661). 3) Lactococcus lactis (iNF517), Bacillus
subtilis (iYO844), Staphylococcus aureus (iSB619), Clostridium ljungdahlii (iHN637),
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis (iNJ661), Escherichia coli (iML1515), Klebsiella
pneumoniae

(iYL1228),

Shigella

flexneri

(iSFxv_1172),

Shigella

boydii

(iSbBs512_1146), Shigella sonnei (iSSON_1240), Pseudomonas putida (iJN746),
Yersinia pestis (iPC815), Helicobacter pylori (iIT341), Geobacter metallireducens
(iAF987), Salmonella entérica (STM_v1_0), Thermotoga marítima (iLJ478),
Synechocystis sp (iJN678) and Synechococcus elongatus (iJB785)
For Bordetella pertussis we used Escherichia Coli as template (iML1515).
CarveMe.

We

used

CarveMe

version

1.2.1

(downloaded

from

https://github.com/cdanielmachado/carveme on August 1st, 2018) to generate the
draft reconstructions. Two genome-scale metabolic reconstructions were generated
for Lactobacillus plantarum using the universal bacterial template and the grampositive bacterial template, respectively. For B. pertussis, the universal bacterial
template and the gram-negative bacterial template were used.
Merlin.

We

used

Merlin

version

3.8

(downloaded

from

https://merlin-

sysbio.org/index.php/Downloads on August 1st, 2018) to generate the draft
reconstructions. For all the networks, we first annotated the genomes with EBI
through MERLIN using default parameters. Then, we loaded KEGG metabolic data

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and integrated the annotation with the model. Finally, we created gene-reactionprotein associations and removed unbalanced reactions to be able to export the
network to SBML format.
MetaDraft. We used MetaDraft version 0.8.1, which was obtained by request from
Brett Olivier on May 1st of 2018, to generate the draft reconstructions. Now available
from https://systemsbioinformatics.github.io/cbmpy-metadraft/.
To generate the genome-scale metabolic reconstructions of Lactobacillus plantarum
we used three different set of templates from the BIGG database: 1) Lactococcus
lactis (iNF517). 2) Lactococcus lactis (iNF517), Bacillus subtilis (iYO844),
Staphylococcus

aureus

(iSB619),

Clostridium

ljungdahlii

(iHN637)

and

Mycobacterium Tuberculosis (iNJ661). 3) Lactococcus lactis (iNF517), Bacillus
subtilis (iYO844), Staphylococcus aureus (iSB619), Clostridium ljungdahlii (iHN637),
Mycobacterium Tuberculosis (iNJ661), Escherichia coli (iML1515), Klebsiella
pneumoniae

(iYL1228),

Shigella

flexneri

(iSFxv_1172),

Shigella

boydii

(iSbBs512_1146), Shigella sonnei (iSSON_1240), Pseudomonas putida (iJN746),
Yersinia pestis (iPC815), Helicobacter pylori (iIT341), Geobacter metallireducens
(iAF987), Salmonella entérica (STM_v1_0), Thermotoga marítima (iLJ478),
Synechocystis sp (iJN678) and Synechococcus elongatus (iJB785)
To generate the genome-scale metabolic reconstructions of Bordetella pertussis we
used three different set of templates from the BIGG database: 1) Escherichia coli
(iML1515). 2) Escherichia coli (iML1515), Klebsiella pneumoniae (iYL1228), Shigella
flexneri

(iSFxv_1172),

(iSSON_1240),

Shigella

Pseudomonas

boydii
putida

(iSbBs512_1146),
(iJN746),

Yersinia

Shigella
pestis

sonnei

(iPC815),

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Helicobacter pylori (iIT341), Geobacter metallireducens (iAF987), Salmonella
entérica (STM_v1_0), Thermotoga marítima (iLJ478), Synechocystis sp (iJN678)
and Synechococcus elongatus (iJB785). 3) Escherichia coli (iML1515), Klebsiella
pneumoniae

(iYL1228),

Shigella

flexneri

(iSFxv_1172),

Shigella

boydii

(iSbBs512_1146), Shigella sonnei (iSSON_1240), Pseudomonas putida (iJN746),
Yersinia pestis (iPC815), Helicobacter pylori (iIT341), Geobacter metallireducens
(iAF987), Salmonella entérica (STM_v1_0), Thermotoga marítima (iLJ478),
Synechocystis sp (iJN678), Synechococcus elongatus (iJB785), Lactococcus lactis
(iNF517), Bacillus subtilis (iYO844), Staphylococcus aureus (iSB619), Clostridium
ljungdahlii (iHN637) and Mycobacterium Tuberculosis (iNJ661).
ModelSEED. We used ModelSEED version 2.2 web service on August 16st of 2018
to generate the draft reconstructions. Models were created using different template
models. No media was specified to create the models.
Pathway Tools. We used Pathway Tools version 22.0 to generate the draft
reconstructions. Four networks were created with the Desktop mode using different
cut-off values for pathways prediction and one was made with the Lisp-console with
default parameters. All the networks were exported manually with the Desktop mode
RAVEN. We used RAVEN version 2.0.1, which was downloaded from
https://github.com/SysBioChalmers/RAVEN, to generate the draft reconstructions.
Different models were created using different databases (KEGG and MetaCyc) and
different values in the parameters for orthology searches.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Pre-processing of L. plantarum and B. pertussis network
We pre-processed the manually curated networks in order to compare them with the draft
networks. We semi-automatically changed metabolite and reaction identifiers to match those
of the BIGG database. Also, we removed duplicated reactions (those with the same reaction
equation). Before deletion of a duplicated reaction, the associated gene-reaction rule was
transferred to or merged with the gene-reaction rule of the reaction that was kept in the
network.

Comparison of gene sets
We define the union of all the unique genes found in a particular metabolic network as the
gene set in that network. We compared gene sets from each draft network with those in the
corresponding manually curated model by case sensitive string comparison.

Comparison of metabolite sets
Each metabolic network contains a set of metabolites. For those networks generated with
reconstruction tools using the BIGG database (AuReMe, CarveMe and MetaDraft) we
compared metabolites just by string comparison. For other reconstruction tools (Merlin,
ModelSEED, Pathway Tools and RAVEN), we mapped the metabolites using MetaNetX
version 3.0 [54]. As metabolite identifiers in the manually curated models contain at the end
of the string a character describing the specific compartment in which the metabolite is
located (for example glc_c for glucose in the cytoplasmic space) and in MetaNetX they do
not, we used the following procedure to compare metabolites: For each metabolic network
and for each metabolite we removed the compartment char from the metabolite identifier.
Then, if the modified identifier is present in MetaNetX and if there is a synonym for that
identifier in the BIGG database, we checked if some of the BIGG synonyms concatenated
with the before removed compartment char match a metabolite in the manually curated

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

model. If so, we considered that the metabolite is present in the manually curated model.
Otherwise, we considered that the metabolite is not present.

Comparison of reaction sets
Each metabolic network contains a set of reactions. Reactions sets were compared using
two complementary methodologies. First, by using reaction identifier MetaNetX mapping
and second, by using reaction equation comparison.
In the first approach, as a pre-processing step, we removed duplicated reactions (those
reactions with the same MetaNetX identifier even if the reaction equation is different). For
those networks generated with reconstruction tools using the BIGG database (AuReMe,
CarveMe and MetaDraft) reactions identifiers were compared by direct case sensitive string
comparison. For other reconstruction tools, MetaNetX was used to map reaction identifiers,
which also were compared by string comparison.
In the second case, as a pre-processing step, we first removed duplicated reactions (those
with the same equation even if they had different identifiers) and empty reactions (those with
an identifier but with no reactants and products). Then, reaction equations were compared
by comparing each metabolite and its stoichiometry individually. For those networks
generated with reconstruction tools using the BIGG database (AuReMe, CarveMe and
MetaDraft) we directly compared reaction equations. For those networks generated with
reconstruction tools using a database different from BIGG (Merlin, ModelSEED, Pathway
Tools and RAVEN), we first converted metabolite identifiers to BIGG by using MetaNetX
version 3.0 and our own dictionary (S13 Table). Then, reaction equations were compared.
All the comparison was done in MATLAB and model handling was performed using functions
from Cobra Toolbox v.3.0 [14]

Calculation of Jaccard Distance

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

The Jaccard distance (𝐽𝐷) was calculated to compare reconstructions in terms of genes,
reactions and metabolites. For two any sets of elements, 𝑆𝑖 and 𝑆𝑗 , the 𝐽𝐷 is calculated as
𝐽𝐷 = 1 − |𝑆𝑖 ∩ 𝑆𝑗 |/|𝑆𝑖 ∪ 𝑆𝑗 |. We called 𝐽𝐷𝑔 , 𝐽𝐷𝑟 and 𝐽𝐷𝑚 to the 𝐽𝐷 calculated in terms of
genes, reactions and metabolites, respectively. Thus, 𝐽𝐷𝑔 , 𝐽𝐷𝑟 and 𝐽𝐷𝑚 were calculated as:
𝐽𝐷𝑔 = 1 − |𝐺𝑖 ∩ 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑓 |/|𝐺𝑖 ∪ 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑓 |, 𝐺𝑖 being the genes set of the generated draft network
𝑖 and 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑓 being the genes set of the reference network (manually-curated model).
𝐽𝐷𝑟 = 1 − |𝑅𝑖 ∩ 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 |/|𝑅𝑖 ∪ 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 |, 𝑅𝑖 being the reactions set of the generated draft
network 𝑖 and 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 being the reactions set of the reference network (manually-curated
model).
𝐽𝐷𝑚 = 1 − |𝑀𝑖 ∩ 𝑀𝑟𝑒𝑓 |/|𝑀𝑖 ∪ 𝑀𝑟𝑒𝑓 |, 𝑀𝑖 being the metabolites set of the generated draft
network 𝑖 and 𝑀𝑟𝑒𝑓 being the metabolites set of the reference network (manually-curated
model).

Calculation of Ratio
The ratio (𝑅) between the coverage and the percentage of additional elements was
calculated to assess how similar a particular draft network was to the manually curated
reconstruction. We called 𝑅𝑔 , 𝑅𝑟 and 𝑅𝑚 to the 𝑅 calculated in terms of genes, reactions and
metabolites, respectively. Thus, 𝑅𝑔 , 𝑅𝑟 and 𝑅𝑚 were calculated as:
𝑅𝑔 = |𝐺𝑖 ∩ 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑓 |/|𝐺𝑖 − 𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑓 |, 𝐺𝑖 being the genes set of the generated draft network 𝑖 and
𝐺𝑟𝑒𝑓 being the genes set of the reference network (manually-curated model).
𝑅𝑟 = |𝑅𝑖 ∩ 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 |/|𝑅𝑖 − 𝑅𝑟𝑒𝑓 |, 𝑅𝑖 being the reactions set of the generated draft network 𝑖
and 𝑅𝑗 being the reactions set of the reference network (manually-curated model).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

𝑅𝑚 = |𝑀𝑖 ∩ 𝑀𝑟𝑒𝑓 |/|𝑀𝑖 − 𝑀𝑟𝑒𝑓 |, 𝑀𝑖 being the metabolites set of the generated draft network
𝑖 and 𝑀𝑗 being the metabolites set of the reference network (manually-curated model).

Evaluation of performance
We created three models of Lactobacillus plantarum with CarveMe version 1.2.1 and
ModelSEED version 2.4, using different media compositions for the gap-filling procedure
that is carried out internally in these tools. Since the models were not able to generate
biomass with the original media composition of CDM, PMM7 and PMM5 [49], we modified
these mediums to ensure growth. The lack of growth was because of the presence of some
compounds in the biomass equation which were not provided in the media. The modified
mediums were called CMM-like, PMM7-like, PMM5-like, respectively (S2 File).
A set of 34 single-omission experiments [49] were used to evaluate the performance of the
models. True positive were defined as growth in vivo and in silico; True negatives as no
growth in vivo and in silico; False positives as no growth in vivo and growth in silico; False
negatives as growth in vivo but no growth in silico. CDM-like media was used as a basal
media for the single omission experiments. For both in vivo and in silico experiments, growth
rates below 10% of the growth rate obtained in CDM-like were considered as no growth.
Metrics to evaluate the performance were calculated as follows:
𝑆𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦 =

𝑇𝑃
(𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑁)

(1)

𝑇𝑁

𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 = (𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑃)

(2)

𝑇𝑃

𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (𝑇𝑃+𝐹𝑃)

(3)
𝑇𝑁

𝑁𝑒𝑔𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑃𝑟𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑒 𝑉𝑎𝑙𝑢𝑒 (𝑁𝑃𝑉) = (𝑇𝑁+𝐹𝑁)

(4)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁

𝐴𝑐𝑐𝑢𝑟𝑎𝑐𝑦 = (𝑇𝑃+𝑇𝑁 +𝐹𝑁+𝐹𝑃)
(𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛∗𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦)

𝐹 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = 2 ∗ (𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛+𝑠𝑒𝑛𝑠𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑣𝑖𝑡𝑦)

(5)

(6)

Acknowledgements
S.N.M. acknowledges the financial support from CONICYT Becas Chile #72180373 and
Chr. Hansen

Authors contributions
Conceptualization: Sebastián N. Mendoza, Brett G. Olivier, Douwe Molenaar, Bas Teusink
Formal Analysis: Sebastián N. Mendoza
Funding Adquisition: Sebastián N. Mendoza, Bas Teusink
Methodology: Sebastián N. Mendoza, Brett Olivier, Douwe Molenaar, Bas Teusink
Resources: Bas Teusink
Software: Sebastián N. Mendoza
Supervision: Bas Teusink
Writing - original draft: Sebastián N. Mendoza
Writing - review & editing: Sebastián N. Mendoza, Brett G. Olivier, Douwe Molenaar, Bas
Teusink

Conflict of interests
The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Availability
All the reconstructions used as well as the MATLAB functions to generate the models (when
possible)

and

to

compared

them

are

available

at

https://github.com/SystemsBioinformatics/pub-data/reconstruction-tools-assessment.

Abbreviations
FBA: Flux Balance Analysis
GSMM: Genome-scale metabolic model
JD: Jaccard Distance
LAB: lactic acid bacterium.
R: Ratio between the coverage and the percentage of additional elements.
SBML: Systems Biology Markup Language

References
1.

Øyås O, Stelling J. Genome-scale metabolic networks in time and space. Curr Opin
Syst Biol. 2017;8: 51–58. doi:10.1016/j.coisb.2017.12.003

2.

Monk J, Nogales J, Palsson BO. Optimizing genome-scale network reconstructions.
Nat Biotechnol. 2014;32: 447–452. doi:10.1038/nbt.2870

3.

McCloskey D, Palsson BØ, Feist AM. Basic and applied uses of genome-scale
metabolic network reconstructions of Escherichia coli. Mol Syst Biol. 2013;9: 661.
doi:10.1038/msb.2013.18

4.

Oberhardt M a, Palsson BØ, Papin J a. Applications of genome-scale metabolic
reconstructions. Mol Syst Biol. 2009;5: 320. doi:10.1038/msb.2009.77

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

5.

Thiele I, Palsson BØ. A protocol for generating a high-quality genome-scale
metabolic reconstruction. Nat Protoc. 2010;5: 93–121. doi:10.1038/nprot.2009.203

6.

Francke C, Siezen RJ, Teusink B. Reconstructing the metabolic network of a
bacterium from its genome. Trends Microbiol. 2005;13: 550–558.
doi:10.1016/j.tim.2005.09.001

7.

Feist AM, Herrgård MJ, Thiele I, Reed JL, Palsson B. Reconstruction of biochemical
networks in microorganisms. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2009;7: 129–143.
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1949

8.

Hamilton JJ, Reed JL. Software platforms to facilitate reconstructing genome-scale
metabolic networks. Environ Microbiol. 2014;16: 49–59. doi:10.1111/14622920.12312

9.

Faria JP, Rocha M, Rocha I, Henry CS. Methods for automated genome-scale
metabolic model reconstruction. Biochem Soc Trans. 2018;
doi:10.1042/BST20170246

10.

Kim WJ, Kim HU, Lee SY. Current state and applications of microbial genome-scale
metabolic models. Curr Opin Syst Biol. 2017;2: 10–18.

11.

Teusink B, Wiersma A, Molenaar D, Francke C, de Vos WM, Siezen RJ, et al.
Analysis of growth of Lactobacillus plantarum WCFS1 on a complex medium using
a genome-scale metabolic model. J Biol Chem. 2006;281: 40041–40048.
doi:10.1074/jbc.M606263200

12.

dos Santos FB, Olivier BG, Boele J, Smessaert V, De Rop P, Krumpochova P, et al.
Probing the genome-scale metabolic landscape of Bordetella pertussis, the
causative agent of whooping cough. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2017;83.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

doi:10.1128/AEM.01528-17
13.

Almaas E. Automated generation of genome-scale metabolic draft reconstructions
based on. BMC Bioinformatics; 2018;19: 467. doi:10.1186/s12859-018-2472-z

14.

Heirendt L, Arreckx S, Pfau T, Mendoza SN, Richelle A, Heinken A, et al. Creation
and analysis of biochemical constraint-based models: the COBRA Toolbox v3.0.
arXiv. 2018; doi:10.1038/nprot.2011.308

15.

Aite M, Chevallier M, Frioux C, Trottier C, Got J, Cortés MP, et al. Traceability,
reproducibility and wiki-exploration for “à-la-carte” reconstructions of genome-scale
metabolic models. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018;14: 1–25.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006146

16.

Loira N, Zhukova A, Sherman DJ. Pantograph: A template-based method for
genome-scale metabolic model reconstruction. J Bioinform Comput Biol. 2015;13:
1550006. doi:10.1142/S0219720015500067

17.

Caspi R, Billington R, Fulcher CA, Keseler IM, Kothari A, Krummenacker M, et al.
The MetaCyc database of metabolic pathways and enzymes. Nucleic Acids Res.
2018;46. doi:10.1093/nar/gkx935

18.

King ZA, Lu J, Dräger A, Miller P, Federowicz S, Lerman JA, et al. BiGG Models: A
platform for integrating, standardizing and sharing genome-scale models. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2016;44. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1049

19.

Machado D, Andrejev S, Tramontano M, Patil KR. Fast automated reconstruction of
genome-scale metabolic models for microbial species and communities. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2018;46: 7542–7553. doi:10.1093/nar/gky537

20.

Hanemaaijer M, Olivier BG, Röling WFM, Bruggeman FJ, Teusink B. Model-based

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

quantification of metabolic interactions from dynamic microbial-community data.
PLoS One. 2017;12: e0173183. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0173183
21.

Olivier BG. MetaDraft [Internet]. Zenodo; 2018. doi:10.5281/zenodo.2398336

22.

Hucka M, Bergmann FT, Hoops S, Keating SM, Sahle S, Schaff JC, et al. The
Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML): Language Specification for Level 3
Version 1 Core. J Integr Bioinform. 2017;12. doi:10.2390/biecoll-jib-2015-266

23.

Olivier BG, Bergmann FT. SBML Level 3 Package : Flux Balance Constraints
version 2. J Integr Bioinform. 2018;15: 0–38. doi:10.1515/jib-2017-0082

24.

Hucka M, Smith LP, Sciences M. SBML Level 3 package : Groups , Version 1
Release 1. J Integr Bioinform. 2017;13: 1–19. doi:10.2390/biecoll-jib-2016290.SBML

25.

Wang H, Marcis S, Hermansson D, Agren R, Nielsen J, Kerkhoven EJ. RAVEN 2.0 :
A versatile toolbox for metabolic network reconstruction and a case study on
Streptomyces coelicolor. PLoS Comput Biol. 2018; 1–17.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1006541

26.

Kanehisa M, Goto S. KEGG: kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes. Nucleic
Acids Res. 2000;28: 27–30. doi:10.1093/nar/28.1.27

27.

Henry CS, DeJongh M, Best AA, Frybarger PM, Linsay B, Stevens RL. Highthroughput generation, optimization and analysis of genome-scale metabolic
models. Nat Biotechnol. 2010;28: 977–982. doi:10.1038/nbt.1672

28.

Overbeek R, Olson R, Pusch GD, Olsen GJ, Davis JJ, Disz T, et al. The SEED and
the Rapid Annotation of microbial genomes using Subsystems Technology (RAST).
Nucleic Acids Res. 2014;42: 206–214. doi:10.1093/nar/gkt1226

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

29.

Karp PD, Latendresse M, Paley SM, Krummenacker M, Ong QD, Billington R, et al.
Pathway tools version 19.0 update: Software for pathway/genome informatics and
systems biology. Brief Bioinform. 2016;17: 877–890. doi:10.1093/bib/bbv079

30.

Dias O, Rocha M, Ferreira EC, Rocha I. Reconstructing genome-scale metabolic
models with merlin. Nucleic Acids Res. 2015;43: 3899–3910.
doi:10.1093/nar/gkv294

31.

Arkin AP, Cottingham RW, Henry CS, Harris NL, Stevens RL, Maslov S, et al.
KBase: The United States department of energy systems biology knowledgebase.
Nat Biotechnol. 2018;36: 566–569. doi:10.1038/nbt.4163

32.

Pitkänen E, Jouhten P, Hou J, Syed MF, Blomberg P, Kludas J, et al. Comparative
Genome-Scale Reconstruction of Gapless Metabolic Networks for Present and
Ancestral Species. PLoS Comput Biol. 2014;10. doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003465

33.

Pabinger S, Snajder R, Hardiman T, Willi M, Dander A, Trajanoski Z. MEMOSys
2.0: An update of the bioinformatics database for genome-scale models and
genomic data. Database. 2014;2014: 2–7. doi:10.1093/database/bau004

34.

Boele J, Olivier BG, Teusink B. FAME, the Flux Analysis and Modeling
Environment. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6: 8. doi:10.1186/1752-0509-6-8

35.

Liao YC, Tsai MH, Chen FC, Hsiung CA. GEMSiRV: A software platform for
GEnome-scale metabolic model simulation, reconstruction and visualization.
Bioinformatics. 2012;28: 1752–1758. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/bts267

36.

Liao YC, Chen JCY, Tsai MH, Tang YH, Chen FC, Hsiung CA. MrBac: A web server
for draft metabolic network reconstructions for bacteria. Bioeng Bugs. 2011;2: 284–
287. doi:10.4161/bbug.2.5.16113

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

37.

Feng X, Xu Y, Chen Y, Tang YJ. MicrobesFlux: a web platform for drafting
metabolic models from the KEGG database. BMC Syst Biol. 2012;6.
doi:10.1186/1752-0509-6-94

38.

Swainston N, Smallbone K, Mendes P, Kell D, Paton N. The SuBliMinaL Toolbox:
automating steps in the reconstruction of metabolic networks. J Integr Bioinform.
2011;8: 186. doi:10.2390/biecoll-jib-2011-186

39.

Arakawa K, Yamada Y, Shinoda K, Nakayama Y, Tomita M. GEM system:
Automatic prototyping of cell-wide metabolic pathway models from genomes. BMC
Bioinformatics. 2006;7: 1–11. doi:10.1186/1471-2105-7-168

40.

Kumar VS, Maranas CD. GrowMatch: An automated method for reconciling in
silico/in vivo growth predictions. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009;5: 18–20.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000308

41.

Hartleb D, Jarre F, Lercher MJ. Improved Metabolic Models for E. coli and
Mycoplasma genitalium from GlobalFit, an Algorithm That Simultaneously Matches
Growth and Non-Growth Data Sets. PLoS Comput Biol. 2016;12: 1–22.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005036

42.

Medlock GL, Papin JA. Guiding the refinement of biochemical knowledgebases with
ensembles of metabolic networks and semi-supervised learning. bioRxiv. 2018; 1–
14. doi:10.1101/460071

43.

Blazier AS, Papin JA. Reconciling high-throughput gene essentiality data with
metabolic network reconstructions. bioRxiv. 2018; 1–36. doi:10.1101/415448

44.

Lieven C, Beber ME, Olivier BG, Bergmann FT, Correia K, Diener C, et al. Memote :
A community driven effort towards a standardized genome-scale metabolic model

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

test suite. bioRxiv. 2018; 1–26.
45.

Novère N Le, Finney A, Hucka M, Bhalla US, Campagne F, Collado-vides J, et al.
Minimum information requested in the annotation of biochemical models ( MIRIAM ).
Nat Biotechnol. 2005;23: 1509–1515. doi:10.1038/nbt1156

46.

Teusink B, Smid EJ. Modelling strategies for the industrial exploitation of lactic acid
bacteria. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2006;4: 46–56. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1319

47.

Mujagic Z, De Vos P, Boekschoten M V., Govers C, Pieters HJHM, De Wit NJW, et
al. The effects of Lactobacillus plantarum on small intestinal barrier function and
mucosal gene transcription; A randomized double-blind placebo controlled trial. Sci
Rep. 2017;7: 1–11. doi:10.1038/srep40128

48.

Molin G. Probiotics in foods not containing milk or milk constituentes, with special
reference to Lactobacillus plantarum 299v. Am J Clin Nutr. 2001;73: 380S–385S.
doi:10.1093/ajcn/73.2.380s

49.

Wegkamp A, Teusink B, de Vos WM, Smid EJ. Development of a minimal growth
medium for Lactobacillus plantarum. Lett Appl Microbiol. 2010;50: 57–64.
doi:10.1111/j.1472-765X.2009.02752.x

50.

Heinken A, Thiele I. Anoxic conditions promote species-specific mutualism between
gut microbes In Silico. Appl Environ Microbiol. 2015;81: 4049–4061.
doi:10.1128/AEM.00101-15

51.

Saulnier DM, Santos F, Roos S, Mistretta TA, Spinler JK, Molenaar D, et al.
Exploring metabolic pathway reconstruction and genome-wide expression profiling
in Lactobacillus reuteri to define functional probiotic features. PLoS One. 2011;6.
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0018783

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

52.

Melvin JA, Scheller E V, Miller JF, Cotter PA. Bordetella pertussis pathogenesis :
current and future challenges. Nat Rev Microbiol. 2014;12: 274–288.
doi:10.1038/nrmicro3235

53.

Magnúsdóttir S, Heinken A, Kutt L, Ravcheev DA, Bauer E, Noronha A, et al.
Generation of genome-scale metabolic reconstructions for 773 members of the
human gut microbiota. Nat Biotechnol. 2016;35: 81–89. doi:10.1038/nbt.3703

54.

Moretti S, Martin O, Van Du Tran T, Bridge A, Morgat A, Pagni M.
MetaNetX/MNXref - Reconciliation of metabolites and biochemical reactions to bring
together genome-scale metabolic networks. Nucleic Acids Res. 2016;44: D523–
D526. doi:10.1093/nar/gkv1117

55.

Teusink B, Enckevort FHJ Van, Francke C, Wiersma A, Wegkamp A, Smid EJ, et al.
In silico reconstruction of the metabolic pathways of Lactobacillus plantarum:
comparing predictions of nutrient requirements with those from growth experiments.
Appl Environ Microbiol. 2005;71: 7253–7262. doi:10.1128/AEM.71.11.7253

56.

Hahn AS, Altman T, Konwar KM, Hanson NW, Kim D, Relman DA, et al. A
geographically-diverse collection of 418 human gut microbiome pathway genome
databases. Sci Data. 2017;4: 1–12. doi:10.1038/sdata.2017.35

57.

Wilkinson MD. Comment : The FAIR Guiding Principles for scientific data
management and stewardship. Sci Data. 2016; 1–9.

58.

Sanchez B, Nielsen J. Genome scale models of yeast: towards standardized
evaluation and consistent omic integration. Integr Biol. 2015;7: 846–858.
doi:10.1039/c5ib00083a

59.

Monk JM, Lloyd CJ, Brunk E, Mih N, Sastry A, King Z, et al. iML1515, a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

knowledgebase that computes Escherichia coli traits. Nat Biotechnol. 2017;35: 8–
12.
60.

Thiele I, Swainston N, Fleming RMT, Hoppe A, Sahoo S, Aurich MK, et al. A
community-driven global reconstruction of human metabolism. Nat Biotechnol.
2013;31: 419–425. doi:10.1038/nbt.2488

61.

Sauls JT, Buescher JM. Assimilating genome-scale metabolic reconstructions with
modelBorgifier. Bioinformatics. 2014;30: 1036–1038.
doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt747

62.

Pham N, Heck RGA Van, Dam JCJ Van, Schaap PJ, Suarez-diez M. Consistency,
Inconsistency and Ambiguity of Metabolite Names in Biochemical Databases Used
for Genome Scale Metabolic Modelling. bioRxiv. 2018;

63.

Opdam S, Richelle A, Kellman B, Li S, Daniel C, Lewis NE, et al. A systematic
evaluation of methods for tailoring genome-scale metabolic models. Cell Syst.
2018;4: 318–329. doi:10.1016/j.cels.2017.01.010.A

64.

Machado D, Herrga M. Systematic Evaluation of Methods for Integration of
Transcriptomic Data into Constraint-Based Models of Metabolism. 2014;10.
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003580

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure Legends
Fig 1.

List of important features for genome-scale reconstruction and software

quality and qualitative assessment of the studied genome-scale metabolic
reconstruction tools. We evaluated each of the tools (AU: AuReeMe. CA: CarveMe. MD:
MetaDraft. ME: Merlin. MS: ModelSEED. PT: Pathway Tools. RA: RAVEN) from an
unsatisfactory (red) to an outstanding performance (dark green). In some categories such
as continuous software maintenance and proper support, on the top of the figure, all the
tools got the maximum score while in others such as automatic refinement using
experimental data, none of the tools got the maximum. In most of the cases, strengths in
some tools are weaknesses in others
Fig 2. Jaccard distance versus the ratio between coverage and percentage of
additional genes for draft reconstructions of Lactobacillus plantarum (A) and
Bordetella pertussis (B). We used the Jaccard distance and the ratio to measure the
similarity between the draft reconstructions and the corresponding manually curated models,
in this case, when the networks are analyzed in terms of genes. The networks more similar
to the manually curated models are located on the top left side of the plot. Thus, the draft
reconstructions more similar to the manually curated models were created by AuReMe,
MetaDraft and RAVEN.
Fig 3. Overlap of genes in draft reconstructions for Lactobacillus plantarum with
those in the manually-curated model, iLP728. In total, 29 networks were reconstructed
with 7 tools (CarveMe: CA, MetaDraft: MD, AuReMe: AU, Pathway Tools: PT, ModelSEED:
MS, RAVEN: RA, Merlin: ME). Several reconstructions, which are represented with different
sub-indices, were generated for each tool using different parameters settings. Numbers
inside bars represent percentages with respect to the total number of genes in iLP728. The
coverage (blue bars) ranged from 49.7% to 87.8% while the percentage of additional genes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(yellow bars) ranged from 4.3% to 65.0%. Most of the genes that were not recovered (dark
green bars) are related to very specific metabolic functions that were carefully incorporated
during the manual curation of iLP728 such as polysaccharide biosynthesis and transport.
Fig 4. Overlap of genes in draft reconstructions for Bordetella pertussis with those in
the manually curated model, iBP1870. In total, 27 networks were reconstructed with 7
tools (CarveMe: CA, MetaDraft: MD, AureME: AU, Pathway Tools: PT, RAVEN: RA, Merlin:
ME). Several reconstructions, which are represented with different sub-indices, were
generated for each tool using different parameters settings. Numbers inside bars represent
percentages with respect to the total number of genes in iBO1870. The coverage (blue bars)
ranged from 49.4% to 83.0% while the percentage of additional genes (yellow bars) ranged
from 18.6% to 99.0%. The genes that were not recovered (dark green bars) are related to
very specific metabolic functions that were carefully incorporated during the manual curation
of iBP1870 such as transport and ferredoxin/thioredoxin-related reactions.
Fig 5. Overlap of reactions in draft reconstructions for Lactobacillus plantarum with
those in the manually-curated model, iLP728. In total, 29 networks were reconstructed
with 7 tools (CarveMe: CA, MetaDraft: MD, AuReMe: AU, Pathway Tools: PT, ModelSEED:
MS, RAVEN: RA, Merlin: ME). Several reconstructions, which are represented with different
sub-indices, were generated for each tool using different parameters settings. Numbers
inside bars represent percentages with respect to the corrected number of reactions in
iLP728, which is the total number of reactions in iLP728 minus the biomass-related reactions
(light green). We observed a wide variation in the coverage (blue bars) and percentage of
additional reactions (yellow bars). In addition, an important number of reactions in the
networks build with ModelSEED, RAVEN (KEGG) and Merlin contained different
stoichiometry for protons than those in iLP728 (dark green bars).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Fig 6. Overlap of reactions in draft reconstructions for Bordetella pertussis with those
in the manually-curated model, iBP1870. In total, 27 networks were reconstructed with 7
tools (CarveMe: CA, MetaDraft: MD, AuReMe: AU, Pathway Tools: PT, ModelSEED: MS,
RAVEN: RA, Merlin: ME). Several reconstructions, which are represented with different subindices, were generated for each tool using different parameters settings. Numbers inside
bars represent percentages with respect to the corrected number of reactions in iBP1870,
which is the total number of reactions minus the biomass-related reactions (light green). We
observed a wide variation in the coverage (blue bars) and percentage of additional reactions
(yellow bars). In addition, an important number of reactions in the networks build with
MODELSEED, RAVEN (KEGG) and Merlin contained different stoichiometry for protons
than those in iBP1870 (draft green bars).
Fig 7. Jaccard distance versus the ratio between coverage and percentage of
additional reactions for draft reconstructions of Lactobacillus plantarum (A) and
Bordetella pertussis (B). We used the Jaccard distance and the ratio the measure the
similarity between the draft reconstructions and the corresponding manually curated model,
in this case, when the networks are analyzed in terms of reactions. The networks more
similar to the manually curated models are located on the top left side of the plot. Thus, the
draft reconstructions more similar, in terms of reactions, to the manually curated models
were created by AuReMe, MetaDraft and CarveMe

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supporting information captions
S1 Fig. Performance of models made with CarveMe and ModelSEED for Lactobacillus
plantarum when different media compositions were provided for the internal gapfilling performed in these tools. Networks gap-filled with CDM-like got an accuracy lower
but close to the obtained with the manually-curated model. For both tools, when PMM7-like
or PMM5-like was used, the accuracy score increased due to the decrease in false negative
results. For both tools, the lines corresponding to PMM7-like are not visible because they
overlap with the ones of PMM5-like.
S1 Table. List of genome-scale metabolic reconstruction tools and databases.
S2 Table. Specification of scores in each feature evaluated.
S3 Table. Detailed evaluation of the reconstruction tools
S4 Table. Calculated Jaccard Distance between genes, metabolites and reactions sets
in draft networks of L. plantarum and those in iLP728.
S5 Table. Calculated Jaccard Distance between genes, metabolites and reactions sets
in draft networks of B. pertussis and those in iBP1870.
S6 Table. Similarity of draft reconstructions of L. plantarum to iLP728 in terms of
reactions, metabolites and genes.
S7 Table. Similarity of draft reconstructions of B. pertussis to iBP1870 in terms of
reactions, metabolites and genes.
S8 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 92 genes of iLP728 which were
recovered in all the draft networks of Lactobacillus plantarum
S9 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 121 genes of iBP1870 which were
recovered in all the draft networks of Bordetella pertussis

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S10 Table. Reaction coverage for draft reconstructions of L. plantarum using different
approaches.
S11 Table. Reaction coverage for draft reconstructions of B. pertussis using different
approaches.
S12 Table. New unique reaction synonyms pairs that were automatically discovered
for both species with the reaction equation comparison approach.
S13 Table. Compound synonyms pairs that were semi-automatically discovered.
S14 Table. Additional reaction synonyms discovered.
S15 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 71 reactions of iLP728 which were
recovered in all the draft networks of Lactobacillus plantarum.
S16 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 91 reactions of iBP1870 which were
recovered in all the draft networks of Bordetella pertussis.
S167 Table. Classification of reactions in iLP728 which were not recovered by any
draft network of L. plantarum.
S18 Table. Classification of reactions in iBP1870 which were not recovered by any
draft network of B. pertussis.
S19 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 208 metabolites of iLP728 which
were recovered in all the draft networks of Lactobacillus plantarum.
S20 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 266 metabolites of iBP1870 which
were recovered in all the draft networks of Bordetella pertussis.
S21 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 9 metabolites which were recovered
in all the draft networks of L. plantarum and were not in iLP728.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

S22 Table. Metabolic processes associated to the 13 metabolites which were
recovered in all the draft networks of Bordetella pertussis and were not in iBP1870.
S23 Table. Topological analysis for draft recontructions of L. plantarum.
S24 Table. Topological analysis for draft recontructions of B. pertussis.
S1 File. Specific input and parameters set to obtain each of the reconstructions
studied.
S2 File. Composition of CDM-like, PMM7-like and PMM5-like mediums.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1.

Feature
Continuous software
maintenance

Description
AU
There is a team of specialists working on improving the tool
and fixing bugs

Proper support to users

There is a team of specialists answering user's questions

CA

TOOLS
MD ME MS PT

RA
Unsatisfactory

Poor
Up to date reference
databases/resources

The tool uses updated databases (BIGG, MetaCyc,
ModelSEED, KEGG, etc)

Straightforward installation The process of installation is fast and easy. In the case of
online services, the creation of an account is fast and easy.

FEATURES

Software availability

The software is easily accessible by any user and if more
than one version exists, all are free.

Able to reconstruct
eukaryotes

It is possible to generate draft reconstructions not only for
prokaryotes but also for eukaryotes

Dependencies

Dependence on free software and databases

Comprehensive
documentation

There is an up-to-date user manual that explains all the
features of the software.

It meets current standards

Outputs and inputs (if applied) with the latest SBML
standards

User-friendly interface

The software has a user-friendly interface which also allows
non-specialists to use the software

Fast

The computational time to get a draft reconstruction is
short

Open-source

The source code is open to all the users

Reproducibility of results
over time

It is possible to get the same results in the long term. This
implies to be able to use the same inputs and algorithms
over time. If so, the same draft should be returned by the
tool.models have all the fields required. Those fields
The
contain few cells with no information

Completeness of model
fields.
Similarity with manuallycurated models, as
knowledgebases
Automatization

The draft reconstruction is similar to a manually-curated
genome-scale metabolic reconstruction

Manual refinement
assistance

Provide workspace and assistance for manual refinement
(add user-defined reactions, balance reactions, provide
thermodynamic information, info from UniProt, etc)
The software allows submitting sequential jobs for
reconstructing a high number (>20) of networks

Customizable for a high
number of genomes
Flexibility in parameter
settings
Provides synonyms for
metabolites and reactions
Traceability

Fully automatic process and a metabolic network ready for
FBA

It is possible to set different values of parameters (alpha
values, others) and use inputs (databases, templates
models, fasta sequences) provided by the user
It provides identifiers which link metabolites and reactions
to other databases
It is possible to keep a register of the changes performed in
a draft network to get the final network

Automatic refinement using Able to automatically integrate experimental data for
experimental data
curation

Satisfactory

Good

Outstanding

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/558411; this version posted February 22, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 7.

