bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rapid Sensorimotor Reinforcement in the Olfactory Striatum

Daniel J. Millman†1,2 and Venkatesh N. Murthy*2,3

1Graduate
2Department

Program in Neuroscience, Harvard University

of Molecular & Cellular Biology, Harvard University

3Center

†Current

for Brain Science, Harvard University

address: Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, WA

*Corresponding author: vnmurthy@fas.harvard.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract

Rodents can successfully learn multiple, novel stimulus-response associations after only a few
repetitions when the contingencies predict reward. The circuits modified during such reinforcement
learning to support decision making are not known, but the olfactory tubercle (OT) and posterior piriform
cortex (pPC) are candidates for decoding reward category from olfactory sensory input and relaying this
information to cognitive and motor areas. Here, we show that an explicit representation for reward
category emerges in the OT within minutes of learning a novel odor-reward association, whereas the
pPC lacks an explicit representation even after weeks of overtraining. The explicit reward category
representation in OT is visible in the first sniff (50-100ms) of an odor on each trial, and precedes the
motor action. Together, these results suggest that coding of stimulus information required for reward
prediction does not occur within olfactory cortex, but rather in circuits involving the olfactory striatum.

Introduction

Reinforcement learning can quickly improve decision making by discovering and emphasizing features
of the environment (e.g. sensory inputs) and actions of the animal (e.g. motor outputs) that correlate
with positive or negative outcomes (Dayan and Niv, 2008; Sutton and Barto, 1998). Rodents can
successfully learn to associate odor cues with motor responses following only a few repetitions of trialand-error per odor when the correct response is reinforced by reward (Slotnick, 2001; Slotnick et al.,
2000). The resulting decision process can be highly odor-specific: mice can accurately determine the
presence or absence of a single rewarded odor hidden within previously unexperienced mixtures of
more than a dozen distractors with similar molecular features as the target rewarded odor (Rokni et al.,
2014). Converging evidence suggests that midbrain (VTA) dopaminergic neurons convey the
reinforcement signal needed for learning (Cohen et al., 2012; Schultz et al., 1997), however the neural
circuits that are modified through reinforcement are not known.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In the olfactory bulb, sensory processing begins with a dedicated channel (i.e. glomerulus) for each
olfactory receptor. An optimal linear readout of these channels is sufficient to determine the presence of
any individual odor among at least a moderately-sized (16 odor) panel of structurally similar odors and,
thus, decide the appropriate motor action given a complex sensory scene (Mathis et al., 2016). The
success of a linear readout implies that any monosynaptic recipient of OB output could learn to make
accurate sensorimotor decisions through biologically-plausible mechanisms such as reward-gated
Hebbian plasticity (Hung et al., 2005; Loewenstein and Seung, 2006; Pfeiffer et al., 2010; Reynolds and
Wickens, 2002).

Although several brain regions receive input from OB, many of these regions are arranged in a feedforward hierarchy (with abundant feedback connectivity), ultimately converging on the posterior piriform
cortex (pPC) and the olfactory tubercle (OT) (Giessel and Datta, 2014; Ikemoto, 2007; Wesson and
Wilson, 2011; Yamaguchi, 2017; Zhang et al., 2017a). pPC is an association cortex, with the axons of
individual neurons branching and projecting to multiple cognitive brain regions, including orbitofrontal
cortex, amygdala, medial temporal lobe (Diodato et al., 2016; Johnson et al., 2000). Although the OT is
located in the ventral striatum (Heimer et al., 1982; Ikemoto, 2007), its anatomy more closely resembles
the dorsal striatum. However, OT is specialized for olfaction with a well-defined cell body layer that
receives input directly from OB in addition to input from multiple olfactory cortical areas (Wesson and
Wilson, 2011; Zhang et al., 2017a). In turn, OT is by far the largest source of olfactory input to VTA
(Watabe-Uchida et al., 2012), suggesting a prominent role in reward-related behaviors.

Physiological evidence suggests that an important transformation in odor coding occurs in pPC and OT
during sensorimotor decision making. Activity of single-neurons that correlate with choice and reward
has been observed in both pPC and OT (Calu et al., 2007; Gadziola and Wesson, 2016; Gadziola et al.,
2015). The anterior piriform cortex, which immediately precedes pPC and OT in the anatomical hierarchy
of olfactory regions, does not have choice activity in the first sniff of an odor stimulus (Miura et al., 2012),
when decision making occurs (Abraham et al., 2004; Rinberg et al., 2006; Uchida and Mainen, 2003),

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

although subsequent activity can reflect the decision (Gire et al., 2013). Single-neuron reward-selectivity
for single odors emerges prior to the motor response at the level of OT neurons (Gadziola et al., 2015),
however it is not known whether this is the case for pPC as well. If reward-selectivity is computed in
pPC during decision making, OT could inherit this selectivity. Alternatively, heavy interconnection with
the reward system provides the OT with the necessary reinforcement signals and plasticity-inducing
dopamine for learning arbitrary odor-reward associations (Gadziola et al., 2015; Wieland et al., 2015).
Indeed, responses of neurons to visual stimuli in dorsal striatum strongly reflect a newly learned reward
association with a few trials of successful learning (Pasupathy and Miller, 2005; Schultz et al., 2003), so
the olfactory striatum could function similarly to learn odor-outcome associations.

We developed a novel odor-reward categorization task in order to investigate the contributions of pPC
and OT to odor-driven sensorimotor learning and decision making. To this end, we recorded the activity
of single neurons in pPC and OT as mice learned, through trial-and-error, the reward valence assigned
to a panel of previously unexperienced odor stimuli. This approach was designed to study and dissect
the interaction of odor coding with reward coding in these brain regions. Along with neural recordings,
we simultaneously measured sniffing in order to focus on the earliest components of sensory processing
and decision making during the first sniff of odor cues. Behavioral responses indicated that mice reliably
learned odor-reward contingencies within a single session, permitting the evolution of neural activity to
be monitored throughout the learning process. We observed that reward selectivity was easily found in
OT, multiplexed with odor selectivity, whereas explicit reward selectivity was largely absent in pPC.
Together, these results support a striatal, rather than cortical, model of rodent olfactory sensorimotor
learning.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Results

Mice quickly learn to categorize rewarded and unrewarded odors
We trained head-restrained mice to decide, based on the identity of an odor stimulus, whether to
respond (Go) or not respond (No-Go) (Figure 1A; see Methods). A panel of eight odors (four rewarded
and four unrewarded) was presented on randomly interleaved trials during each experimental session.
This panel size enabled us to characterize the sparseness of odor tuning while yielding 20-30
repetitions per odor to accurately measure behavioral and neural responses to the odor.

Mice acquired the task structure and reached a high level of performance (>90% correct trials) within
three to four sessions from the start of training with odors (one session per day, consecutive days;
Figure 1B-D; 14 mice). Among correct behavioral responses, the fraction of go responses on rewarded
odor trials (i.e. hit rate) started higher and peaked earlier than the fraction of no-go responses on
unrewarded odor trial (i.e. correct rejection rate), reflecting an initial behavioral bias towards licking.
Upon further training, mice consistently began licking within 200-400ms of odor onset (Figure 1C) for
rewarded odors and maintained licking until reward delivery but did not even initiate licking on most
unrewarded odor trials (Figure 1C), indicating that the animals became confident of the reward
association early during odor presentation. In a typical session, mice worked for about 300-500 trials
and collected 150-250 water rewards before they were satiated.

Naive mice were initially trained on the task with the same panel of eight odors each day (one session
per day) until they achieved successful performance (>90% correct) for two consecutive sessions.
Following successful learning of the task structure, we replaced a subset of the odors with novel odors
to study learning of odor-reward associations which were typically learned to near-saturating (>90%
correct) performance within one or two subsequent sessions. This process was repeated in daily
sessions that continued for one to two months in the same mouse. Thus, the rapid learning of novel
odor-reward associations permitted the observation of behavior and physiology during the acquisition

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of many odor-reward pairs. We first present analysis from sessions with odor-reward pairs in which
successful learning had already been demonstrated through saturated high behavioral performance in
a previous session (“familiar odors”) to characterize odor and reward tuning properties in pPC and OT.
Subsequently, we describe the changes in behavioral and neuronal responses during the sessions in
which novel odor-reward pairs were introduced and learning took place (“novel odors”).

Since neural responses to odors is aligned to respiration (Cury and Uchida, 2010; Shusterman et al.,
2011), and behaving rodents can alter the rate of sniffing significantly (Kepecs et al., 2007; Welker,
1964; Wesson et al., 2008), we monitored respiration with a cannula implanted over the nasal cavity,
contralateral to the side where tetrode recordings were performed. Once familiar with the task
structure, the rate of sniffing during odor presentation did not differ from the spontaneous rate between
trials (3.8 ± 0.52 s-1 vs. 3.9 ± 0.45 s-1; Supp Figure 1).

Task-related activity in pPC and OT
We used multi-tetrode drives (Gray et al., 1995) to isolate and record single units in either pPC (n=6
mice; 385 isolated units) or OT (n=8 mice; 270 isolated units). Following the completion of all behavior
and recordings, tetrode placement was confirmed with an electrolytic lesion and postmortem histology
(Supp Figure 2). Peri-stimulus time histograms (PSTHs) are shown for representative pPC and OT
cells in Figure 2A,B. Since odor responses began following the first sniff during odor presentation, all
of the remaining analyses were performed using the time of the first sniff as the start time for each
trial. An example of sniff-aligned and odor onset-aligned activity for the same OT cell is shown in
(Figure 2A) for comparison.

To characterize the responses of neurons to odors, we used the metric of area under the receiveroperating characteristic curve (auROC) for each cell-odor pair relative to baseline (i.e. pre-stimulus)
firing rate ((Green and Swets, 1966); see Methods). We plotted the responses for all significant cellodor pairs (at least one 100ms bin different from baseline at a significance level of p < 0.01) in both

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

areas with rewarded and unrewarded odors separated to look for differences in prevalence of specific
type of activity (Figure 2C,D). With this criterion, 69 units in pPC and 177 units in OT responded to at
least one odor. This significance measure was used only for visualization and initial characterization,
and further analysis (such as decoding) used all recorded neurons.

Baseline firing of pPC neurons was low (2.33 ± 3.77 Hz, n = 372 units; Supp Figure 2) and odor
responses were predominantly excitatory (Figure 2C). As expected, neurons with excitatory responses
showed odor selectivity, responding only to a subset of odors (Figure 2A,B). Many cells continued to
respond for the duration of the one second odor presentation, seen as sustained band of yellow
(Figure 2C). Other cells had a strong transient (100-200ms) response well aligned to the first
inhalation of an odor, but did not respond for the remainder of the odor presentation despite continued
sniffing (Figure 2C). Interestingly, the cells that were inhibited appear to be inhibited by all odors nonselectively. Low baseline firing rates made it difficult to detect odor-selective inhibition, if it were
present, and suggest that these neurons did not directly contribute to odor discrimination. Therefore,
inhibitory responses of pPC neurons were not analyzed further.

The responses of OT neurons were clearly distinguishable from those of pPC neurons in several
ways. Higher baseline firing rates (e.g. greater than 5 Hz) were much more common in OT (16.2 ±
16.9 Hz, n = 270 units; Supp Figure 2). Unlike pPC, a substantial portion of neurons were inhibited
during odor presentation, often following a brief period of excitation (Figure 2D). Transient excitatory
responses at the beginning of odor presentation were much more prevalent in the OT (Figure 2D). OT
neurons tended to be less odor selective according to a lifetime sparseness measure (Willmore and
Tolhurst, 2001), but neurons in both regions spanned a wide range of selectivity (Supp Figure 2).

Reward-related activity at the single neuron level
We characterized reward coding in the pPC and OT, first focusing on familiar odors (i.e. odors that the
mouse successfully learned in a previous session). Responses lasting longer than 500ms were more

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

common in OT for rewarded odors than unrewarded odors (Figure 2D). In contrast, the overall
distribution of response profiles did not differ between rewarded and unrewarded odors for pPC
neurons (Figure 2C). This difference is clearly visible in the global average responses for rewarded vs.
unrewarded odors for both areas, with OT neurons (but not pPC neurons) clearly showing divergent
responses starting around 300 ms after onset of the first sniff (Figure 2E).

We then examined the extent to which reward information was explicitly available in the firing rate of
individual neurons. Firing rates of individual neurons in each area suggested that OT neurons may be
more discriminating between rewarded and unrewarded odors than pPC neurons (Figure 3A,B). An
auROC analysis comparing responses to all rewarded odors to all unrewarded odors revealed that
reward selectivity was substantially more prevalent in OT than pPC both during and after odor
presentation (Figure 3C,D). Furthermore, roughly equal numbers of OT cells responded with higher
firing rates for rewarded odors than unrewarded odors (yellow in Figure 3D) versus higher firing rates
for unrewarded odors than rewarded odors (blue in Figure 3D). In fact, some cells switched preference
(i.e. higher firing rate) between rewarded and unrewarded odors during the course of the response.

We then asked whether reward selectivity emerged at times corresponding to particular task events,
such as stimulus onset or reward delivery. In order to measure the significance of reward selectivity,
we compared the auROC at times after odor onset against the distribution of auROCs during prestimulus time. Consistent with a lack of actual reward selectivity for pPC cells, the times at which the
reward auROC first reached a very liberal threshold of significance (p < 0.01, 35 comparisons per cell
for the 100ms time bins spanning the 3.5s window; family-wise type 1 error rate = 0.296) were
scattered throughout the trial and not well-aligned to any task events (Figure 3E: orange). In contrast,
reward selectivity emerged in 46% of OT cells within the first 300ms of odor sampling (Figure 3E:
blue). The absence of any subsequent peaks indicates that there was not a separate population of OT
neurons that responded only to later task events, such as reward delivery. The majority of these
selective responses emerged before the mouse began to lick on rewarded odor trials (Figure 3F). This

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

difference in reward selectivity between neurons in pPC and OT was not simply due to differences in
stimulus selectivity and firing rates in the two regions (Supp Figure 3).

Reward coding at the population level
Collectively, many individual cells with weak reward valence selectivity could still give rise to reliable
valence selectivity at the population level. To determine whether our pPC and OT datasets had this
property, we attempted to decode the valence of odors from single trial responses of cells in each area
using a support vector machine with a linear kernel (Hastie et al., 2009). For each cell, the trials during
the session it was recorded were randomly assigned to training (80%), validation (10%), and test
(10%) sets.

To empirically determine an appropriate time window to analyze, we decoded reward valence from OT
activity for a series of windows beginning at the first inhalation of the stimulus; specifically, we used
the average firing rate response (i.e. baseline subtracted) for each cell within the window. Decoding
performance improved with progressively longer time windows until saturation at ~200ms (Figure 4A).
Accordingly, all subsequent decoding analyses were performed using the average firing rate response
within a 200ms window beginning at the first sniff of the odor.

To directly test for an explicit population code for reward valence, we trained linear classifiers (SVMs)
to decode reward from the responses to a set of four odors (2 rewarded, 2 unrewarded), then tested
the ability of the same classifier to decode reward from the responses to the other set of four odors
presented in the same session (Figure 4B). Overall, we found that classifiers trained on OT data
successfully decoded reward from responses to odors that the classifiers did not see during training.
On the other hand, classifiers trained on pPC data did not have this property. Importantly, these results
were consistent across individual mice (OT: n=5 mice, pPC: n=3 mice) and odor sets for which
populations of at least 5 cells were available (Figure 4B; Methods)

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A single neuron could respond similarly to two odors with the same valence, because the response is
valence-specific or strictly due to similar purely sensory-driven responses evoked by the two odors. In
turn, the activity of a population of neurons might also falsely appear to discriminate rewarded versus
unrewarded odors due to chance (i.e. the presence of sensory but not reward information) when
probing with a small number of odors. If population activity explicitly codes for reward valence beyond
sensory tuning alone, however, a single classifier should be able to decode the reward valence for
increasingly larger number of odors without performance declining because the reward information
persists despite the presence of extraneous stimulus-specific information. Therefore, we tested the
ability of a decoder to classify reward valence from progressively larger number of odors (e.g. 1
rewarded odor versus 1 unrewarded odor, 2 rewarded odors versus 2 unrewarded odors, etc.). To
minimize the contribution of stimulus tuning for any single odor to the overall ability to successfully
categorize rewarded versus unrewarded odors, we leveraged the fact that the data collected from
each mouse comprised many odor-reward associations, aggregated from individual sessions with 8
odors each. We therefore trained and tested the classifiers on this pooled dataset with balanced
numbers of rewarded and unrewarded odors (14 mice; minimum of 5 sessions per mouse).
Importantly, the size of the training set (i.e. number of single-trial responses) was held constant
regardless of the number of odors used.

In this test, the decoder successfully classified pPC responses to two odors (one rewarded and one
unrewarded), but performance declined rapidly when challenged to decode valence from responses to
larger numbers of odors suggesting that pPC odor responses conveyed little to no linearly-decodable
information about valence (Figure 4Ci). As a control, we compared this result to the decoding
performance achieved by a classifier that was trained and tested on the same dataset after shuffling
the valence labels of the odors. This shuffling procedure would remove any potential explicit reward
information and force the decoder to rely on stimulus-tuning alone for classification. Decoding
performance on valence-shuffled pPC data followed the same trend as the unshuffled pPC data
(Figure 4Cii), again suggesting the absence of an explicit code for reward in pPC. In contrast, decoder

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

performance for the OT data did not decrease substantially as the number of odors increased (Figure
4Di), but did decrease for valence-shuffled OT data, confirming that valence-specific information was
lost in the shuffling process (Figure 4Dii).

These results clearly indicate that the reward category of odors could be explicitly read out from small
groups of OT neurons, but not from pPC neurons.

Multiplexing of odor and reward codes
To assess the degree to which odor identity information is represented in the activity of pPC or OT
neurons, we picked sets of four odors (two rewarded and two unrewarded) for which we had the most
cells recorded during sessions in which all four odors were used (mean: 24 cells, range: 12-45 cells).
We quantified odor identity information as the decoding accuracy when classifying responses to one
odor versus responses to the other three odors (i.e. “one versus rest” classification). For each brain
region, we tested separately the performance of different mice and sets of odors. In OT, decoding of
any individual odor was significantly better than chance (Figure 5A). Decoding of individual odors was
much worse in pPC than OT, close to chance (Figure 5A). This is likely due to sparse odor responses
in pPC (Supp Figure 2) resulting in few or no responses to a given odor within the relatively small
populations of cells available for this analysis (mean: 32 cells per odor set in pPC). This analysis
indicated that neurons in OT carry information about odor identity multiplexed with reward information.

To visualize the multiplexing of odor and reward selectivity, we created a bar code for each neuron
that separates responses to each of the eight individual odors but also distinguishes odors based on
their reward valence (Figure 5B). The position of each odor in the bar code corresponds to the rankorder of the response magnitude (during the first 200ms window), from most positive on the left to
most negative on the right. The color of each segment corresponds to the valence of the odor
(red=rewarded; black=unrewarded) and the intensity of the color corresponds to the odor-evoked
response normalized to the strongest response among the eight odors. The combined barcodes from

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

neurons in the two regions illustrate that pPC neurons have sparse selectivity for odors and do not
discriminate valence, whereas OT neurons respond much more densely to odors and partially, but not
entirely, discriminate valence (Figure 5C).

Novel odor learning
The results described thus far established that OT neurons had an explicit representation for reward
valence that was multiplexed with odor tuning, whereas pPC neurons lacked an explicit representation
for reward valence. Next, we investigated the evolution of reward coding during the process of
learning novel odor-reward associations, which we were able to do within recording sessions.
Approximately every other session following successful learning of the task structure (total of 71
sessions), four of the eight odors that had been used in previous sessions were replaced with four
novel odors (two rewarded and two unrewarded) (Supp Figure 4A). Mice were not exposed to the
odors prior to training and reward valence was randomly assigned to each odor for every mouse.

We found that across different mice and different novel odors (8 mice, 71 sessions) rapid learning
occurs in the very first session, with additional improvement in performance over the next two
sessions (Figure 6A,B). Correct go responses to rewarded odors become frequent earlier than correct
no-go responses to unrewarded odors (Supp Figure 4). High accuracy is maintained in these sessions
for the already familiar odors (Figure 6B, right).

We recorded activity of OT neurons during novel odor learning, with four familiar and four unfamiliar
odors presented in randomly interleaved trials (Figure 6B). We asked whether the activity of individual
neurons changed during the course of the session by examining the difference in firing rate for the first
and last 10 trials of an odor. For each OT cell recorded during learning, we calculated the change in
response to each novel odor normalized to the mean and standard deviation of the cell's responses to
the four familiar odors used in the same session. Across the population of neurons, we found that the
distribution of these normalized response changes for rewarded novel odors was significantly different

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(mean change of 0.22 +/- 0.13 spikes/s, 69 cells, p = 0.02) from the distribution for unrewarded novel
odors (mean change of - 0.22 +/- 0.14 spikes/s, 61 cells, Figure 6C).

To determine whether odor-reward associations were reflected in the activity of populations of OT
neurons during learning, we leveraged the fact that only four of the odors were novel in learning
sessions and the other four odors were familiar (i.e. learned in a previous session). We therefore
compared the evolution of reward selectivity of novel odors using the familiar odors as a reference
point (Figure 6D, inset). To this end, we trained a linear decoder to classify single-trial responses
(mean firing rate response in first 200ms of odor sampling) to familiar rewarded versus unrewarded
odors, then tested the performance on novel rewarded and unrewarded odors. First, we quantified the
density of reward valence coding in OT by determining the minimum population size for which this
training procedure resulted in decoding accuracy that approximated the average behavioral
performance of a well-trained mouse (~90%) on familiar odors alone – this size was 20 cells (Figure
4C). The average performance of 100 classifiers each trained on a random group of 20 cells out of the
73 recorded during single-session learning is shown in Figure 6D. Indeed, there is a highly significant
(p<10-6) increase in decoder performance as a function of the presentation number (i.e. trials with the
same odor), starting near chance performance at the beginning of the session and reaching
comparable performance to familiar odors (>90%) by the end of the very first session with the novel
odors. Remarkably, the time course of the improvement in decoding closely tracks the performance of
mice in discovering the valence of the novel odors (Figure 6D). Overall, these results establish that
reward selectivity in the OT develops in parallel with learning at the behavioral level.

Relating neural activity and behavior
If the activity in OT is used to drive behavior, we would expect a stronger relationship between coding
and behavior (i.e. “Consistency”) (Majaj et al., 2015) in OT than other candidate areas, such as pPC.
Indeed, the relationship between the decoding accuracy for individual odors and behavioral
performance of the mouse for the corresponding odors was stronger in OT than pPC (r = 0.40 in OT, p

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

= 0.05; r = 0.19 in pPC, p > 0.2; Figure 7A,B).

Finally, we examined whether OT responses were more closely related to reward valence or motor
decision. The go/no-go task structure ties reward valence to motor decision (i.e. go=rewarded, nogo=unrewarded), so we examined OT responses on error trials in order to dissociate these variables.
Due to the asymmetry in hit rate versus correct rejection rate in our task, there were too few misses to
be used for this analysis; instead, we focused on false alarm trials. We quantified the reward valence
coding by calculating the auROC of OT neuron responses across hit versus false alarm trials for which
the motor decision was the same but the valence differed (“reward auROC”). Likewise, we quantified
the motor decision coding by calculating the auROC of OT responses across correct rejection versus
false alarm trials (“motor auROC”), for which the reward valence was the same but the motor decision
differed. Importantly, we never included responses from the same odor among both the false alarm
trials and correct rejection trials when calculating the motor auROC. This ensured that we did not
artificially decrease the motor auROC by forcing the discrimination of an odor from itself, relative to the
valence auROC in which the odors on hit versus false alarm trials were always different, by
construction. If motor decision was the main driver of selective responses in OT neurons, there should
be a strong correlation between motor auROC and valence auROC across a population. Instead, we
found that these two measures were not significantly correlated (p = 0.36) across the population of OT
neurons (Figure 7C), indicating that the observed reward tuning is not primarily driven by a difference
in motor behavior.

Discussion

In this work, we have shown that mice learn to successfully perform an odor-reward categorization
task over the course of a few days. Once the task structure had been learned, mice could flexibly
apply the task rules in order to acquire novel odor-reward associations within a single session. This
categorization task allowed us to study how odor and reward coding interact in the olfactory system.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We observed a code in pPC that had sparse odor responses and weak reward selectivity and a code
in OT that had strong reward selectivity and less sparse odor responses than pPC. Reward selectivity
in OT emerged in the pre-decision time during the first sniff of odor cues and was detectable, though
weak, at the single-cell level. Moreover, reward selectivity and successful behavioral performance
developed in parallel as novel odor-reward associations were learned. These results provide important
constraints on how odors are processed in the olfactory system during reward-motivated behaviors.

Identity coding
Although much previous work has focused on coding of odor identity in the piriform cortex (Bolding
and Franks, 2017; Gottfried, 2010; Illig and Haberly, 2003; Iurilli and Datta, 2017; Roland et al., 2017;
Stettler and Axel, 2009; Wilson and Sullivan, 2011), our experiments were designed to focus on
reward-related activity and only a small number of neurons were recorded during experimental
sessions with a particular set of odors. Previous studies (Bolding and Franks, 2017; Iurilli and Datta,
2017) and our own unpublished work (Grimaud et al, in preparation) demonstrate that more than 100
cells are necessary for odor identity decoding in the piriform cortex. Indeed, identity decoding was very
poor in pPC in our current study, likely due to the sparse odor responses in pPC resulting in few or no
responses to a given odor within the relatively small populations of cells available for this analysis
(mean: 32 cells per odor set in pPC). Interestingly, OT neurons had denser responses than pPC
neurons, which allowed easier decoding of odor identity, but individual OT neurons did not typically
respond to all rewarded or unrewarded odors. Therefore, individual OT neurons carry some
information about both odor identity and reward category. This multiplexing of information in OT may
allow rapid and flexible learning of odor valence.

Reward coding
A major finding of our study is that neurons in the OT carry an explicit representation of reward
category, independent of the identity of the odor. This information can be gleaned reliably from the
firing rates of only a few dozen arbitrarily selected neurons, within a brief period (~200 ms) after odor

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

sampling. Remarkably, when mice learn new odor-reward associations, neurons in the OT alter their
firing properties to begin coding for reward category in concert with learning during the same session.
Importantly, we show that the activity we find to be correlated with reward valence is not simply a
consequence of the motor action. First, the emergence of reward information in the activity of OT
neurons precedes the motor action (licking). Second, when using error trials, the ability to decode the
choice the mouse makes (licking or not licking) for each neuron is unrelated to the ability to decode
the reward category. Therefore, while OT neurons may also carry information related to the motor
action, this would be in addition to the information they carry about reward category.

There is significant anatomical and pharmacological work implicating the OT in reward and motivated
behavior (Heimer et al., 1982; Ikemoto, 2003, 2007). Recent work has implicated the OT in valence
coding (Gadziola and Wesson, 2016; Gadziola et al., 2015; Zhang et al., 2017b) though the
relationship between valence coding and stimulus (odor) tuning was not clear. Here, we used a large
number of odors to probe the breadth of stimulus responses (i.e. lifetime sparseness) when many
different odors reliably predict reward or no reward. We find that OT neurons multiplex odor identity
and reward category information. In addition, we find that the mouse’s behavioral performance for an
individual odor is correlated with the ability to decode reward category from OT activity in response to
that odor. Monitoring sniffing in all the experiments allowed us to determine the timing of neural
responses at high temporal resolution and revealed that reward category-related activity in the OT
arises rapidly (on average, 100ms after onset of sniffing, more than 200ms before the average onset
of the motor act). In contrast, we found little evidence for an explicit representation of reward category
information in the pPC, beyond that which is expected merely from sensory tuning. This appears to be
at odds with an earlier study (Calu et al., 2007) that suggested that the activity of pPC neurons can be
modulated by reward. However, the study only used a few odors and a very small number of cells
(less than 5) showed the effect, leaving open the possibility that the responses they observed were
due to sensory tuning alone (as demonstrated in our Figure 4) or reflected later-onset brain-wide
reward consumption anticipatory signals (Schultz, 2000). Together, these results suggest that the OT,

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

not the pPC, is better situated to integrate olfactory and reward information to facilitate sensorimotor
learning in our task.

How do OT neurons acquire reward-selective responses so early during learning?
The emergence of reward-selective responses in a part of the striatum, such as the OT, is not
unprecedented. Monkeys trained to associate reward with visual stimuli develop reward selectivity in
the dorsal striatum that is apparent in the activity of individual neurons within a few trials of successful
learning (Pasupathy and Miller, 2005; Schultz et al., 2003). In contrast, neurons in the prefrontal cortex
took much longer to acquire reward selectivity (Pasupathy and Miller, 2005). OT, at least in rodents,
has been suggested to implement similar computations for olfactory information that the rest of
striatum implements for other modalities (Giessel and Datta, 2014; Wesson and Wilson, 2011).
Indeed, OT and dorsal striatum have a similar composition of cells (e.g. ~98% D1- or D2-receptorexpressing medium spiny neurons), comparable density of input from VTA, and the same output
targets (Wesson and Wilson, 2011). Our results strengthen the analogy between OT and dorsal
striatum, adding physiological data to the known anatomical and cytoarchitecture similarities.

Reward-selective responses might emerge in striatum early during learning in order for plasticity in the
striatum to support decision-making. Indeed, corticostriatal inputs have been shown to drive decisionmaking in an auditory discrimination task (Znamenskiy and Zador, 2013), and corticostriatal synapses
exhibit plasticity over the course of training (Xiong et al., 2015). Moreover, it has been shown that the
strength of olfactory synaptic inputs to the ventral striatum can be modulated by optogenetic release of
dopamine in slices (Wieland et al., 2015), and the activation of VTA projections to the OT can induce
odor preference in mice (Zhang et al., 2017b).

A recent study was published during the preparation of this manuscript, which arrives at some of the
same conclusions as our study regarding the relationship of pPC and OT to coding odor-reward
associations (Gadziola et al., 2019). Specifically, those authors also find and characterize the much

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

denser reward coding in OT than pPC. Their approach involves a task design that is complementary to
the one we have taken here, in which they use reward contingency reversals to demonstrate that
odor-evoked responses in OT change in response to experimental manipulation of the reward valence
predicted by the odor. On the other hand, our approach of training each mouse to learn many odorreward associations enabled the dissociable characterization of multiplexed odor and reward valence
components of the cells’ tuning in the OT. Taken together, along with the literature discussed already,
our two studies lend strong support for a central role of the OT in odor-driven reward-motivated
behaviors.

Our study sheds light on the representation of a behaviorally relevant aspect of the environment,
reward, and how it relates to sensory coding in the olfactory system. The rapidity of odor-guided
learning in mice, and the direct connectivity of the OT to the sensory periphery as well as motor and
reward areas, make this behavior and brain region attractive candidates for the dissection of rapid
sensorimotor reinforcement.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported, in part, by a grant from the NIH (R01 DC017311) to VNM. DJM was
supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No.
(DGE1144152) and NRSA (F31 DC014602) from the NIDCD. Microscopy on fixed tissue samples was
performed at the Harvard Center for Biological Imaging. We thank Nuné Martiros and Kenneth Blum
for critical feedback that significantly improved the manuscript.

Methods

Animals (general). All experimental animals were C57BL/6J mice obtained from the Charles River
Laboratories, aged two to four months at the start of the experiments. Following surgical implantation
of a tetrode drive and a custom head plate, all mice we rehoused individually. Experiments were

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

conducted in accordance with Harvard University Animal Care Guidelines.

Surgery. Surgeries were performed on naive animals and all behavioral training began after recovery
from surgery. Mice were anesthetized with an IP injection of a mixture of Xylazine (10 mg/kg) and
Ketamine (80 mg/kg). To access sniffing information, airflow was measured through a cannula
implanted in the nasal canal. A craniotomy (~1mm) was made over the nasal canal (2mm anterior of
nasal/frontal fissure, 1 mm lateral) on the skull, with a goal of implanting a nasal cannula to monitor
sniffing during behavioral and physiological experiments. An 18 gauge stainless steel cannula (~5mm
in length) was inserted into the craniotomy. To affix the cannula to the skull, superglue was used for
initial placement followed by two applications of dental cement to ensure stability of the cannula.
Additionally, a craniotomy (~1mm) was made over the dorsal skull at a location directly above the
areas targeted for electrophysiological recordings with the goal of implanting a tetrode bundle (6
tetrodes plus a 200um-diameter optic fiber to ensure stability). The target locations were: pPC
(coordinates: 0.5mm posterior, 3.8mm lateral from bregma, and 3.8mm ventral from brain surface) and
OT (coordinates: 1.2mm anterior, 1.5-2mm lateral from bregma, and 4.6mm ventral from brain
surface). To ensure stability of the animal’s head during behavior and recording at a later stage, a
custom-made head plate (made of light-weight titanium, dimensions of 30 x 10 x 1 mm and weight of
0.8 g) was affixed to the skull. A shallow well was drilled over the posterior lateral skull and a single
skull screw was affixed at that location. A wire was attached to this skull for grounding
electrophysiological recordings. At the end of the surgery, a removable plastic cap was placed on the
top of the nasal cannula to prevent foreign objects from entering the cannula. In addition, a plastic
cone was positioned around the tetrode drive, and capped with a removable lid, to prevent damage to
the drive. The nasal cannula and tetrode drive were implanted during the same surgery, but always on
opposite (i.e. contralateral) sides. Each lateral olfactory tract delivers sensory input from a single
olfactory bulb to the ipsilateral pPC and OT. Implanting the nasal cannula and tetrode drive on
opposite sides was intended to avoid altering the natural airflow to the relevant sensory neurons for
our recordings. Following the completion of the surgery, mice were given one week to recover.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Odor stimulus delivery. A custom-made 16-odor olfactometer was used to deliver stimuli during
behavioral tasks. The olfactometer had a carrier stream of air calibrated to flow at 1 liter per minute. A
single odor at a time could be added onto this carrier stream by opening an odor-specific valve to
permit airflow (at 0.1 liters per minute) from an input manifold, through a tube containing liquid-phase
odorant, and finally into the carrier stream. One-way check valves prevented flow of odor from
odorant-containing tubes into the carrier stream or back into the input manifold when air was not
actively being flowed. Odor delivery to the animal was gated by a single (“final”) valve that directed
odor to the animal or, between odor presentations, to an exhaust system. Note that this single valve
was common to all odors and thus was not informative about odor identity. When odor was not flowed
to the animal, a stream of clean air of the same flow-rate was directed to the animal. This ensured
active clearing of odors between trials. In addition, an exhaust system cleared odors from the behavior
chamber. To ensure immediate delivery of odors, and comparable odor concentration from trial-to-trial,
the line to the final valve was primed with odor from the current trial beginning at the end of the
previous trial (i.e. minimum of 5 seconds, sufficient to replace the line volume 3-5 times). Sound from
the switching of an odor-specific valve to perform selection of an odor for the upcoming trial was
masked by a substantially louder non-odor-specific valve turned on simultaneously. The valves
corresponding to each odor were randomly switched occasionally between sessions to prevent
animals from learning sound, rather than odor, cues. Finally, all tubing that was odor-specific was
replaced at the same time as new odors were added to the olfactometer in order to prevent odor from
previous sessions lingering and being used as cues for task performance.

Behavioral task. When animals fully recovered from surgery (approximately 7 days), they were placed
on a water deprivation schedule for behavioral conditioning. Animals were first acclimated to head
restraint (with their implanted head plate held in place) on the behavior rig over the course of 3-5 days.
Then, animals were trained to lick for water from a spout positions 2-3 millimeters from the mouth until
satiated (typically 1-1.5mL); licking this spout (or not licking) would subsequently serve as the

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

response for all behavioral tasks (go/no-go). Lick training took approximately 2-4 additional days.
Next, odors were presented for one second with a varying (3 seconds minimum plus an exponential
distribution with mean of 5 additional seconds) inter-stimulus interval, and reward was only available
for a subset (half) of these odors. At first, only two odors (one rewarded, one unrewarded) were
presented in order to expedite learning. The number of odors was increased to four and then eight (i.e.
full task odor panel). Initially, water reward would be available immediately upon licking during odor
presentation. Gradually, the delay between lick/odor presentation and reward delivery was increased
until reward delivery occurred at least 500 milliseconds after the conclusion of odor presentation. To
discourage a high false alarm rate, a hit was only scored on trials that the mouse licked in at least
three out of four 350ms bins, beginning at the time of odor onset. It follows that mice were required to
make a decision before the end of the second bin, 700ms into the odor presentation, but this did not
seem to force early inaccurate decisions.

Neural recordings began once the animals reach strong performance (>90%correct) on the full eightodor panel. No odors were replaced during this initial period in order to facilitate the acquisition of task
structure. In the final stage of experiments, a subset of odors was replaced between some sessions in
order to study learning of novel odor-reward associations.

Respiration monitoring. Respiration was recorded through a nasal cannula implanted during surgery.
Following surgery, the nasal cannula was cleaned daily to prevent clogging. In this way, nasal
cannulae typically stayed clear continuously for months of recordings. During experiments, a plastic
tube connected to a pressure sensor was fitted over the nasal cannula to form a continuous pressure
environment. Pressure signals were amplified 10X, bandpass filtered 0.1-100Hz, and recorded at
1000 samples per second. For analysis, the start of each inhalation was identified as negative-going
zero crossings in the pressure signal. Likewise, the end of each inhalation (i.e. start of exhalation) was
identified as a subsequent positive-going zero crossing in the pressure signal.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Electrophysiology. Neural activity was recorded with drives containing six tetrodes (Gray et al., 1995).
The tip of each wire was gold-plated until the impedance was 250-450 kOhms. Electrophysiological
signals were acquired and amplified with a custom-made system built on two 16-channel analog chips
designed by Intan Technologies. Each channel was digitized, sampled at 20kHz, and bandpass filtered
with a 2nd-order Butterworth filter 500-3000Hz. Potential spike events were detected as any activity
that crossed 3.7 standard deviations of noise (corresponding to 1:10,000 events by chance). Potential
spike events were then manually clustered with MClust software (David Redish) to identify single-unit
activity. The quality of clustering was ensured by requiring less than 1 in 1000 spikes to have occurred
within a 2 ms refractory period of one another, clear overlap of single spike waveforms, and L-distance
below 0.05. Following the completion of all behavior and recordings, tetrode placement was confirmed
with an electrolytic lesion and postmortem histology. To minimize selection bias, all spikes that were
visible during each session were recorded, sorted and analyzed. At the end of the recording session
each day, the entire bundle of tetrodes was lowered 40um to obtain a new set of neurons for the
subsequent day.

AuROC analysis: To characterize the responses of neurons to odors, we used the metric of area under
the receiver-operating characteristic curve (auROC) for each cell-odor pair relative to baseline (i.e.
pre-stimulus) firing rate. The auROC gives a measure of how well the firing rate at any given time can
be discriminated from the baseline firing rate for that cell, independent of the absolute firing rates.
Briefly, the value of the auROC for a given time bin indicates the percentile of that time bin in the
distribution of baseline firing rates for bins of the same width. Therefore, a firing rate that is exactly the
median of the baseline firing rate distribution would have an auROC of 0.5. Excitatory responses
(yellow) correspond to an auROC greater than 0.5 but less than or equal to one, whereas inhibitory
responses (blue) correspond to an auROC less than 0.5 but greater than or equal to zero. For analysis
as well as data visualization, the auROC provides a more consistent measure to compare across
neurons than absolute firing rate.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Decoding: Decoding analysis (both identity and reward category) was done with SVMs with a linear
kernel, using the standard 80% training, 10% validation and 10% test. Random shuffles from the entire
population of neurons in a given region allowed many combinations, and therefore error estimates for
decoding accuracy. Responses were obtained in a standard window of 200ms from onset of odor and
first sniff inhalation (except in Figure 4A, where this window was systematically varied). Shuffle
controls for decoding reward category were obtained by scrambling the valence assignment across
the odors.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References

Abraham, N.M., Spors, H., Carleton, A., Margrie, T.W., Kuner, T., and Schaefer, A.T. (2004).
Maintaining accuracy at the expense of speed: stimulus similarity defines odor discrimination time in
mice. Neuron 44, 865–876.
Bolding, K.A., and Franks, K.M. (2017). Complementary codes for odor identity and intensity in
olfactory cortex. Elife 6.
Calu, D.J., Roesch, M.R., Stalnaker, T.A., and Schoenbaum, G. (2007). Associative encoding in
posterior piriform cortex during odor discrimination and reversal learning. Cereb Cortex 17, 1342–
1349.
Cohen, J.Y., Haesler, S., Vong, L., Lowell, B.B., and Uchida, N. (2012). Neuron-type-specific signals
for reward and punishment in the ventral tegmental area. Nature 482, 85–88.
Cury, K.M., and Uchida, N. (2010). Robust Odor Coding via Inhalation-Coupled Transient Activity in
the Mammalian Olfactory Bulb. Neuron 68, 570–585.
Dayan, P., and Niv, Y. (2008). Reinforcement learning: The Good, The Bad and The Ugly. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 18, 1–12.
Diodato, A., Ruinart de Brimont, M., Yim, Y.S., Derian, N., Perrin, S., Pouch, J., Klatzmann, D., Garel,
S., Choi, G.B., and Fleischmann, A. (2016). Molecular signatures of neural connectivity in the olfactory
cortex. Nat. Commun. 7, 12238.
Gadziola, M.A., and Wesson, D.W. (2016). The Neural Representation of Goal-Directed Actions and
Outcomes in the Ventral Striatum’s Olfactory Tubercle. J. Neurosci. 36, 548–560.
Gadziola, M.A., Tylicki, K.A., Christian, D.L., and Wesson, D.W. (2015). The Olfactory Tubercle
Encodes Odor Valence in Behaving Mice. J. Neurosci. 35, 4515–4527.
Gadziola, M.A., Stetzik, L.A., Milton, A.J., Arakawa, K., and Wesson, D.W. (2019). A neural system for
encoding odor-reward associations which influences approach behaviors. BioRxiv.
Giessel, A.J., and Datta, S.R. (2014). Olfactory maps, circuits and computations. Curr. Opin.
Neurobiol. 24, 120–132.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Gire, D.H., Whitesell, J.D., Doucette, W., and Restrepo, D. (2013). Information for decision-making
and stimulus identification is multiplexed in sensory cortex. Nat. Neurosci. 16, 991–993.
Gottfried, J.A. (2010). Central mechanisms of odour object perception. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 11, 628–
641.
Gray, C.M., Maldonado, P.E., Wilson, M., and McNaughton, B. (1995). Tetrodes markedly improve the
reliability and yield of multiple single-unit isolation from multi-unit recordings in cat striate cortex. J.
Neurosci. Methods 63, 43–54.
Green, D.M., and Swets, J.A. (1966). Signal detection theory and psychophysics (New York: Wiley).
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., and Friedman, J. (2009). The Elements of Statistical Learning (New York, NY:
Springer New York).
Heimer, L., Switzer, R.D., and Van Hoesen, G.W. (1982). Ventral striatum and ventral pallidum. Trends
Neurosci. 5, 83–87.
Hung, C.P., Kreiman, G., Poggio, T., and DiCarlo, J.J. (2005). Fast Readout of Object Identity from
Macaque Inferior Temporal Cortex. Science (80-. ). 310, 863–866.
Ikemoto, S. (2003). Involvement of the olfactory tubercle in cocaine reward: intracranial selfadministration studies. J. Neurosci. 23, 9305–9311.
Ikemoto, S. (2007). Dopamine reward circuitry: Two projection systems from the ventral midbrain to
the nucleus accumbens–olfactory tubercle complex. Brain Res. Rev. 56, 27–78.
Illig, K.R., and Haberly, L.B. (2003). Odor-evoked activity is spatially distributed in piriform cortex. J
Comp Neurol 457, 361–373.
Iurilli, G., and Datta, S.R. (2017). Population Coding in an Innately Relevant Olfactory Area. Neuron.
Johnson, D.M., Illig, K.R., Behan, M., and Haberly, L.B. (2000). New features of connectivity in piriform
cortex visualized by intracellular injection of pyramidal cells suggest that “primary” olfactory cortex
functions like “association” cortex in other sensory systems. J Neurosci 20, 6974–6982.
Kepecs, A., Uchida, N., and Mainen, Z.F. (2007). Rapid and precise control of sniffing during olfactory
discrimination in rats. J Neurophysiol 98, 205–213.
Loewenstein, Y., and Seung, H.S. (2006). Operant matching is a generic outcome of synaptic

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

plasticity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103, 15224–15229.
Majaj, N.J., Hong, H., Solomon, E.A., and DiCarlo, J.J. (2015). Simple Learned Weighted Sums of
Inferior Temporal Neuronal Firing Rates Accurately Predict Human Core Object Recognition
Performance. J. Neurosci.
Mathis, A., Rokni, D., Kapoor, V., Bethge, M., and Murthy, V.N. (2016). Reading Out Olfactory
Receptors: Feedforward Circuits Detect Odors in Mixtures without Demixing. Neuron 91, 1110–1123.
Miura, K., Mainen, Z.F., and Uchida, N. (2012). Odor representations in olfactory cortex: distributed
rate coding and decorrelated population activity. Neuron 74, 1087–1098.
Pasupathy, A., and Miller, E.K. (2005). Different time courses of learning-related activity in the
prefrontal cortex and striatum. Nature 433, 873–876.
Pfeiffer, M., Nessler, B., Douglas, R.J., and Maass, W. (2010). Reward-modulated Hebbian learning of
decision making. Neural Comput. 22, 1399–1444.
Reynolds, J.N.J., and Wickens, J.R. (2002). Dopamine-dependent plasticity of corticostriatal
synapses. Neural Netw. 15, 507–521.
Rinberg, D., Koulakov, A., and Gelperin, A. (2006). Speed-accuracy tradeoff in olfaction. Neuron 51,
351–358.
Rokni, D., Hemmelder, V., Kapoor, V., and Murthy, V.N. (2014). An olfactory cocktail party: figureground segregation of odorants in rodents. Nat. Neurosci. 17, 1225–1232.
Roland, B., Deneux, T., Franks, K.M., Bathellier, B., and Fleischmann, A. (2017). Odor identity coding
by distributed ensembles of neurons in the mouse olfactory cortex. Elife 6.
Schultz, W. (2000). Multiple reward signals in the brain. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 1, 199–207.
Schultz, W., Dayan, P., and Montague, P.R. (1997). A neural substrate of prediction and reward.
Science 275, 1593–1599.
Schultz, W., Tremblay, L., and Hollerman, J.R. (2003). Changes in behavior-related neuronal activity in
the striatum during learning. Trends Neurosci. 26, 321–328.
Shusterman, R., Smear, M.C., Koulakov, A. a, and Rinberg, D. (2011). Precise olfactory responses tile
the sniff cycle. Nat. Neurosci. 14, 1039–1044.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Slotnick, B. (2001). Animal cognition and the rat olfactory system. Trends Cogn. Sci. 5, 216–222.
Slotnick, B., Hanford, L., and Hodos, W. (2000). Can rats acquire an olfactory learning set? J. Exp.
Psychol. Anim. Behav. Process. 26, 399–415.
Stettler, D.D., and Axel, R. (2009). Representations of odor in the piriform cortex. Neuron 63, 854–864.
Sutton, R.S., and Barto, A.G. (1998). Reinforcement learning : an introduction (MIT Press).
Uchida, N., and Mainen, Z.F. (2003). Speed and accuracy of olfactory discrimination in the rat. Nat.
Neurosci. 6, 1224–1229.
Watabe-Uchida, M., Zhu, L., Ogawa, S.K., Vamanrao, A., and Uchida, N. (2012). Whole-brain mapping
of direct inputs to midbrain dopamine neurons. Neuron 74, 858–873.
Welker, W.I. (1964). Analysis of Sniffing of the Albino Rat. Behaviour 22, 223–244.
Wesson, D.W., and Wilson, D.A. (2011). Sniffing out the contributions of the olfactory tubercle to the
sense of smell: Hedonics, sensory integration, and more? Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 35, 655–668.
Wesson, D.W., Donahou, T.N., Johnson, M.O., and Wachowiak, M. (2008). Sniffing Behavior of Mice
during Performance in Odor-Guided Tasks. Chem. Senses 33, 581–596.
Wieland, S., Schindler, S., Huber, C., Kohr, G., Oswald, M.J., and Kelsch, W. (2015). Phasic
Dopamine Modifies Sensory-Driven Output of Striatal Neurons through Synaptic Plasticity. J.
Neurosci. 35, 9946–9956.
Willmore, B., and Tolhurst, D.J. (2001). Characterizing the sparseness of neural codes. Network 12,
255–270.
Wilson, D.A., and Sullivan, R.M. (2011). Cortical processing of odor objects. Neuron 72, 506–519.
Xiong, Q., Znamenskiy, P., and Zador, A.M. (2015). Selective corticostriatal plasticity during acquisition
of an auditory discrimination task. Nature 521, 348–351.
Yamaguchi, M. (2017). Functional Sub-Circuits of the Olfactory System Viewed from the Olfactory
Bulb and the Olfactory Tubercle. Front. Neuroanat. 11.
Zhang, Z., Zhang, H., Wen, P., Zhu, X., Wang, L., Liu, Q., Wang, J., He, X., Wang, H., and Xu, F.
(2017a). Whole-Brain Mapping of the Inputs and Outputs of the Medial Part of the Olfactory Tubercle.
Front. Neural Circuits 11.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Zhang, Z., Liu, Q., Wen, P., Zhang, J., Rao, X., Zhou, Z., Zhang, H., He, X., Li, J., Zhou, Z., et al.
(2017b). Activation of the dopaminergic pathway from VTA to the medial olfactory tubercle generates
odor-preference and reward. Elife 6.
Znamenskiy, P., and Zador, A.M. (2013). Corticostriatal neurons in auditory cortex drive decisions
during auditory discrimination. Nature 497, 482–485.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B

100

Performance (%)

A

1s
odor
resp

200
1
200

Lick rate (1/s)

Trial

Rewarded Odors
Unrewarded Odors
0

0.5

1.0
Time (s)

1.5

Hit Rate
CR Rate
Overall

20
0

D

chance-level

40

S-

S+

1

60

3-15s

reward

C

80

3
2
Session #

1

8

4

Hits

6
4

FAs

2
0

Misses
CRs

0

1

2
Time (s)

3

4

Figure 1: Behavioral task design and mouse performance. A. (top) Mouse in the head-fixed behavior
setup. The odor port (red dot) and lick port (yellow dot) are labeled. (bottom) Diagram of the task
structure, indicating the periods for odor, response (lick/no-lick), and reward delivery. B. Average task
performance over the first four sessions for 14 mice. The hit rate, correct rejection (CR) rate, and
overall performance rate are shown separately. C. Raster plots of individual lick times by trial, shown
separately for rewarded and unrewarded odors for an expert mouse. D. Lick rate by trial type averaged
over sessions in well-trained mice (i.e. after session 5). Shading indicates standard error of the mean.
FA: false alarm; CR: correct rejection. For panels C and D, 0 marks onset of odor stimulus.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.
pPC
reward
reward
odor
odor
OT

B

A

aligned
to
first
sniff

Spike rate (Hz)

aligned
to
odor
onset

60
rewarded odors

40

unrewarded odors

20
0

0

1
Time (s)

2

PPC rewarded

100
150
200

D

1
2
Time (s)
OT rewarded

4
0

3

1
Time (s)

2

0

1
Time (s)

2

6
0

E

100
150

0

1

0

0

12

50

200

100

0.6

1
2
Time (s)

3

400
500
0

1
2
Time (s)

3

0.5

0

0.5
Time (s)

1

OT unrewarded

OT

0.6
Mean auROC

Cell-Odor Pairs

300

pPC

Rewarded

Unrewarded

0.4
-0.5

100

200

600

rewarded odors
unrewarded odors

Mean auROC

50

0

8

PPC unrewarded

Cell-Odor Pairs

Cell-Odor Pairs

C

Cell-Odor Pairs

Spike rate (Hz)

Spike rate (Hz)

aligned
to
first
sniff

200
300
400

Rewarded

0.5

Unrewarded

500
0

1
2
Time (s)

3

0.4
-0.5

0

0.5
Time (s)

1

Figure 2: Responses of pPC and OT neurons. A. An example OT cell. Spike rasters are shown unaligned (top) and
aligned (middle) to the first inhalation of odor. A peri-stimulus time histogram (PSTH) aligned to the first sniff is shown
directly below the rasters. Four PSTHs for the rewarded odors are shown in red and four PSTHs for the unrewarded
odors are shown in black. B. Spike rasters (top) and PSTHs (middle) for an exemplar cell from pPC. Bottom: another
cell with more sustained odor responses. C, D. auROC timecourse for each cell-odor pair for cells recorded in pPC and
OT separated into rewarded and unrewarded odors. Odor onset is at 0s. Yellow indicates that the cell was excited
relative to its baseline firing rate, whereas blue indicates that the cell was inhibited relative to its baseline firing rate. For
visualization purposes, cell-odor pairs with noisy firing during pre-odor time are not shown, resulting in a different
number of cell-odor pairs between rewarded and unrewarded odors despite equal number of recorded cell-odor pairs.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

20

10

OT

40

Response (Hz)

30
Response (Hz)

B

pPC

20
0

-20

D

OT

20

50

40

100

60

150
0

OT
pPC

10

0

0

1
2
Time (s)

0

0

F

first significant
deviation in auROC

20

1

3

Percent of cells

Percent of cells

E

1
2
Time (s)

3

rewarded >
unrewarded

pPC

1
2
Time (s)
start of
licking

20

3

unrewarded >
rewarded

C

Cell Index

Rewarded Unrewarded

Rewarded Unrewarded

0.1
Proportion of trials

0

10

0

0

0.4
0.2
Time (s)

0

Figure 3: Reward valence selectivity during decision-making. A. Responses of three examplar
cells from pPC to 8 odors, with no clear reward category information. B. Three exemplar cells from
OT, two of which (red and blue) show clear reward selectivity (visualized by dashed lines separating
firing rates), and one (black) showing imperfect reward selectivity. C, D. auROC to illustrate cells'
ability to discriminate rewarded versus unrewarded odors that had been successfully learned in
previous sessions (i.e. familiar odors). Responses are aligned to the first inhalation following odor
onset (t=0). The cells (rows) are hierarchically clustered by the first three principal components
calculated from the initial (first 200ms) firing rate, delayed response rate (200ms-800ms), and
response rate at the time of reward delivery (1500-2000ms). E. Histograms of the first time bin in
which the auROC for a cell was significant for cells in pPC and OT. F. Zoom-in of the histograms
in E, along with an overlay (hollow black bars) of the mean time of the first lick on hit trials to
illustrate the beginning of the motor response.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

150

0

Cii

100

pPC

50
5

10
15
Number of Cells

20

6 odors
8 odors

200

100
Number of cells

200

OT

2 odors
4 odors
6 odors
8 odors

0
50
100
Number of cells

100

50
0

50

Dii

pPC shuffled

100

OT

100
Number of cells

Decoding Accuracy (%)

50
100
Number of cells

2 odors
4 odors

50

100

Decoding Accuracy (%)

Decoding Accuracy (%)

0

Di

pPC

100

50 ms
100 ms
150 ms
200 ms
250 ms

50

Decoding Accuracy (%)

100

B

Ci

OT

Decoding Accuracy (%)

Decoding Accuracy (%)

A

OT shuffled

50
0
50
100
Number of cells

Figure 4: Decoding reward valence from population data. A. Decoding accuracy for reward valence obtained
with a support vector machine, trained and tested on the average response rate of OT cells in a window that
began at the time of the first inhalation of an odor and had a duration equal to the time denoted for each curve.
B. Training and testing linear classifiers on different sets of odors. Support vector machines with a linear kernel
were trained on the single-trial responses to one set of 4 odors and tested on a different set of 4 odors. Each
line corresponds to the test performance for a different mouse or set of test odors. pPC (yellow): 3 curves total;
each curve is a different mouse (each mouse had a different set of test odors). OT (blue): 5 curves total: 3 curves
for three mice with the same test odor set, 1 curve for a second set of test odors for one of the three mice, and
1 curve for a fourth mouse with a different set of odors than the other three mice. Ci, Di. Decoding accuracy for
similar classifiers that were trained and tested on the given number of odors (color correspondence indicated in
the inset), half of which were rewarded odors and half of which were unrewarded odors. Cii, Dii. The same as
Ci and Di but for classifiers trained and tested on odor responses with the reward valence label shuffled.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

Day 1

B

Familiar

Day 3

SS+
SS+
S-

Novel
50%

S+
SS+

50 trials

0

2

0
1
Accuracy

100

1

Mouse Performance
Decoding Accuracy

Cumulative fraction of
neuron-odor pairs

unrewarded odors

rewarded odors

-4

-2
0
2
Change in firing rate
over the session (spikes/s)

4

90
80

familiar
odors

predict

0

1
Time (s)

population
response

D

C

train

Percent correct response

100%

Day 2

novel
odors

70
60
50
0

10

20

30

Presentation Number

Figure 6: Novel odor learning. A. After 5-10 sessions of training with 8 familiar odors, half of the odors
(2 rewarded and 2 unrewarded) were replaced between some sessions. The performance for the 4 novel
odors on the first 3 days of learning is shown averaged for all novel odors as a function of presentation
number. Each novel odor was presented ~35 times (randomly) in each session. B. Responses of an example
neuron to the 4 rewarded (S+) and 4 unrewarded (S-) odors, half of each were familiar and novel. Trials
were randomly presented, but are shown sorted for visualization. Within each category, trials are displayed
in order of presentation in the session, with early trials at bottom (arrow at bottom right). The accuracy of
performance for each of the odors is indicated at right. Note that accuracy for familiar odors is near 1 for all
trials, but for novel odors accuracy starts low and approaches 1. C. Based on the average firing rate (in
200 ms after first sniff) for each neuron-odor pair, the difference in firing rate between the last 10 and first
10 trials was calculated for novel rewarded and unrewarded odors. As a population, neuronal responses for
rewarded odors become slightly (p < 0.05) stronger compared to unrewarded odors. Each of the recorded
neurons was only recorded during a single session, and therefore had a different stimulus panel than
neurons recorded during other sessions. D. Decoding reward selectivity from OT responses to novel odors.
Inset: A classifier was trained to discriminate two familiar rewarded odors from two familiar unrewarded odors,
then tested on its ability to predict reward valence from responses to two novel rewarded and two novel
unrewarded odors. Decoding accuracy (blue; averaged across 71 novel sessions) steadily increased with
repeated presentation of novel odors, and tracked performance of mice (red). Error bars show standard
error of the mean.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

C 1

B

50

pPC

100

Decoding Performance

Decoding Performance

100

80
100
Behavioral Performance

OT

OT

Reward auROC

A

50

100
80
Behavioral Performance

0

0

Motor auROC

Figure 7: A. Odor-by-odor relationship between behavioral performance and neural coding for
pPC. Each dot is a single odor. N = 19, r = 0.19, p = 0.41. B. Same plot as in A, for OT. N = 24,
r = 0.4, p = 0.05. C. OT activity selectivity on error trials. The effect of motor (lick/no-lick) decision
was measured as the auROC when discriminating responses during the first 200ms of false alarm
versus correct rejection trials. Similarly, the effect of reward valence was measured as the auROC
when discriminating hit versus false alarm trials. A minimum of 15 false alarm trials was required
for the cell to be included in the analysis. N = 43, r = 0.14, p = 0.36.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

exhalation

inhalation

1s

Sniff Rate (Hz)

B

odor on
8
4
0

2000

1000

0

Time from odor onset (ms)

C

3000

sniff
1
sniff
2

200

sniff
3
400

sniff
4
600

Time from odor onset (ms)

800

1000

Supplementary Figure 1: Sniff behavior during task performance. A. An example trace
of five seconds of respiration measurements obtained through air pressure from a nasal
cannula. Exhalation is positive-going pressure and inhalation is negative-going pressure.
B. Average sniff rate over all trials from an example behavior session. C. Histograms of
the times of the first, second, third, and fourth sniffs of each trial.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

pPC

OT

bregma -1.1

bregma +1.0

bregma -0.7

B

C
pPC

200

Number of Cells

Number of Cells

250

150
100
50
0

0

20

40

D
40

pPC rew

2.01

25

OT

20
15
10
5
0

60

Baseline Rate

0

20

40

60

Baseline Rate

E

40 pPC unrew

bregma +0.7

2.14

20
0

0
OT rew

80

40
0
0.1

OT unrew 1.26

1.11

80

Number of Cells

Cell-Odor Pairs

20
20

40

1

0
10 0.1

15
10
5
0

1

Coefficient of Variation

10

pPC
OT

0

0.5

Lifetime Sparseness

1

Supplementary Figure 2: Putative recording sites and single-unit firing properties in pPC
and OT. A. Recording sites estimated from tetrode tracks and electrolytic lesions in
histological sections. B, C. Baseline firing rates for all cells recorded in pPC and OT,
respectively. Note: the last bin in b shows cells that had a firing rate greater than or equal
to 60 spikes per second. D. Coefficient of variation of neuronal responses in pPC and OT,
separated for rewarded and unrewarded odors. For each panel, the median value is
indicated by a dashed red line and number next to it. E. Lifetime sparseness for cells
recorded during sessions in which the animal was familiar with all eight odors in the
stimulus panel. Sparser (more selective) cells have values closer to 1.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

B

C

D
100

100
Decoding Accuracy

D e c o d in g A c c u r a c y

A

90
80
70
60
50
0

10
20
Number of Cells

30

90

Shuffled

80
70
60
50
0

10
20
Number of Cells

30

Supplementary Figure 3: A, B. Influence of odor sparseness on reward selectivity. A. Mean reward selectivity,
as measured by auROC, as a function of lifetime sparseness. auROC was calculated for the first 200ms from
the start of odor sampling (first inhalation following odor onset). Error bars are standard error of the mean.
The number of cells used to calculate each point in the plots are indicated in parentheses. B. The percentile
of the true valence auROC (from a non-discriminating value of 0.5) among the distribution of auROCs
generated from shuffling the valence labels of the odors. Dots are individual cells, the coonected lines show
medians and the error bars are standard error of the mean. The dashed line indicates chance; that is, the
true auROC falling at the median of the distribution on average. The number of cells used to calculate each
point in the plots are indicated in parentheses. C,D. Effects of sensory responsiveness on reward decoding.
C. Decoding of reward in OT and pPC (same color scheme as Figure 4) for 2, 4, 6, and 8 odors among cells
with lifetime sparseness between 03 and 0.6. This was the range of lifetime sparseness in which pPC and
OT most overlapped (Supp Figure 3D). OT still performed better than pPC even when lifetime sparseness
in the two areas was matched in this way. D. Comparison of the reward decoding performance for 8 odors
in OT (blue) and pPC (yellow) for the same data as a but with the reward labels shuffled. While the shuffled
data fare very similar to real data for pPC, they are much worse for OT, again confirming that OT neurons
have explicit represenation of reward category, even after normalizing for response sparsity.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/730697; this version posted August 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

B
Reward | Unrew

Novel Day 1’
Familiar Day 2’
Novel Day 1’’
Familiar Day 2’’

D

Odors

Day 1
Initial
Day 2
Task
Day 3
Learning Day 4
Day 5

C

Rewarded odors
20

20

60

60

100
0

E

lick trial
no-lick trial
80

20
40
Trial number

Unrewarded odors

100

0

lick trial
no-lick trial
20
40
Trial number

80

F

Supplementary Figure 4: Learning of novel odor-reward associations. A. During the initial phase of training on
the task structure, the eight odors in the stimulus panel remained the same. After 5-10 sessions, half of the
odors (2 rewarded and 2 unrewarded) were replaced between some sessions (“Novel”). Before changing the
stimulus panel again, the stimulus panel was held constant for at least one additional session in order to
measure behavioral and neural responses to the newly-familiar odors. Different shapes indicate different sets
of odors, with odors represented by the same shape being introduced at the same time. Hollow shapes indicate
novel odors that the mouse has not been exposed to in previous sessions. Filled shapes indicate odors that
have been learned in a previous session (“Familiar odors”). Red shapes indicate rewarded odors and black
shapes indicate unrewarded odors. B, C. Go/no-go behavioral responses of mice to novel odors, red for lick
and black for no-lick. Each row is one novel odor. The length of each row corresponds to the total number of
presentations of that particular odor during its first session in the odor panel. D, E, F. Histograms of the
number of licks trials for the first ten, second ten, and third ten presentations of a novel odor illustrate learning
of novel odor-reward associations. Red bars indicate responses to rewarded odors and black bars indicate
responses to unrewarded odors.

