bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The proteome of small urinary extracellular vesicles after kidney
transplantation as an indicator of renal cellular biology and a source
for markers predicting outcome
Authors: Fabian Braun1,2,3,4, Markus Rinschen1,3,4, Denise Buchner5, Katrin Bohl1,3,
Martin Späth1,3,4, Heike Göbel6, Corinna Klein3, Oliver Kretz2, Victor G. Puelles2, Daniel
Bachurski3,4,7, Ingo Plagmann1,3,4, Roger Wahba5, Michael Hallek3,4,7, Bernhard
Schermer1,3,4, Thomas Benzing1,3,4,8, Tobias B. Huber2, Andreas Beyer3,8, Dirk Stippel5*,
Christine E. Kurschat1,3,4, Roman-Ulrich Müller1,3,4,8*
Affiliations:
1
Department II of Internal Medicine, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Cologne, Germany
2
III. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg,
Germany
3
Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated
Diseases, University of Cologne, Germany
4
Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne, Faculty of Medicine and
University Hospital Cologne, Germany
5
Department of General, Visceral and Cancer Surgery, Division of Transplantation
Surgery, Transplant Center Cologne, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
6
Institute of Pathology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
7
Department I of Internal Medicine, University Hospital of Cologne, Center for Integrated
Oncology Cologne-Bonn, Germany
8
Systems Biology of Ageing Cologne, SyBaCol, University of Cologne, Germany
One Sentence Summary: This study represents the first atlas of the proteomic
changes in small urinary extracellular vesicles throughout living donor kidney
transplantation identifying PCK2 abundance as a biomarker for renal function 12
months after transplantation
*corresponding authors

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract:
Kidney transplantation is the preferred renal replacement therapy available. Yet, the biological
processes during and after kidney transplantation and how they translate into the overall
functional graft outcome are insufficiently understood. Recent developments in the field of
extracellular vesicle research allow the deeper exploitation of this non-invasive source. We
separated small urinary extracellular vesicles (suEVs) throughout the course of living donor
kidney transplantation. SuEVs were collected longitudinally from both the donor and the recipient
in 22 living donor kidney transplantations. Unbiased proteomic analysis revealed specific temporal
patterns of suEV proteins indicative of the cellular processes involved in the allograft’s response
after transplantation with proteins playing a role in complement activation being among the most
dynamically regulated components. Using a leave-one-out cross validation model, we identified
potential prognostic markers of kidney function at 1 year after transplantation. One of the proteins
identified – phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PCK2) – could be confirmed in an independent
validation cohort of another 22 donor-recipient pairs using targeted mass spectrometry. This study
sheds the light on early molecular processes during the course of kidney transplantation and
shows the future potential of suEVs as a source of biomarkers in this setting. The data set is
provided as a unique resource directly accessible through an online tool that allows dynamic
interrogation of this first comprising suEV proteome atlas after kidney transplantation.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Chronic kidney disease has emerged as one of the major health problems and cost factors for
health care systems worldwide affecting all age groups (1). While renal replacement therapy by
dialysis can reinstate kidney function regarding acid-base homeostasis, water and toxin
elimination to a certain extent, it is accompanied by a dramatic increase in both cardiovascular
and overall mortality (2, 3). The treatment strategy that results in increased quality of life and
patient survival is kidney transplantation (4, 5). However, the number of potential recipients
outweighs the number of donors considerably. This unmet need has prompted a rise in living
donor transplantation circumventing the need for dialysis (6).
Yet, transplant rejection and chronic allograft nephropathy limit organ survival making repetitive
transplantation necessary in many cases (7). Diagnosis of the underlying disorder relies primarily
on renal biopsy via hollow needle tissue sampling involving both a bleeding risk with possible
organ damage and the potential of misdiagnosis due to sampling errors (8, 9). With primary urine
passing all cells of the nephrons, the identification of urinary markers would be of great potential
to complement histology. To date, urinary sediment and proteinuria are still the only tools available
in clinical routine (10).
Recent years have shifted different extracellular vesicles (EVs) into the research focus for both
their biological function as well as their potential as a source of biomarkers for various diseases
(11). In contrast to analyses from full urine, EVs – being actively secreted by nephron-lining
epithelial cells – hold the promise to reflect cellular biology more directly. Most studies have
discriminated between three types of EVs (exosomes, microvesicles and apoptotic bodies)
depending on their biogenesis (12, 13).
Current investigations, however, have depicted both the shortcomings of past separation methods
and vesicle characterizations as well as a considerable overlap in both size, density as well as
protein and nucleic acid content of all three groups (14–18). As a consequence, the International
Society of Extracellular vesicles (ISEV) proposes an operational terminology for separated
extracellular vesicles, indicating the biochemical and physical properties (15).
To quantitatively assess the proteome of small urinary EVs (suEVs) and its changes throughout
living donor transplantation, we employed a simple separation protocol for urinary EVs through
differential (ultra-)centrifugation. The separated suEVs were analyzed for their protein content by
mass spectrometry using label-free quantification. The resulting data set represents a novel and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

unique resource giving insight into biological processes involved throughout renal transplantation.
Additionally, correlation with kidney function after transplantation in combination with targeted
mass spectrometry for specific markers in a validation cohort provides a first insight regarding the
power of this approach for outcome prediction after kidney transplantation.
Results
A fast and widely applicable protocol of differential centrifugation yields a robust separation of
suEVs.
We established a fast, cost-efficient and easy protocol for the separation of small urinary
extracellular vesicles using differential ultracentrifugation to allow for a potential transfer to clinical
routine in the future (Fig. 1A). After the addition of preservatives and protease inhibitors, a
centrifugation step of 17.000 g performed at 4°C for 20 minutes pellets all cells, cellular debris
and large to medium EVs. Analysis of the final suEV pellet via transmission electron microscopy
(TEM) and Nanoparticle Tracking analysis via ZetaView depicted a wide variety of small EVs with
a typical cup-shaped morphology ranging from suEVs of 30 – 60 nm to a small fraction of large
urinary EVs with a diameter up to 500 nm in diameter (Fig. 1B/C and S1A). To validate the stability
of suEV proteins in long-term storage after dissolving the final pellet in 8 M urea buffer, we
performed western blot analyses after 1 and 6 months at -80°C for small EV marker proteins and
detected no storage-dependent differences in immunoblot signal (Fig. 1D). Additionally, our
separation protocol achieved a decrease in the ratio of the ubiquitous urinary protein uromodulin
to the suEV protein TSG101 (Fig. S1B) and we were able to robustly detect the tetraspanins CD9,
CD63 and CD81 – typically present on the surface of EVs – in a flow cytometric bead assay (Fig.
S1C) of the final suEV pellet. A pilot mass spectrometry analysis confirmed that our protocol
separated particles containing marker proteins for all segments of the nephron (19) as well as Alix
and TSG101 – two proteins typically found in EVs (Fig. 1E).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig.1: Differential centrifugation separates small urinary extracellular vesicles (suEVs) originating from all
segments of the nephron. Schematic overview of the employed protocol of differential centrifugation (A).
Representative scanning electron microscopy of suEV pellets depicts EVs of typical exosomal cup shape and size
and as well as smaller and bigger particles. Scalebar: 100nm (B). Size distribution of suEVs measured in 4
independent suEV samples of healthy volunteers measured by Nanoparticle Tracking, bin: 30nm, errorbars: SD, (C).
Representative western blot analysis for exosomal markers ALIX and TSG101 in two separate suEV pellets after 1
and 6 months of storage in 8M Urea Buffer at -80°C (D). Mass spectrometry analysis suEV pellet is able to marker
proteins of all nephron segments. IBAQ: Intensity based absolute quantification (a.u.) (E)

Clinical characteristics of donors and recipients of 22 living donor kidney transplantations
(screening cohort)
We gathered suEV pellets over the course of 22 living donor transplantations. Figure 1F depicts
a brief overview of the study. Urine was collected the day before transplantation from allograft
donors (sample A) and their corresponding recipients directly after transplantation (sample B), 1
day after transplantation (sample C), 4 weeks (sample D) and one year after transplantation
(sample E). Table 1 gives an overview of the clinical characteristics of the donors (Tbl. 1A) and
corresponding recipients (Tbl. 1B). Medium age of donors was 51.5 years with roughly two thirds
of the first cohort being women. Most donors showed a measured creatinine clearance of more
than 100 ml/min/1,73m2 and only 3 donors suffered from arterial hypertension. Recipients were
younger in age, mostly male and showed a lower body weight than the donors on average. More
than two thirds underwent preemptive transplantation with the rest having been on dialysis
between 2 and 39 months. Underlying renal diseases were almost tripartite between genetic,
autoimmune and other causes with only one patient suffering from diabetic nephropathy. 72% of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

patients received basiliximab as an induction therapy and prednisolone, mycophenolic acid and
tacrolimus for maintenance after transplantation. Three of 22 patients did not show a decrease in
serum creatinine values of >1 mg/dl within the first 48 h and did not drop below a value of 3 mg/dl
within the first week. For this study, these patients were classified as exhibiting delayed graft
function for the following correlations.
Category

Subcategory

A (Donors)
Age (in years)
Sex

Value

± SD

51,50 ±11,09
female (%)
male (%)

Weight (kg)
measured clearance (ml/min/1,73m2)
estimated GFR (CKD-EPI 2009)
Hypertension (%)
ACE Inhibitors / AT1R Blockers (%?)
B (Recipients)
Age (in years)
Sex

63,64
36,36
76,95 ±13,52
126,10 ±32,21
92,91 ±12,64
13,64
13,64
45,68 ±15,86

female (%)
male (%)

time on dialysis in months

45,45
54,55
69,89 ±17,03
68,18
31,82
15,29 ±12,37

genetic (%)

31,82

diabetic (%)
glomerulonephritis (%)
other (%)

4,55
31,82
31,82

yes (2nd transplant) (%)
no (%)

9,09
90,91

neg/neg (%)

18,18

neg/pos (%)
pos/neg (%)

18,18
13,64

pos/pos (%)

50,00

Weight (kg)
Diuresis prior to transplant (%)
Dialysis prior to transplant (%)
Underlying renal disease

Retransplant (yes (number) / no)

CMV status (rec/don)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Induction
ATG (%)
Basiliximab (%)

9,09
90,91

Prednisolone / Cyclosporine A / MMF
(%)
Prednisolone / Tacrolimus / MMF (%)

27,27

Initial Immunosuppression

Cold ischemia time (in min)

72,73
174,00 ±26,80

GFR after 6 months

49,82 ±15,58

GFR after 12 months

53,23 ±16,88

Table 1. Patient characteristics (Cohort 1). Donors (A), Recipients (B)

Unbiased proteomic analysis of first 22 transplant sets reveals temporal changes of the suEV
proteome.
Using mass spectrometry, we detected > 1700 individual proteins present in ≥ 50% of samples.
The obtained data set is freely available at PRIDE/ProteomExchange (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride
(20) – accession number: PXD005219). Hierarchical clustering revealed a strong tendency of
samples collected at the same timepoint during transplantation to cluster together (Fig. 2A).
Specifically, the two samples obtained early after transplantation (B and C) share a subcluster
clearly distinguishing them from A, D and E samples – i.e. with the proteomic profiles one month
and one year after transplantation showing more resemblance to the profile in the donor sample.
In order to facilitate fast and uncomplicated access to a primary analysis and visualization of the
data set, we have designed a browser-based application allowing the direct search for protein
LFQs, their rank within the data set as well as the temporal changes in their abundance in suEVs
during living donor kidney transplantation (http://shiny.cecad.uni-koeln.de:3838/suEV/).
When comparing the top 20 proteins per timepoint ranked by label-free quantification after
excluding proteins that could not be annotated, we detected 25% of these proteins to be present
among the top 20 at all timepoints (Fig. 2B). These proteins contain the ubiquitous urinary protein
uromodulin (UMOD) as well as albumin (ALB), AMBP and Complement Factor 3 (C3) but,
interestingly, also cytoplasmatic actin (ACTG). Despite the hierarchical clustering results, the
donor samples differ most from all other timepoints regarding the top 20 suEV proteins indicating
a shift induced by transplantation itself. Programmed cell death 6-interacting protein (PDCD6IP),
a bonafide marker for small extracellular vesicles, for instance, was only detected among the top
20 proteins in the donor samples. All early timepoints up to 4 weeks after transplantation (B/C/D)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

show an overrepresentation of proteins typically expected in serum rather than urine including
fibrinogen chains alpha and beta and apolipoprotein A1 and A4.
To further dissect the impact of renal transplantation on the suEV proteome, we performed Gene
Ontology (GO) analyses of all detected proteins per timepoint (Fig. 2C-G). We observed a striking
overlap among the GO terms of highest significance per timepoint. “Platelet degranulation” and
“Retina homeostasis” was detected as highly significant at all timepoints while “Receptormediated endocytosis” was absent, solely, at timepoint E (Fig. 2G). “Gluconeogenesis” was not
annotated at timepoints b and c and not among the top 20 terms of highest significance at
timepoint d while “Cytolysis” showed the exact opposite pattern. GO terms for complement
activation and regulation were detected among the top 10 significant GO terms exclusively after
transplantation (Fig. 2D, E & F) but lacking in the donor sample and decreased in significance 12
months after transplantation (Fig. 2C & G and http://shiny.cecad.uni-koeln.de:3838/suEV/).
We also observed a considerable overlap when ranking the top GO terms by enrichment (Fig.
S2). However, proteins associated with cholesterol uptake and lipoprotein binding were only
enriched in the samples early after transplantation (Fig. S2B & C) whilst proteins involved in Tolllike-receptor 4 and arachidonic acid binding were overrepresented in the donor sample and one
year after transplantation (Fig. S2A & E).
In contrast to the GO analysis performed separately for each timepoint, GO terms for the
difference in the suEV proteome content of each timepoint after renal transplantation compared
to the initial donor suEV proteome showed much less of an overlap both ranked by enrichment
and significance (Fig. S3/S4). Interestingly, we detected a significant fold change for proteins
associated with the regulation of complement activation one day and one month after
transplantation (Fig. S3B, C and S4A). Four weeks after transplantation, “cytolysis”, “clearance of
apoptotic cells” and protein as well as membrane trafficking pathways were overrepresented (Fig.
S4C).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig.2: The suEV proteome clusters depending on the collection timepoint throughout living donor kidney
transplantation. Hierarchical clustering of all single sample protein measurements of the first cohort (A). Top 20
annotated proteins for each timepoint of sample collection (B). Bubble plots of top 10 significant GO terms for each
timepoint of sample collection. P value depicted as color code, number of annotated proteins corresponding to bubble
size, black GO terms indicating biological processes, gray GO terms indicating molecular function. (C: Timepoint A –
donor sample, D: Timepoint B – day 0, E: Timepoint C – day 1, F: Timepoint D – 1 month, G: Timepoint E – 1 year).

To further elucidate the timepoint-dependent shift in the suEV proteome during renal
transplantation, we analyzed the data set for clusters of proteins showing the same temporal
signatures. We were able to identify 9 clusters exhibiting specific temporal shifts in their protein
abundances (Fig. 3).
Proteins with rising abundances after transplantation and a following decrease to levels above
those detected in the initial donor suEV pellet appear to play a role in Immunity and Blood
coagulation (Fig. 3C) while HDL-associated proteins decreased to donor values one year after
transplantation. Proteins with a persistent increase after transplantation (Fig. 3F) were enriched
in GO terms of protease homeostasis and “Thrombophilia”. An S shaped temporal signature (rise
in abundance at timepoints B and C, decrease at timepoint D and normalization at timepoint E)
was detected for proteins involved in ribosomal and chromosomal biology as well as “Dynein”
activity (Fig.3G). Conversely, decreased abundances right after transplantation were observed
for proteins enriched in GO terms for “Glycoprotein” and Secreted proteins (Fig.3E). These terms
showed a “recovery” to donor values one year after transplantation, while the majority of proteins
in the terms “Transmembrane”, “Glycosidase” and “Signal-Anchor” remained slightly decreased
in the suEV pellet after one year (Fig. 3H). Interestingly, stress response proteins were detected
within the cluster exhibiting the lowest to non-detectable changes in the suEV proteome (Fig. 3J).
Two clusters, one with a pronounced and permanent decrease in abundance right after
transplantation and one with a slow continuous decrease in abundance, could not be annotated
using standard GO terms (Fig. 3B and I).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig.3: The suEV proteome underlies specific temporal changes indicative of specific biological processes in allograft
adaptation. Hierarchical clustering of mean relative protein abundance per timepoint (A). Spaghetti plots depicting suEV protein
clusters with specific temporal changes throughout renal transplantation with enriched GO keywords bargraphs below each cluster.
Color code indicates cluster branches on the heatmap depicted in 3A (B-J).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Identification of potential biomarkers predicting kidney function 6 and 12 months after renal
transplantation using a leave-one-out cross validation model
To assess the potential of the acquired proteomics data for identifying novel biomarkers of the
outcome of renal transplantation, we performed a correlative analysis with the estimated
glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) 6 months and 12 months after renal transplantation using a
leave-one-out cross validation model (for a description of the approach see Supplementary movie
S1). We investigated the predictive value of the foldchange of protein abundances between
timepoints A to B and A to C as well as the single protein intensities at timepoints A and C
normalized to the mean protein intensity. The resulting candidate protein lists were filtered for I)
the 10 candidates exhibiting the lowest error (lowest RSS squared) and highest stability (lowest
stdev RSS squared) when correlated to the estimated GFR after 12 month and, II) the 20
candidates exhibiting the lowest error correlating both with the estimated GFR 6 and 12 months
after transplantation (Supplementary Table S1).
To generate a candidate list of markers for further validation we complemented this selection by
5 proteins specifically not detected and 10 proteins with significantly higher expression in patients
with delayed graft function at timepoints A and C (Table S1). These proteins, the 10 candidates
described under I) and the overlap of proteins found both predictive for the eGFR after 6 and 12
months described under II) resulted in a target list of 64 proteins (Tbl. 2).
List origin
Correlating with 12 Month
GFR with lowest RSSsquare
mean and lowest SD

Protein names
Galactokinase
BH3-interacting domain death agonist;BH3-interacting domain
death agonist p15;BH3-interacting domain death agonist
p13;BH3-interacting domain death agonist p11
Pancreatic secretory granule membrane major glycoprotein GP2
Prominin-1
V-type proton ATPase subunit S1
Myocilin
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit C;Eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 3 subunit C-like protein
40S ribosomal protein SA
Complement C1q subcomponent subunit B
Tetranectin
2-deoxynucleoside 5-phosphate N-hydrolase 1
Charged multivesicular body protein 2a
DnaJ homolog subfamily A member 2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cadherin-16
Monocyte differentiation antigen CD14;Monocyte differentiation
antigen CD14, urinary form;Monocyte differentiation antigen
CD14, membrane-bound form;Monocyte differentiation antigen
CD14
Collagen alpha-2(IV) chain;Canstatin
Glutathione S-transferase A2;Glutathione S-transferase
Villin-1
Excitatory amino acid transporter 3
26S protease regulatory subunit 8
Spectrin beta chain, non-erythrocytic 1

Correlating with both 6
Month and 12 Month GFR
with lowest RSSsquare

Galectin-3-binding protein
Receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase eta
Importin subunit beta-1
Protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 7
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [GTP], mitochondrial
Decorin
Ragulator complex protein LAMTOR1
Annexin;Annexin A4
Alpha-(1,3)-fucosyltransferase
Protocadherin Fat 4
Sortilin-related receptor
SLIT and NTRK-like protein 1
Protein amnionless
Complement C1r subcomponent-like protein
Peflin
IgGFc-binding protein
ATP-dependent RNA helicase DDX3X;ATP-dependent RNA
helicase DDX3Y
Cartilage oligomeric matrix protein
BH3-interacting domain death agonist;BH3-interacting domain
death agonist p15;BH3-interacting domain death agonist
p13;BH3-interacting domain death agonist p11
DnaJ homolog subfamily A member 2
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase [GTP], mitochondrial
Haptoglobin-related protein
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit C;Eukaryotic
translation initiation factor 3 subunit C-like protein
40S ribosomal protein SA
Syntenin-1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fructosamine-3-kinase
Top5-not detectable in
delayed graft function

Transcription elongation factor B polypeptide 1
Ras-related protein Rab-27B
Sodium-dependent phosphate transport protein 2A

Top10-higher abundance in
non delayed graft function

Calbindin
Copine-8
Glutamate carboxypeptidase 2
CD177 antigen
Protein-glutamine gamma-glutamyltransferase 4
Arylsulfatase F
Semenogelin-1;Alpha-inhibin-92;Alpha-inhibin-31;Seminal basic
protein
40S ribosomal protein S17-like;40S ribosomal protein S17
60S ribosomal protein L23a
Histone H2B type 1-D;Histone H2B
Complement component C6

Extracellular vesicle
markers

Podocalyxin
TSG101
ALIX
CD81
CD40, Tumor necrosis factor receptor superfamily member 5
Annexin A5

Table 2. Candidate Biomarker Protein List

Targeted mass spectrometry in suEVs of an independent validation cohort identifies PCK2 as a
predictor of long-term transplant function
To check validity of these 64 suEV candidate markers we performed targeted mass spectrometry
assays for these proteins. These assays were then used to measure suEV pellets collected in an
independent validation cohort throughout 22 additional living donor transplantations. Table 3 gives
an overview of the patient characteristics of this validation cohort.
Renal function as indicated by both measured creatinine clearance (68,9 ml/min/1,73m2) and
estimated GFR (55,41 ml/min/1,73m2) was lower in comparison to the first cohort with 7 patients
being hypertensive and receiving corresponding medication (Tbl. 3A). Recipients were heavier

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

than those of the initial cohort but otherwise closely resembled the latter, also when examining
the renal function 6 months and 12 months after transplantation (Tbl. 3B).
Category
A (Donors)
Age (in years)

Subcategory

Value

± SD

53,77 ±10,7

Sex
female (%)
male (%)
Weight (kg)
measured clearance (ml/min/1,73m2)
estimated GFR (CKD-EPI 2009)
Hypertension (%)
ACE Inhibitors / AT1R Blockers (%)
B (Recipients)
Age (in years)
Sex

50,00
50,00
79,53 ±14,27
68,90 ±18,64
55,41 ±11,60
31,82
31,82
46,05 ±15,06

female (%)
male (%)

time on dialysis in months

45,45
54,55
81,21 ±15,02
77,27
22,73
16,24 ±43,90

genetic (%)
diabetic (%)
glomerulonephritis (%)

31,82
0,00
18,18

other (%)

50,00

Weight (kg)
Diuresis prior to transplant (%)
Dialysis prior to transplant (%)
Underlying renal disease

Retransplant (yes (number) / no)
yes (2nd transplant) (%)

9,09

no (%)

90,91

neg/neg (%)
neg/pos (%)

18,18
18,18

pos/neg (%)

13,64

pos/pos (%)

50,00

CMV status (rec/don)

Induction
ATG (%)
Basiliximab (%)

0,00
100,00

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Initial Immunosuppression
Prednisolone / Cyclosporine A / MMF
(%)
Prednisolone / Tacrolimus / MMF (%)

22,73
72,73

Cold ischemia time (in min)

172,70 ±23,62

GFR after 6 months
GFR after 12 months

53,33 ±16,18
59,16 ±20,50

Table 3. Patient characteristics (Cohort 2). Donors (A), Recipients (B)

We again performed both our correlative
analysis and filter algorithm to identify proteins
with a robust correlation to renal function 6 and
12

months

after

transplantation

(supplementary table S2). This validation
experiment

lead

to

the

confirmation

of

phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2 (PCK2 /
PCK2) as an early marker predicting transplant
outcome after 1 year. PCK2 abundance in
suEVs 1 day after transplantation (timepoint C)
showed a robust positive correlation with the
estimated

GFR

12

months

after

renal

transplantation in both cohorts (Fig. 4A & B).
We detected no predictive value for PCK2
abundances in suEVs of the donor sample or
the foldchanges directly after and 1 day after
transplantation (Fig. S5A-E). Strikingly, the
abundance of PCK2 in suEVs one day after
transplantation did not correlate with either the
initially measured GFR of donors (Fig. 4C) or
the recorded cold ischemia time (Fig. 4D)
showing its potential as an independent
indicator.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig.4: PCK2 abundance in suEVs on day one after transplantation correlates with estimated GFR 12 months
after transplantation. Correlation plots of PCK2 intensity foldchange to mean intensity at timepoint C to GFR 12
months after transplantation measured in the initial (A) and validation (B) transplant cohort. Correlation plots of PCK2
intensity foldchange to mean intensity at timepoint C to donor clearance (C) and cold ischemia (D) measured in the
initial cohort. Blue: individual linear regression models; Red: merged linear regression model for all samples.

suEV abundance of PCK2 rises initially during renal transplantation but does not reflect renal
tissue PCK2 levels
In the initial unbiased proteomic measurement, PCK2 was detected at rank 1515 of 1728 with a
mean LFQ of 21.88 at timepoint A (see (http://shiny.cecad.uni-koeln.de:3838/suEV/).
Consequently, it appeared important to prove its localization within suEVs. Using immunogold
labelling and transmission electron microscopy, we detected PCK2 within a subset of suEVs of
100-400nm diameter (Fig. 5A). Vesicles were permeabilized for 30 minutes (see materials and
methods) allowing antibody penetration into the vesicular lumen for successful staining. No
staining was detected within non-permeabilized vesicles (Fig. S6A).
PCK2 shows a rising abundance in suEVs until 4 weeks after transplantation, with a decrease
towards values measured in the donor sample one year after transplantation (Fig. 5B). To
examine, whether the changes in suEV levels of PCK2 were due to differences in renal
expression, we performed immunohistochemistry for PCK2 in renal biopsies taken during living
donor kidney transplantation before explantation (pre) and right after reperfusion (post) from a
subset of patients also included in the suEV analysis. We detected a strong signal predominantly
in proximal tubules, as described before, but no overt changes after reperfusion or evidence for
a correlation to the measured LFQs in the suEV proteome of the donor samples (Fig. 5C).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Fig.5: PCK2 localizes to suEVs, increases during the initial stages of transplantation and does not correlate
to tissue PCK2 levels after reperfusion. Electron microscopy depicting permeabilized small urinary extracellular
vesicles harbouring immunogold labelled PCK2, scalebar 200nm (A). Box plot diagrams depicting suEV PCK2
abundance at different timepoints throughout living donor kidney transplantation in the initial and validation cohort.
Mean (red line), 95% confidence interval (blue box) (B). Immunohistochemistry staining for PCK2 in renal biopsies
taken from two donors / patients (sample 1 / 2) included in the suEV analysis before explantation (pre) and after
reperfusion (post). suEV PCK2 LFQs at timepoint C indicated in the lower left corner, scalebar 100µm (C).

Discussion
We present the first quantitative analysis of the temporal changes in the suEV proteome
throughout living donor kidney transplantation. Despite the acceptance of kidney transplantation
as the preferred renal replacement therapy in ESRD in developed countries, the precise effects
cold ischemia time and reperfusion exert on renal cells are incompletely understood. Mouse
models can only partially shed light on these mechanisms, as their organism differs greatly
concerning their immune systems, one of the key players involved in transplant biology (21).
Nevertheless, a better understanding could impact future therapeutic approaches to renal
transplantation and lead to a better overall outcome both of organ function in the early days and
long-term organ survival. This study represents the first in-human analysis of these proteomic
patterns and allows novel insights into the molecular processes taking place in the early days and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

weeks after transplantation as well as those underlying the long-term recovery. Former studies in
donors of renal allografts investigated the correlation between EVs carrying specific markers to
the tissue characteristics obtained through renal biopsy during transplantation(22). While an
impressive number of patients was investigated and valuable information was obtained, a deeper
understanding was limited due to the use of a specific antibody panel.
Whole urine proteomics have been employed in the setting of renal transplantation in the past
(23–25). Yet, it is important to note, that, apart from a “core urinary proteome”, free urinary
proteins showed a fairly high inter- and intra-individual variability (26). Employing an unbiased
proteomic analysis, we were able to detect >1700 proteins enriched through our separation
protocol.
The suEV proteome showed a strong tendency to form timepoint-dependent subclusters. This
finding confirms technical reproducibility in a clinical setting, as the individual vesicle separation
was performed by various trained members of our group, and the storage time of the initially
collected urine samples varied from sample to sample.
When considering the top 20 proteins of highest abundance, 5 proteins were detectable to a high
degree at all timepoints. While UMOD, ALB, C3 could be interpreted as a sign for co-precipitation
of free proteins, it is worth noting that all three proteins were also present in proteomic analyses
of urinary extracellular vesicles separated through protocols involving a sucrose cushion or
immune affinity (18, 27, 28). Interestingly, PDCD6IP or ALIX, which, as a bona fide marker for the
late endosome and the vesicles derived from it, is an integral interactor with the ESCRT machinery
in vesicle formation, was only present among the proteins of highest abundance in suEVs before
transplantation. This also holds true when broadening the filter to the top 50 proteins, indicating
a decrease in ALIX-positive vesicles with potential implications for vesicle formation and late
endosome maturation throughout renal transplantation. Further indication for an alteration in the
release of vesicles is given by the reduction in TSG101 right after transplantation as TSG was
proposed as a surrogate marker for urinary vesicle number in a recent study (29).
The surge in serum-associated proteins at timepoints B-D can reflect differences in EV packing
as well as a decreased intercellular barrier upon reperfusion resulting in the crossing of plasma
extracellular vesicles into the urinary space (30, 31). Yet, the fact that these proteins are still
detected as late as 4 weeks after transplantation (timepoint d), speaks for them rather to be
derived from cells of the nephron. Recently, the channel proteins AQP1 and AQP2 were shown
to be decreased in urinary EVs after ischemia reperfusion injury in a rat model (32) and in human

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

patients undergoing renal transplantation (33). We were able to reproduce these findings in our
unbiased proteomic approach.
Regarding the GO term analyses, the term “platelet degranulation” was detected as highly
significant at all timepoints (Fig. 2C-G). As the common denominator of most proteins associated
to the term is their incorporation in platelet-derived extracellular vesicles (31), we believe that
there is constant passage of these vesicles into the urinary space either through the glomerular
filtration barrier, leaky intercellular space or active transcellular transport.
The surge in proteins associated with both complement activation, its regulation and cytolysis
most likely reflects the initial immune response triggered by both ischemia-reperfusion and
exposure to the allograft. This allows for the hypothesis that an early blockade of these responses
– probably focusing on the complement system – may be beneficial (34, 35). Furthermore, the
analysis of suEVs could become a diagnostic strategy to monitor complement activation in the
setting of renal transplantation.
Toll-like receptor 4 signaling has long been investigated as a mediator for renal fibrosis after
transplantation and over the course of various nephropathies (36–41). In contrast to that,
derivatives of arachidonic acids and their mimics were shown to exhibit anti-fibrotic effects and
polymorphisms in their CYP-dependent metabolism to influence susceptibility to renal injury (42–
44).
GO term analysis of the differences in the suEV proteome of each timepoint to the healthy (donor)
state revealed the vast and quickly adapting changes in EV assembly and cargo. Again, the
significant enrichment of complement pathway-activating proteins is not surprising and confirms
published data based on tissue analyses (34). Conversely, the enrichment of proteins associated
to “multivesicular body assembly” and “viral (vesicle) budding” point to a heightened activity of EV
production, potentially triggered through the ischemia reperfusion injury, which is also reflected
by a continuous rise in TSG protein abundance after an initial dip right after transplantation
((http://shiny.cecad.uni-koeln.de:3838/suEV/). Induction of vesicle production has been described
both in cell culture damage systems as well as cardiac ischemia in humans and mice and has
been associated with the recruitment of monocytes to the damaged tissue (45, 46). Given the fact
that EV administration has been shown to facilitate renal recovery after ischemia-reperfusion
damage(47), our finding could point towards an intrinsic counter mechanism.
Besides being a resource for the biological temporal changes after transplantation, we
hypothesized that the suEV proteome could be a future source for the identification of biomarkers.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A set of proteins detected in EVs early after transplantation correlated clearly with eGFR 6 and
12 months later. Since the robust identification of marker proteins cannot be achieved using
untargeted proteomics in a limited set of patients, we then aimed for the validation in a separate
cohort using targeted mass spectrometry. Here, PCK2 abundance in the suEV pellet one day
after transplantation was confirmed to correlate with eGFR one year after transplantation (Fig.
4A&B). This correlation was not detected when measured at any other timepoint or investigating
the difference in abundance between timepoints (Fig. S5). Strikingly, PCK2 abundance did not
correlate with the initial donor clearance or cold ischemia time during transplantation (Fig.4C&D).
This finding points towards unknown mechanisms in transplant adaptation or resistance to
ischemia-reperfusion, revealed by the investigation of the suEV proteome. Mechanistically, PCK2
has been shown to react to states of metabolic starvation, particularly in cancer. In glucose
deprivation, PCK2 upregulation with ensuing gluconeogenesis stabilizes nutrient supply and
tumor growth with growth impairment upon PCK2 inhibition(48, 49). This process may well take
place also in the renal allograft, as PCK2 is highly expressed in the proximal tubule and the tubular
compartment is the prime target of ischemic and acute damage in the kidney (50).
An increase in PCK2 levels could potentially counteract the observed decrease in
gluconeogenesis (Fig.2C-G) at timepoints B, C and D as indicated by our GO analysis. It is
possible that this PCK2 induction is activated after reperfusion, but takes time to reach a
measurable peak in tissue analyses. This would explain why we did not detect evidence for a
correlation of tissue PCK2 levels right after reperfusion in immunohistochemistry with suEV PCK2
levels one day after transplantation. Albeit, there is ongoing debate as to whether suEV protein
content does correlate with tissue protein content at all (51, 52). PCK2 is a mitochondrial protein.
An alternative explanation of the increased PCK2 content in suEVs without a change in the cellular
content may be an activation of mitochondrial activity in individuals protected from damage and a
consecutive rise in the release of this protein. However, this remains speculation at this point and
will require further cell biological studies.
The presented study entails limitations due to the separation protocol and the patient cohort
chosen. Due to the protocol chosen, we cannot draw conclusions of the actual vesicle type
contributing to the protein signals. To this day, there is no agreed gold standard separation
protocol and most studies still use the widely employed protocol of differential (ultra)centrifugation (15)(13). We, as well, chose a modification of these protocols, due to several
reasons. Differential ultracentrifugation enables the use of higher volumes of the initial sample
and, therefore, the separation of more EVs (18). Differential ultracentrifugation fails to separate a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

pure vesicle fraction, yet filtration and precipitation techniques were shown to unspecifically
concentrate free urinary proteins as well while often excluding specific EV fractions from the
separated pellet. More laborious techniques such as sucrose cushion gradient separation, would
make a translation to the clinical setting extremely difficult.
The fact, that patients undergoing living donor transplantation were chosen, leads to a collective
experienced with only short cold ischemia periods and very good outcome, that is not necessarily
comparable in deceased donor transplantations. Nevertheless, this allowed us to include samples
of donors with precisely monitored renal health and follow the effects of early and long-term
transplant adaptation for up to one year.
Whilst our study shows the potential of suEVs as a source of biomarkers, the small number of
patients (22 in the screening cohort, 22 in the validation cohort) does not allow for definite
statement on the predictive capacity of suEV PCK2. Therefore, a potential use of this marker will
depend on future larger trials. Our data set can serve as the first step to inform the design of such
studies. Since PCK2 was located to suEVs between 100-400nm in size, future analyses can
employ separation methods not relying on ultracentrifugation such as size exclusion
chromatography to open the investigation of PCK2 in suEVs to a broad range of groups
worldwide. Likewise, the timepoint of measurement opens up the possibility to validate the
predictive value in deceased donor transplantation.
In conclusion, using differential (ultra-) centrifugation we assembled and analyzed a concise atlas
reflecting the temporal changes in the proteome of small urinary extracellular vesicles throughout
the course of living donor kidney transplantation. We detected specific temporal profiles, e.g. a
surge in complement-associated proteins closely after transplantation reflective of early
immunologic effects. Furthermore, our approach revealed the abundance of phosphoenol
pyruvate carboxykinase (PCK2) in the suEV proteome one day after transplantation to have a
predictive value for overall kidney function one year after transplantation. This study underlines
the potential of analyzing suEVs for monitoring immune response activity and for biomarker
discovery using a fast and easy protocol for their separation.

Materials and Methods
Patient recruitment
Patients were recruited through the Department of General, Visceral and Cancer Surgery,
Division of Transplantation Surgery, Transplant Center Cologne according to the approved ethics

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

statements 11-310 and 15-032, Ethics committee, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. The
performed studies are registered at the German Clinical Trials Registry under the ID:
DRKS00010534 and DRKS00007704.
Urine collection and pre-processing
≥ 50ml urine samples were either collected as second morning midstream sample (timepoint A,
D and E) or as catheter urine from a fresh collection bag (timepoint B and C) into standard urine
sample cups (Sarstedt, Germany). Preservatives and protease inhibitors were added to the final
concentrations 6,6mM NaN3, 2,0mM EGTA, 1,0mM PMSF within 90 minutes after sample
collection. Afterwards cells, debris and large to medium sized EVs were separated via high speed
centrifugation using a Beckman Avanti Centrifuge with a TLA 16,250 fixed angle rotor in 50ml
centrifugation Tubes (Greiner Bio-One, Germany) at 17.000g, 4°C for 20 minutes. Supernatant
was transferred to fresh 50ml centrifugation tubes and samples stored at -80°C until further
processing.
Small urinary extracellular vesicle separation
For suEV separation, frozen samples were thawed with subsequent repetition of centrifugation at
17.000g, 4°C for 20 minutes to pellet protein precipitates due to the freeze thaw cycle.
Supernatant was afterwards transferred to polycarbonate ultracentrifugation bottles (Beckman
Coulter, USA) and suEVs were separated at 200.000g, 4°C, 60 minutes using a Beckman Coulter
Optima Ultracentrifuge with a 70Ti fixed angle rotor. Supernatant was discarded and suEV pellets
resuspended and pooled in 4°C 20mM Tris Buffer pH 8,6 with subsequent repetition of the
ultracentrifugation step. After discarding the supernatant, the suEV pellet of originally ≥25ml whole
urine was resuspended in 50µl of Paraformaldehyde and stored at 4°C for electron microscopy
or 40µl 8M Urea Buffer + Protease Inhibitor Mix (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and stored at -80°C for
protein analysis.
Electron microscopy and assessment of size distribution
Samples were processed according to a modified version of previously published protocols (53).
In short: suEV pellet was resuspended in 50µl 2% PFA (weight/vol) in PBS and incubated at 4°C
over night. 5µl were added to formwar-coated grids and dried for 20 minutes at room temperature.
Grids were washed 7 times in PBS for 2 minutes at room temperature before incubation in 1%
glutharaldehyde (vol/vol) for 5 minutes. After rinsing in distilled water, grids were contrasted in
1,5% uranylacetate in distilled water (weight/vol) in the dark for 4 minutes and dried afterwards.
Grids were analyzed at the TEM109 from Zeiss with a CCD camera by Tröndle. Size distribution

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

was measured in 5 randomly picked images from two individual healthy subjects using the
measuring tool in FIJI (54, 55).
Electron microscopy and immunogold labelling of PCK2
For immunogold staining, 5 μl of resuspended paraformaldehyde fixed suEVs were transferred
on Formvar-carbon coated nickel grids (20 minutes incubation). After washing with PBS the
samples on the grids were permeabilized with 0.05% Tween (in the blocking solution) and blocked
with 0.5% BSA for 30 minutes. suEVs were incubated with the primary rabbit-anti-PCK2 antibody
(Abcam – ab187145) diluted 1:200 for 2 hours at room temperature, washed and labeled with a
goat-anti-rabbit secondary antibody conjugated to 1.4 nm gold particles diluted 1:200 (Jackson
ImmunoResearch - 711-205-152) for 1 hour at room temperature. After washing nanogold
particles were enhanced for 2 minutes using HQ silver kit (Nanoprobes). Grids were contrasted
as described above. Imaging was performed using a Philipps CM 100 TEM and Olympus imaging
software ITEM.
Western blot analysis
suEV pellets resuspened in 8M urea buffer were diluted using 1% triton X-100 buffer and 4% SDS
sample buffer was added accordingly. Size separation was done using SDS-PAGE. Samples
were blotted onto polyvinylidene difluoride membranes and visualized with enhanced
chemiluminescence after incubation of blots with corresponding antibodies (anti-ALIX antibody
BD Bioscience - 611620, anti-TSG101 antibody Abcam – ab30871).
Unbiased proteomic analysis
Peptides were analyzed using a Q Exactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo scientific).
A 50 cm column was packed with 1.7 μm C18 beads (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was used
in a column oven. Peptides were fractionated by nano-liquid chromatography. For this purpose,
a binary buffer system was used. This consisted of two buffers: buffer A: 0.1% formic acid and
buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Linear gradients of 150 minutes duration were used
according to the following scheme: 7-38% B, 80% B for 5 minutes and re-equilibration 5% B.
Peptides were sprayed by Electron Spray Ionization (ESI) into a Q Exactive Plus Tandem mass
spectrometer (56). The following parameters were used for MS1 scans: injection time 20 ms,
resolution 70,000, mass range 200-1200 mz-1, 1E6 as to AGC target. MS2 scans were triggered
by a top 10 method for further peptide fragmentation by means of higher-energy collisional
dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The following parameters were used for MS2 scans: 35,000 at
200 mz-1, AGC target to 5E5, max injection time 120 ms. Raw data (.raw) was analyzed using

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

MaxQuant V 1.5.0.1 (57). The search (target decoy strategy) was performed against a 2017
reference human uniprot database. The default settings were used and the "MQLFQ" and "Match
between runs" options were both used (58). The FDR cutoffs were FDR 0.01 for all peptide, PSM,
and protein identifications. Perseus (v. 1.4.0.1 and v. 1.5.2.4) (59) was used for further analysis.
To correct for multiple testing, a SAM approach was chosen (cutoff s0 = 1, FDR <0.001) (60).
Significantly enriched GeneOntology terms were determined by Fisher's Exact Test (FDR = 0.05).
Correlative analysis
Detected proteins where correlated by linear regression models to eGFR. The eGFR was
estimated using the CKD-EPI Creatinine Equation (61). Models were generated using a leaveone-out crossvalidation procedure(62). Here, all values but one are used as the training set (n-1)
to calculate a linear model using the R function lm. The left out measurement (the "test set") is
calculated using method predict.lm and the difference between predicted and true value is used
to calculate the prediction error of the model. The process is repeated according to the number
of measured proteins (n) resulting in n linear models. Using these models a mean linear model is
generated for each detected protein. From these models candidate proteins were determined for
targeted mass spectrometry with criteria described in the main text. The targeted mass
spectrometry of the independent validation cohort was analysed using the same approach.
Targeted proteomic analysis
A parallel reaction monitoring PRM assay was set up. Analysis was performed using the LC-MS
system as described for untargeted proteomics. Acquisition parameters for targeted proteomics
data were as follows: 70 peptides were selected for scheduled PRM analysis (Supplementary
Table S3). MS2 resolution was set at 140k. The AGC target was set at 1,000,000 at a maximum
injection time of 100 ms. Peptides were isolated using an isolation window of 1.0 Th and
fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 27. The two PCK2 peptides with the amino acid
sequence HGVFVGSAMR (charge state 2, m/z = 530.771468, retention time = 31.92 min and
EGALDLSGLR, charge state 2, m/z = 515.780013 , retention time = 46.77 min were used. A
scheduled method was composed using Skyline software environment (63, 64). A 4 min retention
time window was used for acquisition on a 1h gradient that was previously described. Analysis
and quantification of targeted proteomics data was performed using skyline. A library of 6
representative suEV rawfiles from the untargeted analysis was used as to construct the spectral
library. Peaks were integrated and quantified using skyline. Normalized intensities were exported
and processed. Only peptides within a 5 ppm mass window were considered.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Immunohistochemistry
The tissue was fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) followed by
paraffin embedding for histology. All steps were performed at room temperature (RT) using an
autostainer 480S and protocol by Thermo Scientific. In brief, after deparaffinization with xylene
and rehydration by graded series of ethanol the slides were washed with TRIS-NaCl with Tween
(Medac-diagnostica, Germany). Peroxidase was blocked (Ultra Vision Hydrogen Peroxidase
Block, Medac-diagnostica, Germany) and a pretreatment with citrate buffer at pH6 followed (PT
modul Buffer 1, Thermo Scientific). The primary antibody rabbit-anti-PCK2 antibody (Abcam –
ab187145) was diluted with antibody diluent (Medac-diagnostica, Germany) 1:1000 and
developed using poly-HRP-anti mouse/rabbit IgG (Bright Vision, Medac-diagnostica, Germany)
and DAB away kit (Biocare Medical, Germany). All reagents were used according to
manufacturer’s protocols.
Nanoparticle tracking analysis
EVs were analyzed by the ZetaView PMX-120 device (Particle Metrix, Germany). All samples
were either diluted 1:1000 or 1:5000 in PBS to a final volume of 1 ml to achieve an ideal particle
per frame value of 140 to 200. Every measurement, three times 11 cell positions have been
analyzed after video capturing 30 frames, each position. Autofocus was set and all samples were
measured with a camera sensitivity of 75, using a shutter value of 100 and a constant temperature
of 25°C. Videos were analyzed by the ZetaView software 8.05.10 SP1 with a minimal area of 5,
a maximal area of 1000 and a minimal brightness of 25. The number of completed tracks in NTA
measurements was always greater than 1000 (65).
Supplementary Materials
Table S1.: Potential proteomic suEV biomarkers for renal outcome
Table S2.: Correlative analysis of potential proteomic suEV biomarkers detected in
targeted proteomic analysis
Table S3.: Selected peptide sequences for targeted proteomic analysis
Movie S1: Schematic overview of leave-one-out crossvalidation procedure. After plotting of
all measured values per timepoint or fold change analysis, all values but one are used to create
a correlative model. Subsequently, the missing value is predicted with the generated model, with
the differences between predicted and true value indicating the prediction error and the correlative
value of the model. The process is repeated according to the number of initial values creating

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

correlative models of that number. All created models are summarized into an average model per
protein. By using this mean model, the predictive value of protein abundance or fold change to
GFR is calculated.
Fig.S1: Differential centrifugation leads to a decrease Uromodulin to TSG ratio and
separates small tetraspanin-containing vesicles. Size distribution of suEVs measured in SEM
of 2 independent samples of healthy volunteers (A). Western Blot Analysis and Densitometry of
Uromodulin and TSG101 in 2 independent samples of healthy volunteers (B). Flow cytometric
bead assay for tetraspanins CD9, CD63, CD81 and Phosphatidylserine (PS) of 4 independent
samples of healthy volunteers (C).
Fig.S2: Enriched GO term analysis of absolute protein quantification per timepoint. Bubble
plots of top 10 GO terms enriched for each timepoint of sample collection. P value depicted as
color code, number of annotated proteins corresponding to bubble size, black GO terms indicating
biological processes, gray GO terms indicating molecular function (A: Timepoint A, B: Timepoint
B, C: Timepoint C, D: Timepoint D, E: Timepoint E).
Fig.S3: Significant GO term analysis of protein fold changes compared to initial donor
sample. Top 10 significant GO terms for each timepoint after transplantation compared to the
initial donor samples. P value depicted as color code, number of annotated proteins
corresponding to bubble size, black GO terms indicating biological processes, gray GO terms
indicating molecular function (A: Timepoint B vs A, B: Timepoint C vs A, C: Timepoint D vs A, D:
Timepoint E vs A).
Fig.S4: Enriched GO term analysis of protein fold changes compared to initial donor
sample. Top 10 GO terms enriched for each timepoint after transplantation compared to the initial
donor samples. P value depicted as color code, number of annotated proteins corresponding to
bubble size, black GO terms indicating biological processes, gray GO terms indicating molecular
function (A: Timepoint B vs A, B: Timepoint C vs A, C: Timepoint D vs A, D: Timepoint E vs A).
Fig.S5: PCK2 abundance in suEVs at other timepoints does not correlate with estimated
GFR 12 months after transplantation. Correlation plots of PCK2 intensity foldchange to mean
intensity at timepoint A (A) and B (B) and foldchanges between timepoints A vs. B (C), A vs. C

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(D), and B vs. C (E), to GFR 12 months after transplantation measured in the validation cohort.
Blue: individual linear regression models; Red: merged linear regression model for all samples.
Fig.S6: PCK2 localizes to suEVs, increases during the initial stages of transplantation and
does not correlate to tissue PCK2 levels after reperfusion. Electron microscopy depicting non
permeabilized small urinary extracellular vesicles after immunogold staining for PCK2, scalebar
100nm

References and Notes:
1. T. K. Chen, D. H. Knicely, M. E. Grams, Chronic Kidney Disease Diagnosis and
Management, Jama 322, 1294–1304 (2019).
2. M. van der Velde, K. Matsushita, J. Coresh, B. C. Astor, M. Woodward, A. Levey, P. de Jong,
R. T. Gansevoort, C. Consortium, M. van der Velde, K. Matsushita, J. Coresh, B. C. Astor, M.
Woodward, A. S. Levey, P. E. de Jong, R. T. Gansevoort, A. Levey, M. El-Nahas, K.-U. Eckardt,
B. L. Kasiske, T. Ninomiya, J. Chalmers, S. Macmahon, M. Tonelli, B. Hemmelgarn, F. Sacks,
G. Curhan, A. J. Collins, S. Li, S.-C. Chen, H. K. Cohort, B. J. Lee, A. Ishani, J. Neaton, K.
Svendsen, J. F. Mann, S. Yusuf, K. K. Teo, P. Gao, R. G. Nelson, W. C. Knowler, H. J. Bilo, H.
Joosten, N. Kleefstra, K. Groenier, P. Auguste, K. Veldhuis, Y. Wang, L. Camarata, B. Thomas,
T. Manley, Lower estimated glomerular filtration rate and higher albuminuria are associated with
all-cause and cardiovascular mortality. A collaborative meta-analysis of high-risk population
cohorts, Kidney Int 79, 1341–1352 (2011).
3. K. Matsushita, J. Coresh, Y. Sang, J. Chalmers, C. Fox, E. Guallar, T. Jafar, S. K. Jassal, G.
W. Landman, P. Muntner, P. Roderick, T. Sairenchi, B. Schöttker, A. Shankar, M. Shlipak, M.
Tonelli, J. Townend, A. van Zuilen, K. Yamagishi, K. Yamashita, R. Gansevoort, M. Sarnak, D.
G. Warnock, M. Woodward, J. Ärnlöv, C. Consortium, Estimated glomerular filtration rate and
albuminuria for prediction of cardiovascular outcomes: a collaborative meta-analysis of
individual participant data, Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol 3, 514–525 (2015).
4. P. I. Terasaki, M. J. Cecka, D. W. Gjertson, S. Takemoto, High Survival Rates of Kidney
Transplants from Spousal and Living Unrelated Donors, New Engl J Medicine 333, 333–336

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(1995).
5. K. C. Mange, M. M. Joffe, H. I. Feldman, Effect of the Use or Nonuse of Long-Term Dialysis
on the Subsequent Survival of Renal Transplants from Living Donors, New Engl J Medicine 344,
726–731 (2001).
6. I. S. Currie, L. K. Henderson, ABO-incompatible renal transplantation, Lancet 393, 2014–
2016 (2019).
7. J. Sellarés, D. de Freitas, M. Mengel, J. Reeve, G. Einecke, B. Sis, L. Hidalgo, K. Famulski,
A. Matas, P. Halloran, Understanding the Causes of Kidney Transplant Failure: The Dominant
Role of Antibody-Mediated Rejection and Nonadherence, Am J Transplant 12, 388–399 (2012).
8. K. i. m. Solez, R. A. Axelsen, H. Benediktsson, J. F. Burdick, A. H. Cohen, R. B. Colvin, B. P.
Croker, D. Droz, M. S. Dunnill, P. F. Halloran, P. Häyry, C. J. Jennette, P. A. Keown, N.
Marcussen, M. J. Mihatsch, K. Morozumi, B. D. Myers, C. C. Nast, S. Olsen, L. C. Racusen, E.
L. Ramos, S. Rosen, D. H. Sachs, D. R. Salomon, F. r. e. d. Sanfilippo, R. Verani, E. e. v. a. von
Willebrand, Y. Yamaguchi, International standardization of criteria for the histologic diagnosis of
renal allograft rejection: The Banff working classification of kidney transplant pathology, Kidney
Int 44, 411–422 (1993).
9. C. A. Schinstock, R. Sapir-Pichhadze, M. Naesens, I. Batal, S. Bagnasco, L. Bow, P.
Campbell, M. C. Groningen, M. Cooper, E. Cozzi, D. Dadhania, F. Diekmann, K. Budde, F.
Lower, B. J. Orandi, A. T. Rowshani, L. Cornell, E. Kraus, Banff survey on antibody-mediated
rejection clinical practices in kidney transplantation: Diagnostic misinterpretation has potential
therapeutic implications, Am J Transplant 19, 123–131 (2019).
10. J. Klein, J.-L. Bascands, H. Mischak, J. P. Schanstra, The role of urinary peptidomics in
kidney disease research, Kidney Int 89, 539–545 (2016).
11. S. Roy, F. H. Hochberg, P. S. Jones, Extracellular vesicles: the growth as diagnostics and
therapeutics; a survey, J Extracell Vesicles 7, 1438720 (2018).
12. D. Karpman, A. Ståhl, I. Arvidsson, Extracellular vesicles in renal disease., Nature reviews.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Nephrology 13, 545–562 (2017).
13. M. L. Merchant, I. M. Rood, J. K. Deegens, J. B. Klein, Isolation and characterization of
urinary extracellular vesicles: implications for biomarker discovery., Nature reviews. Nephrology
13, 269 (2017).
14. D. K. Jeppesen, A. M. Fenix, J. L. Franklin, J. N. Higginbotham, Q. Zhang, L. J. Zimmerman,
D. C. Liebler, J. Ping, Q. Liu, R. Evans, W. H. Fissell, J. G. Patton, L. H. Rome, D. T. Burnette,
R. J. Coffey, Reassessment of Exosome Composition., Cell 177, 428-445.e18 (2019).
15. C. Théry, K. W. Witwer, E. Aikawa, M. Alcaraz, J. D. Anderson, R. Andriantsitohaina, A.
Antoniou, T. Arab, F. Archer, G. K. Atkin-Smith, C. D. Ayre, J.-M. Bach, D. Bachurski, H.
Baharvand, L. Balaj, S. Baldacchino, N. N. Bauer, A. A. Baxter, M. Bebawy, C. Beckham, A.
Zavec, A. Benmoussa, A. C. Berardi, P. Bergese, E. Bielska, C. Blenkiron, S. Bobis-Wozowicz,
E. Boilard, W. Boireau, A. Bongiovanni, F. E. Borràs, S. Bosch, C. M. Boulanger, X. Breakefield,
A. M. Breglio, M. Brennan, D. R. Brigstock, A. Brisson, M. L. Broekman, J. F. Bromberg, P. BrylGórecka, S. Buch, A. H. Buck, D. Burger, S. Busatto, D. Buschmann, B. Bussolati, E. I. Buzás,
J. Byrd, G. Camussi, D. R. Carter, S. Caruso, L. W. Chamley, Y.-T. Chang, C. Chen, S. Chen,
L. Cheng, A. R. Chin, A. Clayton, S. P. Clerici, A. Cocks, E. Cocucci, R. J. Coffey, A. Cordeiroda-Silva, Y. Couch, F. A. Coumans, B. Coyle, R. Crescitelli, M. Criado, C. D’Souza-Schorey, S.
Das, A. Chaudhuri, P. de Candia, E. F. Santana, O. Wever, H. A. del Portillo, T. Demaret, S.
Deville, A. Devitt, B. Dhondt, D. Vizio, L. C. Dieterich, V. Dolo, A. Rubio, M. Dominici, M. R.
Dourado, T. A. Driedonks, F. V. Duarte, H. ncan, R. M. Eichenberger, K. Ekström, S.
Andaloussi, C. Elie-Caille, U. Erdbrügger, J. M. Falcón-Pérez, F. Fatima, J. E. Fish, M. FloresBellver, A. Försönits, A. Frelet-Barrand, F. Fricke, G. Fuhrmann, S. Gabrielsson, A. GámezValero, C. Gardiner, K. Gärtner, R. Gaudin, Y. Gho, B. Giebel, C. Gilbert, M. Gimona, I. Giusti,
D. C. Goberdhan, A. Görgens, S. M. Gorski, D. W. Greening, J. Gross, A. Gualerzi, G. N.
Gupta, D. Gustafson, A. Handberg, R. A. Haraszti, P. Harrison, H. Hegyesi, A. Hendrix, A. F.
Hill, F. H. Hochberg, K. F. Hoffmann, B. Holder, H. Holthofer, B. Hosseinkhani, G. Hu, Y.
Huang, V. Huber, S. Hunt, A. Ibrahim, T. Ikezu, J. M. Inal, M. Isin, A. Ivanova, H. K. Jackson, S.
Jacobsen, S. M. Jay, M. Jayachandran, G. Jenster, L. Jiang, S. M. Johnson, J. C. Jones, A.
Jong, T. Jovanovic-Talisman, S. Jung, R. Kalluri, S. Kano, S. Kaur, Y. Kawamura, E. T. Keller,
D. Khamari, E. Khomyakova, A. Khvorova, P. Kierulf, K. Kim, T. Kislinger, M. Klingeborn, D. J.
Klinke, M. Kornek, M. M. Kosanović, Á. Kovács, E.-M. Krämer-Albers, S. Krasemann, M.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Krause, I. V. Kurochkin, G. D. Kusuma, S. Kuypers, S. Laitinen, S. M. Langevin, L. R. Languino,
J. Lannigan, C. Lässer, L. C. Laurent, G. Lavieu, E. Lázaro-Ibáñez, S. Lay, M.-S. Lee, Y. Lee,
D. S. Lemos, M. Lenassi, A. Leszczynska, I. T. Li, K. Liao, S. F. Libregts, E. Ligeti, R. Lim, S.
Lim, A. Linē, K. Linnemannstöns, A. Llorente, C. A. Lombard, M. J. Lorenowicz, Á. M. Lörincz,
J. Lötvall, J. Lovett, M. C. Lowry, X. Loyer, Q. Lu, B. Lukomska, T. R. Lunavat, S. L. Maas, H.
Malhi, A. Marcilla, J. Mariani, J. Mariscal, E. S. Martens-Uzunova, L. Martin-Jaular, C. M.
Martinez, V. Martins, M. Mathieu, S. Mathivanan, M. Maugeri, L. K. McGinnis, M. J. McVey, D.
G. Meckes, K. L. Meehan, I. Mertens, V. R. Minciacchi, A. Möller, M. Jørgensen, A. MoralesKastresana, J. Morhayim, F. Mullier, M. Muraca, L. Musante, V. Mussack, D. C. Muth, K. H.
Myburgh, T. Najrana, M. Nawaz, I. Nazarenko, P. Nejsum, C. Neri, T. Neri, R. Nieuwland, L.
Nimrichter, J. P. Nolan, E. Hoen, N. Hooten, L. O’Driscoll, T. O’Grady, A. O’Loghlen, T. Ochiya,
M. Olivier, A. Ortiz, L. A. Ortiz, X. Osteikoetxea, O. Østergaard, M. Ostrowski, J. Park, M. D.
Pegtel, H. Peinado, F. Perut, M. W. Pfaffl, D. G. Phinney, B. C. Pieters, R. C. Pink, D. S.
Pisetsky, E. von Strandmann, I. Polakovicova, I. K. Poon, B. H. Powell, I. Prada, L. Pulliam, P.
Quesenberry, A. Radeghieri, R. L. Raffai, S. Raimondo, J. Rak, M. I. Ramirez, G. Raposo, M. S.
Rayyan, N. Regev-Rudzki, F. L. Ricklefs, P. D. Robbins, D. D. Roberts, S. C. Rodrigues, E.
Rohde, S. Rome, K. M. Rouschop, A. Rughetti, A. E. Russell, P. Saá, S. Sahoo, E. SalasHuenuleo, C. Sánchez, J. A. Saugstad, M. J. Saul, R. hiffelers, R. Schneider, T. Schøyen, A.
Scott, E. Shahaj, S. Sharma, O. Shatnyeva, F. Shekari, G. Shelke, A. K. Shetty, K. Shiba, P. Rljander, A. lva, A. Skowronek, O. L. Snyder, R. Soares, B. W. Sódar, C. Soekmadji, J. Sotillo, P.
D. Stahl, W. Stoorvogel, S. L. Stott, E. F. Strasser, S. Swift, H. Tahara, M. Tewari, K. Timms, S.
Tiwari, R. Tixeira, M. Tkach, W. Toh, R. Tomasini, A. Torrecilhas, J. Tosar, V. Toxavidis, L.
Urbanelli, P. Vader, B. W. van Balkom, S. G. van der Grein, J. Deun, M. J. van Herwijnen, K.
Keuren-Jensen, G. van Niel, M. E. van Royen, A. J. van Wijnen, H. M. Vasconcelos, I. J.
Vechetti, T. D. Veit, L. J. Vella, É. Velot, F. J. Verweij, B. Vestad, J. L. Viñas, T. Visnovitz, K. V.
Vukman, J. Wahlgren, D. C. Watson, M. H. Wauben, A. Weaver, J. P. Webber, V. Weber, A. M.
Wehman, D. J. Weiss, J. A. Welsh, S. Wendt, A. M. Wheelock, Z. Wiener, L. Witte, J. Wolfram,
A. Xagorari, P. Xander, J. Xu, X. Yan, M. Yáñez-Mó, H. Yin, Y. Yuana, V. Zappulli, J. Zarubova,
V. Žėkas, J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, L. Zheng, A. R. Zheutlin, A. M. Zickler, P. Zimmermann, A. M.
Zivkovic, D. Zocco, E. K. Zuba-Surma, Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles
2018 (MISEV2018): a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular Vesicles
and update of the MISEV2014 guidelines., Journal of extracellular vesicles 7, 1535750 (2018).
16. D.-S. Choi, D.-K. Kim, Y.-K. Kim, Y. Gho, Proteomics of extracellular vesicles: Exosomes

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and ectosomes., Mass spectrometry reviews 34, 474–490 (2015).
17. M. Simons, G. Raposo, Exosomes--vesicular carriers for intercellular communication.,
Current opinion in cell biology 21, 575–581 (2009).
18. L. Musante, M. Saraswat, A. Ravidà, B. Byrne, H. Holthofer, Recovery of urinary
nanovesicles from ultracentrifugation supernatants., Nephrology, dialysis, transplantation :
official publication of the European Dialysis and Transplant Association - European Renal
Association 28, 1425–1433 (2013).
19. J. Z. Clark, L. Chen, C.-L. Chou, H. Jung, J. Lee, M. A. Knepper, Representation and
relative abundance of cell-type selective markers in whole-kidney RNA-Seq data., Kidney
international 95, 787–796 (2019).
20. J. Vizcaíno, A. Csordas, N. del-Toro, J. A. Dianes, J. Griss, I. Lavidas, G. Mayer, Y. PerezRiverol, F. Reisinger, T. Ternent, Q.-W. Xu, R. Wang, H. Hermjakob, 2016 update of the PRIDE
database and its related tools, Nucleic Acids Res 44, 11033–11033 (2016).
21. J. Mestas, C. C. Hughes, Of mice and not men: differences between mouse and human
immunology., Journal of immunology (Baltimore, Md. : 1950) 172, 2731–2738 (2004).
22. A. E. Turco, W. Lam, A. D. Rule, A. Denic, J. C. Lieske, V. M. Miller, J. J. Larson, W. K.
Kremers, M. Jayachandran, Specific renal parenchymal-derived urinary extracellular vesicles
identify age-associated structural changes in living donor kidneys., Journal of extracellular
vesicles 5, 29642 (2016).
23. S. C. Kim, E. K. Page, S. J. Knechtle, Urine proteomics in kidney transplantation.,
Transplantation reviews (Orlando, Fla.) 28, 15–20 (2014).
24. T. Jahnukainen, D. Malehorn, M. Sun, J. Lyons-Weiler, W. Bigbee, G. Gupta, R. Shapiro, P.
Randhawa, R. Pelikan, M. Hauskrecht, A. Vats, Proteomic analysis of urine in kidney transplant
patients with BK virus nephropathy., Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 17, 3248–
3256 (2006).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

25. S. hail, Significance of urinary proteome pattern in renal allograft recipients., Journal of
transplantation 2014, 139361–7 (2014).
26. N. Nagaraj, M. Mann, Quantitative analysis of the intra- and inter-individual variability of the
normal urinary proteome., Journal of proteome research 10, 637–645 (2011).
27. D. A. Raj, I. Fiume, G. Capasso, G. Pocsfalvi, A multiplex quantitative proteomics strategy
for protein biomarker studies in urinary exosomes., Kidney international 81, 1263–1272 (2012).
28. E. J. Goetzl, J. B. Schwartz, E. L. Abner, G. A. Jicha, D. Kapogiannis, High complement
levels in astrocyte-derived exosomes of Alzheimer disease., Annals of neurology 83, 544–552
(2018).
29. E. H. Koritzinsky, J. reet, R. R. Chari, D. M. Glispie, T. R. Bellomo, A. M. Aponte, R. A. Star,
P. S. Yuen, Circadian variation in the release of small extracellular vesicles can be normalized
by vesicle number or TSG101., AJP: Renal Physiology 5, 29975 (2019).
30. P. A. Gonzales, T. Pisitkun, J. D. Hoffert, D. Tchapyjnikov, R. A. Star, R. Kleta, N. Wang, M.
A. Knepper, Large-scale proteomics and phosphoproteomics of urinary exosomes., Journal of
the American Society of Nephrology : JASN 20, 363–379 (2009).
31. A. Pienimaeki-Roemer, K. Kuhlmann, A. Böttcher, T. Konovalova, A. Black, E. Orsó, G.
Liebisch, M. Ahrens, M. Eisenacher, H. E. Meyer, G. Schmitz, Lipidomic and proteomic
characterization of platelet extracellular vesicle subfractions from senescent platelets.,
Transfusion 55, 507–521 (2015).
32. H. Sonoda, N. Yokota-Ikeda, S. Oshikawa, Y. Kanno, K. Yoshinaga, K. Uchida, Y. Ueda, K.
Kimiya, S. Uezono, A. Ueda, K. Ito, M. Ikeda, Decreased abundance of urinary exosomal
aquaporin-1 in renal ischemia-reperfusion injury., American journal of physiology. Renal
physiology 297, F1006-16 (2009).
33. S. Oshikawa-Hori, N. Yokota-Ikeda, H. Sonoda, M. Ikeda, Urinary extracellular vesicular
release of aquaporins in patients with renal transplantation., BMC nephrology 20, 216 (2019).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

34. C. L. Nauser, C. A. Farrar, S. H. Sacks, Complement Recognition Pathways in Renal
Transplantation., Journal of the American Society of Nephrology : JASN 28, 2571–2578 (2017).
35. J. Zuber, M. Frimat, S. Caillard, N. Kamar, P. Gatault, F. Petitprez, L. Couzi, N. JourdeChiche, V. Chatelet, R. Gaisne, D. Bertrand, J. Bamoulid, M. Louis, R. Soussan, D. Navarro, P.F. Westeel, L. Frimat, C. Colosio, A. Thierry, J. Rivalan, L. Albano, N. Arzouk, E. Gall, G.
Claisse, M. Elias, K. Karoui, S. Chauvet, J.-P. Coindre, J.-P. Rerolle, L. Tricot, J. Sayegh, C.
Garrouste, C. Charasse, Y. Delmas, Z. Massy, M. Hourmant, A. Servais, C. Loirat, F. Fakhouri,
C. Pouteil-Noble, M.-N. Peraldi, C. Legendre, E. Rondeau, M. Quintrec, V. Fremeaux-Bacchi,
Use of Highly Individualized Complement Blockade Has Revolutionized Clinical Outcomes after
Kidney Transplantation and Renal Epidemiology of Atypical Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome.,
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology : JASN 27, ASN.2019040331 (2019).
36. W. P. Pulskens, E. Rampanelli, G. J. Teske, L. M. Butter, N. Claessen, I. K. Luirink, T. van
der Poll, S. Florquin, J. C. Leemans, TLR4 promotes fibrosis but attenuates tubular damage in
progressive renal injury., Journal of the American Society of Nephrology : JASN 21, 1299–1308
(2010).
37. H. Zhao, J. Perez, K. Lu, A. J. George, D. Ma, Role of Toll-like receptor-4 in renal graft
ischemia-reperfusion injury., AJP: Renal Physiology 306, F801-11 (2014).
38. T. Bergler, U. Hoffmann, E. Bergler, B. Jung, M. C. Banas, S. W. Reinhold, B. K. Krämer, B.
Banas, Toll-like receptor 4 in experimental kidney transplantation: early mediator of endogenous
danger signals., Nephron. Experimental nephrology 121, e59-70 (2012).
39. A. C. Souza, T. Tsuji, I. N. Baranova, A. V. Bocharov, K. J. Wilkins, J. reet, A. Alvarez-Prats,
X. Hu, T. Eggerman, P. S. Yuen, R. A. Star, TLR4 mutant mice are protected from renal fibrosis
and chronic kidney disease progression., Physiological Reports 3 (2015),
doi:10.14814/phy2.12558 .
40. S. Pushpakumar, L. Ren, S. Kundu, A. Gamon, S. C. Tyagi, U. Sen, Toll-like Receptor 4
Deficiency Reduces Oxidative Stress and Macrophage Mediated Inflammation in Hypertensive
Kidney., Scientific Reports 7, 6349 (2017).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

41. S. Zmonarski, M. Banasik, K. Madziarska, O. Mazanowska, M. Krajewska, The role of tolllike receptors in multifactorial mechanisms of early and late renal allotransplant injury, with a
focus on the TLR4 receptor and mononuclear cells., Advances in clinical and experimental
medicine : official organ Wroclaw Medical University 28, 885–891 (2019).
42. G. Gervasini, M. García-Cerrada, E. Vergara, G. García-Pino, R. Alvarado, M. FernándezCavada, S. Barroso, E. Doblaré, J. Cubero, Polymorphisms in CYP-mediated arachidonic acid
routes affect the outcome of renal transplantation., European Journal of Clinical Investigation
45, 1060–1068 (2015).
43. M. M. Yeboah, M. Khan, M. A. Chesnik, A. Sharma, M. P. Paudyal, J. R. Falck, J. D. Imig,
The epoxyeicosatrienoic acid analog PVPA ameliorates cyclosporine-induced hypertension and
renal injury in rats., AJP: Renal Physiology 311, F576-85 (2016).
44. M. Khan, A. Stavniichuk, M. Sattar, J. R. Falck, J. D. Imig, Epoxyeicosatrienoic Acid Analog
EET-A Blunts Development of Lupus Nephritis in Mice., Frontiers in pharmacology 10, 512
(2019).
45. N. Akbar, J. E. Digby, T. J. Cahill, A. N. Tavare, A. L. Corbin, S. Saluja, S. Dawkins, L.
Edgar, N. Rawlings, K. Ziberna, E. McNeill, O. Study, E. Johnson, A. A. Aljabali, R. A. Dragovic,
M. Rohling, G. T. Belgard, I. A. Udalova, D. R. Greaves, K. M. Channon, P. R. Riley, D. C.
Anthony, R. P. Choudhury, Endothelium-derived extracellular vesicles promote splenic
monocyte mobilization in myocardial infarction., JCI insight 2 (2017),
doi:10.1172/jci.insight.93344 .
46. F. Collino, J. Lopes, S. Corrêa, E. Abdelhay, C. Takiya, C. Wendt, K. de Miranda, A. Vieyra,
R. Lindoso, Adipose-Derived Mesenchymal Stromal Cells Under Hypoxia: Changes in
Extracellular Vesicles Secretion and Improvement of Renal Recovery after Ischemic Injury.,
Cellular physiology and biochemistry : international journal of experimental cellular physiology,
biochemistry, and pharmacology 52, 1463–1483 (2019).
47. J. H. Dominguez, Y. Liu, H. Gao, J. minguez, D. Xie, K. Kelly, Renal Tubular Cell-Derived
Extracellular Vesicles Accelerate the Recovery of Established Renal Ischemia Reperfusion
Injury., Journal of the American Society of Nephrology : JASN , ASN.2016121278 (2017).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

48. K. Leithner, A. Hrzenjak, M. Trötzmüller, T. Moustafa, H. Köfeler, C. Wohlkoenig, E.
Stacher, J. Lindenmann, A. Harris, A. Olschewski, H. Olschewski, PCK2 activation mediates an
adaptive response to glucose depletion in lung cancer., Oncogene 34, 1044–1050 (2015).
49. E. D. Montal, K. Bhalla, R. E. Dewi, C. F. Ruiz, J. A. Haley, A. E. Ropell, C. Gordon, J. D.
Haley, G. D. Girnun, Inhibition of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase blocks lactate utilization
and impairs tumor growth in colorectal cancer., Cancer & metabolism 7, 8 (2019).
50. M. R. Späth, M. P. Bartram, N. Palacio-Escat, J. K. Hoyer, C. Debes, F. Demir, C. B.
Schroeter, A. M. Mandel, F. Grundmann, G. Ciarimboli, A. Beyer, J. N. Kizhakkedathu, S.
Brodesser, H. Göbel, J. U. Becker, T. Benzing, B. Schermer, M. Höhne, V. Burst, J. SaezRodriguez, P. F. Huesgen, R. Müller, M. M. Rinschen, The proteome microenvironment
determines the protective effect of preconditioning in cisplatin-induced acute kidney injury.,
Kidney international 95, 333–349 (2019).
51. R. Sabaratnam, L. Geertsen, K. Skjødt, K. Hojlund, H. Dimke, L. Lund, P. Svenningsen, In
human nephrectomy specimens, the kidney level of tubular transport proteins does not correlate
with their abundance in urinary extracellular vesicles., AJP: Renal Physiology 30, 621 (2019).
52. C. J. Blijdorp, E. J. Hoorn, Urinary extracellular vesicles: mothership connection., AJP:
Renal Physiology 103, 2583 (2019).
53. J. Harford, B. J. in Biology, 2011, Subcellular fractionation and isolation of organelles, Wiley
Online Library , doi:10.1002/0471143030.cb0300s52 .
54. C. T. Rueden, J. Schindelin, M. C. Hiner, B. E. DeZonia, A. E. Walter, E. T. Arena, K. W.
Eliceiri, ImageJ2: ImageJ for the next generation of scientific image data., BMC Bioinformatics
18, 529–26 (2017).
55. J. Schindelin, I. Arganda-Carreras, E. Frise, V. Kaynig, M. Longair, T. Pietzsch, S. Preibisch,
C. Rueden, S. Saalfeld, B. Schmid, J.-Y. Tinevez, D. White, V. Hartenstein, K. Eliceiri, P.
Tomancak, A. Cardona, Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis., Nature
Methods 9, 676–682 (2012).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

56. A. Michalski, E. Damoc, J.-P. Hauschild, O. Lange, A. Wieghaus, A. Makarov, N. Nagaraj, J.
Cox, M. Mann, S. Horning, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics using Q Exactive, a highperformance benchtop quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer., Molecular & cellular
proteomics : MCP 10, M111.011015 (2011).
57. J. Cox, M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification, Nature Biotechnology 26,
1367–1372 (2008).
58. J. Cox, M. Y. Hein, C. A. Luber, I. Paron, N. Nagaraj, M. Mann, Accurate proteome-wide
label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed
MaxLFQ., Molecular & cellular proteomics : MCP 13, 2513–2526 (2014).
59. J. Cox, M. Mann, 1D and 2D annotation enrichment: a statistical method integrating
quantitative proteomics with complementary high-throughput data, BMC Bioinformatics 13, S12
(2012).
60. V. Tusher, R. Tibshirani, G. Chu, Significance analysis of microarrays applied to the ionizing
radiation response., Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 98, 5116–5121 (2001).
61. A. S. Levey, A New Equation to Estimate Glomerular Filtration Rate, Annals of internal
medicine 150, 604 (2009).
62. M. Stone, Cross-Validatory Choice and Assessment of Statistical Predictions, J Royal
Statistical Soc Ser B Methodol 36, 111–133 (1974).
63. L. K. Pino, B. C. Searle, J. G. Bollinger, B. Nunn, B. MacLean, M. J. MacCoss, The Skyline
ecosystem: Informatics for quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics, Mass Spectrom Rev
(2017), doi:10.1002/mas.21540 .
64. B. MacLean, D. M. Tomazela, N. Shulman, M. Chambers, G. L. Finney, B. Frewen, R. Kern,
D. L. Tabb, D. C. Liebler, M. J. MacCoss, Skyline: an open source document editor for creating

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/845941; this version posted November 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments, Bioinformatics 26, 966–968 (2010).
65. D. Bachurski, M. Schuldner, P.-H. Nguyen, A. Malz, K. S. Reiners, P. C. Grenzi, F. Babatz,
A. C. Schauss, H. P. Hansen, M. Hallek, E. von Strandmann, Extracellular vesicle
measurements with nanoparticle tracking analysis – An accuracy and repeatability comparison
between NanoSight NS300 and ZetaView, J Extracell Vesicles 8, 1596016 (2019).

Acknowledgments: We acknowledge the excellent technical support of Ruth Herzog, Beatrix
Martini, Valerie Oberüber, Serena Greco-Torres, Israa Kambar, Frederik Sand, Constantin Rill,
Charlotte Dellmann, Martin Vitus, Ugur Keser, Ismini Halver, Dervla Reilly, Eva Schulze, Vincent
Köntges, Bastian Trinsch, Philip Lützen, Nora Krasniqi, Babak Mochtarzadeh and the Imaging
Facility

at

the

CECAD,

Cologne.

Funding:

This

work

was

supported

by

the

Nachwuchsgruppen.NRW program of the Ministry of Science North Rhine Westfalia (MIWF, to
R.-U.M.). T.B., B.S. and R.-U.M. received funding from the German Research Foundation
(KFO329 to T.B./B.S./R.-U.M., SCHE1562/6-1 to B.S., BE2212 to T.B. and MU3629/2-1 to R.U.M.). The University of Cologne (Köln Fortune Program) and the Marga und Walter Boll
Foundation provided additional support to R.-U.M. TBH was supported by the DFG (CRC
1192, HU 1016/8-2), by the BMBF (STOP-FSGS 01GM1901C) and by the European Research
Council (ERC grant 61689, DNCure). Author contributions: The research was designed by F.B.,
M.R., A.B., D.S. and R.-U.M. F.B., M.R., K.B., C.K., I.P., D.Bu., D.Ba., R.W., M.S., H.G, O.K.,
V.G.P. and C.E.K. conducted the experiments and acquired the data. F.B., M.R., K.B., C.K., D.B.,
C.E.K. and R.-U.M. analyzed the data. F.B. and R.-U.M. wrote the manuscript. F.B., M.R., V.G.P.,
O.K., D.Ba., T.B.H., B.S., T.B., D.S., C.E.K. & R.-U.M. revised the final version. All authors
approved the final version of the paper. Competing interests: The authors declare no competing
interests. Data and materials availability: The obtained data sets are freely available at
PRIDE/ProteomExchange (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride (20) - Project name: Longitudinal study of
the small urinary extracellular vesicle proteome during living donor kidney transplantation; Project
accession: PXD005219; Reviewer account details: Username: reviewer76822@ebi.ac.uk,
Password:

3FR3kDp8.

koeln.de:3838/suEV/.

For

direct

and

visual

access

see

http://shiny.cecad.uni-

