bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

The sequential and cooperative action of CSB, CSA and UVSSA
targets the TFIIH complex to DNA damage-stalled RNA polymerase
II
Yana van der Weegen1, Hadar Golan Berman3, Tycho E.T. Mevissen5, Katja Apelt1,
Román González-Prieto2, Elisheva Heilbrun3,4, Alfred C.O. Vertegaal2, Diana van den
Heuvel1, Johannes C. Walter5, Sheera Adar3, and Martijn S. Luijsterburg1,*
Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC,
Leiden, The Netherlands
2 Department of Cell and Chemical Biology, Leiden University Medical Center, Einthovenweg 20, 2333
ZC, Leiden, The Netherlands
3 Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, The institute for medical research Israel-Canada,
The Faculty of Medicine, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Ein Kerem, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel
4 Department of Bioinformatics, School of life and health science, Jerusalem College of Technology,
Jerusalem, 9372115, Israel.
5 Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Biological Chemistry and Molecular
Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
1

Running title: Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex
* Corresponding author: Martijn Luijsterburg (m.luijsterburg@lumc.nl)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Summary (149 words)
The response to DNA damage-stalled RNA polymerase II (RNAPIIo) involves the
assembly of the transcription-coupled repair (TCR) complex on actively transcribed
strands. The function of the TCR proteins CSB, CSA and UVSSA and the manner in
which the core DNA repair complex, including transcription factor IIH (TFIIH), is
recruited are largely unknown. Here, we define the assembly mechanism of the TCR
complex in human isogenic knockout cells. We show that TCR is initiated by RNAPIIobound CSB, which recruits CSA through a newly identified CSA-interaction motif
(CIM). Once recruited, CSA facilitates the association of UVSSA with stalled RNAPIIo.
Importantly, we find that UVSSA is the key factor that recruits the TFIIH complex in a
manner that is stimulated by CSB and CSA. Together these findings reveal a
sequential and highly cooperative assembly mechanism of TCR proteins and reveal
the mechanism for TFIIH recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to initiate
repair.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Nucleotide excision repair (NER) is a versatile DNA repair pathway that
removes a wide range of helix-distorting DNA lesions from our genome, including ultraviolet (UV) light–induced photolesions. Transcription-coupled repair (TCR) is a
specialized NER sub-pathway that specifically removes DNA lesions from actively
transcribed DNA strands1. It is believed that the TCR pathway is initiated by the stalling
of elongating RNA polymerase II (RNAPIIo) at DNA lesions, which triggers the
recruitment of the core NER machinery to repair these lesions2. After lesion
recognition, the transcription factor IIH (TFIIH) complex is recruited to unwind the
DNA3, 4, followed by dual incision and the release of a 22-30 nucleotide-long DNA
strand containing the lesion5, 6. The generated single-stranded DNA gap is filled by
repair synthesis and the nick is sealed2. However, the mechanism through which TCR
recognizes transcription-blocking lesions and recruits the repair machinery remains
elusive.
Inherited defects that selectively impair TCR give rise to Cockayne Syndrome
(CS) and UV-sensitive syndrome (UVSS). Although cells from both CS and UVSS
patients show a defect in the repair of transcription-blocking lesions through TCR7, 8,
the phenotypes are very different. CS is characterized by severe and progressive
neurodegeneration9, 10, while UVSS shows a mild UV-sensitive phenotype11-13. The
majority of CS patients carry mutations in the genes encoding either the CSB or CSA
proteins14, 15. Patients with UVSS carry mutations in the gene encoding the UVSSA
protein16, 17.
The 168 kDa CSB protein contains a central SWI2/SNF2-like DNA-dependent
ATPase domain18. Biochemical experiments revealed that CSB resides in a complex
with RNAPIIo19, 20. Indeed, live-cell imaging suggests that CSB monitors the
progression of transcription elongation by continuously probing RNAPIIo complexes21.
It has been suggested that CSB is involved in the removal or backtracking of RNAPII
to make the DNA lesion accessible for repair proteins22. Although the association of
CSB with RNAPII is sufficient to recruit TFIIH in vitro23, whether additional factors are
required to trigger the recruitment of the repair machinery in vivo remains unanswered.
In addition to CSB, the CSA and UVSSA proteins also associate with DNA
damage-stalled RNAPIIo16, 17, 24, 25. The 44 kDa CSA protein contains seven WD40
repeats that form a seven bladed β-propeller26. Earlier work has shown that CSA is
incorporated into a DDB1-CUL4-based E3 ubiquitin ligase complex24, 27 that becomes
transiently activated in response to UV irradiation and targets CSB for proteasomal
degradation28. Current models suggest that CSA is dispensable for the recruitment of
the excision repair machinery to stalled RNAPII29, and that CSA is unlikely to recruit
UVSSA to sites of UV-induced DNA damage30. Thus, the precise recruitment
mechanism and the role of CSA in TCR is currently not clear.
The 81 kDa UVSSA protein contains an N-terminal VHS domain and a Cterminal DUF2043 domain of unknown function. Several studies reported that UVSSA,
likely through its binding partner USP7, protects CSB from UV-induced degradation16,
17, 25, 31
. However, ectopic expression of CSB in UVSSA-deficient cells did not rescue
TCR, suggesting that UVSSA has additional functions in this repair mechanism16.
Moreover, UVSSA was found to associate with RNAPII17, 25, but whether UVSSA is

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

constitutively bound to RNAPII, or associates with DNA damage-stalled RNAPII
through either CSA or CSB is still a topic of debate.
Despite the knowledge that CSB, CSA, and UVSSA are required for TCR, we
still know very little about how the interplay between these proteins targets the core
repair machinery to DNA damage-stalled RNAPII. In this study, we demonstrate a
sequential and highly cooperative assembly of TCR proteins and unveil the
mechanism for TFIIH recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Results
Isolation of active TCR complexes under native conditions
Our current understanding of the assembly and functioning of multi-protein complexes
that mediate transcription-coupled DNA repair (TCR) is fairly limited. This is largely
due to a lack of sensitive methods to isolate active TCR complexes and analyze their
composition. To overcome this limitation, we set out to establish a new
immunoprecipitation-based method to isolate the elongating form of RNA polymerase
II (RNAPIIo) and associated proteins from the chromatin fraction of UV-irradiated cells
under native conditions (Fig 1a). To this end, we employed extensive benzonase
treatment to solubilize the chromatin fraction after centrifugation, followed by
immunoprecipitation using antibodies that specifically recognize the Ser2phosphorylated form of RNAPII. This RNAPII modification is absent from transcription
start sites (TSS), but increases across gene bodies and is associated with transcription
elongation32. Immunoprecipitation of RNAPIIo revealed a UV-specific association with
the Cockayne syndrome proteins CSB and CSA, as well as with several subunits of
the TFIIH complex (XPD/p80, XPB/p89, GTFH1/p62; Fig 1b). Importantly, we did not
detect an RNAPII-TFIIH interaction in unirradiated cells, suggesting that our procedure
indeed does not capture RNAPII involved in transcription initiation during which it
interacts extensively with TFIIH33.
Although the CS proteins and TFIIH readily assembled with RNAPIIo after UV
irradiation, downstream repair proteins such as XPA, XPG, ERCC1-XPF and XRCC1
could not be detected (Fig 1b, Supplementary Fig 1a). It should be noted that we
could not detect UVSSA either after pull-down of RNAPIIo or in whole cell lysates due
to a lack of specific antibodies (Supplementary Fig 1b). These initial results suggest
that CSB, CSA and TFIIH associate with DNA damage-stalled RNAPII, but that the
assembly of downstream repair factors may require the removal or backtracking of
RNAPII to make the lesion accessible to the repair machinery22.
CSA is recruited to damage-stalled RNAPII by CSB
To acquire more insights into the initial assembly of TCR factors, we generated CSB,
CSA, and UVSSA knockout (KO) cells using CRISPR-Cas9-mediated genome editing
in U2OS cells equipped with the Flp-In/T-REx system. The knockout of CSB, CSA,
and UVSSA was confirmed by Western blot analysis and/or DNA sequencing (Fig 1c;
Supplementary Fig 2a, b). Clonogenic survival assays revealed that all TCR-KO cells
were highly sensitive to transcription-blocking DNA damage induced by Illudin S (Fig
1d)34. Importantly, complementation of these TCR-KO cells with inducible GFP-tagged
versions of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA fully restored their resistance to Illudin S (Fig 1c,
d). We next applied our immunoprecipitation-based method in the different TCR-KO
cells to establish how CSB and CSA recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo is
regulated. CSB associated with RNAPIIo in wild-type (WT), CSA-KO and UVSSA-KO
cells specifically after UV irradiation, suggesting that CSB is the first of these proteins
to associate with DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo (Fig 1e). The association of CSA with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

6

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

stalled RNAPIIo was abolished in CSB-KO cells, but was not affected in cells lacking
UVSSA (Fig 1e). Importantly, re-expressing GFP-tagged CSB in the CSB-KO cells
restored the association between RNAPIIo and CSA (Fig 1e, f), confirming that CSB
is required for the recruitment of CSA to damage-stalled RNAPIIo. The CSA protein is
part of a DDB1-CUL4 E3 ubiquitin ligase complex24, 27, and we therefore asked
whether CSA associates with DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo together with its E3
ubiquitin ligase partner DDB1. As an additional control we also included XPC-KO cells,
which are deficient in global genome repair (GGR; Supplementary Fig 2c).
Immunoprecipitation of RNAPIIo revealed a UV-specific interaction with DDB1 in WT,
XPC-KO, and UVSSA-KO cells (Fig 1g). However, this interaction was completely
abolished in CSA-KO and CSB-KO cells, showing that CSA indeed mediates the
recruitment of the DDB1-CUL4 complex to lesion-stalled RNAPIIo (Fig 1g).
Mapping the CSA-interaction motif (CIM) in CSB
In order to gain a better understanding of the CSA recruitment mechanism by CSB,
we aimed to identify the region in CSB that is required for the interaction with CSA. To
this end, we employed a chromatin-tethering approach making use of the U2OS 2-63 cell line harboring an integrated LacO array in the genome35. This cell line enables
the analysis of protein-protein interactions by tethering proteins of interest fused to the
bacterial LacR and fluorescent protein mCherry to a defined chromosomal region36,
37
(Fig 2a). Expression of mCherry-LacR fused to full-length CSB (Fig 2b) resulted in
clear localization of the fusion protein to the LacO array, and triggered the robust
recruitment of CSA-GFP (Fig 2c). In contrast, expression of LacR alone failed to
recruit CSA-GFP to the LacO array (Fig 2c).
To identify the CSA-interaction domain in CSB, we fused various truncated
fragments of CSB to mCherry-LacR and examined their ability to recruit CSA-GFP to
the LacO array (Fig 2b, Supplementary Figs 3, 4). Fragments of CSB spanning the
N-terminus or the central region containing the conserved ATPase/helicase domain
(N, M, and ∆C) were unable to recruit CSA-GFP. Conversely, tethering of a LacRtagged CSB region spanning the C-terminus (C and ∆N) triggered robust recruitment
of CSA-GFP (Fig 2a-d, Supplementary Fig 3a-c). These results suggest that the Cterminus of CSB is essential for the interaction with CSA. The C-terminus of CSB
contains a ubiquitin-binding domain (UBD; 1400-142838) and a recently identified
winged-helix domain (WHD; 1417-1493) that interacts with RIF139. Interestingly, we
found that the most N-terminal region (1221-1305) of the CSB C-terminus alone, or
fragments containing solely the UBD (1400-1493) or WHD (1417-1493) domains do
not support CSA recruitment. However, a region just upstream of the UBD (13061399) is sufficient to mediate CSA recruitment to the LacO array (Fig 2b-d,
Supplementary Fig 3a-c). Importantly, we found that tethering full-length CSB lacking
this minimal interaction region (1306-1399) indeed failed to support CSA recruitment
(Fig 2b-d). Further deletion analysis showed that CSB lacking the region just upstream
of the UBD (1353-1399) failed to recruit CSA-GFP, whereas CSB lacking the UBD
(1400-1428) or amino acids 1306-1352 were fully proficient in interacting with CSAGFP (Supplementary Fig 4a-c). Moreover, while CSB1353-1368 and CSB1369-1384 were

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

7

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

fully proficient in recruiting CSA-GFP to the LacO array, deleting amino acids 13851399 abolished the ability of CSB to interact with CSA-GFP (Fig 2b-d,
Supplementary Fig 4). These findings identify an evolutionary conserved CSAinteraction motif (CIM) in CSB that is located between amino acids 1385-1399 (Fig
2e; Supplementary Fig 5).
The C-terminal CIM in CSB mediates the recruitment of CSA to stalled RNAPII
We next set out to address the importance of this new CSB motif under more
physiological conditions. To this end, we stably expressed GFP-tagged CSBWT or
CSBCIM in CSB-KO cells (Fig 3a, b). Pull-down of GFP-tagged CSBWT showed a
strong UV-induced interaction with CSA, which was virtually absent after pull-down of
CSBCIM even though equal amounts of CSB were immunoprecipitated (Fig 3c).
Immunoprecipitation of endogenous RNAPIIo in these cell lines showed that both
CSBWT and CSBCIM associated equally with RNAPIIo after UV irradiation. However,
CSBCIM failed to recruit CSA to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo, while a strong
association of CSA was observed in cells expressing CSBWT (Fig 3d). Importantly, the
stable expression of GFP-CSBCIM in the CSB-KO cells failed to restore the sensitivity
to Illudin S, while expression of GFP-CSBWT almost fully rescued this phenotype (Fig
3e). To determine whether the CIM can mediate a functional interaction between CSB
and CSA, we mixed recombinant Xenopus laevis CSBWT or CSBCIM with ubiquitin,
E1, E2, and the E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4CSA consisting of Xenopus laevis CSA, DDB1,
CUL4A, and RBX1 (Supplementary Fig 6). While xlCRL4CSA promoted the efficient
ubiquitylation of xlCSBWT, it did not ubiquitylate xlCSBCIM (Fig 3f). These data suggest
that xlCSB uses its CIM to interact directly with xlCSA. Consistent with this
interpretation, immobilized xlCSBWT but not xlCSBCIM interacted with endogenous
xlCSA from Xenopus egg extracts (Fig 3g). Similar results were observed when xlCSB
was substituted with hsCSB (Fig 3f, g). Collectively, these data demonstrate that CSA
is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo by CSB through direct interactions with
the newly identified C-terminal CIM in CSB.
UVSSA is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo by CSA
Previous studies have demonstrated that UVSSA associates with RNAPIIo, but due
to conflicting results, it remains unclear if UVSSA recruitment to RNAPIIo is enhanced
by UV irradiation and dependent on the CS proteins17, 25,30. Therefore, we monitored
GFP-UVSSA recruitment to RNAPIIo in UVSSA-KO cells complemented with GFPUVSSA (WT) in which we additionally knocked out either CSB or CSA. The knockout
of CSB and CSA was verified by Western blot analysis, DNA sequencing (Fig 4a,
Supplementary Fig 2), and Illudin S clonogenic survival assays (Fig 4b).
Immunoprecipitation of endogenous RNAPIIo in these cell lines showed that GFPUVSSA became readily detectable after UV irradiation in WT cells, whereas this
interaction was virtually absent in CSA and CSB-KO cells (Fig 4c). Thus, GFP-UVSSA
is UV-specifically targeted to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo in a manner that is
dependent on the CS proteins17. Moreover, pull-down of GFP-UVSSA confirmed a
robust UV-induced association with RNAPIIo, CSB, and CSA. However, these UV-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

8

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

specific interactions were abolished in CSB-KO and CSA-KO cells. Interestingly, we
detected a weak UV-independent interaction between GFP-UVSSA and CSA, which
was enhanced after UV irradiation in a manner that required CSB (Fig 4d). These
findings suggest that the cooperative assembly of the TCR complex is important to
mediate efficient targeting of UVSSA to lesion-stalled RNAPIIo.
CSB and CSA are required for the recruitment of the TFIIH complex
It has been shown that CSB, CSA, and UVSSA can each associate with TFIIH23, 26, 40,
but which of these proteins is responsible for the recruitment of TFIIH to DNA damagestalled RNAPIIo to initiate repair is currently unknown. To directly asses if CSB and
CSA are required for the recruitment of TFIIH, we monitored TFIIH (p62 and p89)
recruitment in UVSSA-KO complemented with GFP-UVSSA (WT) in which we
additionally knocked out either CSB or CSA. Immunoprecipitation of endogenous
RNAPIIo revealed a UV-specific interaction with TFIIH in WT cells, while these
interactions were severely reduced in the CSB-KO and CSA-KO cells (Fig 5a).
Interestingly, TFIIH also failed to associate with RNAPIIo in CSB-KO cells
complemented with GFP-CSBCIM (Supplementary Fig 7a), consistent with our
findings that this mutant is not capable of recruiting CSA (Fig 3c, g). These initial
results suggest that the TFIIH complex is recruited in a manner that requires both CS
proteins.
UVSSA targets the TFIIH complex to stalled RNAPIIo in a CS protein-dependent
manner
It has been reported that UVSSA can interact with TFIIH16, 31, 40, but whether this
reflects a constitutive interaction or a UV-induced association is unclear. To gain more
insight into the nature of this interaction, we immunoprecipitated GFP-UVSSA from
the solubilized chromatin fraction of mock-treated and UV-irradiated cells followed by
mass spectrometry (MS). In the absence of UV-induced DNA damage, we identified
35 specific UVSSA interactors, including the known interactor USP7. However, we did
not detect any significant interactions with RNAPII subunits or CSB in the chromatin
fraction of unirradiated cells (Supplementary Fig 7b; Supplementary Tables 1, 3).
Following UV irradiation, our MS analysis identified 28 UV-specific UVSSA interactors,
including CSB, the CSA-interacting protein DDB1, and RNAPII subunits. Additionally,
among the most prominent UV-specific interactions were the TFIIH subunits XPB/p89
and XPD/p80 (Fig 5b; Supplementary Fig 7c; Supplementary Tables 2, 3). These
findings demonstrate that UVSSA interacts in a UV-specific manner with TFIIH.
Immunoprecipitation of GFP-UVSSA indeed confirmed a UV-specific
interaction with TFIIH subunits by Western blot analysis (Fig 5c). Strikingly, these
interactions were severely reduced in the CSB-KO and CSA-KO cells, suggesting a
cooperative interaction mechanism in which CSB is required to stabilize the interaction
between CSA and UVSSA, while CSA is required to stabilize the interaction between
UVSSA and TFIIH.
We subsequently asked if UVSSA is also required for TFIIH recruitment. To this
end, we employed our immunoprecipitation-based method in CSB-KO, CSA-KO, and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

UVSSA-KO cells to monitor TFIIH recruitment. In addition, we included XPA-KO cells
(Supplementary Fig 2c) as a positive control since XPA recruitment, at least during
GGR, occurs downstream of TFIIH41.
Immunoprecipitation of endogenous RNAPIIo in these cell lines revealed a UVspecific interaction with TFIIH in WT and XPA-KO cells (Fig 5d). These findings
suggest that XPA recruitment does not only occur downstream of TFIIH in GGR but
also in TCR. Interestingly, similar to CSB-KO and CSA-KO cells, we found that the
UV-induced interaction between RNAPIIo and TFIIH was severely reduced in UVSSAKO cells (Fig 5d). Furthermore, complementation of these TCR-KO cells with inducible
GFP-tagged versions of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA fully restored the UV-induced
association of TFIIH to RNAPIIo (Fig 5e). These findings demonstrate that CSB, CSA,
and UVSSA are equally important for the recruitment of the TFIIH complex to DNA
damage-stalled RNAPIIo.
Genome-wide XR-seq confirms that UVSSA is a core TCR factor
Our findings show that UVSSA, just like CSA and CSB, is required to recruit TFIIH to
initiate TCR-mediated repair. To provide further support for a role of UVSSA in TCR,
we carried out genome-wide XR-sequencing (XR-seq), which enables the generation
of genome-wide repair maps by isolating and sequencing the 30-mers that are
generated upon dual incision42. We generated nucleotide-resolution maps of UVinduced cyclobutane pyrimidine dimer (CPDs) repair in U2OS wild-type cells (Fig 5f;
Supplementary Fig 8a), which revealed that CPD repair under these conditions is
enriched on the transcribed strands within gene bodies consistent with TCR-mediated
repair42. Importantly, the CPD repair bias in transcribed strands was completely lost in
both CSA-KO (Supplementary Fig 8a) and UVSSA-KO cells (Fig 5f). These findings
provide direct genome-wide support for an essential role of UVSSA in TCR.
UVSSA is the key protein that recruits the TFIIH complex to DNA damage-stalled
RNAPIIo
We next asked whether TFIIH is recruited via direct protein-protein contacts with
UVSSA, or whether CSB and CSA also contribute to this interaction. To address this,
we generated UVSSA separation-of-function mutants that are selectively impaired in
their interaction with either CSA (UVSSA100-200) or the TFIIH complex (UVSSA400500 31
) (Fig 6a). These separation-of-function mutants were characterized by our
previously described chromatin-tethering approach. mCherry-LacR-UVSSAWT clearly
localized to the LacO array and triggered the robust recruitment of CSA-GFP and
endogenous TFIIH. As expected, mCherry-LacR-UVSSA100-200 was unable to recruit
CSA-GFP to the LacO array, but triggered robust TFIIH recruitment (Fig 6b,c). In
contrast, mCherry-LacR-UVSSA400-500 was unable to recruit TFIIH to the LacO array,
but was proficient in recruiting CSA-GFP (Fig 6b,c). These results confirm that UVSSA
contains a CSA-interacting region (CIR; amino acids 100-200) and a TFIIH-interacting
region (TIR; amino acids 400-500).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

To elucidate the importance of the CIR and TIR in UVSSA under more
physiological conditions, we stably expressed inducible GFP-UVSSAWT, GFPUVSSACIR, or GFP-UVSSATIR in UVSSA-KO cells (Fig 6d). Pull-down of GFPUVSSAWT showed a strong UV-induced interaction with RNAPIIo, CSB, CSA, and
TFIIH. These interactors were virtually absent after pull-down of GFP-UVSSACIR (Fig
6e; Supplementary Fig 8b, c). The UVSSACIR mutant was unable to interact with
CSA and we found that its association with TFIIH was also abolished. This result is
consistent with the finding that the UVSSA-TFIIH interaction is reduced in CSA-KO
cells (Fig 5c), and suggests that CSA stabilizes the interaction between UVSSA and
TFIIH. Pull-down of GFP-UVSSATIR resulted in a strong UV-induced interaction with
RNAPIIo, CSB, and CSA, while its interaction with TFIIH was completely abolished
(Fig 6e; Supplementary Fig 8b, c).
We next set out to directly asses the ability of these UVSSA mutants to
participate in TCR complex assembly. Immunoprecipitation of endogenous RNAPIIo
showed a UV-specific association of RNAPIIo with CSB and CSA in both UVSSAWT
and mutant cell lines (Fig 6f). This is in line with our other data since CSB, CSA, and
UVSSA associate sequentially with RNAPIIo, and UVSSA is the last TCR protein to
be recruited. Moreover, endogenous RNAPIIo immunoprecipitation resulted in a UVspecific interaction with GFP-UVSSAWT and GFP-UVSSATIR, whereas GFPUVSSACIR failed to associate with RNAPIIo. The fact that a mutant of UVSSA that is
deficient in its association with CSA fails to be recruited confirms our earlier findings
that CSA is essential to recruit UVSSA to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo (Fig 4c). In
addition, in both mutant cell lines the recruitment of TFIIH (p89) to DNA damagestalled RNAPIIo was completely abolished (Fig 6f). These experiments strongly
suggest that TFIIH is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo via direct proteinprotein contacts with UVSSA. Importantly, the stable expression of GFP-UVSSACIR
and GFP-UVSSATIR in UVSSA-KO cells failed to restore their sensitivity to Illudin S,
which was almost fully restored by GFP-UVSSAWT (Fig 6g).
Altogether, our data reveal a sequential and cooperative assembly mechanism
of the human TCR complex, which involves the stepwise assembly of CSB, CSA, and
UVSSA to target the TFIIH complex to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to initiate DNA
repair (Fig 6h).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

11

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Discussion
Although it has been recognized for some time that CSA, CSB, and UVSSA are
required for transcription-coupled repair (TCR), remarkably little is known about how
these proteins cooperate to trigger eukaryotic TCR. Our findings suggest a highly
cooperative recruitment mechanism that involves the sequential association of CSB,
CSA and UVSSA to target the TFIIH complex to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to
initiate repair.
CSA recruitment by CSB is crucial for TCR
We show that both CSB and CSA associate with RNAPIIo in a manner that is strongly
induced by UV irradiation. Importantly, we find that CSA recruitment is completely
dependent on CSB. These findings are in line with earlier work showing that CSB
facilitates the translocation of CSA to the nuclear matrix after UV irradiation43.
Moreover, we demonstrate that CSA is required for the association of DDB1 with
RNAPIIo, suggesting that CSA is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo as part of
a CRL4CSA complex24, 27. Previous findings suggested that CSB dynamically
associates with RNAPIIo under undamaged conditions and that this interaction is
stabilized upon UV irradiation21, 44. While our method may not be sensitive enough to
capture these transient interactions, our findings do support that the CSB-RNAPIIo
interaction is stabilized after UV irradiation.
Earlier observations suggested that CSB physically interacts with CSA26, 28,
while other studies failed to detect this association19, 20. Our findings fully support a
direct UV-induced association between the CS proteins. Importantly, we identified the
CSA-interaction motif (CIM) in the C-terminus of CSB that is essential for targeting
CSA to stalled RNAPIIo. Interestingly, the CIM region in CSB is evolutionary
conserved in species that also contain the CSA gene, including mammals, amphibians
and fish (Supplementary Fig 5). In line with this, we demonstrate that both human
and Xenopus leavis CSB require its CIM to directly interact with CSA in vitro. However,
the CIM is absent in species without CSA, including yeast, nematodes, but also
holometabolous insects, which have lost the CSA gene during the course of evolution
(Supplementary Fig 5).
It is striking that even though CSB contains a CSA-interaction motif (CIM), the
association between these proteins is induced by UV irradiation. In line with this,
previous studies revealed that the association of CSB with stalled RNAPIIo triggers a
conformational change that repositions the N-terminus, thereby exposing residues in
the C-terminus of CSB44. It is conceivable that this conformational change exposes
the CIM to facilitate efficient CSA recruitment. Interestingly, while the CIM is located
right next to the ubiquitin-binding domain (UBD) in CSB38, we find that CSBUBD is fully
functional in interacting with CSA. However, it is possible that the CIM and the UBD
collaborate, as a tandem protein-interaction module45, to enable optimal CSA
recruitment. In this scenario, CSA would have protein-protein interactions with the
CIM, which would be stabilized by the binding of the UBD to auto-ubiquitylated CSA27.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

12

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

CSA recruits UVSSA to RNAPIIo in a UV-dependent manner
The recently identified UVSSA protein can be isolated as part of a chromatin-bound
stalled RNAPIIo complex. Our current findings shed light on its recruitment mechanism
by demonstrating that the association of UVSSA with RNAPIIo is strongly induced by
UV irradiation and fully dependent on both CSA and CSB. Moreover, knockout of
UVSSA did not affect CSA or CSB recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo,
suggesting that UVSSA is the last of these proteins to be recruited. Consistent with a
reported association between CSA and UVSSA31, we find that CSA targets UVSSA to
DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo by interacting with a region in the N-terminal VHS
domain (CIR; amino acids 100-200) of UVSSA. Intriguingly, the robust UV-induced
association between CSA and UVSSA is stabilized by CSB, suggesting a cooperative
assembly mechanism of the TCR complex.
In contrast to our observation that the CS proteins are required for the
recruitment of UVSSA to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo, live-cell imaging experiments
showed that UVSSA is recruited to sites of UV-C-induced laser damage independently
of the CS proteins25, 30. There could be several reasons for these seemingly conflicting
results. Firstly, the methodology is very different. We isolate RNAPIIo-associated TCR
proteins from the chromatin-bound fraction after UV, while live-cell imaging studies
monitor the recruitment of GFP-tagged TCR proteins to local UV-C laser damage.
Therefore, it is possible that the observed recruitment of CSB and UVSSA could, in
part, be triggered by something other than stalled RNAPIIo. In line with this hypothesis,
using similar conditions, GFP-CSA could not be detected at sites of local UV-C laser
damage30, even though CSA is essential for TCR and showed a robust association
with stalled RNAPIIo under our conditions. Secondly, the time-frame during which
UVSSA association is measured is different. While we isolate RNAPIIo-associated
UVSSA one hour after UV irradiation, the recruitment studies visualized UVSSA
binding in the first 40 seconds after UV-C laser irradiation. It cannot be excluded that
UVSSA transiently associates with UV-damaged chromatin independently of the CS
proteins, but that the stable association with stalled RNAPIIo during productive TCR
is fully dependent on CSA and CSB. In line with this, we find that mutants of TCR
proteins that display a clear assembly defect under our conditions also show a strong
sensitivity to Illudin S reflecting impaired TCR. In conclusion, our findings favor a
model in which UVSSA is recruited by CSA and argues for a cooperative assembly
mechanism in which CSB stabilizes the association between CSA and UVSSA to
ensure efficient targeting to stalled RNAPIIo.
TFIIH recruitment to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo is dependent on UVSSA
A major unresolved question is how the core NER machinery, likely starting with the
TFIIH complex, is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo to initiate repair.
Biochemical in vitro experiments have shown that the association of CSB with RNAPII
is sufficient to recruit TFIIH23. In addition, CSA was shown to associate with the p44
subunit of TFIIH26, while UVSSA can interact with the p62 subunit of TFIIH40. In
agreement, we found that GFP-UVSSA associates with several subunits of the TFIIH

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

13

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

complex in a UV-specific manner in vivo. Furthermore, our data reveals that CSB,
CSA, and UVSSA are equally important for the recruitment of TFIIH to DNA damagestalled RNAPIIo in vivo. Indeed, similar to previous results with CSB-deficient cells42,
46
, our high-resolution repair maps fully support a crucial role of both CSA and UVSSA
in the TCR-mediated clearing of UV-induced lesions on a genome-wide level.
Importantly, we found that UVSSA contains a TFIIH-interacting region (TIR; amino
acids 400-500), which is crucial for the association of TFIIH with stalled RNAPIIo.
Consistently, it has been shown that the PH domain of p62 (1-108) associates with a
small fragment in UVSSA (400-419) in vitro and that mutations within this region
causes a defect in recovery of RNA synthesis in vivo40. Moreover, we found that the
UVSSA∆CIR mutant was not only unable to associate with CSA, but also with the TFIIH
complex. Our findings favour a model in which CSA not only recruits UVSSA to stalled
RNAPIIo but also stabilizes the direct interaction between UVSSA and TFIIH, resulting
in the recruitment of TFIIH to stalled RNAPIIo. In this regard, it would be interesting to
examine if this interaction between UVSSA and the p62 subunit of TFIIH is the sole
mechanism through which TFIIH is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo in vivo,
or whether other subunits and regions also contribute.
UVSSA: a NER-specific coupling factor?
Here we show that UVSSA is essential to bridge the TFIIH complex to CSB/CSAbound RNAPIIo to initiate TCR. Importantly, these findings also suggest that
neurodegeneration seen in Cockayne syndrome (CS) is not caused by the inability to
remove transcription-blocking DNA lesions, since neurodegeneration is not a feature
in UV-sensitive syndrome (UVSS). In line with this, CS fibroblasts are sensitive to
oxidative damage, while UVSS fibroblasts are not12, 47. Moreover, it was recently shown
that CSB recruits the DNA repair protein XRCC1, which is involved in base excision
repair (BER), to oxidative lesions in a transcription-dependent manner48. These
findings suggest that the CS proteins are involved in transcription-dependent
transactions in multiple DNA repair pathways through specific coupling factors. Here,
we show that UVSSA is a NER-specific coupling factor. It would be interesting to
explore if additional coupling factors exist that link the CS proteins to other DNA repair
systems.
A model for TCR complex assembly
We propose a model in which CSB is the first protein to be recruited to DNA damagestalled RNAPIIo (Fig 6h). This binding of CSB could bring about a conformational
change, thereby exposing the newly identified CIM to facilitate efficient CSA
recruitment through direct protein-protein contacts. Once bound, CSA targets UVSSA
to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo, and this interaction is stabilized by CSB. UVSSA, in
turn, mediates the recruitment of the TFIIH complex in a cooperative manner that is
stabilized by both CSB and CSA. Although both CS proteins could interact with TFIIH,
it is likely that only CSA contributes directly to this stabilization, while CSB contributes
indirectly through ensuring the association of CSA itself and stabilizing the interaction
between CSA and UVSSA. At the stage when TFIIH is bound, it seems likely that

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

14

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

RNAPIIo and CSB/CSA/UVSSA are displaced and that the TCR-specific pre-incision
complex is assembled starting with XPA. In this regard it is interesting to note the yeast
orthologue of CSB, RAD26, is bound to the DNA upstream of RNAPII49, while human
TFIIH in the transcription pre-initiation complex (PIC) is bound downstream of
RNAPII50. If TFIIH is recruited to the same side of RNAPII during TCR, it suggests that
CSB/CSA/UVSSA extend from the upstream to the downstream DNA around RNAPII
to position TFIIH. It will be very interesting to gain structural insights into these
molecular events. In conclusion, our findings reveal the recruitment mechanism of the
TFIIH complex to DNA damage-stalled RNAPII, which involves the sequential and
cooperative assembly of the CSB, CSA and UVSSA proteins.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Experimental Procedures
Cell lines. Cell lines (listed in table 1) were cultured at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 in DMEM
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with penicillin/streptomycin (Sigma) and 10% Fetal bovine
serum (FBS; Bodinco BV). U2OS 2–6-3 cells containing 200 copies of a LacO-containing cassette (~4
Mbp) were a gift from Susan Janicki35. UVSSA-deficient KPS3-hTERT cells and their UVSSA-rescued
counterparts were a gift from Tomoo Ogi16. U2OS Flp-In/T-REx cells, which were generated using the
Flp-InTM/T-RExTM system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), were a gift from Daniel Durocher45.
Generation of knockout cell lines. To generate stable knockouts, U2OS Flp-In/T-REx cells were cotransfected with pLV-U6g-PPB encoding a guide RNA from the LUMC/Sigma-Aldrich sgRNA library
(see table 2 for plasmids, table 3 for sgRNA sequences) together with an expression vector encoding
Cas9-2A-GFP (pX458; Addgene #48138) using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen). Transfected cells were
selected on puromycin (1 µg/mL) for 3 days, plated at low density after which individual clones were
isolated. To generate double knockouts, single knockout clones were transfected with pLV-U6g-PPB
encoding a sgRNA together with pX458 encoding Cas9, cells were FACS sorted on BFP/GFP, plated
at low density after which individual clones were isolated. Isolated knockout clones were verified by
Western blot analysis and/or sanger sequencing. The absence of Cas9 integration/stable expression
was confirmed by Western blot analysis.
PCR analysis of knockout clones. Genomic DNA was isolated by resuspending cell pellets in WCE
buffer (50mM KCL, 10mM Tris pH 8.0, 25 mM MgCl2 0.1 mg/mL gelatin, 0.45% Tween-20, 0.45% NP40) containing 0,1 mg/mL Proteinase K (EO0491;Thermo Fisher Scientific) and incubating for 1h at
56°C followed by a 10 min heat inactivation of Proteinase K by 96°C. Fragments of approximately 1kb,
containing the sgRNA sequence, were PCR amplified (sequencing primers are listed in table 4)
followed by sanger sequencing using either the forward or the reversed primer.
Generation of stable cell lines. Selected knockout clones of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA (see table 1)
were subsequently used to stably express GFP-CSBWT, GFP-CSBCIM, CSAWT-GFP, GFP-UVSSAWT,
GFP-UVSSACIR, and GFP-UVSSATIR by co-transfection of pCDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro plasmid encoding
these CSB, CSA, and UVSSA variants (2 µg), together with pOG44 plasmid encoding the Flp
recombinase (0.5 µg). After selection on 1 µg/mL puromycin and 4 µg/mL blasticidin S, single clones
were isolated and expanded. Clones were selected based on their near-endogenous expression level
compared to parental U2OS Flp-In/T-REx cells. Expression of these GFP-tagged TCR proteins was
induced by the addition of 2 µg/ml Doxycycline for 24 hrs.
Plasmid constructs. The Neomycin resistance gene in pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Neo (Addgene #41000) was
replaced with a Puromycin resistance gene. Fragments spanning GFP-N1 (clontech) and GFP-C1
(clontech) including the multiple cloning site were inserted into pcDNA5/FRT/TO-puro. CSBWT, CSAWT,
and UVSSAWT were amplified by PCR (see table 5 for primers) and inserted into pcDNA5/FRT/TOPuro-GFP-N1 or pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-C1 and in mCherry-LacR-NLS-C1/C3. Deletion
constructs of CSB and UVSSA were generated by site-directed mutagenesis PCR. All sequences were
verified by sequencing.
Illudin S survival assay. Knockout and rescue cell lines were trypsinized, seeded at low density and
mock-treated or exposed to a dilution series of Illudin S (Santa cruz; sc-391575) for 72 h (30, 60, 100
pg/mL or 50, 100, and 200 pg/mL). On day 10, the cells were washed with 0.9% NaCl and stained with
methylene blue. Colonies of more than 20 cells were scored.
Immunoprecipitation for Co-IP. Cells were UV Irradiated (20 J/m2) or mock treated and harvested 1
h after UV. Chromatin enriched fractions were prepared by incubating the cells for 20 min on ice in IP
buffer (IP-130 for endogenous RNAPII IP and IP-150 for GFP-IP), followed by centrifugation, and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

16

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

removal of the supernatant. For endogenous RNA pol II IPs the chromatin enriched cell pellets were
lysed in IP-130 buffer (30 mM Tris pH 7.5, 130 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, protease
inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 250 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen), and 2 µg RNAPII-S2 (ab5095,
Abcam) for 2-3 h at 4 C. For GFP IPs the chromatin-enriched cell pellets were lysed in IP-150 buffer
(50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 2 mM MgCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and
500 U/mL Benzonase® Nuclease (Novagen)) for 1 h at 4 C. Protein complexes were pulled down by
1.5 h incubation with Protein A agarose beads (Millipore) or GFP-Trap®_A beads (Chromotek). For
subsequent analysis by Western blotting, samples were prepared by boiling in Laemmli-SDS sample
buffer. Unless indicated otherwise, all IP experiments were performed on the chromatin fraction.
Generation of mass spectrometry samples. For the generation of mass spectrometry samples the
beads were washed 4 times with EBC-2 buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and
protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and 2 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by
overnight digestion using 2.5 µg trypsin at 37 C under constant shaking. The bead suspension was
loaded onto a 0.45 µm filter column (Millipore) to elute the peptides. The peptides were passed through
a C-18 stage tips for desalting. The stagetips were activated by washing with methanol followed by
washing with buffer B (80% Acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were
acidified with 2% Trifluoroacetic acid and loaded on the stagetips. The peptides were eluted twice with
25 µl 60% Acetonitrile/ 0.1% Formic acid and lyophilized. Four biological repeats for each condition
were performed.
Mass spectrometry. Mass spectrometry was performed essentially as previously described51.
Samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany)
coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Digested peptides were
separated using a 15 cm fused silica capillary (ID: 75 µm, OD: 375 µm, Polymicro Technologies,
California, US) in-house packed with 1.9 µm C18-AQ beads (Reprospher-DE, Pur, Dr. Maisch,
Ammerburch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography using a gradient
from 2% to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min for 65 mins. The mass
spectrometer was operated in positive-ion mode at 2.9 kV with the capillary heated to 250°C. The mass
spectrometer was operated in a Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode with a top 7 method. Full
scan MS spectra were obtained with a resolution of 70,000, a target value of 3x106 and a scan range
from 400 to 2,000 m/z. Maximum Injection Time (IT) was set to 50 ms. Higher-Collisional Dissociation
(HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded with a resolution of 35,000, a maximum IT of 120
ms, a target value of 1x105 and a normalized collision energy of 25%. The precursor ion masses
selected for MS/MS analysis were subsequently dynamically excluded from MS/MS analysis for 60 sec.
Precursor ions with a charge state of 1 and greater than 6 were excluded from triggering MS/MS events.
Mass spectrometry data analysis. Raw mass spectrometry files were analysed with MaxQuant
software (v1.5.3.30 According to52, with the following modifications from default settings: the maximum
number of mis-cleveages by trypsin/p was set to 4, Label Free Quantification (LFQ) was enabled
disabling the Fats LFQ feature. Match-between-runs feature was enabled with a match time window of
0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. We performed the search against an in silico
digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens (14th December 2017). Analysis output from
MaxQuant was further processed in the Perseus (v 1.5.5.3) computational platform53. Proteins identified
as common contaminants, only identified by site and reverse peptide were filtered out, and then all the
LFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Different biological repeats of each condition were grouped and
only protein groups identified in all four biological replicates in at least one condition were included for
further analysis. Missing values were imputed using Perseus software by normally distributed values
with a 1.8 downshift (log2) and a randomized 0.3 width (log2) considering total matrix values. Volcano
plots were generated and Student’s T-tests were performed to compare the different conditions.
Spreadsheets from the statistical analysis output from Perseus were further processed in Microsoft
Excel for comprehensive visualization and analysis of the data.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

17

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Mass spectrometry data availability. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited
to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE54 partner repository with the dataset identifier
PXD013572. For reviewing purposes, data can be downloaded using the following credentials:
Username: reviewer15750@ebi.ac.uk, Password: J9lTSoH3
Western blot. Proteins were separated on 4-12% Criterion XT Bis-Tris gels (Bio-Rad, #3450124) in
NuPAGE MOPS running buffer (NP0001-02 Thermo Fisher Scientific), and blotted onto PVDF
membranes (IPFL00010, EMD Millipore). The membrane was blocked with blocking buffer (Rockland,
MB-070-003) for 2 h at RT. The membrane was then probed with antibodies (listed in table 6) as
indicated.
Chromatin tethering. U2OS 2–6-3 cells containing 200 copies of a LacO-containing cassette (Janicki
et al., 2004) were co-transfected with lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen) and plasmid DNA for 6 h at 37 C
in an atmosphere of 5% CO2. 24 h after transfection the cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde
(Sigma; 252549) in PBS for 15 min. The cells were either permeabilized with 0.5% triton X-100 (Sigma)
in PBS for 10 min and mounted in poly mount (Polysciences; 18606) or subjected to immunofluorescent
labeleing.
Immunofluorescent labeling. Cells were permeabilized with 0.5% triton X-100 (Sigma) in PBS for 10
min, followed by treatment with 100 mM glycine in PBS for 10 min to block unreacted aldehyde groups.
Cells were rinsed with PBS and equilibrated in wash buffer (WB: PBS containing 0.5% BSA, and 0.05%
Tween-20 (Sigma-Aldrich)) for 10 min. Antibody steps and washes were in WB. The primary antibody
rabbit-p89 (1/100; Santa Cruz; SC-293; S19) was incubated for 2 h at RT. Detection was done using
goat-rabbit Ig coupled to Alexa 488 (1:1000; Invitrogen). Cells were incubated with 0.1 μg/mL DAPI and
mounted in Poly mount (Polysciences; 18606).
Microscopic analysis of fixed cells. Images of fixed samples were acquired on a Zeiss AxioImager
M2 or D2 widefield fluorescence microscope equipped with a 63x PLAN APO (1.4 NA) oil-immersion
objectives (Zeiss) and an HXP 120 metal-halide lamp used for excitation. Fluorescent probes were
detected using the following filters: DAPI (excitation filter: 350/50 nm, dichroic mirror: 400 nm, emission
filter: 460/50 nm), GFP/Alexa 488 (excitation filter: 470/40 nm, dichroic mirror: 495 nm, emission filter:
525/50 nm), mCherry (excitation filter: 560/40 nm, dichroic mirror: 585 nm, emission filter: 630/75 nm).
Images were recorded using ZEN 2012 software.
Genome-wide XR-sequencing. XR-seq was performed as previously described42, 46. Briefly, cells were
harvested 3h after treatment with 20J/m2 UVC (254nm). Primary excision products were pulled down
by TFIIH coimmunoprecipitation with anti-p62 and anti-p89 antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology
sc25329 and sc271500), and ligated to both 5′ and 3′ adaptors. Ligation products containing CPD were
purified by immunoprecipitation with the anti-CPD antibody (Cosmo Bio NM-DND-001) and repaired invitro by Drosophila melanogaster CPD photolyase. Repaired DNA were PCR-amplified with Index
primers and purified by 10% native polyacrylamide gels. Libraries were pooled and sequenced in a
single HiSeq 2500 lane producing at least 10 million single-end 50nt reads per sample. Quality score
for each nucleotide was analyzed using the fastx-toolkit to ensure only high-quality reads are processed.
Adapter sequence was trimmed from each read using Trimmomatic55 version 0.36. Reads were aligned
to the genome using Bowtie56. Following alignment, reads that were mapped to chromosome Y or
mitochondrial chromosome were filtered (U2OS cell line is derived from female bone tissue) and PCR
duplicates were removed using PicardCommandLine MarkDuplicates (http://broadinstitute.github.io/
picard/). There were high levels of PCR duplicates due to low efficiency of excised oligo recovery, but
these were sufficient for analysis of TCR. To plot average XR-seq signal along genes, the genes
annotation file was downloaded from Ensembl, assembly GRCh38, release 96. Non-overlapping
regions around the TSS were obtained using custom scripts and BEDTools slop and merge

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

18

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

commands57. All samples were converted to BED format using bedtools bamtobed command. Strandspecific profiles over the TSS were created using the R Bioconductor genomation package58.
Protein expression and purification. Coding sequences of Xenopus laevis CSB and CSA-DDB1CUL4-RBX1 (CRL4CSA), as well as human CSB were amplified from cDNA clones or ordered as codonoptimized gene blocks from Integrated DNA Technologies. All open reading frames were cloned into
pAceBac1 (pAB1) or pIDC vectors containing the indicated affinity tags (Table 2). For the generation of
CRL4CSA, CSA/DDB1 and CUL4A/RBX1 heterodimers were cloned into separate vectors, respectively.
To obtain bacmids for insect cell expression, plasmids were transformed into chemically competent
DH10Bac cells and purified using ZR BAC DNA miniprep kit (Zymo Research). Baculoviruses encoding
CSB variants, CSA/DDB1, or CUL4A/RBX1 were amplified in three stages (P1, P2, and P3) in Sf9 cells
(Expression Systems). Protein expression was performed for 72 h in 500 ml Sf9 cells per construct
infected with 10 ml P2 or P3 baculovirus. Cells were cultured at 27ºC in ESF 921 insect cell culture
medium (Fisher Scientific), pelleted at 1,000xg for 15 min, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80ºC.
Protein purifications were performed at 4ºC. Cell pellets were resuspended in a final volume of 50 ml
Wash Buffer (50 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 300 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol) containing 0.1% NP-40 and one
EDTA-free cOmplete protease inhibitor tablet (Roche). Cells were lysed by sonication and cleared by
centrifugation for 1 h at 30,000xg. The clarified lysate was incubated with 0.3-0.6 ml pre-equilibrated
Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel (Sigma) for 1 h at 4ºC on a rotating wheel. The resin was washed extensively
with Wash Buffer, and proteins were eluted with Wash Buffer containing 0.2 mg/ml 3xFLAG peptide
(Sigma). CSB proteins were further purified by gel filtration (Superdex 200 Increase) containing 2 mM
DTT, and pooled peak fractions were concentrated with 5 ml 10 MWCO spin concentrators (Millipore),
frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80ºC. Eluted CSA-StrepII/FLAG-DDB1 complex was applied to
0.3 ml pre-equilibrated Strep-Tactin XT Superflow high capacity resin in a disposable gravity-flow
column and washed 5x with 0.6 ml Wash Buffer. FLAG peptide-eluted FLAG-CUL4A/RBX1 complex
was incubated with the immobilized CSA-StrepII/FLAG-DDB1 complex for 1 h at 4ºC to assemble
CRL4CSA. The resin was washed 5x with 0.6 ml Wash Buffer to remove excess FLAG-CUL4A/RBX1,
and CRL4CSA was eluted with BXT Buffer (iba-lifesciences), which contains 50 mM biotin. Pooled
fractions were dialyzed O/N into 0.5x Wash Buffer containing 2 mM DTT, concentrated with 0.5 ml 3
MWCO spin concentrators (Millipore), frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80ºC.
Pull-down using immobilized CSB proteins. Purified FLAG-tagged CSB proteins were immobilized
on pre-equilibrated Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma) for 2 h at 4ºC. The beads were washed 3x
with 0.3 ml Pull-down Buffer (20 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 100 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.25
mg/ml BSA, 0.03% Tween) and incubated with Xenopus laevis egg extract (HSS; high-speed
supernatant) for 1 h at 4ºC. The beads were washed 3x with 0.3 ml Pull-down Buffer and resuspended
in Laemmli-SDS sample buffer. Samples were resolved by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by Western blot.
In vitro ubiquitylation assay. Purified xlCRL4CSA was neddylated in vitro using the NEDD8
Conjugation Initiation Kit (Boston Biochem) according to the manufacturer’s protocols, except using
0.5x Uba3, 0.5x UbcH12, and 0.33x NEDD8 as compared to the recommended final concentrations.
The reaction was incubated for 25 min at RT immediately prior to the in vitro ubiquitylation reaction,
which contained the following final concentrations in Ubiquitylation Buffer (40 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10 mM
MgCl2, 0.6 mM DTT): 100 nM E1 (Enzo Life Sciences), 2.5 µM UBE2D2 (Boston Biochem),
approximately 50 nM neddylated xlCRL4CSA, 50 µM ubiquitin, 10 mM ATP, and 200-250 nM CSB
protein. Reaction were incubated for indicated times at RT and stopped in Laemmli-SDS sample buffer
prior to SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

19

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Table 1: Cell lines
Cell lines
KPS3-hTERT
KPS3-hTERT + UVSSA
U2OS (FRT)
U2OS (FRT) CSA-KO (2-4)
U2OS (FRT) CSA-KO (2-4) + CSA-GFP-5
U2OS (FRT) CSB-KO (1-12)
U2OS (FRT) CSB-KO (1-12) + GFP-CSBCIM-4
U2OS (FRT) CSB-KO (1-12) + GFP-CSB-3
U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO (1-8)
U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO (1-8) + GFP-UVSSACIR-1
U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO (1-8) + GFP-UVSSATIR-6
U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO (1-8) + GFP-UVSSA-3
U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO (1-8) / CSA (2-4) + GFP-UVSSA-3
U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO (1-8) / CSB-KO (1-12) + GFP-UVSSA-3
U2OS (FRT) XPA-KO (2-8)
U2OS (FRT) XPC-KO (2-7)
U2OS 2-6-3

Origin
16
16

This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

20

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Table 2: Plasmids
Plasmids
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Neo
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-CSAWT-GFP
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-C1
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-CSBCIM
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-CSBWT
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-N1
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-UVSSACIR
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-UVSSATIR
pcDNA5/FRT/TO-Puro-GFP-UVSSAWT
pEGFP-C1
pEGFP-N1
pLV-U6g-PPB
pmCherry-LacR- UVSSATIR
pmCherry-LacR-C1
pmCherry-LacR-C3
pmCherry-LacR-CSBN
pmCherry-LacR-CSBM
pmCherry-LacR-CSBC
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆N
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆C
pmCherry-LacR-CSB1221-1305
pmCherry-LacR-CSB1400-1493
pmCherry-LacR-CSB1417-1493
pmCherry-LacR-CSB1306-1399
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1306-1300
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1306-1352
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1353-1399
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1400-1428
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1353-1368
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1369-1384
pmCherry-LacR-CSB∆1385-1399
pmCherry-LacR-CSBWT
pmCherry-LacR-NLS
pmCherry-LacR-UVSSACIR
pmCherry-LacR-UVSSAWT
pOG44
pX458
pTM58_pAB1_FLAG-xlDDB1_x_(pIDC_xlCSA-StrepII)x2
pTM65_pAB1_FLAG-xlCSBWT
pTM67_pAB1_FLAG-xlCUL4A_xlRBX1
pTM141_pAB1_FLAG-xlCSB∆CIM
pTM142_pAB1_FLAG-hsCSBWT
pTM143_pAB1_FLAG-hsCSB∆CIM

Origin
Addgene #41000
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
Clontech
Clontech
LUMC/Sigma-Aldrich sgRNA library
This study
37

This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
59

This study
This study
Thermo Fisher
Addgene #48138
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study
This study

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

21

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Table 3: Sequences of sgRNAs
sgRNAs
CSB/ERCC6
CSA/ERCC8
UVSSA
XPA
XPC

5-AGACAGAATGATCCGATGAGGGG-3
5-CCAGACTTCAAGTCACAAAGTTG-3
5-AGAGAGCTGCTTTAGGCTGCTGG-3
5-CCTGTGTCAATTATCTTTGGGGC-3
5-TGGGGGTTTCTCATCTTCAAAGG-3

sgML#003
sgML#018
sgML#019
sgML#002
sgML#014

Table 4: Sequencing primers to validate KO cell lines
Sequencing primers for knockouts
CSB/ERCC6 5-GTAGGGGCCAGTTGTTAGAATGTAA-3
5-CTCACATTCTGAATGACTTGGCTA-3
CSA/ERCC8 5-CAGTCTGTGTCCAGTTTCTGTG-3
5-CATATTTGTTATGTGTTTCTTTGAG-3
5-GTACATACATACATACACATTTACCAATAC-3
5-CTGAGAAAAAATGTACCTAAATATTAAG-3
UVSSA
5-ACCCAGAGGTACACAGAGATTG-3
5-GCTCTTAGAAGTGTCCCTGTG-3
5-ATCAGGAGGCTGAGGCGGCTG-3
5-AGGAGCCTACCCGGGAGCCGGG-3

oML#078_sgML#003_CSB1_fw
oML#079_sgML#003_CSB1_rev
oML#084_sgML#018_CSA_2FW
oML#085_sgML#018_CSA_2RV
oML#100_sgML#018_CSA_2_Fw_Seq
oML#101_sgML#018_CSA_2_Rv_Seq
oML#090_sgML#019_UVSSA1_Fw
oML#091_sgML#019_UVSSA1_Rv
oML#076_sgML#020_UVSSA2_fw
oML#077_sgML#020_UVSSA2_rev

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

22

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Table 5: Primers
Primers
CSB WT

TTAAGTCGACCCAAATGAGGGAATCCCCCAC

oML#375

AATTGCGGCCGCTTAGCAGTATTCTGGCTTGAGTTTC

oML#376

CSA WT

CACAATGCTAGCGCCACCATGCTGGGGTTTTTGTCCG

oML#041

GCATGGTGAACTACCGGTGCTCCTTCTTCATCACTGCTG

oML#042

UVSSA
WT

ACAATTGAATTCGATGGATCAGAAACTTTCGAAG

oML#035

GTGTAAAGATCTCTAGTTCAGTGCGTAGTTAAAC

oML#036

CSBC

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTCCAAATGAGGGAATCCCCCACTC

oML#173

TCAGGTCGGATCCTTATCGAGTTCCTTCAAACTTGGCGTCTC

oML#174

CSB-N

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTCCAAATGAGGGAATCCCCCACTC

oML#173

GCATCAGGTCGGATCCTTAATCTCCATCATCTCGGTATCTTCCCAC

oML#178

CSBN

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTGATGGAGATGAAGATTATTATAAGCAGCGG

oML#175

GCATCAGGTCGGATCCTTAGCAGTATTCTGGCTTGAGTTTCCAAATTC

oML#176

CSB-M

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTGATGGAGATGAAGATTATTATAAGCAGCGG

oML#175

TCAGGTCGGATCCTTATCGAGTTCCTTCAAACTTGGCGTCTC

oML#174

CSB-C

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTCGAATTCCACACCTGGTGAAGAAAAG

oML#177

GCATCAGGTCGGATCCTTAGCAGTATTCTGGCTTGAGTTTCCAAATTC

oML#176

CSB 12211305

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTCGAATTCCACACCTGGTGAAGAAAAG

oML#177

GATGGAGGATCCTTACAGACACCGCTGACGAGAGAG

oML#196

CSB 13061399

TACAGCCTCGAGGTGGAGCAGTGTCTGGTGTTCCC

oML#197

GGCGATGGAGGATCCTTACAGGTGGTTTCTAGCTCTCATTTTAGC

oML#198

CSB 14001493

TCCAGCCTCGAGGTATTCTGCCAGAGCGTTTAGAAAGTGAAAG

oML#199

GCATCAGGTCGGATCCTTAGCAGTATTCTGGCTTGAGTTTCCAAATTC

oML#176

CSB 14171493

TACATCCTCGAGGTGCCCTGCTGCCCACCACAG

oML#200

GCATCAGGTCGGATCCTTAGCAGTATTCTGGCTTGAGTTTCCAAATTC

oML#176

CSB1306
-1352

GCTCTCTCGTCAGCGGTGTCTGTGCCAGGATGGCATCATGAA

oML#226

CCTTTTTCATGATGCCATCCTGGCACAGACACCGCTGACGAG

oML#227

CSB1353
-1399

CCTTCATCAACATCTCCAACAGAGAAGATTCTGCCAGAGCGTTTAG

oML#232

CACTTTCTAAACGCTCTGGCAGAATCTTCTCTGTTGGAGATGTTG

oML#233

CSB1306
-1399

GAGGCTCTCTCGTCAGCGGTGTCTGATTCTGCCAGAGCGTTTAGAAAGTG

oML#224

CTTTCACTTTCTAAACGCTCTGGCAGAATCAGACACCGCTGACGAGAG

oML#225

CSB1400
-1428

GCTAAAATGAGAGCTAGAAACCACCTGGTGGAGATGAGAAACTTCATC

oML#234

GAAAGCGATGAAGTTTCTCATCTCCACCAGGTGGTTTCTAGCTCTC

oML#235

CSB1353
-1368

CCTTCATCAACATCTCCAACAGAGAAGCATTTTAGTGGAAGAGCAGAAG

oML#262

CTGCATCTTCTGCTCTTCCACTAAAATGCTTCTCTGTTGGAGATGTTGA

oML#263

CSB1369
-1384

GAAAAAGGAGGGAAAAGATAATGTCCCTGAGGCTTCCTCCTCACTCTTG

oML#264

CATTTTAGCCAAGAGTGAGGAGGAAGCCTCAGGGACATTATCTTTTCC

oML#265

CSB1385
-1399

AGACTCTTCATCCGGGCCCCTCATTCTGCCAGAGCGTTTAGA

oML#266

CTTTCACTTTCTAAACGCTCTGGCAGAATGAGGGGCCCGGATGA

oML#267

UVSSA
100-200

CACAGACCCCGCACAGCCTCTGAGGCTGCTGGTGCCTTTTG

oML#128

CAAAGTCAAAAGGCACCAGCAGCCTCAGAGGCTGTGCGGGG

oML#129

UVSSA
400-500

GGACAGAAGCCCTGGGGGATGCGGTGGTGCCCTACGGCGTG

oML#138

LacR-C3

ATTAAAACGCGTCAGTGGGCTGATC

oML#377

TAATAATAGATCTGAAACCTTCCTCTTCTTCTTAG

oML#378

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

23

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Table 6: Antibodies
Antibodies
Cas9

Host
Mouse

Clone
7A9
and
3A3
D2

WB
1/5000

aML#031

Mouse

Cell
Signaling
technology,
#14697
Santa Cruz, sc-376981

CSA/ERCC8

1/500

aML#025

CSA/ERCC8

Rabbit

Abcam, 137033

EPR9237

1/750

aML#028

CSB/ERCC6

Goat

Santa Cruz, SC-10459

E-18

1/1000

aML#039

DDB1

Goat

Abcam, ab9194

1/1000

aML#035

ERCC1

Mouse

Santa Cruz, sc-17809

1/300

aML#066

FLAG

Rabbit

GFP

Mouse

New England Peptide; antigen:
C(dPEG4)DYKDDDDK
Roche, #11814460001

GFP

Rabbit

Goat IgG (H+L)
CF680
Mouse IgG (H+L)
CF770
p44/ GTF2H2

Donkey

D10

1/5000
1/1000

aML#011

Abcam, ab290

1/1000

aML#044

1/10000

aML#037

Goat

Thermo
fisher
Scientific,
A21084
Biotium, VWR #20077

1/10000

aML#009

Mouse

kindly provided by J.M. Egly

1H5

1/2000

aML#075

p62/GTF2H1

Mouse

kindly provided by J.M. Egly

3C9

1/2000

aML#074

p62/GTF2H1

Mouse

Santa Cruz, sc-48431

G10

1/500

aML#099

p80/XPD/
ERCC2
p89

Mouse

Abcam, ab54676

1/500

aML#029

Mouse

Millipore, MABE1123

15TF2-1B3

1/2000

aML#101

p89/XPB/ERCC3

Mouse

kindly provided by J.M. Egly

1B3

1/1000

aML#073

p89/XPB/ERCC3

Rabbit

Santa Cruz, SC-293

S-19

1/1000

aML#040

rabbit IgG (H+L)
CF680
RNAPII-S2

Goat

Biotium, VWR #20067

1/10000

aML#010

Rabbit

Abcam, ab5095

1/1000

aML#024

Tubulin

Mouse

Sigma, T6199

DM1A

1/1000

aML#008

UVSSA

Mouse

Genetex, GTX629742

GT816

1/500

aML#100

UVSSA

Rabbit

Novus Biologicals, NBP1-32598

1/1000

aML#030

UVSSA

Rabbit

Abcam ab137644

1/1000

aML#034

UVSSA

Rabbit

Genetex, GTX106751

1/1000

aML#087

xlCSA

Rabbit

1/5000

XPA

Rabbit

New England Peptide; antigen:
CHRTHINPAFEDAWSSSEDES
kindly provided by Rick Wood

XPC

Rabbit

XPF/ ERCC4

Mouse

XPG/ ERCC5

Rabbit

Novus Biologicals, NB10058801
Santa Cruz, sc-136153
Novus
74611

Biologicals,

NB100-

7.1
13.1

CJ1

3F2/3

and

1/10000

aML#079

1/2000

aML#077

1/200

aML#096

1/1000

aML#046

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

24

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Author Contributions
YvdW generated knockout cells, constructs and stable cell-lines, performed LacRbased tethering assays, clonogenic survivals, PCR and Western blot analysis to
validate knockouts, Co-IP experiments for Western blot analysis, Co-IP experiments
for mass spectrometry, and wrote the paper. KA generated stable cell-lines, Western
blot analysis to validate knockouts, and Co-IP experiments. RG-P and ACOV analyzed
the mass spectrometry samples. HG performed XR-seq. HG, EH and SA analyzed the
XR-seq samples. TETM generated recombinant CSB proteins and xlCRL4CSA, and
performed pull-down and in vitro ubiquitylation assays. DvdH generated knockout
cells, constructs, and performed Western blot analysis to validate knockouts, and CoIP experiments. JCW supervised TETM. MSL supervised the project and wrote the
paper.
Acknowledgments
The authors acknowledge Jean-Marc Egly and Rick Wood for their generous gift of
TFIIH and XPA antibodies, respectively. Tom Misteli provided LacR-NLS plasmid,
Tomoo Ogi provided UVSSA-deficient KPS3-hTERT cells, Susan Janicki provided
U2OS 2-6-3 cells. This work was funded by an LUMC Research Fellowship and an
NWO-VIDI grant (ALW.016.161.320) to MSL, an ERC starting grant (310913) to ACOV
and Israel Science Foundation grants (1710/17 and 1762/17) administered by the
Israeli Academy for Science and humanities and The Israel Cancer Association grant
(20191630) to SA. SA is the recipient of the Jacob and Lena Joels memorial fund
senior lectureship. JCW was supported by NIH grant HL098316 and is a Howard
Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI) Investigator and an American Cancer Society
Research Professor. TETM was supported by an EMBO Long-term fellowship (ALTF
1316-2016) and an HHMI fellowship of The Jane Coffin Childs Memorial Fund for
Medical Research.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

25

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

Supplemental Tables
Supplementary Table 1. List of UVSSA-interacting proteins identified by mass spectrometry.
UVSSA-KO cells complemented with GFP-UVSSAWT were subjected to immunoprecipitation using GFP
Trap beads or block beads (BB) in triplicate. Following trypsin digestion and desalting, eluted peptides
were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Raw MS files were analyzed with the
MaxQuant software suite. The difference, significance, and number of unique peptides are indicated.
Hits with a log2 difference above 1 are considered significantly enriched.
Supplementary Table 2. List of UV-induced UVSSA-interacting proteins identified by mass
spectrometry. UVSSA-KO cells complemented with GFP-UVSSAWT were mock-treated or UV
irradiated (20 J/m2) and subjected to immunoprecipitation using GFP Trap beads in triplicate. Following
trypsin digestion and desalting, eluted peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass
spectrometer. Raw MS files were analyzed with the MaxQuant software suite. The difference,
significance, and number of unique peptides are indicated. Hits with a log2 difference above 1 are
considered significantly enriched.
Supplementary Table 3. List of UV-induced UVSSA-interacting proteins identified by mass
spectrometry. Raw data file of the mass spectrometry samples shown in Supplementary Table 1 and
2.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

26

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.

Mellon, I., Spivak, G. & Hanawalt, P.C. Selective removal of transcription-blocking DNA
damage from the transcribed strand of the mammalian DHFR gene. Cell 51, 241-249 (1987).
Marteijn, J.A., Lans, H., Vermeulen, W. & Hoeijmakers, J.H. Understanding nucleotide
excision repair and its roles in cancer and ageing. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15, 465-481 (2014).
Evans, E., Moggs, J.G., Hwang, J.R., Egly, J.M. & Wood, R.D. Mechanism of open complex
and dual incision formation by human nucleotide excision repair factors. EMBO J 16, 65596573 (1997).
Tapias, A. et al. Ordered conformational changes in damaged DNA induced by nucleotide
excision repair factors. J Biol Chem 279, 19074-19083 (2004).
Huang, J.C., Svoboda, D.L., Reardon, J.T. & Sancar, A. Human nucleotide excision nuclease
removes thymine dimers from DNA by incising the 22nd phosphodiester bond 5' and the 6th
phosphodiester bond 3' to the photodimer. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 89, 3664-3668 (1992).
Svoboda, D.L., Taylor, J.S., Hearst, J.E. & Sancar, A. DNA repair by eukaryotic nucleotide
excision nuclease. Removal of thymine dimer and psoralen monoadduct by HeLa cell-free
extract and of thymine dimer by Xenopus laevis oocytes. J Biol Chem 268, 1931-1936 (1993).
van Hoffen, A. et al. Deficient repair of the transcribed strand of active genes in Cockayne's
syndrome cells. Nucleic Acids Res 21, 5890-5895 (1993).
Spivak, G. et al. Ultraviolet-sensitive syndrome cells are defective in transcription-coupled
repair of cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers. DNA Repair (Amst) 1, 629-643 (2002).
Nance, M.A. & Berry, S.A. Cockayne syndrome: review of 140 cases. American journal of
medical genetics 42, 68-84 (1992).
Friedberg, E.C. Cockayne syndrome--a primary defect in DNA repair, transcription, both or
neither? Bioessays 18, 731-738 (1996).
Horibata, K. et al. Complete absence of Cockayne syndrome group B gene product gives rise
to UV-sensitive syndrome but not Cockayne syndrome. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 101, 1541015415 (2004).
Nardo, T. et al. A UV-sensitive syndrome patient with a specific CSA mutation reveals
separable roles for CSA in response to UV and oxidative DNA damage. Proc Natl Acad Sci U
S A 106, 6209-6214 (2009).
Itoh, T., Ono, T. & Yamaizumi, M. A new UV-sensitive syndrome not belonging to any
complementation groups of xeroderma pigmentosum or Cockayne syndrome: siblings
showing biochemical characteristics of Cockayne syndrome without typical clinical
manifestations. Mutat Res 314, 233-248 (1994).
Laugel, V. et al. Mutation update for the CSB/ERCC6 and CSA/ERCC8 genes involved in
Cockayne syndrome. Human mutation 31, 113-126 (2010).
Calmels, N. et al. Functional and clinical relevance of novel mutations in a large cohort of
patients with Cockayne syndrome. Journal of medical genetics 55, 329-343 (2018).
Nakazawa, Y. et al. Mutations in UVSSA cause UV-sensitive syndrome and impair RNA
polymerase IIo processing in transcription-coupled nucleotide-excision repair. Nat Genet 44,
586-592 (2012).
Zhang, X. et al. Mutations in UVSSA cause UV-sensitive syndrome and destabilize ERCC6 in
transcription-coupled DNA repair. Nat Genet 44, 593-597 (2012).
Troelstra, C. et al. ERCC6, a member of a subfamily of putative helicases, is involved in
Cockayne's syndrome and preferential repair of active genes. Cell 71, 939-953 (1992).
van Gool, A.J. et al. The Cockayne syndrome B protein, involved in transcription-coupled
DNA repair, resides in an RNA polymerase II-containing complex. EMBO J 16, 5955-5965
(1997).
Tantin, D., Kansal, A. & Carey, M. Recruitment of the putative transcription-repair coupling
factor CSB/ERCC6 to RNA polymerase II elongation complexes. Mol Cell Biol 17, 6803-6814
(1997).
van den Boom, V. et al. DNA damage stabilizes interaction of CSB with the transcription
elongation machinery. J Cell Biol 166, 27-36 (2004).
Svejstrup, J.Q. Rescue of arrested RNA polymerase II complexes. J Cell Sci 116, 447-451
(2003).
Tantin, D. RNA polymerase II elongation complexes containing the Cockayne syndrome
group B protein interact with a molecular complex containing the transcription factor IIH
components xeroderma pigmentosum B and p62. J Biol Chem 273, 27794-27799 (1998).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

27

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.
44.
45.
46.
47.
48.

Groisman, R. et al. The ubiquitin ligase activity in the DDB2 and CSA complexes is
differentially regulated by the COP9 signalosome in response to DNA damage. Cell 113, 357367 (2003).
Schwertman, P. et al. UV-sensitive syndrome protein UVSSA recruits USP7 to regulate
transcription-coupled repair. Nat Genet 44, 598-602 (2012).
Henning, K.A. et al. The Cockayne syndrome group A gene encodes a WD repeat protein that
interacts with CSB protein and a subunit of RNA polymerase II TFIIH. Cell 82, 555-564
(1995).
Fischer, E.S. et al. The molecular basis of CRL4DDB2/CSA ubiquitin ligase architecture,
targeting, and activation. Cell 147, 1024-1039 (2011).
Groisman, R. et al. CSA-dependent degradation of CSB by the ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
establishes a link between complementation factors of the Cockayne syndrome. Genes &
development 20, 1429-1434 (2006).
Steurer, B. & Marteijn, J.A. Traveling Rocky Roads: The Consequences of TranscriptionBlocking DNA Lesions on RNA Polymerase II. J Mol Biol 429, 3146-3155 (2017).
Wienholz, F. et al. FACT subunit Spt16 controls UVSSA recruitment to lesion-stalled RNA Pol
II and stimulates TC-NER. Nucleic Acids Res (2019).
Fei, J. & Chen, J. KIAA1530 protein is recruited by Cockayne syndrome complementation
group protein A (CSA) to participate in transcription-coupled repair (TCR). J Biol Chem 287,
35118-35126 (2012).
Harlen, K.M. & Churchman, L.S. The code and beyond: transcription regulation by the RNA
polymerase II carboxy-terminal domain. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 18, 263-273 (2017).
Schilbach, S. et al. Structures of transcription pre-initiation complex with TFIIH and Mediator.
Nature 551, 204-209 (2017).
Jaspers, N.G. et al. Anti-tumour compounds illudin S and Irofulven induce DNA lesions
ignored by global repair and exclusively processed by transcription- and replication-coupled
repair pathways. DNA Repair (Amst) 1, 1027-1038 (2002).
Janicki, S.M. et al. From silencing to gene expression: real-time analysis in single cells. Cell
116, 683-698 (2004).
Luijsterburg, M.S. et al. PARP1 Links CHD2-Mediated Chromatin Expansion and H3.3
Deposition to DNA Repair by Non-homologous End-Joining. Mol Cell 61, 547-562 (2016).
Luijsterburg, M.S. et al. A PALB2-interacting domain in RNF168 couples homologous
recombination to DNA break-induced chromatin ubiquitylation. eLife 6 (2017).
Anindya, R. et al. A ubiquitin-binding domain in Cockayne syndrome B required for
transcription-coupled nucleotide excision repair. Mol Cell 38, 637-648 (2010).
Batenburg, N.L. et al. ATM and CDK2 control chromatin remodeler CSB to inhibit RIF1 in
DSB repair pathway choice. Nat Commun 8, 1921 (2017).
Okuda, M., Nakazawa, Y., Guo, C., Ogi, T. & Nishimura, Y. Common TFIIH recruitment
mechanism in global genome and transcription-coupled repair subpathways. Nucleic Acids
Res 45, 13043-13055 (2017).
Volker, M. et al. Sequential assembly of the nucleotide excision repair factors in vivo. Mol Cell
8, 213-224 (2001).
Hu, J., Adar, S., Selby, C.P., Lieb, J.D. & Sancar, A. Genome-wide analysis of human global
and transcription-coupled excision repair of UV damage at single-nucleotide resolution.
Genes & development 29, 948-960 (2015).
Kamiuchi, S. et al. Translocation of Cockayne syndrome group A protein to the nuclear
matrix: possible relevance to transcription-coupled DNA repair. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 99,
201-206 (2002).
Lake, R.J., Geyko, A., Hemashettar, G., Zhao, Y. & Fan, H.Y. UV-induced association of the
CSB remodeling protein with chromatin requires ATP-dependent relief of N-terminal
autorepression. Mol Cell 37, 235-246 (2010).
Panier, S. et al. Tandem protein interaction modules organize the ubiquitin-dependent
response to DNA double-strand breaks. Mol Cell 47, 383-395 (2012).
Adar, S., Hu, J., Lieb, J.D. & Sancar, A. Genome-wide kinetics of DNA excision repair in
relation to chromatin state and mutagenesis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113, E2124-2133
(2016).
D'Errico, M. et al. The role of CSA in the response to oxidative DNA damage in human cells.
Oncogene 26, 4336-4343 (2007).
Menoni, H. et al. The transcription-coupled DNA repair-initiating protein CSB promotes
XRCC1 recruitment to oxidative DNA damage. Nucleic Acids Res 46, 7747-7756 (2018).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

28

Van der Weegen et al. Assembly mechanism of the human TCR complex

49.
50.
51.
52.
53.
54.
55.
56.
57.
58.
59.

Xu, J. et al. Structural basis for the initiation of eukaryotic transcription-coupled DNA repair.
Nature 551, 653-657 (2017).
He, Y. et al. Near-atomic resolution visualization of human transcription promoter opening.
Nature 533, 359-365 (2016).
Kumar, R., Gonzalez-Prieto, R., Xiao, Z., Verlaan-de Vries, M. & Vertegaal, A.C.O. The
STUbL RNF4 regulates protein group SUMOylation by targeting the SUMO conjugation
machinery. Nat Commun 8, 1809 (2017).
Tyanova, S., Temu, T. & Cox, J. The MaxQuant computational platform for mass
spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics. Nature protocols 11, 2301-2319 (2016).
Tyanova, S. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of
(prote)omics data. Nature methods 13, 731-740 (2016).
Perez-Riverol, Y. et al. The PRIDE database and related tools and resources in 2019:
improving support for quantification data. Nucleic Acids Res 47, D442-D450 (2019).
Bolger, A.M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina sequence
data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114-2120 (2014).
Langmead, B., Trapnell, C., Pop, M. & Salzberg, S.L. Ultrafast and memory-efficient
alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome biology 10, R25 (2009).
Quinlan, A.R. & Hall, I.M. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing genomic
features. Bioinformatics 26, 841-842 (2010).
Akalin, A., Franke, V., Vlahovicek, K., Mason, C.E. & Schubeler, D. Genomation: a toolkit to
summarize, annotate and visualize genomic intervals. Bioinformatics 31, 1127-1129 (2015).
Soutoglou, E. & Misteli, T. Activation of the cellular DNA damage response in the absence of
DNA lesions. Science 320, 1507-1510 (2008).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. CSA is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo by CSB. (a) Outline of a new IP
method to isolate RNAPIIo and associated proteins on mock-treated or UV-irradiated (20J/m2) U2OS
(FRT) cells. (b) Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP on WT cells (see also Supplementary Fig 1a). (b) Western
blot analysis of CSA, CSB, and UVSSA knockout cells complemented with inducible GFP-tagged
versions of these proteins. See Supplementary Figure 2 for validation of knockouts by sequencing. (d)
Clonogenic Illudin S survival of WT, CSA, CSB, and UVSSA knockout and rescue cell lines. Data
represent mean ± SEM of two independent experiments. Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP on (e) WT, CSA,
CSB, and UVSSA knockout cells, (f) CSB-KO stably expressing GFP-CSB, and (g) WT, XPC, CSA,
CSB, and UVSSA knockout cells. The asterisk in panel e indicates the heavy chain of the RNAPII
antibody.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. CSA interacts with the newly identified C-terminal CIM of CSB. (a) Outline of the
chromatin-tethering approach in U2OS 2-6-3 cells. (b) A schematic representation of CSB and its
deletion mutants. (c) Recruitment of CSA-GFP to the LacO array upon tethering of the indicated
mCherry-LacR fusion proteins. (d) Quantification of CSA-GFP and mCherry-LacR-CSB co-localization
at the LacO array. Values represent the mean ± SD of >50 cells collected in two independent
experiments. (e) Sequence alignment of CSB orthologues. See Supplementary Figures 3 and 4 for
additional mutants, and Supplementary Figure 5 for additional alignments.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. The CIM of CSB mediates the recruitment of CSA to damage-stalled RNAPIIo. (a) A
schematic representation of CSB and the CSB∆CIM mutant. (b) Western blot analysis of U2OS (FRT)
and CSB-KO complemented with either GFP-CSBWT or GFP-CSB∆CIM. (c) Co-IP of GFP-CSBWT and
GFP-CSB∆CIM on the combined soluble and chromatin fraction. (d) Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP in GFPCSBWT and GFP-CSB∆CIM cell lines. See also Supplementary Figure 7a for additional Co-IP data. (e)
Clonogenic Illudin S survival of WT and CSB-KO cell lines and the GFP-tagged CSB rescue cell lines.
Data represent mean ± SEM of two independent experiments. Note that the same survival data for
WT, CSB-KO and CSB-KO + GFP-CSB is also shown in Fig. 1d. (f) In vitro ubiquitylation of
recombinant Xenopus laevis (xl) and Homo sapiens (hs) CSB variants with recombinant xlCRL4CSA,
E1, E2, ubiquitin, and ATP. At indicated times, in vitro ubiquitination reactions were stopped and
blotted with anti-FLAG (top three panels) or anti-xlCSA (bottom panel) antibodies See also
Supplementary Fig 6. (g) Immobilized recombinant CSB variants were incubated with Xenopus laevis
egg extract (HSS), recovered, and blotted with anti-FLAG (top panel) or anti-xlCSA (bottom panel)
antibody.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. UVSSA is recruited to DNA damage-stalled RNAPIIo by CSA. (a) Western blot analysis
of UVSSA-KO, UVSSA/CSA-dKO, and UVSSA/CSB-dKO complemented with GFP-UVSSA. (b)
Clonogenic Illudin S survival of WT, UVSSA-KO, UVSSA/CSA-dKO, and UVSSA/CSB-dKO cell lines
complemented with GFP-UVSSA. Data represent mean ± SEM of two independent experiments. (c)
Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP on UVSSA-KO, UVSSA/CSA-dKO, and UVSSA/CSB-dKO complemented
with GFP-UVSSA. (d) Co-IP of GFP-UVSSA in UVSSA-KO, UVSSA/CSA-dKO, and UVSSA/CSBdKO cell lines. The asterisk in panel c indicates the heavy chain of the RNAPII antibody.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. CSA, CSB, and UVSSA are equally important for TFIIH recruitment. (a) Endogenous
RNAPII Co-IP in UVSSA-KO, UVSSA/CSA-dKO, and UVSSA/CSB-dKO complemented with GFPUVSSA. (b) Volcano plot depicting the statistical differences of the MS analysis on GFP-UVSSA pulldown in mock-treated and UV-irradiated samples. The enrichment (log2) is plotted on the x-axis and
the significance (t-test -log2 p-value) is plotted on the y-axis. All significantly UV-induced hits are
indicated in green. Several selected hits are shown in red (See also Supplementary Fig 7b, c and
Supplementary table 1-3 for additional MS data analysis). (c) Co-IP of GFP-UVSSA in UVSSA-KO
and UVSSA-dKO cells complemented with GFP-UVSSA. (d) Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP in WT, CSBKO, CSA-KO, UVSSA-KO and XPA-KO cells. (e) Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP in WT and UVSSA-KO
cells and CSA-KO, CSB-KO, and UVSSA-KO cells complemented with GFP-tagged versions of these
proteins. The asterisk in panels d and e indicates the heavy chain of the RNAPII antibody. (f) CPD
XR-seq repair signal 3 Kb upstream and 5 Kb downstream of the annotated TSS of 16.088 genes in
WT and UVSSA-KO cells. Signal is plotted separately for the transcribed (red) and non-transcribed
(black) strands. The data represent the average of two independent experiments with a bin size of 40
nt. See also Supplementary Figure 8a for additional XR-seq data.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6. UVSSA is the key protein that recruits TFIIH. (a) A schematic representation of UVSSA
WT and deletion mutants. The CSA-interacting region (CIR) and TFIIH-interacting region (TIR) are
indicated. (b) Recruitment of CSA-GFP and TFIIH (p89) to the LacO array upon tethering of the
indicated mCherry-LacR fusion proteins. (c) Quantification of CSA-GFP and endogenous TFIIH (p89)
co-localization at the LacO array. Values represent the mean ± SD of >50 cells collected in two
independent experiments. (d) Western blot analysis of U2OS (FRT) and UVSSA-KO cells
complemented with GFP-UVSSAWT, GFP-UVSSA∆CIR, and GFP-UVSSA∆TIR. (e) Co-IP of GFPUVSSAWT, GFP-UVSSA∆CIR, and GFP-UVSSA∆TIR. (f) Endogenous RNAPII Co-IP in GFP-UVSSAWT,
GFP-UVSSA∆CIR, and GFP-UVSSA∆TIR cell lines. See also Supplementary Figure 8b, c for additional
Co-IP data. (g) Clonogenic Illudin S survival of WT and UVSSA-KO cell lines and the GFP-tagged
UVSSA rescue cell lines. Data represent mean ± SEM of two independent experiments. (h) Model of
how the assembly of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA targets the TFIIH complex to DNA damage-stalled
RNAPIIo.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 1. Testing of antibodies in IP and whole cell lysates. (a) Various
examples of endogenous RNAPII Co-IP experiments in WT cells. (b) Testing of various UVSSA
antibodies in KPS3-hTERT, KPS3-hTERT + UVSSA, U2OS (FRT) WT, and U2OS (FRT) UVSSA-KO
cells.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 2. Sequence of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA-KO cells. (a) A schematic
representation of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA including the location of the guide RNAs used for the
generation of the CRISPR/Cas9-mediated KO. (b) Sequences of CSB, CSA, and UVSSA knockouts.
(c) Western blot analysis of XPC and XPA knockouts.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 3. CSA interacts with the C-terminal region of CSB. (a) A schematic
representation of CSB and its deletion mutants. (b) Recruitment of CSA-GFP to the LacO array upon
tethering of the indicated mCherry-LacR fusion proteins. (c) Quantification of CSA-GFP and mCherryLacR-CSB co-localization at the LacO array. Values represent the mean ± SD of >50 cells collected in
two independent experiments.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 4. CSA interacts with amino acids 1385-1399 of CSB. (a) A schematic
representation of CSB and its deletion mutants. (b) Recruitment of CSA-GFP to the LacO array upon
tethering of the indicated mCherry-LacR fusion proteins. (c) Quantification of CSA-GFP and mCherryLacR-CSB co-localization at the LacO array. Values represent the mean ± SD of >50 cells collected in
two independent experiments.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 5. Alignment of CSB and CSB orthologues. (a) Alignment of the C-terminal
CIM of CSB orthologues from a variety of different species. Sequences were aligned with ClustalW
(b) A phylogenetic tree was constructed based on the alignment of CSB orthologues using ClustalW.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 6. Purified CRL4CSA and CSB protein. Coomassie gels of recombinant
xlCRL4CSA complex and xlCSB or hsCSB variants. DDB1, CUL4A, and all CSB proteins contained an
N-terminal FLAG-tag, and CSA contained a C-terminal Strep-tag II.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 7. Mass spectrometry after GFP-UVSSA pull-down. (a) Endogenous
RNAPII Co-IP in CSB-KO + GFP-CSBWT and CSB-KO + GFP-CSB∆CIM (b-c) Volcano plots depicting
mass spectrometry analysis comparing (b) GFP-UVSSA pull-down versus block-beads control in
mock-treated cells samples, and (c) GFP-UVSSA pull-down in mock-treated versus UV-irradiated (20
J/m2) cells samples. The enrichment (log2) is plotted on the x-axis and the significance (-log2 p-value)
is plotted on the y-axis. The -log2 p-value threshold was set to 1.3 (p<0.05). The enrichment threshold
was set to 1 in GFP-UVSSA versus blocked beads and 0.5 in UV-treated GFP-UVSSA vs GFPUVSSA. All significantly significant hits are shown in green. Several selected hits are shown in red.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/707216; this version posted July 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 8. XR-seq in TCR-KO cells, and immunoprecipitation in UVSSA mutants.
(a) Average CPD XR-seq repair signal 3 Kb upstream and 5 Kb downstream of the annotated TSS of
16.088 genes in two independent biological replicates of experiments in WT and UVSSA-KO cells,
and in a single replicate of CSA-KO cells. Signal is plotted separately for the transcribed (red) and
non-transcribed (black) strands. The bin size of 40 nt. (b-c) Co-IP of GFP-UVSSAWT, GFPUVSSA∆CIR, and GFP-UVSSA∆TIR.

