bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Geometric cues stabilise long-axis polarisation of PAR
protein patterns in C. elegans
Raphaela Geßele1 , Jacob Halatek1 , Laeschkir Würthner1 & Erwin Frey1?

1

Arnold Sommerfeld Center for Theoretical Physics and Center for NanoScience,

Department of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,
Theresienstraße 37, 80333 München, Germany.

?

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to E.F.: frey@lmu.de.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract In the Caenorhabditis elegans zygote, PAR protein patterns, driven by mutual anatagonism, determine the anterior-posterior axis and facilitate the redistribution of proteins for
the first cell division. Yet, the factors that determine the selection of the polarity axis remain
unclear. We present a reaction-diffusion model in realistic cell geometry, based on biomolecular reactions and accounting for the coupling between membrane and cytosolic dynamics.
We find that the kinetics of the phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle of PARs and the
diffusive protein fluxes from the cytosol towards the membrane are crucial for the robust selection of the anterior-posterior axis for polarisation. The local ratio of membrane surface to
cytosolic volume is the main geometric cue that initiates pattern formation, while the choice
of the long-axis for polarisation is largely determined by the length of the aPAR-pPAR interface, and mediated by processes that minimise the diffusive fluxes of PAR proteins between
cytosol and membrane.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction

Cell polarisation is a crucial process in development1 . Well studied examples include localisation
of bud sites in Saccharomyces cerevisiae2 , apico-basal asymmetry in mammalian epithelial cells3 ,
and the asymmetric placement of the first cell division in the Caenorhabditis elegans zygote4 . A
key question in such systems is how the correct polarity axis is established and robustly maintained.

In C. elegans, the anterior-posterior axis of the embryo is determined in the fertilised egg by
a polarised distribution of PAR (partitioning defective) proteins4–6 . Immediately before the establishment of polarisation begins, the future anterior PARs (aPARs) cover the cell cortex uniformly,
while posterior PARs (pPARs) are cytoplasmic7 . After fertilisation, the sperm-donated centrosome
induces contraction of the actomyosin network, which leads to cortical flows that displace cortical
aPARs anteriorly, allowing cytoplasmic pPARs to bind in the posterior zone8–11 ; see Fig. 1A. Once
these two PAR domains have formed (during the ‘establishment phase’) and have thereby established the anterior-posterior axis, they persist for several minutes through the ‘maintenance’ phase
until cell division5, 7 .

Several independent in vivo experiments on C. elegans have demonstrated that maintenance
of PAR protein polarity is independent of an intact actomyosin network7, 11–15 . Rather, it appears
that the entry of the sperm and the following contractions of the cortical actomyosin serve as
a temporal trigger for the rapid establishment of the PAR protein pattern9, 13, 16 . However, experimental observations also suggest that while the rapid establishment and perfect position of
anterior-posterior PAR domains are the result of an interplay between mechanical, hydrodynamical
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and biochemical mechanisms, polarisation is nevertheless robustly established (albeit with some
delay) when various mechanical and hydrodynamical mechanisms are eliminated.10, 11, 17–19 . To
disentangle and understand these distinct mechanisms one needs to investigate the mechanism of
self-organised polarisation by the biochemical PAR protein network. Based on the fact that aPAR
and pPAR proteins mutually drive each other off the membrane by phosphorylation20 , and that
this antagonism promotes formation of distinct domains on the membrane10, 21, 22 , previous studies
have outlined how self-organisation of PAR proteins maintain polarisation until cell division?, 15, 16 .
These studies showed that basic features of PAR protein polarisation can be explained by minimal
reaction-diffusion models. However, as these models used a simplified one-dimensional geometry
and assumed that cytosolic proteins are homogeneously distributed, the effect of cell geometry was
disregarded and the distinction between long and short axis was lost. Thus, how the long axis is
selected for polarisation and subsequently maintained, and in a broader context, which features of
a reaction-diffusion system are responsible for axis selection remain open questions.

To answer these questions we draw on previous studies of other intracellular pattern-forming
protein systems which revealed that even the typically rather fast cytosolic diffusion does not eliminate protein gradients in the cytosol23–26 . As a consequence, protein patterns are generically sensitive to cell geometry through coupling between processes in the cytosol and on the membrane.
In particular, it was predicted23, 24 that delayed reattachment to the cell membrane (e.g., due to
cytosolic nucleotide exchange) is key to geometry sensing. Indeed, recent experimental studies
support the idea that axis selection depends on the interplay between reaction kinetics and cellular
geometry25 .
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

These results suggest that the protein dynamics in the cytoplasm of the C. elegans embryo
may also influence the selection of the long over the short axis during polarity maintenance. In
order to investigate axis alignment, we developed a reaction-diffusion model of the PAR protein dynamics . As in previous studies9, 15, 27 , a central element in our model is mutual displacement of membrane-bound aPARs and pPARs by phosphorylation. However, in contrast to earlier models9, 28 , we do not use effective nonlinearities but strictly biomolecular reactions based on
mass-action law kinetics, e.g. by explicitly modelling the formation of PAR protein complexes.
Importantly, we also account for the delay caused by the need for reactivation of detached PAR
proteins by cytosolic dephosphorylation, thus introducing the generic feature of a biochemical
activation-deactivation cycle.

Our extended reaction-diffusion model in realistic cell geometry reveals that the dynamics of
the phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle of PAR proteins is crucial for long-axis polarisation.
Without this additional feature, the biochemical network of PAR proteins would not lead to robust
polarisation along the long axis but instead exhibit a strong tendency to first polarise along the short
axis, and polarisation would not re-align within a time that corresponds to a typical time before
cell division. Furthermore, the extended model enables us to characterise the roles of mutual
antagonism (phosphorylation) and overall protein numbers in robust long-axis polarisation: while
the phosphorylation rates determine how distinctively one polarisation axis is selected over the
other, relative protein numbers primarily affect the robustness of pattern formation as a whole.

Most importantly, our analysis indicates that these findings can be generalised beyond the

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

specific model for the PAR system: axis selection is based on the generic dependence of intracellular pattern-forming processes on the local ratio of membrane surface to cytosolic volume and
on the cell geometry via the length of the interface between the two different protein domains.
Broadly speaking, the membrane-to-bulk ratio determines the likelihood that a given protein will
reattach to the membrane quickly after detachment into the cytosol and the interface length affects
both the establishment and maintenance of long-axis polarisation.

Results

Model The aPAR set of proteins comprises PAR-3, PAR-6, and the atypical protein kinase PKC-3.
Only complexes containing PKC-3 can phosphorylate pPARs, thereby disabling their membrane-binding capacity21, 29 . How trimeric complexes consisting of PAR-3, PAR-6 and PKC-3 actually
form is not fully understood. The evidence so far suggests that PAR-6 acts as a linker between
PKC-3 and PAR-3, which can itself bind directly to the membrane30–33 . In the absence of PAR-6,
PKC-3 freely diffuses in the cytosol34, 35 . In the reaction network upon which our mathematical
model is based, we simplify the formation of trimeric complexes to the formation of a complex
consisting of two effective species of aPARs: A1 and A2 (Fig. 1C). The first species, A1 , models
the membrane binding function of PAR-3, thus we also refer to it as a scaffold protein. The second
species, A2 , corresponds to a complex of PAR-6 and PKC-3. It is assumed to be recruited by
scaffold proteins A1 that are already bound to the membrane, thereby forming hetero-dimers A12
on the membrane . These complexes can then phosphorylate membrane-bound pPARs, which
initiates their release into the cytosol in a phosphorylated (inactive) state.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

As with aPARs, there are different pPAR species, PAR-1 and PAR-2. While it is known
that PAR-2 binds directly to the membrane, and PAR-1 phosphorylates PAR-3, it remains unclear whether PAR-2 also helps to maintain anterior-posterior polarity by excluding aPAR complexes from the membrane7, 20 . However, PAR-2 is required for posterior binding of PAR-136 and
PAR-2 exclusion from the membrane by PKC-3 is essential for proper restriction of pPARs to the
posterior21 . In view of the remaining uncertainties we refrain from distinguishing between different species and effectively treat the pPARs as a single species P (Fig. 1C). P phosphorylates
membrane-bound A1 and A12 , which triggers their subsequent detachment as a phosphorylated
(inactive) species into the cytosol.

Our model also accounts for protein dephosphorylation reactions in the cytosol. This creates
deactivation-reactivation cycles, as proteins that were phosphorylated (deactivated) on the membrane are thereby reactivated for membrane binding (Fig. 1B, C). For simplicity, the reactivation
(dephosphorylation) rate λ is assumed to be identical for cytosolic pPARs (P ) and aPARs (only
A1 ). The ensuing reaction-diffusion equations are given in the Method section Equations (7-18).

We approximate the natural shape of a C. elegans embryo by a prolate spheroid with semi-axis lengths a = 27µm and b = 15µm (see Fig. 1 D) 9 . Here, a is the distance from centre to pole
through a focus along the symmetry axis, also called the semi-major axis, while b is the equatorial
radius of the spheroid, which is called the semi-minor axis. The boundary and interior of the ellipse
represent the cell membrane and cytosolic volume, respectively.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Dephosphorylation plays a key role for axis determination For mutually antagonistic protein
interactions , protein domains are separated by an interface at which mutually induced membrane
detachment dominates9, 15, 16 . For its maintenance proteins that have detached from the membrane
must be replaced, otherwise the antagonistic interaction between the proteins would deplete either
aPARs or pPARs from the membrane. As the protein interactions are mass-conserving, maintenance requires that detached proteins quickly rebind, unless the cytosolic reservoir of proteins is
large enough for them to be replenished directly. This suggests that an interface can best be maintained locally in those membrane regions where rebinding to the membrane after detachment is
most likely.

The likelihood of rebinding depends on the availability of cytosolic proteins for binding,
which depends on the interplay between the local cell geometry and the time required for reactivation of detached proteins by dephosphorylation (Fig. 2). The ratio of available membrane surface
to cytosolic volume is highest at cell poles and lowest at mid-cell. How this local cell geometry affects protein rebinding depends on the dephosphorylation time: a longer reactivation time implies
that a protein that detached in a phosphorylated state from the membrane will on average diffuse
farther away from the membrane before it can be reactivated and reattaches. The corresponding
reactivation length is estimated as
` :=

q

Dcyt /λ .

(1)

To see how this diffusion length affects protein dynamics, consider a protein with a short
inactive (phosphorylated) phase, such that ` is significantly smaller than the cell length L = 2a

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Fig. 2A). Then, proteins are likely to be dephosphorylated fast and can therefore rebind very soon
after phosphorylation-induced detachment. Since the local ratio of membrane surface to cytosolic
volume at the cell poles is larger than at mid-cell, these proteins are more likely to reencounter the
membrane in the polar zone which translates into higher polar reattachment (after reactivation),
i.e. proteins remain caged at the cell poles (Fig. 2A). Conversely, proteins that detached from the
membrane at mid-cell have more cytosolic volume available than those that detached at the poles
and, thus, are less likely to re-encounter the membrane and rebind there (Fig. 2A). This heuristic
picture suggests that for `  L domain interfaces preferentially form at the cell poles and hence
cell polarity will be established along the short-axis. If dephosphorylation requires more time, `
increases and the effect of local membrane curvature is attenuated (Fig. 2B). Ultimately, when
` > L, proteins can be considered as uniformly distributed throughout the cytosol for the next
attachment event (Fig. 2D). Therefore, reactivated proteins are more likely to attach at mid-cell,
where the accumulated density along the long-axis (or, equivalently, the ratio of cytosolic volume
to membrane area) is highest (Fig. 2C). This implies that an interface between different protein
domains will establish itself at mid-cell and cells will become polarised along the long-axis for
large enough reactivation length `.

In summary, if cell polarisation is induced by antagonistic protein interaction , we expect
long-axis polarisation to be favoured only if the delay resulting from the inactive phase is sufficiently long. Moreover, our analysis suggests that relative protein numbers affect axis selection, as
the global availability of an abundant protein species attenuates the effect of cell geometry associated with the activation-deactivation cycle.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In the heuristic arguments outlined above, we tacitly considered a single position along the
interface between the PAR domains. In general, however, the length of the interface may also play
an important role in determining the orientation of the axis ultimately selected, as one expects energetic costs for interface establishment and maintenance to scale with its length. In the following
we will analyse the system’s dynamics in a two-dimensional as well as in a three-dimensional cell
geometry; an analysis of a simplified rectangular geometry would actually be misleading (Supplementary Note 3). Furthermore, the analysis in two and three dimensions enables us to disentangle
the effects due to the membrane-to-bulk ratio and interface length in polarisation establishment and
maintenance. Note that in a two-dimensional ellipse the interface between the domains reduces to
a point, such that all geometric effects can be solely attributed to the membrane-to-bulk ratio.

Growth rates of long versus short-axis polarisation To put the above heuristic reasoning concerning the role of membrane-to-bulk ratio on a firm basis , we first performed a mathematical
analysis in two-dimensional elliptical geometry , building on previous investigations of intracellular pattern formation 23, 24 .

Importantly, in the bounded geometry of a cell, broken detailed balance due to the dephosphorylation-phosphorylation cycle implies that a uniform well-mixed state can no longer be a
steady state of the system24 . Instead, all steady states show cytosolic gradients with a density
profile that is spatially non-uniform but unpolarised24 .

As the reactive dynamics in the PAR

system is bistable, there are two such unpolarised states, one with aPAR and the other with pPAR
being the more abundant membrane species. In the zygote, aPARs predominate on the membrane,

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and we refer to this aPAR-dominant state as the unpolarised state.

To perform a linear stability analysis with respect to this unpolarised state, we use Fourier
modes specific for elliptical geometry23 . These modes are classified as even and odd by their
symmetry with respect to reflections through a plane along the long axis, and correspond to patterns aligned along the long and short axes, respectively (Fig. 3A). If the real parts of the growth
rates σ of all modes are negative, small spatial perturbations of the unpolarised state will decay
and it will remain stable. In contrast, a positive real part of any growth rate (σ > 0) indicates that
the unpolarised state is unstable , and initially a pattern will emerge corresponding to the mode
with the highest growth rate (Fig. 3B). Hence, linear stability analysis can identify the parameter
regime where patterns of a certain symmetry (short- vs. long-axis) form spontaneously. On very
general grounds

26, 38

, we expect that bifurcations in mass-conserving reaction-diffusion systems

are subcritical and hence these pattern attractors persist over some range outside the linear unstable parameter regime (see also details on FEM simulations in the Method section), where patterns
do not form spontaneously but can be triggered by a finite perturbation – such as the fertilisation
event.

For a typical cell size and cytosolic diffusion constants in the range of Dcyt = 5 − 50 µm2 s−1 ,
linear stability analysis shows that second- and higher-order modes are negligible compared to the
first even and odd modes, σe and σo . In the parameter regime under consideration, those two growth
rates exhibit similar magnitude and at least one of them is positive. To quantify the competition
between the first even and odd modes (long- vs. short-axis), we define the relative difference in

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

their growth rates,

δσ := (σe − σo )/

p

σe2 + σo2 ;

(2)

for an illustration see Fig. 3B.

Cytosolic reactivation length is crucial for axis selection We computed δσ as a function of λ
and Dcyt . As shown in Fig. 3C, the even mode dominates (δσ > 0) for large cytosolic diffusion
constant and low reactivation rates (favouring long-axis polarisation), otherwise the odd mode
dominates. This is consistent with the above heuristic reasoning suggesting that reactivation must
be slow or cytosolic diffusion must be fast for the establishment of long-axis polarity. While
linear stability analysis can elucidate the selection of the polarisation axis during the onset of
pattern formation, it can not predict the final pattern as it neglects nonlinear effects in the diffusionreaction equation. To determine the final stable polarisation axis we performed finite-element
(FEM) simulations; see alslo details on FEM simulations in the Method Section. These simulations
show that there is a threshold value for the reactivation length `? = 11.4 µm above/below which
cells stably polarise along the long/short-axis (Fig. 3C). We conclude that in a two-dimensional
cell geometry the reactivation length `, which determines the spatial distribution of active proteins,
is the decisive parameter that determines both initial axis selection and its long-term maintenance.
How in full three-dimensional cell geometry this effect of the membrane-to-bulk ratio interacts
with the role of the interface length will be discussed below.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Role of phosphorylation rates Whether there is a spatial separation between aPAR and pPAR domains, is known to depend on the relative magnitude of the phosphorylation rates kAp and kPa 9, 16 :
an interface between different domains exists and can be maintained only if these antagonistic
phosphorylation processes are balanced. To determine the necessary conditions for this balance,
we analysed the stability of the unpolarised state using linear stability analysis varying both phosphorylation rates over one order of magnitude. We fixed Dcyt = 30 µm2 s−1 and chose two representative reactivation rates, λ = 0.3 s−1 and λ = 0.05 s−1 , corresponding to reactivation lengths,
` = 10 µm and ` = 24.5 µm, respectively.

Our analysis in elliptical cell geometry shows that spontaneous polarisation starting from
the unpolarised state arises only within a limited range of kPa /kAp values (cones in Fig. 4), in
accordance with previous studies using a one-dimensional model9, 28 . Strikingly, however, we find
that the selection of the polarisation axis does not depend on the mutual antagonism but primarily
on the activation-deactivation cycle. The ratio of the phosphorylation rates mainly determines
the initial preference for a polarisation axis starting from an unpolarised state (Fig. 4A and B).
Specifically, we find that for λ = 0.3 s−1 , the first even mode grows more slowly than the first odd
mode (δσ < 0), favouring short-axis polarisation. In contrast, for slower reactivation λ = 0.05 s−1 ,
the first even mode grows faster than the first odd mode (δσ > 0). These respective preferences are
most pronounced for large kPa /kAp . For the mid to low range of kPa /kAp , one finds δσ ≈ 0, i.e. linear
stability analysis does not predict a clear preference for either long- or short-axis polarisation.
FEM simulations (for details on the FEM simulations see Method Section) show, however, that
– irrespective of the ratio kPa /kAp – long- and short-axis polarisation in the final steady state is
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

obtained for ` = 10 µm and ` = 24.5 µm, respectively; see Supplementary Movies M2d 1 – M2d 3
and Supplementary Tables 2, 3. These simulations confirm that the reactivation length ` is the
deciding factor for axis selection in elliptical geometry.

The FEM simulations further show that outside of the parameter regime of linear instability
there exist stable polarised states, showing that the system is excitable, i.e. that patterns can be
triggered by a large enough finite perturbation ; see Supplementary Notes 1. This parameter regime
is actually quite broad (see also Supplementary Fig. 1). As a generic example for an external
stimulus, we have investigated how the PAR system reacts to initial concentration gradients on the
membrane that were aligned along the final stable polarisation axes. We find that large enough
gradients can indeed stimulate the formation of cell polarisation. It would be interesting to specify
external cues more in detail experimentally and study how they affect pattern formation. In another
work we recently showed that Turing instabilities and excitability (i.e. the ability to establish a
pattern by applying a larger perturbation to the stable uniform steady state) are mechanistically
linked in mass-conserving systems such as the PAR system

38

. Hence, even in systems where

polarity is established by an external cue, identifying a Turing instability also locates regions where
external stimulation leads to stable pattern formation.

The dependence of initial growth rates on the ratio of phosphorylation rates can be attributed
to the fact that, in the unpolarised (aPAR-dominant state), the cytosolic concentration of aPARs
increases with the rate at which aPARs are phosphorylated by pPARs, i.e. with a reduction in
kPa /kAp (Fig. 4C, D). If a protein species is abundant in the cytosol, recycling of recently detached

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proteins can be compensated for by a protein of the same type in the cytosolic reservoir attaching
to the membrane. Hence, effects due to different membrane-to-bulk ratios in the initial polarisation
phase are dominant if the cytosolic pool of proteins undergoing an activation-deactivation cycle is
low, explaining why δσ depends on geometry for large values of kPa /kAp (Fig. 4C, D).

Axis selection depends on relative protein densities After learning that the abundance of cytosolic proteins determines initial axis selection, we asked how changing the relative total protein
densities affects cell polarisation. For all investigations up to this point the average densities were
fixed to the order of magnitude determined experimentally by Gross et al.? (see Table 1 and see
Supplementary Note 2). A linear stability analysis revealed that density variations alter several
features: the range of ratios kPa /kAp for which an interface between different PAR domains can
be stably maintained, and the threshold value of reactivation length `? that distinguishes between
short- and long-axis polarisation. The effects were most prominent when the ratio of pPAR and
aPAR proteins that phosphorylate each other ([P ]/[A2 ]), and the ratio of aPAR proteins ([A1 ]/[A2 ])
was varied.

As shown in Fig. 5, increasing the ratio of the antagonistic proteins ([P ]/[A2 ]) mainly shifts
the regime of spontaneous cell polarisation up on the kPa /kAp axis. This upward shift is easily
explained, as the effective mutual phosphorylation rates are given by kAp [P ] and kP a [A12 ], respectively – where [A12 ] is mainly limited by the availability of [A2 ]. Therefore, when the concentration
of pPAR proteins ([P ]) is increased relative to [A2 ], the per capita rate kP a has to be increased relative to kAp as well, in order to retain the balance between the mutual phosphorylation processes.

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Changing the ratio between the different types of aPAR proteins has two effects. First, spontaneous polarisation is possible for a broader range of kPa /kAp . Increasing the concentration of the
scaffold protein [A1 ] relative to [A2 ], which phosphorylates pPARs, decreases the lower bound of
kPa /kAp that allows for polarisation. This is a consequence of the increased reservoir size of A1
which implies a higher rate of attachment of cytosolic A1 to the membrane and hence a fast local
redimerisation of A2 (which lacks an inactive phase) right after the detachment of a hetero-dimer
A12 . This newly formed hetero-dimer A12 is then competent to phosphorylate pPARs. Thus it is
plausible that even for low kPa /kAp one can achieve a balance of mutual antagonism, extending
the lower bound of the polarisation regime. Second, changing the ratio [A1 ]/[A2 ] also has a major
effect on the threshold value of the reactivation length `? . We find that `? increases with increasing
concentration of the scaffold protein [A1 ] (Fig. 5). Again, this can be understood as a reservoir
effect: globally abundant A1 promotes immediate re-dimerisation of A2 with any available A1 .
Axis selection is then affected by the polar recycling of A2 .

Taken together, both of these findings emphasise the importance of the activation-deactivation
cycle. A cell polarises more robustly when amounts of scaffold proteins are higher. However, at the
same time, the cytosolic reactivation length has to increase significantly in order to also robustly
maintain long-axis polarisation.

Role of interface length in three-dimensional cell geometry With the previous analysis in twodimensional cell geometry we have built up a basic understanding of the role of the membrane-tobulk ratio for the selection of the polarisation axis. In a nutshell, we concluded that sufficiently fast

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

diffusion and a sufficiently long inactive phase of the antagonistic proteins ensure that long-axis
polarisation is established in a self-organised manner from homogeneous initial membrane concentrations. As the main parameter serving as a proxy for this effect we identified the reactivation
length `. Is this result directly transferable to a full three-dimensional cell geometry?

Since sensing of the local membrane-to-bulk ratio does not depend significantly on spatial
dimension (see also Supplementary Note 4), one would at first sight expect the same conclusions
to hold. However, there is a fundamental difference between a three- and a two-dimensional
cell geometry. While for an ellipse the interface is always point-like , for a prolate spheroid the
interface is longer for short-axis polarisation than for long-axis polarisation; in our case, we have
135 µm and 94 µm, respectively (Fig. 1 D). This inherent difference between a two- and a three-dimensional cell geometry could significantly affect the protein dynamics on the membrane and
in the cytosol. In the absence of an interface the only geometric effect is the membrane-to-bulk
ratio. Therefore, as in the two-dimensional case, we expect this ratio to be the main factor that
determines the initial formation of the protein domains and the interface between them. However,
as soon as an interface has formed, its length is likely to affect the stability of the polarisation
axis. The maintenance of the interface between protein domains is presumably energetically costly
(protein fluxes sustaining antagonistic reactions, reactivation and rebinding have to be maintained).
Therefore, since the interface is longer for short-axis than for long-axis polarisation, it is possible
that even an initially favoured alignment of polarisation with the short-axis can become unstable.

To assess the protein dynamics of the system in full cell geometry we performed extensive

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FEM simulations, restricting ourselves to parameter regimes that we identified as most relevant
from the two-dimensional geometry (see Table 4 and compare with Table 1). Starting from a
weakly perturbed unpolarised state we observe the following time evolution (Fig. 6 A,B); see the
Method section on FEM simulations for 3d system and see our Supplementary Movies 4 and 5
(M3d 1.mp4 and M3d 2.mp4). During an initial time period Tinitial a protein pattern forms that
is either aligned along the short or long cell axis or somewhere in between. While long-axis
polarisation is stable, any other polarisation is only metastable and after some persistence time
Tpers transitions into stable long-axis polarisation during Ttrans ; as discussed in Supplementary Note
5 and Supplementary Figures 4-6 there are (unphysiological) cell geometries where short-axis
polarisation is stable .

We observe that, as for the two-dimensional case, initial long-axis polarisation is favoured
for large cytosolic diffusion constants Dcyt and low reactivation rates λ, while initial short-axis
polarisation is favoured for the diametrically opposed case; compare Fig. 6 D with Fig. 3 D. This
shows that the local membrane-to-bulk ratio is indeed the main factor that determines initial axis
selection . Moreover, the persistence time Tpers (Fig. 6 C) and the transition time Ttrans (Fig. 6 C,D)
both depend strongly on Dcyt but only weakly on λ. In the regime with a clear preference for
short-axis polarisation (below the dashed line in Fig. 6 D), Ttrans becomes as large as several hours;
for reference see Fig. 6 D with `? ≈ 7µm; for further discussion and results on time scales see also
Supplementary Note 8 and Supplementary Figure 8.

Finally, we wanted to investigate the main factors that determine the stability of long- versus

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

short-axis polarisation. As the essential novel feature of a three-dimensional cell geometry is the
length of the interface between the PAR domains, we speculated that an additional mechanism
relevant for axis polarisation is the minimisation of the interface length. To test this hypothesis, we
performed FEM simulations in different prolate and oblate geometries ; see Supplementary Notes 5
and Supplementary Figures 4 to 6 , and Supplementary Movies 6 to 8 (M3d 3 to M3d 5) . We find
that (for a given set of model parameters) the local diffusive protein fluxes from the cytosol to the
membrane at the aPAR-pPAR interface are the same for short- and long-axis polarisation. Hence,
the corresponding total fluxes scale with the length of the interface (see also Supplementary Note
6). This suggests that the mechanism responsible for long-axis stability is minimisation of protein
fluxes. As a consequence, the transition times Ttrans from short- to long-axis polarisation should
also decrease with larger cytosolic protein fluxes as the maintenance of a larger interfaces becomes
more costly. Indeed, FEM simulations show that changing the cytosolic diffusion constant leads to
an increase in the associated cytosolic fluxes (see Supplementary Note 7 and Supplementary Figs. 7
and 8), and concomitantly to a significant decrease in the transition times Ttrans (Fig. 6 C,D). Taken
together, this shows that it is the interplay between membrane-to-bulk ratio and interface length
minimisation due to flux (energy) minimisation that drives the selection of the polarisation axis
and determines stability and robustness of this selection process.

Discussion

Here, we have addressed two linked questions concerning cell polarity in C. elegans: Under what
conditions do cells polarise, and what determines the polarisation axis?

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Polarisation in C. elegans is controlled by several mechanisms and their interplay: an initial
polarisation cue of the centrosome, contraction of the actomyosin network and the PAR reactiondiffusion system which leads to polarisation in a self-organised manner but also interacts with the
centrosome as well as with the actomyosin network. Recent research has further revealed some
redundant pathways for the reaction-diffusion system depending on other proteins such as CHIN1, LGL-1 and Cdc42

11, 17, 39, 40

. In view of this complexity, it is constructive to disentangle all

individual building blocks, mechanical as well as kinetic, and investigate each separately in order
to properly identify the underlying mechanisms which (i) leads to polarisation and (ii) aligns it
with the long axis. With our work we could now shed light on polarisation and its alignment by
the PAR reaction-diffusion system in 2d and in 3d. We expect the insights gained to be essential
elements for a future three-dimensional model which combines the reaction-diffusion system with
mechanical effects to quantitatively understand pattern formation in the C. elegans embryo.

Previous experiments supported by mathematical models in simplified cell geometry have
indicated that balance between mutual phosphorylation of aPAR and pPAR proteins is a key mechanism responsible for cell polarisation

9, 15, 16, 41

. Our theoretical results in realistic cell geometry

support this finding. In addition, we have shown that robustness of cell polarity to variations in
the phosphorylation rates increases if the scaffold protein PAR-3 is more abundant than PKC-3,
which phosphorylates pPARs. Hence, low scaffold abundance is incompatible with robust biological function. This agrees with experimental findings that the scaffold function of PAR-3 is at
least partially supported by other proteins (e.g. Cdc-42

33

). Our results suggest that it would be

worthwhile to experimentally search for other scaffold proteins and test their functional roles in
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

axis selection.

Most importantly, our theoretical analysis in realistic cell geometry reveals that the key processes for axis selection are cytosolic, specifically the cytosolic diffusion and an inactive (phosphorylated) phase of PAR-3 and PAR-2 after detachment from the membrane. The reactivation
time (λ−1 ) implies a cytosolic reactivation length ` =

p
Dcyt /λ which defines a cytosolic zone of

inactive proteins close to the membrane. Proteins with a short reactivation length remain partially
caged at the cell poles after membrane detachment, while those with a large reactivation length
are uncaged and thereby become uniformly distributed in the cytosol before rebinding. Similarly,
proteins lacking a delay, like the PAR-6 PKC-3 complex, are available for rebinding immediately
after detachment from the membrane and are thus strongly caged to the cell poles.

Our theoretical analysis in a two-dimensional elliptical geometry shows that only for a sufficiently large cytosolic reactivation length ` does the long axis become the preferred polarisation
axis, at onset as well as for the steady state. For the onset of polarisation, starting from a spatially
homogeneous protein distribution, this result is fully transferable to a three-dimensional prolate
spheroid. However, in such a realistic cell geometry, the length of the aPAR-pPAR interface also
becomes important for the stability of the polarisation axis. Our simulation results suggest an (approximate) extremal principle: The dynamics tries to minimise the interface length such that for
physiologically relevant geometries the long axis is always stable. Initial metastable short-axis
polarisation is observed if the reactivation length ` is small (fast reactivation) such that proteins
exhibit caging at the polar zones. In that regime, the transition times from short-axis to long-axis

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

polarisation can be of the order of several hours. In contrast, if `/L ' 0.3 this time can be as short
as 10min. This implies that without guiding cues the reaction-diffusion system requires a sufficiently slow phosphorylation-dephosphorylation cycle and a sufficiently large diffusion constant
for fast and robust long-axis polarisation.

Furthermore, how slow reactivation and how fast cytosolic diffusion need to be in order to
efficiently and robustly establish and maintain long-axis polarisation depends on the ratio of PAR3 proteins to the PAR-6 PKC-3 complex: a larger cytosolic pool of PAR-3 attenuates the effect of
selecting the interface at midplane and at the same time strengthens the tendency of PKC-3 to put
the interface at the poles. Hence we predict that increasing the number of PAR-3 should destabilise
long-axis polarisation in favour of short-axis polarisation.

On a broader perspective, these results show that selection of a characteristic wavelength
for a pattern and selection of a polarity axis are distinct phenomena and are, in general, mediated
by different underlying mechanisms. We expect the following findings to be generic for massconserved intracellular protein systems: local membrane-to-bulk ratio and the length of interfaces
between different protein domains act as geometric cues for protein pattern formation, and an
activation-deactivation as well as cytosolic protein reservoirs alter the sensitivity to cell geometry.
Identifying the biochemical steps that are most relevant for axis selection in other intracellular
pattern forming systems is an important theme for future research.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods

Model First we introduce and discuss the mathematical formulation and analysis of the reaction-diffusion model for PAR protein dynamics. To account for a realistic cell geometry we use,
similar as in previous studies of the Min system23 , a two-dimensional elliptical geometry where
the boundary of the ellipse (∂Ω) represents the membrane and the interior (Ω) represents the cytosol. Attachment-detachment processes are encoded by nonlinear reactive boundary conditions as
introduced in Ref.23 . Protein interactions are assumed to be bimolecular reactions that follow mass-action law kinetics. In the following a species identifies a mass- conserved protein type, whereas
a component indicates the subgroup of proteins in a specific state, such as e.g. ‘phosphorlyated’
(‘inactive’) or ’membrane bound’.

Cytosolic dynamics Proteins in the cytosol are all assumed to diffuse with the same diffusion
constant, Dcyt = 30 µm2 s−1 (see also Table 1). In addition, we consider dephosphorylation (reactivation) of phosphorylated proteins with an activation (dephosphorylation) rate λ = 0.05/s (see
also Table 1). The cytosolic concentration of each protein type X is denoted by cX in its active
form and by cX ∗ in its inactive form (if applicable). The dynamics of the bulk components are thus
given by the following set of reaction-diffusion equations:

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

∂t cA1 = Dcyt ∇2 cA1 + λ cA∗1 ,

(3)

∂t cA∗1 = Dcyt ∇2 cA∗1 − λ cA∗1 ,

(4)

∂t cA2 = Dcyt ∇2 cA2 ,

(5)

∂t cP = Dcyt ∇2 cP + λ cP ∗ ,

(6)

∂t cP ∗ = Dcyt ∇2 cP ∗ − λ cP ∗ ,

(7)

where ∇2 is the Laplacian in the two-dimensional bulk.

Membrane dynamics On the membrane all species are assumed to diffuse with the respective
p
a
= 0.15 µm2 s−1 for aPARs and pPARs (see also
= 0.28 µm2 s−1 and Dmem
diffusion constant, Dmem

Table 1). With mX we denote the membrane-bound concentration of protein X. Then, the bimolecular reactions discussed above (see Fig. 1) translate into the following set of reaction-diffusion
equations:

a
∂t mA1 = Dmem
∇2|| mA1 + kaon cA1 − kaoff mA1 − kAp mP mA1 − kd mA1 cA2 ,
a
∂t mA12 = Dmem
∇2|| mA12 − kaoff mA12 + kd mA1 cA2 − kAp mP mA12 ,
p
∂t mP = Dmem
∇2|| mP + kpon cP − kpoff mP − kPa mA12 mP ,

(8)
(9)
(10)

where ∇2|| is the Laplacian operator on the boundary ∂Ω, i.e. on the membrane.
Reactive boundary conditions The membrane dynamics and cytosolic dynamics are coupled
through reactive boundary conditions. These describe the balance between diffusive fluxes (Dcyt ∇⊥
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

acting on cytosolic concentration) and attachment and detachment processes between membrane
and cytosol:


Dcyt ∇⊥ cA1 = kaoff mA1 + mA12 − kaon cA1

(11)


Dcyt ∇⊥ cA2 = kAp mP + kaoff mA12 − kd cA2 mA1

(12)

Dcyt ∇⊥ cP = kpoff mP − kpon cP

(13)

Dcyt ∇⊥ cA∗1 = kAp mP mA1 + mA12



(14)

Dcyt ∇⊥ cP ∗ = kPa mP mA12

(15)

where ∇⊥ is the Nabla operator perpendicular to the boundary, such that Dcyt ∇⊥ is the flux
operator between cytosol and membrane.

Mass conservation On the time scale of establishment and maintenance of polarisation in C.
elegans, PAR protein production and degradation are negligible. Hence, the total number NX of
each protein species X ∈ {A1 , A2 , P } is conserved. It can be obtained by integrating the average
densities over the whole space or by integrating the space-dependent cytoplasmic concentrations
and membrane concentrations over Ω and ∂Ω, respectively:
Z
NA 1 =

ρ A1 =
Ω

Ω

Z
ρ A2 =
Z
NP =

ρP =
Ω

Ω

and

R
∂Ω

cA1 + cA∗1 +

Z 



mA1 + mA12 ,

(16)

∂Ω

Z
cA 2 +

Ω

Ω

R



Z

NA 2 =

where

Z 

Z 

mA12 ,

(17)

∂Ω



Z

cP + cP ∗ +

Ω

mP ,

(18)

∂Ω

denote integrals over the interior and the boundary of the ellipsoid, respectively.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Linear Stability Analysis In the following we outline the main steps required to perform a linear
stability analysis (LSA) in elliptical geometry, emphasising the major differences relative to the
well known stability analysis in planar system geometries with no bulk-boundary coupling (see
e.g. a didactic derivation of linear stability analysis written by Cross and Greenside42 ). A detailed
derivation of LSA in elliptical geometry can be found in the Supplementary Information of Halatek
et al.23 .

Reaction-diffusion equations in elliptical geometry A LSA yields the initial dynamics of a system perturbed from any of its steady states. In the context of pattern formation in reaction-diffusion
systems this is typically a uniform steady state. The eigenfunctions of the linearised system (around
the steady state) serve as an orthogonal basis in which any perturbation can be expressed. In planar
systems these are simply Fourier modes, e.g. ∼ cos(qx) with spatial variable x and wavenumber q, where q is chosen such that boundary conditions are satisfied. The LSA then yields the
temporal eigenvalues σq (growth rates) for each wavenumber that express exponential growth or
decay, and possible oscillation (if the imaginary part =[σq ] 6= 0) of the respective eigenfunction
exp(σq t) cos(qx). Hence, the main objective is (i) to derive the eigenfunctions for the linearised
system in the corresponding geometry, and (ii) to calculate the associated growth rates (real parts
<[σq ]), where positive growth rates signify formation of patterns with wavelength ∼ 1/q.
For reaction-diffusion systems with bulk-boundary coupling in elliptical geometry there are three
major complications with this approach.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Due to bulk-boundary coupling, we are faced with two separate sets of reaction–diffusion equations. One set is defined in the bulk and accounts for the dynamics in the cytosol. Here reactions
are assumed to be linear (first order kinetics) and typically account for nucleotide exchange or (de)phosphorylation, Eq. (3) – Eq. (7). The second set is defined on the boundary and accounts for the
dynamics on the membrane (or cell cortex) including diffusion and reaction, Eq. (8) – Eq. (10).

The first complication arises as follows: Given orthogonal elliptical coordinates
x = d cosh µ cos ν ,

(19)

y = d sinh µ sin ν ,

(20)

with ‘radial’ variable µ > 0, ‘angular’ variable 0 ≤ ν < 2π, and elliptical eccentricity d =

√

a2 − b2

(with long half-axis a and short half-axis b), the diffusion operator in the bulk Dcyt ∇2 reads:
Dcyt

d2 (sinh2

1
(∂µ2 + ∂ν2 ) .
µ + sin2 ν)

(21)

On the boundary the diffusion operator Dmem ∇2|| acts along constant µ = µ0 = arctan(b/a) and
reads:

Dmem

1
cos ν sin ν
−
∂ν + 2
∂ν2
2
2
2
3/2
d (sinh µ0 + sin ν)
d (sinh µ0 + sin2 ν)


.

(22)

Due to these different diffusion operators the sets of reaction–diffusion equations in the bulk and
on the boundary do not share the same set of canonical eigenfunctions (i.e. eigenfunction obtained
from separation of variables). To overcome this problem the diffusion on the membrane can be
more conveniently expressed in arclength parametrisation s(ν):
Z
s(ν) =

ν

dν̃

q
b2 + (a2 − b2 ) sin2 ν̃ .

0

27

(23)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Then, the diffusion operator Dmem ∇2|| simplifies to Dmem ∂s2 , and the eigenfunctions are obtained as



2πn
(µ0 , s (ν)) = cos
s (ν) ,
S


2πn
mem
s (ν) ,
Ψo,n (µ0 , s (ν)) = sin
S

Ψmem
e,n

(24)
(25)

with the circumference of the ellipse S = 2π s. The goal is then to express these functions in terms
of the orthogonal eigenfunctions of the bulk problem — the Mathieu functions, here denoted by
Ψ(ν) and R(µ) — which are obtained as solutions of the Mathieu equations:


0 = ∂ν2 Ψ(ν) + α − 2q · cos(2ν) Ψ(ν)

(26)



0 = ∂µ2 R(µ) − α − 2q · cosh(2µ) R(µ) .

(27)

Here α is a constant of separation, and
q = − (σ + λ)

d2
4Dcyt

(28)

denotes a dimensionless parameter (not to be confused with a wavenumber!). For small q, analytical approximations of the Mathieu functions can be obtained

?, ?, 23

and matched with the eigen-

mem
functions Ψmem
e,n and Ψo,n at the boundary µ = µ0 .

The second complication is a consequence of the coupling between bulk and boundary processes
through the reactive boundary condition, see e.g. the model equations Eq. (11) – Eq. (15). This
coupling introduces an explicit dependence of the linearised system on the (derivative of the) radial
eigenfunctions R(µ) (see Ref.23 ), which, in turn, depends on the temporal eigenvalues σ in a nonalgebraic fashion. Usually, the final step in any LSA is the solution of a characteristic equation
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0 = f (σ), which is typically polynomial in σ. Due to the bulk-boundary coupling this is no longer
the case (irrespective of the geometry, see e.g. Ref.26 ; the characteristic equation is transcendental
and can only be solved numerically for each parameter combination 23 . Therefore, it is not possible
to derive a general stability criterion analogous to that known for planar systems without bulkboundary coupling 42 . We further note that the boundary condition introduces a coupling between
the angular eigenfunctions Ψ(ν), which, however, is small and can be neglected 23 .

The final complication arrises as consequence of the cytosolic reactivation cycle. This cycle
generically precludes the existence of a uniform steady state (including states uniform along the
boundary). The origin of this symmetry adaption process has been discussed in Ref.24 . Following
Ref.23 we approximate the near-uniform steady state with the eigenfunction that is constant along
the boundary, i.e. Ψmem
e,0 (µ0 , s (ν)). In this case nonlinearities (which are restricted to the boundary)
do not induce mode coupling, which would otherwise complicate the LSA.

Finite Element Simulations (FEM) Linear stability analysis can only predict the onset of pattern formation. In order to understand the full nonlinear protein dynamics and to determine the
steady states corresponding to given parameter sets we further performed finite element (FEM)
simulations on a triangular mesh using Comsol Multiphysics 5.1 - 5.4 (updating versions).

Setup for FEM simulations As time-dependent solver in Comsol Multiphysics we chose PARDISO with a multithreaded nested dissection. The time stepping was performed with a relative
tolerance of 10−6 between time steps and solved with a multistep method (BDF). In all simulations
we used triangular meshing (setting ‘finer’) with additional refinement at the boundary, i.e. along
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the membrane. As for the linear stability analysis, if not specified otherwise, the parameters for
the FEM simulations can be found in Table 1. For the standard parameter sets given in Table 1, we
ran the simulation up to 5 · 106 s. Since the system reached the steady state for most parameter sets
at the latest after 5 · 105 s, we limited simulation times for large parameter sweeps at 106 s.

The critical reactivation rate The 2d FEM sweep of λ versus Dcyt was initialised with a random
initial perturbation of the stationary state with high aPAR concentration on the membrane. The
initial perturbation was implemented by drawing a random number rand(x, y) from a normal distribution with zero mean and unit variance and multiplying the membrane concentration of aPARs
by (1 + 0.01 · rand(x, y)) and that of pPARs by (1 − 0.01 · rand(x, y)), i.e. we perturbed the initial condition randomly by 1%. The parameter sweep was performed varying λ from 5 · 10−3 s−1
to 0.3 s−1 in steps of 5 · 10−3 s−1 and varying Dcyt from 6 µm2 s−1 to 40 µm2 s−1 with a uniform
spacing of 2 µm2 s−1 .

We further performed two test simulations (sweeping λ and Dcyt ) which were initialised
with linear gradients. These implementations were intended to uncover dependencies of the final
pattern on the initial perturbation. In the first sweep, the gradient was oriented along the long-axis,
i.e. the aPAR concentrations were multiplied by (1 + 0.1 · x/a) and the pPAR concentrations by
(1 − 0.1 · x/a). In the second sweep the gradient was oriented along the short-axis, i.e. the aPAR
concentrations were multiplied by (1 + 0.1·y/b) and the pPAR concentrations by (1−0.1·y/b). We
found that the steady state polarisation was the same as with small random perturbations. Initial
linear gradients with the ‘wrong? alignment only lead to a transient polarisation along the same
axis as the initially imposed gradient but then turned to the same polarisation axis as with the
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

random initial perturbation.

Furthermore, we checked the linear stability analysis sweeps on kAp and kPa in Fig. 4 using
FEM simulations. The explicit parameter sets kAp and kPa used for probing FEM simulations are
shown in Tables 2 and 3. 2d FEM simulations confirm that there λ is the decisive parameter that
determines the polarisation axis and not kAp and kPa .
In order to find `∗ /L in steady state for different combinations of density ratios shown in
Fig. 5, we performed FEM sweeps of kPa (for fixed kAp = 0.4 µms−1 ) and λ (for fixed Dcyt = 30 µm2 s−1 )
at first in broad steps (the steps for λ were initiated with 5 · 10−3 s−1 and those for kPa with
0.2 µms−1 ). As soon as we identified a regime of parameters for `∗ /L where long-axis polarisation turned to short-axis polarisation, we used finer steps, with the step size being chosen in
accordance with the cone size of each of the kPa /kAp versus `∗ /L cones in Fig. 5.
FEM simulations for 3d system In 3d FEM simulations for all sweeps were initiated with an
initial aPAR-dominant concentration on the membrane and 1% random perturbation thereof. All
parameters are shown in Table 4. For the sweep of λ versus Dcyt resulting in the data discussed in
the main text and Fig. 6 the parameter range was set to Dcyt = 2 − 32 µm2 s−1 in steps of 2 µm2 s−1 ,
and reactivation rate λ = 0.03 − 0.3 s−1 in steps of 0.03 s−1 . The full region of the formation of
any pattern can be found by using the feature that the absolute value of membrane gradients is zero
for a homogeneous distribution on the membrane and a positive number for inhomogeneous (patterned) protein distributions on the membrane. To distinguish between long and short axis patterns
the FEM simulations were analysed by investigating (i) the angle of the concentration maxima

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on the membrane in ellipsoidal coordinates (which is 90◦ for perfect short axis polarisation and
0/180◦ for perfect long axis polarisation) and additionally (ii) the distance between the concentration maximum of P and A1 on the membrane (which is 2·a= 54µm for long axis polarisation
and 2·b= 30µm for short axis polarisation). For a final check, the pattern dynamics was sampled
by eye to ensure that these criteria work. In order to numerically investigate the onset of long
axis polarisation - which is very sensitive to λ - a finer sweep was additionally performed with
Dcyt = 2 − 32 µm2 s−1 in steps of 2 µm2 s−1 , and reactivation rate λ = 0.015 − 0.01 s−1 in steps of
0.005 s−1 . To find the boundary for a polarity onset with long axis alignment we filtered for a short
axis and a diagonal onset.

Data availability Data supporting the findings of this manuscript are available from the corresponding
authors upon reasonable request. A reporting summary for this Article is available as a Supplementary
Information file.

Code availability Custom written codes used in this study are available from the corresponding author
upon reasonable request.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1. Campanale, J. P., Sun, T. Y. & Montell, D. J. Development and dynamics of cell polarity at a
glance. J Cell Sci 130, 1201–1207 (2017).
2. Chiou, J.-g., Balasubramanian, M. K. & Lew, D. J. Cell polarity in yeast. Annu Rev Cell Dev
Biol 15, 365–391 (2017).
3. Roignot, J., Peng, X. & Mostov, K. Polarity in mammalian epithelial morphogenesis. Cold
Spring Harb Protoc 33 (2013).
4. Goehring, N. W. PAR polarity: from complexity to design principles. Exp Cell Res 328,
258–266 (2014).
5. Goldstein, B. & Macara, I. G. The PAR proteins: fundamental players in animal cell polarization. Dev Cell 13, 609–622 (2007).
6. Gönczy, P. Asymmetric cell division and axis formation in the embryo. WormBook 1–20
(2005).
7. Cuenca, A. A., Schetter, A., Aceto, D., Kemphues, K. & Seydoux, G. Polarization of the
C. elegans zygote proceeds via distinct establishment and maintenance phases. Development
130, 1255–1265 (2003).
8. Munro, E., Nance, J. & Priess, J. R. Cortical flows powered by asymmetrical contraction
transport PAR proteins to establish and maintain anterior-posterior polarity in the early C.
elegans embryo. Dev Cell 7, 413–424 (2004).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

9. Goehring, N. W. et al. Polarization of PAR proteins by advective triggering of a patternforming system. Science 334, 1137–1141 (2011).
10. Motegi, F. et al.

Microtubules induce self-organization of polarized PAR domains in

Caenorhabditis elegans zygotes. Nat Cell Biol 13, 1361–7 (2011).
11. Motegi, F. & Seydoux, G. The PAR network: redundancy and robustness in a symmetrybreaking system. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 368, 20130010 (2013).
12. Hill, D. P. & Strome, S. An analysis of the role of microfilaments in the establishment and
maintenance of asymmetry in Caenorhabditis elegans zygotes. Dev Biol 125, 75–84 (1988).
13. Cowan, C. R. & Cowan, A. A. Centrosomes direct cell polarity independently of microtubule
assembly in C. elegans embryos. Nature 431, 92–96 (2004).
14. Petrásek, Z. et al. Characterization of protein dynamics in asymmetric cell division by scanning fluorescence correlation spectroscopy. Biophys J 95, 5476–5486 (2008).
15. Dawes, A. T. & Munro, E. M. PAR-3 oligomerization may provide an actin-independent
mechanism to maintain distinct par protein domains in the early Caenorhabditis elegans embryo. Biophys J 101, 1412–1422 (2011).
16. Goehring, N. W., Hoege, C., Grill, S. W. & Hyman, A. PAR proteins diffuse freely across the
anterior-posterior boundary in polarized C. elegans embryos. J Cell Biol 193, 583–594 (2011).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

17. Schonegg, S. & Hyman, A. A. Cdc-42 and rho-1 coordinate acto-myosin contractility and par
protein localization during polarity establishment in c. elegans embryos. Development 133,
3507–3516 (2006).
18. Schonegg, S., Constantinescu, A. T., Hoege, C. & Hyman, A. A. The Rho GTPase-activating
proteins RGA-3 and RGA-4 are required to set the initial size of PAR domains in Caenorhabditis elegans one-cell embryos. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104, 14976–14981 (2007).
19. Schenk, C., Bringmann, H., Hyman, A. A. & Cowan, C. R. Cortical domain correction repositions the polarity boundary to match the cytokinesis furrow in C. elegans embryos. Development 137, 1743–1753 (2010).
20. Hoege, C. & Hyman, A. A. Principles of PAR polarity in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos.
Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14, 315–322 (2013).
21. Hao, Y., Boyd, L. & Seydoux, G. Stabilization of cell polarity by the c. elegans ring protein
par-2. Dev Cell 10, 199–208 (2006).
22. Zonies, S., Motegi, F., Hao, Y. & Seydoux, G. Symmetry breaking and polarization of the C.
elegans zygote by the polarity protein PAR-2. Development 137, 1669–1677 (2010).
23. Halatek, J. & Frey, E. Highly canalized MinD transfer and MinE sequestration explain the
origin of robust MinCDE-protein dynamics. Cell Rep 1, 741–752 (2012).
24. Thalmeier, D., Halatek, J. & Frey, E. Geometry-induced protein pattern formation. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 113, 548–553 (2016).

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

25. Wu, F., Halatek, J., Reiter, M., Kingma, E. & Frey, E. Multistability and dynamic transitions
of intracellular Min protein patterns. Mol Syst Biol 12, 873 (2016).
26. Halatek, J. & Frey, E. Rethinking pattern formation in reaction-diffusion systems. Nat Phys
14, 507–514 (2018).
27. Dawes, A. T. & Iron, D. Cortical geometry may influence placement of interface between Par
protein domains in early Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. J Theor Biol 333, 27–37 (2013).
28. Trong, P. K., Nicola, E. M., Goehring, N. W., Kumar, K. V. & Grill, S. W. Parameter-space
topology of models for cell polarity. New J Phys 16, 65009 (2014).
29. Tabuse, Y. et al. Atypical protein kinase C cooperates with PAR-3 to establish embryonic
polarity in Caenorhabditis elegans. Development 125, 3607–3614 (1998).
30. Etemad-Moghadam, B., Guo, S. & Kemphues, K. Asymmetrically distributed PAR-3 protein
contributes to cell polarity and spindle alignment in early C. elegans embryos. Cell 83, 743–
752 (1995).
31. Watts, J. L. et al. par-6, a gene involved in the establishment of asymmetry in early C. elegans embryos, mediates the asymmetric localization of PAR-3. Development 122, 3133–3140
(1996).
32. Hung, T.-J. & Kemphues, K. J. PAR-6 is a conserved PDZ domain-containing protein that
colocalizes with PAR-3 in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. Development 126, 127–135
(1999).

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

33. Rodriguez, J. et al. aPKC cycles between functionally distinct PAR protein assemblies to drive
cell polarity. Dev Cell 42, 400–415.e9 (2017).
34. Li, J. et al. Binding to PKC-3, but not to PAR-3 or to a conventional PDZ domain ligand, is
required for PAR-6 function in C. elegans. Dev Biol 340, 88–98 (2010).
35. Li, B., Kim, H., Beers, M. & Kemphues, K. Different domains of C. elegans PAR-3 are
required at different times in development. Dev Biol 344, 745–757 (2010).
36. Boyd, L., Guo, S., Levitan, D., Stinchcomb, D. T. & Kemphues, K. J. PAR-2 is asymmetrically
distributed and promotes association of P granules and PAR-1 with the cortex in C. elegans
embryos. Development 122, 3075–3084 (1996).
37. Driever, W. & Nüsslein-Volhard, C. A gradient of bicoid protein in Drosophila embryos. Cell
54, 83–93 (1988).
38. Brauns, F., Halatek, J. & Frey, E. Phase-space geometry of reaction–diffusion dynamics.
Preprint at arXiv:1812.08684 (2018).
39. Sailer, A., Anneken, A., Li, Y., Lee, S. & Munro, E. Dynamic Opposition of Clustered Proteins
Stabilizes Cortical Polarity in the C.elegans Zygote. Dev Cell 35, 131–142 (2015).
40. Beatty, A., Morton, D. G. & Kemphues, K. PAR-2, LGL-1 and the CDC-42 GAP CHIN-1
act in distinct pathways to maintain polarity in the C. elegans embryo. Development 140,
2005–2014 (2013).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

41. Tostevin, F. & Howard, M. Modeling the establishment of PAR protein polarity in the one-cell
C. elegans embryo. Biophys J 95, 4512–4522 (2008).
42. Cross, M. & Greenside, H. Pattern Formation and Dynamics in Nonequilibrium Systems
(Cambridge University Press, 2009).

Acknowledgements

We would like to thank T. Fehm and T. Meinhardt who were involved at early, pre-

liminary stages of this project, and F. Brauns and B. Osberg for critical reading of the manuscript and for
providing valuable feedback. E.F. acknowledges support from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)
via project B02 within the Collaborative Research Center Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) - Project-ID 201269156 - SFB 1032. R.G. is supported by a DFG fellowship through
the Graduate School ‘Quantitative Bioscience Munich’ (QBM).

Author contributions R.G., J.H., L.W., and E.F. designed research, performed research, and wrote the
paper.

Competing interests The authors declare no conflict of interest.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

posterior B

anterior

A

aPARs

PAR3
PKC3

A1

aPARs

delay

PAR1
PAR2

Maintenance PAR6
C

A1

pPARs

A2

P

P

A1
A2

P
A1

D

pPARs

actomyosin
contraction

Establishment

inactive

inactive
b

b

a

a

Figure 1:
Figure 1: Biological background and model network (A) Cell polarisation in the C. elegans
embryo during the establishment (top) and maintenance (bottom) phases; sketch adapted from
Ref.5 . (B) Illustration of protein flux between cytosol and membrane. As proteins detach from
the membrane when phosphorylated, they cannot immediately rebind to the membrane. There
is therefore an intrinsic delay before dephosphorylation permits rebinding. (C) The biochemical
reaction network is comprised of two mutually antagonistic sets of proteins, aPARs and pPARs.
Dephosphorylated (active) A1 and P attach to the membrane with rates kaon and kpon , respectively.
Both active proteins may also detach spontaneously from the membrane with rates kaoff and kpoff ,
respectively. A1 acts as a scaffold protein: Once bound to the membrane it recruits A2 with rate
kd and forms a membrane-bound hetero-dimeric aPAR complex A12 . The hetero-dimer A12 may
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

itself spontaneously detach from the membrane with rate kaoff and dissociate into A2 and active A1 .
Membrane-bound A1 and A12 can also be phosphorylated by P with rate kAp [P ], thereby initiating
dissociation of the aPAR complex and release of aPAR proteins into the cytosol. While reattachment of the scaffold protein A1 is delayed by the requirement for dephosphorylation (reactivation),
detached A2 can be recruited to the membrane by membrane-bound A1 immediately. Similarly, P
is phosphorylated by the hetero-dimer A12 at rate kPa [A12 ], and is consequently released as inactive
P into the cytosol. In the same way as A1 , also P must be dephosphorylated before it can bind
again to the membrane. For simplicity, we take identical dephosphorylation (reactivation) rates λ
for inactive A1 and P . The ensuing reaction-diffusion equations are provided in the Method section and a table listing the values of the rate constants can be found in 1. (D) Sketch of the cell’s
geometry: Prolate spheroid with long axis a and short axis b, and with short- (left) and long-axis
(right) polarisation.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

some
diffusion
length

cell size

strong
polar
caging

B

C

weak
midcell
caging

y

x (µm)
-a

0

a

cytosolic bulk

cell size

x (µm)
-a
some
diffusion
length

0

a

D
full
uncaging

partial
uncaging

cell size

Figure 2:
Figure 2: Role of dephosphorylation in axis determination. (A, B, and D): A protein is shown
in the elliptical cell firstly at its phosphorylation and detachment site on the membrane and then
at the point of its reactivation. The reactivation length gives an average radius (gray circles) how
far from the detachment point a protein travels before reactivation. The orange circles around
the reactivated protein and the associated arrows sketch some diffusion distance corresponding to
a time interval ∆t following reactivation, i.e. during this time interval the protein can reattach
to the membrane. (A) If the reactivation length ` (radius of gray circle) is small compared to
the cell size, the local membrane surface to cytosolic volume ratio strongly affects the position
at which detached proteins reattach. Due to the reactivation occurring close to the membrane,
within some time interval ∆t following reactivation a protein that detaches from a cell pole is
more likely to reattach near that same cell pole than a protein detaching from mid-cell is to reattach
at mid-cell. Hence, dynamics that are based on membrane-cytosol cycling (such as antagonistic

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reactions that maintain an interface) are enhanced at the cell poles. (B) As the reactivation length `
approaches the length of the cell, this effect of geometry becomes weaker, and detaching proteins
become increasingly unconstrained by the position of detachment (uncaged). (C) Illustration of
the distribution of cytosolic bulk proteins along the long-axis. The elliptical cell and the cytosol
height is depicted as a function of x, where the x-axis aligns with the long axis (top). The amount
of cytosolic bulk proteins for each x varies from the poles to mid-cell as illustrated (bottom). (D)
This effect of cell geometry is completely lost if the reactivation length ` exceeds the length of the
cell. Hence, detached proteins become uniformly distributed throughout the cell before reactivation
occurs. In that case, most will re-encounter the membrane near mid-cell after reactivation, since a
delocalised protein will most likely be found in the mid-cell area.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3:
Figure 3: Mode selection and polarity. (A) Illustration of the protein distribution on the membrane and the ensuing polarity axis for the lowest-order even and odd modes. (B) Illustration of the
mode spectrum for these lowest-order modes and the gap δσ in the growth rates between the first
even and odd modes. (C) Relative difference in the growth rates of the first even and odd modes
(linear stability analysis in colour code with dashed threshold lines δσ = 0s−1 , δσ = ±0.1s−1 ),
δσ, as a function of Dcyt and λ. For small λ and large Dcyt , δσ is clearly greater than zero (red,
long-axis polarisation), whereas for large λ and small Dcyt , δσ lies below zero (blue, short-axis
polarisation). These findings are validated using FEM simulations. FEM sweeps in Dcyt and λ
were run until the steady state was reached. These simulations yielded a straight-line interface
(black-solid line in (C)) in the λ-Dcyt parameter space which divides long- (above) from shortaxis (below) polarisation in steady state. The line corresponds to a constant threshold reactivation
length `? . All other parameters can be found in Table 1.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

λ =0.3s

B
1.4 λ =0.05s- 1
1.6
1.0
1.4
0.8
1.2
0.6
0.6
0.6
-0.5 0 1.0
0.5
-0.5 0 0.5
0.4
0.8
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.50.6
0.6
λ =0.3s- 1 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0.1 0.2
0.2 0.3
0.3 0.4
0.4
0.6
- 1 0.50.4
C
D
λ =0.3s
1.6
0.2
1.6
kAp [μm/s]
1.4
1.4
1.4
0.11.40.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
1.2 0.6
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
1.2
1.0
1.0 k [μm/s]
1.0
1.0 k
[μm/s] 0.8
0.8 Ap

0.6
0.6
0.4

0.2
0.2

kPa [μm/s]

kPa [μm/s]

kPa [μm/s]

kPa [μm/s]

A 1.6
-1
1.4
1.4 λ =0.3s
1.2
1.0
1.0

0.6

0.80.4 0.9

1.0

Ap

0.6

0.2
0.2
0.1
0.5 0.2
0.6 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.5 0.2
0.60.3 0.4 0.1
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
0.4 0.5
0.6

kAp [μm/s]

kAp [μm/s]

strong cycling weak cycling

strong cycling weak cycling

Figure 4:
Figure 4: Role of phosphorylation rates in polarisation and axis selection. Linear stability
analysis shows that spontaneous polarisation is possible only within a range of ratios of the phosphorylation rates, kPa /kAp (cone-shaped regions): The relative difference in the growth rates of
even and odd modes (δσ) is shown in (A) for λ = 0.3 s−1 , and (B) for λ = 0.05 s−1 in colour code
(indicated in the graph). Panels (C) and (D) show the corresponding cytosolic concentration of
A1 in the aPAR dominant unpolarised state (A2 has a quantitatively similar concentration gradient
to A1 within the cone, not shown), normalised with respect to the maximal concentration of A1
obtained within the respective cone. Cartoons at the bottom of the figure schematically depict the
cytosolic distribution of aPARs throughout the cell.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

kPa /[μm/s]

λ = 2.0 s- 1

9.7 m

3.0

9.1 m

-1
0.1 0.2λ =0.05s
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

[A1]/[A2]

kPa /[μm/s]

kAp [μm/s]
17.7 m

4.5

17.3 m
-1
0.1 0.2λ =0.05s
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

kPa /[μm/s]

kAp [μm/s]
31.9 m
31.3 m

6.5

11.6
1.4
51.2
41.0
0.8
30.6
0.4
20.2
11.6
51.4
1.2
41.0
0.8
30.6
0.4
20.2
1

[P]/[A2]

1.5

1.6
1.4
51.2
1.0
40.8
30.6
0.4
20.2

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6

0.2

0.4
0.6 0.8 1.0 /L 0.2
kAp [μm/s]

0.4

0.6

0.8 1.0 /L

Figure 5:
Figure 5: Relative protein numbers determine robustness of cell polarity. Linear stability
analysis for a range of density ratios [P ]/[A2 ] and [A1 ]/[A2 ]; [A2 ] was kept constant. Each graph
shows the range of phosphorylation ratios (kPa /kAp ) and relative reactivation lengths (`/L) where
the base state is linearly unstable, with δσ given by the same colour code as in Fig. 4A; fixed
parameters are kAp = 0.4 µm s−1 and Dcyt = 30 µm2 s−1 , and further parameters not varied can be
found in Table 1. FEM parameter sweeps of kPa and λ, with fixed parameters kAp = 0.4 µm s−1
and Dcyt = 30 µm2 s−1 , for each density set show that the steady state polarisation axis also depends
strongly on the ratio [A1 ]/[A2 ]. The steady state switches from short- to long-axis polarisation at
the black line in each graph, indicating `? .

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6:
Figure 6: Cell polarisation in three dimensions. (A) Image series from FEM (Comsol) simulation for Dcyt = 6 µm2 s−1 , and reactivation rate λ = 0.21 s−1 . The series illustrates the different
times which are further analysed: The time from the initial aPAR-dominated unpolarised state
to the initial short-axis polarisation, Tinitial ; the time duration of persistent short-axis polarisation,
Tpers ; and the time the pattern takes to turn from short- to long-axis polarisation, Ttrans . (B) The
angle Θ of the concentration maximum of membrane-bound A1 is plotted against simulation time
for different Dcyt indicated in the graph. (C) Tinitial , Tpers , Ttrans plotted as a function of Dcyt for
λ = 0.09 s−1 and λ = 0.3 s−1 . (D) The magnitude of the transition time from short- to long-axis
polarisation, Ttrans , in Dcyt -λ parameter space; a cell was considered to be polarised along the short
axis if 90◦ −10◦ ≤ Θ ≤ 90◦ +10◦ . The monochrome cyan-coloured region above the gray line corresponds to a parameter region where there is no short-axis polarisation, but the polarisation axis is
aligned along the diagonal or long axis from the beginning. The dashed lines demarcate parameter
regimes where the initial polarisation is aligned perfectly with the short axis (Θ = 90◦ ) or with the
long-axis, as indicated in the graph.
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on [µms−1 ] k off [ s−1 ] k [µms−1 ] k [µms−1 ]
Parameters: a[µm] b[µm] Dcyt [µm2 s−1 ] ka/p
Ap
Pa
a/p

27

15

30

0.1

0.005

0.4

1.2

p
a
Parameters: kd [µm2 s−1 ] Dmem
[µm2 s−1 ] Dmem
[µm2 s−1 ] λ[ s−1 ] ρA1 [µm−2 ] ρA2 [µm−2 ] ρP [µm−2 ]

0.034

0.28

0.15

0.3

8.0

2.5

8.0

Table 1: Parameters used to create Fig. 3-5.
Fig. 3: For the sweep using linear stability analysis in Fig. 3 C all parameters but λ and
Dcyt were chosen as shown in this Table. λ was varied between 5 · 10−3 s−1 and 0.35 s−1
with a uniform spacing of 5 · 10−3 s−1 . Dcyt was varied from 6 µm2 s−1 to 38 µm2 s−1 with a
uniform spacing of 2 µm2 s−1 . Fig. 4: For the linear stability analysis sweep in Fig. 4 A,B
all parameters but λ and kAp and kPa were chosen as above. kAp was varied between
0.02µms−1 and 0.8µms−1 and kPa was varied between 0.06µms−1 and 1.6µms−1 ; for both
parameters values were uniformly spaced with distance 0.02µms−1 . Fig. 5: For the linear
stability analysis sweeps in Fig. 5 all parameters but the densities ρA1 , ρA2 and ρP , λ and
kAp were set as shown above. For all triples of densities ρA2 = [µm−2 ] while ρA1 and ρP
were varied accordingly. The simultaneous sweep of ` and kPa /kAp was obtained by varying λ and kPa for fixed Dcyt = 30 µm2 s−1 and kAp = 0.4µms−1 .The values of ` were uniformly
spaced from 2µm to 62µm with distance 2µm. The ratio kPa /kAp was varied from 0.7 to 8.0
with uniform steps of 0.05.

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

kAp kP a

steady state

onset

0.44 1.68

no pattern

no pattern

0.46 1.62

no pattern

no pattern

0.48 1.56

no pattern

no pattern

0.5

1.5 short-axis polarisation short-axis

0.52 1.44 short-axis polarisation short-axis
0.54 1.38 short-axis polarisation short-axis
0.56 1.32 short-axis polarisation long-axis
0.58 1.26 short-axis polarisation long-axis
0.6

1.2

no pattern

no pattern

Table 2: FEM sample sweeps of kAp , kP a with small initial perturbation (1%) for λ = 0.3s−1 .

kAp kP a

steady state

onset

0.44 1.68

no pattern

no pattern

0.46 1.62

no pattern

no pattern

0.48 1.56

no pattern

no pattern

0.5

1.5 long-axis polarisation long-axis

0.52 1.44 long-axis polarisation long-axis
0.54 1.38 long-axis polarisation short-axis
0.56 1.32 long-axis polarisation short-axis
0.58 1.26 long-axis polarisation short-axis
0.6

1.2

no pattern

no pattern

Table 3: FEM sample sweeps of kAp , kP a with small initial perturbation (1%) for λ = 0.05s−1
48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/451880; this version posted December 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on [µms−1 ] k off [ s−1 ] k [µm2 s−1 ] k [µm2 s−1 ]
Parameters: a[µm] b[µm] Dcyt [µm2 s−1 ] ka/p
Ap
Pa
a/p

27

15

30

0.1

0.005

0.4

1.2

p
a
Parameters: kd [µm3 s−1 ] Dmem
[µm2 s−1 ] Dmem
[µm2 s−1 ] λ[ s−1 ] ρA1 [µm−3 ] ρA2 [µm−3 ] ρP [µm−3 ]

0.034

0.28

0.15

0.3

8.0

2.5

8.0

Table 4: Parameters for three-dimensional FEM simulations. For the sweeps shown in
Fig. 6 all parameters but λ and Dcyt were chosen as shown in this Table. λ was varied
between 3 · 10−2 s−1 and 0.3 s−1 with a uniform spacing of 3 · 10−2 s−1 . Dcyt was varied from
2 µm2 s−1 to 32 µm2 s−1 with a uniform spacing of 2 µm2 s−1 .

49

