bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mitochondrial DNA Copy Number
(mtDNA-CN) Can Influence Mortality and
Cardiovascular Disease via Methylation of
Nuclear DNA CpGs
Christina A. Castellani1, Ryan J. Longchamps1, Jason A. Sumpter1, Charles E. Newcomb1,
John A. Lane2, Megan L. Grove3, Jan Bressler3, Jennifer A. Brody4, James S. Floyd4, Traci
M. Bartz4,5, Kent D. Taylor6, Penglong Wang7, Adrienne Tin8, Josef Coresh8, James S.
Pankow9, Myriam Fornage3,10, Eliseo Guallar8, Brian O’Rourke11, Nathan Pankratz2,
Chunyu Liu12, Daniel Levy7, Nona Sotoodehnia4, Eric Boerwinkle3, Dan E. Arking1,11,*
1) McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD; 2) Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, University of
Minnesota School of Medicine, Minneapolis, MN; 3) Human Genetics Center, School of Public
Health, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX; 4) Cardiovascular
Health Research Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; 5)
Department of Biostatistics, University of Washington, Seattle, WA; 6) Institute for Translational
Genomics and Population Sciences, Los Angeles BioMedical Research Institute at HarborUCLA Medical Center, Torrance, CA; 7) Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA, USA,
Population Sciences Branch, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD; 8) Department of Epidemiology and the Welch Center for Prevention,
Epidemiology and Clinical Research, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health,
Baltimore, MD; 9) Division of Epidemiology & Community Health, School of
Public Health, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN; 10) Brown Foundation Institute of
Molecular Medicine, McGovern Medical School, University of Texas Health Science Center at
Houston, Houston, TX; 11) Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD.; 12) Department of Biostatistics, Boston
University School of Public Health.
*corresponding author, arking@jhmi.edu
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building,
Room 459, Baltimore, MD, 21205; 410-502-4867 (Phone), 410-614-8600 (Fax).

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ABSTRACT
Mitochondrial DNA copy number (mtDNA-CN) has been associated with a variety of agingrelated diseases, including all-cause mortality. However, the mechanism by which mtDNA-CN
influences disease is not currently understood. One such mechanism may be through regulation
of nuclear gene expression via the modification of nuclear DNA (nDNA) methylation. To
investigate this hypothesis, we assessed the relationship between mtDNA-CN and nDNA
methylation in 2,507 African American (AA) and European Americans (EA) participants from the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study using the Infinium Human Methylation 450K
Beadchip (485,764 CpGs). Thirty-four independent CpGs were associated with mtDNA-CN at
genome-wide significance (P<5x10-8). To validate our findings we assayed an additional 2,528
participants from the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS) (N=533) and Framingham Heart Study
(FHS) (N=1995). Meta-analysis across all cohorts identified 6 mtDNA-CN associated CpGs to
be validated across cohorts at genome-wide significance (P<5x10-8). Additionally, over half of
these CpGs were associated with phenotypes known to be associated with mtDNA-CN,
including CHD, CVD, and mortality. Experimental modification of mtDNA-CN through knockout
via CRISPR-Cas9 of TFAM, a regulator of mtDNA replication, demonstrated that modulation of
mtDNA-CN directly drives changes in nDNA methylation and gene expression of specific CpGs
and nearby transcripts. Strikingly, the ‘neuroactive ligand receptor interaction’ KEGG pathway
was found to be highly overrepresented in the ARIC cohort (P= 5.24x10-12), as well as the TFAM
knockout methylation (P=4.41x10-4) and expression (P=4.30x10-4) studies. These results
demonstrate that changes in mtDNA-CN influence nDNA methylation at specific loci and result
in differential gene expression of specific genes, including those acting in the ‘neuroactive ligand
receptor interaction’ pathway that may impact human health and disease via altered cell
signaling.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Mitochondria are cytoplasmic organelles primarily responsible for cellular metabolism, and have
pivotal roles in many cellular processes, including aging, apoptosis and oxidative
phosphorylation1. Dysfunction of the mitochondria has been associated with complex disease
presentation including susceptibility to disease and severity of disease2. Mitochondrial DNA
copy number (mtDNA-CN), a measure of mtDNA levels per cell, while not a direct measure of
mtDNA damage, is associated with mitochondrial enzyme activity and adenosine triphosphate
production. mtDNA-CN is regulated in a tissue-specific manner and in contrast to the nuclear
genome, is present in multiple copies per cell, with the number being highly dependent on cell
type3. Further, levels of mtDNA-CN correlate with mitochondrial function4. mtDNA-CN is
therefore a relatively easily attainable biomarker of mitochondrial function. Cells with reduced
mtDNA-CN show reduced expression of vital complex proteins, altered cellular morphology, and
lower respiratory enzyme activity5. Variation in mtDNA-CN has been associated with numerous
diseases and traits, including cardiovascular disease6–8, chronic kidney disease9, diabetes10,11,
and liver disease12,13. Lower mtDNA-CN has also been found to be associated with frailty and
all-cause mortality10.

Communication between the mitochondria and the nucleus is bi-directional and it has long been
known that cross-talk between nDNA and mtDNA is required for proper cellular functioning and
homeostasis14,15. Specifically, bi-directional cross-talk is essential for the maintenance and
integrity of cells16,17, and interactions between mtDNA and nuclear DNA (nDNA) contribute to a
number of pathologies18,19. However, the precise relationship between mtDNA and the nuclear
epigenome has not been well defined despite a number of reports which have identified a
relationship between mitochondria and the nuclear epigenome. For example, mtDNA
polymorphisms have been previously demonstrated to alter nDNA methylation patterns20 and

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hyper- and hypo- methylation of nuclear sites has been observed in mitochondria-depleted
cancer cell lines21. Additionally, differential DNA methylation in brain tissue and corresponding
differential gene expression were observed between strains of mice having identical nDNA, but
different mtDNA18 and reduced mtDNA-CN has been associated with inducing cancer
progression via hypermethylation of nuclear DNA promoters22. Further, mtDNA-CN has been
previously associated with changes in nuclear gene expression23.

Thus, gene expression changes identified as a result of mitochondrial variation may be
mediated, at least in part, by nDNA methylation. Further, given that it has been well-established
that mtDNA-CN influences a number of human diseases we propose that one mechanism by
which mtDNA-CN influences disease may be through regulation of nuclear gene expression via
the modification of nDNA methylation.

To this end, we report the results of cross-sectional analysis of this association between
mtDNA-CN and nDNA methylation in 5,035 individuals from the ARIC, CHS and FHS cohorts.
Further, to determine the causal direction of the association between mtDNA-CN and nDNA
methylation, we present results from experimental modification of mtDNA-CN followed by
assessment of nDNA methylation and gene expression profiles in mtDNA-CN depleted cell
lines.
RESULTS
mtDNA-CN is associated with nuclear DNA methylation at independent genome-wide loci
in cross-sectional analysis
We performed an epigenome-wide association study (EWAS) in 2,507 individuals from the
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study, comprised of 1,567 African American (AA)

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and 940 European American (EA) subjects (Figure 1, Table 1, Table S1). 34 independent CpGs
were significantly associated with mtDNA-CN (P<5x10-8) in a meta-analysis combining the race
groups (Figure 2, Figure S1, Table 2, Table S2A). This conservative P-value cutoff was
confirmed by permutation testing. In stratified analysis of ARIC AA and EA participants, we
identified 23 and 15 independent CpGs at epigenome-wide significance, respectively (Figure
S2, Table S2B,C). Two CpGs were shared by both race groups (cg26094004 and cg21051031).
ARIC AA and EA effect sizes for significant results were strongly correlated (R2=0.49) (Figure
S3). Further, 16/23 (70%) of AA cohort-identified CpGs showed the same direction of effect in
EA participants (P=0.06) and 12/14 (86%) of EA cohort-identified CpGs displayed the same
direction of effect in AA participants (P=0.008). Given these observations, we have focused on
the ARIC results from combining both races (N=2,507) in further analyses.

Additionally, an association was observed between increased mtDNA-CN and global
hypermethylation (P<2.2x10-16, ß=0.1487) in ARIC AA, however no such association was seen
in ARIC EA (P<0.77, ß=0.013) (Figure S4).

Pathway and biological process analysis displays associations with cell signaling
functions and the ‘Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction’ pathway
To assess the potential mechanism underlying the identified associations we performed GO and
KEGG pathway analysis. mtDNA-CN associated CpGs were annotated with their nearest gene.
KEGG analysis identified the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway (path:hsa04080)
to be the top overrepresented pathway (P= 5.24x10-12, Permuted P=3.84x10-5) (Table 3a).
Further, GO analyses identified a number of biological processes related to cell signaling and
ligand interactions including Cell-cell signaling (P=1.42x10-3), Trans-synaptic signaling

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(P=1.88x10-3) and Synaptic signaling (P=1.88x10-3), among others (Table 3b). These results
were confirmed by both permutation testing and through their robustness to ten different
associated-CpG cutoffs (cutoff used for final analysis: 300 CpGs).

Validation of CpG associations in independent cohorts
We performed a validation study to replicate findings from the ARIC discovery population in 239
AA and 294 EA participants from the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS) as well as 1,995 EA
participants from the Framingham Heart Study (FHS), for a total of 2,528 individuals (Table 1).
7/34 CpGs identified in the discovery cohort were nominally significant (P<0.05 and displaying
the same direction of effect as the ARIC cohort results) (Table 2) and the effect sizes from the
ARIC results and the validation meta-analysis were largely correlated (R2=0.36) (Figure 3).
Overall, the results were consistent across individual cohorts (Figure S5, Table S2) and analysis
of the results from the 34 CpGs across all 3 cohorts (ARIC, CHS and FHS, N=5,035), identify 6
CpGs as validated mtDNA-CN associated CpGs (P<5x10-8) (Table 2, Figure S6).

Establishing causality via TFAM knockout
mtDNA-CN is causative of changes in nuclear DNA methylation at loci of interest
To assess if modification of mtDNA-CN drives changes to nuclear DNA methylation we used
CRISPR-Cas9 to knock out the TFAM gene, which encodes a regulator of mtDNA replication
and has been shown to reduce mtDNA-CN24. Heterozygous knockout of the TFAM gene in
HEK293T cells resulted in a 5-fold reduction in the expression of TFAM, negligible protein
production, and an 18-fold reduction in mtDNA-CN across three biological replicates (Figure 4).
We then assayed methylation of the validated mtDNA-CN associated CpGs using the Illumina
Infinium Methylation EPIC Beadchip (Table S3). Specifically, the direct assessment of

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

methylation levels for 4 of the 6 validated mtDNA-CN associated CpGs and one surrogate CpG,
as 2 CpGs were not present on the EPIC array and for one missing CpG a reasonable
surrogate was not available (see Methods). Reduction of mtDNA-CN in TFAM knockout cell
lines led to subsequent site-specific changes to DNA methylation for 3 of the 5 EWAS-identified
CpGs (nominally significant, P<0.05), two of which were in the expected direction of effect
(reduced mtDNA-CN led to an increase in methylation) (Table 4, Figure S7). Further, two of the
validated mtDNA-CN associated CpGs were differentially methylated even after Bonferroni
correction (P<0.01) (Table 4). Pyrosequencing was also performed for 3 of the 6 sites (the other
sites did not pass pyrosequencing quality control) which confirmed methylation changes at all
assayed sites (P<0.05) in the expected direction of effect (Table S4).

Global methylation patterns did not show differences between negative control and TFAM
knockout cell lines suggesting that these differences are site-specific (Figure S8).

mtDNA-CN is causative of changes in nuclear gene expression at nearby genes of
interest
The same TFAM knockout and negative control cell lines were analyzed for differential gene
expression nearby the methylated mtDNA-CN associated CpGs using RNA-seq (Table S5).
RNA-seq resulted in expected clustering of knockout and control lines (Figure S9). All nominally
differentially expressed genes (P<0.05) within 1Mb of the TFAM knockout differentially
methylated CpGs were identified (Table S6). Five genes nearby the three differentially
methylated CpGs were differentially expressed after Bonferroni correction for the number of
genes within 1Mb of each CpG (P<6.41x10-4) (Table 5). The five differentially expressed genes
were: IFI35 (P=3.76x10-5) and RAMP2 (P=5.51x10-4) near cg26094004; RPIA near cg26563141
(P=5.04x10-6); and HLA-DRB5 (P=6.50x10-7) and MSH5 (P=2.50x10-4) near cg08899667.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

These results demonstrate that modulation of mtDNA-CN drives changes in nDNA methylation
and gene expression of specific CpGs and transcripts in a cell culture model.

Pathway and biological process analysis of TFAM KO methylation and expression results
independently identify pathways identified in cross-sectional analysis
We sought to independently assess the underlying pathways and biological processes that were
overrepresented following TFAM knockout in our cell-culture model. Specifically, we analyzed
the most over-represented terms resulting from GO and KEGG analysis of our full list of
differentially methylated CpGs and differentially expressed genes as well as a list of integrated
methylation and expression results (Cutoffs used: TFAM Methylation - top 300 differentially
methylated CpGs, TFAM Expression – differentially expressed genes (169 genes), TFAM
Integrated Methylation/Expression – top 188 genes). The independent results confirmed the
findings from our ARIC cross-sectional analysis. Specifically, KEGG analysis of TFAM knockout
results identified the neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction pathway (path:hsa04080) to be the
second most overrepresented pathway in the TFAM knockout methylation analysis (P=4.41x104)

and the top overrepresented pathway in the TFAM knockout RNA sequencing analysis

(P=4.30x10-4) (Table 3a). Accordingly, integration of results from TFAM knockout methylation
and expression also resulted in strong association with this pathway (P=8.77x10-6). Further,
combining of P-values (Fisher’s method) across ARIC meta-analysis, TFAM knockout
methylation and TFAM knockout expression analyses yielded a combined P-value of 8.96x10-16
for this pathway which was also the top pathway identified in integrated analysis (Table 3a).

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The specific genes identified by each analysis to be part of the neuroactive ligand receptor
interaction pathway were unique to each study (Table S7), with only one gene (GABRG3) in
common between ARIC analyses and TFAM knockout methylation analysis and only one gene
(GABRB1) in common between TFAM knockout methylation and expression analyses (Table
S7).

GO analyses of TFAM knockout cell lines also confirmed the finding from cross-sectional
analysis that biological processes related to cell signaling and ligand interactions including Cellcell signaling (combined P=7.63x10-8), Trans-synaptic signaling (combined P=2.89x10-7) and
Synaptic signaling (combined P=2.97x10-7) were over-represented, among others (Table 3b).
These results suggest that mtDNA-CN drives changes to nDNA methylation at sites nearby
genes relating to cell signaling processes which in turn may cause gene expression changes to
these genes and contribute to disease.

Establishing causality via Mendelian Randomization (MR): Nuclear DNA methylation does
not appear to be causative of changes in mtDNA-CN at identified CpGs
Mendelian randomization, a form of instrument variable analysis, was used to further test the
direction of causality between mtDNA-CN and nuclear methylation by exploring the relationship
between methylation quantitative trait loci (meQTLs) and mtDNA-CN (Table S8). Specifically, if
nDNA methylation at our sites of interest is causative of changes in mtDNA-CN, then meQTL
SNPs for these CpGs of interest would be expected to also be associated with mtDNA-CN.
Alternatively, if mtDNA-CN is not associated with meQTL SNPs, then it would follow that
changes to nDNA methylation likely do not drive changes to mtDNA-CN at these CpGs.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We identified 4 independent cis meQTLs in the ARIC EA cohort (Permuted P=7.84x10-4) and 6
independent cis meQTLs in the ARIC AA cohort (Permuted P=9.12x10-4) across 5 mtDNA-CN
associated CpGs for use as an instrument variable for MR (Table S8A). We further identified 2
independent meta-analysis derived meQTLs by combining results from ARIC EA and AA
cohorts (Permuted P=3.97x10-5, fixed effects (FE) model) (Table S8B).

We then assessed the relationship between meQTL SNPs and mtDNA-CN. The results of the
MR were null for each independent meQTL (Bonferroni P=0.005) (Table S8). While our power
for a single meQTLvaried depending on the specific meQTL assessed, with power to detect an
individual association ranging from 0.18 to 0.99 across the 12 meQTLs, overall power was
>99% to detect at least 1 associated meQTL. These results support the experimentaly
established direction of causality by suggesting that modification of nDNA methylation at CpG
sites of interest does not directly drive alterations in mtDNA-CN.

Association of CpG methylation with mtDNA-CN associated phenotypes
Since decreased mtDNA-CN has been associated with a number of aging-related diseases, and
given our hypothesis that mtDNA-CN leads to nDNA methylation changes which influence
disease outcomes, associated CpGs should also be associated with mtDNA-CN related
phenotypes. To test these associations, we performed linear regression and survival analysis
for prevalent and incident diseases, respectively, for each of the 6 validated CpGs as they relate
to CHD, CVD, and mortality in the ARIC, FHS and CHS cohorts (Table 6, Table S9). Results
from each cohort were meta-analyzed to derive an overall association for each validated CpG
with each outcome of interest.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We identify nominally significant phenotype associations with at least one of the mtDNA-CN
associated traits of interest for 4 of the 6 validated mtDNA-CN associated CpGs (P<0.05).
Specifically, results in the expected direction of effect for prevalent CHD and prevalent CVD
were identified for two mtDNA-CN associated CpGs (cg26094004 and cg08899667). Similarly,
results in the expected direction of effect were identified for the association between all-cause
mortality and cg26563141 and cg08899667. Thus, we found cg08899667 to be associated with
three of the five mtDNA-CN associated phenotypes, including all-cause mortality (Table 6).
DISCUSSION
We report evidence that changes in mtDNA-CN influence nDNA methylation at specific,
validated loci and lead to changes in gene expression of nearby genes, including those acting in
the ‘neuroactive ligand receptor interaction’ pathway which may impact human health and
disease via altered cell signaling. A number of these associations were validated across three
independent cohorts and identified both cross-sectionally and experimentally. Interestingly,
these associations were found to be site-specific in nature. It is important to note that the
methods used to estimate mtDNA-CN differed between the three cohorts with a qPCR based
approach used for CHS, a whole-genome sequencing approach for FHS and microarray
analysis for ARIC. This may reflect the robustness of results across mtDNA-CN estimation
methods and also explain why some but not all CpGs replicated in our validation analysis25. We
also report that our experimental approach using cell lines replicated some but not all of the
cohort validated CpGs. These findings likely reflect both the intrinsic differences between cell
line data and cross-sectional data as well as the inherent complexity of mitochondrial-to-nuclear
signaling which would be expected to vary across cell-types, developmental timepoints and
environmental conditions.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DNA methylation as the link between mtDNA-CN and changes in nuclear gene expression
A symbiotic relationship between the nuclear and mitochondrial genomes has developed in
eukaryotes. This relationship strongly implicates communication between the mitochondrial and
nuclear genomes as vital for proper cell functioning. Epigenetic mechanisms allow for control of
gene expression beyond DNA sequence and have the capacity to be influenced by
environmental stimuli. Given the function of the mitochondria in meeting cellular energy
demands, mitochondria may play an important role in translating environmental stimuli into
epigenetic changes. In addition, mtDNA-CN levels are sensitive to a number of chemicals26,
highlighting the role of mtDNA as an environmental biosensor. Also supporting the notion that
bioenergetics are involved in modulating the epigenetic status of the cell is the observation that
clinical phenotypes of mitochondrial diseases are strikingly similar to those found in a number of
epigenetic diseases such as Angelmans, Rett and Fragile X syndromes27. Further, epigenetic
changes in nuclear DNA correlate with reduced cancer survival and low mtDNA-CN correlates
with poor survival across a number of cancer types28,29. Thus, retrograde signals from the
mitochondria to the nucleus may be crucial in sensing homeostasis and translating extracellular
signals into altered gene expression18.

Our results implicate the neuroactive ligand receptor interaction pathway and in general
additional processes involved in cellular signaling. The results also show that although the same
pathways are implicated across our independent datasets, the specific genes affected differ
between conditions. Interestingly, the neuroactive ligand receptor interaction pathway has been
identified as having the second highest number of atherosclerosis candidate genes of any
KEGG pathway, harboring 53 atherosclerosis candidate genes (272 total genes in the

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pathway)30 . This is an interesting finding given the association of mtDNA-CN with
cardiovascular disease6–8. Perhaps unsurprisingly, this pathway also belongs to the class of
KEGG pathways that are responsible for environmental information processing.

Proposed mechanisms for the methylation of nDNA as a result of changes in mtDNA
The precise identity of the signal(s) coming from the mitochondria that might be responsible for
modifying nDNA methylation has not yet been identified and warrants further experimentation. It
is likely that metabolite intermediates, non-coding RNA, and/or histones, may play a role in this
signaling process. For example, mitochondria-to-nucleus retrograde signaling has been shown
to regulate histone acetylation and alter nuclear gene expression through the heterogenous
ribonucleoprotein A2 (hnRNAP2)23. In fact, histone modifications co-vary with mitochondrial
content and are linked with chromatin activation, namely H4K16, H3L4me3 and H3K36me231.

The differentially expressed genes identified from the experimental knockout may provide some
evidence with regards to the mechanism behind these findings. For example, IFI35, a gene
involved in Interferon response, is associated with mtDNA-CN through the antiviral innate
immune response32. Futher, the differentially expressed genes, RAMP2 and MSH5, are known
to be related to oxidative phosphorylation protein expression and genome stability,
respectively33,34.

Uncovering the precise nature of this signaling from mitochondria to the nucleus would be
expected to expose essential clues that will integrate epigenetic regulation, mitochondrial and
genomic polymorphisms, and complex phenotypes. Further assessment of the functional
mechanisms underlying the crosstalk between mtDNA-CN, methylation and disease will be

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

required to fully appreciate the diagnostic and therapeutic utility of the interaction between
mtDNA and nDNA as identified in this study.

Influence of findings on complex disease etiology
The observation that differential methylation occurred at specific-sites throughout the nuclear
genome as a result of changes to mtDNA-CN, provides an explanation for how mtDNA could
alter normal homeostasis as well as susceptibility and/or severity of diseases. It is particularly
interesting to note that these changes appear to be site-specific rather than global in nature.
The association of mtDNA-CN associated CpGs with mtDNA-CN related disease states lends
further support to the hypothesis that modulation of mtDNA-CN not only modifies the nuclear
epigenome, and the expression of nearby genes, but does so at locations which may be
relevant to disease outcomes, including cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality. In
particular, these observations may explain how mitochondrial-to-nuclear signaling could
influence polygenic traits with complex etiology and in particular those for which environmental
insults play a role. Together, mitochondrial signaling, and subsequent nDNA methylation, may
have an important role in modifying gene expression which may in turn lead to disease
outcomes or influence the severity of disease manifestation. Thus, the mechanism(s) by which
mtDNA-CN influences disease status may be, at least in part, through modification of nDNA
methylation and subsequent modification and/or regulation of nuclear gene expression.

Further, these findings have direct implications for the recent emergence of mitochondrial
donation in humans as they suggest that mitochondrial replacement into recipient oocytes may
lead to unexpected changes to the nuclear epigenome. Thus, with the recent development of

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mitochondrial replacement therapy, unravelling the complex interplay of the mitochondria and
nucleus is also critical to properly informing medical decision makers.
This study design had a number of strengths and limitations. A possible limitation of the crosssectional analysis is the potential for some common factor we have not been able to account for
to influence both mtDNA-CN and nDNA methylation. In experimental analysis, we used
HEK293T cells for our knockdown studies and we note that the use of a blood cell line may be
more relevant to direct interpretation of the results. Further, prevalent disease is subject to
reverse causality and therefore the results on prevalent phentoypes should be interpreted with
caution. Strengths of this study include the well phenotyped and carefully collected incident
disease data, the robustness of the findings across multiple cohorts and ethnic groups, as well
as the carefuly quality control employed. Further, our results stood up to rigorous permutation
testing which increases the reliability of these observations.
CONCLUSION
Cross-sectionally we have shown that variation in mtDNA-CN is associated with nuclear
epigenetic modifications at specific CpGs across multiple independent cohorts. Specifically, six
mtDNA-CN associated CpGs were robustly identified across three independent cohorts, three of
which were confirmed in experimental analysis. Second, we found meQTL SNPs to not be
associated with mtDNA-CN, suggesting that nuclear methylation at these CpGs does not
directly cause altered mtDNA-CN. Third, functional results show that modulation of mtDNA-CN
causes site-specific changes to nuclear DNA methylation and RNA expression near genes
relating to cell signaling processes including those in the neuroactive-ligand-receptor interaction
pathway. Further, mtDNA-CN associated CpGs display association with mtDNA-CN related
phenotypes, namely cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality. These findings
demonstrate that the mechanism(s) by which mtDNA-CN influences disease is at least in part

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

via regulation of nuclear gene expression through modification of nDNA methylation.
Specifically, the data presented here support the model that modification of mtDNA-CN leads to
changes to nDNA methylation which in turn influence nuclear DNA expression of nearby genes
which contribute to disease pathology. These results have implications for understanding the
mechanisms behind mitochondrial and nuclear communication as it relates to complex disease
etiology as well as the consequences of mitochondrial replacement therapeutic strategies.
Taken together, the results confirm that in elucidating the underpinnings of complex disease,
knowledge of only nuclear DNA dynamics is not sufficient to fully elucidating disease etiology.
ONLINE METHODS
A flow chart of general methods can be found in Figure 1.

Ethics
The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study, Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS) and
Framingham Heart Study (FHS) have been approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at
each participating institution. All participants provided written informed consent.

The ARIC study design and methods were approved by four different IRBs at each of the
collaborating medical institutions: University of Mississippi Medical Center Institutional Review
Board (Jackson Field Center); Wake Forest University Health Sciences Institutional Review
Board (Forsyth County Field Center); University of Minnesota Institutional Review Board
(Minnesota Field Center); and Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health Institutional
Review Board (Washington County Field Center).

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FHS is approved by the IRB at Boston University Medical Center. CHS recruited participants
from Medicare lists at 4 sites and IRBs at each site were involved in human subjects approval.

Discovery Study Analysis

The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Cohort (ARIC)

The ARIC study is a prospective cohort intended for the study of cardiovascular disease in
subjects from four communities across the USA: Forsyth County, NC, northwest suburbs of
Minneapolis, MN, Jackson, MS, and Washington County, MD35. Sample characteristics are
available in Table 1. Following quality control, 1,567 African Americans (AA) and 940 European
Americans (EA) were used as a discovery cohort. Participants for ARIC EA were derived from
two existing projects, Brain MRI (81.7%) and OMICS (18.3%). DNA was extracted from
peripheral blood leukocyte samples from visit 2 or 3 using the Gentra Puregene Blood Kit
(Qiagen; Valencia, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions (www.qiagen.com)
and hybridized to the Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450K BeadChip and the GenomeWide Human SNP Array 6.0.

Estimation of mtDNA-CN from Affymetrix Human SNP 6.0 Arrays

The Affymetrix Genome-Wide Human SNP 6.0 Array was used to estimate mtDNA-CN for each
participant as previously described36. Briefly, mtDNA copy number (mtDNA-CN) was determined
utilizing the Genvisis software package (http://www.genvisis.org). Initially, a list of high-quality
mitochondrial SNPs were hand-curated by employing BLAST to remove SNPs without a perfect
match to the annotated mitochondrial location and SNPs with off-target matches longer than 20
bp. The probe intensities of the 25 remaining mitochondrial SNPs was determined using

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

quantile sketch normalization (apt-probeset-summarize) as implemented in the Affymetrix
Power Tools software. To correct for DNA quality, DNA quantity, hybridization efficiency and
other technical artifacts, surrogate variable analysis was applied to the BLAST filtered, GC
corrected LRR of 43,316 autosomal SNPs. These autosomal SNPs were selected based on the
following quality filters: call rate >98%, HWE P-value >0.00001, PLINK mishap for non-random
missingness P-value >0.0001, association with sex P-value 0.00001, linkage disequilibrium
pruning (r2 <0.30), maximal autosomal spacing of 41.7 kb. The median of the normalized
intensity, log R ratio (LRR) for all homozygous calls was GC corrected and used as initial
estimates of mtDNA-CN for each sample. The final measure of mtDNA-CN is represented as
the standardized residuals from a race-stratified linear regression adjusting the initial estimate of
mtDNA-CN for 15 surrogate variables (SVs), age, sex, sample collection site, and white blood
cell count. Technical covariates such as DNA quality, DNA quantity, and hybridization efficiency
were captured via surrogate variable analysis (SVA) as previously described7,37.

Illumina Infinium Human Methylation 450K Beadchip Analysis

The Infinium Human Methylation 450K BeadChip was used to determine DNA methylation
profiles from blood for >450,000 CpGs across the human genome.

Bisulfite Conversion
Bisulfite conversion of 1 ug genomic DNA was performed using the EZ-96 DNA Methylation Kit
(Deep Well Format) (Zymo Research; Irvine, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's
instructions (www.zymoresearch.com). Bisulfite conversion efficiency was determined by PCR
amplification of the converted DNA before proceeding with methylation analyses on the Illumina

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

platform using Zymo Research's Universal Methylated Human DNA Standard and Control
Primers.

Normalization and Quality Control
Probes included on the list of cross-reactive 450K probes as reported by Chen et al were
removed prior to analysis38. The cross-reactive target had to match a minimum of 47 bases to
be considered cross-reactive. This led to the removal of ~28,000 probes.

Genome studio background correction and BMIQ normalization were performed39 and the
wateRmelon R package was used to conduct QC filtering40.

Samples were removed for the following reasons: 1. Failed bisulfite conversion, 2. Call rate
<95%, 3. Sex mismatch using minfi, 4. Weak correlation between available genotypes and
genotypes on 450K array, 5. Weak clustering according to sex in MDS plot, 6. PCA analysis
identified them as an outlier (≥4SD from mean), 7. Failed sex check, 8. Sample pass rate <99%,
9. Only sample to pass on a chip. These filtering settings led to the removal of 68 samples in the
AA group and 24 samples in the EA group. If samples were run in duplicate, the sample with the
lowest missing rate was retained.

Surrogate Variable Analysis (SVA)
SVAs were generated using the package SVA in R and protecting mtDNA-CN37.

Control Probe Principal Components in ARIC European Americans
The control probe principal components are based on 42 measures, which are transformed from
control probes and out-of-band probes in the 450K data41.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Statistical Analysis

All statistical analyses were performed using R (version 3.3.3).

Linear Mixed Model – Association between mtDNA-CN and nuclear DNA methylation
Linear-mixed-effects regression analysis was performed to determine the association between
mtDNA-CN and nuclear DNA methylation at specific CpGs (Table S1).
ARIC AA: Methylation ~ MtDNA-CN + Age + Sex + Site + Visit + Chip Position + Plate + CD8
Count + CD4 Count + B-Cell Count + Monocyte Count + Granulocyte Count + Smoking Status +
First 10 Surrogate Variables + Chip (as random effect).
ARIC EA: Same model as ARIC AA but further inclusion of Project (Brain MRI or Omics) as well
as the first 10 PCs derived from methylation microarray control probes and the composition of
natural killer (NK) cells.
Cell types were imputed using the method of Houseman et al.42. All correlations were performed
using the Pearson method.

Global methylation distributions were assessed by a chi-square test to compare observed to
expected site-specific methylation.

Meta-Analysis
A meta-analysis was performed to combine the results from the individual ARIC AA and EA
analyses (Table S1). This analysis was done using the standard error scheme implemented in
Metal43. CpGs had to have a P-value cutoff of P<0.05 in ARIC AA and EA analyses to be
included in the meta-analysis. Associations that met genome-wide significance were included in

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

subsequent analyses (P=5.0x10-8). 100 meta-analysis permutations were also performed
(Permuted P=3.94x10-8).

Residual Bootstrapping
Residual bootstrapping was used to determine the most appropriate genome-wide significance
cutoff in ARIC EA and AA cohorts (AA: P<6.22x10-8, EA: P<3.03x10-7). The steps taken were as
follows: 1) Residuals were derived from the full model, 2) Fitted values were derived from the
null model (model without mtDNA-CN as independent factor), 3) The residuals from Step 1 were
resampled and added to the fits from Step 2, 4) Each resulting matrix from Step 3 was run as
pseudonull input in the formula lme(pseudonull~CN+covariates) to refit the full model and obtain
null statistics, 4a) The most extreme P-value was pulled from each iteration, 4b) The resulting
100 most extreme P-values were ranked from least to most significant and the 95th value was
chosen to be the ‘genome-wide significance level’ for the corresponding cohort. Additionally, the
qq plots show minimal inflation in ARIC AA, EA and meta-analysis (Figure S1).

Significant CpGs with high correlation (R2≥0.6) were identified as non-independent and the
CpGs with the more significant P-value was retained. Highly correlated CpGs were consistent
between AA and EA results, specifically these CpGs were cg21051031 and cg03964851 (R2:
AA=0.62, EA=0.63) and cg06809544 and cg13393978 (R2: AA=0.65, EA=0.70).

Validation Cohorts

The Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS)

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The CHS is a population-based cohort study of risk factors for coronary heart disease and
stroke in adults ≥65 years conducted across four field centers44. The original predominantly
European ancestry cohort of 5,201 persons was recruited in 1989-1990 from random samples
of the Medicare eligibility lists; subsequently, an additional predominantly African-American
cohort of 687 persons was enrolled in 1992-1993 for a total sample of 5,888. The validation
cohort includes 239 AA participants and 294 EA participants from CHS with mtDNA-CN and
450K methylation derived from the same visit (Table 1).

mtDNA-CN Estimation using Quantitative PCR
mtDNA copy number (mtDNA-CN) was determined utilizing a multiplexed real time quantitative
polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) assay with ABI TaqMan chemistry (Applied Biosystems) as
previously described7. Briefly, each well consisted of a VIC-labeled, primer limited assay specific
to a mitochondrial target (ND1), and a FAM-labeled assay specific to a region of the nuclear
genome selected for being non-repetitive (RPPH1). Each sample was run in triplicate on a 384
well plate in a 10µL reaction containing 20ng of DNA. The cycle threshold (Ct) value was
determined from the amplification curve for each target by the ABI Viia7 software. A ΔCT value
was computed for each well as the difference between the Ct for the RPPH1 target and the Ct
for the ND1 target, as a measure of mtDNA copy number relative to nuclear DNA copy number.
For samples with a standard deviation of ΔCT for the three replicates >0.5, an outlier replicate
was identified and excluded. If the ΔCT standard deviation remained >0.5 after exclusion, the
sample was completely excluded from future analyses. Replicates with Ct values for ND1 > 28,
Ct values for RPPH1 > 5 standard deviations from the mean, or ΔCT values >3 standard
deviations from the mean of the plate were removed. Additionally, due to an observed linear
increase in ΔCT value by the order in which the replicate was pipetted onto the plate, a linear
regression was used to correct for pipetting order. Plate effects are controlled for by performing

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a linear regression whereby the plate a sample is run on is treated as a random effect. The final
measure of mtDNA-CN is represented as the standardized residuals from a race-stratified
mixed linear regression adjusting for age, sex, and sample collection site.

Methylation Analysis
Methylation measurements were performed at the Institute for Translational Genomics and
Population Sciences at the Harbor-UCLA Medical Center Institute for Translational Genomics
and Population Sciences (Los Angeles, CA). DNA was extracted from Buffy coat fractions and
subsequently underwent bisulfite conversion using the EZ DNA Methylation kit (Zymo Research,
Irvine, CA). Methylation was then assayed using the Infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChip
(Illumina Inc, San Diego, CA).

Quality control was performed in in the minfi R package45 (version 1.12.0,
http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/minfi.html). Samples with low median
intensities of below 10.5 (log2) across the methylated and unmethylated channels, samples with
a proportion of probes falling detection of greater than 0.5%, samples with QC probes falling
greater than 3 standard deviation from the mean, sex-check mismatches, failed concordance
with prior genotyping or > 0.5% of probes with a detection P-value > 0.01 were removed.
Probes with >1% of values below detection were removed. In total, 11 samples were removed
for sample QC resulting in a sample of 323 European-ancestry and 326 African-American
samples. Methylation values were normalized using the SWAN quantile normalization
method46. Since white blood cell proportions were not directly measured in CHS they were
estimated from the methylation data using the Houseman method42.

Regression Analysis

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CHS was analysed using linear regression with methylation beta values as the dependent
variable and mtDNA-CN as the independent variable. Analyses were adjusted for age, sex,
batch, measured white blood cell count and estimated cell type counts.

The Framingham Heart Study (FHS)

FHS is a prospective study of individuals from Framingham, Massachusetts47. The validation
cohort includes 1,995 EA participants from FHS with mtDNA-CN and 450K methylation derived
from the same visit (Table 1).

mtDNA-CN Estimation from Whole Genome Sequencing
Cohort-specific mtDNA-CN residuals were obtained by regressing mtDNA-CN on age, sex, and
WBC counts. Mitochondrial DNA copy number was estimated by applying the fastMitoCalc
software48 to harmonized build 37 mappings of TOPMed deep whole genome sequencing data
(freeze 5). The estimated mitochondrial copy number is twice the ratio of average mitochondrial
sequencing depth to average autosomal sequencing depth. We applied inverse normal
transformation to mtDNA-CN residuals.

Methylation Analysis
DNA extraction, methylation quantification (450k-BeadChip), and QC were detailed previously49.
We obtained lab-specific and cohort-specific DNA methylation residuals by regressing
methylation beta values on age, sex, batch effects (plate, col, row), and WBC counts. We
applied inverse normal transformation to DNA methylation residuals.

Regression Analysis

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A linear mixed model was applied with inverse normal transformed DNA methylation residuals
as the dependent variable and inverse normal transformed mtDNA-CN residuals as the
independent variable, accounting for family structure.

Validation and all-cohort meta-analyses
A meta-analysis was performed of all validation cohorts (FHS EA, CHS EA, CHS AA). We also
performed an all-cohort meta-analysis (ARIC AA, ARIC EA, FHS EA, CHS EA, CHS AA). Both
meta-analyses were performed using the standard error scheme implemented in Metal43.

Mendelian Randomization

meQTL Analysis

meQTLs were identified using MatrixEQTL50. Imputed genotypes which were previously derived
from ARIC for the relevant participants as well as normalized residuals from our 450K
methylation dataset were used in regression analysis. Haplotype phasing was performed using
ShapeIt51 and imputation was performed using IMPUTE252. SNPs were filtered for allele
frequency >0.05, and imputation quality >0.4. Genotypes were imputed to the 1000G reference
panel (Phase I, version 3). The same covariates used for the ARIC EWAS analysis were used
to call meQTLs as well as the addition of genotyping PCs (4 for EA, 10 for AA). Only meQTLs
which had an individual cohort P value >0.05 were included in the meta-analysis.

A linear model was used for MatrixEQTL and a cis meQTL was defined as having a distance
less than 100 kb. Only cis meQTLs derived from the 6 CpGs of interest and which met a cohortspecific permuted P-value cutoff (Permuted P: EA=7.84x10-4, AA=9.12x10-4) or a permuted

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

meta-analysis P-value cutoff (Permuted P, fixed effects (FE) model: 3.97x10-5) were retained for
use in Mendelian randomization. Metasoft53 was used for meta-anlaysis; in addition to the fixed
effects (FE) model, a random effects (RE) and Han and Eskin’s Random Effects model (RE2)
were also used and yielded very similar results (Table S8).

Mendelian Randomization Methods

Independent meQTLs were used for MR. Independence was defined by including SNPs in the
same linear model. MR with mtDNA-CN as the outcome and methylation as the exposure was
undertaken. meQTLs served as the known relationship of genotype on exposure (methylation)
and the results of the linear model, lm(mtDNA~meQTL SNP) were calculated. Power for the MR
was calculated using the YZ association function in mRnd54.

Phenotype Analysis
We compared methylation at the 6 validated CpGs to phenotypes that are known to be
associated with mtDNA-CN. Phenotypes included prevalent diseases (CHD, CVD) as well as
incident diseases (CHD, CVD, Mortality). The analysis was performed as follows for each
cohort:

A) Prevalent diseases (CHD, CVD): glm(PRVCVD ~ resids(methyl) + AGE + SEX +
CENTER + RACE, family=binomial(logit))
B) Incident diseases (CHD, CVD, Mortality): coxph(Surv(STime,dead) ~ resids(methyl) +
AGE + SEX + CENTER + RACE))
Where resids(methyl) represents methylation adjusted for all relevant covariates from the
EWAS. The event adjudication process in ARIC, CHS and FHS consisted of expert committee

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

review of hospital records, telephone interviews, and death certificates. In addition, adjudicated
events between visit 1 and the baseline visit for this study were considered prevalent events.

Analyses of prevalent and incident events in CHS were adjusted for age, sex, clinic site and
batch.

In ARIC, prevalent coronary heart disease (CHD) was defined as history of myocardial
infarction (MI) or cardiac procedures (heart or arterial surgery, coronary bypass, or angioplasty).
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) was defined as either CHD or stroke. Prevalent stroke was
defined as stroke at baseline. For all phenotypes, prevalent disease was a combination of selfreport at visit 1 plus adjudicated events between visit 1 and the baseline visit. Incident CHD was
defined as the first incident MI or death owing to CHD. Incident stroke was defined as the first
nonfatal stroke or death owing to stroke. In ARIC, the mean follow-up time was 20.6 years in the
EA cohort and 18.1 years in the AA cohort. Follow-up for incident events was administratively
censored at December 31, 2016.

CHS and FHS followed similar phenotype definitions as ARIC. For FHS, the mean follow-up
time was 6.0 years and individuals were removed if follow-up years equaled 0, FHS events were
adjudicated through 12/2016. In CHS, prevalent CVD/CHD was excluded during sampling and
events were adjudicated through June 30, 2015. The follow up time for incident events from the
time of methylation measurement was 23 years.

Results from each of the 5 individual cohorts were meta-analyzed across cohorts using an
inverse weighted standard error method43 to derive an overall phenotype association for each
CpG of interest.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

CRISPR-Cas9 Knockout of TFAM

Generation of TFAM Knockout

The stable TFAM CRISPR-Cas9 knockout was generated in HEK293T cells using the Origene
TFAM – Human Gene Knockout Kit via CRISPR (catalog number: KN215488) following the
manufacturer’s protocol. The following sgRNA guide sequence was used to generate the stable
TFAM knockout lines: GCGTTTCTCCGAAGCATGTG. Lipofection was conducted using
Turbofectin 8.0 (catalog number: TF81001). Puromycin was used for selection at a
concentration of 1.5 µg/mL. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) was used for single cell
sorting and clonal expansion. HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM containing 10% FBS and
1% penicillin-streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2. Sequencing primers used to confirm the TFAM
knockout and proper insertion of the Donor plasmid are as follows:
TFAM_Left_Forward_Primer_2: AGCGACTGTGGACAACTAGC, GFP_Reverse_Primer_2:
TCATCTTGTTGGTCATGCGG, Puro-Forward_Primer_1: CACAACCTCCCCTTCTACGAG,
TFAM_Right_Reverse_Primer_1: CCCCAAACTCCTTACCTGGG.

DNA Isolation
DNA extraction was performed on harvested HEK293T TFAM knockout cells using the AllPrep
DNA/RNA Mini Kit (Qiagen #80204) following the manufacturer’s protocol. DNA was eluted in
100 µL ultrapure water. DNA was quantified using a Nanodrop 1000. Low purity samples were
subjected to ethanol precipitation.

RNA Isolation

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Total RNA was extracted from confluent T75 culture flasks of TFAM CRISPR Negative Control
and KO cell lines (p32) using the AllPrep DNA/RNA/Protein Kit (Qiagen #80004). RNA was
extracted using the provided kit manual/instructions for RNA extraction, except all microcentrifuge
spins were performed at 10,000 x g. RNA was eluted twice in 50 uL molecular biology grade water
and stored in a -80C freezer.

mtDNA-CN Estimation on TFAM Knockout Cell Lines
qPCR was used to measure mtDNA-CN as described above for CHS in section “mtDNA-CN
Estimation using Quantitative PCR”.

TFAM Expression Assay
cDNA synthesis was performed with the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System for RTPCR (ThermoFisher #18080-051) following the manufacturer's protocol. 1.5 µg of total RNA
from each cell line was used as input and primed with 50 ng random hexamers using the
appropriate incubation conditions from the manufacture’s protocol. Following completed cDNA
synthesis, samples were quantified using the Qubit ssDNA assay kit (Invitrogen #Q10212) and
Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer. Synthesized cDNA was then diluted to 10 ng/µL using ultrapure water
and stored in -20oC.

qPCR to determine TFAM gene expression for TFAM KO
20 ng of synthesized cDNA from each cell line was used as input for a 10 µL volume reaction.
TFAM cDNA were amplified using TaqMan probe Hs00273372_s1 (20x, FAM-labeled, Applied
Biosystems #4331182). GAPDH cDNA served as a housekeeping reference control and was
amplified with probe Hs03929097_g1 (20x, VIC-labeled, Applied Biosystems #4448489). Both
probes were multiplexed together and all qPCR reactions were conducted at 50o C for 2 min,

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

95oC for 10 min, and then 40 cycles of 95oC for 15 sec and 60oC for 1 min. Expression fold
change was determined using double delta cycle threshold using GAPDH as the housekeeping
reference control.

Total Protein Extraction
Total protein lysates from HEK293T TFAM CRISPR knockout cell lines were extracted using
ice-cold radioimmunoprecipitation assay buffer (RIPA) buffer supplemented with Halt Protease
and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Scientific #78440). Protein concentrations were
quantified using the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific #23227) and lysates were
stored at -80oC.

Western Blotting
Equal amounts of each lysate were diluted 1:1 with 2x Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad #1610737) supplemented with 5% β-mercaptoethanol. Samples were then heated at 95oC for 5
minutes to denature the proteins. 30 µg of each protein lysate was separated on a 12%
polyacrylamide Mini-PROTEAN TGX Gel (Bio-Rad #456-1044) and then transferred to a PVDF
membrane (Bio-Rad #1704156) using the Trans-Blot Turbo Transfer System. The membrane
was blocked overnight at 4o C in Tris-Buffered Saline and Tween 20 (TBST) containing 5%
nonfat milk with gentle shaking. After blocking, the membrane was incubated with rabbit antiTFAM primary antibody diluted 1:2000 in 5% milk (Abcam #ab131607) and rabbit anti- βTubulin primary antibody diluted 1:3000 in 5% milk (Invitrogen #PA5-27552) for 1 hour at room
temperature with gentle shaking. The membrane was washed 5-times with TBST after primary
antibody incubation, then incubated with goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody conjugated with
horseradish peroxidase (1:20,000 dilution, Abcam #ab97080) in the dark for 1 hour at room
temperature with shaking. Signals were visualized by enhanced chemiluminescent substrate

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(SuperSignal West Pico PLUS, Thermo Scientific #34577) and photographed digitally using the
ChemiDoc-It2 Imager.

Methylation Analysis of TFAM Knockout Lines

TFAM KO cell lines were hybridized to the Illumina Infinium EPIC BeadChip at The University of
Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth). Bisulfite conversion efficiency was
reviewed in the laboratory using the Bead Array Controls Reporter (BACR) tool, and Illumina
chemistry (sample independent controls) performed within acceptable specifications.
All samples passed with detected CpG (0.01) >97%.

EPIC BeadChip analysis was performed using the minfi package55. Data was normalized using
Functional Normalization41 and differential methylation was calculated using the dmpFinder
function in minfi (Table S3).

In the cases where the CpG from the 450k array was not represented on the EPIC array a CpG
surrogate was chosen if there was a nearby CpG within 1000 bp upstream or downstream of the
original CpG that was highly correlated with the original CpG (R2 ≥0.6) and associated with
mtDNA-CN in the ARIC analysis (P<5x10-8).

RNA sequencing of TFAM Knockout Lines

RNA Preparation
RNA quantification was performed using the Qubit RNA BR Assay (Invitrogen #Q10211) and
Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer. The Agilent BioAnalyzer was used for quality control of the RNA prior to
library creation, with a minimum RIN of 8.5. Samples were diluted to 300 ng/uL in 12 uL molecular

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

biology grade water, and then submitted to the Genetic Resources Core Facility for RNA
sequencing.

Library Preparation and Sequencing
Illumina’s TruSeq Stranded Total RNA kit protocol was used to generate libraries. Specifically,
total RNA is converted to cDNA and size selected to 150 to 200 bp in length with 3' or 5'
overhangs. End repair is performed where 3' to 5' exonuclease activity of enzymes removes 3'
overhangs and the polymerase activity fills in the 5' overhangs. An ‘A’ base is then added to the
3' end of the blunt phosphorylated DNA fragments which prepares the DNA fragments for ligation
to the sequencing adapters, which have a single ‘T’ base overhang at their 3' end. Ligated
fragments are subsequently size selected through purification using SPRI beads and undergo
PCR amplification techniques to prepare the ‘libraries’. The BioAnalyzer is used for quality control
of the libraries to ensure adequate concentration and appropriate fragment size. The resulting
library insert size is 120-200 bp with a median size of 150 bp. Libraries were uniquely barcoded
and pooled for sequencing. DNA sequencing was performed in duplicate on an Illumina® HiSeq
2500 instrument using standard protocols for paired end 150 bp sequencing. As per Illumina’s
recommendation, 3% PhiX was added to each lane as a control, and to assist the analysis
software with any library diversity issues.

Primary Analysis
Illumina HiSeq reads were processed through Illumina’s Real-Time Analysis (RTA) software
generating base calls and corresponding base call quality scores. CIDRSeqSuite 7.1.0 was used
to convert compressed bcl files into compressed fastq files.

Secondary Analysis

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Each independent cell-line was sequenced twice. RNA sequencing fastq files were pseudoaligned
to Genome Reference Consortium Human Build 37 (GRCh37) using Kallisto56. 100 bootstraps
were performed using Kallisto. The R package Sleuth was used for RNA sequencing analysis57
(Table S5). Lane was included as a covariate in the Sleuth model. Differentially expressed genes
were defined as those with a P<0.05.

Integrated analysis of TFAM knockout methylation and expression

The linear-gwis method in FAST (genotype mode) was used to collapse TFAM KO methylation
data into one gene level P-value per gene58. These gene-level methylation results were
combined with gene-level gene expression results for the same gene using the Fisher P-value
combination method to generate an integrated gene level Methylation/RNA sequencing P-value.

GO/KEGG Analysis
Each CpG was annotated with the nearest gene as defined by the closest gene which harbors
the CpG within 1,500 bp of the transcriptional start site and extending to the polyA signal. A bias
exists when performing gene set analysis for genome-wide methylation data that occurs due to
the differing numbers of CpG sites profiled for each gene59. Due to this, we used gometh for GO
and KEGG analysis since it is based off of the goseq method which accounts for this bias60. We
analyzed our individual ARIC/TFAM datasets as well as our TFAM integrated (meth/expression)
dataset. We also combined GO/KEGG results for ARIC, TFAM methylation and TFAM RNA
sequencing using the Fisher P-value combination method to generate an overall combined Pvalue for each term. 10 stepwise cutoffs ranging from 75 CpGs to 300 CpGs were performed to
ensure robustness of results. Final P-value cutoffs used for each analysis were as follows: ARIC
Meta-Analysis (300 CpGs, P=5.24x10-12), TFAM Methylation (300 CpGs, P=4.41x10-4), TFAM

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Expression (169 genes, P=4.30x10-4), TFAM Integrated (Methylation/Expression) (188 genes,
P=8.77x10-6).

All statistical analyses were performed using R (version 3.3.3).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Infinium Methylation EPIC BeadChip array hybridization was performed at the UTHealth Human
Genetics Center, The University of Texas, Houston, TX. Illumina sequencing was conducted at
the Genetic Resources Core Facility, Johns Hopkins Institute of Genetic Medicine, Baltimore,
MD. This research was supported by grant R01HL131573 from the US National Institutes of
Health. Castellani was supported by a CIHR Postdoctoral Fellowship.

ARIC Acknowledgements
The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study has been funded in whole or in part with Federal
funds from the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Department of Health and Human Services (contract numbers HHSN268201700001I,
HHSN268201700002I, HHSN268201700003I, HHSN268201700004I and
HHSN268201700005I). The authors thank the staff and participants of the ARIC study for their
important contributions. Funding was also supported by 5RC2HL102419 and R01NS087541.

CHS Acknowledgements
Infrastructure for the CHARGE Consortium is supported in part by the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute grant R01HL105756. The CHS research was supported by NHLBI contracts
HHSN268201200036C, HHSN268200800007C, HHSN268201800001C, N01HC55222,
N01HC85079, N01HC85080, N01HC85081, N01HC85082, N01HC85083, N01HC85086; and

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NHLBI grants U01HL080295, U01HL130114, K08HL116640, R01HL087652, R01HL092111,
R01HL103612, R01HL103612, R01HL111089, R01HL116747 and R01HL120393 with
additional contribution from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS).
Additional support was provided through R01AG023629 from the National Institute on Aging
(NIA), Merck Foundation / Society of Epidemiologic Research as well as Laughlin Family, Alpha
Phi Foundation, and Locke Charitable Foundation. A full list of principal CHS investigators and
institutions can be found at CHS-NHLBI.org. The provision of genotyping data was supported in
part by the National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences, CTSI grant UL1TR000124,
and the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease Diabetes Research
Center (DRC) grant DK063491 to the Southern California Diabetes Endocrinology Research
Center. The content is solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily
represent the official views of the National Institutes of Health.

FHS Acknowledgements
Whole genome sequencing (WGS) for the Trans-Omics in Precision Medicine (TOPMed)
program was supported by the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI). WGS for
“NHLBI TOPMed: Whole Genome Sequencing and Related Phenotypes in the Framingham
Heart Study” (phs000974.v1.p1) was performed at the Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard
(HHSN268201500014C). Centralized read mapping and genotype calling, along with variant
quality metrics and filtering were provided by the TOPMed Informatics Research Center
(3R01HL-117626-02S1). Phenotype harmonization, data management, sample-identity QC, and
general study coordination, were provided by the TOPMed Data Coordinating Center (3R01HL120393-02S1). We gratefully acknowledge the studies and participants who provided biological
samples and data for TOPMed.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

This work is supported by National Institutes of Health (NIH) contract N01-HC-25195 and
HHSN268201500001I and grant R01 HL092577, also supported by intramural funding of Dan
Levy, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) (for DNA methylation profiling), and
Trans-Omics for Precision Medicine (TOPMed) sponsored by NHLBI/NIH. The Framingham
Heart Study thanks the study participants and the multitude of investigators who over its 70 year
history continue to contribute so much to further our knowledge of heart, lung, blood and sleep
disorders and associated traits.

The views expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; the National Institutes of
Health; or the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Concept and design: Castellani, Guallar, Pankratz, O’Rourke, Coresh, Arking.
Acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data: Castellani, Longchamps, Newcomb,
Sumpter, Lane, Brody, Bartz, Grove, Fornage, Floyd, Bressler, Pankow, Tin, O’Rourke, Guallar,
Pankratz, Taylor, Wang, Liu, Boerwinkle, Arking.
Drafting of the manuscript: Castellani, Arking.
Critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: Castellani,
Longchamps, Floyd, Liu, Tin, Fornage, O’Rourke, Brody, Pankow, Bartz, Arking.
Statistical analysis: Castellani, Longchamps, Lane, Brody, Liu, Guallar, Pankratz, Arking.
Obtained funding: Coresh, Guallar, Boerwinkle, Arking.
Administrative, technical, or material support: Newcomb, Sumpter, Grove, Bressler.
Supervision: Sotoodehnia, Levy, Guallar, Arking.

COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT
The authors declare no competing interests.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES

1. Clayton, D. A. Transcription and replication of animal mitochondrial DNAs. Int. Rev.
Cytol. 141, 217–232 (1992).
2. Pello, R. et al. Mitochondrial DNA background modulates the assembly kinetics of
OXPHOS complexes in a cellular model of mitochondrial disease. Hum. Mol. Genet.
17, 4001–4011 (2008).
3. Wai, T. et al. The role of mitochondrial DNA copy number in mammalian fertility.
Biol. Reprod. 83, 52–62 (2010).
4. Guha, M. & Avadhani, N. G. Mitochondrial retrograde signaling at the crossroads of
tumor bioenergetics, genetics and epigenetics. Mitochondrion 13, 577–591 (2013).
5. Jeng, J.-Y. et al. Maintenance of mitochondrial DNA copy number and expression
are essential for preservation of mitochondrial function and cell growth. J. Cell.
Biochem. 103, 347–357 (2008).
6. Dai, D.-F., Rabinovitch, P. S. & Ungvari, Z. Mitochondria and cardiovascular aging.
Circ. Res. 110, 1109–1124 (2012).
7. Ashar, F. N. et al. Association of Mitochondrial DNA Copy Number With
Cardiovascular Disease. JAMA Cardiol 2, 1247–1255 (2017).
8. Chen, S. et al. Association between leukocyte mitochondrial DNA content and risk of
coronary heart disease: A case-control study. Atherosclerosis 237, 220–226 (2014).
9. Tin, A. et al. Association between Mitochondrial DNA Copy Number in Peripheral
Blood and Incident CKD in the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities Study. J Am
Soc Nephrol 27, 2467–2473 (2016).

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10. Ashar, F. N. et al. Association of mitochondrial DNA levels with frailty and all-cause
mortality. J. Mol. Med. 93, 177–186 (2015).
11. Crovetto, F. et al. A role for mitochondria in gestational diabetes mellitus? Gynecol.
Endocrinol. 29, 259–262 (2013).
12. Sookoian, S. et al. Epigenetic regulation of insulin resistance in nonalcoholic fatty
liver disease: Impact of liver methylation of the peroxisome proliferator–activated
receptor γ coactivator 1α promoter. Hepatology 52, 1992–2000 (2010).
13. Pirola, C. J. et al. Epigenetic Modifications in the Biology of Nonalcoholic Fatty Liver
Disease: The Role of DNA Hydroxymethylation and TET Proteins. Medicine
(Baltimore) 94, e1480 (2015).
14. Delsite, R., Kachhap, S., Anbazhagan, R., Gabrielson, E. & Singh, K. K. Nuclear
genes involved in mitochondria-to-nucleus communication in breast cancer cells.
Mol. Cancer 1, 6 (2002).
15. Kitamura, E. et al. Analysis of tissue-specific differentially methylated regions
(TDMs) in humans. Genomics 89, 326–337 (2007).
16. Horan, M. P. & Cooper, D. N. The emergence of the mitochondrial genome as a
partial regulator of nuclear function is providing new insights into the genetic
mechanisms underlying age-related complex disease. Hum. Genet. 133, 435–458
(2014).
17. Cagin, U. & Enriquez, J. A. The complex crosstalk between mitochondria and the
nucleus: What goes in between? Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol. 63, 10–15 (2015).

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

18. Vivian, C. J. et al. Mitochondrial Genomic Backgrounds Affect Nuclear DNA
Methylation and Gene Expression. Cancer Res. 77, 6202–6214 (2017).
19. Latorre-Pellicer, A. et al. Mitochondrial and nuclear DNA matching shapes
metabolism and healthy ageing. Nature 535, 561–565 (2016).
20. Bellizzi, D., D’Aquila, P., Giordano, M., Montesanto, A. & Passarino, G. Global DNA
methylation levels are modulated by mitochondrial DNA variants. Epigenomics 4,
17–27 (2012).
21. Smiraglia, D. J., Kulawiec, M., Bistulfi, G. L., Gupta, S. G. & Singh, K. K. A novel role
for mitochondria in regulating epigenetic modification in the nucleus. Cancer Biol.
Ther. 7, 1182–1190 (2008).
22. Xie, C. et al. Mitochondrial regulation of cancer associated nuclear DNA methylation.
Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 364, 656–661 (2007).
23. Guha, M. et al. HnRNPA2 is a novel histone acetyltransferase that mediates
mitochondrial stress-induced nuclear gene expression. Cell Discov 2, 16045 (2016).
24. Ekstrand, M. I. et al. Mitochondrial transcription factor A regulates mtDNA copy
number in mammals. Hum. Mol. Genet. 13, 935–944 (2004).
25. Longchamps, R. J. et al. Evaluation of mitochondrial DNA copy number estimation
techniques. bioRxiv 610238 (2019). doi:10.1101/610238
26. Roubicek, D. A. & Souza-Pinto, N. C. de. Mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA as
relevant targets for environmental contaminants. Toxicology 391, 100–108 (2017).
27. Wallace, D. C. A mitochondrial bioenergetic etiology of disease. J Clin Invest 123,
1405–1412 (2013).

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

28. Munot, K. et al. Pattern of expression of genes linked to epigenetic silencing in
human breast cancer. Hum. Pathol. 37, 989–999 (2006).
29. Yu, M. et al. Reduced mitochondrial DNA copy number is correlated with tumor
progression and prognosis in Chinese breast cancer patients. IUBMB Life 59, 450–
457 (2007).
30. Timinskas, A., Au, Z. & Ku, V. Atherosclerosis: alterations in cell communication. 6
(2007).
31. Guantes, R. et al. Global variability in gene expression and alternative splicing is
modulated by mitochondrial content. Genome Res. 25, 633–644 (2015).
32. West, A. P. et al. Mitochondrial DNA stress primes the antiviral innate immune
response. Nature 520, 553–557 (2015).
33. Shindo, T. et al. Regulation of cardiovascular development and homeostasis by the
adrenomedullin-RAMP system. Peptides 111, 55–61 (2019).
34. Bannwarth, S. et al. The human MSH5 (MutSHomolog 5) protein localizes to
mitochondria and protects the mitochondrial genome from oxidative damage.
Mitochondrion 12, 654–665 (2012).
35. The Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) Study: design and objectives. The
ARIC investigators. Am. J. Epidemiol. 129, 687–702 (1989).
36. MitoPipeline, G. MitoPipeline: Generating Mitochondrial copy number estimates from
SNP array data in Genvisis. (2018). Available at: http://genvisis.org/MitoPipeline/.
(Accessed: 27th November 2017)

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

37. Leek, J. T., Johnson, W. E., Parker, H. S., Jaffe, A. E. & Storey, J. D. The sva
package for removing batch effects and other unwanted variation in high-throughput
experiments. Bioinformatics 28, 882–883 (2012).
38. Chen, Y. et al. Discovery of cross-reactive probes and polymorphic CpGs in the
Illumina Infinium HumanMethylation450 microarray. Epigenetics 8, 203–209 (2013).
39. Teschendorff, A. E. et al. A beta-mixture quantile normalization method for
correcting probe design bias in Illumina Infinium 450 k DNA methylation data.
Bioinformatics 29, 189–196 (2013).
40. Pidsley, R. et al. A data-driven approach to preprocessing Illumina 450K methylation
array data. BMC Genomics 14, 293 (2013).
41. Fortin, J.-P. et al. Functional normalization of 450k methylation array data improves
replication in large cancer studies. Genome Biol 15, (2014).
42. Houseman, E. A., Molitor, J. & Marsit, C. J. Reference-free cell mixture adjustments
in analysis of DNA methylation data. Bioinformatics 30, 1431–1439 (2014).
43. Willer, C. J., Li, Y. & Abecasis, G. R. METAL: fast and efficient meta-analysis of
genomewide association scans. Bioinformatics 26, 2190–2191 (2010).
44. Fried, L. P. et al. The Cardiovascular Health Study: design and rationale. Ann
Epidemiol 1, 263–276 (1991).
45. Aryee, M. J. et al. Minfi: a flexible and comprehensive Bioconductor package for the
analysis of Infinium DNA methylation microarrays. Bioinformatics 30, 1363–1369
(2014).

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

46. Maksimovic, J., Gordon, L. & Oshlack, A. SWAN: Subset-quantile within array
normalization for illumina infinium HumanMethylation450 BeadChips. Genome Biol.
13, R44 (2012).
47. Dawber, T. R., Meadors, G. F. & Moore, F. E. Epidemiological approaches to heart
disease: the Framingham Study. Am J Public Health Nations Health 41, 279–281
(1951).
48. Ding, J. et al. Assessing Mitochondrial DNA Variation and Copy Number in
Lymphocytes of ~2,000 Sardinians Using Tailored Sequencing Analysis Tools. PLoS
Genet. 11, e1005306 (2015).
49. Joehanes Roby et al. Epigenetic Signatures of Cigarette Smoking. Circulation:
Cardiovascular Genetics 9, 436–447 (2016).
50. Shabalin, A. A. Matrix eQTL: ultra fast eQTL analysis via large matrix operations.
Bioinformatics 28, 1353–1358 (2012).
51. Delaneau, O., Zagury, J.-F. & Marchini, J. Improved whole-chromosome phasing for
disease and population genetic studies. Nat. Methods 10, 5–6 (2013).
52. Howie, B., Fuchsberger, C., Stephens, M., Marchini, J. & Abecasis, G. R. Fast and
accurate genotype imputation in genome-wide association studies through prephasing. Nat. Genet. 44, 955–959 (2012).
53. Han, B. & Eskin, E. Random-effects model aimed at discovering associations in
meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 88, 586–
598 (2011).

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

54. Brion, M.-J. A., Shakhbazov, K. & Visscher, P. M. Calculating statistical power in
Mendelian randomization studies. Int J Epidemiol 42, 1497–1501 (2013).
55. Fortin, J.-P., Triche, T. J. & Hansen, K. D. Preprocessing, normalization and
integration of the Illumina HumanMethylationEPIC array with minfi. Bioinformatics
33, 558–560 (2017).
56. Bray, N. L., Pimentel, H., Melsted, P. & Pachter, L. Near-optimal probabilistic RNAseq quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 34, 525–527 (2016).
57. Pimentel, H., Bray, N. L., Puente, S., Melsted, P. & Pachter, L. Differential analysis
of RNA-seq incorporating quantification uncertainty. Nat. Methods 14, 687–690
(2017).
58. Huang, H., Chanda, P., Alonso, A., Bader, J. S. & Arking, D. E. Gene-Based Tests
of Association. PLOS Genetics 7, e1002177 (2011).
59. Geeleher, P. et al. Gene-set analysis is severely biased when applied to genomewide methylation data. Bioinformatics 29, 1851–1857 (2013).
60. Young, M. D., Wakefield, M. J., Smyth, G. K. & Oshlack, A. Gene ontology analysis
for RNA-seq: accounting for selection bias. Genome Biol. 11, R14 (2010).

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Flow chart of methods.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. ARIC Meta-Analysis (AA and EA) Results. 34 Independent genome-wide significant CpGs were identified in ARIC meta-analysis to be associated with mtDNACN (red dots). Blue dotted line represents genome-wide significance cutoff (P=5x10-8). CpGs had to be independent and nominally significant in both cohorts (P<0.05), as
well as meet the meta-analysis significance cutoff (P=5x10-8) to be considered significant.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Validation of Meta-analysis identified CpGs in CHS and FHS combined cohorts (N=2,528, R2=0.36).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. CRISPR-Cas9 induced heterozygous knockout of TFAM reduced RNA expression, mtDNA-CN and protein levels. A. RNA expression was reduced by over
80% relative to negative control (NC) expression (left) (passage 45). mtDNA-CN levels showed an ~18-fold reduction in TFAM knockout cell lines, (passage 32) (right). B.
Western blot of CRISPR TFAM heterozygous knockout showed a significant reduction in TFAM protein (passage 35). NC=Negative Control lines. CRISPR=CRISPR TFAM
knockout lines. Control is Tubulin.

A.

B.

Table 1. Sample characteristics of discovery and validation cohorts.
bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCOVERY COHORTS
ARIC AA (N=1567) ARIC EA (N=940)

VALIDATION COHORTS
CHS

CHS AA (N=239)

CHS EA (N=294)

FHS

FHS (N=1995)

mean (range)

mean (range)

mean (range)

mean (range)

mean (range)

57.2 (47 - 71)

60.2 (47 - 72)

72.4 (65 - 92)

72.3 (65 - 95)

61.4 (20-91)

0.04 (-6.47 - 2.88)

0.04 (-4.41 - 2.87)

0.05 (-3.19 - 2.69)

0.05 (-2.28 - 2.76)

0.01 (-2.28 -8.11)

N (percentage)

N (percentage)

N (percentage)

N (percentage)

N (percentage)

Male

604 (38.5%)

381 (40.5%)

97 (41.8%)

112 (38.9%)

901 (45.16%)

Female

963 (61.5%)

559 (59.5%)

135 (58.2%)

176 (61.1%)

1094 (54.64%)

Age
mtDNA-CN (SD units)
Sex

Collection Site
Forsyth County, NC
Suburbs of Minneapolis, MN
Jackson, MS
Washington County, MD

Collection Site
188 (12%)
0 (0%)
1379 (88%)
0 (0%)

832 (88.5%)
86 (9.2%)

Bowman Gray
Davis

0 (0%)

Hopkins

22 (2.3%)

Pittsburgh

Collection Site
74 (31.9%)
71 (30.6%)
0 (0%)
87 (37.5%)

67 (23.3%)
71 (24.7%)

Framingham
Town

1995 (100%)

83 (28.8%)
67 (23.3%)

Smoking Status
Current Smoker

655 (41.8%)

181 (19.3%)

32 (13.8%)

26 (9.0%)

205 (10.4%)

Former Smoker

484 (30.9%)

366 (38.9%)

89 (38.4%)

116 (40.3%)

947 (47.47%)

Never Smoker

428 (27.3%)

392 (41.7%)

85 (36.6%)

133 (46.2%)

838 (42.0%)

26 (11.2%)

13 (4.5%)

5 (0.2%)

Unknown

0 (0.0%)

1 (0.1%)

Phenotypes (# of cases)
Mortality
CVD
Prevalent
Incident
CHD
Prevalent
Incident

605 (38.6%)
154 (9.8%)
296 (18.9%)
112 (7.1%)
193 (12.3%)

224 (23.8%)
49 (5.2%)
108 (11.5%)
40 (4.3%)
83 (8.8%)

194 (83.6%)
N/A
83 (35.8%)
N/A
48 (20.7%)

263 (91.3%)
N/A
99 (34.4%)
N/A
57 (19.8%)

217 (10.87%)
94 (4.71%)
94 (4.71%)
94 (4.71%)
68 (3.41%)

Cell Type Proportions

mean (range)

mean (range)

mean (range)

mean (range)

mean (range)

CD8

0.15 (0.00 - 0.48)

0.10 (0.00 - 0.27)

0.09 (0.00 - 0.38)

0.06 (0.00 - 0.22)

0.10 (0.00-0.36)

CD4

0.19 (0.00 - 0.52)

0.16 (0.00 - 0.44)

0.20 (0.00 - 0.48)

0.15 (0.00 - 0.52)

0.19 (0.02-0.44)

B-cell

0.07 (0.00 - 0.58)

0.06 (0.00 - 0.56)

0.08 (0.00 - 0.26)

0.06 (0.00 - 0.76)

0.04 (0.00-0.52)

Monocyte

0.13 (0.02 - 0.26)

0.09 (0.02 - 0.19)

0.10 (0.00 - 0.27)

0.09 (0.01 - 0.35)

0.12 (0.05-0.30)

Granulocyte

0.45 (0.15 - 0.98)

0.55 (0.16 - 0.93)

0.44 (0.11 - 0.75)

0.57 (0.03 - 0.92)

0.49 (0.02-0.85)

NK cells

N/A

0.07 (0.00 - 0.36)

0.12 (0.01 - 0.38)

0.09 (0.00 - 0.36)

0.02 (0.00-0.13)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2. ARIC discovery meta-analysis identified 34 independent mtDNA-CN associated CpGs. Validation meta-analysis included CHS AA, CHS EA and FHS EA
cohorts (P<0.05 and same direction, bolded cells). All cohort meta-analysis (ARIC AA, ARIC EA, CHS AA, CHS EA and FHS EA) identified 6 validated CpGs (P<5x10-8,
shaded cells).
ARIC Meta-Analysis (N=2507)
Validation Meta-Analysis
All Cohort Meta-Analysis (N=5035)
(N=2528)
Marker Name
Chr
Position
Gene‡
Estimate Standard
P-value
Estimate Standard
P-value
Estimate Standard
P-value
Error
Error
Error
cg21051031

5

93,905,482

KIAA0825

0.0080

0.0005

1.66E-47

0.0015

0.0007

2.45E-02

0.0056

0.0004

1.48E-42

cg26094004

17

42,075,116

PYY

-0.0098

0.0009

4.54E-28

-0.0043

0.0012

5.05E-04

-0.0079

0.0007

4.13E-28

cg26563141

2

-0.0088

0.0013

2.42E-11

-0.0044

0.0010

7.42E-06

-0.0060

0.0008

2.20E-14

cg03597491

11

113,945,432

RGPD2;
RGPD1
ZBTB16

0.0038

0.0006

6.20E-11

-0.0011

0.0004

6.94E-03

0.0006

0.0003

7.05E-02

cg04454285

16

86,016,317

IRF8

0.0033

0.0005

9.95E-11

0.0007

0.0004

1.25E-01

0.0018

0.0003

7.31E-08

cg01351315

17

46,667,737

LOC404266

0.0049

0.0008

1.84E-10

-0.0004

0.0005

4.26E-01

0.0013

0.0004

3.54E-03

cg21163717

8

21,769,903

DOK2

-0.0038

0.0006

2.13E-10

0.0001

0.0005

8.88E-01

-0.0014

0.0004

1.13E-04

cg13488078

8

27,469,338

CLU

0.0045

0.0007

6.72E-10

-0.0002

0.0005

7.13E-01

0.0013

0.0004

1.47E-03

cg01697902

14

25,046,117

CTSG

0.0041

0.0007

6.72E-10

0.0010

0.0005

4.19E-02

0.0020

0.0004

1.43E-07

cg26894523

4

107,725

ZNF718

0.0036

0.0006

6.90E-10

-0.0008

0.0004

8.68E-02

0.0007

0.0004

4.67E-02

cg10044470

14

104,866,284

C14orf144

-0.0059

0.0010

7.51E-10

-0.0002

0.0007

7.47E-01

-0.0021

0.0005

1.39E-04

cg20605134

6

15,400,462

JARID2

0.0030

0.0005

9.41E-10

0.0008

0.0005

8.75E-02

0.0018

0.0003

6.76E-08

cg17356733

21

34,774,627

IFNGR2

0.0044

0.0007

2.38E-09

-0.0008

0.0006

1.57E-01

0.0012

0.0005

7.50E-03

cg11212901

17

22,020,759

MTRNR2L1

0.0042

0.0007

3.60E-09

0.0001

0.0007

9.74E-01

0.0022

0.0005

2.33E-05

cg17586302

6

144,013,969

PHACTR2

0.0048

0.0008

4.24E-09

0.0007

0.0007

3.20E-01

0.0023

0.0005

7.39E-06

cg22068629

19

2,446,633

LMNB2

0.0050

0.0009

9.85E-09

-0.0001

0.0006

9.01E-01

0.0016

0.0005

1.29E-03

cg06358171

1

54,822,008

SSBP3

0.0057

0.0010

1.03E-08

-0.0003

0.0007

6.71E-01

0.0017

0.0006

2.30E-03

cg25006194

12

94,288,553

CRADD

0.0040

0.0007

1.15E-08

-0.0001

0.0005

8.82E-01

0.0012

0.0004

2.13E-03

cg13381110

18

60,646,614

PHLPP1

0.0065

0.0011

1.43E-08

-0.0003

0.0008

7.56E-01

0.0020

0.0007

2.55E-03

cg03910874

6

209,712

LOC285766

-0.0038

0.0007

1.64E-08

-0.0004

0.0006

4.67E-01

-0.0020

0.0005

1.28E-05

cg23304647

7

2,778,058

GNA12

0.0042

0.0007

1.84E-08

-0.0008

0.0005

1.65E-01

0.0010

0.0004

2.72E-02

cg00705730

2

106,438,120

NCK2

0.0046

0.0008

2.04E-08

0.0007

0.0006

2.52E-01

0.0020

0.0005

2.40E-05

cg00960906

5

31,769,846

PDZD2

-0.0050

0.0009

2.33E-08

-0.0009

0.0007

1.53E-01

-0.0024

0.0005

8.50E-06

cg14531564

1

1,154,853

SDF4

-0.0039

0.0007

2.34E-08

0.0006

0.0006

3.52E-01

-0.0013

0.0005

3.79E-03

cg14575356

6

130,013,903

ARHGAP18

0.0047

0.0008

3.14E-08

0.0023

0.0007

1.10E-03

0.0033

0.0005

1.22E-09

cg12430029

17

55,446,979

MSI2

-0.0044

0.0008

3.19E-08

0.0007

0.0006

2.83E-01

-0.0012

0.0005

1.10E-02

88,124,876

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cg23513930

3

0.0030

0.0006

3.28E-08

0.0014

0.0004

1.96E-03

0.0020

0.0003

3.71E-09

0.0048

0.0009

3.35E-08

0.0001

0.0007

9.95E-01

0.0017

0.0005

8.20E-04

30,720,263

GHRLOS;
GHRL
SNORA22;
CCT6P1
IER3

cg01323964

7

cg03720100

6

0.0030

0.0005

3.73E-08

-0.0008

0.0005

8.46E-02

0.0008

0.0004

2.31E-02

cg08899667

6

31,761,055

VARS

-0.0051

0.0009

4.15E-08

-0.0035

0.0007

3.11E-06

-0.0041

0.0006

1.55E-12

cg16276850

17

38,498,914

RARA

0.0047

0.0008

4.35E-08

-0.0004

0.0005

4.38E-01

0.0010

0.0004

2.77E-02

cg17564205

12

89,992,940

ATP2B1

0.0017

0.0003

4.43E-08

0.0004

0.0004

2.66E-01

0.0012

0.0002

4.34E-07

cg12578100

8

106,330,170

ZFPM2

0.0045

0.0008

4.49E-08

-0.0003

0.0007

6.58E-01

0.0017

0.0005

1.33E-03

cg18548864

3

112,995,278

BOC

0.0031

0.0006

4.83E-08

0.0004

0.0005

4.46E-01

0.0016

0.0004

2.40E-05

10,334,717
65,219,171

‡Gene is defined as the closest gene(s) which harbor the CpG within 1500 bp of the transcriptional start site and extending to the polyA signal.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3. Results of pathway and functional analysis in ARIC Meta-analysis and TFAM knockout methylation and expression datasets with
combined P-Value and ARIC P-Value <0.05. TFAM integrated (INT) P-value represents combined methylation and expression results. Combined P-value
represents combined ARIC and TFAM methylation and expression results. A. KEGG pathways sorted by combined p-value. B. GO pathways sorted by
combined p-value.

A.
Pathway

Name

ARIC
P-value

path:hsa04080
path:hsa05033
path:hsa04024
path:hsa04614
path:hsa04723
path:hsa05032
path:hsa05031
path:hsa04724

Neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction
Nicotine addiction
cAMP signaling pathway
Renin-angiotensin system
Retrograde endocannabinoid signaling
Morphine addiction
Amphetamine addiction
Glutamatergic synapse

5.24E-12
8.99E-04
1.29E-05
1.04E-05
1.89E-04
1.26E-02
3.54E-02
1.80E-02

TFAM
METH
P-value
4.41E-04
6.30E-05
2.32E-02
5.11E-02
1.84E-02
4.38E-02
9.64E-02
9.49E-02

TFAM
RNA
P-value
4.30E-04
9.32E-04
2.23E-01
1.00E+00
1.56E-01
5.15E-02
4.23E-01
1.00E+00

TFAM Combined Pathway P-value
INT
(ARIC, TFAM-METH,
P-value
TFAM-RNA)
8.77E-06
8.96E-16
7.72E-06
1.61E-08
3.25E-01
1.03E-05
1.00E+00
6.37E-05
3.66E-03
6.48E-05
1.40E-03
1.88E-03
1.19E-01
4.18E-02
1.00E+00
4.73E-02

TFAM
METH
P-value
1.71E-05
1.06E-05
1.08E-05
2.22E-05
2.22E-05
8.02E-04
9.81E-05
1.03E-04

TFAM
RNA
P-value
1.19E-02
6.27E-02
6.34E-02
6.05E-02
6.05E-02
1.23E-04
2.74E-01
1.45E-01

TFAM
INT
P-value
1.42E-02
1.92E-02
1.92E-02
1.87E-02
1.87E-02
3.74E-07
5.92E-03
6.19E-04

B.
Function

Name

ARIC
P-value

GO:0007267
GO:0099537
GO:0099536
GO:0007268
GO:0098916
GO:0099095
GO:0045202
GO:0045211

Cell-cell signaling
Trans-synaptic signaling
Synaptic signaling
Chemical synaptic transmission
Anterograde trans-synaptic signaling
Ligand-gated anion channel activity
Synapse
Postsynaptic membrane

1.42E-03
1.88E-03
1.88E-03
1.88E-03
1.88E-03
4.30E-02
1.98E-04
8.33E-03

Combined Function Pvalue (ARIC, TFAM-METH,
TFAM-RNA)
7.63E-08
2.89E-07
2.97E-07
5.47E-07
5.47E-07
8.74E-07
1.07E-06
1.78E-05

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 4. Methylation Status of Validated CpGs in TFAM KO cell lines (N=6). Bolded entries indicate differential expression P<0.05.
Average
Average
All Cohort Meta-Analysis
TFAM Differential Expression
Methylation Methylation in
Marker Name
in Negative
TFAM
Mean
Standard
Estimate
P-value
Beta Estimate
P-Value
Control
Knockout
Methylation
Error
Lines
Lines
cg03964851
(surrogate for
cg21051031)

0.83

0.0038

0.0004

7.34E-27

0.7685

0.7710

-0.0025

9.42E-01

cg26094004

0.55

-0.0079

0.0007

4.13E-28

0.6504

0.9001

-0.2497

2.91E-05

cg26563141

0.37

-0.0060

0.0008

2.20E-14

0.3071

0.4187

-0.1116

1.25E-02

cg14575356

0.55

0.0033

0.0005

1.22E-09

0.7906

0.7918

-0.0013

9.40E-01

cg23513930

0.35

0.0020

0.0003

3.71E-09

cg08899667

0.58

-0.0041

0.0006

1.55E-12

Not on EPIC array and no surrogate available
0.7931

0.7014

0.0917

3.33E-03

*Note: Mean methylation for cg21051031 = 0.85

Table 5. Differentially expressed genes (P=6.41x10-4) within 1Mb of differentially methylated CpGs.

EWAS CpG

cg26094004

Chr:Position

17:42,075,116

Number
of Genes
Within 1
Mb

42

P-Value for
TFAM
Methylation
Difference

Gene

P-value for
TFAM
Differential
Expression

Direction of
Effect
(following
KO)*

Distance
from
CpG
(Kb)

IFI35

3.76E-05

Increased

931.6

RAMP2

5.51E-04

Increased

683.3

RPIA

5.04E-06

Decreased

566.8

HLA-DRB5

6.50E-07

Decreased

756.3

MSH5

2.50E-04

Increased

1.8

2.91E-05

cg26563141

2:88,124,876

4

1.25E-02

cg08899667

6:31,761,055

32

3.33E-03

Description

interferon induced protein 35 [Source:HGNC
Symbol;Acc:HGNC:5399]
receptor activity modifying protein 2
[Source:HGNC Symbol;Acc:HGNC:9844]
ribose 5-phosphate isomerase A [Source:HGNC
Symbol;Acc:HGNC:10297]
major histocompatibility complex: class II: DR
beta 5 [Source:HGNC Symbol;Acc:HGNC:4953]
mutS homolog 5 [Source:HGNC
Symbol;Acc:HGNC:7328]

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/673293; this version posted June 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 6. Summary of phenotype associations from all-cohort meta-analysis for Validated CpGs. Bold entries highlight nominally significant
associations (P<0.05).
Meta
Direction

Expected
Direction of
Phenotype
Association

cg21051031

Positive

cg26094004

All Cohorts

Prevalent CHD
Beta

Std.
Error

P-Value

Negative

-0.56

1.95

Negative

Positive

2.91

cg26563141

Negative

Positive

cg14575356

Positive

cg23513930
cg08899667

Prevalent CVD
Beta

Std.
Error

P-Value

7.74E-01

-0.67

1.88

1.48

4.89E-02

3.13

0.22

1.33

8.69E-01

Negative

-1.80

2.04

Positive

Negative

1.99

Negative

Positive

3.65

Incident CHD
Beta

Std.
Error

P-Value

7.23E-01

0.96

1.80

1.40

2.55E-02

0.89

-0.31

1.24

8.00E-01

3.79E-01

-2.19

1.88

3.37

5.54E-01

0.88

1.76

3.81E-02

3.35

Incident CVD

Mortality

Beta

Std.
Error

P-Value

Beta

Std.
Error

P-Value

5.94E-01

-0.28

1.41

8.43E-01

-0.79

0.81

3.31E-01

0.93

3.39E-01

-0.13

0.77

8.63E-01

-0.78

0.49

1.16E-01

0.13

0.94

8.88E-01

1.10

0.75

1.40E-01

0.98

0.45

2.87E-02

2.45E-01

2.71

1.34

4.36E-02

1.75

1.08

1.04E-01

0.12

0.68

8.63E-01

3.07

7.75E-01

2.24

1.84

2.24E-01

0.50

1.49

7.39E-01

1.07

0.94

2.53E-01

1.61

3.81E-02

1.57

1.10

1.54E-01

0.06

0.93

9.44E-01

2.08

0.59

3.93E-04

