bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cell based strain stiffening of a non-fibrous matrix as organizing principle for
morphogenesis

Daniel Rüdiger1, Kerstin Kick1, Andriy Goychuk2, Angelika M. Vollmar1, Erwin Frey2,
Stefan Zahler1*
1

Department of Pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Biology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität

München, Butenandtstraße 5-13, 81377 Munich, Germany
2

Arnold Sommerfeld Center for Theoretical Physics and Center for NanoScience,

Department of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Theresienstraße
37, 80333 Munich, Germany.

Classification: Biological Sciences/Cell Biology

*Corresponding author: Stefan Zahler, Department of Pharmacy, LudwigMaximilians-Universität, Butenandtstraße 5-13, 81377 Munich, Tel.: +49-89-218077196; Fax: +49-89-2180-77170; E-mail: stefan.zahler@cup.uni-muenchen.de

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract

Endothelial tube formation on a reconstituted extracellular matrix (Matrigel) is a wellestablished in vitro model for studying the processes of angiogenesis and
vasculogenesis. However, to date, the organizing principles that underlie the
morphogenesis of this network, and that shape the initial process of cell-cell finding
remain elusive. Furthermore, it is unclear how in vitro results extrapolate to in vivo
morphogenesis. Here, we identify a mechanism that allows cells to form networks by
mechanically reorganizing and stiffening their extracellular matrix, independent of
chemical guidance cues. Interestingly, we find that this cellular self-organization
strongly depends on the connectivity and topology of the surrounding matrix, as well
as on cell contractility and cell density. Cells rearrange the matrix, and form bridges
of matrix material that are stiffer than their surroundings, thus creating a durotactic
track for the initiation of cell-cell contacts. This contractility-based communication via
strain stiffening and matrix rearrangement might be a general organizing principle
during tissue development or regeneration.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Significance Statement

In addition to chemotactic gradients, biomechanical cues are important for guiding
biological pattern formation. Self-assembly of cells has often been ascribed to
reorganization of collagen fibres in the extracellular matrix. However, the basement
membrane surrounding vascular cells, is per se non-fibrous. Here, we find that this
difference in matrix topology can crucially influence cell behaviour and pattern
formation. In a homogeneously elastic environment like the basement membrane,
endothelial cells rearrange extracellular matrix proteins by contractile force, forming
stiff intercellular bridges as tracks for cell-cell contacts. Our findings shine some light
why there is a lot of merit in having multiple approaches to matrix elasticity (like
continuum theories or dilated network approaches). Our observations might help to
understand why vascular nets look different in different tissues and after
rearrangement of the extracellular matrix during disease.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction

Angiogenesis, the sprouting of new vessels from pre-existing ones, and
vasculogenesis, the de novo formation of vessels from blood islands during
embryogenesis are crucial for any tissue growth – be it physiological (during
development or wound healing) or pathophysiological (e.g. in solid tumours). Since
the discovery of Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF), the concept that
vascular networks are shaped and driven by chemotactic gradients became
predominant (1). The clinical success of anti-VEGF therapy further fuelled this
hypothesis (1).

In recent years it became more and more clear that biophysical cues, and especially
interactions of cells with the extracellular matrix (ECM), are important determinants
for morphogenesis of tissues in health and disease (2, 3), especially in organs
showing tubular structure and branching morphogenesis, like mammary glands (4). It
has also just recently been recognized that biomechanical cues and mechanical
interactions between cells also affect vascular development and organ specificity of
vascular systems. This has, to date, largely been ascribed to shear stress exerted via
blood flow (5). However, there are also numerous reports showing that endothelial
cells respond to biophysical confinements (6), matrix stiffness (7, 8), and fibrous
topography (9, 10). Furthermore, endothelial cells are able to deform collagen I gels
(11) and thereby to communicate mechanically (12). This clearly indicates that
biomechanical regulation of endothelial cells is much more versatile than only
responding to shear stress. Unfortunately, so far, not much has been uncovered
about the role of biomechanical processes in vascular development. Here, we aim to
address this issue by experimentally probing the influence of biomechanics on
cellular pattern formation. In vivo endothelial cells are mainly exposed to a vascular
basement membrane (BM). Instead of collagen I this membrane consists of laminins
and collagen IV (13), which form a non-fibrous matrix on a micron scale (14-16). One
of the most widely used in vitro assays for angiogenesis, the “tube formation assay”,
employs Matrigel, which is a reconstituted basement membrane (BM) prepared from
a murine tumour (17). In this assay, single endothelial cells find each other within
minutes and start to form a network. The mechanisms underlying this initial finding
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

process and the subsequent pattern formation are still unclear. Here, we address this
open issue and perform an in-depth analysis of the interactions between endothelial
cells and Matrigel using functional assays, confocal microscopy and atomic force
microscopy (AFM). We report that, while chemotactic gradients do not seem to play a
role for the initial finding process between cells, the cells actively restructure the
matrix. This leads to stiff fibrous bridges between nearby cells, which then become
tracks for cell-cell contacts. In the light of recent studies showing matrix remodelling
by diseases like fibrosis (18, 19), as well as therapeutical accessibility of the ECM
(20), our data might help to understand the forces shaping vascular beds.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results

The early finding phase of cells depends on cell density and has intrinsic
length scales
After seeding the cells on Matrigel, cell-cell contacts are rapidly formed (Fig. 1A,
Supplementary Movie S1). Subsequent to this initial “finding phase”, tubes are
formed and re-organized. To investigate the impact of cell-cell distance on network
formation, tube formation assays were performed with different cell densities. At low
densities (up to 6 x 104 cells/ml), the cells barely moved, and no network formation
occurred (Fig. 1B). With higher cell numbers, tube formation was observed (Fig. 1B).
To characterize cell behaviour during tube formation, we analysed a large body of
individual trajectories obtained from cells at eight different seeding densities (from 0.5
to 20 x 104 cells/ml). Since cells only move significantly when tube formation occurs,
we concluded that cell motility must be a result of the macroscopic self-organization
of the cells into a network, and not the other way around. Therefore, we directly
related the behaviour of single cells to the behaviour of the collective and found the
typical time scale of tube formation to be 93 min in the normalized velocity
autocorrelation function (Fig. 1C, lower left panel)]. Furthermore, we observe network
formation only above a critical cell density, which suggests that cells cannot detect
each other if they are far apart. To test whether there is an intrinsic length for
intercellular signalling, we first measured the mutual velocity alignment of distant
cells. Here, we found that cells weakly align their motion across the whole field of
view, and especially so within a typical radius of 106 µm (Fig. 1C, lower right panel).
Finally, we confirmed that there is a directed component of cell motion, so that cells
sense the positions of surrounding individuals. We found that cells are attracted to
distant cells, while being sterically repelled from nearby cells. The distance over
which cells optimally sense other cells coincides well with the distance over which
cells align their direction of motion (Fig. 1C, upper right panel). Taken together, these
findings suggest that cells can sense each other, to align and cluster, over a typical
distance of at least 106 µm. To communicate over such long distances, cells would
have to employ either chemical or mechanical signalling. Therefore, we next
narrowed down which type of cellular signal is necessary for tube formation.
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The initial phase of tube formation is not based on soluble or matrix bound
chemotactic gradients
To investigate what causes the initial finding of cells and early pattern formation, we
first examined the potential role of chemotactic gradients. To override endogenous
gradients, we added 20 nM VEGF to the medium. After 3 h and 6 h we detected no
significant difference in the number of tubes and nodes (Fig. 2A). Even when cells
were totally deprived of growth factors by seeding them in phosphate buffered saline
(PBS), initial tube formation took place (Fig. 2A). To specifically avoid the formation
of soluble gradients in the medium, we also performed microfluidic experiments,
where the tube formation setting was constantly superfused. However, tube formation
still occurred (Fig. 2B and Supplementary Movie S2) – even though the tubes were
distorted by shear stress.

Next, we investigated the potential existence of matrix bound gradients. As shown by
immunostainings and intensity profiles (Fig. 2C), there was no matrix bound gradient
of VEGF (green) between single cells, or tubular structures respectively. At the
starting point right after cell adhesion (20 min), the fluorescence intensity of VEGF
was evenly distributed with a slightly elevated intensity at the areas covered the cells,
but without a long-ranged gradient. The intensity plot after 3 h showed an equal
progression: The intensity of VEGF bound to the matrix was at a basal level, and
there was an increased intensity at the areas covered by cells or tubes, respectively.
However, there were still no apparent long-ranged VEGF gradients. In an additional
set of experiments, we inhibited matrix metalloproteases (MMPs) with 10 µM
batimastat to block the potential release of matrix bound growth factors. Batimastat
treatment did not reduce tube formation (Supplementary Fig. S1). Therefore, we
conclude that protein gradients are not the leading cause of tube formation.

Tube formation depends on cell contractility, matrix deformation/remodelling
and matrix stiffness
To test the hypothesis of mechanical signalling as driver of tube formation, we treated
cells with the myosin II ATPase inhibitor blebbistatin. This caused a loss of
contractility, and initial network formation was dramatically reduced (Fig. 3A). Next,
we performed traction force microscopy experiments to investigate matrix
deformation during tube formation (Fig. 3B). The analysis of the bead displacement
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

over the first 3 h after seeding the cells showed significant matrix deformation.
Matrigel was detectably compressed in a distance up to only 30 µm around the cell,
but the displacement of the beads could be detected at distances around at least 100
µm. This nicely corresponds to the normalized attraction between cells detected by
cell tracking (Fig. 1C). With blebbistatin treatment the deformation was weaker and
slower, but the length scale of substrate compression remained roughly the same.

Since matrix deformation seems to play an important role for tube formation, we
created polyacrylamide (PAA) and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gels of defined
stiffness and coated them with a layer of Matrigel of defined thickness (< 20 µm).
This setup allows for sensing of the underlying polymer surface by the cells
(Supplementary Figs. S2 and S3). At stiffness values between 0.5 kPa (similar to
Matrigel) and 1.5 kPa HUVECs form a tubular network on both polymers, comparable
to the Matrigel control (Fig. 3C). At a stiffness of 4 or 5 kPa, HUVECs just spread like
on the glass control (Fig. 3C). When we stained and imaged the two main
constituents of Matrigel, laminin and collagen IV, we observed a dramatic remodelling
over time (Fig. 4): the cells rearranged laminin and collagen IV, forming bridges of
matrix material between them. Inhibiting cell contractility via blebbistatin treatment
strongly inhibited this behaviour (Fig. 4) so that no bridges were observed. We find
that matrix remodelling depends on matrix stiffness: while cells remodelled the matrix
at low stiffness values (0.5 and 1.5 kPa), a stiffer gel (4 kPa) stayed largely
unstructured (Supplementary Fig. S3C). This suggests that the ability to deform and
restructure the matrix is crucial for subsequent tube formation, and depends on cell
contractility and matrix stiffness.

Laminin plays a key role for the tube formation
To investigate, whether substrate stiffness alone is the key parameter for initial tube
formation, we coated PDMS gels with a collagen I gel to obtain the same stiffness as
with Matrigel. In this case, the

HUVECs spread

without

forming

tubes

(Supplementary Figs. S4A and B, and S5A). Most likely, this difference between
Matrigel and a collagen gel of identical stiffness originates from the respective
molecular and structural makeup of both gels. To investigate this point, we first
focussed on laminin, the main constituent of Matrigel. A commercially available pure
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

laminin gel turned out to be much softer that Matrigel (Supplementary Fig. S4A), but
supported the initial tube formation process. At later time points, however, the tubular
networks collapsed (Supplementary Fig. S4B). This suggests that the soft laminin gel
could not withstand the contractile forces of cell collectives. When we created mixed
gels with different ratios of laminin and collagen I, only the ratio of 6:1
(4.8 mg/ml:0.8 mg/ml, other ratios not shown) supported tube formation over a longer
period of time (Supplementary Fig. S4B and C), although this gel was as soft as
laminin alone. Thus, the presence of laminin seems to be of crucial importance. The
presence of small amounts of fibrillary collagen I seems to lend mechanical stability
to the gel, while a ratio above 6:1 disturbs the matrix reorganization process.
Next, we manipulated the structure of Matrigel with netrin-4, which binds to laminin-

γ1 and is able to destroy laminin networks (21). We tested ratios between netrin-4
and laminin of 1:2, 1:1 and 1.5:1 (Fig. 5A). With a laminin excess no change in the
laminin structure was observed. Both in pure Matrigel and for a netrin-4 to laminin
ratio of 1:2, laminin showed a very homogeneous structure and cells formed a tubular
network. For a netrin-4 to laminin ratio of 1:1, the homogenous structure of laminin
was slightly interrupted, and the cells formed clusters instead of a network. With a
netrin-4 excess, the structure of the laminin network completely changed and
became rough (Fig. 5A). HUVECs seemed to sediment through the gel and spread
on the plastic bottom of the well. Accordingly, not only the presence of laminin is of
importance for tube formation, but also the crosslinking of laminin and the
homogeneity of the substrate.
As a different approach to test the relevance of laminin for tube formation, we used
integrin-blocking antibodies (Fig. 5B). While inhibition of integrins favouring binding to
fibronectin and other ECM proteins (integrins α4, α5 and αv) did not influence
endothelial tube formation, blocking of integrins that mainly bind to laminin (integrins

α1, α2, α3 and α6), potently inhibited the formation of tubular structures. This again
underscores that laminin is the crucial matrix component for the formation of tubes on
Matrigel.

Strain stiffening guides the cell-cell sensing process
To get an impression of the mechanical landscape of the different matrices in the
absence and presence of cells, we prepared stiffness maps by using atomic force
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

microscopy (AFM). In collagen I gels we detected an inhomogeneity of the stiffness
map, with alternating stiff regions at the collagen fibre locations and soft regions in
between (Fig. 6A). In contrast, we found that the stiffness of Matrigel was
homogeneous across the whole gel. By using fluorescence reflection microscopy, we
could clearly detect fibres in collagen gels (Fig. 6A, right panel), while Matrigel
showed no fibrous structure (not shown). On the collagen gels, the cells aligned
along the stiff collagen fibres (Fig. 6B). The cell tracking plots shows that on collagen,
single cells persistently migrated over long distances. In contrast, on Matrigel, single
cells without interactions with other cells moved only over very short distances (Fig.
6B). Using AFM, we measured the stiffness of the areas between two cells (below
the critical cell-cell distance for tube formation). As a control, an area not affected by
cells was also measured. For all cell pairs, we could detect a significant increase in
the stiffness of the space between cells, just before cells protrude into this area (Fig.
6C). It seems like the cells use the self-created stiffer regions as a guidance cue.
Supplementary Fig. S6shows further examples for the strain stiffening effect and its
use for connecting cells.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion

Since the development of Matrigel, an extracellular matrix preparation from murine
tumors, by the group of Hynda Kleinman nearly 30 years ago (22), the endothelial
tube formation assay has become one of the most widely used in vitro assay systems
for investigating angiogenesis (23). It is highly intriguing to note that the driving force
behind the self-organization of the tube-forming cells is still unclear. The common
assumption is that chemotactic gradients are the main sculptors of vascular
development. VEGF is undoubtedly a central player in the processes of angiogenesis
and vasculogenesis (1), since it guarantees endothelial cell survival, proliferation and
chemotaxis. Furthermore, it coordinates with other signalling pathways (e.g. Notch),
which are important for the differentiation of endothelial cells into tip and stalk cells
(24). However, in our experimental model we could exclude that soluble gradients of
VEGF play a role for the initial sensing phase of tube formation. Furthermore, matrix
bound gradients of VEGF, which have been demonstrated in collagen gels (25), were
not detectable in Matrigel during tube formation. This does of course by no means
indicate that VEGF is not important at later time points (26) or for navigating new
vessels into hypoxic tissues, but points to additional, alternative pathways of
endothelial cell communication, like, e.g. mechano-signalling. We and others see that
tube formation relates to cell density (26) and stiffness of the matrix (8). We
hypothesize that endothelial cells generate deformation fields in the matrix, which
allow for communication over longer cell-cell distances. A further hint towards a
mechanical component during pattern formation is the drastic reduction of tube
formation after inhibition of cell contractility via blebbistatin treatment.
In fibrous gels (mostly collagen) mechanical sensing between cells over long
distances (approx. 100 µm) has been repeatedly described and has been ascribed to
two phenomena: fibre alignment and strain stiffening in response to cellular traction
forces (27, 28). Furthermore, it has been shown that cell-induced matrix stiffening is
more profound for cell ensembles than for single cells (10, 29). Similar observations
have also been made in fibrin gels (30, 31). On linearly elastic materials, like
polyacrylamide gels, the range of cellular force sensing was much smaller (32). This
leaves two major open questions concerning our experimental data: 1) How do cells
communicate mechanically in a non-fibrous gel like Matrigel? and 2) Why are the
cells not able to form a network on fibrous (collagen) gels?
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Matrigel mainly consists of laminins, which are of primary importance for tube
formation (17, 22). In fact, functionally blocking antibodies against integrins that
mainly bind to laminin inhibits tube formation, while blocking other integrins has no
significant effect. While laminin gels are per se amorphous, it has been shown that
cell-sized fibrous structures can be induced by mechanical forces, like the external
application of fluid flow (33) or exerting a force via paramagnetic particles in a
magnetic field (34). Here, we observe that Matrigel is rearranged into fibres by the
exposure to cells. Since this phenomenon occurs rapidly and at intercellular regions,
which have not been covered by cellular protrusions, we can exclude that this is due
to secretion of fibrillary proteins. Furthermore, mixing netrin-4, which has been shown
to disrupt laminin networks (21), into Matrigel preparations inhibited tube formation.
This underscores that rearranging laminins into fibrous structures via traction
stresses is a fundamentally important feature of tissue organization. Similar
phenomena might occur in vivo, since extracellular spaces where vasculogenesis
takes place during development (35, 36), or angiogenesis during tissue regeneration
(37) are generally rich in laminin.
Rearrangement of extracellular matrix can influence cell behaviour in multiple ways.
Recently, it has been shown that cells can sense the density of fibre networks, which
was termed “topotaxis” (41). At high pre-existing fibre densities (like in a conventional
collagen I gel) cells stay unorganized. At lower densities of pre-formed fibres (but still
the right stiffness of the gel), endothelial cells have recently been shown to align to
these fibres (9). At a low cell density, we make a similar observation on collagen:
cells align to preformed fibres. However, unlike on Matrigel, they do not organize
themselves into tubes. Furthermore, Matrigel – similar to collagen or fibrin gels –
shows stress stiffening after cell contraction (38). As a consequence, cells could
migrate along the ensuing stiffness gradient, a phenomenon called “durotaxis” (39,
40). Then why do endothelial cells form tubes on Matrigel by inducing a fibrous
structure in their environment, but not on collagen I gels of similar stiffness, which are
fibrous from the start? A possible hint lies in the different behaviour of single cells and
cell collectives: though the single cells in our case were not able to communicate on
collagen I gels, endothelial spheroids have been shown to sense each other over
large distances in collagen gels (10). On Matrigel, even single cells are able to
restructure the previously homogenous matrix into a fibril network, where fibres are
aligned between cells. The resulting rigid structures might be the basis for durotaxis,
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

topotaxis, or might be places of high adhesive ligand density (for a schematic
overview see Fig. 7). On collagen, single cells are not able to do induce a significant
restructuring as collagen is already inhomogeneous from their perspective. However,
on the length scale of an organoid, collagen might seem almost like a homogeneous
environment. This might explain why organoids are able to communicate via
restructuring their extracellular matrix, where single cells are not able to do so.
Accordingly, our concepts of factors shaping a vascular network need to be
extended: Though chemotactic gradients are doubtlessly important, they are
definitely not the only key. Tissue and matrix stiffness, biochemical constitution (e.g.
the presence of laminin or collagen I), as well as topographic cues from the matrix (is
the matrix homogenous or heterogeneous?) play important roles. The latter ones
might rely on physical differences: in homogeneous gels, deformation fields are
transmitted across wide area, while fibrous gels transmit forces in a rope-like fashion.
From a systemic perspective, the high variability of extracellular matrices throughout
the tissues of the body, which is even remodelled by diseases like fibrosis (18, 19),
might be the basis of highly flexible and adapted vascular networks. The apparent
importance of the mechanical properties of the ECM, as well as its constituents, for
morphogenesis and pattern formation gives access to an exciting new field, which
might even give rise to new therapies of metabolic diseases/cancer. Similar concepts
might also apply for morphogenic processes in other contexts.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Material and Methods

Cell culture
HUVECs were purchased from Promocell (Heidelberg, Germany) and maintained in
EC growth medium ([PB-MH-100-2199] Pelobiotech, Planegg, Germany) containing,
10% fetal calf serum (FCS), 10.000 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin and 250 µg/ml
amphotericin B under constant humidity at 37 °C and 5 % CO2. Experiments were
performed using cells at passage 6.
Tube formation assay on Matrigel
HUVEC tube formation assays were performed in µ-Slide angiogenesis or µ-Slide 8
well (ibidi, Martinsried, Germany). Matrigel (Corning, Amsterdam, Netherlands) was
thawed on ice over night the day before use. For homogeneity the gel was mixed
thoroughly after thawing and kept on ice. Where indicated, Netrin-4 (a kind gift from
R. Reuten) was mixed with Matrigel at ratios of 1:2, 1:1 and 1.5:1 netrin-4 to laminin.
10 µl and 30 µl of Matrigel were used to fill the inner well of the angiogenesis slides
or 8 well slides, respectively. For gelation, the gel was kept at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 for at
least 30 min. After reaching confluency, HUVECs were trypsinized and diluted to the
desired density with EC growth medium. Compounds (blebbistatin; batimastat, Sigma
Aldrich, St. Louis, USA; α integrin blocking kit, Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) for
treatment were diluted with the cell suspension to the indicated final concentration.
50 µl of the cell suspension was applied to the upper well of the angiogenesis slide,
and for the 8 well slide 250 µl of the cell suspensions were added. The slides were
incubated at 37 °C and 5 % CO2, and Live imaging was performed on an inverted
microscope Eclipse Ti (Nikon, Düsseldorf, Germany), with a 4x/10x phase contrast
objective and a CCD camera ([DS-Qi1Mc] Nikon, Düsseldorf, Germany). The slide
was inserted into a 37 °C heating and incubation system, which was flushed with
actively mixed 5 % CO2 at a rate of 10 l/h and the humidity was kept at 80 % to
prevent dehydration. Images were taken after a desired period of time on a Leica
DMi1 microscope (Leica Microsystems CMS GmbH, Wetzlar, Germany). All images
for the tube formation were analyzed using the ImageJ software (National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, USA) tool “Angiogenesis Analyzer” (Gilles Carpentier, Faculte
des Sciences et Technologie Universite Paris Est Creteil Val-de-Marne, France)
according to the number of tubes and nodes.
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Microfluidics
For culture under flow conditions the µ-Slides I Luer (ibidi, Martinsried, Germany)
were coated with Matrigel (100 µl per Slide) and kept at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 for at least
30 min. HUVECs (5 x 105 per cm2) were seeded into the channels with a
micropipette, and the cells were allowed to attach to the gel for 20 min under static
conditions at 37 °C, 5 % CO2. Afterwards the channel slide was inserted into an
incubation system and placed on an inverted microscope. The humidity was kept at
80 % to prevent dehydration. Fresh EC growth medium was then perfused through
the channel at a flow rate of 0.1 ml/min for 6 h.
Tube formation assay with different cell densities
For cell tracking in the live imaging HUVECs were stained with Hoechst 33342
(Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA). The confluent cells were washed with PBS+ (with
Ca2+ and Mg2+) and then stained with 5 µg/ml Hoechst for 20 min. The tube formation
assay was performed according to the protocol described above.
The positions of the stained cell nuclei were detected from the fluorescent channels
of the tube formation videos, and then stitched together into sets of time-lapse cell
trajectories. Here, we proceeded as follows. First, to detect the cell cores, we (i)
improved contrast via a contrast-limited adaptive histogram equalization using
OpenCV (https://github.com/opencv/opencv/wiki/CiteOpenCV), (ii) normalized all
image data, and (iii) applied a multi-pass Laplace-of-Gaussian filter using scikitimage (https://scikit-image.org). Then, we linked the individual cell core coordinates
into cell trajectories with Trackpy (https://zenodo.org/record/1226458). An alternative
analysis with the software ImageJ and its plugin TrackMate (42) yielded similar
results (not shown). Further analysis of the obtained cell trajectories was performed,
as described below.
To measure whether cell motion during tube formation could be described by a
persistent random walk with a typical timescale, a measure for the correlation
between the direction of cell motion at a reference time

and a time

∆

, the

normalized velocity autocorrelation function, was introduced:

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

 , ·

 , ∆  

 ,

  ,    ,

∆ 
 ∆ 


   

For a time-independent process, one can average over all available reference times
. Tube formation, however, is a time-dependent process which might be subject to
aging, for example if cell velocities change over time. Therefore, here we chose to
average over reference times that lie within a window,

 ∆    , ∆ 

 

. This

time window is shorter than the timescale of tube formation (which we show to be
93 ),

and much shorter than the overall duration of the experiments (20h). We

found that the normalized velocity autocorrelation function decays rapidly from
 0   1

to

  10   0.42,

after the first frame. For all subsequent frames,

the typical timescale of tube formation,

,

was obtained from an exponential fit:

 ∆    !"#$∆ / .

A possible correlation between the migration of distant cells, as a function of
separation distance between the considered cells, was determined as follows:

Ct, r 

 , ·



  ,   

+ ,, 
)*
+ ,, 
)*


    ,   

Here, we measured the cosine of the angle between the velocity vector of a cell at
position , and a cell at position
in the direction of the angle

,

 ) -,

where

+ ,
*

is the radial unit vector pointing

(in cylindrical coordinates). Again, we averaged over

reference times that lie within a time window,  )  

, )

 

. Then, the

typical length scale of cell-cell velocity alignment, ) , was obtained from a biexponential fit:  )   !"#$)/)   . !"#$)/) , where )

/ ) .

Finally, a correlation between the migration of a cell and the position of a distant cell
that lies in the direction

+ ,,
*

as a function of their separation distance r, was

determined in a similar way:

Ct, r 

 , ·*
+ ,
  , 


    ,   

Note that this measure does not vanish if the cells are distributed inhomogeneously.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Traction force microscopy
For the traction force microscopy HUVECs were prepared according to the protocol
for the tube formation assay on Matrigel with µ-Slides 8 well. Yellow-green
microbeads (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) of 1 µm diameter, 2 % solids were
mixed with Matrigel (1:200). To determine the forces of single cells, cells were
seeded at a concentration of 10,000 cells/ml. Time-lapse video microscopy was
performed with a time interval of 1 min between images over 3 h.
Substrate displacement fields,

0 , ,

were obtained from the fluorescent channels

of the videos by computing the corresponding optical flow fields using the “TwoFrame Motion Estimation Based on Polynomial Expansion” by Gunnar Farnebäck
implemented in OpenCV. Then, the compression fields,

1 · 0 , ,

were determined

and visualized in the phase contrast channels of the videos. We found that each
(round) cell generated a radially symmetric compression field. Therefore, we
determined the average radial component of the compression field, 1 · 0
the radial component of the displacement field,

*
+ , · 0 ,  ,

,  ,

and

in the reference

frame of the individual cells.
Tube formation assay on other gels
HUVEC tube formation on rat tail collagen I gels (Corning, Amsterdam, Netherlands)
was prepared according to the protocol for tube formation assays on Matrigel. The
collagen I gel (2 mg/ml) consisted of 10 % 10x PBS, 1 N NaOH (0.023 times of the
final volume of collagen I) and dH2O to adjust the collagen concentration. 10x PBS,
1 N NaOH and dH2O were mixed and kept on ice. Subsequently, the calculated
volume of collagen I was added. For creating the laminin-collagen I mixture gel in a
ratio 6:1 (4.8 mg/ml:0.8 mg/ml), a 4 mg/ml collagen I gel (produced according the
protocol) and a 6 mg/ml laminin gel (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, USA) were mixed on
ice. For gelation, the gels were kept at 37 °C, 5 % CO2 for at least 1 h. Organ specific
ECM gels were from Xylyx (New York, USA) and used according to the
manufacturer´s protocols.
Polyacrylamide gels coated with Matrigel
Elastic polyacrylamide gels with a Young’s modulus from 0.5 to 5 kPa were prepared
as reported elsewhere (43). For cell adhesion, Matrigel was covalently attached to
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the polyacrylamide gels and to amino-silane coated glass with the bifunctional crosslinker Sulfo-SANPAH (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA), respectively.
HUVEC tube formation assay was performed as described before.
Gel printing on polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
In order to determine the maximum thickness of Matrigel, which still allows cells to
feel the stiffness of an underlying PDMS gel (Sylgard 184 silicone elastomer kit, Dow
Corning, Midland, USA), different volumes were tested in the angiogenesis slide.
PDMS and the curing agent were mixed and dried in a desiccator for 15-20 min in
order to remove air bubbles. Afterwards, the gels were baked for 20 h in a
compartment drier at 60 °C. The inner well of the angiogenesis slide was filled with a
very stiff PDMS gel (10 % curing agent), which, as such does not support tube
formation. PDMS was hydrophilized with oxygen plasma for 3 min at 0.3 mbar in a
plasma cleaner (Diener Plasma-Surface-Technology, Ebhausen, Germany). Matrigel
was mixed with 5(6)-FAM, SE (5-(and-6)-Carboxyfluorescein, Succinimidyl Ester)
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) with a final concentration of 0.1 mg/ml and
volumes from 10 µl to 1 µl were added on the PDMS. The thickness of the Matrigel
layer was measured on a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope (Leica, Wetzlar,
Germany) with HC PL FLUOTAR CS2 10x/0.3 NA DRY using LAS X Core Software
(Leica, Wetzlar, Germany). Even at a layer thickness of 25 μm, the cells formed a
network and did not feel the stiffness of the underlying PDMS (Supplementary Fig.
S2). To obtain an even thinner layer, PDMS was filled into a 2 well slide (ibidi,
Martinsried, Germany), then hydrophilized, and 5 µl of Matrigel was added. A PDMS
stamp was pushed on the Matrigel to equally distribute it (model in Supplementary
Fig. S3A). This procedure allows a layer thickness under 20 µm, which is thin enough
for the cells to sense the stiffness of the underlying PDMS, because they did not form
a network any longer (Supplementary Fig. S2). PDMS and the curing agent were
mixed in different ratios in order to obtain various gel stiffnesses. PDMS gels with a
Young’s modulus of 0.5 (1.3 %), 1.5 (2 %) and 4 kPa (2.22 %) were prepared
(Supplementary Fig. S3B). The stiffnesses of the PDMS gels were measured after
the hydrophilization with a Modular Compact Rheometer MCR 100 (Physica,
Stuttgart, Germany) in the amplitude sweep mode with a constant frequency of 1 Hz
at 37 °C between PP25 measuring plate. The deformation was varied from 0.01 % to

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10 % in a ramp mode. The measurements were averaged after applying the Grubbs
outlier test. For the gel printing, Matrigel and collagen I gel (2 mg/ml) were used.
Immunostaining and confocal microscopy
Cells were washed with PBS for 10 min and fixed after desired time points with 4 %
para-formaldehyde for 10 min, followed by three washing steps with PBS for 10 min,
and blocking with 1 % bovine serum albumin (BSA) in PBS at least 2 h or overnight
at 4 °C. After the blocking step the slide was washed with PBS for 10 min. The
primary antibodies (anti-VEGF (rabbit) 1:100 dilution [ab46154] Abcam, Cambridge,
UK; anti-collagen I (rabbit) 1:200 dilution [34710] Abcam, Cambridge, UK; anticollagen IV (rabbit) 1:100 dilution [AB756P] Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA; antilaminin (rat) 1:200 dilution [MA1-06100] Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA)
were incubated overnight at 4 °C. Prior to incubation with the secondary antibody
(Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rabbit 1:200 dilution [A-11008] Life Technologies,
Carlsbad, USA; Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-rat 1:200 dilution [A-11006] Life
Technologies, Carlsbad, USA; Alexa Fluor 647 chicken anti-rabbit 1:200 dilution [A21443] Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA), the slide was washed six times with PBS
for 10 min and then incubated overnight at 4 °C. Again, cells were washed three
times with PBS for 20 min and stained with Hoechst 33342 in a final concentration of
5 µg/ml and rhodamine-phalloidin ([R415], Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) diluted with
1 % BSA in PBS for 1 h. Afterwards the preparation was washed three times with
PBS for 10 min and mounted with FluorSave™ Reagent (Merck, Darmstadt,
Germany). Confocal images were collected using the Leica TCS SP8 confocal
microscope with HC PL APO CS2 20x/0.75 NA IMM, or 63x/1.4 NA OIL objectives
using LAS X Core Software.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
400 µl of the respective gel was distributed in a 40 mm petri dish. The petri dish was
filled with EC growth medium and kept at 37 °C for the measurement. The AFM
measurements were performed on a NanoWizard® 4 (JPK Instruments, Berlin,
Germany) with an integrated Axiovert 200 inverted microscope (Zeiss, Jena,
Germany) using SPM software (JPK Instruments, Berlin, Germany) in the contact
mode. For measuring the gel stiffness homogeneity a MLCT-C cantilever (silicon
nitride, resonance frequency 7 kHz, spring constant 0.01 N/m, Bruker, Berlin,
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Germany) was used and calibrated with the contact free method. The following
values have been set: setpoint 1 nN, z-length 8 µm, speed 2 µm/s and pixel size
16x16 on a 30x30 µm grid. For measuring the strain stiffening, a tipless MLCT-D
cantilever (silicon nitride, resonance frequency 15 kHz, spring constant 0.03 N/m,
Bruker, Berlin, Germany) glued with a hollow glass bead ([PBGH-18] Kisker Biotech,
Steinfurt, Germany) was used and calibrated with the contact free method.
Immediately before the measurement, the diameter of the bead was measured. For
the setting the following parameters were used: setpoint 2 nN, z-length 10 µm, speed
10 µm/s. The measuring area was adjusting to the distance of the cells. The pixel
size was 10x10 and every pixel was measured three times directly successively. For
the control area a 5x5 µm grid far away from the cells was measured after every cell
measurement.
Data processing was performed using the corresponding software version 6.0.50
(JPK Instruments, Berlin, Germany). The Hertzian contact model (Young’s modulus)
was used to calculate the stiffness. In the software the spring constant and sensitivity
of the cantilever were loaded and then the baseline and contact point were
determined. The tip shape of the MLCT-C was modelled as quadratic pyramid and
the half-front angle of the cantilever set to 15°. For the MLCT-D with the bead a
sphere model was used and the radius of the bead was set. The Poisson ratio was
set to 0,5.
Statistical analysis
Results of at least three independent experiments (biological replicates, each
performed in two or three technical replicates) are expressed as mean ± SEM.
Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software,
San Diego, USA) with either two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s
correction, or one-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s test, *P < 0.033, **P < 0.002, ***P < 0.001.
Significantly different groups are signified in the respective figure.
Acknowledgments
The authors are grateful for constructive discussions with Chase Broedersz and
Florian Rehfeldt, and for funding by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(SFB1032, Projects B02 and B08). Netrin was a kind gift from Raphael Reuten. The
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

authors thank Christian Hohmann from the Nanosystems Initiative Munich (LMU) for
the graphical design of Figure 7.
Figure legends

Figure 1: The initial finding phase depends on cell-cell distance.
(A) HUVECs rapidly form cell-cell contacts when seeded on Matrigel. White arrows
indicate the initial formation of the first cell-cell contacts in a time range from 1 to 2 h.
Scale bar: 100 µm. (B) Tube formation after seeding different cell densities from
0.5 x 104 cells/ml to 20 x 104 cells/ml. At least 10 x 104 cells/ml were necessary to
induce tube formation, while at lower cell numbers, HUVECs stayed separate or
formed small group of cells. Images were taken after 6 h. Scale bar: 100 µm. (C) The
cell densities inducing tube formation (blue curves) showed a higher mean squared
displacement compared to the cell densities without tube formation (red curves). The
normalized attraction and the velocity cross-correlation showed that cells can sense
each other, to align and cluster, over a typical distance of at least 106 µm (vertical
dotted line in the attraction graph; the typical interaction distance is extracted from an
exponential fit with a constant offset, which is indicated in black). The typical time
scale for the tube formation with 93 min is obtained by fitting the velocity
autocorrelation with an exponential (indicated in black). A typical cell size is indicated
by the grey region.

Figure 2: Tube formation does not depend on chemotactic gradients.
(A) Quantification of the number of tubes and nodes after 3 h and 6 h. Neither a
saturation of potential gradients by externally adding 20 nM VEGF, nor complete
deprivation of growth factors (PBS+ instead of growth medium) significantly changed
tube formation (One-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s test, compared to control). (B) To
disturb potential local gradients of chemoattractants, the tube formation setting was
continuously superfused in a microfluidic device (left panel). The absence of soluble
gradients did not impair HUVEC tube formation (right panel, see also Supplementary
Video 1). Scale bar: 100 µm. (C) To detect potential bound gradients of VEGF, an
immunostaining for VEGF was performed (left panel). VEGF levels are highest
around the cells, and no continuous long-ranged gradients between cells can be
detected. Right panel: Fluorescence intensity profiles along the indicated white lines
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in the left panel. Scale bar: 100 µm. The read and blue circles around cells in the
images correspond to the respective peaks in the intensity diagram.

Figure 3: Tube formation depends on active matrix deformation and substrate
stiffness
(A) Inhibition of cell contractility with 20 µM blebbistatin inhibited the formation of
tubular structures. Scale bar: 100 µm (B) Upper left: Representative image of bead
displacement by cells (red circles) on Matrigel as a dimensionless heatmap. Upper
right: The analysis of the bead displacement over the first 3 h after seeding the cells
on Matrigel showed that cells deform the matrix with a maximum around 40 µm. The
treatment with 20 µM blebbistatin reduced radial displacement, bulk deformation
energy

21 3 0 4

(lower left) and radial strain (lower right) (C) HUVECs

(20 x 104 cells/ml) were seeded on PAA or PDMS gels with different stiffness from
0.5 kPa to 5 kPa, coated with Matrigel, on Matrigel alone or on glass coated with
Matrigel. At high (4 kPa and glass) stiffness values, the cells formed no network. On
substrates with a stiffness between 0.5 and 1.5 kPa, HUVECs formed a tubular
network like on the Matrigel control. Scale bar: 100 µm.

Figure 4: Endothelial cells actively remodel ECM during early tube formation.
Immunostaining of laminin and collagen IV in Matrigel without (first row, scale bar
10 µm), and with cells (second and third row, scale bar 50 µm). Cells time
dependently re-arrange the matrix proteins so that fibres between cells are formed.
This process depends on cell contractility and is inhibited by 20 µM blebbistatin
(fourth and fifth row).

Figure 5: Laminin is a key factor for tube formation.
(A) Upper row: immunostaining of laminin in Matrigel alone or after treatment with
different rations of netrin-4 (Scale bar: 10 µm). Lower row: Tube formation on
Matrigel and with different ratios of netrin-4 to laminin. Starting from a ratio of 1:1,
netrin-4 changes the structure of the laminin network and influences tube formation.
(B) Functionally blocking antibodies against integrins α1, α2, α3, α4, α5, α6 and αv
were added (40 µg/ml). Blocking integrins, which preferentially bind to laminin (α1,
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

α2, α3 and α6) inhibited tube formation, while blocking of mainly collagen and
fibronectin binding integrins (α4, α5 and αv) did not affect endothelial tube formation.
Scale bar: 100 µm.

Figure 6: Cells change the local stiffness topography of the substrate.
(A) Pseudo coloured AFM stiffness map of Matrigel and rat tail collagen I gel (Scale
bar 5 µm): while the stiffness is evenly distributed in Matrigel, the collegen gel
contains stiff fibres and soft interspaces. Right panel: the total reflection microscopy
image of the collagen I gel shows the collagen fibre network (scale bar: 100 µm).
Matrigel shows no fibrillary structure (data not shown). (B) Immunostaining of a
collagen I gel in the presence of an endothelial cell. White arrows mark collagen
fibres to which the cell is aligned (scale bar: 25 µm). Exemplary cell trajectories on
Matrigel and collagen I over 20 h. Single cells on collagen migrated over a longer
distance in all directions. The accumulated distance for 45 cells for each gel is
normalized to the Matrigel and showed a significant increase on collagen I. Twotailed unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction, *P < 0.033. (C) The stiffness
of the area between two single cells after adhesion on Matrigel was measured with
an AFM and compared to the stiffness of a cell-free part of the gel. The pseudocoloured stiffness map shows the relative Young’s modulus normalized to the control
area. From the overlay of the microscope image and the stiffness map it can be seen
that the cells formed a stiff bridge between them, before cell protrusions cover this
area. Over all cell pairs (n=21) we detected a significant increase in the Young’s
modulus of the cell interspace. Two-tailed unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s
correction, *P < 0.002 Scale bar: 20 µm. See also Supplementary Fig. S6.

Figure 7: Graphical Summary.
While endothelial cells align to collagen fibres and move along them (left panels),
they remodel the laminin based Matrigel (right panels): by contractile forces, strain
stiffening occurs and the stiffened intercellular bridges are used as tracks for pattern
formation.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Fig. S1: Inhibition of proteolytic activity has no influence on
tube formation.
HUVECs were seeded on Matrigel and treated with 10 µM batimastat to inhibit a
broad range of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). Images were taken after 6 h.
Quantitative analysis of the number of tubes and nodes normalized to Control (Ctrl)
showed that the activity of MMPs is not crucial for HUVEC tube formation. Two-tailed
unpaired Student’s t test with Welch’s correction showed no significant differences.
Scale bar: 100 µm.

Supplementary Fig. S2: Role of the thickness of the Matrigel layer.
(A) Matrigel was labelled with a fluorescent dye to measure the gel thickness by
confocal microscopy. Different volumes of Matrigel from 1 to 10 µl were added to a
PDMS gel, and the thickness was measured. To achieve a thickness of less than
20 µm, Matrigel was printed. Scale bar: 100 µm. (B) HUVECs were seeded on a stiff
PDMS gel (70 kPa) coated with layers of Matrigel of a different thickness. On
uncoated PDMS cells only adhered poorly and formed cell clusters. At a thickness
under 20 µm, the cells sensed the stiffness of the underlying PDMS and formed no
tubes. In all other cases, the cells did not sense the PDMS and formed the tubular
network like on a thick Matrigel layer. Thus, printing of Matrigel was used for all
further experiments. Scale bar: 100 µm.

Supplementary Fig. S3: PDMS stiffness influences tube formation.
(A) Schematic overview of the Matrigel printing on top of a PDMS gel. After activation
of the PDMS with the plasma cleaner a thin layer with a thickness under 20 µm was
printed on the PDMS. (B) PDMS stiffness in dependence of the rate of curing agent.
(C) Immunostaining of HUVECs seeded on printed Matrigel on top of PDMS gels with
different stiffness. If the stiffness was too high (4 kPa), cells did not form a tubular
network, but simply spread on the surface. At 0.5 and 1.5 kPa cells interacted and
tubes were formed. White arrows indicate the alignment of cells and fibrillary matrix.
Scale bar: 100 µm.

Supplementary Fig. S4: Tube formation on different hydrogel mixtures.
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(A) Young’s modulus of Matrigel, a rat tail collagen I gel (2 mg/ml), a mixture of
laminin and collagen I in the ratio 6:1 (L:C 6:1) (4.8 mg/ml:0.8 mg/ml) and a laminin
gel (6 mg/ml). The stiffness of Matrigel is significantly higher than the mixture L:C 6:1
or laminin, while there is no difference to collagen. One-way ANOVA, Dunnett’s test,
compared to Matrigel, ***P < 0.001. (B) HUVECs were seeded on Matrigel, collagen
I, L:C 6:1 or laminin. Images were taken after 0 h, 1 h and 6 h. Cells showed the
typical tube formation on Matrigel and the L:C 6:1 gel, while on collagen ECs only
formed a monolayer. After a short time (1h), the cells on the laminin gel also formed a
small network, which then collapsed. Scale bar: 100 µm. (C) Quantitative analysis of
the number of tubes and nodes normalized to Matrigel showed no difference
between the network on Matrigel and the network on L:C 6:1 (Two-tailed unpaired
Student’s t test with Welch’s correction).

Supplementary Fig. S5: Tube formation on fibrous hydrogels.
(A) HUVECs were seeded on a collagen I gel printed on top of PDMS gels with
different stiffness. In all cases, the cells did not form tubes, but a monolayer. Scale
bar: 100 µm. (B) First row: total reflection microscopy image of different ECM
hydrogel kits from different organs. All hydrogels showed a fibre structure. Scale bar:
100 µm. Second row: Cell behaviour on different ECM hydrogel kits. Cells always
formed a monolayer and no tube formation was observed. Scale bar: 100 µm.

Supplementary Fig. S6: Further examples for the strain stiffening effect.
Single cells were seeded on Matrigel and the stiffness of the gel between the cells
was measured with an AFM. As control, substrate stiffness in a cell-free area was
also measured. The pseudo-coloured stiffness map shows the relative Young’s
modulus normalized to the control area. From the overlay of the microscope Image
and the stiffness map it can be seen that the cells formed a stiff bridge between them
even before cellular protrusions form. In a time range from 30 min to 2 h, the cells
used the stiffness line for locating each other and for contacting. Scale bar: 20 µm.

Supplementary Movie S1: Tube formation of endothelial cells on Matrigel.

Supplementary Movie S2: Tubes still form under continuous superfusion.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References

1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.

Apte RS, Chen DS, & Ferrara N (2019) VEGF in Signaling and Disease: Beyond Discovery and
Development. Cell 176(6):1248-1264.
DuFort CC, Paszek MJ, & Weaver VM (2011) Balancing forces: architectural control of
mechanotransduction. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 12(5):308-319.
Northey JJ, Przybyla L, & Weaver VM (2017) Tissue Force Programs Cell Fate and Tumor
Aggression. Cancer Discov 7(11):1224-1237.
Brownfield DG, et al. (2013) Patterned collagen fibers orient branching mammary epithelium
through distinct signaling modules. Curr Biol 23(8):703-709.
Augustin HG & Koh GY (2017) Organotypic vasculature: From descriptive heterogeneity to
functional pathophysiology. Science 357(6353).
Sun J, Jamilpour N, Wang FY, & Wong PK (2014) Geometric control of capillary architecture
via cell-matrix mechanical interactions. Biomaterials 35(10):3273-3280.
Bordeleau F, et al. (2017) Matrix stiffening promotes a tumor vasculature phenotype. Proc
Natl Acad Sci U S A 114(3):492-497.
Saunders RL & Hammer DA (2010) Assembly of Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells on
Compliant Hydrogels. Cell Mol Bioeng 3(1):60-67.
Davidson CD, Wang WY, Zaimi I, Jayco DKP, & Baker BM (2019) Cell force-mediated matrix
reorganization underlies multicellular network assembly. Sci Rep 9(1):12.
Korff T & Augustin HG (1999) Tensional forces in fibrillar extracellular matrices control
directional capillary sprouting. J Cell Sci 112 ( Pt 19):3249-3258.
Vernon RB & Sage EH (1996) Contraction of fibrillar type I collagen by endothelial cells: a
study in vitro. J Cell Biochem 60(2):185-197.
Reinhart-King CA, Dembo M, & Hammer DA (2008) Cell-cell mechanical communication
through compliant substrates. Biophys J 95(12):6044-6051.
Marchand M, Monnot C, Muller L, & Germain S (2018) Extracellular matrix scaffolding in
angiogenesis and capillary homeostasis. Semin Cell Dev Biol.
Abrams GA, Goodman SL, Nealey PF, Franco M, & Murphy CJ (2000) Nanoscale topography of
the basement membrane underlying the corneal epithelium of the rhesus macaque. Cell
Tissue Res 299(1):39-46.
Kick K, Nekolla K, Rehberg M, Vollmar AM, & Zahler S (2016) New View on Endothelial Cell
Migration: Switching Modes of Migration Based on Matrix Composition. Arterioscler Thromb
Vasc Biol 36(12):2346-2357.
Yurchenco PD, Cheng YS, & Colognato H (1992) Laminin forms an independent network in
basement membranes. J Cell Biol 117(5):1119-1133.
Grant DS, et al. (1989) Two different laminin domains mediate the differentiation of human
endothelial cells into capillary-like structures in vitro. Cell 58(5):933-943.
Bonnans C, Chou J, & Werb Z (2014) Remodelling the extracellular matrix in development
and disease. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15(12):786-801.
Cox TR & Erler JT (2011) Remodeling and homeostasis of the extracellular matrix:
implications for fibrotic diseases and cancer. Dis Model Mech 4(2):165-178.
Lampi MC & Reinhart-King CA (2018) Targeting extracellular matrix stiffness to attenuate
disease: From molecular mechanisms to clinical trials. Sci Transl Med 10(422).
Reuten R, et al. (2016) Structural decoding of netrin-4 reveals a regulatory function towards
mature basement membranes. Nat Commun 7:13515.
Kubota Y, Kleinman HK, Martin GR, & Lawley TJ (1988) Role of laminin and basement
membrane in the morphological differentiation of human endothelial cells into capillary-like
structures. J Cell Biol 107(4):1589-1598.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33.
34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

Arnaoutova I, George J, Kleinman HK, & Benton G (2009) The endothelial cell tube formation
assay on basement membrane turns 20: state of the science and the art. Angiogenesis
12(3):267-274.
Hellstrom M, Phng LK, & Gerhardt H (2007) VEGF and Notch signaling: the yin and yang of
angiogenic sprouting. Cell Adh Migr 1(3):133-136.
Chen TT, et al. (2010) Anchorage of VEGF to the extracellular matrix conveys differential
signaling responses to endothelial cells. J Cell Biol 188(4):595-609.
Serini G, et al. (2003) Modeling the early stages of vascular network assembly. EMBO J
22(8):1771-1779.
Ma X, et al. (2013) Fibers in the extracellular matrix enable long-range stress transmission
between cells. Biophys J 104(7):1410-1418.
Wang H, Abhilash AS, Chen CS, Wells RG, & Shenoy VB (2014) Long-range force transmission
in fibrous matrices enabled by tension-driven alignment of fibers. Biophys J 107(11):25922603.
van Helvert S & Friedl P (2016) Strain Stiffening of Fibrillar Collagen during Individual and
Collective Cell Migration Identified by AFM Nanoindentation. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces
8(34):21946-21955.
Sopher RS, et al. (2018) Nonlinear Elasticity of the ECM Fibers Facilitates Efficient
Intercellular Communication. Biophys J 115(7):1357-1370.
Winer JP, Oake S, & Janmey PA (2009) Non-linear elasticity of extracellular matrices enables
contractile cells to communicate local position and orientation. PLoS One 4(7):e6382.
Rudnicki MS, et al. (2013) Nonlinear strain stiffening is not sufficient to explain how far cells
can feel on fibrous protein gels. Biophys J 105(1):11-20.
Jang JM, Tran SH, Na SC, & Jeon NL (2015) Engineering controllable architecture in matrigel
for 3D cell alignment. ACS Appl Mater Interfaces 7(4):2183-2188.
Paul CD, et al. (2019) Probing cellular response to topography in three dimensions.
Biomaterials 197:101-118.
Risau W & Flamme I (1995) Vasculogenesis. Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 11:73-91.
Rongish BJ, Hinchman G, Doty MK, Baldwin HS, & Tomanek RJ (1996) Relationship of the
extracellular matrix to coronary neovascularization during development. J Mol Cell Cardiol
28(10):2203-2215.
Rousselle P, Montmasson M, & Garnier C (2019) Extracellular matrix contribution to skin
wound re-epithelialization. Matrix Biol 75-76:12-26.
Han YL, et al. (2018) Cell contraction induces long-ranged stress stiffening in the extracellular
matrix. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115(16):4075-4080.
DuChez BJ, Doyle AD, Dimitriadis EK, & Yamada KM (2019) Durotaxis by Human Cancer Cells.
Biophys J 116(4):670-683.
Hartman CD, Isenberg BC, Chua SG, & Wong JY (2017) Extracellular matrix type modulates
cell migration on mechanical gradients. Exp Cell Res 359(2):361-366.
Park J, Kim DH, & Levchenko A (2018) Topotaxis: A New Mechanism of Directed Cell
Migration in Topographic ECM Gradients. Biophys J 114(6):1257-1263.
Tinevez JY, et al. (2017) TrackMate: An open and extensible platform for single-particle
tracking. Methods 115:80-90.
Pelham RJ, Jr. & Wang Y (1997) Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by
substrate flexibility. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 94(25):13661-13665.

27

A

00:00

00:30

01:00

01:30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

02:00

08:00

2 x 104 cells/ml

4 x 104 cells/ml

6 x 104 cells/ml

10 x 104 cells/ml

14 x 104 cells/ml

20 x 104 cells/ml

0.010
0.005
0.000
0

100 200 300 400 500
Time/min

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
0

100 200 300 400 500
Time/min

Velocity crosscorrelation

0.015

Normalized attraction

1 x 104 cells/ml

Mean squared
displacement/mm2

C

06:00

0.5 x 104 cells/ml

Velocity
autocorrelation

B

04:00

0.2
0.1
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
0

100
200
Distance/µm

300

0

100
200
Distance/µm

300

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0

0.5 x 104 cells/ml
1 x 104 cells/ml
2 x 104 cells/ml
4 x 104 cells/ml
6 x 104 cells/ml
10 x 104 cells/ml
14 x 104 cells/ml
20 x 104 cells/ml
Fit

-0.2

Figure 1

1.5

Nodes normalized to Ctrl

Tubes normalized to Ctrl

A

Ctrl
20nM VEGF
PBS+

1.5

1.0 preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version1.0
bioRxiv
posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
0.5
0.0
3h

0.5
0.0
3h

6h

6h

B

20min

Gray value

40
30
20
10
0
0

50

100
150
Distance/µm

200

0

50

100
150
Distance/µm

200

40

Gray value

C

30
20
10
0

3h

Figure 2

A

Matrigel

20µM blebbistatin

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

Matrigel deformation
0

Radial displacment/µm

1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0

-2
-4
-6

Ctrl
20µM blebbistatin

-8
Distance/µm
50
100

150

0.2

Radial strain

Deformation energy

150

0

0

0.0015

Distance/µm
50
100

0.0010
0.0005

0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6

0.0000
0

50

100
150
Time/min

C

200

-0.8

PAA
0.5kPa

1kPa

5kPa

Matrigel

Glass

0.5kPa

1.5kPa
PDMS

4kPa
Figure 3

Nucleus

Actin

Laminin

Collagen IV

Merge

30min
1h

20µM blebbistatin

1h

Matrigel

30min

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4

A

Ratio netrin-4:laminin
Matrigel

1:2

1:1

1.5:1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

Laminin binding integrins
Anti-integrin α1

Anti-integrin α2

Anti-integrin α3

Anti-integrin α6

Anti-integrin α4

Anti-integrin α5

Anti-integrin αV

Control

Figure 5

A

Matrigel

Collagen I

Collagen I structure
0.3kPa

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.1kPa

B

Nucleus

Actin

Collagen I

Merge

Collagen I
100

Y axis/µm

Y axis/µm

100

0
-100

-100
-100

0
100
X axis/µm

0h

-100

0
100
X axis/µm

2.0

*

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Matrigel Collagen I

Stiffness map

Overlay
Ctrl
area

relative Young’s
modulus
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0

Y axis/µm

10
5
0
-5
-10

2h

2.0

Young’s modulus
normalized to Ctrl

C

0

Accumulated migration distance
normalized to Matrigel

Cell tracking plot

Matrigel

**

-10 -5 0 5 10
X axis/µm

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Ctrl

Cell
interspace

Figure 6

Collagen

Matrigel

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Collagen

Laminin

Cell

Matrigel

10µM batimastat

Number normalized to Ctrl

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

4

Ctrl
10µM batimastat

3
2
1
0
Tubes

Nodes

S1

A

10µl

5µl

2.5µl

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Thickness/µm

400
300
200
100
0

1µl

B

Matrigel printing

Matrigel 1
2.5
5
10
Printing Volume of Matrigel/µl

PDMS

<20µm

25µm

40µm

150µm

350µm

S2

Matrigel layer

B

Young’s modulus/kPa

A

100

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. 10
The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.
HUVECs

PDMS

C

Actin

Laminin

0.1
0.00

0.05
0.10
Rate of curing agent

Collagen IV

0.15

Merge

4kPa

1.5kPa

0.5kPa

Nucleus

1

S3

A

Young’s modulus
normalized to Matrigel

1.5

***

bioRxiv
https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
1.0preprint doi:certified
by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0.5

0.0
Matrigel Collagen I Laminin

B

Collagen I

L:C 6:1

Laminin

C

Number normalized to Matrigel

6h

1h

0h

Matrigel

L:C 6:1

Matrigel
L:C 6:1

2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
Tubes

Nodes

S4

A

0.5kPa

1.5kPa

4kPa

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B

ECM hydrogel intestine

ECM hydrogel lung

Cells

Structure

ECM hydrogel bone

Young’s modulus
normalized to Matrigel

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0
Matrigel

Bone Intestine Lung

S5

0h

0h

0h

Overlay

Overlay

Overlay

Stiffness map

Stiffness map

Stiffness map

8

8

4

4

4

0

Y axis/µm

8

Y axis/µm

Y axis/µm

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/816496; this version posted October 24, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

-4

-4

-4

-8

-8
-8

-4
0
4
X axis/µm
relative Young’s
modulus
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
30min

8

0

-8
-8

-4
0
4
X axis/µm
relative Young’s
modulus
1.0
1.8
2.6
3.2
4.0
2h

8

-8

-4
0
4
X axis/µm
relative Young’s
modulus
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.1
1.2

8

1h

S6

