bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Building customizable auto-luminescent luciferase-based reporters in plants
Arjun Khakhar1, Colby Starker2, James Chamness2, Nayoung Lee4, Sydney Stokke2, Cecily Wang2, Ryan
Swanson2, Furva Rizvi3, Takato Imaizumi4, Dan Voytas2
1 – College of Biological Sciences, University of Minnesota, MN, 55108
2 – Department Genetics, Cell Biology, & Development, University of Minnesota, MN, 55108
3 – Department Biomedical engineering, University of Minnesota, MN, 55108
4 - Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, 98195-1800

Abstract
Bioluminescence is a powerful biological signal that scientists have repurposed to design reporters for
gene expression in plants and animals. However, there are some downsides associated with the need to
provide a substrate to these reporters, such as its high cost and non-uniform tissue penetration. In this
work we reconstitute a fungal bioluminescence pathway (FBP) in planta using an easily composable
toolbox of parts. We demonstrate that the FBP can create luminescence across various tissues in a
broad range of plants without external substrate addition. We also show how our toolbox can be used
to deploy the FBP in planta to build auto-luminescent reporters for the study of gene-expression and
hormone fluxes. A low-cost imaging platform for gene expression profiling is also described. These
experiments lay the groundwork for the future construction of programmable auto-luminescent plant
traits, such as creating light driven plant-pollinator interactions or light emitting plant-based sensors.

Introduction
Bioluminescence is one of nature’s more spectacular tricks. It is used by a diverse set of organisms to
achieve a broad range of goals such as attracting mates, scaring off predators and recruiting other
creatures to spread spores1,2,3,4,5. The mechanism of light emission is broadly conserved: an enzymatic
oxidation reaction by a luciferase enzyme turns a luciferin substrate into a high energy intermediate
which decays to produce light1. There have been several different examples of luciferin substrateluciferase enzyme pairs described to date6,7. Researchers have leveraged some, such as the firefly and
renilla luciferase enzymes to build reporters to study gene expression in plants and other eukaryotic
systems8,9. These reporters have a high signal to noise ratio because there is effectively no background
signal produced by plants.
Additionally, thanks to its water-soluble luciferin substrate, firefly luciferase can be used to visualize live
changes in gene expression in plants in a non-invasive manner, theoretically enabling whole plant time
lapse imaging8. However, current bioluminescent reporters do present some significant challenges
which has limited their broad application for macro scale visualization of gene expression. One major
challenge is uniform delivery and penetration of the luciferin substrate, especially in adult plant tissues.
Some luciferins like coelenterazine, the substrate for renilla luciferase, are non-water soluble and so
cannot be used for imaging without cell-lysis9. The luciferin for firefly luciferase, D-luciferin, is water
soluble and can be topically applied to whole plants or delivered through watering10. However, uniform
substrate delivery is challenging to achieve, which makes it difficult to disambiguate whether a lack of
bioluminescent signal is due to a lack of expression of the luciferase or delivery of the substrate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Additionally, the relatively high cost of D-luciferin (up to several hundred dollars per gram) makes
continuous whole plant imaging a prohibitively expensive practice.
To avoid the need to deliver the luciferin substrate, an optimal solution would be to engineer plants
such that the substrate is produced in every cell. Krichevsky et al. demonstrated one approach to
achieve this by incorporating the lux operon from the prokaryote Photobacterium leiognathi into the
chloroplast genome in Nicotiana tabacum11. While auto-luminescence was achieved, this approach is
extremely challenging to extend to other plants due to the technical challenges of transforming plastids.
In their 2018 paper, Kotlobay and Sarkisyan et al. identify a fungal bioluminescence pathway (FBP)
consisting of a set of three genes that are sufficient to convert caffeic acid, a common plant
metabolite12, into a luciferin molecule and a paired luciferase, Luz, that can oxidize it to create a
bioluminescent signal12. This pathway can be nuclear encoded, as it is derived from a eukaryotic fungus,
overcoming the challenges associated with plastid transformation. Additionally, this luciferase produces
light in the green spectrum, which minimizes absorption by the predominant plant pigment, chlorophyll,
and makes it spectrally separable from the other major luciferase-based reporters13.
In this report we sought to reconstitute the FBP in planta and to test if natively produced caffeic acid
could be used to generate bioluminescence. We also tested whether the FBP functioned across plant
species and if it could be used to study the spatiotemporal patterns of gene expression. In this work we
describe a toolkit of resources to easily generate FBP-based reporters to study gene expression in
planta. We also demonstrate how this toolkit could be deployed to generate programable autoluminescence patterns in planta and to build plant-based biosensors with luminescent outputs that do
not require external substrate addition.

Results
Reconstitution of the fungal bioluminescence pathway in planta leads to auto-luminescence
To test if the fungal bioluminescence pathway described by Kotlobay and Sarkisyan et al.12 would
function in planta, we attempted to transiently reconstitute this pathway in the leaves of Nicotiana
benthamiana. We chose to use N. benthamiana because Agrobacterium infiltration provides an easy
way to transiently express genes. We synthetized codon optimized versions of the three genes
necessary to turn caffeic acid into 3-hydroxyhispidin, 4′-phosphopantetheinyl transferase (NPGA) from
Aspergillus nidulans, hispidin-3-hydroxylase (H3H) from Neonothopanus nambi, and a polyketide
synthase (Hisps) also from N. nambi12 (Figure 1A). We also generated a codon optimized version of the
fungal luciferase, Luz. These DNA sequences were also domesticated to remove all commonly used type
II-S restriction sites to make them compatible with the MoClo plasmid assembly kit14. This enabled the
promoters and terminators to be easily swapped and facilitated the creation of a toolbox of vectors to
build FBPs for constitutive or spatio-temporally regulated auto-luminescence (Table 1). The expression
cassettes can be easily assembled into single T-DNAs that express the entire FBP with a one-step
GoldenGate reaction.
When we imaged N. benthamiana leaves three days after delivery of the FBP via Agrobacterium
infiltration, we see significant bioluminescence over background at the site of infiltration (Figure
1B,C,D), demonstrating the pathway can produce bioluminescence using natively synthesized caffeic
acid. Upon comparing luminescence from leaves that had the complete pathway versus controls in
which enzymes from the pathway were missing, we only observe a bioluminescence signal with the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

complete pathway (Figure 1D, Supplement figure 1). This indicates that there are no native enzymes
expressed at functional levels in N. benthamiana leaves which could complement the functions of the
FBP enzymes. We also observe no bioluminescence from confluent cultures of Agrobacterium that carry
the pathway (Supplementary figure 1), implying the observed bioluminescent signal is not from
expression of this pathway in Agrobacterium.
Incorporation of spent luciferin recycling pathway prolongs transient auto-luminescence
In their paper, Kotlobay and Sarkisyan et al12 also describe an additional enzyme, caffeylpyruvate
hydrolase (CPH), that recycles the spent luciferin, caffeylpyruvic acid, back into the substrate for the
pathway, caffeic acid (Figure 1A). We reasoned that incorporating this enzyme into our reconstituted
pathway would create a stronger bioluminescence signal due to a higher substrate concentration and
potentially prolong the presence of transient bioluminescence from Agrobacterium infiltration. To test
this hypothesis, we built a new pathway with all the enzymes described above as well as one additional
expression cassette for CPH expression. When we compared luminescence from Agrobacterium
infiltrated N. benthamiana leaves, we observed approximately equal signals at four days, consistent with
initial saturating substrate conditions (Supplementary Figure 2). At later time points we see higher mean
luminescence signal from leaves infiltrated with the CPH containing pathway, consistent with the
hypothesis that when the substrate is limited, the presence of a recycling pathway improves the
bioluminescence signal (Figure 1E). Based on these results, for all further experiments we used FBPs that
included the recycling enzyme, CPH.
Stable integration of the fungal bioluminescence pathway creates auto-luminescent plants
Our experiments thus far implied that we could create auto-luminescent plants by genomically
integrating expression cassettes for the three enzymes in the biosynthesis pathway, namely NPGA, H3H,
and Hisps, the recycling pathway, CPH, and the fungal luciferase, Luz. We used the FBP characterized in
Figure 1 to generate a stable transgenic line of N. benthamiana. When we characterized the
luminescence on rooting medium (Figure 1F) and in soil (Figure 1G), we observed auto-luminescence
across the plant. We see stronger signals in the root tips and shoot apical meristem, consistent with a
higher density of cells in these tissues. Similar patterns of expression are observed in root tips of
Arabidopsis thaliana with constitutively expressed firefly luciferase8. It is therefore possible to generate
plants with genomically integrated FPBs to create stable auto-luminescence.
Auto-luminescence in different plant species
While N. benthamiana is an excellent model to prototype the FBP, we hypothesized that it should, in
principle, work in any plant capable of producing caffeic acid, as long as the appropriate promoters and
terminators were used to ensure expression of the pathway enzymes. To test this hypothesis, we
performed transient Agrobacterium-based delivery of the FBP into the model plant A. thaliana and the
crop plant Solanum lycopersicum (tomato) using the AgroBEST protocol15. We observed robust autoluminescence signal over background in the cotyledons of treated seedlings (Figure 2A,B). We also
performed Agrobacterium infiltrations of the leaves of the ornamental plant, Dahlia, and were able to
observe auto-luminescence (Figure 2C). Finally, we explored if the FBP was functional in petals, as
luminescence of this tissue has applications for horticulture as well as engineering plant pollinator
interactions. Agrobacterium infiltrations with the FBP of petals from Catharanthus roseus (periwinkle),
Petunia axillaris, and three different varieties of Rosa rubiginosa (Rose) resulted auto-luminescence in

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

all flowers with a range of intensities (Figure 2D,E, Figure 3A). We also observed that the signal dropped
off within a day of the flowers being detached from the plant body, whereas it persisted when the
flowers remained connected to the plant body. This might mean some of the pathway substrates or cofactors might be trafficked from source tissues; however, more tests are required to confirm this
hypothesis. These results demonstrate that the FBP can function across a wide range of plants.
Visualizing spatio-temporal patterns of gene expression
In planta substrate-independent bioluminescence promises to be a powerful reporter technology, as it
enables long-term characterization of gene expression on a macro scale in a cost-effective manner. The
approach also does not suffer from the issues associated with current bioluminescent reporters, such as
the challenges of substrate application and non-uniform substrate penetration. To validate that the
pathway could be used to study spatio-temporal patterns of gene expression, we built a version of the
pathway in which the expression of Luz was driven by the promoter of the ODORANT1 (ODO1) gene
from petunia16,17,18 (Figure 3B). This gene has been previously characterized with a firefly luciferasebased reporter. Its expression was only observed in the flowers of petunia and was shown to be diurnal,
peaking in the evening at the transition of day to night16. We used Agrobacterium infiltration to deliver
two versions of FBP to petunia flower petals: one with Luz expressed from the ODO1 promoter (pODO1)
and the other with Luz expressed from the constitutive 35S promoter. We then performed time course
imaging of detached flowers. We observed an increase in luminescence in the evening at the transition
between day and night in the flowers treated with the pODO1:Luz, a trend not seen in the 35S:Luz
control (Figure 3A).
Visualizing multiple diurnal oscillations in flowers is technically challenging, as the auto-luminescence
signal only lasts approximately one day after the flower is separated from the plant body, a necessity for
mounting it in the imaging platform. To overcome this limitation, we infiltrated two sets of flowers 24
hours apart and then harvested tissue and began time course imaging on the same day. In this way we
were able to quantify luminescence signal from the pODO1:Luz over a two-day period post infiltration.
We observed the expected luminescence signal peak at the transition between day and night both one
and two days after infiltration (Figure 3C), with a diminishing signal over time, which can be explained by
the gradual loss of T-DNA expression over time19 combined with gradual senescence of the detached
flower. These results demonstrate that the FBP can be used in a similar fashion to firefly luciferase to
study spatio-temporal patterns of gene expression without necessitating substrate addition. These
experiments also serve as a proof-of-concept that, by using an appropriate set of promoters to drive the
pathway genes, an FBP could be programmed to generate specific spatio-temporal patterns of autoluminescence in stable transgenic lines for synthetic biology applications.
Visualizing hormone fluxes in planta
Hormone signals coordinate diverse aspects of plant metabolism and development by carrying
information from cell to cell across tissues and organ systems in the plant. Firefly luciferase-based
reporters have been an invaluable tool to study how hormone fluxes can trigger developmental changes
in the plant8. However, the challenges of substrate cost, application and penetration make using them
across the entire plant body or over long periods problematic. The substrate independence of the FBP
makes it an attractive alternative to overcome these challenges. To demonstrate how this pathway
could be engineered to build a hormone biosensor we built a version of the pathway with the AtRAB18
promoter (pRAB18) driving expression of Luz (Figure 4A). This promoter has been previously

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

characterized as having strong and selective increase in expression in response to the plant hormone
abscisic acid (ABA)20.
We first validated if this FBP could indeed faithfully report ABA levels in planta. To do this, we assayed
the bioluminescent signal produced three days after infiltration into N. benthamiana leaves that were
treated with increasing concentrations of ABA. As expected, we observed increasing bioluminescence
signal with increasing doses of ABA (Figure 4B).
We next tested if this system could respond to endogenous ABA signals. The pRAB18 driven FBP was
delivered to the leaves of N. benthamiana via Agrobacterium infiltration. One set of leaves was allowed
to desiccate, while the other set was kept moist. The bioluminescence of the leaves was then imaged
over time. We expected that as the leaves dry out, they would begin to produce ABA21, leading to an
increase in luminescence. We observed a significant increase in luminescence in desiccating leaves, up
to levels of an FBP with a 35S:Luz (Figure 4C). We did not see an increase in signal in leaves that were
kept moist (Figure 4C,D). These results demonstrate the utility of the fungal luciferase as a tool to enable
substrate independent visualization of hormone fluxes in planta. They also serve as a proof of concept
for how this pathway could be deployed in stable plant lines as a biosensor for soil moisture levels in the
future.
Developing a low-cost, long-term bioluminescence imaging system.
The power of bioluminescence as a tool to study dynamic signals in biology, such as ABA accumulation
during drought, is challenging to access in lower resource settings due to high costs of substrate and
instrumentation. The substrate independence of the FBP makes it more economical than other
bioluminescent systems. However, the high cost and small chamber size of commercially available
luminescence imaging setups make running multiple experiments in parallel cost prohibitive. The cost of
such commercial systems can exceed $100,000USD. To address this challenge, we leveraged a wealth of
open-source software and off-the-shelf hardware components to design and build a relatively low cost,
modular platform for bioluminescence imaging. Our platform uses a Raspberry Pi single board computer
as a controller for a DSLR camera, outfitted with a macro lens and mounted in either a dark room or
pop-up plant growth tent. The code used for controlling customized still and time-course imaging with
this platform, as well as the image processing pipeline, is available on Github (Table 2). The entire cost
comes to less than $2,500, the bulk of which is for the camera and lens; substituting an entry-level DSLR
and kit lens would bring the cost below $2,000.
With programmatically controlled long exposures and a tripod stabilizer, the DSLR camera provides the
best of both worlds: high resolution and detail for macroscopic plant subjects under multiple light
conditions, and sufficient sensitivity to capture even low levels of bioluminescence signal. We do
observe higher levels of thermodynamic noise than using cooled CCD camera setups, but this is easily
filtered away using opensource software such as ImageJ22. An example for comparison is given in
Supplementary Figure 3, where the same periwinkle petal infiltration was imaged under the CCD camera
(Supplementary Figure 3A) and then the DSLR (Supplementary Figure 3B). The DSLR captured high
resolution, true color images under both the light and dark conditions, while showing similar light
sensitivity to the reporter.
In contrast to all-in-one tabletop chamber systems, our setup with a dark room or pop-up tent23 permits
both much larger plant subjects and flexible positioning of the camera relative to the subject. For

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

example, we took images of flower petal infiltrations on intact rose bushes a meter in size. These
features make our platform a compelling alternative to commercially available systems at a fraction of
the cost. We used this platform to capture high-resolution images of various plant subjects (Figure 2B,
Figure 3D,E), and to perform time-course imaging for an FBP under an AtRAB18 drought-inducible
promoter (Figure 4D). These results illustrate how our platform, in conjunction with the FBP, enable low
cost bioluminescence reporting for dynamic biological phenomena.

Discussion
The results presented here demonstrate how the FBP can convert a common plant metabolite, caffeic
acid, into a luciferin and turn it over to produce robust luminescence in planta, without the addition of
any additional substrate. We go on to show how the FBP can be deployed as a useful addition to the
bioluminescent reporter toolbox in plants. As it emits in the green spectrum13, it should be spectrally
separable from firefly luciferase, allowing it to be applied in a complementary manner to the reporters
that already exist. Our observation that the incorporation of the recycling pathway prolongs the autoluminescent signal implies further tuning this pathway might be an avenue to enable long term imaging
without substrate depletion in stable lines. While this may explain why we observe stronger autoluminescence in infiltrated tissue than in the stable transgenic line, it might also be due to the
overexpression of the enzymes due to the delivery of multiple T-DNAs. Thus, further optimizing the
expression of the enzymes in the FBP might be another avenue to increase the auto-luminescent signal.
This reengineering can be easily implemented in the future with our FBP toolkit, thanks to the easy
promoter and terminator swapping enabled by using the MoClo system14.
Based on our transient expression assays, the FBP can function in a broad range of plant species. With
the recent development of rapid morphogen mediated plant transgenesis protocols24, we believe FBPbased biosensors and reporters will be easy to extend across a range of plants for long term visualization
of gene expression. This extensibility to a broad range of plants makes this approach to autoluminescence superior to the existing transplastomic approach11, as plastid transformation is challenging
and largely limited to tobacco and a few related Solanaceae25.
Our results with the pODO1 driven Luz in petunia flowers demonstrate that the FBP can be used to
study the spatiotemporal patterns of gene expression, reporting the same patterns of gene expression
as a firefly luciferase-based reporter16, but without necessitating substrate addition. The development of
high expressing FBP lines by Mitiouchkina et al in parallel to this work demonstrate how our FBP tools
could be applied to visualize gene expression in various tissues over the lifetime of the plant29. Thus, its
application would lower the cost of performing these kinds of the experiments. Further, the data shows
how by swapping promoters in the pathway, spatio-temporal patterns of auto-luminescence can be
programmed into plants for synthetic biology applications. For example, plants engineered to have
sufficiently bright auto-luminescent flowers might attract nocturnal insects enabling the creation of
novel plant-pollinator interactions. The creation of bioluminescent flowers would also have relevance to
designer floriculture and might serve as a visually compelling and viscerally exciting demonstration to
the public of the power of synthetic biology. We plan to generate stable FBP petunia lines and explore
this avenue of research further in the future.
The data we present on using the pRAB18 driven Luz to track drought stress via ABA signaling serves as a
demonstration for how the FBP could be used to build biosensors for internal or external signals by

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

driving genes in the pathway with synthetic promoters. In the future, stable lines generated with this
construct could be deployed to track soil moisture levels at field scales. These biosensors would have an
output more easily visualized than fluorescent reporters, have a high signal to noise ratio, and be cost
effective due to their substrate independence. Thanks to the ease of promoter swapping in our FBP
toolkit, this approach could be easily extended to build biosensors for a range of different
phytohormones, environmental cues like light, or synthetic signaling systems for basic science and
translational applications.
Besides the substrate costs, the high cost of commercially available bioluminescence imaging systems
restrict access to luminescence-based reporters. We demonstrate how commercially available
photography equipment and open source software can be used to set up relatively low-cost, modular
and programmable luminescence imaging platforms. This coupled with the substrate independence of
the FBP will broaden access to these tools to lower resource settings as well as enable scalable
application of these reporters. We hope the work presented here will serve as a first step for the
creation of novel bioluminescence-based tools in plants for basic science discovery and synthetic biology
enabled applications.

Materials and methods
FBP plasmid construction
The various FBP encoding T-DNA constructs that were characterized in this work were built using a twostep process. First base plasmids containing an expression cassette was built for each of the five
enzymes in the FBP. These base plasmids were designed to have promoters for either constitutive or
tissue/time-period specific expression of the FBP using a mix of promoters that were either from the
MoClo toolkit14 or amplified from genomic or plasmid DNA with primers that added the appropriate BsaI
sites. The AtRAB18 and PhODO1 promoters were amplified from published plasmids that were obtained
from either addgene or via requests from the authors. Terminators were chosen from the MoClo kit to
ensure high expression14. DNA sequences encoding the enzymes were designed to be codon optimized
for N. benthamiana. Additionally, all the common type-IIs restriction sites were removed via codon
swaps. These sequences were synthesized by Twist biosciences. All these parts were assembled into the
base vectors with a BsaI-based goldengate assembly reaction. The base vector backbones were designed
to contain the appropriate AarI sites to be assembled together into either four or five expression
cassettes containing T-DNAs through an AarI-based goldengate assembly reaction26. All vectors listed in
Table 1 are available via addgene or upon request.
Agrobacterium infiltration for transient expression of FBP
For all the transient expression assays of an FBP besides those shown in Figure 2A,B, the protocol
described by Sparkes et al. was used27. Briefly, agrobacterium strains transformed with T-DNAs
expressing the grown up overnight under Kanamycin and Gentamicin selection. These cultures were
then pelleted and washed twice with infiltration media the next day and then resuspended at OD600 0.8
and infiltrated into the desired tissue using a needleless syringe. Imaging of the luminescence signal was
performed between three and five days after infiltration, depending on the assay being performed.
AgroBEST co-culture for transient expression of FBP

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The transient expression assays for S. lycopersicum and A. thaliana were carried out using the AgroBEST
protocol15. Briefly, seeds were sterilized and germinated in 0.5x MS and once cotyledons emerged, the
seedlings were co-cultured with the appropriate agrobacterium strain that had been transformed with
the T-DNA encoding an FBP, in a mixture of MS and AB-MES. For all tomato AgroBEST treatments FBP_6
was used (Table 1). For the Arabidopsis AgroBEST FBP_12 and FBP_11 (Table 1) were used. These strains
were primed for agrobest the previous day through overnight culture in AB-MES salts according to the
AgroBEST protocol. Visualization of the bioluminescence signal was performed after two days of coculture.
Generation of a stable transgenic FBP line of Nicotiana benthamiana
The protocol detailed in Sparkes et al.27 was used to generate stable lines of Nicotiana benthamiana
with the FBP integrated into the genome. To summarize, the agrobacterium strain characterized in
Figure 1 was used to infiltrate leaves of N. benthamiana. After three days these leaves were excised,
sterilized and transferred to shooting media plates that contained Kanamycin for selection. After callus
and shoot formation, the shoots were transformed to rooting media plates which also had Kanamycin in
the media. Finally, rooted plantlets were screened for luminescence and the individual with the highest
signal was transferred to soil for seed.
CCD camera-based luminescence imaging
For all static CCD camera-based luciferase imaging eight minute exposures of plant tissue were taken in
using a UVP BioImaging Systems EpiChemi3 Darkroom. For transgenic plants a twelve minute exposure
was used. Paired bright field images were also taken using the same camera. The brightness and
contrast of the long exposure images were adjusted using imageJ22 to optemize signal visibility and then
overlaid as a false colored image on the bright field image, where warmer colors correspond to higher
signals.
Time lapse CCD camera-based imaging
For the time lapse data collected in Figures 3A,C and in Figure 4C, experiments were performed using
the NightOWL LB 983 in vivo imaging system16. In all cases agrobacterium infiltration of the FBP into the
desired tissue was performed as described previously. For the petunia time lapse imaging data displayed
in Figure 3A and C, the petals of flowers were infiltrated and then the flowers were excised from the
plants either one or two days after infiltrations and were mounted in the imaging platform with their
pedicles immersed in a solution of 5% sucrose16. Images were then captured every hour with a tenminute exposure. Long day light conditions were implemented in the times between images. For the
data displayed in Figure 4C, leaves of N. benthamiana were infiltrated and then excised from the plant
after three days and placed in petri dishes. For the watered conditions a moistened filter paper was
added to the petri dish, whereas for the drought conditions the filter paper was left dry. Images were
then captured every hour with a ten-minute exposure and the timepoint with the peak pRAB18:Luz
signal was reported.
Quantification of luminescence signal in images
For quantification of luminescence signal, imageJ22 was used to box areas of the same size in images of
infiltrated leaves or 96 well plates containing hole punches from infiltrated leaves and then the average
signal intensity was recorded and plotted in python using the seaborn28 plotting package. All p values

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

reported were calculated using the t-test function in the scipy package. All the raw data and data
analysis code were made available on Github (https://github.com/craftyKraken/P4).

Time lapse luminescence imaging using DSLR-based system
A complete listing of sourced components and costs is found in Table 2. Timelapse images were
captured using a Canon DSLR equipped with a macro lens and programmably controlled from a
Raspberry Pi microcomputer running a combination of free, open-source and custom software. The
gphoto2 library was used to control the camera via USB; power to lights and the camera was modulated
by a pair of controllable four outlet power relays connected to the Pi GPIO interface via jumper cables; a
custom python wrapper was used to implement control logic for the camera, using gphoto2, and for the
relay, using the RPi.GPIO package. Long-exposure images were captured in a dark room or light-proof
pop-up tent. Image processing was performed using macros written in ImageJ, and the FFMPEG library,
under top-level control of an additional custom python wrapper. Gphoto2, ImageJ and FFMPEG are free
and open-source software; the custom wrappers are hosted on a public GitHub repository
(https://github.com/craftyKraken/P4), and are also available for reuse under the GNU 3.0 public license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figures

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1. A) Schematic of the chemical reactions driving the generation of auto-luminescence in planta.
Caffeic acid produced by the phenylpropanoid biosynthesis pathway is converted to Hispidin by Hisps
once it is post-translationally activated by NPGA. Hispidin is then converted to 3-Hydroxyhispidin, the
luciferin molecule, by H3H. Finally, the luciferase Luz oxidizes 3-Hydroxyhispidin to a high energy
intermediate which degrades into Caffeylpyruvic acid, producing light. CPH can turn Caffeylpyruvic acid
back into Caffeic acid, closing the cycle. B) An image in the dark with an eight minute exposure of a N.
benthamiana leaf infiltrated with the FBP demonstrating auto-luminescence in the infiltrated zone. C)
An image in the light of the same leaf with the infiltrated zone marked with a black outline. D) Bar plots
visualizing background subtracted luminescence from N. benthamiana leaves infiltrated with either a
functional FBP (yellow) or a broken control (gray) missing the luciferase, Luz, three days after infiltration
(n=12, p=0.0002). Black bars represent standard deviation. E) Bar plots visualizing background
subtracted luminescence seven days after infiltration from N. Benthamiana leaves infiltrated with FBPs
that either have (pink) or do not have (gray) the CPH-based recycling pathway (n=12, p=0.05). Black bars
represent standard deviation. F, G) Luminescence signal captured with a CCD camera superimposed on a
bright field image of a transgenic N. benthamiana plant with a genomically integrated FBP on rooting
media (F) and in soil (G). Warmer colors correspond to higher luminescence.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 1. A) Bar plots summarizing luminescence recorded from N. benthamiana leaves
infiltrated with FBPs three days after infiltration. Each dot represents a reading from a different
infiltrated leaf. The back bars represent standard deviations. The background level of Luminescence
recorded was 23 AU. The bars labeled agro are readings from confluent cultures of agrobacterium
strains used to deliver the respective FBP. Pathway 2 is a functional pathway without CPH and pathway
6 is a functional pathway with CPH. Pathways 8,10 and 11 are all negative controls missing pathway
enzymes. B) Schematics of the expression cassettes assembled for each of the pathways characterized.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Figure 2. Box plots visualizing luminescence from N. benthamiana leaves infiltrated an
FBP that either with (blue) or without (gray) the CPH-based recycling pathway. Each dot represents a
reading from a different infiltrated leaf. Data is form four days and seven days after infiltration.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. A) Luminescence signal superimposed on a bright field image of Solanum lycopersium (tomato)
seedlings with an FBP delivered to them via the agrobest protocol. Warmer colors correspond to higher
luminescence signal. B) Luminescence signal superimposed on bright field images of Arabidopsis
thaliana seedlings with a functional FBP (left three seedlings) or a broken FBP (right most seedling)
delivered to them via the agrobest protocol. Warmer colors correspond to higher luminescence signal.
C) Luminescence signal superimposed on a bright field image of a Dahlia pinnata leaf infiltrated with an
FBP. D) Lit (left) and unlit, long exposure (right) true color images of Catharanthus roseus flowers
infiltrated with an FBP. E) Lit (left) and unlit, long exposure (right) true color images of Rosa rubiginosa
flowers infiltrated with an FBP.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. A) Time course luminescence data from long day entrained P. axillaris flowers that were
infiltrated with FBPs. The orange line represents FBP with Luz driven by the ODO1 promoter from
Petunia (n=1) and the blue line represents the mean luminescence signal of an FBP with Luz driven by
the 35S promoter (n=2). The light blue outline represents standard deviation. The gray background
represents the night period. Representative images of petunia flowers infiltrated with the pODO1:Luz at
minimum and maximum bioluminescence are also shown, where luminescence signal is overlaid on the
bright field image. B) A schematic of the Luz expression cassette being driven by flower specific diurnal
promoter of the petunia gene, ODO1, which is expected to have peak expression at the day to night
transition. C) Time course luminescence data from long day entrained P. axillaris flowers that were
infiltrated with an FBP with Luz driven by the ODO1 promoter, 1 and 2 days post infiltration (n=7 for

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

both). The solid orange lines are mean luminescence and light orange outlines represent standard
deviation. The gray background represents the night period.

Figure 4. A) Schematic of the Luz expression cassette driven by the AtRAB18 promoter which responds
to ABA signals, such as those that produced in response to drought. B) Bar plots summarizing mean
luminescence signal observed from N. benthamaina leaves that were co-infiltrated with the pRAB18:Luz
containing FBP along with increasing concentrations of the hormone ABA and then imaged after three
days. Black bars represent standard deviation (n=3). C) Luminescence signal observed from N.
benthamaina leaves that were infiltrated with an FBP and then were either kept moist (blue
background) or were allowed to desiccate to trigger an ABA signal (orange background). Gray and red
dots represent data from independent leaves infiltrated with FBP with a 35S or pRAB18 driven Luz
respectively. Representative images of watered and un-watered leaves infiltrated with the pRAB18:Luz
FBP with luminescence signal overlaid on a bright field picture. Warmer colors represent higher signals.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Supplementary figure 3. Petal infiltrations of C. roseus flowers with an FBP imaged three days post
infiltration with either our DLSR-based imaging system (A) or a CCD based imaging system (B).

Video figure 1. Time lapse imaging was performed with our RaspberryPi controlled DSLR imaging
platform to visualize ABA induced FBP expression in plants exposed to drought stress. We infiltrated one
leaf each on two N. benthamiana plants with FBPs that had either a 35S (+control) or pRAB18 driven Luz.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

One plant was allowed to desiccate while the other was kept watered. Bioluminescence in the leaves as
then imaged over three days. The treatments of the leaves are labeled with white legends.

Table 1. Vectors containing FBP components.
Plasmid Fungal Bioluminescent Pathway Components
Name
P302p35S_Short_TMV 5':AsNpga:tAtug7, AtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_1
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, pAtuMas:NnLuz:trbcSE9
P303p35S_Short_TMV 5':AsNpga:tAtug7, AtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_2
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, pAtuMas:NnLuz:trbcSE9
P304p35S_Short_TMV 5':AsNpga:Atug7, pAtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_3
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, pAtELF4:NnLuz:trbcse9
P305pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_4
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, pAtuMas:NnLuz:trbcSE9
P306pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtUbi1:NhH3H:tNos,
FBP_5
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, pAtuMas:NnLuz:trbcSE9
P307pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_6
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp
P308pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_7
pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, p35S:NnLuz:AtuOcs
P313pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp,
FBP_8
pAtuMas:Nn Luz:trbcSE9
P314pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtUbi1:NhH3H:tNos
FBP_9
P315pUBQ1:NnH3H:tNos, pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp, pAtuMas:NnLuz:trbcSE9
FBP_10
P336pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4, p35S:AsNPGA:tAtug7, pAtUbi10:NnH3H:AtuOCS,
FBP_11 pCmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp
P362pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, p35S:AsNpga:tAtug7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_12 p35S:Hisps:t35S, p35S:NnLuz:AtuOcs
P427pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_13 p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtELF4:NnLuz:trbcse9
P428pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_14 p35S:NnHisps:t35S
P443pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_15 p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtSUC2:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
P444pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_16 p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtCCA1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
P445pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_17 p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pPhODO1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
P446pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtSUC2:NnH3H:tAtuOCS,
FBP_18 p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtCCA1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
P447pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
FBP_19 p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtRAB18:NnLuz:tAtuOcs

Plasmid Type
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

P491FBP_20
P492FBP_21
P493FBP_22
P494FBP_23
P495FBP_24
P195
P199
P212
P214
P223
P364
P366
P368
P438
P439
P440
P441
P442
pCO486
pCO487
pCO488
pCO489
pCO601

pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
p35S:NnHisps:t35S, p35S:NnLuz:AtuOcs
pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtCCA1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtRAB18:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtSUC2:NnH3H:tAtuOCS,
p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtCCA1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4, pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7, pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas,
p35S:NnHisps:t35S, pAtSUC2:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pMOD_A''_p35S:AsNpga:tAtug7
pMOD_D_pAtELF4:NnLuz:trbcSE9
pMOD_D_p35S:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pMOD_B_pAtUbi1:NnH3H:tAtuNos
pMOD_A'_pLHB1B1:NnCPH:tSlH4
pMOD_A'_pSlH4:NnCPH:tSlH4
pMOD_A''_pSlRBCS2:AsNpga:tAtuG7
pMOD_B_pAtuMas:NnH3H:tAtuMas
pMOD_D_pAtSUC2:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pMOD_D_pAtCCA1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pMOD_D_pPhODO1:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pMOD_B_pAtSUC2:NnH3H:tAtuOcs
pMOD_D_pAtRAB18:NnLuz:tAtuOcs
pMOD_A_35S Short_TMV 5':AsNpga:tAtug7
pMOD_B_AtUbi10:NnH3H:tAtuOcs
pMOD_C'_CmYLCV:NnHisps:tHsp
pMOD_D_AtuMas:NnLuz:trbcSE9
pMOD_C'_p35S:NnHispst:35S

T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
T-DNA
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26
Module26

Table 2. Components for DSLR-Based Imaging Platform
Component

Source

Cost

RaspberryPi 3 Complete Starter Kit

CanaKit

$75

Canon EOS 80D DSLR

Canon

$1,100

Canon AC adapter and DC coupler

B&H Photo

$150

EF 100mm f/2.8 Macro Lens

Canon

$600

Tripod

Amazon

$25

Hardware

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Controllabe 4-Outlet Power Relay

Adafruit

$25

Jumper cables

Amazon

$10

Pop-up plant growing tents

Zazzy

$153

RPi.GPIO

https://pypi.org/project/RPi.GPIO/

Free

gphoto2

http://gphoto.org/

Free

ImageJ

https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/

Free

ffmpeg

https://ffmpeg.org/

Free

Python wrappers

https://github.com/craftyKraken/P4

Free

Software

Acknowledgements
N.L. and T.I. are supported by grants from National Institute of Health (R01GM079712) and NextGeneration BioGreen 21 Program (PJ013386, Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea). We
would like to thank Dr. Karen Sarkisyan and Dr. Nadya Markina for kindly sharing the sequences of the
FBP genes from their publication.

References
1. Shimomura, O. (2006). Bioluminescence: chemical principles and methods. World Scientific Publishing
Co. Pte.
2 Wainwright, P. C., & Longo, S. J. (2017). Functional innovations and the conquest of the oceans by
Acanthomorph fishes. Current Biology, 27(11), R550-R557.
3. Verdes, A., & Gruber, D. F. (2017). Glowing worms: Biological, chemical, and functional diversity of
bioluminescent annelids. Integrative and comparative biology, 57(1), 18-32.
4. Labella, A. M., Arahal, D. R., Castro, D., Lemos, M. L., & Borrego, J. J. (2017). Revisiting the genus
Photobacterium: taxonomy, ecology and pathogenesis. Int Microbiol, 20, 1-10.
5. Oliveira, A. G., Stevani, C. V., Waldenmaier, H. E., Viviani, V., Emerson, J. M., Loros, J. J., & Dunlap, J. C.
(2015). Circadian control sheds light on fungal bioluminescence. Current Biology, 25(7), 964-968.
6. Oba, Y., Stevani, C. V., Oliveira, A. G., Tsarkova, A. S., Chepurnykh, T. V., & Yampolsky, I. V. (2017).
Selected least studied but not forgotten bioluminescent systems. Photochemistry and
photobiology, 93(2), 405-415.
7. Schultz, D. T., Kotlobay, A. A., Ziganshin, R., Bannikov, A., Markina, N. M., Chepurnyh, T. V., ... & Oba,
Y. (2018). Luciferase of the Japanese syllid polychaete Odontosyllis umdecimdonta. Biochemical and
biophysical research communications, 502(3), 318-323.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

8. Khakhar, A., Leydon, A. R., Lemmex, A. C., Klavins, E., & Nemhauser, J. L. (2018). Synthetic hormoneresponsive transcription factors can monitor and re-program plant development. Elife, 7, e34702.
9. Wend, S., Dal Bosco, C., Kämpf, M. M., Ren, F., Palme, K., Weber, W., ... & Zurbriggen, M. D. (2013). A
quantitative ratiometric sensor for time-resolved analysis of auxin dynamics. Scientific reports, 3, 2052.
10. Rellán-Álvarez, R., Lobet, G., Lindner, H., Pradier, P. L., Sebastian, J., Yee, M. C., ... & Haney, C. H.
(2015). GLO-Roots: an imaging platform enabling multidimensional characterization of soil-grown root
systems. Elife, 4, e07597.
11. Krichevsky, A., Meyers, B., Vainstein, A., Maliga, P., & Citovsky, V. (2010). Autoluminescent
plants. PloS one, 5(11), e15461.
12. Kotlobay, A. A., Sarkisyan, K. S., Mokrushina, Y. A., Marcet-Houben, M., Serebrovskaya, E. O.,
Markina, N. M., ... & Petushkov, V. N. (2018). Genetically encodable bioluminescent system from
fungi. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115(50), 12728-12732.
13. Kaskova, Z. M., Dörr, F. A., Petushkov, V. N., Purtov, K. V., Tsarkova, A. S., Rodionova, N. S., ... &
Baranov, M. S. (2017). Mechanism and color modulation of fungal bioluminescence. Science
advances, 3(4), e1602847.
14. Engler, C., Youles, M., Gruetzner, R., Ehnert, T. M., Werner, S., Jones, J. D., ... & Marillonnet, S.
(2014). A golden gate modular cloning toolbox for plants. ACS synthetic biology, 3(11), 839-843.
15. Wu, H. Y., Liu, K. H., Wang, Y. C., Wu, J. F., Chiu, W. L., Chen, C. Y., ... & Lai, E. M. (2014). AGROBEST:
an efficient Agrobacterium-mediated transient expression method for versatile gene function analyses
in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant methods, 10(1), 19.
16. Fenske, M. P., Hazelton, K. D. H., Hempton, A. K., Shim, J. S., Yamamoto, B. M., Riffell, J. A., &
Imaizumi, T. (2015). Circadian clock gene LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL directly regulates the timing of
floral scent emission in Petunia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(31), 9775-9780.
17. Van Moerkercke, A., Haring, M. A., & Schuurink, R. C. (2011). The transcription factor EMISSION OF
BENZENOIDS II activates the MYB ODORANT1 promoter at a MYB binding site specific for fragrant
petunias. The Plant Journal, 67(5), 917-928.
18. Verdonk, J. C., Haring, M. A., van Tunen, A. J., & Schuurink, R. C. (2005). ODORANT1 regulates
fragrance biosynthesis in petunia flowers. The Plant Cell, 17(5), 1612-1624.
19. Norkunas, K., Harding, R., Dale, J., & Dugdale, B. (2018). Improving agroinfiltration-based transient
gene expression in Nicotiana benthamiana. Plant methods, 14(1), 71.
20. Kim, T. H., Hauser, F., Ha, T., Xue, S., Böhmer, M., Nishimura, N., ... & Lee, S. (2011). Chemical
genetics reveals negative regulation of abscisic acid signaling by a plant immune response
pathway. Current Biology, 21(11), 990-997.
21. Reddy, A. R., Chaitanya, K. V., & Vivekanandan, M. (2004). Drought-induced responses of
photosynthesis and antioxidant metabolism in higher plants. Journal of plant physiology, 161(11), 11891202.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809533; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

22. Schindelin, J., Arganda-Carreras, I., Frise, E., Kaynig, V., Longair, M., Pietzsch, T., ... & Tinevez, J. Y.
(2012). Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nature methods, 9(7), 676.
23. Katagiri, F., Canelon-Suarez, D., Griffin, K., Petersen, J., Meyer, R. K., Siegle, M., & Mase, K. (2015).
Design and construction of an inexpensive homemade plant growth chamber. PloS one, 10(5),
e0126826.
24. Lowe, K., La Rota, M., Hoerster, G., Hastings, C., Wang, N., Chamberlin, M., ... & Gordon-Kamm, W.
(2018). Rapid genotype “independent” Zea mays L.(maize) transformation via direct somatic
embryogenesis. In Vitro Cellular & Developmental Biology-Plant, 54(3), 240-252.
25. Rigano, M. M., Scotti, N., & Cardi, T. (2012). Unsolved problems in plastid
transformation. Bioengineered, 3(6), 329-333.
26. Čermák, T., Curtin, S. J., Gil-Humanes, J., Čegan, R., Kono, T. J., Konečná, E., ... & Voytas, D. F. (2017).
A multipurpose toolkit to enable advanced genome engineering in plants. The Plant Cell, 29(6), 11961217.
27. Sparkes, I. A., Runions, J., Kearns, A., & Hawes, C. (2006). Rapid, transient expression of fluorescent
fusion proteins in tobacco plants and generation of stably transformed plants. Nature protocols, 1(4),
2019.
28. Waskom, M., Botvinnik, O., Hobson, P., Cole, J. B., Halchenko, Y., Hoyer, S., ... & Coelho, L. P. (2014).
seaborn: v0. 5.0 (November 2014). Zenodo, doi, 10.
29. Tatiana Mitiouchkina, Alexander S. Mishin, Louisa Gonzalez Somermeyer, Nadezhda M.
Markina,Tatiana V. Chepurnyh, Elena B. Guglya, Tatiana A. Karataeva, Kseniia A. Palkina, Ekaterina S.
Shakhova, Liliia I. Fakhranurova, Sofia V. Chekova, Aleksandra S. Tsarkova, Yaroslav V. Golubev, Vadim V.
Negrebetsky, Sergey A. Dolgushin, Pavel V. Shalaev, Olesya A. Melnik, Victoria O. Shipunova, Sergey M.
Deyev, Andrey I. Bubyrev, Alexander S. Pushin, Vladimir V. Choob, Sergey V. Dolgov, Fyodor A.
Kondrashov, Ilia V. Yampolsky and Karen S. Sarkisyan. "Plants with self-sustained luminescence", 2019
Biorxiv

