bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Title: Distinctions among real and apparent respiratory motions in human fMRI data
Corresponding Author: Jonathan D Power
Authors: Jonathan D. Powera*, Benjamin M. Silvera, Marc J. Dubinb, Alex Martinc, Rebecca M.
a

Jones

Author Affiliations:
a: Sackler Institute for Developmental Psychobiology, Department of Psychiatry
Weill Cornell Medicine
1300 York Avenue
Box 140
New York, NY 10065 USA

b: Department of Psychiatry
Weill Cornell Medicine
1300 York Avenue
Box 140
New York, NY 10065 USA

c: National Institute for Mental Health
10 Center Dr.
Bethesda, MD 20814 USA

Contact information:
Jonathan Power: jdp9009@nyp.org
Benjamin Silver: bes2037@med.cornell.edu
Marc Dubin: mrd9035@med.cornell.edu
Alex Martin: alexmartin@mail.nih.gov
Rebecca Jones: rej2004@med.cornell.edu

Conflict of Interest:
The authors declare no conflicts of interest with respect to this report.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Highlights
Examines several fast-TR datasets with sampling rates of 720-1160 ms
Identifies 7 kinds of motion in fMRI scans, 5 of them related to respiration
Identifies 2 forms of pseudomotion occurring only in phase encode direction
Pseudomotion is a function of soft tissue mass, not lung volume
Reformulates motion estimates to draw out particular kinds of motion
Abstract
Head motion estimates in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) scans appear
qualitatively different with sub-second image sampling rates compared to the multi-second
sampling rates common in the past. Whereas formerly the head appeared still for much of a
scan with brief excursions from baseline, the head now appears to be in constant motion, and
motion estimates often seem to divulge little information about what is happening in a scan.
This constant motion has been attributed to respiratory oscillations that do not alias at faster
sampling rates, and investigators are divided on the extent to which such motion is “real”
motion or only “apparent” pseudomotion. Some investigators have abandoned the use of
motion estimates entirely due to these considerations. Here we investigate the properties of
motion in several fMRI datasets sampled at rates between 720-1160 ms, and describe 5 distinct
kinds of respiratory motion: 1) constant real respiratory motion in the form of head nodding
most evident in vertical position and pitch, which can be very large; 2) constant pseudomotion
at the same respiratory rate as real motion, occurring only in the phase encode direction; 3)
punctate real motions occurring at times of very deep breaths; 4) a low-frequency
pseudomotion in only the phase encode direction following very deep breaths; 5) slow
modulation of vertical and anterior-posterior head position by the respiratory envelope. We
reformulate motion estimates in light of these considerations and obtain good concordance
between motion estimates, physiologic records, image quality measures, and events evident in
the fMRI signals.

Introduction
Head motion causes major signal disruptions in functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data (Caballero-Gaudes and Reynolds, 2017; Friston et al., 1996). Head motion causes modeling
confounds in task fMRI when it correlates with task design (Barch et al., 1999; Bullmore et al.,
1999), and it clouds interpretation of resting state fMRI studies because it adds spatially focal
covariance to images (Horien et al., 2018; Satterthwaite et al., 2017). Though some motion may
be voluntary, some is involuntary, arising from head nodding during respiratory cycles, head
bobbing with cardiac pulsations, or events like yawns or sighs or twitches or sneezes, in
addition to other factors (Zaitsev et al., 2017). In previous decades, when whole-brain fMRI
images were typically obtained only every few seconds, little could be said about the extent to
which various motions reflected various physiological or voluntary causes in a typical dataset.
However, multi-band accelerations now permit much more rapid brain imaging, and subsecond acquisitions are becoming normative. Such rapid acquisitions are yielding head position
estimates fundamentally different than prior estimates, as noted by several authors (Glasser et

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

al., 2018; Power, 2017). Figure 1 illustrates the difference using data from the Brain Genomics
Superstruct Project (GSP) and the Human Connectome Project (HCP) (Holmes et al., 2015; Van
Essen et al., 2013). In older datasets like the GSP with multi-second sampling rates it was
common for the head to appear essentially still for much of the scan, with occasional spikes of
motion. However, in datasets like the HCP, with sub-second sampling rates, motion estimates
appear much “noisier”, and in many cases the head appears to be in constant motion.

Some authors have attributed this noisy appearance of head motion in fast-repetition-time
(fast-TR) data to the fact that some physiological cycles no longer alias, in particular respiratory
cycles (Burgess et al., 2016; Siegel et al., 2017). Breathing can cause the head to move, but
changes in lung volume can also cause a particular kind of artifact called pseudomotion, which
manifests as a shift of the brain when the lung expands (Brosch et al., 2002; Durand et al., 2001;
Raj et al., 2001). Some authors have postulated that the HCP data, and fast-TR data generally,
are substantially contaminated by respiratory pseudomotion and have proposed either filters
to remove the motion (Fair et al., 2018), or to disregard motion estimates entirely and measure
“motion” in terms of where denoising strategies intervene in the timeseries (Glasser et al.,
2018). Because motion of the head is hardly ever measured externally, and because respiratory
records are also infrequently obtained during scanning, there has been little evidence to inform
the extent to which motion in fast-TR data is “real” or not. However, we recently found that
physical restraint of heads by anatomy-specific molds reduced head motion amplitude in
images, and evidence of motion artifact, and that this occurred even in the low-motion portions
of scans where only ongoing respiratory motions were apparent (Power et al., 2019). These
findings are compatible with a reduction in real motion, and are hard to explain by
pseudomotion, prompting us to examine the sources of motion in fast-TR data more closely.

In this article we examine scans from several fast-TR datasets and discern five distinct kinds of
respiratory motion: true constant motion of the head at the respiratory rate, false constant
pseudomotion of the head at the respiratory rate, true intermittent spikes in motion due to
sighs and yawns, a distinct and very slow form of pseudomotion at the times of signs and
yawns, and long-term modulation of head position by respiratory depth. We reformulate
motion estimates for fast-TR data, and demonstrate how reformulation reveals distinct kinds of
relationships between motion and respiration and body habitus.

Methods
Data

The “900-subject” release of the Human Connectome Project data was obtained, with a focus
on the following files in each subject:

Four resting state fMRI scans transformed to atlas space (in each subject’s
/MNINonLinear/Results folder): [RUN]=REST1_LR, REST1_RL, REST2_LR, REST2_RL (this order is
runs 1-4 in the text). rfMRI_[RUN].nii.gz and rfMRI_[RUN]_hp2000_clean.nii.gz scans were

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

obtained, representing minimally preprocessed and FIX-ICA-denoised data. For each of these
scans, the [RUN]_Physio_log.txt and Movement_Regressors_dt.txt files were also obtained.

Structural scans transformed to atlas space (in each subject’s /MNINonLinear/ folder): the
T1w.nii.gz and the aparc+aseg.nii.gz files, representing the anatomical T1-weighted scan and its
FreeSurfer segmentation.

Image Processing

The aparc+aseg.nii.gz file for each subject underwent a set of serial erosions within white
matter and ventricle segments, exactly as in (Power et al., 2017b). Masks of cortical gray
matter, the cerebellum, and subcortical nuclei were extracted, as were serially eroded layers of
superficial, deep, and deepest (with respect to distance from gray matter) masks of the white
matter and ventricles. These masks, together, include all in-brain voxels of these tissue types,
and are used to extract certain signals and to order signals for “gray plots” (Power, 2017).

For the purpose of making useful gray plots, because of the considerable thermal noise in HCP
scans, a within-mask 6 mm FWHM Gaussian kernel was applied to the data using the above
masks (illustrated for HCP data in (Power, 2017)). This blurring does not mix tissue
compartments due to the use of masks.

Parameter processing

Respiratory and cardiac measures:
Respiratory belt and pulse oximeter traces (sampled at 400 Hz) first underwent visual
inspection in their entirety to determine if the quality was sufficient for reliable peak detection,
since traces are often partially or fully corrupted. Only subjects with traces deemed likely to
successfully undergo peak detection in all runs were analyzed (440 of the original 900 passed
this quality control step; traces and quality decisions can be seen in the materials of (Power,

1

2019) .).

After selection, for respiratory traces, an outlier replacement filter was used to eliminate
spurious spike artifacts (Matlab command: filloutliers(resp_trace,'linear','movmedian',100)) and
the traces were then gently blurred to aid peak detection (Matlab command:
smoothdata(resp_trace,'sgolay',400)) (a 1-second window for a 400 Hz signal). These treated
respiratory traces are the ones shown in Figures unless indicated.

Following prior literature, several respiratory measures were derived from the treated
respiratory belt trace. First, the (upper) envelope of the trace over a 10-second window (at 400
Hz) was calculated after (Power et al., 2018) (Matlab command:
envelope(zscore_resp_trace,4000,'rms')). Second, the RV measure, defined as the standard

1

https://www.jonathanpower.net/2018-glasser-comment.html

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

deviation of the treated respiratory trace within a 6-second window, was calculated following
(Chang and Glover, 2009) (Matlab command: movstd(zscore_resp_trace
,2400,'endpoints','shrink')). Finally, the RVT measure, defined for all peaks as ((peak-prior
trough)/(time between peaks)), was calculated after (Birn et al., 2006). Peak detection on the
trace yielded peaks (and troughs, using the inverted trace) for calculations (Matlab command:
(findpeaks(zscore_resp_trace,'minpeakdistance',800,'minpeakprominence',.5)). The minimum
peak distance presumes breaths occur more than 2 seconds apart. If a peak did not have a
preceding trough prior to the previous peak, no value was scored at that peak. All traces and
derived measures were visually checked to ensure that outliers and abnormalities would not
drive results. These 3 measures were termed ENV, RV, and RVT in figures.

Data quality measures:
The data quality measure DVARS was calculated after (Power et al., 2012; Smyser et al., 2010)
as the root mean squared value in the brain at each timepoint of all voxel timeseries
differentiated in time by backwards differences. DVARS by convention is 0 at the first
timepoint.

Head position and head motion measures:
Head position was taken from the Movement_Regressors_dt.txt files. In Figures these position
parameters are displayed either after subtracting the first timepoint value from the timeseries
(so that all traces start at zero) or by spreading them on the y-axis by adding constants to each
trace (so that each individual trace is seen clearly). Head motion was represented by Framewise
Displacement (FD) measures, following (Power et al., 2012), wherein all position measures were
differentiated in time by backwards differences, rotational measures were converted to arc
displacement at 5 cm radius, and the sum of the absolute value of these measures was
calculated. FD is typically calculated by backwards differences to the preceding timepoint (for
HCP data, 720 ms prior), but historically FD measures using sampling rates of 2-4 seconds were
common; for comparison to such measures, FD was also calculated by backwards differences
over 4 timepoints (e.g., 4 * 720 ms = 2.88 seconds effective sampling rate) where indicated.

Frequency content:
At times, the frequency content of certain signals is illustrated, such as for respiratory belt
traces or for position estimates. Power spectral density estimates were generated via Welch’s
method (e.g., for a respiratory trace, Matlab command: [pw pf] =
pwelch(signal,[],[],[],400,'power')) and are shown on a semilogarithmic scale. All spectra were
visually checked to ensure correct peak frequency identification.

At times and where indicated, position estimates were filtered to exclude certain frequencies
using a Butterworth filter (Matlab commands for an example stopband of 0.2-0.5 Hz: TR = 0.72;
nyq = (1/TR)/2; stopband=[0.2 0.5]; Wn = stopband/nyq; filtN = 10; [B,A] =
butter(filtN,Wn,'stop'); filtposition(:,column) = filtfilt(B,A,position(:,column));).

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Accessory data

To examine the generalizability of certain findings, head position estimates from other fast-TR
datasets were examined.

MyConnectome dataset: The data studied were motion estimates from 84 scans of a single
adult scanned at rest, with TR = 1160 ms and scan durations of 10 minutes, the exact data used
in (Laumann et al., 2015; Power, 2017; Power et al., 2017b). These position estimates were
obtained using the 4dfp tools of Washington University, which yield similar estimates to other
software packages (Power et al., 2017a). A Siemens 3T Skyra scanner with 32-channel head coil
was used, and the sequence was a multi-band factor 4 EPI sequence with TR = 1160 ms, TE = 30
ms, flip angle = 63 degrees, voxel size 2.4 x 2.4 x 2 mm, and AP phase encoding direction.
Respiratory records were not acquired with this dataset.

Cornell Dataset 1: N = 70 adult subjects scanned once at rest on a Siemens Prisma 3T scanner
using a 32-channel head coil for 5.4 min at rest with AP phase encode direction, TR = 766 ms, TE
= 34 ms, multi-band factor 8, and 2 mm isotropic voxel sizes. Realignment was calculated using
AFNI’s 3dvolreg command. These scans have not been previously published and were collected
with written informed consent from subjects under a protocol approved by the Weill Cornell
Medicine Institutional Review Board. Respiratory records were not provided with this dataset.

Cornell Dataset 2: N = 11 pediatric subjects (ages 7-17, mean 13.7) scanned twice each at rest
for 4.8 min in a Siemens Prisma 3T scanner with 32-channel head coil. Sequences used AP
phase encode, TR = 800 ms, TE = 30 ms, multi-band factor 6, and 2.4 mm isotropic voxel sizes.
Realignment was calculated using AFNI’s 3dvolreg command. These scans a subset of the data
published in (Power et al., 2019), the “head mold off” scans of subjects younger 18 years old.
The scans were collected with written informed consent from parents and assent of pediatric
subjects under a protocol approved by the Weill Cornell Medicine Institutional Review Board.

Estimating motion before image realignment

For 10 subjects of the HCP dataset and 10 sessions of the MyConnectome dataset, unprocessed
images were obtained, and the center of mass was calculated in each volume, yielding position
estimates in the X (left-right), Y (anterior-posterior), and Z (superior-inferior) axes.

Results
The important kinds of measures used in this paper are illustrated in Figure 2 for portions of
three HCP scans. At top in gray are the realignment parameters (shown on 2 mm vertical scale)
and in red the framewise displacement (FD) motion estimate (also shown on a 2 mm scale). The
respiratory belt trace is in blue in the third panel. Note the constant zigzags in the gray position
traces matching visually the frequency seen in the blue respiratory traces. DVARS traces before
and after FIX-ICA denoising are shown, as are respiratory measures derived from the

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

respiratory belt (ENV, RV, and RVT). “DVARS dips” in FIX-ICA-denoised images have been
proposed as a measure of motion that would be insensitive to pseudomotion (Glasser et al.,
2018). DVARS spikes in minimally processed data indicate that signals are changing abnormally
rapidly, and DVARS dips after FIX-ICA denoising indicate abnormally little change in signals at
those times. The dips are caused by FIX-ICA intervening strongly at those timepoints to remove
so much variance that unusually little variance remains, and the logic of proposing DVARS dips
as an index of motion is that FIX-ICA would intervene so strongly mainly at times of motion. At
bottom are the signals of all in-brain voxels of the minimally processed image shown as a heat
map and ordered by anatomical compartment. These scans were chosen to illustrate a “best
case” scenario at left, where FD and DVARS abnormalities are highly concordant, and then two
“worse” scenarios at middle and right where there is less concordance between measures. In
the middle and right scans, there is so much “noise” in the motion estimate that visible step
changes in the gray position measures do not necessarily translate into noticeable motion
spikes. Sometimes these changes in position have no DVARS spike, and sometimes they have a
spike but no dip. These images encapsulate the uncertainty about what “motion” means in fastTR data. Both constant and punctate motions are seen, but either might simply be
pseudomotion, since many of the punctate motions (black arrows) are occurring at times of
brief pauses and/or deep breaths visible in the respiratory traces.

Basic properties of respiration
We will soon begin to fractionate motions based on their properties, but first it is helpful to
examine the respiratory properties that are likely to manifest in the motion estimates.
Breathing assumes a variety of forms within and across scans. Figure 3 illustrates respiratory
traces from 8 subjects, notable for the variation in frequencies across scans and within scans.
Many scans exhibit pauses in breathing, changes in the depth of breathing, occasional deep
breaths, and some breathing patterns simply appear chaotic. Breathing patterns have
recognizable and reproducible features within subjects. Figure 4A shows the peak respiratory
frequency for each of the four scans for all 440 subjects studied in this paper. Peak frequencies
almost entirely fall between 0.2-0.4 Hz, with an average of 0.3 Hz. Within-subject variance in
peak frequency is 0.018 Hz, much less than the variance across the group of 0.055 Hz. A
minority of subjects do display quite variable peak frequency across scans (the instances with
purple stars in Figure 4A are shown in Figure S1). Some subjects have very broad spectral peaks
reflecting a wide variety of respiratory rates within a run. Harmonics are visible in the spectra

nd

(i.e., the secondary peaks at twice the fundamental frequency in the 2

th

-4

panels of Figure

4B). In the examples shown, there is obvious similarity of the spectra within individuals, an
observation borne out statistically in the entire dataset: correlations of the spectra (spanning
0.05-0.6Hz) are r = 0.79 ± 0.15 within subjects, versus r = 0.44 ± 0.30 across all scans (p = 0).
Individual subjects sometimes exhibit characteristic events in multiple scans. For example, the
top subject of Figure 4B has notable accelerations and decelerations, and the third subject has
idiosyncratic deep breaths followed by a ballooning pattern in the respiratory envelope in each
run. To the extent that pseudomotion or real motion accompany breathing, motion estimates
should share many of these properties.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The power spectra of respiratory and position traces contain informative similarities and

2

differences (spectra of all subjects can be seen in online movies ). Spectra of all runs are shown
for 8 individual HCP subjects in Figure 5, with clear representation of respiratory frequencies in
the position traces. Additionally, there is a low-frequency peak around 0.10-0.15 Hz in the
position traces that is not present in the respiratory traces (red ovals). When power spectra
from all runs of all HCP subjects are shown as a heat map, ordered by peak respiratory
frequency (Figure 5B), three properties are evident. First, the peak frequencies of respiration
and its harmonics map onto the peak frequencies of position traces. Second, there is a position
frequency peak around 0.12 Hz in virtually all subjects that is not present in respiratory traces,
corresponding to the red ovals above. Third, there is a position frequency peak around 0.55 Hz
in virtually all subjects that is not present in respiratory traces. The narrowness of the 0.55 Hz
peak suggests that it is an artifact, and this will be confirmed below, but the 0.12 Hz peak has
interesting properties that will be explored further. Figure 5C plots peak respiratory frequency
against peak head position frequency, with excellent correspondence above ~0.20 Hz. Below
~0.2 Hz the true respiratory peak begins to merge with the 0.12 Hz peak and the
correspondence weakens. The respiratory traces have not undergone any filtering that would
influence signals at 0.10-0.15 Hz, but to ensure that the outlier replacement and 1-second
blurring procedures used to prepare the respiratory traces did not somehow obscure a 0.12 Hz
peak, identical analyses were performed on the raw respiratory belt traces that had undergone
no processing, and these analyses yielded no evidence of a 0.12 Hz peak, or of a 0.55 Hz peak
(data not shown). When analyzed similarly, pulse oximetry traces yielded no evidence of a 0.12
Hz peak (data not shown).

Identifying a low-frequency respiratory pseudomotion
Although the low-frequency 0.12 Hz peak in position traces is not in respiratory traces, it is a
respiratory phenomenon. This fact is appreciable in single subjects. Figure 6 shows data from
the starred subject of Figure 5A (this subject was chosen because it displays considerable
amplitude at the low-frequency peak, see the 0.12 Hz peak height in Figure 5A). At top,
respiratory traces of all runs are shown, with red ovals placed to encircle numerous deep
breaths. Below, the X position traces are shown, with high-amplitude low-frequency waves
emerging at the times of the deep breaths (see identically placed ovals). The third panel
illustrates variance removed from position traces by a 0.08-0.18 Hz stopband filter, confirming
that these waves are the ones that constitute the low-frequency peak. DVARS traces indicate
that there are usually image abnormalities at these times. Thus, the low-frequency X position
changes are associated with deep inspirations.

Because subjects are scanned lying supine, the occiput is the natural pivot of the head due to
movement of the chest, and respiratory motion should most prominently appear in the pitch
rotation estimate and the superior-inferior translation estimate. However, the parameter used
for Figures 5 and 6 is the left-right (X) parameter. Position parameters are coupled in rigid body
realignment in ways fundamentally dependent on the origin of the coordinate system. Thus,

2

www.jonathanpower.net/2019-respiratory-motion.html

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

one could posit that deep breaths cause some kind of true low-frequency motion, and the leftright parameter changes are due to coupled “bleeding” of motion from one parameter into
another. There is, however, another explanation. Expansion of the lungs can shift the B0 field,
which can manifest as apparent motion in the phase-encode direction despite the head
remaining still, the phenomenon called pseudomotion (Brosch et al., 2002; Durand et al., 2001;
Raj et al., 2001). The left-right direction is also the phase encode direction of the HCP data, and
thus both true motion and pseudomotion could explain the low-frequency waves.

To help disambiguate these possibilities, several fast-TR datasets with different phase encode
directions were obtained, and power spectra of all 6 position estimates of these datasets are
shown in Figure 7. A low-frequency peak appears in each of these datasets, but only in the
phase-encode direction (red arrows). The frequency of the low-frequency peak scales with a
sequence parameter: the MyConnectome, Cornell, and HCP datasets have respective TRs of
1160, 766, and 720 ms, and peak frequencies of 0.08, 0.11, and 0.12 Hz. In other words, a TR
1.5 times faster yields a low-frequency peak approximately 1.5 times faster. Thus, these lowfrequency waves in the phase encode direction are consistent with pseudomotion resulting
from B0 shifts with deep breaths. The fact that this in-plane translational motion does not
“bleed” into other parameters during realignment is informative because roll effects might
have also been expected due to inferior brain tissue being closer to the lungs. By contrast, the
peak respiratory frequencies of the HCP data appear in all position parameters, consistent with
true head motion occurring in multiple parameters as the head pivots about the occiput and
then “bleeding” into all position estimates via the rigid body assumptions. Whether this
presumably true respiratory motion is accompanied by pseudomotion (in only the phase
encode direction) will be examined below.

A fast-TR developmental dataset gathered on the same scanner as the Cornell 1 dataset yields a
further interesting finding. In 11 children and teenagers scanned twice for 4.8 minutes with TR
of 800 ms, typical respiratory frequencies are observed in position power spectra in all
directions, but there is no low-frequency peak in the phase encode direction (Figure S2). The
apparent absence of the low-frequency pseudomotion in the Cornell 2 dataset may be due to
the relatively small lungs and bodies of these children, which should produce less perturbation
of B0 fields during breaths than adult bodies produce, or, if the low-frequency pseudomotion
relates to a physiological phenomenon, perhaps this process emerges over development. These
findings suggest that different kinds of motion may manifest over development for technical (or
biological) reasons in addition to the tendency of children to be restless and active in the
scanner.

A final comment on these findings is that only in the HCP data is a 0.55 Hz peak in position
spectra seen, making the scanner, sequence, or environmental artifacts specific to this dataset
the most likely explanation of this peak. Conceivably, the low-frequency pseudomotion could
be related to a low-frequency physiological phenomenon, such as the Mayer waves that occur
at similar frequencies (Strik et al., 2002), but we see no obvious mechanism by which such
arterial pressure waves would produce effects only in the phase encode direction.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Using unprocessed images to disambiguate pseudomotion from real motion
Pseudomotion can be distinguished most clearly from real motion in one of two ways: by
demonstrating a pseudomotion in only the phase encode direction in unprocessed images, and
by demonstrating a real motion in a non-phase-encode direction in unprocessed images. To
describe motion in unregistered, unprocessed, scanner space images, one can calculate the
centers of mass of the entire image, yielding motions in the X, Y, and Z directions (rotations may
or may not influence the center of mass). A number of unprocessed HCP and MyConnectome
datasets were obtained, and center of mass traces were calculated and inspected. Readers may

3

view data from all scans online , and data from several scans are shown in Figure 8. In HCP
scans there are visible respiratory fluctuations in the phase encode (left-right), frequency
encode (anterior-posterior), and slice stack (superior-inferior) directions. MyConnectome scans
also exhibited respiratory-appearing motion in all 3 directions (respiratory records were not
acquired with MyConnectome datasets). These results indicate that much of the constant
respiratory motion is real motion because it is not limited to the phase encode direction.

The head will be variably placed within scanner space, but, assuming a reasonably aligned
placement, one would expect respiratory nodding to substantially appear in the superiorinferior direction, to partially appear in the anterior-posterior direction, and to rarely appear in
the left-right direction. Compatible observations are made in the unprocessed images. First,
constant respiratory fluctuation in the superior-inferior direction is seen in all scans. Second,
constant respiratory fluctuation in one or both of the left-right and anterior-posterior directions
is seen in most scans, and is accentuated in the phase encode direction. Re-examination of
Figure 7 yields congruent information: Z and pitch parameters have the strongest respiratory
power in all datasets, as does whichever parameter is the phase encode direction. This
augmentation of respiratory power in the phase encode direction presumably reflects the
contribution of pseudomotion at the respiratory rate. These patterns accord with the findings
in (Raj et al., 2001), in which left-right oscillations were absent in acquisitions with anteriorposterior phase encode direction but were prominent in left-right phase encode acquisitions,
whereas anterior-posterior oscillations were present regardless of phase encode direction but
were stronger with anterior-posterior phase encode acquisitions. Similarly, the mannequin
constructed by Brosch and colleagues to investigate respiratory pseudomotion yielded only
phase encode effects (Brosch et al., 2002).

Pseudomotion and real motion can be dissociated from one another in time. Under normal
circumstances, when air is moving into and out of the lungs, both real head motion and
pseudomotion could scale with deeper breathing. An example of pseudomotion scaling with
breathing depth is shown in the boxed portions of Figure 8 (real vertical head motion in these
instances is present (e.g., in the vertical orientation) but is not visibly changing). However,
during apneas, dissociations can occur. If an apnea is central (i.e., there is no respiratory drive
and no ventilatory effort), both pseudomotion and respiratory motion should essentially cease.
But if an apnea is obstructive (i.e., soft tissues impede air flow), pseudomotion should cease but

3

www.jonathanpower.net/2019-respiratory-motion.html

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

respiratory efforts may continue and even increase. Instances of both of thes ephenomena can
be found in the 10 subjects we examined, and examples are shown in Figure 9. Note that the
inspiratory efforts can cause large vertical and anterior-posterior motions during partial or
complete obstruction as the subject attempts to breathe against resistance and/or restore air
flow.

The occurrence and magnitude of true respiratory motion is likely to depend on characteristics
of the subject (and on the steps taken to physically restrain the head). For example, subjects
with asthma will exert themselves more to draw breaths, and if partial airway obstruction
occurs as a subject relaxes or sleeps, snoring or inspiratory efforts will ensue at the breathing
frequency. That the amplitude of constant real respiratory motion can become very large is
both self-evident and demonstrated in Figure 9.

The occurrence and magnitude of pseudomotion will largely depend on scan parameters (e.g.,
phase encode direction, field strength), and the size of lungs and the body. Additionally, the
magnitude of pseudomotion can fluctuate, as demonstrated in the examples above of apnea
and deepened breathing, but these fluctuations appeared limited to perhaps two or three-fold
the eupneic fluctuations. We saw no instances of left-right pseudomotion amplitude increases
comparable to the large increases in real vertical fluctuations shown in Figure 9; when very
large oscillations occurred, they only appeared in anterior-posterior and vertical orientations.
The largest amplitude changes in pseudomotion are seen during very deep breaths, which, by
their nature, occur more slowly than typical respirations. Deep breaths also produce the
distinct low-frequency phase encode phenomenon described above. That such low-frequency
fluctuations are not the same as ongoing respiratory pseudomotion can be seen in several
instances in Figures 8 and 9 where orange dotted lines mark reversals in phase-encode position
occurring at times of apnea or unchanging respiratory direction.

Beyond the constant respiratory motion and pseudomotion, large changes in vertical and
anterior-posterior positions that followed the respiratory envelope (but not the respiratory
rate) were often seen (see black and blue traces at the boxed times of Figure 8). The magnitude
of these changes is generally considerably larger than that of the constant respiratory
oscillations of the phase encode direction. Other examples of real step motions in all three
directions at deep inspirations are seen in Figure 9, as are examples of real motions in all three
directions that appear completely unrelated to respiration.

Collectively, these observations indicate that the head is in constant motion due to respiratory
cycles, that pseudomotion augments this constant motion in the phase encode direction, but
that much constant motion and most major motions are not attributable to pseudomotion.

Re-presenting motion in fast-TR data
In a contemporary fast-TR dataset like the HCP data, based on the above observations,
investigators may encounter at least seven kinds of motion, five of them related to respiration:
1) constant real respiratory motion in the form of head nodding most evident in vertical

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

position and pitch, which can be very large at times; 2) constant pseudomotion at the same
respiratory rate as real motion, occurring only in the phase encode direction; 3) punctate real
motions occurring at times of very deep breaths; 4) a low-frequency pseudomotion in only the
phase encode direction following very deep breaths; 5) slow modulation of vertical and
anterior-posterior head position by the respiratory envelope; 6) punctate real motions
unrelated to respiration; and 7) periodic or transient artifacts such as the 0.55 Hz motion of the
HCP data. The existence of distinct kinds of motion raises interrelated questions: how well can
the kinds of motion be separated, are effect sizes meaningful if different kinds of motion are
separated, and what purposes could be served by separating kinds of motion?

In the case of pseudomotion, it seems self-evident that one might wish to separate “apparent”
from “true” motion for a variety of purposes (e.g., one is within-plane motion and largely a
respiratory epiphenomenon, the other is largely through-plane motion with different physical
consequences for fMRI signals).

The low-frequency pseudomotion can often be isolated by frequency filters, since most
subjects have respiratory frequencies well above the low-frequency pseudomotion. Figure 10
illustrates filtering the phase-encode direction position parameter to suppress low-frequency
pseudomotion in two representative subjects (compare gray and black X position traces, and
the corresponding gray and black FD traces). Slight changes in both traces are seen after
filtering. The FD effects are small because low-frequency pseudomotion is typically prominent
during only a small fraction of the scan and affects only one of six position parameters.
Additionally, though low-frequency pseudomotion effects are large amplitude in some subjects,
this is not true of most subjects (see the relative peak heights in spectra of Figure 5). Across
subjects, filtering out low-frequency pseudomotion results in mean FD correlated at r = 0.999
with original FD, with magnitude of 98.9% of original magnitudes (Figure S3). Practically, for
purposes of motion estimation, filtering out such pseudomotion has little effect in most
subjects. The largest effects occur in subjects with low respiratory frequencies, which is
predictable because in such subjects the low-frequency filter (here, a stop band of 0.08 – 0.18
Hz) removes some of the true cyclic respiratory motion. Although removing low-frequency
pseudomotion has little impact on motion estimates in most subjects, the isolation of lowfrequency pseudomotion via filtering could potentially serve as an index of deep respiration in
data lacking respiratory records.

A different way to eliminate pseudomotion would be to omit the phase encode direction
entirely from motion calculations. This approach is simple, but has a major practical constraint:
though one might be relatively comfortable omitting a left-right phase encode position
parameter from motion calculations in HCP data (since little true motion is expected in this
direction), one would probably hesitate to eliminate an anterior-posterior phase encode
parameter in a different dataset (since much true motion occurs in this orientation). For
illustrative purposes, FD calculated without the left-right parameter is shown for the subjects in
Figure 10 (compare gray and maroon FD). Because there is constant real motion at the
respiratory rate in multiple parameters of comparable (or greater) magnitude than the
pseudomotion in the phase encode parameter, ongoing respiratory motion remains a

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

prominent effect in the trace. Across subjects, omitting the phase encode direction results in
mean FD correlated at r = 0.921 with original FD, with magnitude of 66.7% of original
magnitudes (Figure S3). Because this approach seems unlikely to be used in datasets with
anterior-posterior phase encode orientations (the bulk of our own data, and much other data),
we do not pursue this avenue further.

The dominant respiratory frequency is present at all times in the scan and affects all position
parameters. Filtering out those frequencies has a large effect on head motion (compare gray
and red traces in Figure 10). Filtered position estimates are “smoothed” out with relative
preservation of step changes. The filter in Figure 10 has a 0.2 – 0.5 Hz stop band, and across
subjects this filter yields mean FD with magnitude 51.9% of the original magnitudes, correlated
at r = 0.819 with original FD (Figure S3). Some comments should be made about filter selection
and application, but prior to discussing these issues, it is helpful to consider what purpose is
served by removing respiratory motion.

There are two main reasons to separate constant respiratory motion from episodic or gradual
motion. The first reason is conceptual: different neural phenomena and behavioral or biological
predispositions may underlie constant respiratory versus episodic/gradual motion. For
example, constant respiratory motion may relate to body habitus, whereas episodic/gradual
motion may more closely reflect restlessness, impatience, fatigue, or anxiety. Separating kinds
of motion can help identify such distinct relationships. The second reason to filter out
respiratory motion is practical: motion traces become more visually useful and more congruent
with other data quality traces once constant respiratory motion is suppressed.

In fMRI datasets with TRs of 2-4 seconds, it is customary to see FD traces with well-defined, flat
“floor” values from which brief, clear excursions are seen during motion, and these FD traces
closely resemble DVARS traces and other data quality traces (Power et al., 2012; Power et al.,
2014; Satterthwaite et al., 2013; Yan et al., 2013). Multiple authors have noted that the HCP FD
traces do not have these properties, and, instead, there appears to be constant motion in the
traces often without clear excursions even when motion is known to occur (Burgess et al., 2016;
Glasser et al., 2018; Power, 2017). There are two reasons for such properties. First, constant,
cyclic, respiratory motion used to be aliased with slower fMRI sampling rates but is not aliased
in HCP data due to the faster sampling, and the head is truly in constant motion in the images.
Second, and separately, episodic or gradual shifts of head position that would appear large if
measured every 2-4 seconds become subdivided in fast TR data to such an extent that the
motion can “disappear” into the cyclic respiratory motion. Two steps can be taken to counter
these two phenomena. First, respiratory filtering can suppress much of the cyclic motion.
Second, calculating FD over multiple TRs rather than a single TR can “undo” the subdivision of
episodic or gradual motion. To illustrate these steps, FD was calculated over intervals of 4 TRs
(4 * 720 ms = 2880 ms), using the position estimates with 0.2-0.5 Hz frequencies removed, to
yield the orange FD traces in Figure 10. These orange FD traces show large excursions from a
floor value, at times when motion is visually evident in the position traces, during which times
image abnormalities are indexed by DVARS spikes. These orange FD traces are visually useful in

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ways comparable to FD traces in traditional slow-TR datasets; they plainly reflect the changes
visible in position estimates.

Returning to filter selection and application, there is no single “correct” way to treat or filter
motion estimates to suppress respiratory motion, for the simple reason that respiratory rates
vary widely across and within subjects. Some subjects have low respiratory rates that overlap
with pseudomotion frequencies. Many more subjects have variable respiratory rates that
sometimes drop to low frequencies for portions of scans. An example is in Figure 10 at the end
of the bottom scan, where the respiratory rate drops dramatically in the final 30 seconds of the
scan, and respiratory motion starts to escape the respiratory filter (red position traces), causing
a continuous elevation of FD even after filtering (see red and orange FD traces). When a
subject’s frequency peak is narrow (i.e., the subject exhibits a relatively constant periodicity of
breathing), a rather narrow stop band filter could suppress much respiratory motion. But if the
frequency peak is broad (i.e., there are times of slow and of fast breathing, e.g., the bottom
panel of Figure 10), then a wider stop band is needed to suppress respiratory motion.

Faced with these characteristics, an investigator can apply a uniform filter intended to suppress
much but not all of the respiratory motion (the choice made here), or apply a filter tailored to
each subject’s respiratory characteristics. The width of the stop band interacts with the ability
to localize motion in time. Step changes and brief spikes in motion have broadband frequency
characteristics, and, as stop bands widen and remove more frequencies, the ability to represent
rapid position changes diminishes. This fact is seen in two forms in Figure 10: the lower slopes
of red filtered position traces compared to gray unfiltered position traces at step changes, and
the relatively small sizes of peaks in the red filtered FD traces. The boxed portions of Figure 10
show several instances where motion is evident in the original position traces, but is difficult to
discern in the red filtered FD traces until drawn out by calculating 4-TR differentials shown in
the orange FD trace. An additional factor in filter selection is that the broader the stop band,
the fewer the degrees of freedom in the residuals. We chose our filter to be uniform across
subjects in order to avoid adding further complexity to the paper. The filter parameters were
chosen to suppress most respiratory motion in most subjects, knowing that respiratory motion
may persist if breaths are sufficiently slow, but balancing this consideration against wanting
clear peaks of motion. Interpretations of our motion-related findings below will bear these
caveats in mind (and, at times, we only examine subjects with peak frequencies within the
respiratory stop band (i.e., above 0.2 Hz) to minimize confounds of unsuppressed respiratory
motion).

Finally, we should note that if an investigator possesses respiratory records, those records (or
treatments of the records) can be used as nuisance regressors in the motion traces. However,
the relationships that are so visually evident between respiratory records and motion traces
can be complicated to capture statistically in a regressor: respiratory records often hit ceiling
and floor values during deep inspirations and exhalations, and position does not tend to scale
linearly with belt values during deep breaths; obstructive apneas dissociate motion from
respiratory fluctuations; and position estimates contain a variety of step changes and gradual
shifts not present in the respiratory traces. For these reasons, regressors from belt traces can

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

show markedly different success at removing respiratory motion across scans and even across
single position parameters in a scan. Figure S4 shows instances of success and failure. With
regard to identifying or removing respiratory motion, respiratory records are probably mainly
useful for independently establishing respiratory frequencies (which, for example, could be
used to guide a wavelet-based removal of respiratory motion).

The net effect of filtering out respiratory frequencies and calculating motion over multiple TRs

4

is shown in Figure 11 (similar plots are shown online for all subjects ). The original motion
estimate shows nothing informative beyond seemingly constant motion. Once respiratory
frequencies are suppressed and a 4-TR differential is calculated, motion estimates show modest
but distinct episodes of motion corresponding to the visible changes in position estimates, and
to changes in the centers of mass in anterior-posterior and superior-inferior directions. DVARS
spikes are present at these times, but DVARS dips are largely absent. These images
demonstrate how motion traces can be modified to become informative about events in a scan.

Links of motion to body habitus and respiration
In the center of mass data, we encountered examples of deep breaths causing spikes of motion,
and also more gradual shifts in position that corresponded to changes in the envelope of
breathing. Measures that capture such respiratory events, like the envelope of the respiratory
waveform (ENV, (Power et al., 2018)) or windowed variance in the belt trace (RV, (Chang and
Glover, 2009)), should thus be associated with motion (note that depending upon the shape of
the deep inspiration, the RVT measure of (Birn et al., 2006) may or may not mark the event,
because this measure depends on timings of peaks and troughs in the trace, see Figure 3). In
slow-TR datasets, variance in respiratory measures like ENV and RVT scales with mean motion
(Power et al., 2018; Power et al., 2017b). We therefore sought to establish whether this
relationship was also found in fast-TR data.

A strong association of summary motion and variance in respiration measures is found in the
HCP data. The standard deviation of the ENV trace and mean FD correlate at r = 0.51 across
subjects (p = 0; see scatter plot). This statistic is obtained using the mean of the summary
values across each run (std ENV and mean FDfiltered,4-TR), and using only a single subject per
family, but it does not matter whether all subjects are used, whether only single runs are
examined, whether also only subjects with respiratory frequencies over 0.2 Hz are examined, or
whether also high-motion subjects are excluded from the calculation (Figure 12). If withinsubject linear fits are calculated across the 4 runs between the standard deviation of ENV and
mean FD, the betas are 0.40

± 0.93 (p = 0 by one-sample t-test). A similar set of findings

emerges from calculations using RV and RVT, both with the correlations (Figure 12) and with
the across-subject betas: RV betas are 0.39

± 0.74 (p = 0) and RVT betas are 0.41 ± 1.33 (p = 0).

All of these tests converge on the finding that increased variance in respiratory measures scales
with increased motion, both across subjects and within subjects. If FD with respiratory filtering
only is used (FDfiltered), the relationships above are weakened to approximately r = 0.35, and

4

www.jonathanpower.net/2019-respiratory-motion.html

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

remain significant. If FD without respiratory filtering is used (FDoriginal), permitting constant
respiratory motions to overshadow other motions, the relationships are largely lost (Figure 12).
These findings demonstrate a strong link between respiration and motion that exists beyond an
effect of pseudomotion: the effect is strongest when constant respiratory cycle motion
(including pseudomotion) is maximally suppressed, and is largely abolished when respiratory
cycles are permitted to influence motion estimates.

Pseudomotion is suspected to arise as a function of changes in lung volume, due to both
expansion of the lung cavity and displacement of the organs and soft tissues, but the relative
contribution of each factor has been debated. In general, as BMI increases, tidal volumes and
lung capacities decrease, whereas the work of breathing, minute ventilation, and respiratory
rates all rise (Littleton, 2012; Luce, 1980). If expansion of the lung cavity is the important factor
in causing pseudomotion, one might expect less pseudomotion in heavier subjects, and one
might predict more pseudomotion in taller subjects, since lung volume scales strongly with
height (Hepper et al., 1960). Either prediction could interact with respiratory rate, since shorter
subjects breathe faster, as do heavier subjects (Chlif et al., 2009; Sampson and Grassino, 1983).
In the HCP data, however, FDoriginal has no correlation with height, but correlates at r = 0.5-0.7
with weight or BMI (Figure 13, using 1 subject per family). When individual realignment
parameters are examined, the amplitude of fluctuations in the left-right phase encode direction
scales at r = 0.8 with BMI but not at all with height. Evidently, the soft tissues are the decisive
factor in causing pseudomotion. Note that this special scaling of BMI with motion in the leftright parameter is not necessarily a reflection of how much pseudomotion contributes to
overall BMI-associated motion; most precisely, it reflects how little left-right motion there is
aside from pseudomotion.

The scaling of BMI and motion could be due to the role of soft tissue mass in generating
pseudomotion, but it might also be explained by increased minute ventilation and respiratory
rates in heavier subjects. Figure S5 summarizes relevant findings. As expected, there is a
modest correlation of BMI and weight to respiratory rate (BMI: r = 0.17 and 0.26 for males and
females; weight r = 0.15 and 0.17). Respiratory rate correlated with mean FDoriginal in males at r
= 0.14 and at r = 0.32 in females (likely due to the influence of the shorter subjects: in males
height did not correlate with respiratory rate (r = 0.01) but in females, the shortest subjects
around 5 feet tall had notably higher respiratory rates, causing a modest correlation of r = -0.22
between height and respiratory rate). The relationship of respiratory rate to motion was
abolished in males and females after respiratory filtering of motion estimates. Thus, the
explanatory power of respiratory rate for motion is much less than that of BMI, and the
influence of respiratory rate disappears after filtering whereas BMI displays a persistent if
weakened relationship to motion.

Given the persistent relationship of BMI to motion beyond influences of respiratory rate, we
wondered if the respiratory variables that indexed motion in Figure 12 might mediate the
persistent influence of BMI on motion, but there was no evidence for this (e.g., correlations of
variance in ENV with BMI were r = 0 for males and r = 0.06 for females, and comparably low for
weight and height). Different patterns of obesity exist, but generally, as BMI increases, fat

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

deposits between the ribs and organs, reducing the flexibility of the trunk (Littleton, 2012). We
speculate that this lack of flexibility may cause motions of all kinds to become more likely to be
transferred to the neck and head.

Heritability of respiratory and motion parameters
A prior study demonstrated in multiple datasets (including HCP data) that BMI and head motion
(corresponding to FDoriginal ) are heritable traits, as is peak respiratory rate (Hodgson et al.,
2017). In the HCP subjects studied here, 31 monozygous (MZ) and 23 (DZ) dizygous twin pairs
are present (more subjects are twins, but without an accompanying twin under analysis). These
numbers are not high, but permit preliminary descriptions of the heritability of respiratory and
motion parameters studied in this paper. As mentioned earlier, respiratory power spectra are
much more similar within-subject (r = 0.79 ± 0.15) than across all subjects (r = 0.44 ± 0.30).
These observations extend to the twins: MZ pairs exhibit mean correlations between spectra of
r = 0.64 ± 26, and DZ pairs exhibit mean correlations of r = 0.46 ± 0.34. As mentioned earlier,
peak respiratory frequency is usually stable within subjects (standard deviation 0.018 Hz across
4 runs compared to 0.055 Hz across the group). As in (Hodgson et al., 2017), we find heritability
of respiratory rate (MZ intraclass correlation coefficient = 0.48 (p = 0.002) and DZ ICC = 0.25

2

(n.s.), estimated H

2

= 0.46, compared to H

= 0.62 in (Hodgson et al., 2017)). Summary

respiratory parameters such as variance in ENV are more similar within individuals than across
the group (standard deviation within subject 0.048 vs 0.082 for the group), and are heritable
(MZ ICC = 0.50 (p = 0.002) and DZ ICC = -0.14 (n.s.)). For variance in RVT, similar findings
emerge: within-subject standard deviation of 0.037, group standard deviation of 0.069, MZ ICC
= 0.46 (p = 0.003), and DZ ICC = -0.27 (n.s.). For FDoriginal, within-subject standard deviations are
0.021 mm, group standard deviations are 0.061 mm, MZ ICC = 0.56 (p = 0) and DZ ICC = -0.03
(n.s.). For FDfiltered,4-TR, within-subject standard deviation is 0.034 mm, group standard deviation
is 0.078 mm, MZ ICC = 0.46 (p = 0.003), and DZ ICC = -0.12 (n.s.). All of these statistics conform
to the pattern of respiratory and motion properties being most similar within-subject, nextmost-similar within monozygotic twins, and then less similar within dizygotic twins (and
unrelated subjects).

Prior studies have linked BMI to FDoriginal (Hodgson et al., 2017) and found no major influence of
respiratory rate on that relationship. Here, beyond the BMI-FDoriginal link, we have described a
link between two other measures: variance in respiratory measures like ENV, and mean values
of the motion measure FDfiltered,4-TR. As a final investigation of the link between BMI and
respiration and motion, we examined discordance between twin pairs for BMI, standard
deviation in ENV, and mean FDfiltered,4-TR. There was no relationship of discordance of BMI to
discordance of motion or of variance in ENV in either MZ or DZ twins (Figure S6). However,
there was a strong relationship between discordance in variance in ENV and mean FDfiltered,4-TR, r
= 0.78 for MZ (p = 0) and r = 0.64 for DZ (p = 0). These are consistent with a causal “state”
interpretation whereby the respiratory events indexed by variance in ENV cause increased
punctate and gradual head motion.

Discussion

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The popularity of functional connectivity techniques, and the fact that head motion confers
systematic artifacts to fMRI data while also correlating with variables of interest, has made the
identification of head motion and its correlates an important topic in human neuroscience
(Hodgson et al., 2017; Siegel et al., 2017; Zeng et al., 2014). The challenge of controlling for this
artifact has been compounded by the emergence of fast-TR sequences: motion estimates in
fMRI images obtained with sub-second sampling are qualitatively different than the older,
slower motion estimates, both because constant respiratory motion no longer aliases to the
extent it used to, and because larger, sustained motions get subdivided and lost amidst the
constant respiratory motion. The different appearance of these estimates, and the detection in
large datasets of strong relationships between BMI and motion, have led some investigators to
abandon the use of realignment estimates as measures of motion due to a suspicion that the
estimates are so contaminated by pseudomotion as to be untrustworthy (Glasser et al., 2018).
Other groups have begun to apply respiratory filters to the data, agnostic of the extent to which
they are suppressing motion or pseudomotion (Fair et al., 2018; Siegel et al., 2017).

Motivated by an apparent reduction in low-amplitude real motion in our subjects who wear
head molds (Power et al., 2019), we examined fast-TR data for evidence of respiratory
pseudomotion, and came to recognize five distinct kinds of respiratory motion: constant real
motion, constant pseudomotion, real motion at deep breaths, real gradual motions modulated
by breathing depth, and a low-frequency pseudomotion at deep breaths. We now discuss some
implications of these findings.

On the low-frequency pseudomotion
The fact that a low-frequency wave appears only in the phase encode direction and seemingly
only at and just after deep breaths is interesting for several reasons. First, because it exhibits all
the signatures of pseudomotion. Second, because it appears exclusively in the phase encode
direction and does not “contaminate” other realignment parameters. Third, because it seems at
times to have no instantaneous correlate in terms of the respiratory belt (the wave oscillates
regardless of whether the belt measure is unchanging or changing monotonically); if it reflects a
respiratory phenomenon it may have to do with intrathoracic dynamics of the lung not evident
in abdominal circumference. Fourth, because it was not evident in our cohort of children but
was present in all adult cohorts. And fifth, because it was the largest amplitude form of
pseudomotion we detected. Future studies with more comprehensive physiological recordings
may determine the basis of this phenomenon. One potential use of these waves would be to
identify them in phase encode parameters as an index of deep inspiration in fMRI data lacking
respiratory monitoring.

On constant respiratory motions
Constant respiratory motion is evident in all directions of unprocessed images, and appears in
all realignment parameters, most prominently in the superior-inferior axis and the pitch
rotation, and also in whichever of the other directions is the phase encode direction. In

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

unprocessed images, respiratory displacement in the vertical direction is present in all scans. In
the literature examining pseudomotion, when the left-right direction is the frequency encode
direction, virtually no respiratory motion is seen in it, whereas when the anterior-posterior
direction is the frequency encode direction, respiratory motion is seen (Brosch et al., 2002;
Durand et al., 2001; Raj et al., 2001). These results collectively indicate that true respiratory
motion is primarily occurring in the vertical direction, less so in the anterior-posterior direction,
and minimally in the left-right direction.

In this setting, left-right respiratory motion in the HCP data is likely almost entirely
pseudomotion, which would be consistent with the very high proportion of oscillatory variance
that can be explained by BMI alone (approximately 50-65% of the variance). However, if this inplane motion behaves as the low-frequency pseudomotion identified above, this pseudomotion
may not “bleed” into the other motion parameters. Thus, one advantage of a left-right phase
encode acquisition is that pseudomotion is “trapped” in a direction with inherently little
motion. By contrast, an anterior-posterior phase encode direction will mix real motion and
pseudomotion in ways more difficult to disentangle.

Very importantly, pseudomotion became dissociated from real motion during times of
obstructive apnea. Whereas central apnea abolished oscillations of all kinds, obstructive apnea
eliminated phase encode oscillations but enhanced anterior-posterior and vertical oscillations.
This result makes sense physiologically. In central apnea, there is no respiratory effort and thus
no head nodding, and also no air flow and thus no pseudomotion. In obstructive apnea, there is
no air flow and thus no pseudomotion, but the subject will increase inspiratory effort as they
labor against the obstruction, truly moving the head. Potentially, the congruence or
incongruence of phase encode and vertical oscillations could be used to classify apneas or
hypopneas, or to index arousal state, since presumably these obstructive events occur as the
subject relaxes or falls asleep (Duran et al., 2001). If true, then one would expect at the
transition to sleep not only punctate hypnic jerks, but also potentially sustained, rhythmic
motions, which can be large in amplitude.

The amplitude of pseudomotion will vary according to acquisition parameters and subject
characteristics like BMI or breathing rate. We will therefore only state that in the HCP data,
omitting the phase encode direction entirely from motion calculations yielded estimates with
67% of the original amplitude, correlated at r = 0.92 with the original estimates.

On punctate or gradual respiratory motions
In the unprocessed images it appeared that, much as tidal breathing can move the head up and
down, deep inspirations can move the head, and gradual changes in the depth of breathing can
modulate head position in correspondingly gradual ways. We used respiratory measures like
ENV and RV to gauge such events, and found a strong relationship of variance in these
respiratory variables to motion. This relationship is not attributable to pseudomotion: it was
absent to weak when constant respiration was part of motion estimates, and only emerged
strongly once respiratory frequencies were suppressed. These results, in fast-TR data, resemble

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

those obtained elsewhere by use in several slow-TR datasets (Power, 2017; Power et al., 2018).
This kind of motion is modestly related to BMI (r ~ 0.30-0.35), but the reasons for this
association are unclear; BMI did not scale with variance in the respiratory variables above,
leading us to speculate that motions of all kinds are transferred more forcefully to the head in
heavier subjects due to the relative inflexibility of their chests and abdomens.

On reformulated motion estimates
We examined several reformulations of motion, in part to understand the contribution of
various phenomena to overall motion, and in part because visualization of motion has been
challenging in fast-TR data compared to slow-TR data. By suppressing respiratory motion, and
aggregating position changes over several seconds, we drew out motions that were apparent in
position estimates but which had largely been “invisible” once temporally subdivided and
blended into constant respiratory motions. Our particular reformulation of FDfiltered,4-TR is one of
many possible and reasonable ways to represent motion. The 4-TR differential was chosen
mainly to obtain an effective TR comparable to TRs we were accustomed to in the past, but also
because 4 TRs is the time over which, in the past, we could readily detect systematic distancedependent influences of motion, presumably in part due to spin history effects (Power et al.,
2014). These modified motion estimates are visually helpful for understanding events during a
scan – the motions are visible, they visually match position changes, they often correspond to
changes in respiratory traces (deep breaths, modulations of breathing depth), and they often
have corresponding DVARS spikes and dips.

Sampling over multiple TRs could potentially be tailored to a subject’s respiratory rate. For
example, assuming sinusoidal motion, an “effective” TR near the full respiratory cycle time will
yield minimal respiratory motions compared to any other fraction of the cycle time, a topic
discussed in detail in (Fair et al., 2018). For the mean respiratory period of 3.33 seconds
(0.3 Hz) in this report, the 2.88 second effective TR we used is approximately the typical cycle
time.

On the directionality of motion and respiratory effects
The respiratory records of the HCP data are from a single elastic belt about the abdomen,
prompting us to make certain caveats about the information it provides. Respiratory efforts can
occur nearly independently at both the abdomen and chest (Quan et al., 1997; Randerath et al.,
2017). For this reason, in the respiratory literature, current state-of-the-art noninvasive
respiratory monitoring is accomplished via inductive or light plethysmography, which involves
dual belts or dual optical measurements of abdominal and thoracic excursions. More invasive
ways to monitor respiration include monitoring air flow via a mask, and measuring end-tidal
pCO2 by mask or nasal canula. Accompanying pulse oximetry is standard (the HCP pulse
oximeter provides only a waveform, not blood oxygenation). And often electrocardiography
and/or electroencephalography are performed, depending on if the study is during awake or
sleeping periods. There is thus a substantial disparity in the kinds of records we possess in HCP

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

data in comparison to the redundant and precise records obtained by investigators specifically
studying respiratory phenomena.

Is it likely the HCP records are missing respiratory phenomena, or, conversely, that nonrespiratory phenomena are appearing in the abdominal belts? In the respiratory literature,
chest and abdominal traces are typically congruent even if amplitude is low in one location,
with one major exception: incongruence or phase shifts between chest and abdomen records
are a defining feature of obstruction. Our respiratory records show nearly constant respiratory
efforts other than sometimes transient apneas after very deep breaths, which are normal
phenomena; we therefore suspect that little information was fundamentally lost by not having
a chest belt, other than a way to define obstruction (beyond the dissociations in head motions
above). However, it is possible that body motion caused apparent changes in respiratory traces
that might resemble respiratory phenomena. Movement of the body can strain the abdominal
belt, causing brief changes to the trace that could conceivably appear as a respiratory pause or
breath (and sometimes subjects do make glottal stops during motions involving abdominal
contracture, but these will probably tend to be brief and without a significant impact on
ventilation). Without a redundant source of respiratory information, like a chest excursion or
nasal cannula measure, we have no way of definitively identifying such “spurious” respiratory
events.

However, one way of disambiguating real respiratory phenomena from “apparent” respiratory
phenomena would be to monitor cerebral blood flow. Ventilation reduces the concentration of
CO2 in the bloodstream (pCO2), and pCO2 is a potent modulator of cerebral blood flow (Hall,
2016). Increases of pCO2 induced by breath holds or CO2-enriched gas inhalation can cause
cerebral arterial flow increases of up to 50%; such changes are associated with large (several
percent) BOLD signal changes throughout the brain (Bright et al., 2009; Kastrup et al., 1999;
Poulin et al., 1996). Thus, one way of verifying that, for example, a deep breath is actually a
deep breath and not a modulation of the respiratory belt by non-respiratory motion, would be
to examine the fMRI timeseries for evidence of pan-brain signal changes reflecting alterations
of cerebral blood flow.

Pan-brain signal changes associated with respiratory trace abnormalities are widespread in the
HCP fMRI data. An example run from one subject is shown in Figure 14, and several examples of
deep breaths in other subjects are shown in Figure 15. These images convey what is routinely
seen in the HCP scans. By contrast, many major motions seem to have no effect on the
respiratory belt (Figure S7 shows several examples). Though likely there are times when
respiratory records are altered by abdominal motion apart from breathing, such times must be
a minor portion of respiratory “events”, and are unlikely to have played any significant role in
the findings of this paper. Relatedly, since we visually checked all physiology records for quality
as a selection criterion for this paper, we probably excluded from our analysis many traces that
would have had significant issues in this regard.

On the fidelity of position and motion estimates in fast-TR data

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We have uncovered evidence of pseudomotion in the HCP data, but this effect is limited to the
phase encode direction. Though it is a substantial amount of the motion in the images
(approximately a third of the magnitude), it is mainly oscillatory motion associated with
respiration, and such oscillatory motion is also a true phenomenon in non-phase-encode
directions. When the phase encode direction is not permitted to contribute to motion
estimates, estimates correlate at r = 0.92 with the original estimates. We see little reason to
mistrust the position estimates in HCP data, so long as the varied and distinct contributions of
different kinds of motion and pseudomotion are kept in mind.

Our findings qualify the use of DVARS dips as an index of motion: DVARS dips are highly specific
but not particularly sensitive indicators of motion. DVARS dips occur when FIX-ICA identifies
structured abnormalities in the images sufficiently large to meet automated criteria, causing
the denoising procedure to remove so much variance at those timepoints that those times
exhibit unusually little variance thereafter. In our experience (and figures), essentially without
exception, DVARS dips occurred at times of motion, and, in this sense, the dips are good
indicators of motion. However, there are numerous instances of motion for which the dips are
absent, mainly during smaller motions. Signal abnormalities during smaller motions are typically
less marked than those during major abnormalities, and the FIX-ICA procedure was trained to
mimic human decisions about components, which may explain why the denoising procedure
readily identifies large motions that greatly disrupt signals in recognizable ways, but does not
identify some smaller motions with less obvious signal disruptions. Note that DVARS spikes in
minimally processed images very often accompany motions, indicating that signal disruptions
are present, even if they are not recognized by FIX-ICA and converted to DVARS dips during
denoising. A corollary of these observations is that DVARS-dip-associated findings are motionrelated, but that non-DVARS-dip-associated findings are not necessarily not-motion-related.

Revisiting the motivation for this paper
The investigations in this paper were prompted by reductions in motion and motion artifacts in
fMRI scans obtained while using anatomy-specific head restraints (Power et al., 2019). In that
report we contrasted our usual procedure of packing head coils with foam padding to
restraining the head by filling the head coil with a customized Styrofoam insert molded to the
subjects’ heads. In scans using head molds, absolute displacement and/or absolute motion
were significantly reduced in all realignment parameters except the anterior-posterior axis, an
effect we originally attributed to the head already being at rest on the occiput (we obtained
modest but non-significant reductions in displacement and motion in the Y axis). Reexamination of those data leads us to suspect that the failure to substantially attenuate motion
in the Y direction was probably due in part to pseudomotion. Without the mold, ongoing
constant respiratory motion was prominent in the Z and Y directions, and with the molds the
constant respiratory motion was visibly attenuated in the Z direction but not visibly changed in
the Y direction (e.g., see Figure 1 or Figures S3-5 of (Power et al., 2019); Figure S8 reproduces
Figure 1 with some modification). This observation prompts two comments. First, a
developmental comment: though we did not see evidence of the low-frequency pseudomotion
in our developmental Cornell 2 data (which was the mold “off” scans in only the younger

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

subjects of (Power et al., 2019)), we do see the motion compatible with pseudomotion at the
dominant respiratory rate in the data. And second, a comment on the utility of physical head
restraints: to the extent that the residual motion in the Y axis with molds on was
pseudomotion, we underestimated the reductions in “true” motion produced by the molds,
which were a 60% reduction in large motions, and a 25% reduction in mean motion, when
presuming all motion was “true” motion (Power et al., 2019).

Broad considerations
Respiration can influence subject motion in multiple ways, and it influences fMRI signals
prominently via cerebral blood flow modulations. It is hoped that resting state fMRI will one
day have clinical relevance in psychiatry or neurology clinics. Preliminary studies indicate that
resting state characteristics in extensively scanned subjects are stable and display unique
features (Braga and Buckner, 2017; Gordon et al., 2017; Horien et al., 2019; Laumann et al.,
2015). The same appears to be true for respiratory waveforms and presumably for the kinds of
motion they produce: multiple within-subject parameters of respiration were most stable in
individuals, next-most-stable in monozygotic twins, and less stable in dizygotic twins. Certain
individuals had peculiar and idiosyncratic patterns in respiration (e.g., the deep breath and
balloon envelope in Figure 4). In our data, the link between variance in summary respiratory
properties (variance in ENV) and motion (FDfiltered,4-TR) appeared independent of previouslydescribed links of BMI and motion (FDoriginal). Motion is a heritable property (Hodgson et al.,
2017), and motion characteristics can classify individuals at above-chance levels in resting state
studies (Horien et al., 2019). More studies will be needed to define the extent to which
(heritable) respiratory phenomena contribute to such identifying features.

Conclusion
We identified five kinds of respiratory motion in this paper, two of which are forms of
pseudomotion, the other three of which are real motions. One form of pseudomotion is a lowfrequency phenomenon not directly related to the respiratory rate. The other form occurs at
the respiratory rate and is apparent in the phase encode direction of scans, but real respiratory
motion is apparent in other directions at the same times. Motion estimates, once reformulated
to accommodate the effects of various kinds of motion, yield productive information in fast-TR
datasets that accords well with the information that they routinely delivered in slow-TR
datasets in the past. The head is in constant motion in fast-TR images, but treatments of the
motion estimates can permit investigators to “see beyond” the constant motion to identify
meaningful events in scans.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by Simons Foundation Grant 528440 and a gift from the Mortimer D.
Sackler, M.D. family. We thank Conor Liston, Henning Voss, and Steve Nelson for comments on
the manuscript. We thank Kevin Tran and the NIH Helix/Biowulf staff for computing support.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Barch, D.M., Sabb, F.W., Carter, C.S., Braver, T.S., Noll, D.C., Cohen, J.D., 1999. Overt verbal
responding during fMRI scanning: empirical investigations of problems and potential solutions.
Neuroimage 10, 642-657.

Birn, R.M., Diamond, J.B., Smith, M.A., Bandettini, P.A., 2006. Separating respiratory-variationrelated fluctuations from neuronal-activity-related fluctuations in fMRI. Neuroimage 31, 15361548.

Braga, R.M., Buckner, R.L., 2017. Parallel Interdigitated Distributed Networks within the
Individual Estimated by Intrinsic Functional Connectivity. Neuron 95, 457-471 e455.

Bright, M.G., Bulte, D.P., Jezzard, P., Duyn, J.H., 2009. Characterization of regional
heterogeneity in cerebrovascular reactivity dynamics using novel hypocapnia task and BOLD
fMRI. Neuroimage 48, 166-175.

Brosch, J.R., Talavage, T.M., Ulmer, J.L., Nyenhuis, J.A., 2002. Simulation of human respiration in
fMRI with a mechanical model. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng 49, 700-707.

Bullmore, E.T., Brammer, M.J., Rabe-Hesketh, S., Curtis, V.A., Morris, R.G., Williams, S.C.,
Sharma, T., McGuire, P.K., 1999. Methods for diagnosis and treatment of stimulus-correlated
motion in generic brain activation studies using fMRI. Hum Brain Mapp 7, 38-48.

Burgess, G.C., Kandala, S., Nolan, D., Laumann, T.O., Power, J.D., Adeyemo, B., Harms, M.P.,
Petersen, S.E., Barch, D.M., 2016. Evaluation of Denoising Strategies to Address MotionCorrelated Artifacts in Resting-State Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data from the
Human Connectome Project. Brain Connect 6, 669-680.

Caballero-Gaudes, C., Reynolds, R.C., 2017. Methods for cleaning the BOLD fMRI signal.
Neuroimage 154, 128-149.

Chang, C., Glover, G.H., 2009. Relationship between respiration, end-tidal CO2, and BOLD
signals in resting-state fMRI. Neuroimage 47, 1381-1393.

Chlif, M., Keochkerian, D., Choquet, D., Vaidie, A., Ahmaidi, S., 2009. Effects of obesity on
breathing pattern, ventilatory neural drive and mechanics. Respir Physiol Neurobiol 168, 198202.

Duran, J., Esnaola, S., Rubio, R., Iztueta, A., 2001. Obstructive sleep apnea-hypopnea and
related clinical features in a population-based sample of subjects aged 30 to 70 yr. Am J Respir
Crit Care Med 163, 685-689.

Durand, E., van de Moortele, P.F., Pachot-Clouard, M., Le Bihan, D., 2001. Artifact due to B(0)
fluctuations in fMRI: correction using the k-space central line. Magn Reson Med 46, 198-201.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fair, D.A., Miranda-Dominguez, O., Snyder, A.Z., Perrone, A.A., Earl, E.A., Van, A.N., Koller, J.M.,
Feczko, E., Klein, R.L., Mirro, A.E., Hampton, J.M., Adeyemo, B., Laumann, T.O., Gratton, C.,
Greene, D.J., Schlaggar, B., Hagler, D., Watts, R., Garavan, H., Barch, D.M., Nigg, J.T., Petersen,
S.E., Dale, A., Feldstein-Ewing, S.W., Nagel, B.J., Dosenbach, N.U.F., 2018. Correction of
respiratory artifacts in MRI head motion estimates. bioRxiv, 337360.

Friston, K.J., Williams, S., Howard, R., Frackowiak, R.S., Turner, R., 1996. Movement-related
effects in fMRI time-series. Magn Reson Med 35, 346-355.

Glasser, M.F., Coalson, T.S., Bijsterbosch, J.D., Harrison, S.J., Harms, M.P., Anticevic, A., Van
Essen, D.C., Smith, S.M., 2018. Using temporal ICA to selectively remove global noise while
preserving global signal in functional MRI data. Neuroimage 181, 692-717.

Gordon, E.M., Laumann, T.O., Gilmore, A.W., Newbold, D.J., Greene, D.J., Berg, J.J., Ortega, M.,
Hoyt-Drazen, C., Gratton, C., Sun, H., Hampton, J.M., Coalson, R.S., Nguyen, A.L., McDermott,
K.B., Shimony, J.S., Snyder, A.Z., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., Nelson, S.M., Dosenbach, N.U.F.,
2017. Precision Functional Mapping of Individual Human Brains. Neuron 95, 791-807 e797.

Hall, J.E., 2016. Guyton and Hall textbook of medical physiology, 13th edition. ed. Elsevier,
Philadelphia, PA.

Hepper, N.G., Fowler, W.S., Helmholz, H.F., Jr., 1960. Relationship of height to lung volume in
healthy men. Dis Chest 37, 314-320.

Hodgson, K., Poldrack, R.A., Curran, J.E., Knowles, E.E., Mathias, S., Goring, H.H.H., Yao, N.,
Olvera, R.L., Fox, P.T., Almasy, L., Duggirala, R., Barch, D.M., Blangero, J., Glahn, D.C., 2017.
Shared Genetic Factors Influence Head Motion During MRI and Body Mass Index. Cereb Cortex
27, 5539-5546.

Holmes, A.J., Hollinshead, M.O., O'Keefe, T.M., Petrov, V.I., Fariello, G.R., Wald, L.L., Fischl, B.,
Rosen, B.R., Mair, R.W., Roffman, J.L., Smoller, J.W., Buckner, R.L., 2015. Brain Genomics
Superstruct Project initial data release with structural, functional, and behavioral measures. Sci
Data 2, 150031.

Horien, C., Noble, S., Finn, E.S., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., Constable, R.T., 2018. Considering
factors affecting the connectome-based identification process: Comment on Waller et al.
Neuroimage 169, 172-175.

Horien, C., Shen, X., Scheinost, D., Constable, R.T., 2019. The individual functional connectome
is unique and stable over months to years. Neuroimage 189, 676-687.

Kastrup, A., Kruger, G., Glover, G.H., Neumann-Haefelin, T., Moseley, M.E., 1999. Regional
variability of cerebral blood oxygenation response to hypercapnia. Neuroimage 10, 675-681.

Laumann, T.O., Gordon, E.M., Adeyemo, B., Snyder, A.Z., Joo, S.J., Chen, M.Y., Gilmore, A.W.,
McDermott, K.B., Nelson, S.M., Dosenbach, N.U., Schlaggar, B.L., Mumford, J.A., Poldrack, R.A.,

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Petersen, S.E., 2015. Functional System and Areal Organization of a Highly Sampled Individual
Human Brain. Neuron 87, 657-670.

Littleton, S.W., 2012. Impact of obesity on respiratory function. Respirology 17, 43-49.

Luce, J.M., 1980. Respiratory complications of obesity. Chest 78, 626-631.

Poulin, M.J., Liang, P.J., Robbins, P.A., 1996. Dynamics of the cerebral blood flow response to
step changes in end-tidal PCO2 and PO2 in humans. J Appl Physiol (1985) 81, 1084-1095.

Power, J.D., 2017. A simple but useful way to assess fMRI scan qualities. Neuroimage 154, 150158.

Power, J.D., 2019. Temporal ICA has not properly separated global fMRI signals: A comment on
Glasser et al. (2018). Neuroimage.

Power, J.D., Barnes, K.A., Snyder, A.Z., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., 2012. Spurious but
systematic correlations in functional connectivity MRI networks arise from subject motion.
Neuroimage 59, 2142-2154.

Power, J.D., Mitra, A., Laumann, T.O., Snyder, A.Z., Schlaggar, B.L., Petersen, S.E., 2014.
Methods to detect, characterize, and remove motion artifact in resting state fMRI. Neuroimage
84, 320-341.

Power, J.D., Plitt, M., Gotts, S.J., Kundu, P., Voon, V., Bandettini, P.A., Martin, A., 2018. Ridding
fMRI data of motion-related influences: Removal of signals with distinct spatial and physical
bases in multiecho data. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, E2105-E2114.

Power, J.D., Plitt, M., Kundu, P., Bandettini, P.A., Martin, A., 2017a. Temporal interpolation
alters motion in fMRI scans: Magnitudes and consequences for artifact detection. PLoS One 12,
e0182939.

Power, J.D., Plitt, M., Laumann, T.O., Martin, A., 2017b. Sources and implications of whole-brain
fMRI signals in humans. Neuroimage 146, 609-625.

Power, J.D., Silver, B.M., Silverman, M.R., Ajodan, E.L., Bos, D.J., Jones, R.M., 2019. Customized
head molds reduce motion during resting state fMRI scans. Neuroimage 189, 141-149.

Quan, S.F., Howard, B.V., Iber, C., Kiley, J.P., Nieto, F.J., O'Connor, G.T., Rapoport, D.M., Redline,
S., Robbins, J., Samet, J.M., Wahl, P.W., 1997. The Sleep Heart Health Study: design, rationale,
and methods. Sleep 20, 1077-1085.

Raj, D., Anderson, A.W., Gore, J.C., 2001. Respiratory effects in human functional magnetic
resonance imaging due to bulk susceptibility changes. Phys Med Biol 46, 3331-3340.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/601286; this version posted April 7, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Randerath, W., Verbraecken, J., Andreas, S., Arzt, M., Bloch, K.E., Brack, T., Buyse, B., De Backer,
W., Eckert, D.J., Grote, L., Hagmeyer, L., Hedner, J., Jennum, P., La Rovere, M.T., Miltz, C.,
McNicholas, W.T., Montserrat, J., Naughton, M., Pepin, J.L., Pevernagie, D., Sanner, B.,
Testelmans, D., Tonia, T., Vrijsen, B., Wijkstra, P., Levy, P., 2017. Definition, discrimination,
diagnosis and treatment of central breathing disturbances during sleep. Eur Respir J 49.

Sampson, M.G., Grassino, A.E., 1983. Load compensation in obese patients during quiet tidal
breathing. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ Exerc Physiol 55, 1269-1276.

Satterthwaite, T.D., Ciric, R., Roalf, D.R., Davatzikos, C., Bassett, D.S., Wolf, D.H., 2017. Motion
artifact in studies of functional connectivity: Characteristics and mitigation strategies. Hum
Brain Mapp.

Satterthwaite, T.D., Elliott, M.A., Gerraty, R.T., Ruparel, K., Loughead, J., Calkins, M.E., Eickhoff,
S.B., Hakonarson, H., Gur, R.C., Gur, R.E., Wolf, D.H., 2013. An improved framework for
confound regression and filtering for control of motion artifact in the preprocessing of restingstate functional connectivity data. Neuroimage 64, 240-256.

Siegel, J.S., Mitra, A., Laumann, T.O., Seitzman, B.A., Raichle, M., Corbetta, M., Snyder, A.Z.,
2017. Data Quality Influences Observed Links Between Functional Connectivity and Behavior.
Cereb Cortex 27, 4492-4502.

Smyser, C.D., Inder, T.E., Shimony, J.S., Hill, J.E., Degnan, A.J., Snyder, A.Z., Neil, J.J., 2010.
Longitudinal analysis of neural network development in preterm infants. Cereb Cortex 20, 28522862.

Strik, C., Klose, U., Kiefer, C., Grodd, W., 2002. Slow rhythmic oscillations in intracranial CSF and
blood flow: registered by MRI. Acta Neurochir Suppl 81, 139-142.

Van Essen, D.C., Smith, S.M., Barch, D.M., Behrens, T.E., Yacoub, E., Ugurbil, K., Consortium,
W.U.-M.H., 2013. The WU-Minn Human Connectome Project: an overview. Neuroimage 80, 6279.

Yan, C.G., Cheung, B., Kelly, C., Colcombe, S., Craddock, R.C., Di Martino, A., Li, Q., Zuo, X.N.,
Castellanos, F.X., Milham, M.P., 2013. A comprehensive assessment of regional variation in the
impact of head micromovements on functional connectomics. Neuroimage 76, 183-201.

Zaitsev, M., Akin, B., LeVan, P., Knowles, B.R., 2017. Prospective motion correction in functional
MRI. Neuroimage 154, 33-42.

Zeng, L.L., Wang, D., Fox, M.D., Sabuncu, M., Hu, D., Ge, M., Buckner, R.L., Liu, H., 2014.
Neurobiological basis of head motion in brain imaging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111, 6058-6062.

27

Slow-TR (TR = 3000 ms)
GSP0009

Fast-TR (TR = 720 ms)
HCP105115

0

Gray matter voxels
White matter & ventricle voxels

2

GSP0012

HCP156637

0

Gray matter voxels
White matter & ventricle voxels
-3
6 minutes

Signal (z-score)

3

fMRI signals

Motion (mm)

-3

Signal (z-score)

3

fMRI signals

Motion (mm)

2

6 minutes

Figure 1: Illustrations of motion in slow-TR vs fast-TR data. Left column shows two 6-minute scans from the Brain Genomics
Superstruct Project (GSP), right column shows two 6-minute segments of Human Connectome Project data. Slow-TR scans show
“floors” of motion in many scans, where the brain appears essentially still, with occasional excursions from the floor. By contrast,
motion is continuously elevated throughout many HCP scans. Images are modified from supplemental videos of {Power, 2017}.

HCP150625

HCP178647

good concordance

HCP175439

weak concordance

Position
Motion
poor concordance
DVARS pre-FIX
DVARS post-FIX

ENV
RV
RVT (2 sec cycle)
Respiratory trace

Gray matter voxels
White matter & ventricle voxels
-3
5 minutes

5 minutes

Signal (z-score)

3

5 minutes

Figure 2: Examples of concordance and discordance of motion and DVARS. Top panels show position and motion estimates (the realignment parameters, and framewise
displacement (FD), on a 2 mm vertical scale; the horizontal line is FD = 0.5 mm), the next panels show DVARS before and after FIX-ICA, the next panels show respiratory belt
traces and the derived measures ENV, RV, and RVT, and bottom panels show heat maps of all in-brain voxel signals in minimally processed images. In all scans there is constant
motion at the respiratory frequency in the gray position estimates and red motion estimate. In the left scan, there is good concordance between motion estimates, DVARS spikes,
and DVARS dips, a “best case scenario”. However, the middle and right scans show poor concordance of motion estimates and DVARS, as well as instances of position estimates
visibly changing without the changes being notable in the motion estimates (or DVARS). Black arrows mark times when position, motion, or DVARS measures suggest that motion
has occurred.

HCP116726
Run 3

HCP148840
Run 3

HCP111514
Run 2

HCP115825
Run 4

HCP105923
Run 3

HCP128026
Run 3

HCP141119
Run 4

HCP111716
Run 1
0 min

Respiratory belt trace

ENV measure: envelope of respiratory trace (10 second window)
RV measure: standard deviation (6 second window)
RVT measure: (peak-trough)/interval

14.4 min

Figure 3: Examples of respiratory traces and derived measures. For 8 scans from 8 subjects of the HCP dataset, respiratory traces and derived ENV, RV, and RVT
measures are shown. Each scan lasts 14.4 minutes. Note the wide variety of rate and depth of breathing within a scan and across subjects, the varied shapes of the raw
respiratory belt waveforms, as well as the variety of pauses and very large breaths.

Frequency peak (Hz)

A)

Peak power of respiratory traces in all runs of all subjects (4 runs per subject; subjects ranked by mean peak frequency)

0.6

Group mean and std: 0.293 ± 0.055
Mean individual std: 0.018

0.4
0.2
0

1

100

B)

200

300

Power (log)

#007 HCP111514

400
Run 1

0.198 ± 0.024

Run 2
Run 3

Power (log)

Run 4
#062 HCP506234

Power (log)

0.240 ± 0.005

#316 HCP166438

0.322 ± 0.006

Power (log)

#431 HCP788876
0.462 ± 0.031

0

Hz

1

Time (14.4 min)

Figure 4: Frequency content of respiratory traces. A) The peak in power spectra of respiratory traces of each run of each subject, ordered by subject mean peak value. Most runs have peak power between 0.2-0.4
Hz. B) Example subject power spectra and respiratory traces. Spectra tend to be similar within a subject across runs, reflected in narrow variance in peak location in single subjects relative to variance across the
group. See Figure S1 for examples of dissimilar spectra within individuals across runs (the subjects with purple stars in (A)). Note that many spectra exhibit rather narrow peaks (e.g., the last 4 examples of (B))
whereas in some subjects a rather broad range of respiratory rates are found within a run (e.g., the broad peaks of the first example of (B)).

#428 HCP857263

#304 HCP882161

#217 HCP654350

#103 HCP191033

#405 HCP185341

#258 HCP193239

#162 HCP588565

#030 HCP192843

Power
POSITION

Power
RESP

Power
POSITION

Power
RESP

A)

0

0.2

Hz

1

0

0.2

Hz

1

0

B)

0.2

Hz

1

0

0.2

Hz

1

C)
Power in respiration
Power in position
0

0.2

Hz

1

Peak position power (Hz)

Power in respiration
(440 subjects)
Power in position
(440 subjects)

0.6

All runs; r = 0.97; p = 0
Run 1; r = 0.99; p = 0
Run 2; r = 0.97; p = 0
Run 3; r = 0.98; p = 0
Run 4; r = 0.95; p = 0

0.12 Hz

0

0.2
0.12

Hz
0.55

1

0

0

0.2

0.6

Peak respiratory power (Hz)

Figure 5: Comparison of respiratory frequency spectra with head position frequency spectra. A) Power spectra of 8 subjects are shown for respiratory and position traces (X
realignment parameter); the 4 colors denote the 4 runs. Ovals circle a peak in position spectra not present in respiratory spectra. B) Heat map of spectra from all runs of all subjects,
ordered by peak respiratory frequency. Scatter plots are means across subjects. C) Frequency of peak power in respiration plotted against frequency of peak power in head position.
Correlations of peak frequencies across subjects are inset. The starred subject is examined in Figure 6.

4 DVARS traces

Position within
0.08-0.18 Hz filter

Position traces

Respiratory traces

#258 HCP193239

Time (14.4 min)

Figure 6: Low-frequency position waveforms emerge during deep breaths. For the starred subject of Figure 5, respiratory traces, position traces, and DVARS traces
of all runs in their entirety are shown. Instances of deep breaths highlighted are in red ovals. Low frequency waves in position traces occur during these breaths, and
a stopband filter spanning 0.08 Hz-0.18 Hz removes the variance in the third panel, confirming that these waves constitute the low-frequency peak of the data. This
same subject is shown again in Figure 8.

X

Y

Z

Pitch

Roll

Yaw

HCP Data
TR = 720 ms
14.4 min runs
Phase encode: LR (x)
N = 444
4 runs

0.29 Hz

0.12
MyConnectome Data
TR = 1160 ms
10 min runs
Phase encode: AP (y)
N=1
84 runs
0.13 Hz
0.25 Hz

0.08
Cornell 1 Data
TR = 766 ms
5.4 min runs
Phase encode: AP (y)
N = 70
1 run

0.26 Hz

0

Hz

1

0.11

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

Figure 7: Low-frequency position waveforms occur only in the phase-encode direction. For 3 fast-TR datasets with 2 different phase encode directions, power spectra of position
estimates are shown for all scans of all subjects. Each dataset contains a low-frequency peak (or shoulder) seen only in the phase-encode direction (red arrows), whereas
frequencies typical of respiratory frequencies are seen congruently in all parameters. Note the respiratory harmonics of 0.13 Hz and 0.25 Hz in the MyConnectome dataset,
visible because all 84 scans are of the same subject (whereas the other datasets sample dozens to hundreds of subjects and blur a variety of peak frequencies).

HCP100307 (LR phase encode)
Left-right
Anterior-posterior
Superior-inferior

Respiratory trace
HCP193239 (LR phase encode)
Low frequency pseudomotion
see Fig 6, green trace (run 2)

Low frequency pseudomotion
see Fig 6, green trace (run 2)

HCP107018 (LR phase encode)

modulation of head position by respiratory envelope

MyConnectome 030 (AP phase encode)

MyConnectome 002 (AP phase encode)

MyConnectome 081 (AP phase encode)

MyConnectome 093 (AP phase encode)

Figure 8: Plots of the center of mass of unprocessed scans from the MyConnectome and HCP datasets. Respiratory fluctuations are evident in all 3
directions in scanner space, but especially in the superior-inferior direction (slice stack) and the phase encode directions.

Central apnea:
pseudomotion stops
real motion stops

Obstructive apnea:
pseudomotion stops
real motion increases

Obstructive hypopnea:
pseudomotion continues
real motion increases

True motion with deepened breaths

True motion with single deep breath

LR
AP
SI

1 min

Respiratory
trace
HCP114924

Large true respiratory motion

HCP102008

HCP101915

HCP101915

True motion independent of respiration, and at deep breath

HCP178748

HCP107018

HCP108121

Marked low frequency pseudomotion at times, little pseudomotion at others

HCP212015

Figure 9: Examples of motion and pseudomotion. Small excerpts from several scans are shown, illustrating central apnea, obstructive apnea, obstructive
hypopnea, true step motions occurring with substantial changes in breathing depth, true motions occurring with deep breaths, marked real respiratory
motion, real motions without any respiratory contribution, low-frequency pseudomotion in the absence of respiratory motion (orange dotted lines), and
variable appearance of pseudomotion within a subject. LR: left-right; AP: anterior-posterior; SI: superior-inferior.

Yaw
Roll
Pitch
Z
Y
X

Position & FD
original
respiratory filter

HCP100307 Run 3

pseudomotion filter (X)
little effect of pseudomotion filter

big effect of respiratory filter

big effect of 4-TR sampling

FD

respiratory filter; 4 TR
withhold X

DV

DVARS (min proc)
DVARS (after FIX-ICA)

Resp

Resp belt

Yaw
Roll
Pitch
Z
Y
X

HCP104012 Run 3
vs
: effect of
pseudomotion filter

modest effect of withholding X

vs
: effect of
withholding X
vs
: effect of
respiratory filter

FD
DV

vs
: effect of
4-TR sampling

Resp
Time (14.4 min)
Figure 10: Modifications of motion estimates. Runs for two subjects are shown. At top, the 6 position estimates: gray traces show the original estimates, red traces show estimates
after removing 0.2-0.5 Hz respiratory frequencies, and the black X trace represents the phase encode direction after removing 0.08-0.18 Hz pseudomotion frequencies. In the middle,
FD derived from the three kinds of position traces at top are shown. Filtering out pseudomotion has little effect on FD (compare gray and black FD traces) whereas filtering respiratory
frequencies has a large effect (compare gray and red traces). Withholding the X parameter has a modest effect. At bottom are the respiratory trace and DVARS traces for reference.
Note that several motions are apparent in the raw position estimates, with corresponding DVARS abnormalities (boxes). However these motions are lost amidst the respiratory noise
in the gray and black and maroon FD traces, and are also not prominent in the red traces. When a 4-TR differential in motion is calculated (orange FD trace), true head motions stand
out from the rest of the trace and match what is seen in DVARS.

Left-right
Anterior-posterior
Superior-inferior

Virtually no information in the FD trace other than that the head is seemingly always moving

Position
Motion (original)

FD now showing distinct, limited motions, matching DVARS spikes and visible position changes in centers of mass and realignment estimates

Position
Motion (filtered, 4-TR)
Motion (filtered, 1-TR)

DVARS pre-FIX
DVARS post-FIX

ENV
RV
RVT (2 sec cycle)
Respiratory trace
HCP100307 Run 4

Gray matter voxels
White matter & ventricle voxels
-3

Signal (z-score)

3

Figure 11: Illustration of the utility of filtering motion estimates and sampling motion over 2.88 seconds instead of 720 ms. Panels are as in prior figures: at top, centers of mass of
the unprocessed image, next the original position and motion estimates, next the filtered motion estimate using 4-TR sampling is shown in red, with a faint trace showing the 1TR version. Bottom panel shows signals of the minimally processed image.

Correlation of mean motion to variance in respiratory measure
N

ENV

RV

RVT

All subjects

440

r=0.53; p=0

r=0.57; p=0

r=0.43; p=0

1 per family

268

r=0.51; p=0

r=0.53; p=0

r=0.42; p=0

1 per family; 1st run only

268

r=0.47; p=0

r=0.51; p=0

r=0.37; p=0

1 per family; resp > 0.2 Hz

259

r=0.51; p=0

r=0.53; p=0

r=0.44; p=0

1 per family; resp > 0.2 Hz; low motion

252

r=0.50; p=0

r=0.53; p=0

r=0.41; p=0

FDfiltered
1 per family; resp > 0.2 Hz; low motion

252

r=0.35; p=0

r=0.37; p=0

r=0.33; p=0

FDoriginal
1 per family; resp > 0.2 Hz; low motion

Motion vs respiratory measures
N = 268 (1 per family)

std ENV

FDfiltered, 4-TR

r = 0.51
p=0
mean FD (filtered, 4-TR)

252

r=0.11; p=0.10

r=0.10; p=0.11

r=0.24; p=0

Figure 12: Relationship of summary respiratory measures to summary motion measures. Correlations between mean FD and standard deviations of
ENV, RV, and RVT are shown, for several versions of cohort formation, and for several versions of FD. The scatter plot demonstrate the basis of the
starred statistic of the chart.

FDoriginal

0.6

FDfiltered

0
0.25

FDfiltered,4-TR

0
0.8

0

∆left-right
(mm)

0.2

∆sup-inf
(mm)

0
0.2

0

r = 0.61
r = 0.70

p=0
p=0

r = 0.53
r = 0.63

p=0
p=0

r = -0.01
r = -0.10

p = 0.89
p = 0.16

r = 0.46
r = 0.50

p=0
p=0

r = 0.42
r = 0.47

p=0
p=0

r = 0.02
r=0

p = 0.75
p = 0.95

r = 0.34
r = 0.33

p=0
p=0

r = 0.32
r = 0.31

p=0
p=0

r = 0.02
r = 0.02

p = 0.80
p = 0.77

15

BMI

45

r = 0.79
r = 0.78

80

Weight (lbs)

r = 0.70
r = 0.68
p=0
p=0

r = 0.46
r = 0.40

15

320

p=0
p=0

BMI

45

55

Height (in)

85

r = -0.02
r = -0.14

p = 0.79
p = 0.06

r = -0.04
r = -0.03

p = 0.58
p = 0.68

p=0
p=0
r = 0.36
r = 0.39

80

p=0
p=0

Weight (lbs)
Females

320

55

Height (in)

85

Males

Figure 13: Relationship of summary motion measures to summary body habitus measures.

Left-right
Anterior-posterior
Superior-inferior

Position
Motion (filtered, 4-TR)
Motion (filtered, 1-TR)
DVARS pre-FIX
DVARS post-FIX
ENV
RV
RVT (2 sec cycle)
Respiratory trace

HCP107018 Run 1

Gray matter voxels
White matter & ventricle voxels
1 min

Figure 14: Concordance of respiration records and fMRI timeseries indicative of cerebral blood flow changes. Traces are as in prior figures, fMRI timeseries
are from minimally processed image.

-3

Signal (z-score)

3

HCP116726
Run 2

HCP128026
Run 3

HCP121921
Run 3

1 min

1 min

1 min

HCP123824
Run 4

1 min

HCP129634
Run 1

1 min

Figure 15: Concordance of respiration records and fMRI timeseries indicative of cerebral blood flow changes. Traces are as in prior figures, fMRI
timeseries are from minimally processed images.

SUPPLEMENTAL

Power (log)

0.199 ± 0.011

Power (log)

#008 HCP169949

0.201 ± 0.093

#009 HCP479762

Power (log)

#010 HCP966975

Power (log)

0.201 ± 0.008

#118 HCP192641

0.265 ± 0.007

Power (log)

#119 HCP197348
0.265 ± 0.138

#120 HCP299154

Power (log)

0.265 ± 0.015

0

Hz

1

Time (14.4 min)

Figure S1: Examples of variable power spectra across runs in respiratory traces, after Figure 4. A minority of subjects have variable respiratory power spectra across runs (red boxes
denote subjects with purple stars in Figure 4A with variable peak frequency). For reference, data from the neighboring ranked subjects are shown.

A)

MyConnectome
Adults

Cornell 1
Adults

Cornell 2
Ages 7-17 (mean 13.7)

Power in
phase encode

Power in
phase encode

HCP
Adults

0

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

0

Hz

1

Power in position
(Cornell 2)

B)
X

0

Hz

Y

1

0

Hz

Z

1

0

Hz

Pitch

1

0

Hz

Roll

1

0

Hz

Yaw

1

0

Hz

1

Figure S2: A) Position power spectra in the phase encode direction in adult versus developmental datasets. The Cornell 2
dataset is composed of 11 subjects ages 7-17, with 2 resting state runs lasting 4.8 min each per subject, TR = 800 ms, on the
same scanner as the Cornell 1 dataset. In these children, there is no evident low-frequency peak. B) Position power spectra in
all position estimates of the Cornell 2 dataset. Respiratory frequencies are represented in all position parameters, and no
parameters show a visible low-frequency peak; the star denotes the phase-encode direction.

0.6
Filter pseudomotion

Filter respiration; 4 TR

phase encode omitted

Mean FD (treated)

Filter respiration
r = 0.999
p=0
mag 98.9%

0

r = 0.819
p=0
mag 51.9%
0

Mean FD (original)

0.6

r = 0.660
p=0
mag 90.1%
0

Mean FD (original)

0.6

r = 0.921
p=0
mag 66.7%
0

Mean FD (original)

Figure S3: Summary motion during motion re-estimation. At right, mean FD calculated over the 4 runs of each subject defines
the X-axis. Mean FD in the position estimates after filtering to remove either pseudomotion or the dominant respiratory
frequencies is shown in black and red points, with summary statistics inset. At right, similar data are shown for the 4-TR FD
estimates shown in Figure 11. In maroon are FD estimates produced without the X phase encode parameter

0.6

Yaw
Roll
Pitch
Z
Y
X

Position & FD
original
respiratory regressor

HCP100307 Run 3

pseudomotion filter (X)

FD

respiratory filter; 4 TR
withhold X

DV

DVARS (min proc)
DVARS (after FIX-ICA)

Resp

Resp belt

Yaw
Roll
Pitch
Z
Y
X

HCP101915 Run 3
vs
: effect of
pseudomotion filter
vs
: effect of
withholding X
vs
: effect of
respiratory filter

FD
DV

vs
: effect of
4-TR sampling

Resp
Time (14.4 min)
Figure S4: Figure in the style of Figure 10, but with blue position traces showing the effect of a respiratory nuisance regressor sampled from the respiratory belt instead of the red
frequency-filtered position traces shown in Figure 10. The subject at top is the same subject shown in Figure 10, the bottom shows a different subject. The respiratory regressor
attenuates respiratory oscillations best in the X parameter where the motion is most purely related to respiration (and in the top subject especially, revealing the distinct low-amplitude
phase encode oscillations during and after some larger breaths). In subjects with marked excursions in the respiratory belt during deep breaths, the regressors tend to perform
poorly.

Peak respiratory
frequency (Hz)

0.6

r = 0.17
r = 0.26

p = 0.02
p=0

r = 0.15
r = 0.17

p = 0.03
p = 0.02

r = 0.01
r = -0.22

p = 0.93
p=0

Females
Males

0
15

BMI

45

80

Weight (lbs)

Figure S5: Interactions of body habitus with respiration rate.

320

55

Height (in)

85

MZ twins

DZ twins

∆BMI
r = 0.00
p = 0.99

MZ twins

DZ twins

∆BMI

∆BMI

∆BMI

∆stdENV

∆stdENV

r = 0.34
p = 0.13

r = 0.00
p = 0.99

r = 0.23
p = 0.31

r = 0.78
p = 0.00

r = 0.64
p = 0.00

∆stdENV

∆FDfiltered,4-TR

DZ twins
∆FDfiltered,4-TR

MZ twins

Figure S6: Discordance plots showing differences among twins on multiple variables. Discordance in BMI and ENV variance
have no relationship to one another, discordance in BMI and mean FDfiltered,4-TR have no relationship to one another, but
discordance in ENV variance and mean FDfiltered,4-TR have a strong relationship, supporting a causal link between respiratory
phenomena and punctate/sustained motion.

HCP114217
Run 3

HCP114318
Run 1

1 min

HCP105014
Run 4

1 min

Figure S7: Instances of motion with no apparent relationship to respiration.

HCP105620
Run 1

1 min

1 min

FD (mm)

Position

Subject 1, age 14

Run 1; Mold OFF

Yaw
Roll
Pitch
Z
Y
X
2

Run 3; Mold ON

otion
attenuation of m
cannot attenuate
pseudomotion

1
0

FD (mm)

Position

Run 2; Mold OFF
Yaw
Roll
Pitch
Z
Y
X
2

Run 4; Mold ON

attenuation of motion

cannot attenuate
pseudomotion

1
0

Time (4.8 min)

Time (4.8 min)

Figure S8: Position and motion estimates in the four runs of the first subject of {Power, 2019}. The horizontal red line is set at FD = 0.30 mm. Position estimates show
respiratory motion prominent in the Y, Z, and pitch traces, as expected, most prominent with the mold OFF. With the mold ON, constant respiratory motion is visibly
attenuated in the Z axis, but little changed in the Y axis, which is the phase encode direction in which pseudomotion would occur.

