bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Full Title

Dysmorphic neuron density underlies intrinsic epileptogenicity of the centre
of cortical tubers
Running title
Dysmorphic neuron density in cortical tubers
Authors and Affiliations
Sarah EM. Stephenson1,2, Harley G. Owens1,2, Kay L. Richards3, Wei Shern Lee1,2, Colleen
D’Arcy8, Sarah Barton2,4, Simone A. Mandelstam2,3,5, Wirginia J. Maixner2,6,7, Duncan
MacGregor8, Steven Petrou3, Paul J. Lockhart1,2*, A. Simon Harvey2,4,6* and Richard J.
Leventer2,4,6*
1

Bruce Lefroy Centre, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, 3052, Australia

2

Department of Paediatrics, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, 3052, Australia

3

The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, Parkville, 3052, Australia

4

Department of Neurology, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, 3052, Australia

5

Department of Radiology, University of Melbourne, Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville,

3052, Australia.
6

Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, Parkville, 3052, Australia

7

Department of Neurosurgery, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, 3052, Australia

8

Department of Pathology, The Royal Children’s Hospital, Parkville, 3052, Australia

*These authors contributed equally
Corresponding author
Associate Professor Richard Leventer
Department of Neurology, The Royal Children’s Hospital
50 Flemington Road, Parkville, Victoria, 3052, Australia
E-mail: richard.leventer@rch.org.au

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Cortical tubers are benign lesions that develop in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex
(TSC), often resulting in drug-resistant epilepsy. Surgical resection may be required for seizure
control, but the extent of the resection required is unclear. Many centres include resection of
perituberal cortex, which may be associated with neurological deficits. Also, patients with
tubers in eloquent cortex may be excluded from epilepsy surgery.
Our electrophysiological and MRI studies indicate that the tuber centre is the source of seizures,
suggesting that smaller resections may be sufficient for seizure control. Here we report five
epilepsy surgeries in four children with TSC and focal motor seizures from solitary
epileptogenic tubers in the sensorimotor cortex in whom the resection was limited to the tuber
centre, leaving the tuber rim and surrounding perituberal cortex intact. Seizures were
eliminated in all cases, and no functional deficits were observed. On routine histopathology we
observed an apparent increase in density of dysmorphic neurons at the tuber centre, which we
confirmed using unbiased stereology which demonstrated a significantly greater density of
dysmorphic neurons within the resected tuber centre (1951 ± 215 cells/mm3) compared to the
biopsied tuber rim (531 ± 189 cells/mm3, n = 4, p = 0.008).
Taken together with our previous electrophysiological and MRI studies implicating the tuber
centre as the focus of epileptic activity, and other electrophysiological studies of dysmorphic
neurons in focal cortical dysplasia, this study supports the hypothesis that dysmorphic neurons
concentrated at the tuber centre are the seizure generators in TSC. Furthermore, our results
support limiting resection to the tuber centre, decreasing the risk of neurological deficits when
tubers are located within eloquent cortex.

Keywords
Tuberous sclerosis, histopathology, stereology, dysmorphic neurons, epilepsy surgery

Abbreviations
Antiseizure medications (ASM); Drug-resistant epilepsy (DRE); Electrocorticography (EcoG);
Electroencephalography (EEG); focal cortical dysplasia (FCD); interictal epileptiform
discharges (IEDs); magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); mechanistic target of rapamycin
(mTOR); neuronal nuclei (NeuN); tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
Tuberous sclerosis complex (TSC) is an autosomal dominant, multisystem disorder caused by
mutations in the genes encoding hamartin (TSC1) or tuberin (TSC2). Loss of functional
hamartin or tuberin results in failure to form a critical negative regulatory protein complex in
the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway (van Slegtenhorst et al., 1998). mTOR
overactivation causes dysregulation of neural stem cell proliferation, differentiation, migration
and apoptosis, leading to cortical malformation (Aronica and Crino 2014).
TSC is a model for understanding epilepsy due to focal cortical dysplasia (FCD), due to many
clinical, histopathological and neuroimaging similarities, particularly with FCD type IIb (Crino
2007). Recent genetic studies of individuals with FCD have identified pathogenic variants in
genes encoding multiple components of the mTOR pathway, including TSC1/2 (Baulac et al.,
2015, D'Gama et al., 2015, Leventer et al., 2015, Lim et al., 2015, Scerri et al., 2015, Mirzaa
et al., 2016, Sim et al., 2016, D'Gama et al., 2017, Lim et al., 2017). Furthermore, single-cell
electrophysiological studies of dysmorphic neurons and balloon cells, the pathognomonic cell
lines in FCD type IIb and TSC (Najm et al., 2018), have shown similar electrophysiological
properties in both conditions (Cepeda et al., 2005, Cepeda et al., 2010).
Epileptic seizures occur in up to 90% of patients with TSC, often commencing during infancy,
having a focal basis, being drug-resistant, and associated with neurodevelopmental
impairments (Chu-Shore et al., 2010). Epilepsy surgery is performed in some patients with
TSC and drug-resistant epilepsy (DRE), a variety of approaches being employed in seizure
localisation and cortical resection, and favourable seizure outcome being reported in the
majority (Harvey 2019).
The underlying pathological substrate and cellular mechanisms of epileptogenesis in TSC are
debated, being attributed to either cortical tubers, occult dysplasia in perituberal cortex,
molecular mechanisms related to the mTORopathy, or pervasive epileptic network
disturbances (Wong 2008, Harvey 2019). Our MRI and electrocorticography (ECoG) studies
in children with TSC undergoing epilepsy surgery suggested that tubers, not perituberal cortex,
are the source of focal seizures in TSC (Mohamed et al., 2012), and that epileptogenicity resides
in the centre, not the rim, of epileptogenic tubers (Kannan et al., 2016). When reviewing the
histopathology of resected tubers, we repeatedly observed more dysmorphic neurons in the
centre compared to the rim of tubers. Additionally, we recognised histopathological and ECoG
similarities with bottom-of-sulcus dysplasia (Harvey et al., 2015) and considered performing
similar, small, targeted resections in TSC.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Here we provide proof of principle, reporting five surgeries in four children with TSC in whom
resection of an epileptogenic tuber in primary motor cortex was limited to the dysplastic tuber
centre, eliminating the related seizures and EEG abnormalities and avoiding potential motor
deficits. To investigate our hypothesis of an increased density of dysmorphic neurons at the
centre of tubers, we performed unbiased stereology in the resected tissue and showed that the
density of dysmorphic neurons is significantly greater in the tuber centre than the rim. Our
results provide further evidence for epileptogenicity residing in the centre of tubers, further
implicate dysmorphic neurons as the generator of seizures in TSC and FCD, and suggest that
limited resection may be a practical approach in certain settings.

Materials and methods
The Royal Children’s Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee approved this study (HREC
29077) and informed consent was obtained for all participants in accordance with the
Declaration of Helsinki.

Clinical details
TSC was diagnosed clinically and confirmed genetically by identification of pathogenic
germline variants in TSC2 in the four children. All had DRE with unilateral tonic or clonic
motor seizures, beginning in infancy and occurring at multiple daily frequency at the time of
surgery. Three children developed infantile spasms, promptly and effectively treated with
vigabatrin; patient 3 was treated with vigabatrin before seizure onset and did not develop
infantile spasms. Scalp EEG showed focal interictal epileptiform discharges (IEDs) and ictal
rhythms in the contralateral central region. One or more candidate tubers were visible on MRI
in the central region.
The children were aged 9 months to 2.9 years at the time of surgery, which was performed
between April 2012 and November 2016. Patient 3 underwent separate surgeries for
independent right and left-sided focal motor seizures. In all patients, surgery was performed in
one stage with intraoperative ECoG, targeting candidate tubers exposed following a
stereotactic craniotomy. The precentral and postcentral gyri and adjacent sulci were identified
from cross-referencing the cortical surface appearance with their 3D surface-rendered MRI
(Figure 1). The candidate tubers, and their centres and sulcal boundaries, were identified in a
similar fashion, supplemented by cortical palpation; the concept and boundaries of tuber
centres and rims are reported (Kannan et al., 2016). One or two 4-contact depth electrodes (5
mm spaced, Ad-Tech Medical, Wisconsin USA) were used to record from the tuber centres,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and either subdural strip (Patients 3a, 3b and 4) or strip and grid (Patients 1 and 2) electrodes
(10 mm spaced, Ad-Tech Medical, Wisconsin USA) were used to record from the tuber rims
and perituberal cortex. ECoG was recorded from 1-5 candidate tubers in the central and
surrounding regions. Runs of rhythmic periodic IEDs or electrographic seizures recorded from
the tuber centre indicated their epileptogenicity. EcoG findings and resection details are
described in the Results.
Patient 3 underwent an ineffective resection of a non-epileptogenic left parietal tuber, due to
false localisation of her right-sided focal motor seizures, prior to the eventually effective left
precentral gyrus tuber-centre resection. Patients 1, 2 and 4 developed independent, non-motor
seizures from remote foci that were successfully resected in Patients 1 and 2.
Clinical, EEG, imaging, ECoG and surgical details are summarised for the central surgeries in
Table 1 and for all surgeries in Supplementary Table 1.

Tuber stereology details
Tissue samples were collected from the centre (resected tissue) and rim (biopsy) of the operated
tuber in patients 2, 3 and 4; no rim biopsy was obtained in patient 1 who was omitted from the
stereology study. These were processed for routine histopathological examination. Tissue was
placed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, stained with H&E and NeuN, and then reviewed by
conventional light microscopy (Supplementary Methods).
Approximately 2 mm of residual paraffin embedded specimen was later cut at 15 µm and 1:10
serial sections were stained with a monoclonal anti-neurofilament antibody (Covance, SMI311R) to identify dysmorphic neurons (Supplementary Methods) and counterstained with
haematoxylin. Stereological analysis of dysmorphic neuron number was performed on blindcoded slides to prevent interpreter bias. Dysmorphic neuron density estimates were obtained
using the optical fractionator method (West et al., 1991) via stereology software
(StereoInvestigator, Version 11.08.1 [64-Bit]; MicroBrightField (MBF) Bioscience, Williston,
Vermont, USA) and a 40x oil immersion lens on a light microscope (DMBL2; Leica,
Germany). Dysmorphic neurons were only included in the count if they met the ILAE’s criteria
(Blumcke et al., 2011) which required cytoplasmic accumulation of neurofilament proteins,
whole cell size measured >20 μm, nuclei measured >15 μm, and abnormally distributed
intracellular Nissl substance. For each sample, dysmorphic neurons were counted in every 10th
section cut and stained, giving a sampling fraction (ssf) of 1/10. A trace was drawn around the
boundaries of the tissue on each section at 5x, within which a counting frame grid was overlaid.
The size of each counting frame for the optical dissector probe was 150 μm x 150 μm, giving

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

an area of the counting frame (Aframe) of 22,500 μm2. To account for specimen size variability
an arbitrary 5% of total surface area per section was sampled. The height of the optical dissector
(h) was 10 μm, with an upper guard zone of 2.5 μm. The actual thickness of the mounted
sections (t) was measured at five random points within each section analysed.
The estimated total number (N) of dysmorphic neurons in each sample was determined as the
sum of cells counted (ΣQ−) on all sections, multiplied by the inverse of the ssf (1/10), the
inverse of the area sampling fraction, asf (Aframe/Astep), and the inverse of the thickness
sampling fraction, tsf (h/t), according to the formula N = ΣQ− × 1/(ssf × asf × tsf). The
coefficient of error (CE) for each stereological estimate of total dysmorphic neuron number
was calculated with the Gunderson-Jensen estimator (Gundersen and Jensen 1987) using a
smoothness factor of 0 and a = 1/12 (Slomianka and West 2005). The sampling scheme for
estimating total dysmorphic neuron number is summarised in Supplementary Table 2. The
numerical density (cells/mm3; Nv) of dysmorphic neurons was defined as the estimated total
number (N) of cells divided by the estimated total volume (Vref) of each sample (given as a
default output by StereoInvestigator dictated by the surface area covered by each section trace
and the principles of Cavalieri’s basic estimator), according to the formula NV = N/Vref.

Statistical analysis
For statistical analysis, the paired one-tailed student’s t-test method was employed via Graph
Pad Prism (V6, San Diego, USA), where a p value less than 0.05 was considered evidence of
statistical significance. Unless otherwise stated, results are expressed as mean ± standard error
of the mean (SEM).

Results
Tuber centre-only resections
The operated, epileptogenic tubers were in the precentral (Patients 1, 3a, 3b, 4) or postcentral
gyrus (Individual 2), abutting the central sulcus. Intraoperative ECoG showed runs (Patients 1,
3a, 3b, 4) or continuous (Patient 2) rhythmic spike-wave activity and electrographic seizures
(Patients 1, 3a) in the tuber centre, recorded by depth electrodes. These were confined to the
tuber centre (Patients 2, 3b,) or propagated to the tuber rim (Patients 1, 3a, 4). ECoG from the
surrounding perituberal cortex showed independent spike-wave activity in Patients 1 and 2.
The grey matter of the tuber centre was resected in a subpial fashion using an ultrasonic
aspirator, to the grey-white junction. This left a cavity of variable depth in the centre of the
tuber, with the cortex of the tuber rim surrounding. The abnormal white matter underlying the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cortex of the tuber was not resected. Post-resection ECoG from the tuber rim and perituberal
cortex, using subdural strip electrodes, showed no epileptiform activity; independent spiking
persisted in the perituberal cortex of Patient 2 (Figure 1, Supplementary Figure 1).
No patient had postoperative weakness, even transiently, and none has a motor or sensory
deficit on examination at follow-up. The focal motor seizures ceased immediately following
the five surgeries in the four patients, with no recurrence during the 2.4-7.0 (mean 5.0) years
of close clinical monitoring. Routine postoperative scalp EEG recordings three months
following surgery, and subsequent video-EEG monitoring for independent seizures, did not
reveal IEDs or electrographic seizures in the operated central region, except for patient 4 who
developed ipsilateral centrotemporal spikes without Rolandic epilepsy (Table 1).
Antiseizure medications (ASM) were ceased following these surgeries in Patients 3 and 4.
Patient 3 remains off ASM. Patient 4 was commenced on lacosamide three years later for
infrequent, non-motor seizures of remote origin. Patients 1 and 2 had medications reduced
following this and subsequent surgeries, to oxcarbazepine monotherapy. No patient has regular,
ongoing seizures. Patients 2 and 4 have mild learning and behavioural difficulties, but all attend
mainstream schooling. Patient 1 has an intellectually disability and autism spectrum disorder
and attends a special developmental school. Patient 3 is developmentally normal.

Histopathology and dysmorphic neuron density
Histopathological examination of tuber specimens showed similar features in each. Cortical
neuronal layering was distorted by dysmorphic and enlarged neurons and balloon cells,
resulting in blurring of the cortical-white matter junction. On routine histopathological
examination using H&E staining (Figure 2) and NeuN immunohistochemistry (data not
shown), the density of dysmorphic neurons appeared greater in the tuber centre of cortical
specimens relative to the tuber rim biopsies, the latter showing a predominance of balloon cells
and fewer dysmorphic neurons.

Stereological measurement demonstrated a greater density of dysmorphic neurons within the
tuber centre (1951 ± 215 cells/mm3, mean ± SEM, n=4) compared to the rim (531 ± 189
cells/mm3, mean ± SEM, n=4) (p=0.008) (Fig. 3). The significantly higher density of
dysmorphic neurons at the centre compared to the rim was present in each individual when
analysed independently, with a mean difference of 1420 cells/mm3 (95% confidence interval
490 to 2351).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Discussion
The approach to epilepsy surgery in TSC varies significantly between hospitals. Presurgical
workup is complex and involves detailed clinical, imaging and electrophysiological studies to
identify the epileptogenic tubers and best approach for their removal. Surgery is considered
early in children with DRE to minimise the detrimental effects of seizures, EEG discharges and
ASM on the developing brain. However, some children are not considered candidates for
epilepsy surgery due to their epileptogenic tubers being in eloquent cortex, seizures being
poorly localised, or tuber load being high.
These four children with tuber centre resections were selected from our surgical series because
of the localisation of their seizures. The certainty of seizure remission was clearer clinically
than in many children with TSC, given their epileptogenic tubers were located in sensorimotor
cortex. Additionally, this was the patient group in which we first undertook this minimalistic
approach, to minimise potential injury to surrounding motor cortex and corticospinal tracts.
Notably, only a single tuber was found to be responsible and resected, and follow-up was
lengthy after surgery. We have employed this technique in several other TSC patients not
reported here, those being children with poorly localised usually non-motor seizures and large
tuber loads in whom the centres of several tubers were resected, limiting the amount of tissue
resected.
Electrophysiological studies of the seizure generating zone in TSC have shown variable results,
with some suggesting seizure onset within perituberal cortex (Madhavan et al., 2007, Major et
al., 2009, Marcotte et al., 2012, Chalifoux et al., 2013, Ruppe et al., 2014, Sosunov et al., 2015)
and others within tubers (Ma et al., 2012, Mohamed et al., 2012, Kannan et al., 2016, Despouy
et al., 2019). Many studies lacked detailed methods to determine the spatial and temporal
characteristics of seizure onset and spread within, around and between tubers (see review in
Harvey 2019). The view that seizures originate in perituberal cortex or widely distributed
networks potentially leads to large resections or exclusion of patients from surgery, possibly
inappropriately. Our intracranial EEG monitoring studies in children with TSC showed that
focal seizures and IEDs arise from the centre of epileptogenic tubers and propagate to the tuber
rim, perituberal cortex and other tubers (Mohamed et al., 2012, Kannan et al., 2016). A recent
single patient study using new hybrid electrodes with tetrodes demonstrated the tuber is
critically involved in seizure onset, with a gradient of epileptogenicity from the tuber centre to
the perituberal cortex (Despouy et al., 2019). These electrophysiological findings correlate with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the features of dysplasia on MRI and histopathology being more marked in the tuber centres
(Kannan et al., 2016).
There are limited descriptions of the microstructure and histopathology of cortical tubers, and
few of dysmorphic neuron distribution (Muhlebner et al., 2016a, Muhlebner et al., 2016b). On
review of routine histopathology in our wider TSC surgical series, we repeatedly observed
abundant dysmorphic neurons in tuber centre specimens and hypothesised that this might be
the cause of the increased epileptogenicity at the tuber centre that we detected with our
electrophysiology studies. Therefore, we performed objective, quantitative analysis using
stereological methods to assess the density of dysmorphic neurons in cortical tubers and
demonstrated that the tuber centre contains 3.7 fold greater density of dysmorphic neurons than
the rim. We suggest that the efficacy of limited tuber centre resections in these patients is due
to removal of a nidus of dysmorphic, and intrinsically epileptic, neurons.
It is suggested that dysmorphic neurons are the pathogenic substrate driving epileptogenesis in
FCD, being the source of ictal discharges (Chassoux et al., 2000, Battaglia et al., 2013).
Compared to normal pyramidal neurons, dysmorphic neurons possess atypical passive
membrane properties. Due to their increased cell membrane area, dysmorphic neurons exhibit
a larger cell capacitance, a longer time constant and a lower input resistance (Cepeda et al.,
2003). Additionally, dysmorphic neurons are predisposed to hyperexcitability via larger
amplitudes of macroscopic Ca2+ currents and Ca2+ influx. Studies demonstrating high
expression of ionotropic and metabotropic glutamate receptor subtypes and/or subunits in these
cells also provide evidence of dysfunctional molecular pathways contributing to
hyperexcitability (White et al., 2001, Wang et al., 2007, Boer et al., 2008). Conversely, balloon
cells have a high input resistance, do not exhibit voltage-gated Na+ or Ca2+ currents, and do
not generate spontaneous synaptic currents (Cepeda et al., 2003). Further to this, studies
demonstrating an insensitivity of balloon cells to excitatory amino acids suggest a low
epileptogenic potential (Cepeda et al., 2012), and studies demonstrating increased clearance of
glutamate in areas with a high density of balloon cells suggest a protective or antiseizure
propagation function (Gonzalez-Martinez et al., 2011). This is of potential relevance to our
surgical approach, in which a tuber rim rich in balloon cell remains between the tuber centre
resection cavity and normal perituberal cortex.
Our study provides strong evidence for hyperexcitable, dysmorphic neurons concentrated in
the centre of cortical tubers being the pathological substrate of DRE in TSC. Our recent report

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of second-hit DEPDC5 somatic mutation in a child with FCD being limited to dysmorphic
neurons in the seizure focus (Lee et al., 2019) suggests that localised, cell-specific mechanisms
may underlie epilepsy in other forms of dysplasia. In bottom-of-sulcus dysplasia, dysmorphic
neurons are concentrated at the depth of the dysplastic sulcus where MRI and ECoG
abnormalities are greatest, and seizures are similarly controlled with small, targeted resections
(Harvey et al., 2015, Jackson et al., 2017).
Limited, tuber-centre resections in children with TSC might be considered in settings other
than epileptogenic tubers in eloquent cortex. Given the multiplicity of seizure foci, the large
tuber load, the involvement of homologous brain regions and the difficulties with seizure
localisation in many children with TSC, multiple tubers could be safely operated using this
technique, without the need for resecting large volumes of cerebral tissue. Additionally, laser
interstitial thermal therapy is being employed in TSC (Tovar-Spinoza et al., 2018) but could
be directed at tuber centres, rather than ablating whole tubers, reducing the risk of thermal
injury to normal perituberal cortex.

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the families for agreeing to be part of this research study. We thank Greta
Gillies and Kate Pope for their contributions.

Funding Information
This work was supported by the Australian Government National Health and Medical Research
Council GNT1128933, the Murdoch Children’s Research Institute, the Campbell Edwards
Trust and the Brain Foundation. Additional funding was provided by the Independent Research
Institute Infrastructure Support Scheme and the Victorian State Government Operational
Infrastructure Program. RJL is supported by the Melbourne Children’s Clinician Scientist
Fellowship scheme.

References
Aronica, E. and P. B. Crino. Epilepsy related to developmental tumors and malformations of
cortical development. Neurotherapeutics. 2014 11(2): 251-268.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Battaglia, G., F. Colciaghi, A. Finardi and P. Nobili. Intrinsic epileptogenicity of dysplastic
cortex: converging data from experimental models and human patients. Epilepsia. 2013 54
Suppl 6: 33-36.
Baulac, S., S. Ishida, E. Marsan, C. Miquel, A. Biraben, D. K. Nguyen, et al. Familial focal
epilepsy with focal cortical dysplasia due to DEPDC5 mutations. Ann Neurol. 2015 77(4): 675683.
Blumcke, I., M. Thom, E. Aronica, D. D. Armstrong, H. V. Vinters, A. Palmini, et al. The
clinicopathologic spectrum of focal cortical dysplasias: a consensus classification proposed by
an ad hoc Task Force of the ILAE Diagnostic Methods Commission. Epilepsia. 2011 52(1):
158-174.
Boer, K., D. Troost, W. Timmermans, J. A. Gorter, W. G. Spliet, M. Nellist, et al. Cellular
localization of metabotropic glutamate receptors in cortical tubers and subependymal giant cell
tumors of tuberous sclerosis complex. Neuroscience. 2008 156(1): 203-215.
Cepeda, C., V. M. Andre, J. S. Hauptman, I. Yamazaki, M. N. Huynh, J. W. Chang, et al.
Enhanced GABAergic network and receptor function in pediatric cortical dysplasia Type IIB
compared with Tuberous Sclerosis Complex. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 45(1): 310-321.
Cepeda, C., V. M. Andre, H. V. Vinters, M. S. Levine and G. W. Mathern. Are cytomegalic
neurons and balloon cells generators of epileptic activity in pediatric cortical dysplasia?
Epilepsia. 2005 46 Suppl 5: 82-88.
Cepeda, C., V. M. Andre, I. Yamazaki, J. S. Hauptman, J. Y. Chen, H. V. Vinters, et al.
Comparative study of cellular and synaptic abnormalities in brain tissue samples from pediatric
tuberous sclerosis complex and cortical dysplasia type II. Epilepsia. 2010 51 Suppl 3: 160-165.
Cepeda, C., R. S. Hurst, J. Flores-Hernandez, E. Hernandez-Echeagaray, G. J. Klapstein, M.
K. Boylan, et al. Morphological and electrophysiological characterization of abnormal cell
types in pediatric cortical dysplasia. J Neurosci Res. 2003 72(4): 472-486.
Chalifoux, J. R., N. Perry, J. S. Katz, G. C. Wiggins, J. Roth, D. Miles, et al. The ability of high
field strength 7-T magnetic resonance imaging to reveal previously uncharacterized brain
lesions in patients with tuberous sclerosis complex. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2013 11(3): 268-273.
Chassoux, F., B. Devaux, E. Landre, B. Turak, F. Nataf, P. Varlet, et al.
Stereoelectroencephalography in focal cortical dysplasia: a 3D approach to delineating the
dysplastic cortex. Brain. 2000 123 ( Pt 8): 1733-1751.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Chu-Shore, C. J., P. Major, S. Camposano, D. Muzykewicz and E. A. Thiele. The natural
history of epilepsy in tuberous sclerosis complex. Epilepsia. 2010 51(7): 1236-1241.
Crino, P. B. Focal brain malformations: a spectrum of disorders along the mTOR cascade.
Novartis Found Symp. 2007 288: 260-272; discussion 272-281.
D'Gama, A. M., Y. Geng, J. A. Couto, B. Martin, E. A. Boyle, C. M. LaCoursiere, et al.
Mammalian target of rapamycin pathway mutations cause hemimegalencephaly and focal
cortical dysplasia. Ann Neurol. 2015 77(4): 720-725.
D'Gama, A. M., M. B. Woodworth, A. A. Hossain, S. Bizzotto, N. E. Hatem, C. M.
LaCoursiere, et al. Somatic Mutations Activating the mTOR Pathway in Dorsal Telencephalic
Progenitors Cause a Continuum of Cortical Dysplasias. Cell Rep. 2017 21(13): 3754-3766.
Despouy, E., J. Curot, M. Denuelle, M. Deudon, J. C. Sol, J. A. Lotterie, et al. Neuronal spiking
activity highlights a gradient of epileptogenicity in human tuberous sclerosis lesions. Clin
Neurophysiol. 2019 130(4): 537-547.
Gonzalez-Martinez, J. A., Z. Ying, R. Prayson, W. Bingaman and I. Najm. Glutamate clearance
mechanisms in resected cortical dysplasia. J Neurosurg. 2011 114(4): 1195-1202.
Gundersen, H. J. and E. B. Jensen. The efficiency of systematic sampling in stereology and its
prediction. J Microsc. 1987 147(Pt 3): 229-263.
Harvey, A. S. Invasive EEG in tuberous sclerosis. Invasive Studies of the Human Epileptic
Brain: Principles and Practice. K. P. Lhatoo SD, Lüders HO. Oxford, UK Oxford University
Press: 213-234; 2019.
Harvey, A. S., S. A. Mandelstam, W. J. Maixner, R. J. Leventer, M. Semmelroch, D.
MacGregor, et al. The surgically remediable syndrome of epilepsy associated with bottom-ofsulcus dysplasia. Neurology. 2015 84(20): 2021-2028.
Jackson, G. D., M. Pedersen and A. S. Harvey. How small can the epileptogenic region be? A
case in point. Neurology. 2017 88(21): 2017-2019.
Kannan, L., S. Vogrin, C. Bailey, W. Maixner and A. S. Harvey. Centre of epileptogenic tubers
generate and propagate seizures in tuberous sclerosis. Brain. 2016. 139(Pt 10): 2653-2667.
Lee, W. S., S. E. M. Stephenson, K. B. Howell, K. Pope, G. Gillies, A. Wray, et al. A somatic
second hit mutation in DEPDC5 is limited to dysmorphic neurons with maximal mutation load

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

in the seizure onset zone of focal cortical dysplasia. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2019: Accepted
22 May 2019.
Leventer, R. J., T. Scerri, A. P. Marsh, K. Pope, G. Gillies, W. Maixner, et al. Hemispheric
cortical dysplasia secondary to a mosaic somatic mutation in MTOR. Neurology. 2015 84(20):
2029-2032.
Lim, J. S., R. Gopalappa, S. H. Kim, S. Ramakrishna, M. Lee, W.-i. Kim, et al. Somatic
Mutations in TSC1 and TSC2 Cause Focal Cortical Dysplasia. Am J Med Genet. 2017.
100(3):454-472
Lim, J. S., W. I. Kim, H. C. Kang, S. H. Kim, A. H. Park, E. K. Park, et al. Brain somatic
mutations in MTOR cause focal cortical dysplasia type II leading to intractable epilepsy. Nat
Med. 2015 21(4): 395-400.
Ma, T. S., R. E. Elliott, V. Ruppe, O. Devinsky, R. Kuzniecky, H. L. Weiner, et al.
Electrocorticographic evidence of perituberal cortex epileptogenicity in tuberous sclerosis
complex. J Neurosurg Pediatr. 2012 10(5): 376-382.
Madhavan, D., H. L. Weiner, C. Carlson, O. Devinsky and R. Kuzniecky. Local epileptogenic
networks in tuberous sclerosis complex: a case review. Epilepsy Behav. 2007 11(1): 140-146.
Major, P., S. Rakowski, M. V. Simon, M. L. Cheng, E. Eskandar, J. Baron, et al. Are cortical
tubers epileptogenic? Evidence from electrocorticography. Epilepsia. 2009 50(1): 147-154.
Marcotte, L., E. Aronica, M. Baybis and P. B. Crino. Cytoarchitectural alterations are
widespread in cerebral cortex in tuberous sclerosis complex. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 123(5):
685-693.
Mirzaa, G. M., C. D. Campbell, N. Solovieff, C. P. Goold, L. A. Jansen, S. Menon, et al.
Association of MTOR Mutations With Developmental Brain Disorders, Including
Megalencephaly, Focal Cortical Dysplasia, and Pigmentary Mosaicism. JAMA Neurol. 2016
73(7): 836-845.
Mohamed, A. R., C. A. Bailey, J. L. Freeman, W. Maixner, G. D. Jackson and A. S. Harvey.
Intrinsic epileptogenicity of cortical tubers revealed by intracranial EEG monitoring.
Neurology. 2012 79(23): 2249-2257.
Muhlebner, A., A. M. Iyer, J. van Scheppingen, J. J. Anink, F. E. Jansen, T. J. Veersema, et al.
Specific pattern of maturation and differentiation in the formation of cortical tubers in tuberous

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

sclerosis omplex (TSC): evidence from layer-specific marker expression. J Neurodev Disord.
2016a 8: 9.
Muhlebner, A., J. van Scheppingen, H. M. Hulshof, T. Scholl, A. M. Iyer, J. J. Anink, et al.
Novel Histopathological Patterns in Cortical Tubers of Epilepsy Surgery Patients with
Tuberous Sclerosis Complex. PLoS One. 2016b 11(6): e0157396.
Najm, I., H. B. Sarnat and I. Blumcke. The international consensus classification of Focal
Cortical Dysplasia - a critical update 2018. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2018. 44(1):18-31.
Ruppe, V., P. Dilsiz, C. S. Reiss, C. Carlson, O. Devinsky, D. Zagzag, et al. Developmental
brain abnormalities in tuberous sclerosis complex: a comparative tissue analysis of cortical
tubers and perituberal cortex. Epilepsia. 2014 55(4): 539-550.
Scerri, T., J. R. Riseley, G. Gillies, K. Pope, R. Burgess, S. A. Mandelstam, et al. Familial
cortical dysplasia type IIA caused by a germline mutation in DEPDC5. Ann Clin Transl Neurol.
2015 2(5): 575-580.
Sim, J. C., T. Scerri, M. Fanjul-Fernandez, J. R. Riseley, G. Gillies, K. Pope, et al. Familial
cortical dysplasia caused by mutation in the mammalian target of rapamycin regulator NPRL3.
Ann Neurol. 2016 79(1): 132-137.
Slomianka, L. and M. J. West. Estimators of the precision of stereological estimates: an
example based on the CA1 pyramidal cell layer of rats. Neuroscience. 2005 136(3): 757-767.
Sosunov, A. A., R. A. McGovern, C. B. Mikell, X. Wu, D. G. Coughlin, P. B. Crino, et al.
Epileptogenic but MRI-normal perituberal tissue in Tuberous Sclerosis Complex contains
tuber-specific abnormalities. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2015 3: 17.
Tovar-Spinoza, Z., R. Ziechmann and S. Zyck. Single and staged laser interstitial thermal
therapy ablation for cortical tubers causing refractory epilepsy in pediatric patients. Neurosurg
Focus. 2018 45(3): E9.
van Slegtenhorst, M., M. Nellist, B. Nagelkerken, J. Cheadle, R. Snell, A. van den Ouweland,
et al. Interaction between hamartin and tuberin, the TSC1 and TSC2 gene products. Hum Mol
Genet. 1998 7(6): 1053-1057.
Wang, Y., J. S. Greenwood, M. E. Calcagnotto, H. E. Kirsch, N. M. Barbaro and S. C. Baraban.
Neocortical hyperexcitability in a human case of tuberous sclerosis complex and mice lacking
neuronal expression of TSC1. Ann Neurol. 2007 61(2): 139-152.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

West, M. J., L. Slomianka and H. J. Gundersen. Unbiased stereological estimation of the total
number of neurons in thesubdivisions of the rat hippocampus using the optical fractionator.
Anat Rec. 1991 231(4): 482-497.
White, R., Y. Hua, B. Scheithauer, D. R. Lynch, E. P. Henske and P. B. Crino. Selective
alterations in glutamate and GABA receptor subunit mRNA expression in dysplastic neurons
and giant cells of cortical tubers. Ann Neurol. 2001 49(1): 67-78.
Wong, M. Mechanisms of epileptogenesis in tuberous sclerosis complex and related
malformations of cortical development with abnormal glioneuronal proliferation. Epilepsia.
2008 49(1): 8-21.

Table 1: Outline of seizures and tuberectomies performed in patients.
Patient
- sex
- current
age
Pt 1*
- female
- 7y 11m

Seizure
focus (age
at onset)

Clinical manifestations of
seizures (state)

Scalp EEG
- ictal
- interictal

Candidate tubers
on MRI

Surgery
(age at surgery)

ECoG findings preop; postop
(number of tubers recorded)

L central
(1m)

R shoulder/arm jerking +/bilateral stiffening, no LOC
(awake)

- L central rhythmic
SW
- no IEDs

one large,
dysplastic tuber in L
precentral gyrus

resection of centre
of L precentral
gyrus tuber (11m)

Pt 2
- female
- 9y 8m

L central
(9m)

periodic spasms or
negative myoclonus of R
arm +/- head drop or fall
(awake)

- L central-parietal
PEDs
- L central-parietal
SW

one dysplastic L
postcentral gyrus
tuber

resection of centre
of L postcentral
gyrus tuber (2y 9m)

Pt 3
- female
- 5y 1m

R central
(6w)

jerking L arm (awake)

- R central rhythmic
SW
- R central SW

one large,
dysplastic tuber in R
precentral gyrus

resection of centre
of R precentral
gyrus tuber (9m)

two small dysplastic
tubers in L
precentral gyrus,
superiorly and
inferiorly

resection of centre
of L precentral
gyrus tuber (2y 8m)

several dysplastic
tubers in L frontal,
central, temporal
and parietal lobes

resection of centre
of L precentral
gyrus (2y 9m)

runs of rhythmic SW at 1-2Hz and
an electrographic seizure in
centre of L precentral gyrus
tuber, occasional SW propagating
to the tuber rim, independent SW
in PTC; no postop ECoG (1)
continuous rhythmic SW at 1 Hz
in centre of L postcentral gyrus
tuber without propagation,
frequent independent SW in
perituberal and remote cortex;
less frequent perituberal and
remote SW on postop ECoG (1)
runs of periodic SW and brief
seizures in the centre of R
precentral gyrus tuber,
occasionally propagating to the
tuber rim, no PTC SW; no
abnormality on postop ECoG (1)
brief runs of periodic SW in
centre of the superior but not
inferior L precentral gyrus tuber,
no propagation to tuber rim, no
PTC SW; no abnormality on
postop ECoG (1)
runs of rhythmic SW in centre of L
precentral gyrus tuber
propagating to its rim and to
adjacent SFG tuber, continuous
independent SW from remote L
occipital tuber; no PTC SW;
postop ECoG only SW from L
occipital tuber (5)

Pt 4
- female
- 6y 11m

L central
(4m)

subclinical seizures or
periodic spasms with chin
contraction, rapid blinking,
jerking R arm (awake)

- midline-L central
rhythmic SW
- L central SW

Postop outcome
- seizures
- EEG
- ASM
- seizures ceased
- no L central IEDs
- on oxcarbazepine
for other operated
seizures
(controlled)
- seizures ceased
- no L central IEDs
- on oxcarbazepine
for other nonoperated seizures
(mild, infrequent)
- seizures ceased
- no R central IEDs
- no ASM

- seizures ceased
- no L sided IEDs
- no ASM

- seizures ceased
- no midline or L
central IEDs
- on lacosamide for
other nonoperated seizures
(rare)

*Patient 1 had transient infantile spasms of unknown localisation at age 5 months. Abbreviations: antiseizure medications (ASM), electrocorticography (EcoG), interictal epileptiform
discharges (IEDs), left (L), months (m), perituberal cortex (PTC), right (R), spike wave (SW), years (y).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1 Perioperative MRI scans, photographs and electrocorticography (ECoG) of
patient 2, highlighting resection at age 2.8 years of the dysplastic and epileptogenic centre
of a left postcentral gyrus tuber causing negative motor seizures of the right arm and
epileptic spasms.
Preoperative (A and B) and postoperative (I and J) MRI scans in coronal (A and I) and axial
(B and J) planes are double inversion recovery sequences acquired at ages 2.8 and 5.8 years,
shown in anatomical orientation with the patient’s left side on the left, to correlate with the
preoperative (C and D) and postoperative (G and H) photos (C and G) and 3D surface-rendered
T1-weighted MRI images (D and H) in which the patient’s left side is on the left and midline
is on the right. The preoperative MRI scans (A and B) show thickened cortex with slightly
lower signal in the tuber centre, surrounded by high signal in the subcortical white matter of
the tuber rim. The preoperative photograph (C) shows the tuber in the postcentral gyrus,
identified by correlation of brain surface anatomy with the surface-rendered MRI (D) and
palpation, the tuber rim being outlined on the photos by green string and the tuber centre visible
as a slight depression. Pre-resection ECoG shown on a referential montage (F), recorded with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a 4-contact strip (10mm spacing) straddling the tuber (E), shows continuous, rhythmic spiking
at about 1 Hz frequency in the tuber centre contact 2, occasionally propagating to the tuber rim
contacts 1 and 3 but not the perituberal cortex contact 4 (F); depth electrode recording was
performed separately but was unnecessary, as the tuber centre was shallow and easily recorded
with the subdural strip as shown here. The postoperative photograph (G) shows resection of
the tuber centre, performed to the grey-white junction at the depth, with a small biopsy of the
tuber rim (white dotted circle). The postoperative MRI scans (H, I and J) show a small cavity
in the tuber centre surrounded by the high signal of the white matter in the remaining tuber rim.
Arrows indicate the tuber centre throughout.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2 Qualitative differences in dysmorphic neurons numbers identified in specimens
from the centre of cortical tubers compared to the rim.
Haemotoxylin and Eosin staining from paired biopsies taken from the rim and the centre of
cortical tubers demonstrate spatial differences in the laminal architecture and cellular
constituents within specimens. Specimens resected from the tuber centre also largely

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/621607; this version posted June 10, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

comprised of grey matter but demonstrated marked dyslamination with irregular clusters of
large, cytomegalic and dysmorphic neurons and balloon cells. Conversely, biopsy specimens
from the tuber rim largely comprised grey matter in which cortical lamination appeared
relatively normal, cytomegalic or dysmorphic neurons were rarely identified, and there was a
predominance of balloon cells. Scale bars are indicated.

Figure 3 The density of dysmorphic neurons is greater in the centre of the tuber.
(A) Representative images of anti-neurofilament protein immunohistochemistry staining the
dysmorphic neurons in tuber rim and tuber centre demonstrating a typically observed cluster
of dysmorphic neurons in the centre biopsy that were absent from the rim. Scale bars are
indicated. (B) Unbiased quantitative stereology determined the density of dysmorphic neurons
in the tuber centre was greater than the tuber rim. Patient 2 – green; Patient 3a – light blue;
Patient 3b – dark blue; patient 4 – red. Cell densities (expressed as cell number/mm3) on the
y-axis are compared between tuber rim and centre on the x-axis for each paired sample. Error
bars represent standard error of the mean.

