bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Title - Spatiotemporal control of gene expression
boundaries using a feedforward loop
Prasad U. Bandodkar1, Hadel Al Asafen1,2, and Gregory T. Reeves1,3*

1 - Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, North Carolina State University,
Raleigh, North Carolina, United States of America
2 - Current Address: Department of Chemical Engineering and Applied Chemistry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, CA
3 - Program in Genetics, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, United
States of America

Running Head – Coherent feedforward loops result in stable gene expression boundaries
* Corresponding author
Address for correspondence - 840 Main Campus Drive, Partners II Room 3100, Raleigh,
North Carolina, United States of America - 27606-5215.
Email: gtreeves@ncsu.edu
Telephone - +1(919) 513-7451

Grant Sponsor - NIH
Grant Number - R21HD092830

Keywords – Feed Forward Loop, Dorsal morphogen, Twist, Spatiotemporal dynamics, Zelda,
transcription factor, Drosophila embryo, Gene expression model

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
A feed forward loop (FFL) is commonly observed in several biological networks. The FFL
network motif has been mostly been studied with respect to variation of the input signal in
time, with only a few studies of FFL activity in a spatially distributed system such as
morphogen-mediated tissue patterning. However, most morphogen gradients also evolve in
time. We studied the spatiotemporal behavior of a coherent FFL in two contexts: (1) a
generic, oscillating morphogen gradient and (2) the dorsal-ventral patterning of the early
Drosophila embryo by a gradient of the NF-κB homolog Dorsal with its early target Twist. In
both models, we found features in the dynamics of the intermediate node – phase difference
and noise filtering – that were largely independent of the parameterization of the models, and
thus were functions of the structure of the FFL itself. In the Dorsal gradient model, we also
found that the dynamics of Dorsal require maternal pioneering factor Zelda for proper target
gene expression.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
In animal development, establishment of proper gene expression patterns within tissues is
crucial to the fatemap and fitness of the organism. As such, regulation of gene expression is
in place to ensure patterns are robust to perturbations in developmental conditions. While
development is initiated by maternal morphogen gradients, robust gene expression often
arises from the coordinated effort of several downstream transcription factors that are wired
together to form gene regulatory networks. These networks may be represented as graphs,
with genes represented by nodes and directed edges (arrows) representing direction of
regulatory interactions. In such a network, there are some patterns, called “network motifs,”
that seem to occur more frequently than others when compared with randomized networks.
In a motif described as a feed forward loop (FFL), transcription factor A regulates expression
of two targets, B and C (Fig. 1A). B also acts as a transcription factor for C and
transcriptional control is shared by both A and B. An FFL is called coherent (cFFL) when the
direct effect of A on C and the indirect effect of A on C via B has the same sign, while it is
called incoherent (iFFL) when the signs are opposite. These FFLs have been subjected to
extensive mathematical analysis, both generally and in the context of real biological networks
(Mangan and Alon, 2003; Mangan et al., 2003). However, these studies have been primarily
restricted to studying the dynamics of FFLs in time upon transient or sustained changes to the
input A. Since the FFL network motif occurs frequently and is found in several biological
networks, it was expected that the structure of the motif serve a specific purpose. Indeed,
cFFLs were found to delay the response of target genes to an increasing input (Mangan et al.,
2003). This implies that detectable response of targets is feasible only when there is a
sustained input signal and not when the signal is in short pulses. Such a mechanism would be
effective in buffering small-time scale variations in the input signal.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A smaller set of studies have analyzed the role of FFLs activated by morphogen gradients at
steady state in tissue patterning (Zinzen et al., 2006). However, the field of developmental
biology is discovering that morphogen gradients are rarely at steady state (DeLotto et al.,
2007; Gregor et al., 2007; Heemskerk et al., 2019; Nahmad and Stathopoulos, 2009; Reeves
et al., 2012; Ribes et al., 2010). Also, Sanger and Briscoe suggest that the level and duration
of a morphogen signal, that might differ at various tissue locations, in combination with a
network motif like an FFL can produce stable gene expression boundaries (Sagner and
Briscoe, 2017). As such, some studies have also focused on the role of FFLs when the
morphogen was varying both in space and time. Schaerli et al studied networks from the
standpoint of stripe formation. They connected networks with 3 nodes with all possible
combinations of regulation between them to predict stripe formation, and differentiated
possible stripe-forming network topologies on the basis of similar dynamical mechanisms
(Schaerli et al., 2014). They found that the minimal 3-node network to form stripes requires
the motif to be incoherent in nature. In this study we investigated the function of coherent
FFLs in both space and time to determine whether the cFFL could buffer gene expression
against a time-varying morphogen gradient.
We first analyzed a general, dynamic morphogen gradient, which we modeled as having
sinusoidal oscillations in time and an exponential decay in space (Fig. 1A). The generic
morphogen, A, activates a secondary transcription factor, B. The two transcription factors
then jointly activate the final target, C. We investigated whether the FFL may be more robust
than if regulation were controlled by the initial activator (A) independently. We found that,
under general conditions, the FFL indeed resulted in more stable (less oscillatory) gene
expression boundaries than if A alone were activating C. The results were observed under a
wide variety of parameter sets, indicating that the stabilization was a result of the structure of
an FFL, rather than specific values of parameters. In particular, the intermediate transcription
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

factor, B, had a modest phase difference from the oscillations in A, and furthermore, B
generally acted as a noise filter on the dynamics of A. Both attributes of B contributed to the
stabilization of C. After analysis of the generic morphogen model, we focused our analysis on
the particular example of patterning of the dorsal-ventral (DV) axis of the early Drosophila
melanogaster embryo by the morphogen Dorsal (Dl).
The Dl gradient has a bell-shaped distribution in space and is highly dynamic, with
oscillations that are underscored by the relatively rapid syncytial nuclear divisions (Fig.
1B,C; (DeLotto et al., 2007; Liberman et al., 2009; Reeves et al., 2012)). As has been shown
previously, the nuclear concentration of Dl varies significantly between nc 11 – nc 14
(Reeves et al., 2012), which, theoretically, may be incorrectly interpreted by the cells. It is
possible that a cFFL through twist (twi), which is an early, high threshold target of Dl and
codes for a transcription factor that activates gene expression with Dl, could potentially
buffer fluctuations to result in the observed stability and consistency of target gene
expression borders.
Several studies have indicated that genes expressed along the DV axis from the prospective
mesoderm to the prospective ectoderm may be jointly regulated by the coordinated effort of
Dl and Twi (Ip et al., 1992b, 1992a; Szymanski and Levine, 1995). Additionally, binding
sites of Dl and Twi have been found in close proximity in the regulatory regions of these
genes, suggesting that there could be synergistic interactions between the two proteins
(Levine and Papatsenko, 2002; Ozdemir et al., 2011). Expression of these Dl/Twi target
genes is limited to the ventral half of the embryo where the Dl and Twi gradients are active.
Type I genes, such as snail (sna) and twi itself, are expressed on the ventral 20% of the
embryo (Fig. 1D). Type II genes, such as rhomboid (rho), are repressed by Sna activity, and
have dorsal borders around 35% DV (Fig. 1D). Finally, Type III genes, such as brinker (brk),
are also repressed by Sna, but have domains that extend to roughly 50% DV (Fig. 1D).
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We used Dl expression data (Reeves et al., 2012) as inputs to a model of the Dl/Twi cFFL.
We modeled the expression of a target gene, C (Fig. 1B), which can have an expression
border anywhere from 20% DV to 50% DV, as true Dl/Twi target genes do. As with the
generic morphogen model, we investigated the stability of the gene expression border of the
final target in the presence and absence of an FFL. We first found that, as a result of the short
duration of nc 11-13, early activation of target genes was not possible. This problem also
affected twi, which ruled out its role in a presumptive FFL with Dl. However, it is known
experimentally that zygotic gene expression begins in nc 10 and observable gene expression
for twi is first observed in nc 12, localized to the 20% ventral-most nuclei (Alberga et al.,
1991; Jiang et al., 1991; Sandler and Stathopoulos, 2016; Thisse et al., 1988). Therefore, we
included in our model the activity of pioneer factor Zelda (Zld), which has been shown to
make enhancer regions accessible for transcription factors and to locally increase
transcription factor concentration at enhancer sites (Dufourt et al., 2018; Liang et al., 2008;
Mir et al., 2017; Nien et al., 2011; Yamada et al., 2019). A previous model of Zld activity
showed that cooperativity between Zld and Dl may help explain Dl-dependent gene
expression patterns (Kanodia et al., 2012).
After properly accounting for Zld activity, we found that, in the Dl/Twi system, in spite of the
irregular Dl gradient amplitudes and oscillation periods, the case where Dl and Twi act
together in an FFL outperforms the singular action of Dl. The observed stabilization in the
boundary of target genes was due to a phase difference in the Dl and Twi concentrations that
were largely independent of the parameter values characterizing the model. We also
examined a twi mutant case, in which the target gene, C, is designed to respond to both Dl
and Twi, yet Twi was absent. While the FFL often outperformed the twi mutant, shifting gene
expression ventrally in the twi mutant helped to artificially stabilize gene expression.
Together, the results of both the generic and the Dl/Twi models demonstrate that it is the
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

structure of a coherent FFL that buffers oscillations in an input signal that varies both in
space and time under variety of input conditions and parameter values.

Results
Generic morphogen gradient model
To study the effect of the cFFL on the dynamics of a morphogen system, we first investigated
a model in which a generic morphogen, A, stably oscillates (sinusoidally) in time and has an
exponential distribution in space (Fig. 1A, Fig. 2A,B; see Eqn 2 in Methods). The primary
transcription factor A activates B, the intermediate node in the FFL, so that the gene
expression border of B is located at roughly 20% tissue length (  0.2) on average (see
Methods). Through a combination of diffusion and degradation, the secondary transcription
factor B is also present in a concentration gradient, which varies slightly in time due to
oscillations in A. The gradient of B is determined by its diffusive length scale () and lifetime
(; see Eqn 3 in Methods). Due to the oscillations in A, one may expect the concentration of
B to also oscillate. However, the concentration profile of transcription factor B (simulated
with parameter values   0.1 and   10) appears largely stable in time, except near the
boundary of B expression (  0.2), where one might expect the profile of B to be the most
sensitive (Fig. 2C). The oscillations in B near

 0.2 are slightly out of phase with the

oscillations in A (Fig. 2D), which may potentially impart stability to downstream gene
expression.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We next analyzed the final target C, whose expression border in the absence of oscillations is
located at





(see Methods). We calculated the expression profile of C for two cases: (1)

the “A-only” case, when C is designed to be activated only by A, and (2) the “FFL” case,
when C is co-activated by A and B in an FFL. In both cases, the gene expression boundary of
C,

, oscillated in time due to the oscillations in A. However, by-eye it appeared that the

expression boundary oscillated with a smaller amplitude in the FFL case than in the A-only
case (compare Fig. 2E to F). To quantify whether the FFL stabilizes gene expression
compared to the A-only case, we took the ratio of the extent of oscillations between the two
cases (see Fig. 2G). If this ratio, which we call , is less than 1, the FFL results in more stable
boundaries. For the scenario shown in Fig. 2G, in which   0.1,   10, and
ratio is



 0.3, this

 0.45, which reflects the fact that the FFL visually results in oscillations with

smaller amplitude. One possible explanation would be the phase difference in the
concentrations of A and B, which can be seen clearly around the boundary of B and less
clearly elsewhere (see Fig 2D and Movie S1-3).
To determine whether the stabilizing effect of the FFL was general, or perhaps limited to the
particular choice of parameter values above, we calculated the metric
with borders between



for different genes

 0.2 and 0.5 while varying the parameters of the intermediate

node B. We first varied  (the diffusive length scale of B) and fixed the lifetime of B to be

  10. We found that the FFL stabilizes nearly all gene expression between
0.5 (i.e.,



 0.2 and

 1 for those genes), irrespective of how far B diffuses (Fig. 2H). However, with

the exception of the curve for



 0.2 which is very close to the boundary of B expression,

the FFL tends to stabilize gene expression more when B is able to diffuse further. This
implies that, a higher diffusive length scale of B results in better regulation of targets farther
away. Thus, in the generic model, the FFL will almost always stabilize gene expression
boundaries as long as the secondary transcription factor can diffuse to those boundaries.
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Since the tissue length is scaled to vary from 0 to 1, a value of   0.1 is a reasonable
choice for diffusive length scale of B, as it corresponds to a concentration gradient that
extends roughly half-way around the tissue to include the domain of 0.2 



 0.5 (Fig.

S1).
Thus, holding   0.1, we next varied the lifetime, , to determine its effect on the stabilizing
role of the FFL. We found that for small values of , the FFL does little to improve on the
independent action of transcription factor A (i.e.,
each gene curve of

 1 Fig. 2I). As the value of  increases,

as a function of  drops below

 1, and approaches a minimum

before becoming flat. Since the oscillation period of A is 2π, the lifetime of the intermediate
node must be on roughly the same time scale or longer for the FFL to realize stable
expression borders. If the lifetime of B is too short, the gradient of B simply oscillates with
A, in phase. Once the lifetime of B is on the same scale as the oscillation period of A, B can
act as a noise filter to stabilize gene expression boundaries. Much longer lifetimes also
provide this benefit but may not be biologically realistic. This effect of  is also illustrated
visually in the normalized expression profiles of A, B and, C in the two models, namely Aonly and FFL, plotted after the initial transients have decayed (see Movie S1 compared to
Movie S3). We conclude that there is a reasonably wide range of diffusive length scales and
protein lifetimes that result in stable gene expression boundaries, due in part to the phase
differences between A and B and the noise-filtering of B (see also Fig. S2).

The effect of Zelda on the Dorsal gradient and twist expression
After finding that, generally, the cFFL stabilizes gene expression boundaries in the face of a
generic, oscillating morphogen, we then analyzed a model based upon experimentally
obtained spatio-temporal data of Dl as the primary transcription factor (see Figs. 3A,B;
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Reeves et al., 2012)). Unlike the generic morphogen, the oscillations of the Dl gradient do
not have a regular period, even though they achieve limited oscillations due to syncytial
nuclear divisions. During interphase, the amplitude of the Dl gradient constantly increases,
then sharply decreases during mitosis. Moreover, the average amplitude within each
interphase progressively increases from one nuclear cycle to the next, whether it be from each
nuclear cycle being longer than the one prior, or some memory of previous state (Fig 3A,B).
The highest levels of Dl are observed at the end of nc 14 interphase, which lasts about four
times longer than the previous three nuclear cycle interphases (Fig 3B). Even so, the Dl
gradient does not fully attain steady state by the end of nc 14. These precise dynamics are
problematic for models of gene expression (O’Connell and Reeves, 2015; Reeves et al.,
2012).
In the Dl gradient system, twi is activated by Dl (Fig. 3C) and together, Dl and Twi act in a
cFFL (Ip et al., 1992b, 1992a; Szymanski and Levine, 1995). twi is expressed on the ventral
20% of the embryo (



 0.2), and Twi protein has been detected as early as late nc 12

(Alberga et al., 1991; Jiang et al., 1991; Sandler and Stathopoulos, 2016; Thisse et al., 1988).
However, when we used the published Dl gradient data (Reeves et al., 2012) as the input to
our gene expression model for twi (see Eqn 6 in Methods), the simulated twi activation was
delayed until late nc 13 (Fig 3D). This delay resulted in insignificant Twi levels, compared to
Dl levels, until mid-nc 14 at almost all relevant values of the DV coordinate (see Fig. S3). In
our simulations, we found that the delayed activation of Twi rendered it practically
ineffective as a collaborator in the FFL with Dl. In order to resolve the inconsistency in
experimental observations and our gene expression model, we included the effect of the
ubiquitous and pioneer maternal factor Zelda (Zld) (Liang et al., 2008; Nien et al., 2011; Sun
et al., 2015).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Zld cooperatively interacts with Dl by enhancing its activity near the cis-regulatory modules
(CRMs) of DV genes (Foo et al., 2014; Kanodia et al., 2012; Yamada et al., 2019). The
cooperative effect of Zld on Dl has been previously modeled as an effective increase in the
affinity of Dl for its DNA binding site (Kanodia et al., 2012). The increase in affinity could
equivalently be seen as an increase in the effective Dl concentration by a factor  :



 

 . The factor  is given by:


where 

1   ⁄
1  ⁄

,

(1)

refers to the DNA binding affinity of Zld and  is a measure of Zld cooperativity

with Dl. Thus, a high Zld binding affinity (low 

) or high cooperativity (high ) leads to

an increase in the effective Dl concentration, which leads to an increase in the activity of the
regulatory region.
It is also important to note that Zld is a maternal protein that decays almost completely by the
end of nc 14 (Fig. 3E), by which time transcription is entirely regulated by zygotic
transcription factors. Dl levels on the other hand, have the steepest increase in concentrations
in nc 14. It is expected that the effect of increasing levels of the graded factor Dl is offset by
decreasing levels of the ubiquitous factor Zld, resulting in stable gene expression domains
(Kanodia et al., 2012).
When we include cooperative interactions between Dl and Zld in the model (Fig. 3E), twi
expression occurs earlier, at nc 12, which is consistent with experimental observations (Fig.
3F). Furthermore, the earlier expression of twi allows sufficient time for Twi levels to
accumulate to enhance the performance of the FFL. An additional effect of Zld is to stabilize
the Dl gradient: in the presence of Zld, the effective concentration of Dl in nc 13 becomes
comparable to that in nc 14 (Fig. 3F; compare to Fig. 3D). There is a wide range of Zld model
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

parameters (i.e, binding affinities and cooperativity) for which Dl activity in nc 13 and 14 are
roughly similar (see Fig. S3).

Downstream gene expression in the Dorsal/Twist/Zelda model
Given that Twi levels adequately represent experimental measurements when Zld is
accounted for, we next simulated the dynamics of the output gene, C, which has a final
expression border located at



,

(see Methods). We chose the value of

,

to lie

between 0.2 and 0.5, where most Dl/Twi targets lie (Fig. 1D) and analyzed two cases similar
to those in the generic model. In the first case (“Dl-only”; Fig. 4A(i)), the output gene, C, is
hypothetically designed to only be activated by Dl. In the second case (“wildtype FFL”; Fig.
4A(ii)), C is regulated by both Dl and Twi, similar to the enhancer structure of many Dl
target genes. Since Zld is a pioneer factor, it acts on both transcription factors Dl and Twi.
In both cases (Dl-only and wildtype), the C expression profile varies in time in response to
the varying concentrations of transcription factors Dl and Twi (Figs. 4B,C). Typically, the
expression boundary of C – where the profile of C is half-max (Fig. 4B,C) – evolves rapidly
from

~ 0.1

0.2 at the start of nc 11 to ~

,

by the end of nc 13, which occurs around

 30 minutes (Fig. 4D). Gene expression boundaries then oscillate around

,

in both

cases through nc 14. To measure which case (Dl-only vs. FFL) results in more stability in nc
14, we once again calculated the ratio

(see annotation in Fig. 4D). For the parameters

chosen in the simulations in Fig. 4B-D (see Methods), we found that the FFL case had less
variability than Dl-only case (  0.74  1).
To investigate the mechanism by which the FFL may stabilize gene expression boundaries,
we analyzed the dynamics of Dl and Twi in the FFL case. Within the first 20 minutes of nc
14, Dl concentrations are initially low, then increase rapidly. However, during this time
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

window, Twi is not being produced due to the low Dl levels. Thus, as Dl levels are rising,
Twi levels are falling (highlighted region in Fig 4E), which stabilizes the activation signal
(Eqn 9; Fig 4E). This stabilizing effect can be seen by comparing the behavior of the C
expression border for the two cases: between ~35 – ~45 min, the expression border of C
controlled by Dl-only fluctuates much more than the expression border of C controlled by the
FFL (highlighted region in Fig. 4D).
To determine whether stabilization by Twi can be achieved with a wide range of parameter
values, we varied the affinity of Zld for DNA, 

, and the diffusive length scale of Twi,

λ  . The lifetime of early zygotic patterning proteins has been experimentally measured to
be around 10 minutes (Boettiger and Levine, 2013; Reeves et al., 2012); therefore we set

   10 min. Theoretically, the higher the cooperativity between Zld and Dl, the more
influence Zld has on the Dl system. We found that as the value of cooperativity was
increased,

generally decreased (see Fig. 4F and Fig. S4). Hence, we chose an intermediate

value of   30, for further analysis of the model.
When we varied the diffusive length scale of Twi (), setting 
ratio

 1, we found that the

generally achieves a minimum at intermediate ranges of , with the exception of

targets close to the domain of Twi (Fig. 4G). The minimum in

occurs at higher values of 

for gene expression domains further away from the Twi boundary and lower values of  for
domains closer to the Twi boundary. In other words, in order for the Twi FFL to affect genes
far from the ventral midline, the Twi diffusive length scale must be long. However, a longer
length scale is detrimental to genes closer to the ventral midline, likely because this spreads
Twi too thinly. Given this result, and the fact that the Twi gradient does not appear to extend
to the dorsal midline (Bothma et al., 2018; Zinzen et al., 2006), we expect that   0.1 is a
reasonable estimate of the diffusive strength of Twi.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We then varied the binding affinity of Zld (



) and found the ratio

 3 for all genes (Fig. 4H). To determine why

has a minimum near

as a function of 

would have a

minimum, we analyzed how the dynamic behavior of  , the factor that modulates the
effective Dl and Twi concentrations (Eqn 1), depends on 
(

. If the affinity of Zld is too low

too high), then the Zld binding is so low that it only weakly modulates the effective Dl

concentration (i.e.,  # 1 across nc 11-14; green curve in Fig. 4I). Similarly, if the affinity is
too high (

too low), then the DNA is always saturated with Zld, even when Zld reaches

its lowest level at the end of nc 14 (i.e.,  #  across nc 11-14; blue curve in Fig. 4I). In
either case, a constant value of  occurs, which implies that the effective concentrations of Dl
and Twi, given by  and $%& respectively, are not appreciably modulated in time, and
the beneficial effects of Zld (Fig. 3F) are not realized (see Eqn 10, Methods). On the other
hand, if 

is of order 1, the dynamic range of  across nc 11-14 is maximized. This is

because the normalized concentration of Zld is roughly order 1: it is a constant 1 from nc 10
through the end of nc 13, then decreases to 0.2 by the end of nc 14. In order to counteract the
rapid increase in the Dl concentration in nc 14, the effect of Zld must respond by decreasing
in magnitude so that the activity remains stable. This occurs when the binding affinity of Zld
is of order 1.

twi-mutant model
In our above analysis, we analyzed two cases: the Dl-only case and the wildtype (FFL) case,
in which both Dl and Twi regulate C. Since twi mutants (Fig. 5A(i)) represent an
experimentally attainable model, herein we include a similar analysis comparing the
performance of the twi mutant to that of the FFL case (see Fig. 5A). It should be noted that
the Dl-only case is not a twi mutant; it is a hypothetical construct wherein C is designed to

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

only respond to Dl. Thus, the primary difference between the Dl-only case and the twi
mutant is that in the former, Dl is both necessary and sufficient to independently place gene
expression boundary at

, ,

whereas in the latter, the loss of Twi results in a ventral shift in

gene expression boundary.
In our analysis, we found that in many cases, wildtype gene expression boundaries were more
stable than those in the twi mutant (Fig. 5B). It should be noted that, since the final
expression boundaries for the wildtype vs. twi mutant cases are different, we slightly
modified our metric

(see Methods for details).

To determine whether our observation – that the FFL stabilizes gene expression with respect
to the twi mutant case – is general, we varied the Twi diffusive length scale, the affinity of
Zld, and the cooperative strength of Zld. Similar to our comparison of Dl-alone vs the
wildtype FFL, we found that with increasing cooperativity between Zld and Dl, the value of
generally decreased for all values of

, .

Therefore, we set an intermediate value of   30

for further analysis (see Fig. 5C and Fig. S5). We also found that genes further away from the
ventral midline are benefitted by longer diffusive length scales, and vice versa (Fig 5D).
However, the curves were generally shifted upwards (compare curves in Fig. 5D to those in
Fig. 4G), which perhaps surprisingly implies that the twi mutant is slightly more stable than
the Dl-alone case. We also found similar behavior of

as a function of 

(Fig. 5E; cf Fig.

4H) and of  (Fig. 5C; cf Fig. 4F), each with the added upward shift. In general, regulation
by Dl/Twi FFL appears to be more stable than regulation by Dl in twi mutants, which in turn
is more stable than regulation by Dl when it acts independently. The exceptions are genes
close to the twi expression boundary, which are almost always more stable in twi mutants
than in wildtype, unless the Twi diffusion length is very short (Fig. 5D). Besides those
exceptions, the general behavior may be attributed to the ventral shift of gene expression in

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

twi mutants, which places gene expression in regions of steeper Dl gradient slope. A steeper
slope implies that variation in Dl concentration can be absorbed better, in that the location
where Dl achieves a given threshold has less variation (Reeves et al., 2012). This effect is
prominent closer to the ventral midline and wanes away from it, as binding affinities become
similar.

Discussion
Feedforward loops are one of the most commonly-found – and extensively-studied – motifs
in a wide variety of biological networks, such as transcription factor networks, metabolic
pathway networks, gene regulatory networks, signaling networks etc. (Davidson et al., 2002;
Duggan et al., 1998; Mangan et al., 2003; Schmitz et al., 2011; Shen-Orr et al., 2002; Sunaga
et al., 2019).

Most quantitative, theoretical, or computational studies of FFL function have

focused on purely time-varying systems, such as single-cell organisms, although a handful of
studies have introduced a spatial component (Hironaka and Morishita, 2012; Schaerli et al.,
2014) . In this work, we have analyzed the function of a coherent FFL in a non-steady-state,
spatially-distributed morphogen system. First, we used a model with a generic morphogen to
show the versatility of an FFL. Next, we used spatiotemporal data of Dl in the early
Drosophila embryo as the primary morphogen in a realistic model to extend the analysis of
FFLs to a real biological network. In both cases, we find that there are viable regions in the
parameter space of both models that make an FFL network motif a robust choice for
development.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In the generic morphogen gradient model, we found that the effectiveness of the FFL was
largely independent of the parameters of the model. From previous analyses of coherent
FFLs, primarily in well-mixed systems, we would expect that small fluctuations in the
gradient of the primary morphogen would be buffered by the intermediate node (Mangan and
Alon, 2003). A wide range of time and length scales were explored in the model and in
almost all cases, regulation by an FFL resulted in robust expression boundaries, in the sense
of lesser oscillations over time, throughout the tissue domain. We found that two aspects in
particular contributed to the increased stability in the output gene. Most importantly, the
lifetime of the intermediate transcription factor was required to be roughly as long as (or
longer than) the fluctuations in the input transcription factor. This fact allowed the
intermediate to smooth out the fluctuations in the input, roughly acting as a noise-filtering
mechanism. Second, the output gene could be more stabilized if the fluctuations in the
intermediate were shifted slightly out of phase with the input fluctuations. In this case, the
oscillations in the intermediate would somewhat cancel out the oscillations in the input.
Given that these two aspects arise in our system under a wide range of parameter values, the
superior performance of the spatiotemporal FFL can be attributed to the structure of the
network motif rather than a result of any particular choice of model parameters.
We extended this model to use the dynamic profile of Venus-tagged Dl as the primary
morphogen and included the dynamics of the target gene in a more realistic model (Reeves et
al., 2012). The major oscillations in the Dl gradient are due to nuclear divisions, and, unlike
in the generic model, these divisions are limited in time (only four nuclear divisions occur in
the relevant stage) and do not have a regular, repeated period. The last nuclear cycle is about
four times longer than the previous nuclear cycle and a substantial increase in the
concentration of Dl is observed. The growing amplitude, limited number of oscillations, and
short duration of nc 10-13 interphases implied that, prior to nc 14, gene expression may be
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

limited. Indeed, when we used the Dl/Twi FFL to place the domains of target genes, we
observed that expression levels of all Dl targets, including that of the intermediate node of the
FFL, Twi, were insignificant until nc 14. This problem had been observed in previous models
that tried to simulate gene expression domains of Dl targets and could not explain the lack of
expression in the previous nuclear cycles (O’Connell and Reeves, 2015; Reeves et al., 2012).
However, gene expression for many Dl targets has been experimentally observed as early as
nc 12 (Liang et al., 2008; Nien et al., 2011; Ozdemir et al., 2011; Sandler and Stathopoulos,
2016; Sandmann et al., 2007). The ubiquitous pioneer factor Zld has been shown to
coordinate the temporal activation of transcription by binding to DNA as early as nc 2 (Nien
et al., 2011). In Zld mutant embryos, several genes either fail to activate or are delayed, with
some showing sporadic expression. In addition, Zld binding sites have been found in large
numbers near transcription start sites of several of these genes as well as near their enhancer
modules (Nien et al., 2011; Sun et al., 2015). Zld has also been known to increase the local
concentration of patterning transcription factors such as Bcd and Dl, thus effectively
increasing its local activity (Dufourt et al., 2018; Mir et al., 2017; Yamada et al., 2019).
Considering these known effects of Zld, we decided that Zld was a crucial and well-founded
missing piece of our model.
The role of Zld in early transcriptional activation was seen due to an increase in the activity
of Dl in earlier nuclear cycles, allowing twi to be expressed in late nc 12 (see Fig. 3D,F).
Furthermore, the role of Zld in stabilizing target gene expression occurs due to opposite
trends in Zld and Dl concentrations in nc 14. The rapid increase in Dl concentrations in nc 14
was counteracted by a decrease in the concentration of Zld, resulting in a relatively stable
activation signal, which translated to stable gene expression (see Fig. 3D,F,). These two
effects, coupled together, resulted in early gene expression that was more stable than the case
when effects of Zld were not included.
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

As with the generic model, the stability of gene expression borders can be at least partially
attributed to the phase difference between Dl and Twi oscillations: at the onset of nc 14, Dl
levels are increasing while Twi levels are decreasing. This results from the fact that, at the
boundary between nc 13 and 14, the Dl gradient sharply decreases in amplitude, which
momentarily halts Twi production. Thus, the FFL activation signal is only partly disturbed
due to the mitosis event between nc 13 and 14, due to lag in the response of Twi. This phase
difference fades later in nc 14 when both Dl levels continue to increase, and production of
Twi resumes. The degree to which Twi levels declined at the onset of nc 14 was dependent
on the specific values of the model parameters, but the duration was largely independent of
the parameters chosen. Therefore, this phase difference, and thus the robustness of the FFLdependent gene expression, is mainly determined by the wiring of the network motif itself.
Given the stability of gene expression that is imparted to the system by the FFL, one would
expect twi mutants to be less stable than wildtype. Indeed, literature shows that the border of
sna is less well-defined in twi mutant embryos, which could imply a less stable sna border (Ip
et al., 1992b). While the model does in fact predict that some DV gene expression in twi
mutants is less stable, the increased sensitivity is not as great as one might expect. In fact, the
twi mutant case outperformed the Dl-only case. This is possibly due to the fact that gene
expression is shifted ventrally in twi mutants (i.e., a gene with a border located at 0.3 in the
wildtype FFL case may shift to 0.25 in the twi mutant). More ventral positions experience a
steeper Dl gradient slope, which in turn intrinsically imparts more robustness to gene border
locations with respect to fluctuations in morphogen concentration (Reeves et al., 2012). The
end result is that some of the increase in sensitivity due to loss of Twi activity is partially
counterbalanced by the ventral shift in the gene of interest. Even so, the model predicts that,
for reasonable ranges of parameter values, twi mutants would indeed have more dynamic

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

gene expression borders. This prediction could be tested by quantitative imaging of Dl-target
gene dynamics in live, twi mutant embryos.
Coherent FFLs have been shown to buffer abrupt changes in the input signal (Mangan and
Alon, 2003). We observed this phenomenon under general conditions in both the generic,
oscillating morphogen model and in our Dl/Twi/Zld model, where abrupt changes in the
morphogen concentration of Dl, due to mitosis events, are buffered by Twi, ensuring that the
activation signal perceived by the target genes is stable. We predict that other dynamic,
morphogen-mediated systems may have cFFLs that stabilize gene expression borders.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Methods
Generic morphogen model details
In this model the primary morphogen A, was treated as a generic transcription factor, whose
protein concentration oscillates sinusoidally in time and decays exponentially along a single
spatial dimension which is varied from 0 to 1:

' ,

 exp +

,

- . sin

(2)

2 .

In our model, we chose ,  0.2, .  0.1, and 2  1. The primary morphogen activates the
secondary transcription factor B at a threshold that, on average, corresponds to a gene

 0.2. The dynamics of the intermediate node B is described by the

expression border at

following differential equation,

3 1    3
 4
5 ,
 



(3)

36 ,

where [B] refers to protein concentration of B,  represents diffusion constant of B, τ
represents lifetime of B and 5 ,

is a smoothened step activation function which activates

expression for a threshold in A that corresponds, on average, to

 0.2.

Either A alone, or both A and B together, activate(s) the output target gene (C).The gene
expression border of C,
chosen to vary between

,

was defined as the location of the border when .  0, and was

 0.2 and

 0.5. The location of B was chosen to roughly

coincide with location of the boundary of Twist in the DV axis of the early Drosophila
embryo. We evaluated the stability of the gene expression border of C in two cases – 1).
When protein A independently controls the expression border of gene C (“A-only”), and 2).

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

when the gene expression border of C is jointly regulated by A and B using OR-gate logic in
a feed forward loop (“FFL”).
The concentration profile of target C, in the A-only case is described by the following Hill
function,

8  9  9

'⁄ 
1  '⁄

(4)


and in the FFL case is described using an FFL with OR-gate logic as follows,

8 9  9

'⁄   3⁄   '⁄  3⁄ 
1  '⁄   3⁄   '⁄  3⁄

(5)


where  represents binding affinity of factor & to the enhancer regions of :. The affinities

 and  were set equal to each other and were tuned so that
value between



would take on a chosen

 0.2 and  0.5 at  100 min.

Dl/Twi/Zld model details
In this model, we replaced the generic morphogen with experimentally derived expression
data from Venus-tagged Dl (Reeves et al., 2012). The simulation was run for the length of the
time period between nc 10 and nc 14, which was roughly 80 minutes. The spatial dimension
is scaled to vary between 0 and 1, extending from the ventral to the dorsal midline. As with
the generic morphogen model, Dl activates Twi and several other targets, referred to herein as
C.
We evaluated the stability of the gene expression border of C in two cases – 1). When Dl
protein independently controls the expression border of C (“Dl-only”), and 2). when the gene

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expression border of C is jointly regulated by Dl and Twi using OR-gate logic in a feed
forward loop (“wildtype FFL”).
The dynamics of Twi is described by the following differential equation,

1
$%&
  $%&


4
5 ,
 
 


(6)

$%&6,

where [Twi] refers to a lumped variable of the mRNA or protein concentration of Twi, 
represents diffusion constant of Twi,  represents lifetime of Twi, and 5

,

is a

smoothened step activation function which activates Twi at a threshold of Dl that corresponds
to roughly

 0.2 at the end of the simulation (end of nc 14). Dynamics of C is incorporated

in this model, which is given by the following differential equation,

8 1
; ,




(7)

8 ,

where [C] refers to mRNA concentration of C,  refers to the lifetime of C and ; ,

is the

activation function given by the following Hill function,

;   , 9  9

⁄  
1  ⁄ 

(8)


when the dynamics are controlled independently by Dl, and by the following Hill function

;  , 9
9

(9)

⁄    $%&⁄   ⁄   $%&⁄ 
1  ⁄    $%&⁄   ⁄   $%&⁄

23



bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

when dynamics are controlled by a Dl-Twi FFL governed by OR gate logic. The affinities,

  and  , were set to be equal. The affinities were tuned so that the expression
boundary for C,

, would take on a chosen value,

, ,

between

 0.2 and

 0.5 if

the final Dl gradient and Zld concentration at the end of nc 14 were held constant and both
Twi and C came to steady state.. Note that, by definition, the value of binding affinity  
would be different in the two cases.
We included the effect of ubiquitous factor Zld that has the following variation in time,

  <

where, @ is a constant and



=

1

భర 


>

 ?


,

(10)

is the time of the beginning of nc 14. The value of @ was

chosen so that  reached 0.2 by the end of nc 14. Zld influences the activity of Dl by
changing its effective concentration to , where  is as defined in Eqn 1.

twi mutant case
The twi mutant case had the same formulation as the Dl-only case; however, the binding
affinity,   , in the twi mutant model was set to be equal to that in the wildtype FFL case.
In the FFL case, the binding affinity was tuned, together with  , to ensure the gene
expression boundary was placed at

,

(see above). In the twi mutant case, Twi activity is

lost, but the Dl binding affinity remains the same, which ensures that gene expression in the
twi mutant would be shifted ventrally as compared to the wildtype FFL case (i.e.,

,

is

different between the two cases). This is in contrast to the comparison between the Dl-only
case and the wildtype FFL case, in which the binding affinities are intentionally different
between the two cases so that

,

is held the same.
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

In addition, since the final gene expression boundary location in the twi mutant case is
different from the FFL case, we use the following metric to compare stability of oscillations
in the boundary –

ρ

such that, F  G  

B∆ D  E
B∆ D  E

(11)
 



,

25

!"

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figures

Figure 1. Introduction to the models. A. Schematic figure depicting the generic morphogen
gradient model. The inset shows the variation of the concentration of the primary
transcription factor A in space and time. B. Schematic figure depicting the Dl/Twi/Zld model.
The inset shows the variation of the concentration of the primary transcription factor Dl in
space and time. The peaks in the Dl gradient amplitude in time correspond to nuclear cycles
11-14. C. Fluorescence image of an anti-Dl immunostaining in a cross-sectioned embryo at
nuclear cycle 14. D. Fluorescence image showing brk and rho, two genes with expression
borders between 20% - 50% DV length. Domain of twi and sna expression annotated in
white. Expression of rho on the dorsal 10% of the embryo is not Dorsal-dependent.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2. Generic morphogen gradient model. A. The enhancer module of C regulated by (i).
A-only and by (ii) Feed Forward Loop (FFL). B. Variation of the concentration of primary
transcription factor A in time, plotted at different values of

. C. Variation of the

concentration of intermediate node B in time, plotted at different values of . D. There is a
slight phase difference between the concentration curves of A and B. This plot shows the
variation of concentration of the intermediate node around its boundary (at
against A, where the curves of A are representative of A at

 0.2) plotted

 0.2 that have been moved

along the y axis to show the phase difference. E. Normalized concentration profile of C in the
A-only case plotted after the initial transients have died. F. Normalized concentration profile
of C in the FFL case plotted after the initial transients have died. Arrows in E and F highlight
the extent of variation in space of the half-max of gene expression. G. Variation in the
boundary of C against time for both cases. H. Variation of the extent of oscillations
at different values of
of



I. Variation of the extent of oscillations

.

28

with 

with  at different values

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Effect of Zelda on the Dorsal gradient and Twist expression. A. Normalized Dl
intensities as obtained from Venus-tagged Dl (Reeves et al., 2012) varying in space at the end
of nuclear cycle 11 - 14. B. Normalized Dl intensities varying with time at different values of
. C. Schematic of the enhancer module of twi where Dl activates twi. D. Dl and Twi
concentration curves at

 0.3 for parameters   0.1 and   10. E. Schematic of the

enhancer module of twi where Zld potentiates the activity of Dl and activates twi. Inset shows
the dynamics of Zld concentration over time. F. Effective Dl concentration, as a result of Zld,
and Twi concentration curves at

 0.3 for parameters   0.1 and   10.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Effect of Dl-Twi FFL in the full model. A. The enhancer module of C regulated by
(i). Dl-only and by (ii) Feed Forward Loop (FFL). Both cases include the effect of Zld. B.
Normalized concentration profile of C in the Dl-only case plotted from ~5 minutes into nc 14
till the beginning of gastrulation (~80 min) C. Normalized concentration profile of C in the
wildtype FFL case plotted from ~5 minutes into nc 14 till the beginning of gastrulation (~80
min). D. Variation in the boundary of C against time for both cases. E. Effective Dl and Twi
concentration curves along with the Activation signal (see Eqn 9) at
the extent of oscillations
oscillations
with 

with  at different values of

with  at different values of

at different values of

different values of 

,

,

,

 0.3. F. Variation of

G. Variation of the extent of

H. Variation of the extent of oscillations

I. Variation of the effect of Zld (see Eqn. 1) in time at

.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. Effect of Dl-Twi FFL in the twi mutant model. A. The enhancer module of C in the
case of (i). twi mutant and (ii) wildtype FFL. Both cases include the effect of Zld. B.
Variation in the boundary of C against time for both cases. The extent of variation is
normalized by the final value of
different values of
of

,

,



. C. Variation of the extent of oscillations

D. Variation of the extent of oscillations

E. Variation of the extent of oscillations

33

with 

with  at

with  at different values

at different values of

,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Alberga, A., Boulay, J.L., Kempe, E., Dennefeld, C., and Haenlin, M. (1991). The snail gene
required for mesoderm formation in Drosophila is expressed dynamically in derivatives of all
three germ layers. Development 111, 983–992.
Boettiger, A.N., and Levine, M. (2013). Rapid Transcription Fosters Coordinate snail
Expression in the Drosophila Embryo. Cell Rep. 3, 8–15.
Bothma, J.P., Norstad, M.R., Alamos, S., and Garcia, H.G. (2018). LlamaTags: A Versatile
Tool to Image Transcription Factor Dynamics in Live Embryos. Cell 173, 1810-1822.e16.
Davidson, E.H., Rast, J.P., Oliveri, P., Ransick, A., Calestani, C., Yuh, C.-H., Minokawa, T.,
Amore, G., Hinman, V., Arenas-Mena, C., et al. (2002). A provisional regulatory gene
network for specification of endomesoderm in the sea urchin embryo. Dev. Biol. 246, 162–
190.
DeLotto,

R.,

DeLotto,

Y.,

Steward,

R.,

and

Lippincott-Schwartz,

J.

(2007).

Nucleocytoplasmic shuttling mediates the dynamic maintenance of nuclear Dorsal levels
during Drosophila embryogenesis. Development 134, 4233–4241.
Dufourt, J., Trullo, A., Hunter, J., Fernandez, C., Lazaro, J., Dejean, M., Morales, L., NaitAmer, S., Schulz, K.N., Harrison, M.M., et al. (2018). Temporal control of gene expression
by the pioneer factor Zelda through transient interactions in hubs. Nat. Commun. 9, 5194.
Duggan, A., Ma, C., and Chalfie, M. (1998). Regulation of touch receptor differentiation by
the Caenorhabditis elegans mec-3 and unc-86 genes. Development 125.
Foo, S.M., Sun, Y., Lim, B., Ziukaite, R., O’Brien, K., Nien, C.Y., Kirov, N., Shvartsman,
S.Y., and Rushlow, C.A. (2014). Zelda potentiates morphogen activity by increasing
chromatin accessibility. Curr. Biol. 24, 1341–1346.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Gregor, T., Wieschaus, E.F., McGregor, A.P., Bialek, W., and Tank, D.W. (2007). Stability
and nuclear dynamics of the Bicoid morphogen gradient. Cell 130, 141–152.
Heemskerk, I., Burt, K., Miller, M., Chhabra, S., Guerra, M.C., Liu, L., and Warmflash, A.
(2019). Rapid changes in morphogen concentration control self-organized patterning in
human embryonic stem cells. Elife 8.
Hironaka, K. ichi, and Morishita, Y. (2012). Encoding and decoding of positional information
in morphogen-dependent patterning. Curr. Opin. Genet. Dev. 22, 553–561.
Ip, Y.T., Park, R.E., Kosman, D., Bier, E., and Levine, M. (1992a). The dorsal gradient
morphogen regulates stripes of rhomboid expression in the presumptive neuroectoderm of the
Drosophila embryo. Genes Dev. 6, 1728–1739.
Ip, Y.T., Park, R.E., Kosman, D., Yazdanbakhsh, K., and Levine, M. (1992b). dorsal-twist
interactions establish snail expression in the presumptive mesoderm of the Drosophila
embryo. Genes Dev. 6, 1518–1530.
Jiang, J., Kosman, D., Ip, Y.T., and Levine, M. (1991). The dorsal morphogen gradient
regulates the mesoderm determinant twist in early Drosophila embryos. Genes Dev. 5, 1881–
1891.
Kanodia, J.S., Liang, H.L., Kim, Y., Lim, B., Zhan, M., Lu, H., Rushlow, C.A., and
Shvartsman, S.Y. (2012). Pattern formation by graded and uniform signals in the early
Drosophila embryo. Biophys. J. 102, 427–433.
Levine, M., and Papatsenko, D. (2002). Exploiting transcription factor binding site clustering
to identify cis-regulatory modules involved in pattern formation in the Drosophila genome.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99, 757–762.
Liang, H.-L., Nien, C.-Y., Liu, H.-Y., Metzstein, M.M., Kirov, N., and Rushlow, C. (2008).
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The zinc-finger protein Zelda is a key activator of the early zygotic genome in Drosophila.
Nature 456, 400–403.
Liberman, L.M., Reeves, G.T., and Stathopoulos, A. (2009). Quantitative imaging of the
Dorsal nuclear gradient reveals limitations to threshold-dependent patterning in Drosophila.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 106, 22317–22322.
Mangan, S., and Alon, U. (2003). Structure and function of the feed-forward loop network
motif. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 100, 11980–11985.
Mangan, S., Zaslaver, A., and Alon, U. (2003). The Coherent Feedforward Loop Serves as a
Sign-sensitive Delay Element in Transcription Networks. J. Mol. Biol. 334, 197–204.
Mir, M., Reimer, A., Haines, J.E., Li, X.Y., Stadler, M., Garcia, H., Eisen, M.B., and
Darzacq, X. (2017). Dense bicoid hubs accentuate binding along the morphogen gradient.
Genes Dev. 31, 1784–1794.
Munteanu, A., Cotterell, J., Solé, R. V., and Sharpe, J. (2014). Design principles of stripeforming motifs: The role of positive feedback. Sci. Rep. 4.
Nahmad, M., and Stathopoulos, A. (2009). Dynamic Interpretation of Hedgehog Signaling in
the Drosophila Wing Disc. PLoS Biol. 7, e1000202.
Nien, C.Y., Liang, H.L., Butcher, S., Sun, Y., Fu, S., Gocha, T., Kirov, N., Manak, J.R., and
Rushlow, C. (2011). Temporal coordination of gene networks by Zelda in the early
Drosophila embryo. PLoS Genet.
O’Connell, M.D., and Reeves, G.T. (2015). The presence of nuclear cactus in the early
drosophila embryo may extend the dynamic range of the dorsal gradient. PLoS Comput. Biol.
11, e1004159.
Ozdemir, A., Fisher-Aylor, K.I., Pepke, S., Samanta, M., Dunipace, L., McCue, K., Zeng, L.,
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Ogawa, N., Wold, B.J., and Stathopoulos, A. (2011). High resolution mapping of Twist to
DNA in Drosophila embryos: Efficient functional analysis and evolutionary conservation.
Genome Res. 21, 566–577.
Reeves, G.T., Trisnadi, N., Truong, T. V, Nahmad, M., Katz, S., and Stathopoulos, A. (2012).
Dorsal-ventral gene expression in the Drosophila embryo reflects the dynamics and precision
of the dorsal nuclear gradient. Dev. Cell 22, 544–557.
Ribes, V., Balaskas, N., Sasai, N., Cruz, C., Dessaud, E., Cayuso, J., Tozer, S., Yang, L.L.,
Novitch, B., Marti, E., et al. (2010). Distinct Sonic Hedgehog signaling dynamics specify
floor plate and ventral neuronal progenitors in the vertebrate neural tube. Genes Dev. 24,
1186–1200.
Sagner, A., and Briscoe, J. (2017). Morphogen interpretation: concentration, time,
competence, and signaling dynamics. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Dev. Biol. 6, 1–19.
Sandler, J.E., and Stathopoulos, A. (2016). Quantitative Single-Embryo Profile of Drosophila
Genome Activation and the Dorsal-Ventral Patterning Network. Genetics 202, 1575–1584.
Sandmann, T., Girardot, C., Brehme, M., Tongprasit, W., Stolc, V., and Furlong, E.E.M.
(2007). A core transcriptional network for early mesoderm development in Drosophila
melanogaster. Genes Dev. 21, 436–449.
Schaerli, Y., Munteanu, A., Gili, M., Cotterell, J., Sharpe, J., and Isalan, M. (2014). A unified
design space of synthetic stripe-forming networks. Nat. Commun. 5.
Schmitz, M.L., Weber, A., Roxlau, T., Gaestel, M., and Kracht, M. (2011). Signal
integration, crosstalk mechanisms and networks in the function of inflammatory cytokines.
Biochim. Biophys. Acta - Mol. Cell Res. 1813, 2165–2175.
Shen-Orr, S.S., Milo, R., Mangan, S., and Alon, U. (2002). Network motifs in the
37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/806620; this version posted October 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

transcriptional regulation network of Escherichia coli. Nat. Genet. 31, 64–68.
Sun, Y., Nien, C.Y., Chen, K., Liu, H.Y., Johnston, J., Zeitlinger, J., and Rushlow, C. (2015).
Zelda overcomes the high intrinsic nucleosome barrier at enhancers during Drosophila
zygotic genome activation. Genome Res. 25, 1703–1714.
Sunaga, H., Koitabashi, N., Iso, T., Matsui, H., Obokata, M., Kawakami, R., Murakami, M.,
Yokoyama, T., and Kurabayashi, M. (2019). Activation of cardiac AMPK-FGF21 feedforward loop in acute myocardial infarction: Role of adrenergic overdrive and lipolysis
byproducts. Sci. Rep. 9.
Szymanski, P., and Levine, M. (1995). Multiple modes of dorsal-bHLH transcriptional
synergy in the Drosophila embryo. EMBO J. 14, 2229–2238.
Thisse, B., Stoetzel, C., Gorostiza-Thisse, C., and Perrin-Schmitt, F. (1988). Sequence of the
twist gene and nuclear localization of its protein in endomesodermal cells of early Drosophila
embryos. EMBO J. 7, 2175–2183.
Yamada, S., Whitney, P.H., Huang, S.-K., Eck, E.C., Garcia, H.G., and Rushlow, C.A.
(2019). The Drosophila Pioneer Factor Zelda Modulates the Nuclear Microenvironment of a
Dorsal Target Enhancer to Potentiate Transcriptional Output. Curr. Biol. 29, 1387-1393.e5.
Zinzen, R.P., Senger, K., Levine, M., and Papatsenko, D. (2006). Computational Models for
Neurogenic Gene Expression in the Drosophila Embryo. Curr. Biol. 16, 1358–1365.

38

