bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Paired-end Mappability of Transposable Elements in the Human
Genome
Corinne E Sexton1,2 and Mira V Han1,2,*
1

School of Life Sciences, University of Nevada, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA

2

Nevada Institute of Personalized Medicine, Las Vegas, NV 89154, USA

*Corresponding author
Email Addresses:
CES: corinne.sexton@unlv.edu
MVH: mira.han@unlv.edu
Abstract
Though transposable elements make up around half of the human genome, the
repetitive nature of their sequences makes it difficult to accurately align conventional
sequencing reads. However, in light of new advances in sequencing technology, such
as increased read length and paired-end libraries, these repetitive regions are now
becoming easier to align to. This study investigates the mappability of transposable
elements with 50bp, 76bp and 100bp paired-end read libraries. With respect to those
read lengths and allowing for 3 mismatches during alignment, over 68%, 85%, and 88%
of all transposable elements in the RepeatMasker database are uniquely mappable,
suggesting that accurate locus-specific mapping of older transposable elements is well
within reach.
Keywords
Transposon, mappability, L1HS, RNA-Seq, GEM

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Background
Sequences from transposable elements (TE) have been observed to account for an
average of 7% of reads from human RNA-Seq datasets (1). Because of the repetitive
nature of TE sequences, fragments originating from locus-specific TEs are challenging
to accurately align to a reference genome. However, RNA-Seq protocols now allow for
paired-end reads up to 150bp long which theoretically should substantially increase the
ability to confidently map to repetitive regions (2). Mappability of the genome has been
analyzed before, and several representations have been proposed, including pair-wise
cross mappability, and minimum unique length (3–6), but, no study has investigated the
mappability of TE regions in light of differences in read lengths and paired-end
sequencing. The purpose of our study is to assess which TEs can be confidently
quantified at the locus-specific level, rather than at the aggregated family level. We
provide base level mappability of TEs in detail and show that a significant fraction of
TEs are uniquely mappable at the element level.
Mappability has been defined for the genome by Derrien et al as the inverse of the
number of times a k-mer originating from the genome appears in the genome,
considering its reverse complement and allowing a limited number of mismatches (5).
We follow this definition to attain mappability scores for all TE regions in the
RepeatMasker database using both the GEM (GEnome Multitool) Mappability and
Bowtie programs (5,7).
Several factors affect the ability to accurately map a sequencing read to its originating
locus which are not accounted for in this analysis. These include sequencing errors in
the reads, true variants between the genome which was sequenced and the reference

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

genome, and the accuracy of the alignment software used to map the reads. Both
random sequencing errors and true genomic variants can potentially create sequencing
reads that are not present in the genome (8,9). Such reads are not generated in the
simulation in this analysis, but by allowing for up to 3 mismatches for each read in our
alignment, we are capturing possible mappings to potential errors and variants up to 3
nucleotides for every sequence of read length in the genome. Also, since no alignment
software maps sequencing reads perfectly (1), we compare our estimates of mappability
based on two independent alignment algorithms, GEM and Bowtie, and check whether
the estimates are largely congruent between the two methods.
Additional factors which affect the ability to discern the originating position of reads
when looking at TE loci specifically include the copy number of the TE subfamily (10),
the Hamming distance between related loci relative to the allowed mismatch rate and,
importantly, the accuracy of TE annotations. In this analysis we use the Repeatmasker
TE annotation database for all TE classifications, but the current lack of benchmarking
methods for TE annotation likely results in missing annotations or incorrect annotations
even in this database (11). Our analysis takes this fact into consideration as we have
calculated mappability scores for the entire genome and therefore TE locus level scores
would be simple to recalculate based on any future updates to TE annotations.
In our analysis, we provide a specific mappability score which represents the ability of
Bowtie software to map a read pair uniquely to a locus when allowing for up to 3
mismatches. Although this is a very specific definition of mappability and we cannot
account for all of the above listed confounding factors, these scores provide an estimate
of the sequence uniqueness under particular parameters and assumptions (12). While

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mappability scores are not directly related to how well a read maps to a region, they do
provide a conservative estimate of the uniqueness of a sequence which can inform on
the resulting confidence of a read mapping.
We have provided six new hg38 mappability tracks for the UCSC browser as well as
provided aggregate mappability scores for each TE locus found in the RepeatMasker
database. We show that more than 85% of TE loci are considered to be unique in terms
of 76bp paired-end mappability allowing for 3 mismatches using the Bowtie aligner.
Because these TE loci have unique mappability scores, we present these TE loci as a
high confidence set that researchers can utilize as a reference for studying TE
expression based on RNA-seq.
Methods
We used two approaches to estimate the mappability of repeat elements. First to obtain
baseline single-end read mappability scores, we used GEM Mappability, an efficient
software used to rapidly determine mappability with multiple mismatches. And second,
we generated all possible k-mers from the reference genome sequence, and mapped
them back to the reference genome using Bowtie reporting all mappings. We
considered this approach would be complementary to GEM Mappability because the
scores from Bowtie 1) represent how an aligner would actually map the reads and 2)
can accurately assess paired-end read mappability by allowing for a range of insert
sizes.
Additionally, Karimzadeh et al have more recently described Umap (4) as a method for
scoring genome mappability. Though Umap does map kmers to the genome using
Bowtie, similar to our method, we omit a comparison to this software because the

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

definition of mappability used in Umap is vastly different from both GEM Mappability and
our method. Umap defines mappability as “the fraction of a region that overlaps at least
one uniquely mappable k-mer” whereas we define mappability as the inverse of the
number of times a k-mer originating from the genome appears in the genome. In other
words, our method depends on the start position of a kmer to determine mappability
scores, whereas Umap takes into account the length of the kmer in its scoring.
Additionally, the default Umap mappability tracks were created using Bowtie not
allowing any mismatches whereas our Bowtie mappability scores allowed for 3
mismatches. This results in dramatically different scores as well and for these reasons
we believe a direct comparison between GEM Mappability, Umap and our method could
be misleading.
GEM Mappability Estimates
To get single-end mappability scores for comparison, GEM Mappability (build 1.315) (5)
was run on hg38 with a read length of 50, 76, and 100 base pairs and an allowance of 3
mismatches.
Read Generation for Bowtie Mapping
To represent all possible read sequences that could be transcribed from the reference
genome, we generated 76-mers from hg38 using jellyfish (13). We assume that no
splicing events occur in the transcription of the transposon sequence. Although, this
assumption can be wrong for certain transposons, it is generally applicable to the
majority of transposons. To simulate paired-end reads, we generated all possible 200mers, 242-mers, and 300-mers from hg38 using jellyfish. For each of these sizes we
removed a region between the two paired-end “reads,” (100bp, 90bp, and 100bp

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

respectively) and reverse complemented the second “read” in each pair to simulate a
forward-reverse paired-end library. In order to create a library similar to the RNA-seq
data from the Genotype-Tissue Expression (GTEx) project (5) insert length of 242bp
was chosen for the 76bp paired-end library based on the median insert length across
GTEx bamfiles.
Bowtie Mappability Estimates
Using Bowtie (v1.2.2) (7) with the -a all alignments flag, both the single 76-mer set and
the three paired-ended 50-mer, 76-mer, and 100-mer sets generated above were
mapped back to their originating reference allowing for 3 mismatches. We also
investigated the effect of alignment by using STAR instead of Bowtie using options -outFilterMultimapNmax 1000 --winAnchorMultimapNmax 100. Based on the preliminary
analysis which showed Bowtie to generate generally more conservative mappability
scores (Supplemental Figure 1), we decided to use Bowtie for the downstream
analyses.
Throughout this article, when we refer to mappability of a single base position in the
genome, it is based on the read alignments that start at that base position. We inferred
the mappability of a position in the genome using the Bowtie alignments as follows. As
an example, for a single base position, if a kmer mapped to that position and jellyfish
reported that kmer to appear 5 times in the genome, the mappability of that position
would be 1/5. Using the reported counts from jellyfish we can significantly simplify the
process of mapping by including each unique kmer sequence only once in our read set
while still retaining all pertinent information for the mappability calculation. Similarly, if
multiple kmers map to a base position, as is often the case when considering

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mismatches, we calculate mappability by summing all reported jellyfish counts for each
mapped kmer. For example, if 2 kmers map to a single position and jellyfish reports that
one of the kmers appears 3 times in the genome and the other kmer appears only 1
time in the genome, the mappability for that base position would be 1/4.
An alternative, but equivalent, way of calculating mappability from a bamfile is to identify
a kmer which maps exactly to a base position and take the inverse of how many times
that kmer appears at other positions in the bamfile. For example, if a kmer maps
perfectly to a base position and appears at exactly 4 other positions in the genome, then
the mappability for that position would be 1/5. With this method, if 2 kmers mapped to
the same base position, we would only consider mappability as the number of times the
perfectly matching kmer appears in the bamfile.
These methods are theoretically equivalent, provided, jellyfish reports correct counts,
and Bowtie reports the complete set of mappable positions. In reality, with single-end
reads, we found that they are exactly equivalent (Supplemental Figure 2a). For pairedend reads, the two methods have a correlation coefficient of 0.98 with over 90% of
mappability scores the exact same between the two methods (Supplemental Figure 2b).
But the fact that the correlation is not 1 shows that there are some minor amount of
errors in the approach that results in both missed mappings (points in the upper
diagonal), or spurious mappings (points in the lower diagonal) in the Bowtie alignment,
or vice versa for Jellyfish. The fact that we see more data points in the upper diagonal
shows us that the method relying on Jellyfish counts (method 1) is more sensitive in
retrieving all possible mappings compared to the method relying on Bowtie only
(method 2). We use method 1 in our mappability calculations throughout this study.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Transposon Locus Mappability
Extending this definition, we describe transposon locus mappability. If all positions in a
transposon locus are uniquely mappable then the locus is considered uniquely
mappable. Otherwise, if at least one position is not uniquely mappable, then the entire
locus is classified as not uniquely mappable. We introduce this stringency because we
are interested in a conservative mappability estimate. This approach also avoids
possible mappability score inflation caused by unique flanking regions around TEs
because the entire sequence must be considered unique for a TE locus to be classified
as uniquely mappable.
Results and Discussion
Mappability Estimates across Software and Paired-end Results
In general GEM Mappability and Bowtie mapping scores have highly concordant results
for single end mapping ( Supplemental Figure 3), suggesting that Bowtie does indeed
recover most if not all possible mapping locations when using the -a parameter. Since
GEM Mappability software is also based on an independent alignment algorithm, the
congruence between the two methods, especially for the exact matches, shows that the
impact of alignment errors are limited. There are more discrepancies between the two
methods as more mismatches are allowed, and it gives us some idea of the errors
originating from mis-alignments. Even with 2 mismatches, the difference in mappability
is less than 0.25 for 99.7% of the TE loci, and the correlation between the two methods
is 0.98. We report the GEM Mappability results to represent single-end mappability
going forward.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 1 shows the mappability scores for both single-end and paired-end mapping.
Each point in Figure 1 represents a TE with its mappability score generated from the
76bp reads with single-end (GEM) on the x-axis and paired-end (Bowtie) on the y-axis.
The clear trend is an increase in mappability score with paired-end alignment. However,
some paradoxical points have higher single-end mappability than paired-end
mappability. These points make up less than 1% of total TE loci and can be accounted
for by the presence of valid multiple mappings for the mate in the read pair (Figure 2).
Especially in repetitive TE sequences, paired-end reads can map to the same starting
position with varying insert sizes. This lowers the overall mappability score for a base
position, in some cases making it lower than single-end mappability. An example of this
is the AluY element at chrY:9192414-9192738. This 325bp-long element has 55 base
positions where a varying insert size of the paired-end reads results in lower 50bp
paired-end mappability scores compared to 50bp single-end mappability scores. It is
relatively rare that varying insert sizes impact mappability scores in this way and
therefore in analysis we treat differing insert size mappings conservatively as distinct
mappings as shown in Figure 2.
Mappability of Elements
To assess general mappability for the TE sequences in the RepeatMasker database,
we calculated both single and paired-end mappability scores as described in the
methods. Figure 3 shows the percent of loci in each subfamily that are uniquely
mappable for all three read library lengths in both single-end and paired-end
configurations. We define a locus as uniquely mappable if all base positions at that
locus had unique mappability scores.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Across all 4.67 million TEs defined in the Repeatmasker database, when allowing for 3
mismatches using the Bowtie aligner, 68.2% of all TEs are uniquely mappable with
50bp paired-end reads, 85.1% of all TEs are uniquely mappable with 76bp paired-end
reads, and 88.9% of TEs are uniquely mappable with 100bp paired-end reads. At the
class level using 76bp paired-end reads, 82.8% of SINE elements, 86.1% of LINE
elements, 91.4% of DNA elements, and 84.7% of LTR elements are uniquely mappable
(For full mappability statistics see Supplemental Table 1).
Given the nature of our mappability score calculation we would expect trends to arise
with regards to copy number and age of TEs. More specifically, we expect as copy
number for each subfamily increases, observed mappability scores should decrease
due to multiple similar sequences being present in the genome. We investigated this
relationship for each locus using 76bp paired-end mappability scores in Figure 4a. In
general, the trend, though weak, is as predicted; as subfamily copy number increased,
the average unique mappability scores for TE loci decreased. This trend may not be as
strong as expected because the age of the TEs overshadows the effects of copy
number; larger copy numbers do not necessarily lead to lower mappability, because
mappability is also influenced by the mutations that have independently accumulated in
each copy.
To examine age and its effect on mappability scores, in Figure 4b, we plot the average
unique 76bp paired-end mappability scores for TE subfamilies with ages predicted in
Pace and Feschotte (14). This trend is much clearer; as age decreases, mappability
score decreases as well.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Specifically, the families with the least mappable elements include some of the
youngest, namely L1HS, L1PA2, L1PA3, AluY, and AluYa5. It is well known that the L1
and Alu families both contain elements which are considered to be active transposons
(15,16). Because identical copies have recently been inserted in the genome, this
decrease in mappability is expected. However even for these low-mappability elements
a substantial increase in mappability is achieved on average with paired-end reads
when compared to single-end 50bp reads (Figure 5). There are a few data points where
the paired end mappability is lower than the single ended mappability, due to the issue
of variable insert sizes described above. The outlier with the lowest value in AluY in
Figure 5 is the AluY element at chrY:9192414-9192738 described above.
Effect of Read Lengths on Mappability of Elements
To investigate the effect of read length on mappability scores, we plotted the
mappability scores for TE loci using our six different read libraries in Figure 6. The loci
are sorted based on the 50bp single-end mappability scores. As expected, there is a
strong pattern of higher mappability scores with longer read length.
To further understand the gain between different library types, we plotted the
differences between all paired-end and single-end library mappability scores. As shown
in Figure 7, the scores from the 50bp paired-end library are very comparable to a single
76bp read library and are in general lower than a single 100bp read library. Similarly,
the 76bp paired-end library has very similar scores when compared to a 100bp singleend read library. This suggests that the gain in mappability from longer single reads
may outweigh the gain from a shorter paired-end read library. It is however important to
note that these scores are unique to our specific definition of mappability and therefore

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

we cannot conclusively state at what point a single-read library is more advantageous
than a paired-end library for all experiments.
Mappability of L1HS
As L1HS elements are active in both germline and somatic cells (17,18), their
mappability is of particular interest. Figure 8 shows that mappability scores for the 76bp
paired-end library correlate generally with the time since the L1 elements were active in
the human genome; younger subfamilies contain less mappable loci than older
subfamilies. This is expected because over time sequences acquire variants and
therefore become more unique leading to higher mappability scores. Because L1HS is
the youngest subfamily of L1 in the human genome, it contains the smallest amount of
uniquely mappable elements.
To further understand the mappability of L1HS, we investigated each L1HS sequence.
The insertion mechanism of L1HS initiates from the 3’ end of the L1 RNA and often fails
to reach the 5’ end (19) and therefore we expect more elements present and lower
mappability scores at the 3’ end of L1HS consensus sequence. We used BLAST to
align each L1HS locus in the genome to the consensus sequence obtained from
RepBase (20) and recovered the mappability score for each locus at each position of
the consensus sequence. Using those mappability scores, the trend is confirmed,
shown in Figure 9. The median mappability score across loci decreases and the number
of L1HS loci is greater towards the 3’ end of the consensus sequence. Conversely the
median mappability increases and the number of L1HS loci is lower towards the 5’ end
of the consensus sequence. For the 5’ end of L1HS, about 15% of the elements have a

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

mean mappability greater than 0.20, meaning, the source of the read can be narrowed
down to five potential L1HS loci in the genome.
We also determined mappability scores for putatively active L1HS elements defined in
L1Base 2 (21) as compared to other elements in the L1HS subfamily. These elements
are classified as putatively active if they are either full-length or contain an intact ORF2
region. Figure 10a shows the distribution of mappability for both the 144 putatively
active L1HS elements and the 1,542 L1HS elements not predicted to be active. The
means of these distributions are significantly different (p = 2.2e-16; permutation test
(22)) which corroborates the hypothesis that active elements are less mappable than
inactive elements.
In addition, we further classified the L1HS elements classified in Repeatmasker into
sub-clades by their characteristic 3’ UTR variants: ACA for L1HS-Ta and ACG for
L1HS-preTa (23). The resulting distributions as shown in Figure 10b are also
significantly different (p = 2.491e-06) again validating the idea that older elements,
L1HS-preTA in this case, have higher mappability scores than younger elements,
L1HS-Ta elements.
Discussions
In our mappability analysis the insert size chosen to simulate the paired-end kmers was
fixed, whereas in a true dataset the insert size would follow a distribution. However, by
aligning the kmers with Bowtie’s default allowance of a variable insert size, we allow for
a distribution of possible alignments. A limitation of our study is that we did not account
for the polymorphic TEs present in the human population which could lower the
mappability even further for younger elements. This limitation could be addressed in the

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

future, once we have a compilation of the full-length sequences of longer polymorphic
TEs utilizing long read sequencing platforms, such as the Pacific Biosciences (PacBio)
platform or the Oxford Nanopore platform. Another limitation of our study is that we do
not consider splicing events that happen for certain endogenous retroviruses, e.g.
HERV-K(HML-2), or MLT2A1 LTRs. This is a common limitation found in virtually all
mappability studies due to feasibility issues, including ones aimed at regular genes. For
example, for genes, artificial transcripts are generated by concatenating all exons within
the boundary of the gene, and mappability is calculated based on the artificial transcript,
ignoring realistic splicing events observed. We partially address this issue by examining
the alignment using STAR, a splicing oriented alignment software. But, we found that in
general Bowtie gave us more conservative mappability, i.e. STAR was missing a lot of
mappable positions.
In conclusion, we present our findings that increased read length and paired-end
libraries result in a rise in the mappability of repeat elements, to the point where a
majority of elements are uniquely mappable using Bowtie with paired-end reads
allowing for 3 mismatches. Additionally we predict that a longer read library size of 150
bp would further increase mappability scores, although we have only calculated scores
for up to 100bp paired-end reads for feasibility reasons.
Based on previous studies (24), only a few of all TE loci in the genome have been
observed to be transcriptionally active depending on the tissue and developmental time
point, and the majority of the uniquely mappable TE loci we have identified may be
biologically irrelevant. Even so, these mappability estimates give us a set of references
that we can utilize to identify the few transcriptionally active and potentially biologically

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

relevant loci with confidence. Overall, our paired-end mappability analysis suggests that
longer paired-end read libraries can be confidently mapped to repetitive regions and
specifically to the locus-level of the majority of TEs.
Abbreviations
TE: Transposable Element; GEM: GEnome Multitool; GTEx: Genotype-Tissue
Expression Project
Declarations
Ethics approval and consent to participate
Not applicable.
Consent for publication
Not applicable.
Availability of data and material
Six hg38 mappability tracks (GEM Mappability single-end 50bp, 76bp, and 100bp
allowing 3 mismatches, Bowtie paired-end 50bp, 76bp, and 100bp allowing 3
mismatches) are available for upload as a custom track on the UCSC browser at
https://github.com/HanLabUNLV/TEmappability (Supplemental Figure 4), as well as
locus level mappability scores for all TEs in the RepeatMasker database.
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Funding
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health [R15GM116108,
P20GM121325 to M.V.H.], and by the National Science Foundation [1750532 to M.V.H].
Authors' contributions

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

CES and MVH conceived the study, ran the analysis, and wrote the manuscript. Both
authors critically reviewed and approved the final manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Not applicable.
References
1.

Mangul S, Yang HT, Strauli N, Gruhl F, Porath HT, Hsieh K, et al. ROP: dumpster
diving in RNA-sequencing to find the source of 1 trillion reads across diverse adult
human tissues. Genome Biol. 2018;19(1):36.

2.

Slotkin RK. The case for not masking away repetitive DNA. Mob DNA.
2018;9(1):15.

3.

Saha A, Battle A. False positives in trans-eQTL and co-expression analyses arising
from RNA-sequencing alignment errors. F1000Research [Internet]. 2019 Apr 8
[cited 2019 May 21];7. Available from:
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6305209/

4.

Storvall H, Ramsköld D, Sandberg R. Efficient and Comprehensive Representation
of Uniqueness for Next-Generation Sequencing by Minimum Unique Length
Analyses. PLoS ONE [Internet]. 2013 Jan 18 [cited 2019 May 21];8(1). Available
from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3548888/

5.

Derrien T, Estellé J, Sola SM, Knowles DG, Raineri E, Guigó R, et al. Fast
computation and applications of genome mappability. PloS One. 2012;7(1):e30377.

6.

Karimzadeh M, Ernst C, Kundaje A, Hoffman MM. Umap and Bismap: quantifying
genome and methylome mappability. Nucleic Acids Res. 2018 Nov 16;46(20):e120.

7.

Langmead B, Trapnell C, Pop M, Salzberg SL. Ultrafast and memory-efficient

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol.
2009;10(3):R25.
8.

Meyer CA, Liu XS. Identifying and mitigating bias in next-generation sequencing
methods for chromatin biology. Nat Rev Genet. 2014 Nov;15(11):709–21.

9.

Day DS, Luquette LJ, Park PJ, Kharchenko PV. Estimating enrichment of repetitive
elements from high-throughput sequence data. Genome Biol. 2010 Jun
28;11(6):R69.

10. Ewing AD. Transposable element detection from whole genome sequence data.
Mob DNA. 2015 Dec 29;6(1):24.
11. Hoen DR, Hickey G, Bourque G, Casacuberta J, Cordaux R, Feschotte C, et al. A
call for benchmarking transposable element annotation methods. Mob DNA. 2015
Aug 4;6(1):13.
12. Sims D, Sudbery I, Ilott NE, Heger A, Ponting CP. Sequencing depth and
coverage: key considerations in genomic analyses. Nat Rev Genet. 2014
Feb;15(2):121–32.
13. Marçais G, Kingsford C. A fast, lock-free approach for efficient parallel counting of
occurrences of k-mers. Bioinformatics. 2011;27(6):764–770.
14. Pace JK, Feschotte C. The evolutionary history of human DNA transposons:
evidence for intense activity in the primate lineage. Genome Res. 2007
Apr;17(4):422–32.
15. Sassaman DM, Dombroski BA, Moran JV, Kimberland ML, Naas TP, DeBerardinis
RJ, et al. Many human L1 elements are capable of retrotransposition. Nat Genet.
1997 May;16(1):37–43.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

16. Bennett EA, Keller H, Mills RE, Schmidt S, Moran JV, Weichenrieder O, et al.
Active Alu retrotransposons in the human genome. Genome Res. 2008
Dec;18(12):1875–83.
17. Coufal NG, Garcia-Perez JL, Peng GE, Yeo GW, Mu Y, Lovci MT, et al. L1
retrotransposition in human neural progenitor cells. Nature. 2009 Aug
27;460(7259):1127–31.
18. Upton KR, Gerhardt DJ, Jesuadian JS, Richardson SR, Sánchez-Luque FJ, Bodea
GO, et al. Ubiquitous L1 mosaicism in hippocampal neurons. Cell. 2015 Apr
9;161(2):228–39.
19. Sun X, Wang X, Tang Z, Grivainis M, Kahler D, Yun C, et al. Transcription factor
profiling reveals molecular choreography and key regulators of human
retrotransposon expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2018 12;115(24):E5526–
35.
20. Bao W, Kojima KK, Kohany O. Repbase Update, a database of repetitive elements
in eukaryotic genomes. Mob DNA. 2015;6:11.
21. Penzkofer T, Jäger M, Figlerowicz M, Badge R, Mundlos S, Robinson PN, et al.
L1Base 2: more retrotransposition-active LINE-1s, more mammalian genomes.
Nucleic Acids Res. 2017 04;45(D1):D68–73.
22. Hothorn T, Hornik K, Van De Wiel MA, Zeileis A. Implementing a class of
permutation pests: the coin package. 2008;
23. Boissinot S, Chevret P, Furano AV. L1 (LINE-1) retrotransposon evolution and
amplification in recent human history. Mol Biol Evol. 2000 Jun;17(6):915–28.
24. Faulkner GJ, Kimura Y, Daub CO, Wani S, Plessy C, Irvine KM, et al. The

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

regulated retrotransposon transcriptome of mammalian cells. Nat Genet. 2009
May;41(5):563–71.
Figures
Figure 1: Comparison of single-end and paired-end TE mappability
Each point represents 1 TE sequence. Paired-end mappability scores were generated
from 76 base pair read alignments with <= 3 mismatches. Single-end mappability
scores were generated from GEM Mappability (k=76) with the default of a 4% mismatch
rate. Mappability scores were aggregated for each TE as the percent of base pairs in
the sequence with a unique mappability score.
Figure 2: Paired-end and single-end alignment
Paired-end mappability for certain base pair positions may be lower than for the singleend mappability due to the read pair aligning multiple times in the same start position
with a different insert size. In that case, the paired-end mappability score for that
specific base position could be lower than the single-end mappability as in this example.
Figure 3: Percent mappable elements for each family and subfamily of TEs
Colored by class distinction, each bar represents the percent unique elements in each
subfamily. An element is only considered unique if every position in its sequence has a
unique mappability score. Both GEM Mappability and Bowtie were run with an
allowance of 3 mismatches.
Figure 4: Mappability scores with regards to age and copy number of TEs
Plots of average unique mappability score in each TE subfamily colored by class. The
average unique mappability score for each subfamily is calculated by averaging each
individual locus’s percent unique sequence. The percent unique sequence is defined as

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the percent of uniquely mappable base positions in each individual locus. These
aggregated scores are plotted against (a) copy number and (b) age for each subfamily.
The ages in (b) were predicted in Pace and Feschotte (14).
Figure 5: Increase in mappability between single-end and paired-end reads for low
mappability families
For 8 of the lowest mappability scoring subfamilies in L1 and Alu, the boxplots show the
difference between paired-end scores (at 50bp, 76bp and 100bp read lengths) and the
50bp single-end scores for every element in the subfamily.
Figure 6: Paired-end and single-end mappability Scores for different library sizes
The mappability scores for each locus calculated using (a) paired-end and (b) singleend libraries at three different read lengths: 50bp, 76bp, and 100bp. Loci along the xaxis in both (a) and (b) are sorted in ascending order for the 50bp single-end library
scores.
Figure 7: Difference in paired-end and single-end mappability scores across
combinations of library sizes.
Boxplots show the distribution of the differences between paired-end mappability scores
(specified above the boxplots) and single-end mappability scores (specified along the xaxis) for each combination of 50bp, 76bp, and 100bp paired and single-end libraries.
The scores shown here exclude TE loci where all three paired-end libraries have 100%
unique scores and where length < 300bp in order to allow for a fair comparison with the
100bp paired-end library. Points < 0 signify a higher single-end than paired-end
mappability score and points > 0 signify a higher paired-end than single-end mappability
score.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 8: L1 phylogeny and mappability scores
For each subfamily in the phylogeny, the bar represents the percent of completely
uniquely mappable loci in that subfamily according to Bowtie paired-end mappings
allowing for 3 mismatches.
Figure 9: Mappability along the L1HS consensus sequence
The black line is the median mappability scores across L1HS elements and the blue
lines are the 1st and 3rd quartile scores. The x axis represents the base positions along
the consensus sequence. The red line is a density line of the number of loci present at
that base position of the consensus sequence.
Figure 10: L1HS mappability score distributions
We calculated the percent of each element’s sequence with unique mappability scores
and then generated a histogram from those percentages. In (a), the pink distribution is
the 1,542 not putatively active elements and the blue distribution is the 144 putatively
active elements. Using a permutation test, the means of these distributions are
significantly different (p = 2.2e-16). In (b), the blue distribution is made of the L1HS-Ta
elements and the purple distribution is made of the L1HS-preTa elements. The means
of these distributions are also significantly different (p = 2.491e-06) when using a
permutation test.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/663435; this version posted June 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

