bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

AP-1 Imprints a Reversible Transcriptional Program of Senescent Cells

Ricardo Iván Martínez-Zamudio1,5,8, Pierre-François Roux1,5, José Américo N L F de
Freitas1,4, Lucas Robinson1,4, Gregory Doré1, Bin Sun6,7, Jesús Gil6,7, Utz Herbig8 and
Oliver Bischof1,2,3,9*

1

Institut Pasteur, Laboratory of Nuclear Organization and Oncogenesis, Department of

Cell Biology and Infection, 75015 Paris, France
2

INSERM, U993, 75015 Paris, France

3

Equipe Labellisée Fondation ARC pour la recherche sur le cancer, Paris, France

4

Université de Paris, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Paris, France

5

These authors contributed equally to this work

6

MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences (LMS), Du Cane Road, London, W12 0NN,

UK.
7

Institute of Clinical Sciences (ICS), Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, Du

Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.
8

Department of Microbiology, Biochemistry & Molecular Genetics, Rutgers Biomedical &

Health Sciences, Rutgers University, 205 South Orange Avenue, Newark, NJ 07103,
USA
9

Lead contact

*Correspondence: oliver.bischof@pasteur.fr

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

SUMMARY
Senescent cells play important physiological- and pathophysiological roles in tumor
suppression, tissue regeneration, and aging. While select genetic and epigenetic
elements crucial for senescence induction were identified, the dynamics, underlying
epigenetic mechanisms, and regulatory networks defining senescence competence,
induction and maintenance remain poorly understood, precluding a deliberate
therapeutic manipulation of these dynamic processes. Here, we show, using dynamic
analyses of transcriptome and epigenome profiles, that the epigenetic state of
enhancers predetermines their sequential activation during senescence. We
demonstrate that activator protein 1 (AP-1) ‘imprints’ the senescence enhancer
landscape effectively regulating transcriptional activities pertinent to the timely execution
of the senescence program. We define and validate a hierarchical transcription factor
(TF) network model and demonstrate its effectiveness for the design of senescence
reprogramming experiments. Together, our findings define the dynamic nature and
organizational principles of gene-regulatory elements driving the senescence program
and reveal promising inroads for therapeutic manipulation of senescent cells.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

INTRODUCTION
Cellular senescence plays beneficial roles during embryonic development, wound
healing, and tumor suppression. Paradoxically, it is also considered a significant
contributor to aging and age-related diseases including cancer and degenerative
pathologies1. As such, research on therapeutic strategies exploiting senescence
targeting (e.g., senolytics, senomorphics or pro-senescence cancer therapies) to
improve healthspan has gained enormous momentum in recent years2.
Cellular senescence is a cell fate that stably arrests proliferation of damaged and
dysfunctional cells as a complex stress response. The most prominent inducers of
senescence are hyper-activated oncogenes (oncogene-induced senescence, OIS)3. The
senescence arrest is accompanied by widespread changes in gene expression,
including a senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) – the expression and
secretion of inflammatory cytokines, growth factors, proteases, and other molecules,
which exert pleiotropic effects on senescent cells themselves as well as the surrounding
tissue4. Importantly, although activation of the senescence program can pre-empt the
initiation of cancer, the long-term effects of the SASP make the local tissue environment
more vulnerable to the spread of cancer and other age-related diseases. Therefore,
therapeutic interventions aimed at limiting SASP production are of relevance for cancer
and many age-related diseases4-6.
The knowledge on epigenetic mechanisms underlying senescence has only
recently increased revealing significant contributions of select transcription factors (TFs),
chromatin modifiers and structural components, as well as non-coding RNAs to the
senescent phenotype7-12. A major limitation of such studies, however, was their
restriction to start-end-point comparisons, ignoring the dynamic nature of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

senescence fate transition. Consequently, critical gene-regulatory aspects of the
execution and maintenance of the senescence state remain poorly understood.
Therefore, an integrative, temporally resolved, multidimensional profiling approach is
required to establish essential regulatory principles that govern this key biological
decision-making process. Such knowledge would be instrumental both for identifying
stage-specific senescence regulators and urgently needed specific biomarkers as well
as control points in TF and gene regulatory networks, which would pave the way for a
deliberate therapeutic manipulation of the senescence cell fate.
Enhancers are key genomic regions that drive cell fate transitions. The enhancer
landscape is established during development by the concerted action of TF networks
and chromatin modifiers13. The details on how this information converges in cis remain
unclear, and we still lack valid organizational principles that explain the function of
mammalian TF networks. In mammalian cells, enhancer elements are broadly divided
into two major categories -active and poised. While active enhancers are characterized
by the simultaneous presence of H3K4me1 together with H3K27ac and are associated
with actively transcribed genes, only H3K4me1 marks poised enhancers, and their
target genes are generally not expressed14. A subset of enhancers may also be
activated de novo from genomic areas devoid of any TF binding and histone
modifications. These latent or nascent enhancers serve an adaptive role in mediating
stronger and faster gene expression upon cycles of repeated stimulation15,16. Recent
evidence showed a role for enhancer remodeling in driving senescence-associated gene
expression11,12,17. However, it is currently unknown which enhancer elements, epigenetic
marks or TFs render cells competent to respond to senescence-inducing signals with
precise timing and output. A thorough understanding of how senescence competence is

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

established, realized and what defines it would allow for the prediction of a positive
senescence engagement for example in pro-senescence cancer therapies18.
Pioneer TFs are critical in establishing new cell fate competence by granting longterm chromatin access to non-pioneer factors and are also crucial determinants of cell
identity through their opening and licensing of the enhancer landscape19,20. We can now
reliably deduce pioneer and non-pioneer TF activity from chromatin accessibility data
allowing for the hierarchization of TF function whereby pioneer TFs sit atop a TF binding
hierarchy, recruiting non-pioneers such as settler and migrant TFs to gene-regulatory
regions for optimal transcriptional output21. The pioneer TFs bestowing senescence
potential have not been identified to date. However, their identification might be a prerequisite for reprogramming or manipulation of senescent cells for future therapeutic
benefit as was shown successfully for the reprogramming to adopt full stem cell
identity22.
In this study, we examined the possibility that the epigenetic state of enhancers
could determine senescence cell fate. We explored this question by generating timeresolved transcriptomes and comprehensive epigenome profiles during oncogenic RASinduced senescence. Through integrative analysis and further functional validation, we
revealed novel and unexpected links between enhancer chromatin, TF recruitment, and
senescence potential and defined the organizational principles of the TF network that
drive the senescence program. Together, this allowed us to precisely manipulate the
senescence phenotype with important therapeutic implications. Specifically, we show
that the senescence program is predominantly encoded at the enhancer level and that
the enhancer landscape is dynamically reshaped at each step of the senescence
transition. Remarkably, we find that this process is pre-determined before senescence

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

induction and AP-1 acts as a pioneer TF that ‘premarks’ prospective senescence
enhancers to direct and localize the recruitment of other transcription factors into a
hierarchical TF network that drives the senescence transcriptional program after
induction. We also uncover a class of enhancers that retain an epigenomic memory after
their inactivation during the senescence transition. These “remnant” enhancers lack
traditional enhancer histone-modification marks but are instead “remembered” by AP-1
TF bookmarking for eventual future re-activation. Finally, functional perturbation of
prospective senescence enhancers and AP-1 validated and underscored the importance
of these entities for the timely execution of the senescence gene expression program
and allowed for the precise reprogramming and reversal of the senescence cell fate.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RESULTS
We employed time-series experiments on WI38 fibroblasts undergoing oncogeneinduced senescence (OIS) using a tamoxifen-inducible ER: RASV12 expression
system23. We determined global gene expression profiles by microarrays and mapped
the full set of accessible chromatin sites by ATAC-seq24 at 6-time points (0, 24, 48, 72,
96 and 144 h). Cells intended for ChIP-seq were crosslinked at 3-time-points (0, 72 and
144h) and used for profiling histone modifications including H3K4me1 (putative
enhancers), H3K4me3 (promoters), H3K27ac (active enhancers and promoters) and
H3K27me3 (polycomb repressed chromatin). From accessible chromatin regions
determined by ATAC-seq we deduced TF binding dynamics and hierarchies (Figure 1A).
For comparison, we included cells undergoing quiescence (Q) by serum withdrawal for
up to 96h. Unlike senescence arrested cells, quiescence arrested cells can be triggered
to re-enter the cell cycle upon serum addition. Q and OIS cells were validated using
classical markers (Supplementary Figures 1A-B).

Multi-state establishment of the senescence transcriptional program
To identify and visualize dynamic gene expression patterns across the entire Q and
RAS-OIS time-courses, we employed an unsupervised, self-organizing map (SOM)
machine learning technique25 (Figure 1B) and multidimensional scaling (MDS) (Figure
1C) to our transcriptome data sets. Remarkably, serum-deprived fibroblasts rapidly
established a Q-specific gene expression program within 24 h after serum deprivation,
which changed only marginally within the remainder of the time-course (Figure 1B, left
column and Figure 1C), and mainly involves only up-regulated (Figure 1B, top right
corner, red) and down-regulated (Figure 1B, bottom left corner, blue) genes. By

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

contrast, fibroblasts undergoing RAS-OIS displayed dynamic gene expression
trajectories that evolved steadily, both for up- (red) and down-regulated metagenes
(blue) (Figures 1B, right column and Figure 1C). Thus, RAS-OIS, unlike Q, is highly
dynamic and does not gyrate towards a stable transcriptome end state. To substantiate
this further we calculated the diversity and specialization of transcriptomes and gene
specificity26 (Figure 1D) and performed a kernel density estimation analysis
(Supplementary Figure 1C). These analyses demonstrated that RAS-OIS cells exhibit a
temporally evolving increase in transcriptional diversity, whereas Q cells exhibit a
temporally evolving, specific gene expression program. We conclude that the RAS-OIS
cell fate is an open-ended succession of cell states rather than a fixed cell fate with a
defined end-point, which is the current tenet. The apparent open-endedness and
transcriptional diversity may provide a fertile soil for the eventual escape of precancerous senescent cells as previously shown27,28.
To further delineate the evolution of the RAS-OIS gene expression program, we
next performed dynamic differential gene expression analysis on the Q and OIS
datasets29. A total of 4,986 genes (corresponding to 2,931 up-regulated and 2,055
down-regulated genes) were differentially regulated in at least one-time point (with a
minimal leading log2 fold-change of 1.2; q=5*10-4) and partitioned into seven (I-VII) gene
expression modules with distinct functional overrepresentation profiles in line with the
senescence phenotype (Figures 1E-F and Figure S1D). The highly reproducible
dynamics of gene expression during RAS-OIS transition suggest a high degree of
preprogramming of this succession of cell states.
Cell-fate decisions are typically associated with stable changes in gene
expression that shift the regulatory system from one steady state to the next30. In line

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with this, we found that proliferation-promoting genes of modules II and IV (E2F targets
and G2M checkpoint) became increasingly repressed (i.e. senescence arrest), while
pro-senescent SASP genes of modules VI and VII (e.g., inflammatory and interferon
response genes) became persistently induced (Figure 1F and Supplementary Figure
1E). Apoptosis-related genes of module III were repressed very early on in the timecourse (within the first 24-48 hours during RAS-OIS induction), which is surprising given
that apoptosis-resistance is considered a very late event in senescence (Figure 1F and
Supplementary Figure 1E). This indicates that the commitment to senescence is a very
early event made at the expense of apoptosis. Finally, we identified a set of genes in
modules I and V that would have gone unnoticed in a traditional start-end-point analysis
because they follow an ‘‘impulse’’-like pattern. In these modules, transcript levels
spiked-up (module V) or down (module I) following RAS-OIS induction, then sustained a
new level, before transitioning to a new steady state, similar to the original levels
(Figures 1E and Supplementary Figure 1E). These expression patterns support the
notion that genes of module V play an active and vital role early in the transition to RASOIS, while genes in module I hold key regulators to maintain the proliferative fibroblast
state.
Altogether, our investigation of transcriptome dynamics defined a modular
organization and transcriptional diversity of the RAS-OIS gene expression program,
providing a framework to unravel the gene-regulatory code underlying the senescence
process.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A dynamic enhancer program shapes the senescence transcriptome
Senescence cell fate involves a global remodeling of chromatin and specifically, the
enhancer landscape11,12. An unanswered question, however, is how TFs and epigenetic
modifications cooperatively shape a transcriptionally permissive enhancer landscape
prior to gene activation to endow the cell with senescence potential.
To provide mechanistic insight into this question, we first comprehensively
mapped genomic regulatory elements (i.e. putative enhancers, promoters and
polycomb-repressed chromatin) during the transition of proliferating cells to RAS-OIS,
profiling genome-wide histone modifications by ChIP-seq and transposon-accessible
chromatin by ATAC-seq. To capture and quantify chromatin state dynamics we used
ChromstaR (see Materials and Methods), which identified a total of sixteen chromatin
states (Supplementary Figure 2A). The majority of the genome (≈80%) was, irrespective
of the time-point, either devoid of any of the histone modifications analyzed (≈62%) or
polycomb-repressed (≈18%). The fraction of the genome represented by active and
accessible chromatin states (i.e., enhancers and promoters) was comparably lower
(≈20% combined). Chromatin state transitions occurred most prominently at enhancers,
while promoters were only mildly affected (Figures 2A-B and Supplementary Figure 2A,
arrows) congruent with previous results11. Unexpectedly, we found, however, that most
of the enhancer activation, i.e. acquisition of H3K4me1 and H3K27ac, occurred de novo
from unmarked chromatin at the T0-72 h and 72 h-144 h intervals, followed by the more
stereotypical enhancer activation from a poised state (H3K4me1+ plus H3K27ac
acquisition) and enhancer poising from the unmarked and polycomb-repressed state at
the T0-72 h interval (acquisition of H3K4me1) (Figures 2A and -B). Thus, the regulatory

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

landscape of senescence is largely predetermined by sequential enhancer activation
from de novo and poised enhancers implying the existence of a prior imprint of past cell
fate decisions.
The (in)activation chronology of enhancers was highly concordant with the
temporal expression pattern of the nearest genes, indicating that most of these elements
indeed function as bona fide enhancers (Supplementary Figure 2B). In line with this,
correspondence analysis (CA) (Supplementary Figure 2C) revealed a strong correlation
between gene expression modules (Figure 1E) and chromatin state transitions (Figure
2A). For example, globally up-regulated transcriptomic modules V, VI, VII projected
proximally to chromatin state transitions involving enhancer activation congruent with the
installation of the SASP. By contrast, dynamic enhancer inactivation associated with
repressed transcriptomic modules (II, III, IV) congruent with installation of the
senescence arrest. Finally, the oscillatory expression of genes in the module I
associated with an equally oscillatory activation of its closest enhancers. Therefore,
dynamic remodeling of the enhancer landscape reflects and defines the modular and
dynamic nature of the RAS-OIS gene expression program.
We next addressed the question of which TFs are key drivers for the dynamic
enhancer remodeling driving the senescence transcriptome. To this end, we first
intersected ATAC-seq peaks with the identified enhancer coordinates (Figure 2A-B) and
performed a motif over-representation test. This analysis identified AP-1 super-family
members (cJUN, FOS, FOSL1, FOSL2, BATF) as well as AP-1-associated TFs ATF3
and ETS1 as the most enriched motifs at any given time-point, thus, hinting at a putative
chromatin priming and pioneer function for these TFs (Supplementary Figure 2D).
Because AP-1 TFs are essential and inducible downstream effectors for the RAS

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

signaling pathway in cellular transformation31 the possibility remains that the observed
enrichment of AP-1 TFs at enhancers is strictly dependent on oncogenic RAS signaling
per se and not a reflection of a specific pioneering role in the enhancer landscape
independent of RAS signaling. We therefore performed the same analysis in cells
undergoing replicative senescence (which is driven by loss of telomere integrity) and
also in growth factor-deprived (and thus RAS signaling-muted) quiescent cells
(Supplementary Figures 2E-F). In both cases, the AP-1 motif ascended as the
predominant motif enriched at enhancers, thus, corroborating the notion that AP-1 TFs
act as the universal pioneers imprinting the global as well as senescence-associated
enhancer landscape.
To elaborate this further, we analyzed our time-resolved ATAC-seq data sets by
adapting the “Protein Interaction Quantitation (PIQ)” algorithm, which was developed
initially for DNAse-seq-based digital TF footprinting21. Importantly, PIQ allows for the
functional hierarchization of TFs into pioneers, settlers, and migrants - whereby pioneer
TFs bind nucleosome-compacted chromatin to initiate chromatin remodeling and to
enable subsequent binding of non-pioneers (i.e., settler and migrant TFs). PIQ
segregated TFs into pioneers (e.g., AP-1 TF family members), settlers (e.g., NFY and
RELA subunit of NF-κB) and migrants (e.g., TF RAR family members and SREBF1)
(Figure 2C). We confirmed this TF hierarchization by inspecting a selection of individual
TF footprints for their adjacent nucleosomal positioning (Supplementary Figure 2G-I).
AP-1 family member FOSL1, for example, bound to its cognate binding site despite the
presence of strongly positioned flanking nucleosomes, as would be expected from a
pioneer TF (Supplementary Figure 2G), while RELA binding required partial nucleosome

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

displacement/chromatin opening, as would be expected for a settler TF (Supplementary
Figure 2H), and SREBF1 bound to its cognate site in a near-nucleosome free context,
as would be expected for a migrant TF (Supplementary Figure 2I). Importantly, there
was a high correspondence between PIQ predictions and TF ChIP-seq profiling as
exemplified for AP-1-members FOSL2 and cJUN, which we used as surrogate marks for
bound AP-1 (which is typically a complex of JUN-JUN or JUN-FOS family member
dimers), and RELA (Supplementary Figure 2J).
To decode additional TF properties critical for shaping the dynamic RAS-OIS
enhancer landscape, we applied a principal component analysis (PCA) considering
several metrics describing TF binding characteristics (Figure 2D). This analysis revealed
two key features: First, pioneer TFs bind statically, extensively, and most importantly
before RAS-OIS induction (i.e., pre-stimulation) along the genome, while settler and
migrant TFs bind more dynamically (“Dynamicity” in Figure 2D), far less frequently
(“Windows” in Figure 2D), and on average less often before OIS induction (i.e. prestimulation) along the genome. Second, and in line with the proposed pioneering activity
of AP-1 TFs, the latter clearly stand out amongst other pioneer TFs (highlighted by black
circle in Figure 2D) because they bind exclusively and extensively to enhancers prior to
RAS-OIS induction whereas most of the remaining pioneer TFs tend to accumulate
away from them.
In summary, we identify de novo enhancer activation and AP-1 as novel and key
elements that pioneer and shape a transcriptionally permissive enhancer landscape in
senescence.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

AP-1 pioneer TF bookmarking of senescence enhancer landscape foreshadows
the senescence transcriptional program
Given our unexpected finding that most of the enhancer activation occurred de novo out
of unmarked chromatin territories, i.e., devoid of enhancer-related histone modifications
H3K4me1 and H3K27ac and ending in an active H3K4me1+/ H3K27ac+ enhancer state
at 144h, and that AP-1 TFs act as pioneers to shape the senescence enhancer
landscape, we explored a possible role of AP-1 as a general bookmarking agent for
future and past enhancer activity. Quantification of enhancer mark dynamics (Figure 3A
and Supplementary Figures 3A-C) unveiled that for windows shifting from the
“unmarked” state at T0 to an “active enhancer” state (H3K4me1+ / H3K27ac+) at either
72 h or 144 h, i.e. “de novo enhancers”, there is both a gradual increase in H3K4me1
and H3K27ac levels from initial levels (T0) similar to steady-state unmarked regions but
different from poised enhancers, to final levels (144 h) indistinguishable from constitutive
enhancers (Figure 3A and Supplementary Figures 3A-B). By contrast, for windows
shifting from an “active enhancer” state at T0 to an “unmarked” state at either 72 h or
144 h, that we refer to as “remnant enhancers”, there is a progressive decrease both in
H3K4me1 and H3K27ac levels from initial levels indistinguishable from constitutive
enhancers to final levels similar to unmarked regions and distinct from poised enhancers
(Figure 3A and Supplementary Figures 3A and 3C). The dynamic behavior of each
enhancer class on average associated with the expression profile of nearby genes, with
constitutive enhancers displaying constant gene expression, de novo enhancers
increasing and remnant enhancers decreasing gene expression (Supplementary Figure
3D). To directly show the functional role of de novo enhancers we used a CRISPR
interference (CRISPRi) approach32,33. Expression of 4 different gRNA targeting the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dCas9-KRAB transcriptional repressor to de novo enhancers in the IL1α /IL1β genomic
locus (g7, -14, -15, and -61) significantly reduced the expression of IL1β when analyzed
8 days after oncogenic RAS induction (Figure 3B). Interestingly, IL1α expression was
only mildly reduced by the two gRNAs (g61 and g7) adjacent to the IL1β promoter
(Figure 3B). While similar results were observed 14 days after oncogenic RAS induction
(Supplementary Figure 3E), a control gRNA (g54) targeting a genomic region just
downstream of the IL1α /IL1β locus did not affect either expression, while control gRNA
guides g2 and g48, targeting sequences in-between two de novo enhancers, had only
very moderate effects (Supplementary Figure 3F). Together, we render ample evidence
that de novo and remnant enhancers are novel senescence-associated cis-regulatory
modules that define the senescence transcriptional program.
We next determined whether TFs bookmark de novo enhancers for future
activation and also, whether TFs bookmark remnant enhancers after their inactivation as
part of a molecular memory. Indeed, as shown in Figure 3C, we found that AP-1 is the
predominant TF bookmarking de novo and remnant enhancers. Importantly, and
highlighting the importance of AP-1 in bookmarking de novo enhancers for future
activation, gRNAs chosen for CRISPRi were either overlapping with AP-1 binding sites
(g14, g15 and g61) or in close proximity (g7), i.e. ~125bp outside of it (Figure 3B).
Because CRISPRi can control repression over a length of two nucleosomes (~300bp)34,
it is highly probable that g7 also affects this AP-1 binding site. Moreover, a control gRNA
(g2) targeting a non-enhancer AP-1 site (Supplementary Figure 3F) did not affect IL1
expression strongly suggesting that only enhancer-positioned AP-1 sites are functional.
Finally, we validated the importance of AP-1 TFs for de novo and remnant enhancer
bookmarking by examining their positioning also in cells undergoing replicative

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

senescence, which demonstrated that AP-1 TFs here also play a leading role for
bookmarking (Supplementary Figure 3G). We conclude that AP-1 bookmarking of de
novo and remnant enhancers is independent of oncogenic RAS signaling and a novel
and cardinal feature that reflects future and past transcriptional activities in senescence.
While performing this analysis, we noticed that only 2,480 out of 3,334 de novo
enhancers were TF bookmarked, while the remainder (n=854) lacked any detectable TF
binding activity (Figure 3D). Thus, de novo enhancers can be further divided into two
subclasses: 1) “TF bookmarked de novo enhancers” and 2) “TF virgin de novo
enhancers” that are reminiscent to previously described latent enhancers15,35 expanding
the senescence enhancer landscape. Next, we considered the chromatin state
environment of the two de novo enhancer classes to further characterize them
(Supplementary Figure 3H). While a chromatin state environment already rich in
constitutive enhancers surrounded bookmarked de novo enhancers at T0 (i.e., pre-OIS
stimulation; left top and bottom plots), a chromatin state environment poor in constitutive
enhancer elements surrounded virgin de novo enhancers at T0 (right top and bottom
plots). Both AP-1 bookmarked and virgin de novo enhancers became progressively
activated and expanded upon RAS-OIS induction. Given that AP-1 premarked de novo
enhancers operate within pre-existing, active enhancer-rich cis-regulatory regions and
virgin de novo enhancers in poor ones, we hypothesized that this might impact absolute
gene expression levels and kinetics upon enhancer activation. Indeed, we observed that
the nearest genes associated with bookmarked de novo enhancers were already
expressed at higher basal levels (as were genes proximal to poised enhancers) and
reached significantly higher absolute expression levels with faster kinetics after RASOIS induction. In contrast, virgin de novo enhancers showed only low-to-background

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

basal expression levels and reached comparatively lower absolute expression levels
with slower kinetics after RAS-OIS induction (Figure 3E). These results argue that TF
bookmarking of de novo enhancers, similar to traditional enhancer poising36, is a
chromatin-priming event that impacts gene expression kinetics and absolute output.
Contrary to latent enhancers, our newly identified virgin enhancers do not serve an
adaptive role in mediating stronger and faster gene expression upon restimulation as
observed in macrophages15, but instead serve as novel enhancer elements for de novo
gene expression. Finally, we plotted leading gene expression fold-changes against the
number of de novo enhancers in a given prospective senescence enhancer region.
Remarkably, we discovered that a single de novo enhancer element of 100 bp can
substantially activate the expression of its nearest gene and that there exists a positive
correlation between the number of de novo enhancer elements and the expression
increase of their nearest genes (Supplementary Figure 3I).
Altogether, our results provide compelling evidence that de novo and remnant
enhancers play a critical role for ensuring that genes pertinent for senescence are
expressed at the correct time and the correct level and highlight the importance of AP-1
bookmarking for epigenetic memorization of past and future enhancer activity to define
the senescence transcriptional program.

A hierarchical TF network defines the senescence transcriptional program
The combinatorial and dynamic binding of TFs to enhancers and their organization into
TF networks are central to the spatiotemporal specificity of gene expression and a key
determinant in cell fate decisions37. TF networks are frequently corrupted in disease and
thus, a detailed understanding on TF networks has important implications for developing

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and improving new therapeutic strategies38. Currently, a TF network regulating
senescence is not available, which precludes a deliberate therapeutic manipulation of
the senescence phenotype. Importantly, TF networks deduced in silico from the
integration of time-resolved multidimensional, genome-wide datasets improve the
accuracy and predictive power of such networks.
To elucidate the combinatorial and dynamic binding of TFs to enhancers and their
organization into TF networks, we first computed co-occurring pairs of TFs in enhancers
(Figure 4A, Supplementary Figure 4A and Supplementary data: see under Code
availability in Material and Methods) followed by a topic machine learning approach that
dissects the complexity of combinatorial binding of many TFs into compact and easily
interpretable regulatory modules or TF "lexicons" that form the thematic structures
driving the RAS-OIS gene expression program (Figure 4B)39,40. These analyses
illustrated two key points. First, as shown in the co-binding matrix of Figure 4A and
heatmap of Figure 4B, AP-1 pioneer TFs interact genome-wide with most of the
remaining non-pioneer TFs (i.e., settlers and migrant TFs; Figure 4A), have the highest
total number of binding sites (Figure 4B, grey colored box plot) and contribute to virtually
all of the 54 TF lexicons (Figure 4B, green colored boxplot) with lexicon 22 being the
most frequently represented lexicon genome-wide (Figure 4B, top orange colored box
plot). Our interactive heatmap of Figure 4B (Supplementary data: see under Code
availability in Material and Methods) provides a valuable resource for generating new
hypotheses to functionally dissect TF interactions in cells undergoing RAS-OIS. Second,
TF lexicon usage associates with specific chromatin states (Supplementary Figure 4B).
For example, lexicons 21 and 22 are exclusively used for enhancers holding most of the
AP-1 binding instances, while lexicon 50 is strongly related to polycomb repressor

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

complex (PRC)-repressed regions and lexicons 44 and 52 predominantly associate with
promoters. Interestingly among the most prominent TFs in lexicon 50 are the known
PRC-interacting transcriptional co-repressor complex REST and insulator CTCF41,42.
The latter implies that these proteins may recruit PRC to silence or structure genomic
regions, an intriguing possibility that deserves further investigation. Moreover, the
promoter-centric lexicon 52 holds many E2F TFs, which is in line with a primary role of
E2Fs at promoters43.
Next, we developed an algorithm, based on our temporal TF co-binding
information and a previously published TF network (Supplementary Figure 4C)44, to
visualize the hierarchical structure of the senescence TF network. In Figure 4C we show
a representative example of the TF network of SASP gene module VI. The network has
a three-layered architecture: i) a top layer defined exclusively by the AP-1 family of
pioneer TFs ii) a core layer composed mostly of other pioneer and settler TFs, and iii) a
bottom layer characterized by settler and migrant TFs (Figures 4C and Cytoscape
interactive maps in Supplementary Data: see under Code availability in Material and
Methods). The core layer itself separates into a multi-level and single-level core,
depending on the complexity of TF connectivity to the top and bottom layers (Figure 4C).
Remarkably, the organizational logic of the TF network is highly similar, if not identical,
for all gene expression modules despite high transcription factor diversity in the core and
bottom layers (Supplementary data: see under Code availability in Material and
Methods). The TF network topology for RAS-OIS is congruent with the biochemical and
dynamic properties of each TF category (i.e., pioneer, settler or migrant) in each layer of
the network. As the interactions flow from the top to the bottom layer, there is an
increasing dynamicity and number of TFs and a decreasing number of bound regions

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Supplementary Figures 4D-E). Ranking the dynamicity index and the number of bound
regions for all TFs in each network confirmed the hierarchical principles of their
organization, with a common core of highly connected TFs from the top and core layers
shared across all networks (Supplementary Figure 4F, black circle at center). Variability
in the composition of the most dynamic TFs of the core and bottom layers defines the
gene expression module specificity for each network and its corresponding specialized
transcriptional output (Supplementary Figures 4G-I). Thus, TF network topology
imposes and constrains the position of a given TF in the network and thus, its generegulatory contribution. Our data also revealed unanticipated plasticity in transcription
factor binding leading to similar gene expression, thus, refuting the simple rule that coexpression behooves co-regulation45.
Our hierarchical TF network model for RAS-OIS enhancers predicted that the
number of direct target genes regulated by a given TF is a function of its position in the
TF network hierarchy. To test this prediction, we performed transient RNA interference
(siRNA) experiments targeting AP-1-cJUN (top layer), ETS1 (multi-level core layer) and
RELA (single-level core layer) in fully senescent RAS-OIS cells (144 h), determined the
global transcriptome profiles and compared them to the transcriptomes of cells
transfected with a non-targeting siRNA (siCTRL) (Figure 4D). Consistent with the TF
network hierarchy, silencing of AP-1-cJUN affected the most substantial number direct
gene targets (n=5,089), followed by ETS1 (n=2,431) and RELA (n=2,224), thus,
confirming the master regulatory role of AP-1 pioneer TFs at enhancers and in the
execution of the RAS-OIS gene expression program. Specifically, 172 genes were coregulated by the three TFs, while 987 were co-regulated by cJUN and ETS1, 520 by
JUN and RELA, and 293 by ETS and RELA. Correspondence analysis (CA) revealed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that perturbing the function of AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 or RELA could separate faithfully (p =
1.8 x 10-149) up-regulated (V-VII) from down-regulated gene expression modules (I-IV)
(Figure 4E), which aligns perfectly, both with the CA for chromatin states (see Figures
2A-B) and the differential impact of the TFs on RAS-OIS-associated enhancer activation
as predicted in the TF network analysis (Figure 4C and Supplementary data: see under
Code availability in Material and Methods).
We conclude that the senescence response is encoded by a universal threelayered TF network architecture and relies strongly on the exploitation of an enhancer
landscape implemented by AP-1 pioneer TFs to choreograph the OIS transcriptional
program via local, diverse and dynamic interactions with settler and migrant TFs.

Hierarchy Matters: Functional Perturbation of AP-1 pioneer TF, but no other TF,
reverts the senescence clock
Pioneer TFs have been identified as important drivers of cell fate changes during
adaptive and cellular reprogramming as well as in cells undergoing malignant
transformation46,47. As such, they represent attractive targets to manipulate cell fate for
diverse research and therapeutic purposes19.
The identification of AP-1-cJUN as a principal pioneer TF in fibroblasts
undergoing RAS-OIS raised the possibility that perturbing its function could considerably
change the transcriptional trajectory of the OIS cell fate, while perturbation of other TFs
should not. To test this hypothesis, we depleted AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 and RELA at T0, 72 h
and 144 h following oncogenic RAS expression and compared global gene expression
profiles with siCTRL treated cells at identical time-points. Capturing their transcriptional

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

trajectories using PCA illustrated that functional perturbation of ETS1 and RELA shifted
trajectories along the second principal component (PC2, which captures siRNA-related
variability) at any given time-point compared to the control time course, but it did not
affect the timely execution of the RAS-OIS gene expression program, since there is not
shift along the first principal component (PC1, which captures time-related variability).
By contrast, perturbing AP-1-cJUN function shifted trajectories both along PC1 and PC2
and effectively reverted the RAS-OIS transcriptional trajectory to a profile closely related
to that of siCTRL-treated fibroblasts at 72 h after RAS-OIS induction. Silencing AP-1cJUN expression at 72 h also pushed the transcriptional profile closer to control-treated
cells at day T0 (Figure 5A, blue arrow). Functional overrepresentation analyses of the
target genes (direct and/or indirect) of each TF further supported the siJUN-mediated
reversion of the RAS-OIS transcriptional trajectory demonstrating that depletion of AP-1cJUN strongly affected both the repression of the inflammatory response (i.e., the
SASP) and a partial reactivation of pro-proliferation genes (i.e., E2F, G2M and mitotic
spindle targets) (Figure 5B and Supplementary Figures 5A-C). A complete exit of
senescence is not expected here, however, as AP-1 is absolutely required for
proliferation48,49.
To quantify and visualize the temporal overlaps in differentially expressed genes
between siJUN and siCTRL-treated cells we used an UpSet plot (Supplementary
Figures 5D) and expression heatmaps (Figure 5C and Supplementary Figures 5E-G).
Congruent with a resetting of the senescence clock, a significant number of proproliferation E2F target genes (14%; e.g. CCNB2 or CDCA8) were up-regulated
(Supplementary Figure 5E) and NF-κB-regulated SASP target genes (e.g. IL1B or IL6)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were down-regulated (60%) (Supplementary Figure 5F). cJUN-depleted RAS-OIS cells
also shared a similar expression profile for a subset of genes (27%) of the Notch-1
intracellular domain (NC1ID)-induced senescence (NIS) transcriptional signature50 that
develops within the first 72-96 h of RAS-OIS (Supplementary Figure 5G). Thus, AP-1
inhibition is a powerful and save means to potently repress SASP expression in
senescent cells without affecting their cell cycle arrest.
Altogether, these data identify AP-1 as a master regulator and molecular “timekeeper” of senescence. Our detailed description of the layered TF network architecture
will facilitate targeted disruption of TFs to manipulate specific features of the
senescence phenotype for future therapeutic benefit.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

DISCUSSION
Exploiting senescence targeting for treating age-related diseases and cancer requires a
detailed knowledge of the transcriptional, epigenetic, and signaling mechanisms defining
the basis and realization of the senescence program, which is currently missing. To fill
this critical gap in our knowledge, we used a dynamic, multidimensional approach at
high-resolution to define the gene-regulatory code driving the senescence cell fate.
A central finding of our study is that the senescence program is defined and driven
by a predetermined enhancer landscape that is sequentially (in)activated during the
senescence process. AP1 is instrumental for this predetermination by imprinting a
prospective senescence enhancer landscape that, in the absence of traditional
enhancer histone-modification marks, foreshadows future transcriptional activation. This
is a surprising discovery given that AP-1 transcriptional activation has been traditionally
linked to growth-factor and MAPK signaling51. There is, however, now accumulating
evidence that AP-1 also plays an essential role as a pioneering factor for establishing
cell type-specific enhancers and cellular identities52,53. In line with its role in pioneering
and bookmarking enhancers, we show that AP-1 is also recruited de novo as a first line
TF to “virgin” enhancers and that it serves as a molecular memory for enhancers that
become inactivated during the senescence fate transition that we termed “remnant”
enhancers. Based on these findings we propose a model by which “enhancer recycling”
of AP1-bookmarked future and past enhancer activities is an evolutionary conserved
mechanism that allows for modular and flexible, yet, efficient transcriptional responses
to incoming signals. We stipulate that the senescence program is preserved through AP1 binding to enhancer chromatin as part of epigenetic memory of the cell’s
developmental (stress) history bypassing histone modification-dependent bookmarking

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

to store genomic information. Further, given the pristine specificity of the newly identified
prospective and remnant enhancers they can be used as urgently needed specific,
rather than associated, senescence biomarkers and to predict a cell’s potential to
undergo senescence. This latter carries also important translational implications for
identifying cancers that would respond positively to pro-senescence therapy. A natural
question that arises from our data is whether the senescence program is universal to all
inducing stimuli and cell types or if multiple senescence programs exist. Based on the
data presented here and work in progress, we predict that the organizational principles
of the senescence program we defined here hold for all cell types and inducers.
Additional time-resolved studies of various inducers in different cell types are required
and currently ongoing to answer this question definitively.
Another key finding is the reversibility of senescence by an informed intervention on
network topology that we delineated in this study. Indeed, silencing the function of a
single TF sitting atop the TF network hierarchy, AP-1, is sufficient to revert the
“senescence clock”. We thus define after the “telomere clock” a second, “epigenomicenhancer clock” regulating the senescence process. Why does functional AP-1
perturbation not lead to complete senescence exit? Based on published49 and our own
results we surmise that AP1 depletion does not lead to a full cell cycle re-entry and
proliferation, because AP1 plays important roles for proliferation. Thus, AP1 confines
cells to their existing proliferative state and therefore may be viewed as a ‘locking
device’ that restricts cells to their current state. However, we provide compelling
evidence that functional inhibition of AP1 factors reverts the senescence transcriptional
program and potently represses the expression of the pro-inflammatory senescenceassociated secretory phenotype (SASP). This finding has great therapeutic potential, as

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pharmacological interference with AP1 using selective inhibitors (e.g. improved T-5224
derivatives) would allow to control effectively the detrimental effects of the SASP in
promoting cancer and other age-related diseases54-56. In summary, we believe that AP1
is a prime target for therapeutic SASP modulation in vivo.
By determining the layered architecture/organizational principles of the TF network
that orchestrate(s) the transition to OIS, we revealed the plasticity and stability of the
senescent phenotype. We show that a highly flexible, combinatorial TF interactome
establishes the senescence program, which is in line with the TF network dynamics
during hematopoietic and stem cell differentiation57,58. In addition, we demonstrate that
targeted engineering of specific nodes at different layers of the TF network disrupts
gene expression with a corresponding magnitude, suggesting a path for the
manipulation of the senescent phenotype in vivo. Pharmacological inhibition of TFs (see
above for AP-1), signal transduction molecules, such as kinases or acetylases that
converge in the activation of TFs, could represent a viable approach for manipulating the
senescent phenotype in vivo59. Alternatively, small molecules that prevent TF-TF
combinatorial interactions could also be envisioned60.
In conclusion, the present work emphasizes the advantages of, and indeed the need
for, integrating time-resolved genome-wide profiles to describe and interrogate the
transition to senescence. This approach generates detailed knowledge necessary to
develop strategies for manipulating/engineering the senescent cell fate (and other cell
fate transitions) in vivo for research and therapeutic purposes. Overall, our study
provides a comprehensive resource for the generation of novel hypotheses regarding
senescence regulation, offers important mechanistic, regulatory insights that could

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

translate to the study of other cell fate transitions and provide new inroads for the
diagnosis and manipulation of the senescence state in age-related diseases and cancer.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MATERIAL AND METHODS
Cell culture
WI-38 fibroblasts (purchased from ECCAC) were cultured in Dulbecco’s Modified
Eagle’s medium (DMEM) containing 10% FBS and 1X Primocin (Invivogen) at 37ºC and
3% oxygen. WI-38-ER: RASV12 fibroblasts were generated by retroviral transduction as
previously described9. Senescence was induced by addition of 400 nM 4hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT, Sigma Cat no. H7904-5MG) to the culture medium and
samples were collected and processed at the time points indicated in the main text.
Replicative senescent cells were generated by proliferative exhaustion and were used
for experiments when cell cultures went through 1 population (PD) per 3 weeks, were
>80% positive for senescence-associated beta galactosidase activity (SABG) and
stained negative for EdU (see below for details). For the induction of quiescence, WI-38
fibroblasts were cultured in DMEM containing 0.2% FBS for up to 4 consecutive days
and samples were collected and processed as described in the main text.

ATAC-seq
The transposition reaction and library construction were performed as previously
described24. Briefly, 50,000 cells from each time point of the senescence time course (2
biological replicates) were collected, washed in 1X in PBS and centrifuged at 500 x g at
4ºC for 5 min. Nuclei were extracted by incubation of cells in Nuclear Extraction Buffer
(NEB) containing 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1% IGEPAL
CA-630 and immediately centrifuging at 500 x g at 4ºC for 5 min. The supernatant was
carefully removed by pipetting, and the transposition was performed by resuspension of
nuclei in 50 µL of Transposition Mix containing 1X TD Buffer (Illumina) and 2.5 µL Tn5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Illumina) for 30 min at 37ºC. DNA was extracted using the QIAGEN MinElute kit.
Libraries were produced by PCR amplification (12-14 cycles) of tagmented DNA using
the NEB Next High-Fidelity 2x PCR Master Mix (New England Biolabs). Library quality
was assessed in an Agilent Bioanalyzer 2100. Paired-end sequencing was performed in
an Illumina Hiseq 2500. Typically, 30-50 million reads per library are required for
downstream analyses.

Histone modification and transcription factor ChIP-seq
WI-38-ER: RASV12 fibroblasts were treated with 400 nM 4-OHT for 0, 72 and 144
hours, and 107 cells (per time point, minimum two biological replicates) were fixed in 1%
formaldehyde for 15 min, quenched in 2M glycine for additional 5 min and pelleted by
centrifugation at 2,000 rpm, 4ºC for 4 min. For histone modification ChIP-seq, nuclei
were extracted in Extraction Buffer 2 (0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM
MgCl2, 1% Triton X-100 and proteinase inhibitor cocktail) on ice for 10 min followed by
centrifugation at 3,000 x g at 4ºC for 10 min. The supernatant was removed and nuclei
were resuspended in Nuclei Lysis Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1%
SDS and proteinase inhibitor cocktail). Sonication was performed using a Diagenode
Picoruptor until the desired average fragment size (100-500 bp) was obtained. Soluble
chromatin was obtained by centrifugation at 11,500 rpm for 10 min at 4ºC and chromatin
was diluted 10-fold. Immunoprecipitation was performed overnight at 4ºC with rotation
using 1-2 x 106 cell equivalents per immunoprecipitation using antibodies (5 µg) against
H3K4me1 (Abcam), H3K27ac (Abcam), H3K4me3 (Millipore), H3K27me3 (Millipore).
Subsequently, 30 µL of Ultralink Resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was added and
allowed to tumble for 4h at 4ºC. The resin was pelleted by centrifugation and washed

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

three times in low salt buffer (150 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1% Triton X-100, 20 mM EDTA,
20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), one time in high salt buffer (500 mM NaCl, 0.1% SDS, 1%
Triton X-100, 20 mM EDTA, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), two times in lithium chloride buffer
(250 mM LiCl, 1% IGEPAL CA-630, 15 sodium deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM TrisHCl pH 8.0) and two times in TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA). For transcription
factor ChIP-seq, fibroblasts were treated as described above except that chromatin was
isolated using the enzymatic SimpleChIP kit (Cell Signaling) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions, obtaining chromatin with an average fragment length of 4-5
nucleosomes. Immunoprecipitation was performed overnight at 4ºC with rotation using
6-10 x 106 cell equivalents per immunoprecipitation using antibodies (5 µg) against
cJUN, FOSL2 and RELA (Santa Cruz Biotechnologies) and processed as described
above. Washed beads were resuspended in elution buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0, 5 mM
EDTA, 300 mM NaCl, 0.5% SDS) treated with RNAse H (30 min, 37 ºC) and Proteinase
K (2 h, 37ºC), 1 µL glycogen (20 mg/mL, Ambion) was added, and decrosslinked
overnight at 65 ºC. For histone modifications, DNA was recovered by mixing the
decrosslinked supernatant with 2.2X SPRI beads followed by 4 min incubation at RT.
The SPRI beads were washed twice in 80% ethanol, allowed to dry, and DNA was
eluted by in 35 µL 10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0. For transcription factors, DNA was eluted by
phenol/chloroform extraction (2X) followed by ethanol precipitation overnight at -20ºC.
The DNA pellet was washed with 70% ethanol, allowed to dry, and DNA was
resuspended in 35 µL 10 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.0. Histone modification libraries were
constructed using the NextFlex ChIP-seq kit (Bioo Scientific) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Libraries were amplified for 12 cycles. Transcription factor
libraries were constructed using a modified protocol from the Accel-NGS 2S Plus DNA

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Library Kit (#21024), where we performed DNA extraction at each step using 25:24:1
phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol followed by overnight ethanol precipitation of DNA at
each step of the protocol. Additionally, we enriched for small DNA fragments using
AMPure-XP beads (Beckman-Coulter (#A63881). Libraries were then resuspended in
20 µL of low EDTA-TE buffer. Libraries were quality controlled in an Agilent
Technologies 4200 Tapestation (G2991-90001) and quantified using the Invitrogen
Qubit DS DNA HS Assay kit (Q32854). Libraries were sequenced using an Illumina
High-Seq 2500. Typically, 30-50 million reads were required for downstream analyses.

RNA and microarrays
RNA from each time point from the senescence and quiescence time series (2 biological
replicates) was purified using the QIAGEN RNeasy Plus kit according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. 100 ng RNA per sample was analyzed using Affymetrix
Human Transcriptome Arrays 2.0, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

EdU staining and senescence-associated beta galactosidase activity (SABG)
Representative samples from the senescent and quiescent time series were evaluated
for EdU incorporation using the Click-iT EdU Alexa Fluor Imaging Kit (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. SABG activity was assessed as
previously described61. Cells were imaged in a Zeiss confocal fluorescence microscope
and images analyzed using the ZEN suite.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RNA interference
Small interfering RNAs (20 µM) targeting JUN (QIAGEN, Ambion), ETS1 (QIAGEN) and
RELA (QIAGEN) as well as non-targeting controls were transfected into WI-38-ER:
RASV12 using siIMPORTER reagent (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (minimum 2 biological replicates per transcription factor per time course
experiment). RAS-OIS was induced with 400 nM 4-OHT concomitantly with the addition
of DMEM containing 20% FBS 4 hours after transfection and incubated overnight.
Sixteen hours after transfection, cells were replenished with new media containing 10%
FBS and 400 nM 4-OHT, and RNA was isolated at indicated time points and analyzed in
Affymetrix Human Transcriptome Arrays 2.0.

Expression microarray pre-processing
Raw Affymetrix HTA 2.0 array intensity data were analyzed using open-source
Bioconductor packages on R. The quiescence and the RAS-OIS time series data were
normalized together (2 conditions, 2 biological replicates per condition, 6 time points per
replicates) using the robust multi-array average normalization approach implemented in
the oligo package. Internal control probe sets were removed and average expression
deciles over time-points were independently defined for each treatment. Probes whose
average expression was lower than the 4th expression decile in both conditions were
removed for subsequent analyses. To remove sources of variation and account for
batch effects, data were finally corrected with the sva package. To recover as much
annotation information as possible, we combined Affymetrix HTA 2.0 annotations
provided by Affymetrix and Ensembl through the packages hta20sttranscriptcluster.db
and biomaRt. Principal component analysis and bi-clustering based on Pearson’s

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

correlation and Ward’s aggregation criterion were used to confirm consistency between
biological replicates and experimental conditions at each step of the pre-processing.

Self-organizing maps (SOM)
Normalized log-scaled and filtered expression values were processed using the
unsupervised machine learning method implemented in oposSOM25 to train a selforganizing map. This algorithm applies a neural network algorithm to project high
dimensional data onto a two-dimensional visualization space. In this application, we
used a two-dimensional grid of size 60 x 60 metagenes of rectangular topology. The
SOM portraits were then plotted using a logarithmic fold-change scale. To define
modules of co-expressed meta-genes, we used a clustering approach relying on
distance matrix and implemented in oposSOM. Briefly, clusters of gene expression were
determined based on the patterns of the distance map which visualizes the mean
Euclidean distance of each SOM unit to its adjacent neighbors. This clustering algorithm
– referred to as D-clustering – finds the SOM units referring to local maxima of their
mean distance with respect to their neighbors. These pixels form halos edging the
relevant clusters in the respective distance map and enable robust determination of
feature clusters in the SOM. We finally performed a gene set over-representation
analysis in each cluster considering the Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB)
hallmark gene sets using a right-tail modified Fisher’s exact test and the hypergeometric
distribution to provide p-value.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Correlation and multidimensional analyses
To highlight differences in expression profiles between quiescence and RAS-OIS
through time, we used multi-dimensional scaling plot representing leading fold change,
which is defined as the root-mean-square average of the log-fold-changes for the genes
best distinguishing each pair of samples. To quantify the evolution of transcriptomic
variability and noise through time, we looked at the gene expression density distributions
for all possible pairs of treated vs T0 transcriptomes. Distributions were estimated using
kernel density estimation of all genes’ expression in the

th

T0 transcriptome and the th

treated transcriptome. We also computed Pearson’s correlation for each of these
combinations. The Pearson’s correlation between two transcriptomes,  and 
containing  gene expressions, is obtained by , 
where

and  are the

th





∑





 ⁄ 

,

observation in the vectors  and  respectively,  and  the

average values of each transcriptome, and  and  , the corresponding standard
deviations.

Information theory – derived metrics
To evaluate transcriptome diversity and specialization, we used an approach based on
information theory as described in 26.

Gene expression time series analysis
Normalized log-scaled and filtered expression data related to the quiescence and the
OIS time series were further considered for differential analysis with limma62. To define
an RAS-OIS specific transcriptomic signature, we proceeded in three steps, each relying

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on linear mixed model cubic B-splines, as nonlinear response patterns are commonly
encountered in time course biological data. For each probe, and each treatment the
expression was modeled as follow:


  

with 



 





∑



1 

 

 




 







 

where  is the average probe expression over all samples in a given condition, 

the

model coefficients,  the number of knots,  the th knot and  the error term. First, we
defined probes responding over time to RASV12 induction. Second, we considered all
together the quiescence and the RAS-OIS time series, as well as the interaction
between time and treatment, and defined probes responding to one or the other
treatment over time, as well as probes responding differently between the two
treatments at any time point. We finally defined the set of probes responding
consistently to both treatment and time and removed these probes from the global set of
probes responding to RASV12 induction defined at the first step. Moderated F-statistics
that combine the empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics for all contrasts into an overall
test of significance for each probe were used to assess the significance of the observed
expression changes. At any step of this workflow, p-values were corrected for multiple
testing using the FDR approach for a stringent significance level of 0.005. For validation
purposes, we also wanted to compress the RAS-OIS time-series and achieve a volcano
plot representation. To do so, we’ve computed the maximal absolute log2 fold change in
expression in the RAS-OIS time series considering T0 as the reference and selected up
and down regulated probes using an absolute log2 fold change cutoff at 1.2 and a
corrected p-value cutoff of 0.005. We then build a scatter-plot plotting the log10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

significance versus log2 fold-change on the y and x axes, respectively. Probes
responding consistently to both ER: RASV12 induction and quiescence were finally
over-plotted.

Gene expression unsupervised clustering
Probes constitutive of the RAS-OIS specific transcriptomic signature were clustered
using the weighted gene correlated network analysis approach implemented in the
WGCNA R package63. Standard WGCNA parameters were used for the analysis, with
the exceptions of soft-thresholding power which was defined using methods described
by and set at 18. The 7 co-expressed probe clusters identified were further functionally
characterized using gene set over-representation tests. The same approach as
previously described for the SOM-defined clusters was used.

Histone modification ChIP-seq data processing
Reads were cleaned and trimmed using fastq-mcf from the ea-utils suite v1.1.2 to
remove adapters, low quality bases and reads, and discard reads shorter than 25 bp
after filtering. Reads were then aligned to the human reference genome (hg19) with
bowtie v1.1.1 using best matches parameters (bowtie -v 2 -m 1 --best --strata).
Alignment files were further processed with samtools v1.2 and PicardTools v1.130 to
flag PCR and optical duplicates and remove alignments located in Encode blacklisted
regions. Fragment size was estimated in silico for each library using spp v1.10.1.
Genome-wide consistency between replicates was checked using custom R scripts.
Enriched regions were identified for each replicate independently with MACS v2.1.0 with
non-IPed genomic DNA as a control (macs2 callpeak --nomodel --shiftsize --shift-control

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

--gsize hs -p 1e-1). These relaxed peak lists were then processed through the
irreproducible discovery rate (IDR) pipeline64 to generate an optimal and reproducible
set of peaks for each histone modification and each time point.

ATAC-seq data processing
Paired-ends reads were cropped to 100bp with trimmomatic v0.3665 and cleaned using
cutadapt v1.8.366 to remove Nextera adapters, low quality bases and reads, and discard
reads shorter than 25 bp after filtering. Fragments were then aligned to the human
reference genome (hg19) using bowtie2 v2.2.3 discarding inconsistent pairs and
considering a maximum insert size of 2kb (bowtie2 -N 0 --no-mixed --no-discordant -minins 30 --maxins 2000). Alignment files were further processed with samtools v1.2
and PicardTools v1.130 to flag PCR and optical duplicates and remove alignments
located in Encode blacklisted regions. Accessible regions were identified using MACS2
v2.1.0 without control (macs2 callpeak --gsize hs -p 1e-3). These relaxed peak lists were
then processed through the irreproducible discovery rate (IDR) pipeline to generate an
optimal and reproducible set of peaks for each time point.

Normalized ATAC-seq and ChIP-seq signal tracks
After verifying the consistency between biological replicates, time points and data type
using deepTools67, alignments related to biological replicates for a given assay and a
given time point were combined. We then binned the genome in 200bp non-overlapping
windows and generated genome-wide read count matrices for each assay

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

independently. These matrices were finally quantile normalized with custom R script and
further used to generate genome-wide signal tracts.

Histone modification ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq differential analysis
After assessing library saturation using preseqR, alignment and peak data were
imported and pre-processed in R using the DiffBind package68. Briefly, for a given
histone modification type, we first defined the global reproducible peak set as the union
of each time-specific reproducible peak sets defined previously. We then counted the
number of reads mapping inside each of these intervals at each time point and for each
replicate. The raw count matrix was then normalized for sequencing depth using a nonlinear full quantile normalization as implemented in the EDASeq package69. To remove
sources of unwanted variation and consider batch effects, data were finally corrected
with the RUVSeq70 package considering 2 surrogate variables. Differential analyses for
count data were performed using edgeR71 considering time and batch in the design
matrix, by fitting a negative binomial generalized log-linear model to the read counts for
each peak. Peaks were finally annotated using ChIPpeakAnno considering annotations
provided by Ensembl v86.

Chromatin state differential analysis
To quantify and define combinatorial chromatin state dynamics in space and time, we
analyzed histone modification combinations with the chromstaR package72. Briefly, after
partitioning the genome into 100bp non-overlapping bins and counting the number of
reads mapping into each bin at each time point and for each histone modification, this

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

algorithm relies on a univariate Hidden Markov Model (HMM) with two hidden states
(unmodified, modified). This HMM is used to fit the parameters of the two-component
mixture of zero-inflated negative binomial distribution considered to model read counts
for every ChIP-seq experiments. A multivariate HMM is then used to assign every bin in
the genome to one of the multivariate components considering 2(3 time points x 4 histone
modifications)

possible states. To limit computational burden and focus on accurate

differences, the analysis was run in differential mode with a 100bp resolution (i.e.
smaller than a single nucleosome), such that every mark is first analyzed separately with
all conditions combined while the full combinatorial state dynamics is rebuilt by
combining the differential calls obtained for the four marks. We finally filtered out
differential calls not overlapping with any histone modification and ATAC-seq
reproducible peaks. To properly associate histone modification combinations with
biologically meaningful mnemonics, we made an extensive comparison between the
binning we obtained in WI38 fibroblasts undergoing RAS-OIS and IMR90 fetal lung
fibroblasts chromatin states described in the scope of the Epigenomic Roadmap
consortium. To test for association between changes in chromatin states through time
and gene expression modules we ran a correspondence analysis. Briefly, genomic loci
experiencing changes in chromatin states through time were first associated to the
nearest gene. We then specifically focused on loci associated to genes belonging to any
expression module and built a two-way contingency table summarizing the number of
transition in states (considering all possible combinations) occurring in each expression
module, further used as an input for a correspondence analysis using FactoMineR73.
The significance of association between the two qualitative variables (transition in state
and module) was assed using a 2 test. Results of the CA were visualized using a row-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

metric-preserving contribution asymmetric biplot and filtering for the top contributing and
well-projected (squared cosine > 0.5) changes in chromatin states.

Motif enrichment analysis in active enhancers
For each time point independently, we defined the set of active enhancers as the
overlap between H3K4me1, H3K27ac and ATAC-seq reproducible peaks using
bedtools74. We then ran 3 independent motif enrichment analyses with homer v4.975
using default parameters.

Transcription factor footprinting
All transcription factor Position-Weight Matrices (PWM) representing eukaryote
transcription factors were downloaded from the JASPAR database and used as an input
for PIQ21 to predict transcription factor binding sites from the genome sequence on
down-sampled ATAC-seq alignments. For each motif, we retained only binding sites that
were within the reproducible ATAC-seq peaks and passed the default purity cut-off
(70%). We then computed pairwise PWM similarities based on Pearson’s correlation,
and clustered together PWMs sharing more than 90% similarity, defining a set of 310
non-redundant and distinct PWMs. The Pearson’s correlation between two PWM




of length ! was defined as:

"



,



1
!



#$


∑,,,%
+∑,,,%


,


,

0.25*%


0.25*


,

0.25*

# ∑,,,%


,



0.25*

We further combined the bound instances identified with PIQ according to the PWM
clustering.

and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Transcription factor metrics
For each transcription factor, we computed the chromatin-opening index (COI), the motif
dependence and the chromatin dependence (CD) following the approach described in
21

.

Validation of PIQ predictions through ChIP-seq
To compare PIQ prediction with RELA, JUN and FOSL2 ChIP-seq data, we first used
the approach suggested in 21, computing how many of the total ChIP-seq peaks are
overlapping with any potential factor motif (since ChIP-Seq peaks can result from cofactor binding, and methods such as digital genomic footprinting are factor agnostic). We
then used a more sophisticated approach aiming at correlating the ChIP-seq signal
intensity with the bound / unbound status at PWM matches. For a given transcription
factor (cJUN, FOSL2 or RELA,), we first considered all the PWM matches located inside
ATAC-seq reproducible peaks, we selected all the PWM matches assigned with a purity
score > 0.7 (the threshold used to define “bound” instances), and then randomly
selected 3 times more PWM matches assigned to a purity score < 0.7 (considered as
“unbound” instances) to obtain a global set containing 25% / 75% of bound / unbound
instances for each TF. The selected regions were extended up to 2kb (1kb in each
direction, from the middle of the match), and the 2kb intervals were binned in one
hundred 20bp windows. We computed the normalized ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq signal
inside each bin. The windows were finally ranked according to the summed ChIP-seq
signal in the 10 most central bins (200bp). We finally run a set enrichment analysis with
the fgsea package to assess whether bound / unbound PWM matches were enriched /
depleted along this ranking and computed the enrichment score (ES, positive when

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bound instances are enriched for highest ChIP-seq signals, negative when unbound
instances are depleted for highest ChIP-seq signals) and p-values which revealed the
strength of the correlation. We performed 1,000 permutations to obtain p-values.

Distribution of transcription factor binding sites in space and time
Using the R package annotatr we first created an annotation datasets combining
coordinates for hg19 promoters, 3’UTRs, exons, introns and intergenic regions as
defined in UCSC, as well as our custom set of enhancers (intersection of the global sets
of reproducible H3K4me1 peaks with global sets of reproducible H3K27ac peaks, to
focus on enhancers that are active at least in one time point during RAS OIS in WI38
fibroblasts). We then annotated the PIQ binding occurrences for each of the PWM
independently, and for the 6 time-points independently. Data were further normalized, to
account for differences between time-points in the total number of bound occurrences
summed across PWM, and finally they were converted to frequencies. We filtered TFs
for which less than 100 binding sites were identified throughout the entire timecourse.
TFs were ordered according to the proportions of binding sites located in promoters,
introns or exons, and we finally computed the density in migrant, settler and pioneer
factors along the ranking.

Transcription factor co-binding
For every cluster of PWM and time-point independently, we first removed all the bound
instances identified outside enhancers. The remaining bound instances for all PWM
were then combined for every time point using GEM regulatory module discovery40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

setting at 500 bp the minimal distance for merging nearby TF bound instances into cobinding regions and at 3 the minimum number of TF bound instances in a co-binding
region.
Global pairwise co-binding heatmap. At this step, we obtained a set of contingency
matrices Mmt of dimension  #  with i the number of co-binding regions for the
transcriptomic module m at the time point t and j = 310 PWM clusters, for each time
point and each transcriptomic module. We then generated module- and time- specific
normalized pairwise co-binding matrices Cmt by computing the normalized cross-product
of matrices Mmt defined as:
,

- #



-

∑ ∑ ∑ .



# 10

with atmj the number of bound instances for the PWM clusters j, in transcriptomic module
m, at the time point t. To get a global picture of pairwise co-binding, we summed these
matrices and tested for each combination of PWM clusters A and B whether the overlap
between bound instances for A and B was significant using a hyper-geometric test
defined as:
   ,

/0, -, , 

$


0
1 31
2


2

3

0
1 3
2

where Q is the overall number of regions in the universe, M is the number of regions
bound by A, n is the number of regions bound by B, and k the total number of regions
bound by A and B. The p-values were further corrected for multiple testing using the
Bonferroni strategy. We finally clustered the co-binding occurrence matrix using Ward’s
aggregation criterion and projected corresponding corrected q-values on this clustering.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Pair-wise co-binding circos plots. To generate the co-binding circos plots, we used the
global time- and, module-specific pair-wise normalized co-binding matrix Cmt described
above, after a logarithmic transformation. For each time-point and module
independently, we selected the top 500 interactions based on their occurrence N. The
images were generated using the Circos suite76.

Identification of TF regulatory modules
We used the data-sets generated using GEM regulatory module discovery described
above. We applied a Hierarchical Dirichlet Process topic model which automatically
determines the number of topics from the data, with the hyperparameter for the topic
Dirichlet distribution set at 0.1 (encoding the assumption that most of the topics contains
a few TFs) and the maximum number of iterations set at 2000. The lexicon usage for
each time point and each transcriptomic was explored using a multiple factor analysis
(MFA) with the R package FactoMineR, and lexicons were further selected based on
their goodness of representation on the 3 first components (squared cosine > 0.5).

TF properties
With the aim of characterizing the binding properties of each TF, we computed the
dynamicity, the total number of bound regions, the fraction of bound regions in
enhancers and the fraction of bound regions before stimulation.
Dynamicity. We quantified the dynamicity of a TF accordingly to the following
expression:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

∑
4 5
∑

 5
6
7 5
6

where 45 is the dynamicity of TF A;  5 is the number of regions bound by A for the
first time at time point 7 ; 7 5 is the number of regions bound by A at time point 7 and
6

is the number of regions bound by any TF in time point 7. The factor 6 was added

to the expression to account for differences in the number of reads sequenced by the
ATAC-seq protocol and normalizes the number of regions bound by TF A based on the
number of bound regions detected at its corresponding time point. Notice that, if all
samples have the same amount of TF binding events, this expression is reduced to the
quotient of the sum of the regions first bound at each time point by the sum of all regions
bound by the TF at each time point. By using this definition, the function 45 maps the
activity of a TF to the interval 8



೟

, 19,

where : is the number of time points in the

timecourse and is higher as the TF binds to previously not bound regions or leaves
already bound regions. In the case of a TF that, for every time point, leaves all its
previous bound regions and binds to only regions not previously bound, the numerator
will be identical to the denominator, leading to 45
the same regions it has bound at 7
4 5


೟

0

, then ∑ 

1.


Alternatively, if a TF remains on

and ∑ 7

: ; 

, resulting in

. One can observe that, if the same region is bound by TF A in different time

points, it will contribute once to the numerator of the expression, while it will contribute to
the denominator once for each time point it has been bound to.
Total number of bound regions. The number of bound regions was calculated by the
following the expression:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

∑
5

 5

# ∑ 6

6

:

where 5 is the normalized number of bound regions by TF A during the timecourse
and  5 , 6 and : are defined as above. The first factor is a normalized sum of the
regions bound by TF A, counting each region only once. The second factor scales the
result by the mean of the number of regions bound by all TFs on each day.
TF percentage of binding at enhancers. The ratio of binding at enhancers, relative to all
cis regulatory regions, was assessed by:

 5

where



5

 5
 5   5

is the percentage of bound regions in enhancers for TF A,  5 is the

number of regions bound by TF A marked as enhancers and  5 is the number of
regions bound by TF A marked as promoters.
TF prestimulation binding. For each TF, we computed the ratio of regions bound at T0,
relative to the number of regions bound during the whole timecourse. We used the
following definition for the prestimulation binding factor for each TF:

/5



5

6
∑



 5
6

where /5 corresponds to the prestimulation binding of TF A and  5 and 6 are
defined as above. The numerator of this expression corresponds to the normalized
number of regions bound by TF A at t = T0, while the denominator is the normalized
number of regions bound by TF A during the whole timecourse. Notice the denominator
also corresponds to factor 5 before scaling.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hierarchical transcription factor network
In order to assess the TF chromatin binding hierarchy, i.e. TFs required for the binding
of a specific TF, we generated a network for each gene module depicting the
precedence of TF chromatin binding. The algorithms mentioned were implemented in R
and all networks were visualized in CytoScape77.
Computing precedence relationships. The edges in the generated networks represent
the precedence relationship of TFs: an oriented edge from TF A to TF B, represented as
(A, B), means that A was present in at least 30 % of the cis-regulatory regions bound by
B at the same instant or before44. To account for the difference in the number of reads
sequenced for each sample in the ATAC-seq, we normalized the number of regions
bound based on the first day they appeared. The weight of an edge from A to B is given
by:

∑  ,

 



∑ 
where   stands for the number of regions first bound by TF B at time point ;

 , , for the number of regions first bound by TF B at time point

that were bound by

TF A at time point or before; and  represents the total number of regions bound by
any TF in time point . In order to handle the networks, we used the igraph package78.
Network simplification. Aiming to analyze the hierarchical relationship of TFs and
simplify the interpretation of the network, we performed two operations over each gene
module network: Vertex Sort and transitive reduction (TR)79. Briefly, the vertex sort
algorithm assigns two parameters for each node in the network: the distance, in edges,
between the node and the bottom of the network; and the distance between the node

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

and the top of the network. Combined, those parameters allow for the topological
ordering of the network, which consists in listing its nodes such that nodes at the top
precede downstream nodes. We then defined the ’top layer’ as the set of nodes with
lowest distance to the top of the network, i.e., nodes that have no incoming edges or
nodes that assemble a strongly connected component (SCC) with all upstream nodes.
Analogously, the ’bottom layer’ was defined as the set of nodes with lowest distance to
the bottom of the network, i.e., nodes with no outgoing edges or that form a SCC with all
downstream nodes. The ’core layer’ comprises nodes that link top layer and bottom
layer. Nodes in the core layer that are exactly one edge from both top and bottom layers
constitute the ’single-level core layer’, while nodes that link top and bottom through
paths composed of more than one edge form the ’multi-level core layer’. The result of
this procedure for each gene module can be seen in Figure 4 and supplementary data.
The TR, in turn, simplifies the network visualization by generating the network with the
smallest number of edges that keeps the reachability of the original network.
Network validation. We validated our approach by comparing the network produced
when applying our method to the ChIP-seq data produced by 44 with the network they
obtained. Transcription factor ChIP-seq peak files were retrieved from Gene Expression
Omnibus (GSE36099, 23 TFs, and 4 time points; note that RUNX1 and ATF4 were
discarded from the analysis since one and three time points, respectively, were missing
on GEO for those TFs) and preprocessed as previously described to generated time
resolved co-binding matrices, further used as an input for our networking algorithm. We
computed the precedence relationships among TFs and generated the TF binding
hierarchy networks for visualization. We compared the produced TF hierarchy network
with the network shown in Figure S4 and in 44 using two metrics: sensitivity and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

specificity. Sensitivity is calculated as the ratio of edges described in this study over the
edge number sum for both networks. Specificity is defined as the ratio of the number of
edges that were described to not exist in the network produced by our software over the
number of edges described to not occur in any of both studies.
Proportion of incoming edges based on the classification of the TF source node. Aiming
to assess the hierarchy of TFs accordingly to their chromatin dependence and
chromatin-opening index, we computed the number of edges connecting the sets of all
TFs with a given classification for each gene module. We then divided those values by
the number of edges that target TFs with a specific classification. Hence, the proportion
of incoming edges based on TF classification is given by:


|
|
 ∑|  |


where  is the proportion of edges from nodes with classification C1 to nodes with
classification C2;

 is the set of edges from nodes with classification C1 to nodes

with classification C2;  can represent either pioneer, settler or migrant and || means the
cardinality of a set, i.e. the number of elements it contains.
We assessed the classification precedence significance for TF interaction with a
hyper-geometric test. We consider the sample space as all possible oriented edges in a
network with the same number of nodes for each classification as the hierarchy network
for a given transcriptional module. Formally:

 , , ,



∑

||
|಴భ՜಴మ |

಴భ՜಴మ

 ಴భ՜಴మ
|| 
||

Where is the number of edges on the sample space network, i.e., a fully
connected network with the same number of nodes as the TF hierarchy network for a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

given transcriptional module (excluding self-loops), is the number of edges from
TFs with classification 1to TFs with classification 2 in the sample space network,

| |is the number of edges on the TF hierarchy network for a given transcriptional
module and |  |is the number of edges in the same network connecting TFs with
classification 1to TFs with classification 2.
Network visualization. In order to visualize the network, we exported the adjacency
matrices in the R environment to CytoScape using the CyREST API80. The networks’
layout and style were automated with the help of packages RCy381 and RJSONIO.

Network mining
With the purpose of identifying key TFs in the transition to the senescent phenotype, we
analyzed the TF binding characteristics with their relative location in the chromatin
binding hierarchy networks for each gene module. The figures illustrating this analysis
were generated with the help of the ggplot2 R package.
TF classification. For each network relative to a transcriptional gene module, the number
of TF classified as either pioneer, settler or migrant was calculated for each layer, with
the subdivision of the core layer as ’multi-level’ and ’single-level’ (see “Network
simplification”). The overrepresentation of TFs with a specific classification in a given
layer was evaluated by using a hypergeometric test. We calculated the p-value given by:

   
, ,,   

where K is the number of TFs with a certain classification in the whole network, N is the
number of TFs in the network; n is the number of TFs that belong to a specific layer and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

k is the number of TFs that belong to the same layer and have the referred
classification. The p-values were corrected for multiple testing with FDR and a corrected
p = 0.05 was considered an indicative of enrichment for that specific classification in the
corresponding layer.
TF dynamicity. For each network relative to a transcriptional gene module, we compared
the distribution of the dynamicity of TFs belonging to a certain layer with the distribution
of the dynamicity of TFs belonging to the rest of the network. We used the dynamicity
index defined previously for each TF, considering only the regions marked as enhancers
belonging only to the gene module relative to the network. For each layer in the network,
we applied the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to compare the TF dynamicity distribution for
the chosen layer with the dynamicity distribution relative to the TFs belonging to three
other layers in the respective network. To account for multiple hypothesis testing, we
also performed an FDR correction, considering values of p = 0.05 as an indicative of
statistical significance.
TF number of binding regions. We performed the same analysis as described in the
previous section (“TF dynamicity”) for the number of bound regions defined in section
“Total number of bound regions”, instead of the dynamicity index.
TF binding characteristics and transcriptional modules. In order to characterize the
binding activity of each TF for the different gene modules, we ranked them accordingly
to their dynamicity and their number of bound regions. Both parameters for each gene
module are shown in Supplementary Figure 4E, which was generated with the
ComplexHeatmap82 and circlize83 R packages. We used the mean of the ratio
dynamicity - number of bound regions to order the TFs. We assessed the significance of
pioneer (respectively, migrant) TF enrichment at the top (respectively, bottom) of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ranked clustered list by employing a set enrichment analysis implemented in the
package fgsea.
TF chromatin binding hierarchy networks overlap. To analyze the similarity between the
networks for different transcriptional gene modules, we generated a 7-set Euler diagram,
where each set contains the edges present in the TF hierarchy network relative to a
gene module. Edges in two different networks are considered equal if they link nodes
corresponding to the same TFs in their respective networks. We used the package
Vennerable to compute the intersections of all possible network combinations and to
create the Euler diagram in Supplementary Figures 4F-I. In this figure, the area of each
region is proportional to the number of edges shared by the networks corresponding to
the sets that contain the referred region and was calculated using the Chow-Ruskey
algorithm84. A Euler diagram is similar to a Venn diagram, with the difference that the
area of a region representing a set is proportional to the number of elements in the set.

Analysis of de novo and remnant enhancers
To track combinatorial chromatin state dynamics in space and time, we integrated
histone modification ChIP-seq signals at a sub-nucleosomal resolution considering nonoverlapping 100bp windows genome-wide using chromstaR (see above), which converts
quantitative ChIP-seq data to qualitative chromatin states. For subsequent analysis,
since these 100bp windows can be either isolated or organized in stretches
experiencing consistent changes in states, we summarized the information at a higher
level, and linked them with the histone modification peaks identified using the more
classical ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq peak-calling approach (see flowchart). Briefly, after
merging all the peaks identified for all the time-points, for all the histone modification and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

for the ATAC-seq data sets defining cis-regulatory regions, we determined the overlap
between “poised enhancers“-, “de novo enhancers”-, “remnant enhancer” or “constitutive
enhancers”-flagged 100bp windows. When an overlap was found, the entire cisregulatory regions were annotated according to the 100bp window it is overlapping with.
This operation rendered a list of annotated cis-regulatory regions with de novo,
constitutive, poised or remnant enhancer elements. We finally considered the center +/10kb of these elements.

CRISPR interference (CRISPRi)
hU6-gRNA-hUbc-dCas9-KRAB plasmid was a kind gift from Charles Gerbach (Addgene
71236). gRNA cloning was as published 34. Briefly, the plasmid was digested with BsmBI
and dephosphorylated before ligation with phosphorylated oligo pairs. The gRNA
sequences were listed in the Table 1. The plasmid was then transfected in HEK293T
cells, together with packaging plasmids psPAX2 and pMD2.G. 24 hours after fresh

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

medium was added and the medium containing lentivirus was collected and filtered
subsequently. Cells were infected for 3 hours. 3 days post infection, cells were
passaged and selected with puromycin and used for analyses.

Table 1. gRNA sequences
gRNA

Sequence

ctrl

caccgGTATTACTGATATTGGTGGG

aaacCCCACCAATATCAGTAATACc

2

caccgAGATGAGGTGTTGCGTGTCT

aaacAGACACGCAACACCTCATCTc

7

caccgTCTGCTCATTGGGGATCGGA

aaacTCCGATCCCCAATGAGCAGAc

14

caccgAAGGCGAAGAAGACTGACTC aaacGAGTCAGTCTTCTTCGCCTTc

15

caccgCAATGAAATGACTCCCTCTC

48

caccgGGAGAACAGTCGCATGAACA aaacTGTTCATGCGACTGTTCTCCc

54

caccgTTCCAGGGAGTCACCTGTCC

aaacGGACAGGTGACTCCCTGGAAc

61

caccgTTGAAGCAGCACTAGTATCC

aaacGGATACTAGTGCTGCTTCAAc

aaacGAGAGGGAGTCATTTCATTGc

Immunofluorescence staining and imaging of cells
Immunofluorescence staining was performed as previously published85. Cells grown in
96-well plates were fixed with 4% PFA and permeabilised with 0.2% Triton-X in PBS.
After blocking, the cells were incubated with primary antibody for 1 hour, and then Alexa
Fluor secondary antibody for 30 min. Nuclei were counterstained with DAPI. The
antibodies were listed in Table 2. The imaging was carried out by IN Cell Analyzer 2000
(GE Healthcare) with the 20x objective and the quantification was processed using IN
Cell Investigator 2.7.3 software.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2. Antibodies
Antibody Dilution

Cat. No.

IL1α

1:100

R&D MAB200

IL1β

1:100

R&D MAB201

IL8

1:100

R&D MAB208

Quantitative RT-qPCR
RNA was extracted with TRIzol (Ambion) and RNAeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to
the manufacturer’s protocol. Reverse transcription was carried out with SuperScript II RT
kit (Invitrogen). Samples were analysed with SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied
Biosystems) in CFX96TM Real-Time PCR Detection system (Bio-Rad). Ribosomal
protein S14 (RPS14) was used as the housekeeping gene. Primers are listed in Table 3.

Table 3. qPCR primer sequence
Gene

Sequence

RPS14 CTGCGAGTGCTGTCAGAGG

TCACCGCCCTACACATCAAACT

IL1α

AGTGCTGCTGAAGGAGATGCCTGA CCCCTGCCAAGCACACCCAGTA

IL1β

GGAGATTCGTAGCTGGATGC

AGCTGATGGCCCTAAACAGA

IL8

GAGTGGACCACACTGCGCCA

TCCACAACCCTCTGCACCCAGT

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Data availability
All transcriptome data are hosted on Gene Expression Omnibus (BioProject
PRJNA439263, accession n°GSE112084). ATAC-seq, and ChIP-seq data (histone
modification and transcription factor) are hosted on SRA (BioProject PRJNA439280).

Code availability for reproducible science
Interactive maps, circus plots, workflows, scripts and software developed to pre-process
raw data, perform statistical analyses as well as data mining and integration are
available as .html, and R Markdown files provided in Supplementary data hosted on
Zenodo (https://zenodo.org, DOI : 10.5281/zenodo.1493872). This archive collapses all
the material (including processed data) required to reproduce figures presented in the
manuscript.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank all members, in particular Nir Rozenblum, of the O.B. laboratory for fruitful
discussions and suggestions through the course of this work. We would like to thank the
Transcriptome and Epigenome facility of Institut Pasteur. We thank Claudia Chica for
expert advice on ChIP-seq data processing. We thank Ido Amit and Deborah Winter for
valuable discussion and technical support. We thank Benno Schwikowski for key
insights and technical advice. We also thank Lars Zender, Eric Gilson, and Hinrich
Gronemeyer for valuable intellectual input. R.I.M-Z. was supported by La Ligue
Nationale Contre le Cancer and was a Mexican National Scientific and Technology
Council (CONACYT) and Mexican National Researchers System (SNI) fellow. Lucas

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Robinson was supported by the Pasteur - Paris University (PPU) International PhD
Program and by the Fondation pour la Recherche Médicale (FRM). J.A.N.L.F.F. was
supported by La Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer. O.B was supported by the PasteurWeizmann Foundation, ANR-BMFT, Fondation ARC pour la recherche sur le Cancer, La
Ligue Nationale Contre le Cancer, INSERM-AGEMED. Research reported in this
publication was supported by the National Cancer Institute of the National Institutes of
Health under Award Number R01CA136533. The content is solely the responsibility of
the authors and does not necessarily represent the official views of the National
Institutes of Health. O.B. is a CNRS Research Director DR2.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
R.I.M-Z, P.-F.R and O.B conceived of the study and conceptual ideas. R.I.M-Z, P.-F.R
and O.B. planned, designed experiments, interpreted data and wrote the manuscript. All
authors discussed the results and contributed to the final manuscript. R.I.M-Z generated
the cell culture system and performed ChIP-seq, ATAC-seq and RNAi experiments. PF.R performed computational analyses, designed bioinformatics pipelines and prepared
figures. L.R. performed senescence characterization studies and performed ChIP-seq
experiments. J.A.N.L.F.F. generated TF networks. G.D. generated Affymetrix microarray
data. B.S. and J.G. performed CRISPRi experiments. U.H. supported the study. O.B.
supervised, managed and obtained funding for the study.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS
The authors declare no conflict of interest.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

REFERENCES
1.

Martinez-Zamudio, R.I., Robinson, L., Roux, P.F. & Bischof, O. SnapShot:

Cellular Senescence in Pathophysiology. Cell 170, 1044-1044 e1 (2017).
2.

Kirkland, J.L. & Tchkonia, T. Cellular Senescence: A Translational Perspective.

EBioMedicine 21, 21-28 (2017).
3.

Martinez-Zamudio, R.I., Robinson, L., Roux, P.F. & Bischof, O. SnapShot:

Cellular Senescence Pathways. Cell 170, 816-816 e1 (2017).
4.

Coppe, J.P., Desprez, P.Y., Krtolica, A. & Campisi, J. The senescence-

associated secretory phenotype: the dark side of tumor suppression. Annu Rev Pathol
5, 99-118 (2010).
5.

Franceschi, C. & Campisi, J. Chronic inflammation (inflammaging) and its

potential contribution to age-associated diseases. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci 69
Suppl 1, S4-9 (2014).
6.

Schosserer, M., Grillari, J. & Breitenbach, M. The Dual Role of Cellular

Senescence in Developing Tumors and Their Response to Cancer Therapy. Front Oncol
7, 278 (2017).
7.

Benhamed, M., Herbig, U., Ye, T., Dejean, A. & Bischof, O. Senescence is an

endogenous trigger for microRNA-directed transcriptional gene silencing in human cells.
Nat Cell Biol 14, 266-75 (2012).
8.

Shah, P.P. et al. Lamin B1 depletion in senescent cells triggers large-scale

changes in gene expression and the chromatin landscape. Genes Dev 27, 1787-99
(2013).
9.

Puvvula, P.K. et al. Long noncoding RNA PANDA and scaffold-attachment-factor

SAFA control senescence entry and exit. Nat Commun 5, 5323 (2014).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10.

Rai, T.S. et al. HIRA orchestrates a dynamic chromatin landscape in senescence

and is required for suppression of neoplasia. Genes Dev 28, 2712-25 (2014).
11.

Tasdemir, N. et al. BRD4 Connects Enhancer Remodeling to Senescence

Immune Surveillance. Cancer Discov 6, 612-29 (2016).
12.

Sen, P. et al. Histone Acetyltransferase p300 Induces De Novo Super-Enhancers

to Drive Cellular Senescence. Mol Cell 73, 684-698 e8 (2019).
13.

Heinz, S., Romanoski, C.E., Benner, C. & Glass, C.K. The selection and function

of cell type-specific enhancers. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 16, 144-54 (2015).
14.

Creyghton, M.P. et al. Histone H3K27ac separates active from poised enhancers

and predicts developmental state. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 21931-6 (2010).
15.

Ostuni, R. et al. Latent enhancers activated by stimulation in differentiated cells.

Cell 152, 157-71 (2013).
16.

van Oevelen, C. et al. C/EBPalpha Activates Pre-existing and De Novo

Macrophage Enhancers during Induced Pre-B Cell Transdifferentiation and
Myelopoiesis. Stem Cell Reports 5, 232-47 (2015).
17.

Huggins, C.J. et al. C/EBPgamma suppresses senescence and inflammatory

gene expression by heterodimerizing with C/EBPbeta. Mol Cell Biol 33, 3242-58 (2013).
18.

Nardella, C., Clohessy, J.G., Alimonti, A. & Pandolfi, P.P. Pro-senescence

therapy for cancer treatment. Nat Rev Cancer 11, 503-11 (2011).
19.

Drouin, J. Minireview: pioneer transcription factors in cell fate specification. Mol

Endocrinol 28, 989-98 (2014).
20.

Soufi, A. et al. Pioneer transcription factors target partial DNA motifs on

nucleosomes to initiate reprogramming. Cell 161, 555-568 (2015).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

21.

Sherwood, R.I. et al. Discovery of directional and nondirectional pioneer

transcription factors by modeling DNase profile magnitude and shape. Nat Biotechnol
32, 171-178 (2014).
22.

Takahashi, K. & Yamanaka, S. Induction of pluripotent stem cells from mouse

embryonic and adult fibroblast cultures by defined factors. Cell 126, 663-76 (2006).
23.

Martin, N. et al. Physical and functional interaction between PML and TBX2 in the

establishment of cellular senescence. EMBO J 31, 95-109 (2012).
24.

Buenrostro, J.D., Giresi, P.G., Zaba, L.C., Chang, H.Y. & Greenleaf, W.J.

Transposition of native chromatin for fast and sensitive epigenomic profiling of open
chromatin, DNA-binding proteins and nucleosome position. Nat Methods 10, 1213-8
(2013).
25.

Loffler-Wirth, H., Kalcher, M. & Binder, H. oposSOM: R-package for high-

dimensional portraying of genome-wide expression landscapes on bioconductor.
Bioinformatics 31, 3225-7 (2015).
26.

Martinez, O. & Reyes-Valdes, M.H. Defining diversity, specialization, and gene

specificity in transcriptomes through information theory. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105,
9709-14 (2008).
27.

Patel, P.L., Suram, A., Mirani, N., Bischof, O. & Herbig, U. Derepression of

hTERT gene expression promotes escape from oncogene-induced cellular senescence.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113, E5024-33 (2016).
28.

Milanovic, M. et al. Senescence-associated reprogramming promotes cancer

stemness. Nature 553, 96-100 (2018).
29.

Zhang, B. & Horvath, S. A general framework for weighted gene co-expression

network analysis. Stat Appl Genet Mol Biol 4, Article17 (2005).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

30.

Yosef, N. & Regev, A. Impulse control: temporal dynamics in gene transcription.

Cell 144, 886-96 (2011).
31.

Deng, T. & Karin, M. c-Fos transcriptional activity stimulated by H-Ras-activated

protein kinase distinct from JNK and ERK. Nature 371, 171-5 (1994).
32.

Thakore, P.I. et al. Highly specific epigenome editing by CRISPR-Cas9

repressors for silencing of distal regulatory elements. Nat Methods 12, 1143-9 (2015).
33.

Klann, T.S. et al. CRISPR-Cas9 epigenome editing enables high-throughput

screening for functional regulatory elements in the human genome. Nat Biotechnol 35,
561-568 (2017).
34.

Gilbert, L.A. et al. Genome-Scale CRISPR-Mediated Control of Gene Repression

and Activation. Cell 159, 647-61 (2014).
35.

Kaikkonen, M.U. et al. Remodeling of the enhancer landscape during

macrophage activation is coupled to enhancer transcription. Mol Cell 51, 310-25 (2013).
36.

Wang, A. et al. Epigenetic priming of enhancers predicts developmental

competence of hESC-derived endodermal lineage intermediates. Cell Stem Cell 16,
386-99 (2015).
37.

Zinzen, R.P., Girardot, C., Gagneur, J., Braun, M. & Furlong, E.E. Combinatorial

binding predicts spatio-temporal cis-regulatory activity. Nature 462, 65-70 (2009).
38.

Wilkinson, A.C., Nakauchi, H. & Gottgens, B. Mammalian Transcription Factor

Networks: Recent Advances in Interrogating Biological Complexity. Cell Syst 5, 319-331
(2017).
39.

Neph, S. et al. An expansive human regulatory lexicon encoded in transcription

factor footprints. Nature 489, 83-90 (2012).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

40.

Guo, Y. & Gifford, D.K. Modular combinatorial binding among human trans-acting

factors reveals direct and indirect factor binding. BMC Genomics 18, 45 (2017).
41.

Ren, X. & Kerppola, T.K. REST interacts with Cbx proteins and regulates

polycomb repressive complex 1 occupancy at RE1 elements. Mol Cell Biol 31, 2100-10
(2011).
42.

Li, T. et al. CTCF regulates allelic expression of Igf2 by orchestrating a promoter-

polycomb repressive complex 2 intrachromosomal loop. Mol Cell Biol 28, 6473-82
(2008).
43.

Weinmann, A.S., Bartley, S.M., Zhang, T., Zhang, M.Q. & Farnham, P.J. Use of

chromatin immunoprecipitation to clone novel E2F target promoters. Mol Cell Biol 21,
6820-32 (2001).
44.

Garber, M. et al. A high-throughput chromatin immunoprecipitation approach

reveals principles of dynamic gene regulation in mammals. Mol Cell 47, 810-22 (2012).
45.

Novershtern, N. et al. Densely interconnected transcriptional circuits control cell

states in human hematopoiesis. Cell 144, 296-309 (2011).
46.

Zaret, K.S. & Carroll, J.S. Pioneer transcription factors: establishing competence

for gene expression. Genes Dev 25, 2227-41 (2011).
47.

Jozwik, K.M. & Carroll, J.S. Pioneer factors in hormone-dependent cancers. Nat

Rev Cancer 12, 381-5 (2012).
48.

Wisdom, R., Johnson, R.S. & Moore, C. c-Jun regulates cell cycle progression

and apoptosis by distinct mechanisms. EMBO J 18, 188-97 (1999).
49.

Weitzman, J.B., Fiette, L., Matsuo, K. & Yaniv, M. JunD protects cells from p53-

dependent senescence and apoptosis. Mol Cell 6, 1109-19 (2000).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

50.

Hoare, M. et al. NOTCH1 mediates a switch between two distinct secretomes

during senescence. Nat Cell Biol 18, 979-92 (2016).
51.

Duronio, R.J. & Xiong, Y. Signaling pathways that control cell proliferation. Cold

Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5, a008904 (2013).
52.

Biddie, S.C. et al. Transcription factor AP1 potentiates chromatin accessibility and

glucocorticoid receptor binding. Mol Cell 43, 145-55 (2011).
53.

Vierbuchen, T. et al. AP-1 Transcription Factors and the BAF Complex Mediate

Signal-Dependent Enhancer Selection. Mol Cell 68, 1067-1082 e12 (2017).
54.

Krtolica, A., Parrinello, S., Lockett, S., Desprez, P.Y. & Campisi, J. Senescent

fibroblasts promote epithelial cell growth and tumorigenesis: a link between cancer and
aging. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 98, 12072-7 (2001).
55.

van Deursen, J.M. The role of senescent cells in ageing. Nature 509, 439-46

(2014).
56.

Eggert, T. et al. Distinct Functions of Senescence-Associated Immune

Responses in Liver Tumor Surveillance and Tumor Progression. Cancer Cell 30, 533547 (2016).
57.

Tsankov, A.M. et al. Transcription factor binding dynamics during human ES cell

differentiation. Nature 518, 344-9 (2015).
58.

Goode, D.K. et al. Dynamic Gene Regulatory Networks Drive Hematopoietic

Specification and Differentiation. Dev Cell 36, 572-87 (2016).
59.

Xu, M. et al. Senolytics improve physical function and increase lifespan in old

age. Nat Med 24, 1246-1256 (2018).
60.

Overman, J. et al. Pharmacological targeting of the transcription factor SOX18

delays breast cancer in mice. Elife 6(2017).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

61.

Itahana, K., Campisi, J. & Dimri, G.P. Methods to detect biomarkers of cellular

senescence: the senescence-associated beta-galactosidase assay. Methods Mol Biol
371, 21-31 (2007).
62.

Ritchie, M.E. et al. limma powers differential expression analyses for RNA-

sequencing and microarray studies. Nucleic Acids Res 43, e47 (2015).
63.

Langfelder, P. & Horvath, S. WGCNA: an R package for weighted correlation

network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 9, 559 (2008).
64.

Landt, S. G. et al. ChIP-seq guidelines and practices of the ENCODE and

modENCODE consortia. Genome Res. 22, 1813–31 (2012).
65.

Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M. & Usadel, B. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina

sequence data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114–20 (2014).
66.

Martin, M. Cutadapt removes adapter sequences from high-throughput

sequencing reads. EMBnet.journal 17, 10–12 (2011).
67.

Ramírez, F. et al. deepTools2: a next generation web server for deep-sequencing

data analysis. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, W160–W165 (2016).
68.

Ross-Innes, C. S. et al. Differential oestrogen receptor binding is associated with

clinical outcome in breast cancer. Nature 481, 389–93 (2012).
69.

Risso, D., Schwartz, K., Sherlock, G. & Dudoit, S. GC-content normalization for

RNA-Seq data. BMC Bioinformatics 12, 480 (2011).
70.

Risso, D., Ngai, J., Speed, T. P. & Dudoit, S. Normalization of RNA-seq data

using factor analysis of control genes or samples. Nat. Biotechnol. 32, 896–902 (2014).
71.

Robinson, M. D., McCarthy, D. J. & Smyth, G. K. edgeR: a Bioconductor package

for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data. Bioinformatics 26,
139–40 (2010).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

72.

Taudt, A., Nguyen, M. A., Heinig, M., Johannes, F. & Colome-Tatche, M.

chromstaR: Tracking combinatorial chromatin state dynamics in space and time. bioRxiv
038612 (2016). doi:10.1101/038612
73.

Lê, S., Josse, J. & Husson, F. FactoMineR: An R package for multivariate

analysis. 25, 1–18 (2008).
74.

Quinlan, A. R. & Hall, I. M. BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing

genomic features. Bioinformatics 26, 841–2 (2010).
75.

Heinz, S. et al. Simple Combinations of Lineage-Determining Transcription

Factors Prime cis-Regulatory Elements Required for Macrophage and B Cell Identities.
Mol. Cell 38, 576–589 (2010).
76.

Krzywinski, M. et al. Circos: an information aesthetic for comparative genomics.

Genome Res. 19, 1639–45 (2009).
77.

Shannon, P. et al. Cytoscape: A Software Environment for Integrated Models of

Biomolecular Interaction Networks. Genome Res. 13, 2498–2504 (2003).
78.

Csárdi, G. & Nepusz, T. The igraph software package for complex network

research.
79.

Aho, A. V., Garey, M. R. & Ullman, J. D. The Transitive Reduction of a Directed

Graph. SIAM J. Comput. 1, 131–137 (1972).
80.

Ono, K., Muetze, T., Kolishovski, G., Shannon, P. & Demchak, B. CyREST:

Turbocharging Cytoscape Access for External Tools via a RESTful API. F1000Research
4, 478 (2015).
81.

Shannon, P. T., Grimes, M., Kutlu, B., Bot, J. J. & Galas, D. J. RCytoscape: tools

for exploratory network analysis. BMC Bioinformatics 14, 217 (2013).
82.

Gu, Z., Eils, R. & Schlesner, M. Complex heatmaps reveal patterns and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

correlations in multidimensional genomic data. Bioinformatics 32, 2847–2849 (2016).
83.

Gu, Z., Gu, L., Eils, R., Schlesner, M. & Brors, B. Circlize implements and

enhances circular visualization in R. Bioinformatics 30, 2811–2812 (2014).
84.

Chow, S. & Ruskey, F. Drawing Area-Proportional Venn and Euler Diagrams. in

466–477 (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2004). doi:10.1007/978-3-540-24595-7_44
85.

Georgilis, A. et al. PTBP1-Mediated Alternative Splicing Regulates the

Inflammatory Secretome and the Pro-tumorigenic Effects of Senescent Cells. Cancer
Cell 34, 85–102.e9 (2018).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 1:
Multi-state establishment of the senescence transcriptional program
(a) Schematic overview for defining the gene-regulatory code of RAS-OIS using timeresolved, high-throughput transcriptome (microarray) and epigenome (ChIP-seq, and
ATAC-seq) data sets.
(b) Self-organizing maps (SOMs) of gene expression profiles for quiescence and RASOIS time-series experiments as logarithmic fold-change. Red spots mark
overexpression, blue spots underexpression.
(c) Multidimensional scaling (MDS) analysis scatter plot visualizing the level of
similarity/dissimilarity between normalized quiescence and RAS-OIS time-series
transcriptomes. Distances between samples represent leading logarithmic fold-changes
defined as the root-mean-squared average of the logarithmic fold-changes for the genes
best distinguishing each pair of samples.
(d) Scatter plot depicting the evolution of transcriptome diversity (Hj) vs. transcriptome
specialization (σj) in cells undergoing quiescence or RAS-OIS. For each time-point and
treatment, the average Hj and σj values across biological replicates are given. T0 is start
of time-course.
(e) Heatmap showing seven modules (I-VII) of temporally co-expressed genes specific
for RAS-OIS using an unsupervised WGCNA clustering approach. Data are expressed
as raw Z-scores.
(f) Functional over-representation map depicting Molecular Signatures Database
(MSigDB) hallmark gene sets associated to each transcriptomic cluster. Dots are colorcoded according to the FDR corrected p-value based on the hypergeometric distribution.
Size is proportional to the percentage of genes in the gene set belonging to the cluster.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 2:
A dynamic enhancer program shapes the senescence transcriptome
(a) Arc plot visualizing dynamic chromatin state transitions for the indicated intervals.
Edge width is proportional to the number of transitions.
(b) Histogram showing the total number of windows of the top 15 chromatin states
transitions. Chromatin state transitions corresponding to de novo enhancer activation
are highlighted as white bars.
(c) Chromatin dependence (CD) versus chromatin opening index (COI) are plotted for
high-confidence TF sequence motifs used in our study (see Materials and Methods for
details). Pioneer, settler and migrant TFs as defined by their COI and CD property are
color-coded and select members of each TF class are listed. Same color code is used in
all figures.
(d) Biplot for principal component analysis performed with select TF binding parameters:
dynamicity, total number of bound windows (N), percentage of binding at enhancers,
pioneer index (referred to as the number of bound windows pre-stimulation), chromatin
opening index (COI) and chromatin dependence (CD). The plot depicts the projections
of the TFs and the loading of the different covariates for the first two principle
components which explain 76.9% of the total inertia. The ellipses delineate the 95%
confidence intervals for AP1 pioneers (blue with black outline), non-AP1 pioneers (blue),
settlers (red), and migrants (green).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 3:
AP-1 pioneer TF bookmarking of senescence enhancer landscape foreshadows
the senescence transcriptional program
(a) Distribution of fold-change in normalized enhancer marks H3K27ac and H3K4me1
ChIP-seq signals over input in the “unmarked”-, “constitutive”-, “poised”-, “de novo”-, and
“remnant enhancers”-flagged genomic bins at indicated time-points (see Material and
Methods for details). The cartoon at the top illustrates the temporal rules used to flag
genomic bins. Bottom specifies the genomic coverage in mega bases (Mb) for each
category and the corresponding number of enhancers.
(b) WI38-ER: RASV12 were super-infected with dCas9-KRAB and individual guides
(g14, 15, g61 and g7) targeting two de novo enhancers. Cells were pharmacologically
selected and induced into RAS-OIS by 4-OHT. 8 days after RAS-OIS induction cells
were stained by indirect immunofluorescence for IL1β or analyzed by RT-qPCR for the
expression of IL1α or IL1β. WI38-ER: RASV12 treated with 4-OHT or DMSO served as
positive and negative controls. Data represent mean ± SD (n=3). *p<0.05, ***p<0.001.
Comparison with ctrl 4-OHT, one-way ANOVA (Dunnett’s test). Scale bar, 100 µm.
(c) Rank plot depicting the summed occurrences for TF binding in de novo enhancers
before RAS-OIS induction (left) and remnant enhancers after RAS-OIS (6 days)
induction (right). Top ten TFs are indicated.
(d) Distribution of total number (N) of TFs bound per enhancer for constitutive
enhancers (grey), TF pre-marked de novo enhancers (yellow) and TF virgin de novo
enhancers (orange).
(e) Average absolute expression level (log2 scale) kinetics for genes associated with:
poised (blue), TF pre-marked de novo (yellow), and TF virgin de novo enhancers

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(orange). Dots depict the average absolute expression level, and bars depict the
standard error of the mean. Inset histogram illustrates the average leading log2 foldchange in expression (+/- standard error of the mean) for genes associated with
constitutive (black), poised (light blue), TF pre-marked de novo (yellow) and TF virgin de
novo (orange), and remnant enhancers (dark blue).

FIGURE 4:
A hierarchical TF network defines the senescence transcriptional program
(a) Genome-wide transcription factor co-binding occurrence matrix summed across all
time-points (left, shades from blue to yellow, in log10 scale). Overlap significance was
calculated by a hyper-geometric test (right, shades from blue to red, in -log10 scale). The
co-binding occurrence matrix was clustered using Ward’s aggregation criterion and
corresponding, corrected q-values were projected on this clustering. The graphs on the
left and bottom show the density in pioneer, migrant and settler TFs along each axis of
the matrix.
(b) Heatmap describing the association between individual TFs (row) and TF lexicons
(columns). Four boxed out insets provide detailed information on TF composition of
lexicons. A comprehensive, high-resolution and interactive heatmap is shown in
Supplementary Data (see under Code availability in Material and Methods). The right
bar plot shows the total number of binding sites for each TF. The top bar plot shows the
total number of regions for each regulatory module. The bottom bar plot shows the
average proportion of AP1 binding sites inside each regulatory module.
(c) Graphical representation of the hierarchical TF network for transcriptomic module VI.
Nodes (circles) represent TFs and an oriented edge (line) connecting TFs A and B

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

means that at least 30 % of the regions bound by B were also bound by A at the same
time point or before. In order to simplify the visualization, we represent strongly
connected components (SCCs) as a single node and performed a transitive reduction
(TR). Node color is based on the average dynamicity of the SCC members. Node border
color indicates their classification as pioneer (blue), settler (red) or migrant (green).
Node border thickness encodes the percentage of bound regions before RAS
stimulation. Edge color was calculated accordingly to the relative coverage of the
outgoing TF over the incoming TF. The network has three layers: top, core and bottom.
Nodes in the top have no incoming edges and nodes in the bottom have no outgoing
edges. The core layer comprises TFs that have both incoming and outgoing edges.
Interactive Cytoscape graphs are accessible as Supplementary data (see under Code
availability in Material and Methods).
(d) Venn diagram showing the specificities and overlaps in differentially expressed direct
target genes upon siRNA-mediated AP-1-cJUN, ETS1, and RELA depletion in RAS-OIS
cells at day 6 (fully senescent cells). Genes are considered as direct targets of a given
TF when PIQ predicts that the TF bound to an enhancer associates to this gene (see
Materials and Methods for details). Promoters were excluded from the analysis.
(e) Asymmetric biplot for correspondence analysis between transcriptomic clusters and
the number of up-, down-, up-or-down- or nonregulated (stable) genes upon siRNAmediated AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 or RELA depletion. The p-value reflects the strength of the
association as assessed with a 2 test.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

FIGURE 5:
Hierarchy Matters: Functional Perturbation of AP-1 pioneer TF, but no other TF,
reverts the senescence clock
(a) Principal component analysis (PCA) on transcriptomes obtained from siRNAmediated depletion of AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 or RELA at indicated timepoints of the RASOIS timecourse. Horizontal and vertical bars show minimal and maximal coordinates for
each siRNA and time-point on principal components one (PC1, horizontal axis) and two
(PC2, vertical axis).
(b) Functional overrepresentation map showing Molecular Signature Database
(MSigDB) hallmark pathways associated to “All, Direct Target and Indirect Target” genes
differentially expressed after siRNA-mediated AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 or RELA depletion.
Genes are considered as direct targets when a PIQ prediction for the given TF is falling
inside an enhancer associated to this specific gene. Promoters are excluded from the
analysis. The size of dots is proportional to the -log10 q-value based on the
hypergeometric distribution obtained when testing for over-representation, and their
color denote whether the term is enriched for an up or down-regulated gene list.
(c) Heatmap comparing gene expression profiles of siRNA-Control-treated (siCTRL)
cells at indicated time-points of OIS and siRNA-cJUN treated senescent RAS-OIS cells
at day 6 (144h).

Figure S1:
Multi-state establishment of the senescence transcriptional program
(a-b) Characterization of quiescence and RAS-OIS cells. (a) Representative DAPI, EdU,
SABG (from left to right) indirect fluorescence and phase contrast microscopy images of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

WI38 fibroblasts undergoing quiescence at indicated time-points. Proliferative capacity is
% of EdU-positive staining cells. Scale bar, 100µm. (b) Representative DAPI, EdU,
SABG (from left to right) indirect fluorescence and phase contrast microscopy images of
WI38 fibroblasts undergoing OIS at indicated time-points. Scale bar, 100µm.
(c) Distribution of gene expression levels as kernel density estimates for time-resolved
quiescence and RAS-OIS transcriptomes. Pearson’s correlation coefficient (R2) is
shown.
(d) Volcano plot of RAS-OIS time-series transcriptome data. Dark grey dots highlight
genes sharing a common gene expression pattern between quiescence and OIS timeseries experiments and were removed to define the RAS-OIS specific temporal
transcriptomic signature used for all further downstream analyses.
(e) Boxplot depicting expression patter for each of the RAS-OIS transcriptomic modules.
Data are expressed as row Z-score.

Figure S2:
A dynamic enhancer program shapes the senescence transcriptome
(a) Histogram showing the percentage of genome covered by each chromatin state at
indicated time. Bottom table assigns histone modification combinations (grey: presence,
white: absence) to biologically meaningful mnemonics. Venn diagrams highlight the
specificities and overlaps in chromatin states associated with active (left) and poised
enhancers (right) at indicated time-points.
(b) Boxplots showing the distribution of relative gene expression (row Z-score) through
time for genes associated to regions undergoing different chromatin state changes. The

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pictogram at the top of each graph describes the class of chromatin state change
considered.
(c) Asymmetric biplot for correspondence analysis between changes in chromatin states
and gene expression modules. The p-value reflects the strength of the association using
a 2 test. Only the top 20 contributing and best projected (squared cosine > 0.5)
chromatin state changes are shown.
(d-f) Most enriched sequence motifs in (d) active enhancers or (e-f) ATAC-seq peaks at
each time point for the (d) RAS-OIS, (e) replicative senescence, and (f) quiescence time
courses. (d) Motif logos are shown on left of the histogram. Black, dotted boxes highlight
the core motif for AP1 transcription factor family members. Note that the transcriptional
repressor BACH shares this motif.
(g-i) ATAC-seq (grey lines for forward, black lines for reverse reads) and nucleosome
(red line) footprints for (g) AP-1 FOSL1 (pioneer), (h) RELA (settler), and (i) SREBF1
(migrant).
(j) Comparison between PIQ predictions and RELA (left), AP-1-JUN (middle) and AP-1FOSL2 (right) ChIP-seq. The two density heatmaps at the center of each panel illustrate
ChIP-seq (left) and ATAC-seq (right) signals computed in 10bp non-overlapping
windows at selected bound- (25%) and unbound- (75%) predicted PWM hits ± 1kb
ranked according to the ChIP-seq signal in the most central 100bp. The stack histogram
on the left shows the distribution of bound (red) and unbound (green) PWM hits as
defined by PIQ along the ranking. The curves on the right depict the evolution of the
enrichment score (ES) along the ranking as defined with a set enrichment analyses
(SEA) comparing the ChIP-seq signal and the bound (red) and unbound (green) status

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of the PWM hit. For each SEA, we performed 1 000 permutations and provide the
associated Benjamini–Hochberg adjusted p-value and ES score.

Figure S3:
AP-1 pioneer TF bookmarking of senescence enhancer landscape foreshadows
the senescence transcriptional program
(a) Density heatmaps of normalized H3K27ac and H3K4me1 ChIP-seq signals
computed in 10bp non-overlapping windows at enhancers +/- 10kb grouped by
enhancer status (constitutive, de novo or remnant) at indicated time-points after RASOIS induction.
(b-c) Representative genome browser screenshots of normalized H3K4me1 (pink),
H3K27ac (orange), H3K4me3 (blue) and H3K27me3 (green) ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq
(light grey) profiles and chromatin states at (b) IL1ß and (c) CDC6 gene loci. Red boxes
single-out (b) IL1ß de novo and (c) CDC6 remnant enhancers.
(d) Boxplots depicting the distribution of relative gene expression (row Z-score) through
time for genes associated with constitutive (left), de novo (middle) and remnant (left)
enhancer windows.
(e) RAS-OIS cells at day 14 infected with dCas9-KRAB and individual guides (g14, g15,
g61, and g7) and analyzed by RT-qPCR for the expression of IL1α or IL1β as described
in Figure 3b. Data represent mean ± SD (n=3). *p<0.05, ***p<0.001. Comparison with
ctrl 4OHT, one-way ANOVA (Dunnett’s test).
(f) RAS-OIS cells were infected with dCas9-KRAB and individual guides (g2, g48 and
g54) for non-enhancer regions (outside de novo enhancers) as described in Figure 3b. 8
or 14 days after infection, cells were stained for IL1α or IL1β by indirect

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

immunofluorescence and percentage positive cells were quantified (n=3 for 8 days and
n=2 for 14 days). Data represent mean ± SD. *p<0.05, **p<0.01, ***p<0.001.
Comparison with ctrl 4OHT, one-way ANOVA (Dunnett’s test).
(g) Rank plot depicting the summed occurrences for TFs binding in proliferating cells
(T0) in de novo enhancers (left) and after replicative senescence in remnant enhancers
(right). Top ten TFs are highlighted.
(h) Metaprofiles showing the density in “active enhancer”-flagged genomic bins (top)
and “constitutive enhancer”-flagged genomic bins (bottom) in the vicinity (+/- 50kb) of TF
bookmarked de novo (left) and TF virgin de novo enhancers (right). The density in
“active enhancer”-flagged genomic bins is provided for the indicated time points.
(i) Boxplot showing the correlation between absolute leading log2 expression foldchange and the number of genomic bins flagged as “de novo” enhancers per enhancer.
*** : p-value < 10-3, Student’s t-test considering regions with 0 “de novo” enhancers bins
as a control.

Figure S4:
A hierarchical TF network defines the senescence transcriptional program
(a) Representative circos plots summarizing pairwise transcription factor co-binding at
enhancers for down-regulated transcriptomic module (IV, top) and up-regulated
transcriptomic module (VI, bottom) at indicated time-points. Co-interactions involving
AP1 are shown in black. Selected examples of gained (green) and lost (orange)
interactions are highlighted. Pioneer TFs blue, settler TFs red, migrant TFs green. See
also dynamic circos plot movies in Supplementary Data (see under Code availability in
Material and Methods).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(b) Heatmap showing the overlap between TF lexicons (rows) and chromatin states,
ChIP-seq and ATAC-seq peaks (columns). The dendrograms were computed by
applying hierarchical clustering on the fraction matrix with Pearson’s correlation and
average linkage.
(c) Validation of TF network algorithm using TF ChIP-seq published data sets (Garber et
al., 2012). Edges colored in gray were detected in both studies and edges colored in red
were found only the analysis performed by Garber et al.. The displayed edge set is the
same as in Figure 5A (Garber et al., 2012). We employed a transitive reduction step in
order to facilitate visualization. Comparison of the two networks resulted in a sensitivity
of 88,9 % and a specificity of 100 %.
(d) Ratio of incoming edges based on the classification of the TF source node. The
relative and absolute number of edges corresponding to all seven modules are
displayed inside the nodes, which are colored accordingly to TF classification as in
previous panels. The thickness of links is proportional to the relative number of TF
hierarchy edges connecting nodes with the corresponding classification.
(e) Number of bound regions and dynamicity index for each TF (rows) across all gene
modules (columns). The left heatmap depicts the dynamicity index scaled by column.
The middle heatmap depicts the square root of number of bound regions scaled by
column. The right single-column heatmap illustrates TF classification.
(f) Venn diagram showing specificities and overlaps of TF interactions in each gene
module. Each set corresponds to the TF-TF network edges identified for a given
transcriptomic module. The global area of each set is proportional to the number of
edges in its respective transcriptomic module and was calculated with the ChowRuskey algorithm.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(g-i) Chow-Ruskey diagrams for edges (g) originating only from TFs at the top of
hierarchy, (h) connecting only TFs at the core layer or (i) reaching only TFs at the
bottom. Note that edges at the top of the hierarchy are shared among the gene modules
while edges towards the bottom of the hierarchy are module-specific.

Figure S5:
Hierarchy Matters: Functional Perturbation of AP-1 pioneer TF, but no other TF,
reverts the senescence clock
(a-c) Volcano plots depicting the -log10 p-value as a function of the log2 fold-change in
gene expression defined by a differential analysis conducted with limma to highlight the
effect of siRNA-mediated (a) AP-1-cJUN, (b) ETS1 and (c) RELA depletion in senescent
RAS-OIS cells at day 6 (144h). Blue dots in respective plots indicate probes
corresponding to AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 and RELA. Black outlined dots highlight direct
targets of AP-1-cJUN, ETS1 and RELA.
(d) Upset plot depicting specificities and overlaps in differentially expressed genes of
siRNA-Control and siRNA-JUN silenced OIS fibroblasts at indicated time-points. The
yellow dots highlight gene sets specific to a single comparison set, while green dots
highlight gene sets find in two different pair-wise comparison.
(e-g) Venn diagrams (top) and heatmaps (bottom) depicting the overlap between genes
belonging to (e) E2F-, (f) NFκB target, and (g) N1ICD-induced senescence (NIS) gene
signatures. Venn diagrams show the overlap of up-regulated genes after siRNAmediated AP-1-cJUN knock-down for upregulated E2F- (i.e. pro-proliferation genes),
NIS- (i.e. early SASP genes), and downregulated NFκB target genes (i.e. late SASP
genes) RAS-OIS cells at day 6 (144h). Bottom heatmaps show the comparison of gene

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

expression profiles of siRNA-Control (siCtrl) and siRNA-cJUN treated cells undergoing
RAS-OIS at indicated time-points. Data are expressed as row Z-score. E2F targets and
NFκB targets were defined according to Molecular Signature Database (MSigDB).

certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/633594; this version posted May 9, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

