bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

Suppression of store-operated calcium entry causes dilated
cardiomyopathy of the Drosophila heart

Courtney E. Petersen1, Matthew J. Wolf2, and Jeremy T. Smyth3*

1

Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology and 3Department of Anatomy, Physiology,

and Genetics, Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences, F. Edward Hébert School
of Medicine, Bethesda, MD 20814
2

Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Department of Medicine, The University of Virginia School

of Medicine, Charlottesville, VA 22908

*

Corresponding Author:

Jeremy T. Smyth
Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences
4301 Jones Bridge Rd
Bethesda, MD 20814
Tel: (301) 295-5879
Email: jeremy.smyth@usuhs.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

ABSTRACT
Store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) is an essential Ca2+ signaling and homeostatic mechanism
present in nearly all animal cells. SOCE refers to influx of Ca2+ into cells that is activated by
depletion of endoplasmic or sarcoplasmic reticulum stores (ER/SR) Ca2+ stores. In the SOCE
pathway, STIM proteins function as Ca2+ sensors in the ER, and upon ER Ca2+ store depletion
STIM rearranges to ER-plasma membrane junctions where it activates Orai Ca2+ influx
channels. Multiple studies have implicated STIM and Orai mediated SOCE in the pathogenesis
of cardiac hypertrophy. Importantly however, the functional roles of SOCE in normal heart
physiology have not been well defined. We have addressed this in Drosophila melanogaster, a
powerful animal model of cardiac development and physiology. We show that heart specific
suppression of Drosophila Stim and Orai resulted in reduced contractility consistent with dilated
cardiomyopathy, characterized by increased end diastolic and end systolic dimensions and
decreased fractional shortening. Reduced contractility was apparent in larval hearts and
became more pronounced in adults. Myofibers were disorganized and more widely spaced in
larval and adult hearts with Stim and Orai RNAi as compared to controls, possibly reflecting
decompensation or upregulated stress response signaling due to altered Ca2+ homeostasis.
Lastly, we show that reduced heart function significantly affected animal health and viability, as
animals with heart specific Stim and Orai suppression exhibited significant delays in postembryonic development and adults died significantly earlier than controls. Collectively, our
results demonstrate that SOCE is essential for normal heart physiology and establish
Drosophila as an important model for delineation of functional SOCE roles in cardiomyocytes.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

INTRODUCTION
Cardiac disease continues to be a leading cause of morbidity and mortality throughout
the western world, with current treatment options limited to palliative pharmacological or
invasive therapy (McKenna et al., 2017). The discovery of curative treatments depends on
thorough understanding of the molecular mechanisms that govern the onset and progression of
cardiac pathophysiology. Significantly, irregularities in cardiomyocyte calcium (Ca2+)
homeostasis are a major contributing factor to cardiac disease pathogenesis, and targeting Ca2+
signaling mechanisms may therefore be an important approach to novel therapeutic
development (Abraham and Wolf, 2013; Kranias and Bers, 2007; Limas et al., 1987; MacLeod,
2016).
The role of Ca2+ in the process of excitation-contraction (E-C) coupling, which drives
cardiomyocyte contractility, is well established. In E-C coupling, membrane depolarization
opens L-type voltage gated Ca2+ channels and entering Ca2+ then activates ryanodine receptors
(RyRs) in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). Release of SR Ca2+ via RyRs results in a large
cytoplasmic Ca2+ pulse that drives acto-myosin contractility (Bers, 2002). Ca2+ is also an
important regulator of cardiomyocyte signaling pathways, such as those that control
differentiation, cell growth, and pathological remodeling (Vega et al., 2003). Maintenance of
Ca2+ homeostasis, including SR Ca2+ stores, is therefore essential to multiple aspects of
cardiomyocyte physiology. Store-operated Ca2+ entry (SOCE) is a process that plays a major
role in maintaining cellular Ca2+ homeostasis, as it couples the influx of extracellular Ca2+ to the
depletion of sarco/endoplasmic (S/ER) Ca2+ stores. Ca2+ that enters the cell via SOCE can be
pumped back into the S/ER to replenish depleted stores and restore S/ER Ca2+ homeostasis.
Importantly, despite the prominent role for SR Ca2+ stores in cardiomyocyte physiology, the
functions of SOCE in cardiomyocytes and overall cardiac physiology are poorly understood.
The main components of the SOCE pathway are STIM (stromal interacting molecule)
and Orai. STIM is a single-pass transmembrane protein that serves as an E/SR Ca2+ sensor via
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

its N-terminal. E/SR lumenal Ca2+ binding EF-hand domain, and Orai is a SOCE pore forming
channel subunit in the plasma membrane (Putney, 2011, 2018). In response to E/SR Ca2+ store
depletion, STIM undergoes a large conformational change that results in oligomerization and
exposure of a cytoplasmic Orai activating domain. Oligomerized STIM then translocates to
E/SR-plasma membrane junctions where it interacts with and activates Orai to induce Ca2+ influx
(Putney, 2018; Smyth et al., 2010). In mammals, there are two STIM isoforms, STIM1 and
STIM2, and three Orai isoforms (Orai1-3), with STIM1 and Orai1 exhibiting the widest functional
distribution across mammalian cell and tissue types.
Numerous studies strongly suggest that SOCE contributes to the pathogenesis of
pathological cardiac hypertrophy, whereby heart muscle mass increases in response to
stressors such as hypertension or valve dysfunctions. For example, induction of cardiac
hypertrophy by pressure overload results in upregulation of STIM1 and Orai1 expression in
mouse cardiac tissue, and cardiomyocyte-specific STIM1 and Orai1 suppression attenuates the
hypertrophic response (Benard et al., 2016; Hulot et al., 2011; Luo et al., 2012; Parks et al.,
2016). Similarly, suppression of STIM1 or Orai1 in rodent cardiomyocytes attenuates
phenylephrine and endothelin-1 induced hypertrophy (Hulot et al., 2011; Luo et al., 2012;
Voelkers et al., 2010). Enhanced SOCE in response to pathological stimuli likely activates the
calcineurin-nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) signaling axis, which is essential for
reactivation of developmental gene expression and promotion of cardiomyocyte growth (Hulot et
al., 2011; Molkentin et al., 1998; Schulz and Yutzey, 2004; Wilkins et al., 2004).
In light of this strong evidence that enhanced SOCE can drive pathological responses in
cardiomyocytes, an important question remains: what is the role of SOCE in healthy
cardiomyocytes and normal heart physiology? In support of the concept that SOCE is essential
for healthy cardiac function, two independent studies have shown that cardiomyocyte restricted
STIM1 deletion in mice results in marked left ventricular dilation and reduced ejection fraction in
adult hearts (Collins et al., 2014; Horton et al., 2014; Parks et al., 2016). Decreased cardiac
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

function was concomitant with indications of ER stress and changes in cardiomyocyte
mitochondrial morphology (Collins et al., 2014), as well as altered contractile Ca2+ transients
and myofibril organization (Parks et al., 2016). In addition, Orai1 suppression in zebrafish
embryos resulted in reduced fractional shortening and severe heart failure (Volkers et al., 2012).
These results support the conclusion that SOCE is essential for normal cardiac physiology, but
importantly, the specific cellular processes that are regulated by SOCE in cardiomyocytes
remain unknown. It is also unclear whether these results reflect full suppression of SOCE
activity, because functional contributions by other STIM and Orai isoforms cannot be ruled out in
these vertebrate models. The goal of our current study was to begin addressing these important
questions by testing the role of SOCE in Drosophila melanogaster heart function, a valuable
animal model in which powerful genetic tools can be integrated with in vivo analyses of
cardiomyocyte physiology and heart function.
The Drosophila heart is a muscular tube of cardiomyocytes that runs along the dorsal
midline of the animal. It is responsible for pumping hemolymph, a plasma-like fluid, throughout
the body in an open circulatory system (Rotstein and Paululat, 2016). Importantly, the
contractile physiology of the Drosophila heart, including cardiomyocyte Ca2+ transport
mechanisms and sarcomere composition, is highly conserved with mammals (Lin et al., 2011;
Ocorr et al., 2007), and the genetic and functional bases of many cardiomyopathies can be
readily modeled and analyzed in flies (Piazza and Wessells, 2011). Simplified genetics is
another important advantage of Drosophila over other animal models. In particular, Drosophila
express single isoforms of Stim and Orai, thus precluding complications of functional overlap
encountered with vertebrate models. Taking advantage of the strengths of the Drosophila
model, we demonstrate that animals with heart-specific suppression of the key SOCE pathway
components, Stim and Orai, exhibit dilated cardiomyopathy characterized by enlarged enddiastolic and end-systolic dimensions and decreased fractional shortening. Myofibrils were also
disorganized and loosely spaced in Stim and Orai suppressed hearts, further consistent with
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

disrupted contractile physiology. Lastly, these animals exhibited significantly delayed
development and they died earlier than controls, suggesting pathological impairment of cardiac
function. Our results, as well as those from other animal models, demonstrate that SOCE has
essential and highly conserved roles in supporting normal heart physiology, and lay the
groundwork for future studies using Drosophila to mechanistically define SOCE functions in the
heart.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

RESULTS
Stim and Orai suppression results in dilated cardiomyopathy
Drosophila Stim and Orai loss-of-function mutants fail to grow properly and die as
second or third instar larvae (Pathak et al., 2017), limiting their use in analysis of heart function.
We therefore used inducible RNAi to suppress Stim and Orai expression specifically in the heart
and avoid the systemic effects of global SOCE suppression. We first tested the effectiveness of
our RNAi constructs by expressing them ubiquitously in the whole animal and analyzing
transcript levels and phenotypes. Stim and Orai RNAi driven by the ubiquitous act-GAL4 driver
suppressed Stim and Orai mRNA expression in whole first instar larvae by 72.67 ± 3.18% and
80 ± 2.65% (mean ± SEM), respectively, compared to non-targeting RNAi controls,
demonstrating potent knockdown of the targeted transcripts (Supplemental Figure S1A).
Ubiquitous expression of Stim and Orai RNAi also resulted in reduced growth and larval lethality
(Supplemental Figure S1B-F) similar to loss-of-function mutants, suggesting specific knockdown
of the targeted gene products with few to no off-target effects.
We next used optical coherence tomography (OCT) to evaluate heart contractility in fully
intact, non-anesthetized animals with heart specific Stim and Orai suppression. Adult males with
heart-specific tinC-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi exhibited significantly increased enddiastolic dimensions (EDD), and a more pronounced increase in end-systolic dimensions (ESD)
as compared to non-targeting RNAi controls (Figure 1A-H).This resulted in significantly reduced
fractional shortening (FS), a direct measure of the contractile strength of the heart, in Stim and
Orai RNAi animals (88.73 ± 2.04% in control, 42.28 ± 1.4% in Stim RNAi, 49.21 ± 3.11% in Orai
RNAi; mean ± SEM, p < 0.001) (Figure 1I). Enlarged ESD and EDD and reduced FS in Stim and
Orai RNAi animals are consistent with dilated cardiomyopathy. Similar results were also
observed using a second heart specific driver, 4xhand-GAL4 (Figure 1J-R). Animals with
4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi again exhibited significantly larger EDD and ESD
compared to nontargeting RNAi controls (Figure 1P,Q), and this resulted in significantly reduced
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

FS in Orai RNAi animals (Figure 1R). The decrease in FS was not significantly different in
animals with 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim RNAi, likely due to less efficient knockdown of Stim
compared to Orai expression (see Supplemental Figure S1A). Neither tinC-GAL4 nor 4xhandGAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi significantly altered heart rates or caused notable arrhythmias
compared to controls (Supplemental Figure S2A and B). Overall, heart specific suppression of
Stim and Orai driven by two independent heart specific drivers resulted in dilated
cardiomyopathy, suggesting an essential function for SOCE in adult Drosophila cardiac function.
Results from mouse models demonstrate that STIM1 suppression results in agedependent cardiomyopathy and heart failure in adults (Collins et al., 2014; Parks et al., 2016),
whereas severe heart failure was evident during embryogenesis in zebrafish with Orai1
suppression (Volkers et al., 2012). We therefore sought to determine whether cardiomyopathy
caused by SOCE suppression in Drosophila occurs in larvae, prior to the adult life cycle stage.
Larval heart contractility was analyzed using intravital fluorescence imaging of animals with
cardiomyocyte-specific tdTomato (CM-tdTom) expression (Klassen et al., 2017) as opposed to
OCT, because OCT imaging in larvae is complicated by light scattering caused by high fat
content. We first validated our intravital CM-tdTom imaging approach by showing that analysis
of adult heart contractility yielded similar results to OCT, with significantly larger ESD and EDD
and reduced FS in tinC-GAL4 driven Stim RNAi hearts compared to controls (Figure S3,
Supplemental Videos 1 and 2). Similar to adults, larvae with tinC-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai
RNAi exhibited significantly increased EDD and ESD compared to nontargeting RNAi controls
(Figure 2A-H, Supplemental Videos 3 and 4), and this resulted in significantly decreased FS for
Orai, though not Stim RNAi (Figure 2I).We also observed a small though significant decrease in
heart rate in Orai but not Stim RNAi larvae (Supplemental Figure S2C). These results suggest
that reduced cardiac output due to SOCE suppression is already evident in larval stages of
Drosophila development, and thus is not exclusively an age-dependent effect in the adult heart.
We also tested larval contractility with 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi and although
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

this resulted in modest increases in ESD and EDD, FS was unchanged compared to controls
(Figure 2J-R). It is possible that 4xhand-GAL4 does not drive RNAi expression as strongly in the
larval heart as does tinC-GAL4, thus explaining the weaker effects of 4xhand-GAL4-driven Stim
and Orai RNAi on larval heart contractility. Because of this, the 4xhand-GAL4 driver was not
used further for larval heart analysis.

Stim and Orai suppression disrupts myofibril organization
Disrupted myofibril organization is a common feature of dilated cardiomyopathy in
mammalian (Garfinkel et al., 2018; Sussman et al., 1998) and Drosophila (Wolf et al., 2006)
hearts. We therefore determined whether SOCE suppressed hearts similarly exhibit
disorganized myofibrils. As shown in Figure 3A and B, hearts from tinC-GAL4 driven control
RNAi third-instar larvae exhibited evenly spaced myofibrils that were oriented circularly around
the heart tube as revealed by actin staining and confocal microscopy. In contrast, myofibrils in
tinC-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi hearts exhibited highly varied orientations, with some
myofibrils running nearly parallel to the long axis of the heart tube (Figure 3C-D). In addition,
myofibrils in Stim and Orai RNAi hearts were more widely spaced compared to controls, as
indicated by a significant reduction of nearly 45% in myofibril density in Stim and Orai RNAi
versus control hearts (Figure 3E). In adult control animals, myofibrils again were densely
packed and uniformly oriented around the heart tube (Figure 4A-B and E). Conversely,
myofibrils in adult tinC-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi hearts exhibited non-uniform
orientation including longitudinal fibers, as well as significantly reduced myofibril density
compared to controls (Figure 4C-D and H). Similar results were seen in adult hearts with
4xhand-GAL4 driven RNAi (Figure 4F-G), including a significant decrease in myofibril density
(Figure I). These results are consistent with the dilated cardiomyopathy phenotype in SOCE
suppressed animals, and suggest that myofibril remodeling as a result of suppressed SOCE
may contribute to the aberrant contractility.
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

Heart specific Stim and Orai suppression reduces animal viability
We next determined whether the functional defects in Stim and Orai suppressed hearts
affect animal health and viability. In support of this, larval development was significantly
prolonged in animals with tinC-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi, with nearly 86% fewer Stim
and Orai RNAi animals having undergone pupariation on day five post-embryogenesis
compared to controls (Figure 5A, B). Numbers of pupariated Stim and Orai RNAi animals were
indistinguishable from controls by day six post-embryogenesis, indicating that the overall delay
in pupariation was approximately 24 hours. Eclosion, when adult animals emerge from their
pupal cases, was also delayed by about 24 hours in tinC-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai animals
compared to controls, suggesting that development was not further prolonged during pupal
metamorphosis (Figure 2C-D). These results suggest that the contractile deficits caused by Stim
and Orai suppression in the larval heart alter developmental physiology of the animal, possibly
by limiting nutrient availability to developing tissues or reducing the circulation of the hormone
ecdysone that regulates larval developmental timing.
We next analyzed adult lifespan to determine whether heart dysfunction resulting from
Stim and Orai suppression affects adult viability. Males with tinC-GAL4 driven Orai RNAi died
significantly earlier than those with nontargeting control RNAi, as indicated by a statistically
significant reduction of approximately 13 days in average median lifespan for Orai RNAi versus
controls (Figure 6A and B). Animals with tinC-GAL4 driven Stim RNAi also exhibited an
approximately 11 day reduction in average median life span compared to controls, though this
difference was not statistically significant (Figure 6A and B). More profound effects on adult
lifespan were observed with 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi, as the average median
lifespan of adult males was 11 ± 1.73 and 13 ± 2.65 days for Stim and Orai RNAi, respectively,
compared to 43.64 ± 3.38 days for controls (Figure 6C-D; mean ± SEM). Thus, whereas Stim
and Orai suppression driven by tinC-GAL4 resulted in greater deficiencies in heart contractility,
suppression driven by 4xhand-GAL4 resulted in greater reductions in adult lifespan. This
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

difference may result from broader tissue distribution of 4xhand-GAL4 expression compared to
tinC-GAL4, and thus 4xhand-GAL4 driven RNAi may have had effects on animal survival
independent of heart function. Consistent with this, many 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai
RNAi adults exhibited severe wing damage, including blistering and tearing of large sections of
the wings (Figure 6E). This is likely due to 4xhand-GAL4 driven RNAi expression in wing hearts,
which are muscles of cardiac origin that circulate hemolymph throughout the wings (Togel et al.,
2013; Togel et al., 2008). Interestingly, this suggests that SOCE is also required for proper wing
heart function, though we did not investigate this possibility further. However, we did consider
the possibility that wing damage may have contributed to the early lethality of the 4xhand-GAL4
driven RNAi animals by causing them to become stuck in the food or on the vial walls. To test
this and more clearly determine whether lethality is attributable to dysfunction of the primary
heart, we repeated adult survival experiments with 4xhand-GAL4 driven RNAi animals whose
wings were removed at the time of eclosion. As shown in Figure 6F and G, wingless 4xhandGAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi animals indeed survived longer than those with wings
(compare to Figure 6C and D), but these animals still died significantly earlier than
corresponding wingless controls. Furthermore, the median lifespan of wingless 4xhand-GAL4
driven Stim and Orai RNAi animals was shorter than controls by approximately 12 days, similar
to the result with tinC-GAL4 driven RNAi, suggesting consistent early lethality due to abnormal
heart function. Collectively, these results suggest that heart dysfunction caused by SOCE
suppression pathologically impairs developmental physiology and longevity in Drosophila.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

DISCUSSION
The critical importance of proper Ca2+ homeostasis and transport in cardiomyocytes is
accentuated by the fact that nearly all cardiomyopathies involve Ca2+ dysregulation. Clear
understanding of the cellular and molecular mechanisms that regulate cardiomyocyte Ca2+
handling is therefore fundamental to unraveling the complexities of cardiac pathophysiology.
Our results demonstrate that SOCE is an essential component of cardiomyocyte Ca2+
physiology in Drosophila, because suppression of the key molecular components of the SOCE
pathway, Stim and Orai, resulted in contractile deficiencies that are highly consistent with dilated
cardiomyopathy. In conjunction with contractility defects, SOCE suppressed hearts exhibited
disrupted myofibril organization and density, a common finding in genetic cardiomyopathy
models. Furthermore, our results demonstrate that reduced functional output of Stim and Orai
suppressed hearts significantly impaired overall animal physiology and health, because these
animals developed significantly more slowly and died earlier than controls. Importantly, our
results are largely consistent with those from mice and zebrafish in which STIM1 or Orai1,
respectively, were suppressed (Collins et al., 2014; Volkers et al., 2012), strongly suggesting
that SOCE has essential, cardiomyocyte-specific functions that are highly conserved across
animal species.
Our current study adds to previous findings showing cardiomyocyte-specific functions of
STIM and Orai proteins in new and important ways. Most notably, our results are the first
demonstration that suppression of both Stim and Orai results in nearly identical cardiac
phenotypes in the same animal model. This suggests that these two proteins function together
to regulate the same process, namely SOCE. This is significant, because previous studies in
mammalian cardiomyocytes have implicated Orai1-independent targets of STIM1, such as
canonical transient receptor potential (TrpC) channels (Ohba et al., 2009) and L-type Ca2+
channels (Correll et al., 2015), suggesting SOCE-independent functions of STIM1 in
cardiomyocytes. While our results do not rule out additional functional partners of STIM and
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

Orai, particularly in vertebrate species, they do strongly suggest that Ca2+ influx mediated
specifically by SOCE is essential for proper cardiomyocyte physiology. This conclusion is further
substantiated by the fact that Drosophila express single Stim and Orai isoforms. Thus, we can
effectively target the SOCE pathway by suppressing only Stim or Orai, without possible
compensation by other isoforms such as STIM2, Orai2, or Orai3. Moving forward, these
advantages of the Drosophila model will allow us to investigate the functional roles of SOCE in
cardiomyocytes using genetic tools that are largely unattainable with vertebrate models.
Despite several recent studies demonstrating that SOCE is required for normal, healthy
heart function, the specific cellular processes that are regulated by SOCE in cardiomyocytes
have not been clearly defined. Maintenance of SR Ca2+ stores is a seemingly likely function of
SOCE that would broadly impact cardiomyocyte physiology. For example, reduced SR Ca2+
content in the absence of SOCE may reduce RyR-dependent Ca2+ release that drives
contraction, and would be consistent with the severe systolic dysfunction that we and others
have observed in STIM and Orai suppressed hearts. In this case, the myofibril disorganization
observed in SOCE suppressed hearts may be the result of decompensation in response to
reduced contractile force generation (Houser and Margulies, 2003). However, direct analyses of
SR Ca2+ store content in STIM or Orai depleted cardiomyocytes have yielded conflicting results.
For example, siRNA knockdown of STIM1 in freshly isolated neonatal rat ventricular myocytes
led to a significant reduction of the caffeine-releasable SR Ca2+ pools (Voelkers et al., 2010),
whereas SR Ca2+ store content was unchanged in adult cardiomyocytes isolated from STIM1
deleted mouse hearts compared to controls (Parks et al., 2016). These STIM1 deleted hearts
also exhibited dilated cardiomyopathy, suggesting that SR Ca2+ store depletion may not be a
direct cause of heart failure when SOCE is suppressed. However, an independent analysis of
STIM1 deficiency-dependent dilated cardiomyopathy in mice demonstrated significantly
upregulated expression of ER stress response factors (Collins et al., 2014), possibly reflecting
mild but chronic Ca2+ store depletion that may be difficult to measure in acutely isolated cells.
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

An important possibility is that reorganization of cytoarchitecture, including myofibril disarray,
may be an effect of ER stress that impairs contractility and leads to heart failure.
It is also possible that SOCE has specific signaling functions in cardiomyocytes that are
required for heart development or tissue homeostasis. The best characterized signaling function
of SOCE across cell and tissue types involves calcineurin-mediated dephosphorylation and
activation of transcription factors such as NFAT. Overwhelming evidence has established that
upregulated calcineurin-NFAT signaling is an essential mechanism of cardiac hypertrophy
pathogenesis (Tham et al., 2015), and SOCE upregulation also results in cardiac hypertrophy
(Benard et al., 2016; Hulot et al., 2011; Parks et al., 2016) and enhanced calcineurin activity
(Luo et al., 2012). Collectively, these findings suggest that calcineurin is a key cardiomyocyte
target of SOCE in the pathological, upregulated state. However, whether calcineurin or other
signaling factors are essential targets of SOCE in normal heart physiology has not been
determined. Arguing against a signaling role of SOCE during heart development, STIM1
knockout mouse hearts do not exhibit altered phenotypes at early postnatal stages (Collins et
al., 2014), and we also did not observe effects of heart-specific Stim or Orai suppression on
Drosophila embryogenesis (data not shown). In addition, cardiomyopathy in STIM1 knockout
mouse hearts was progressive and age-dependent (Collins et al., 2014), further suggesting that
any signaling functions of SOCE are likely to be homeostatic rather than developmental. It is
important to note that we first observed heart defects in larvae, early in the Drosophila lifecycle.
This may also reflect homeostatic functions of SOCE, and the effects of SOCE suppression may
manifest earlier in these animals due to the rapid lifecycle of Drosophila compared to vertebrate
models. Clearly, much work is still required to identify the specific functional roles of SOCE in
the healthy heart, and genetic tools combined with in vivo analyses of heart physiology and Ca2+
dynamics in Drosophila will allow us to address this in novel and significant ways.
Our study is the first to demonstrate the use of intravital fluorescence imaging of heart
contractility in Drosophila larvae, an important lifecycle stage that involves rapid animal growth
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

and high nutritional demands. Importantly, larval heart contractility has been difficult to analyze
using other methods often employed for adults, such as OCT and direct imaging of dissected
preparations. For example, the high fat content of larvae introduces light scattering that can
obscure OCT imaging. Furthermore, the larval heart is extremely delicate and poorly attached to
the larval body wall, making partial dissections that faithfully preserve heart function extremely
challenging. Thus, intravital fluorescence imaging of larval hearts is a versatile and accessible
method that is also amenable to longitudinal analysis. We first validated our intravital imaging
approach by confirming that we were able to measure significantly increased ESD and EDD and
decreased FS values in adult Stim suppressed compared to control hearts, similar to our results
from the more established OCT method. However, it was notable that even in controls, ESD and
EDD values were substantially larger with intravital imaging compared to OCT measurements.
This is likely due to better spatial resolution of the heart walls with fluorescence imaging
compared to OCT. Importantly, our fluorescence imaging measurements of adult heart ESD,
EDD, and FS were very similar to those from the first study that developed the CM-tdTom model
for intravital fluorescence imaging (Klassen et al., 2017), further validating the accuracy of our
measurements.
Another notable finding of our study was that there were several key differences in the
results of Stim and Orai RNAi driven with tinC-GAL4 compared to 4xhand-GAL4, both of which
are described interchangeably in the literature as heart specific GAL4 drivers. Most strikingly,
4xhand-GAL4 but not tinC-GAL4 driven RNAi resulted in significant effects on adult wing
structure and integrity that were likely caused by defective wing heart function, given that hand
but not tinman (the genes from which the respective GAL4 drivers are derived) is expressed in
wing heart myocytes (Togel et al., 2013; Togel et al., 2008). Importantly, we found that the wing
defects caused by 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim and Orai RNAi significantly shortened animal
lifespan, independently of effects on contractility of the primary adult heart. This illustrates that

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

caution is warranted when attributing phenotypes, such as premature lethality, to dysfunction of
the primary Drosophila heart when using these GAL4 drivers.
In conclusion, our results demonstrate that SOCE mediated by STIM and Orai is
essential for proper function of the Drosophila heart, and add to a growing number of studies
that collectively suggest that SOCE has highly conserved functional roles in cardiomyocytes
across animal species. Paradoxically, it is still unknown whether loss of function mutations in
STIM1 or Orai1 result in heart defects or cardiomyopathies in humans likely due to the fact that
individuals homozygous for these mutations die from immunodeficiency in infancy or early
childhood, before adverse heart phenotypes may fully manifest (Rosenberg et al., 2019).
Therefore, animal model studies will continue to be vital to our understanding of how alterations
to SOCE result in or contribute to devastating cardiomyopathies and heart failure.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Fly Stocks
The following Drosophila stocks were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock
Center: mCherry RNAi (35785; non-targeting control), GAL4 RNAi (35783; non-targeting
control RNAi), Stim RNAi (27263), Orai RNAi (53333), and act-GAL4 (3954). tinC-GAL4 was
obtained from Dr. Manfred Frausch (Friedrich Alexander University), and 4xhand-GAL4 was
from Dr. Zhe Han (George Washington University School of Medicine). CM-Tdtom flies were
obtained from Dr. Rolf Bodmer (Sanford Burnham Prebys Institute). Flies were maintained on
standard cornmeal agar food, and all crosses were carried out at 25ºC.

Adult Survival
Virgin female tinC-GAL4 or 4xhand-GAL4 flies were crossed with male RNAi animals,
and progeny were raised to adulthood at 25ºC to eclosion. On the day of eclosion, adult
progeny were collected and separated based on sex into vials containing up to ten flies per vial,
with a total of 20-30 flies per group. Flies were maintained at 25ºC throughout the course of the
experiments. Every three days, the vials were checked for dead animals and surviving flies were
transferred into new vials with fresh food. For wingless experiments, wings were removed
immediately following eclosion on the day of adult collection.

Developmental Timing
Approximately 30-40 virgin female tinC-GAL4 or 4xhand-GAL4 animals were mated with
RNAi males for three days, at which time mated females were transferred into egg laying
chambers that consisted of a 100ml plastic beaker with holes for air exchange affixed over a
petri dish containing grape juice agar (Genesee Scientific). A dollop of yeast paste (active dry
yeast mixed with water) was placed in the center of each grape juice agar plate to provide food.
Animals were acclimated in the chambers for 24 hours, and then transferred to new plates for 4
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

hours at 25ºC for timed egg laying. After removing the females, plates with eggs were incubated
at 25ºC for an additional 24 hours. Hatched larvae were then transferred to vials with standard
fly food, with up to 30 larvae per vial, and maintained at 25ºC through the course of the
experiment. Vials were checked each day, and the numbers of newly formed pupae and
eclosed adults were recorded.

RNA Isolation and RT-qPCR
Twenty to 30 first instar larvae were collected in 20µl cold Trizol and manually crushed
with a pestle. Additional Trizol was then added to a total volume of 500µl, 100µl chloroform was
added, and the aqueous layer containing extracted RNA was isolated. Extracted RNA was
further purified with the RNeasy kit (Qiagen) and converted to cDNA using an S1000 Thermo
Cycler (BioRad) with high capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription kit (ThermoFisher). Real-time
quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) was performed on a StepOnePlus RT-qPCR
machine (Applied Biosystems) with each reaction consisting of triplicate samples containing
iTaq Universal Probes Supermix (BioRad), pre-validated 6-carboxyfluorescein (FAM)-labeled
Taqman probes (Applied Biosystems) against Stim, Orai, and RPL32 (housekeeping gene), and
template cDNA diluted per manufacturer’s instructions. For quantification, triplicate cycle
threshold (Ct) values were averaged and normalized to the RPL32 Ct value to calculate ∆Ct.
The ∆(∆Ct) was determined by subtracting the control RNAi ∆Ct value from the experimental
∆Ct value, and fold changes expressed as 2-∆(∆Ct). Fold changes are expressed as a percentage
of expression compared to non-targeting RNAi control.

Heart Dissection, Staining, and Confocal Imaging
Hearts from third instar larvae of five-day old adults were dissected and fixed as
previously described (Alayari et al., 2009). In brief, for adults the ventral abdomens and
underlying tissues were removed to expose the contracting heart while bathed in oxygenated
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

artificial Drosophila hemolymph (ADH; 108 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 8 mM MgCl2, 1
mM NaH2PO4, 4 mM NaHCO3, 10 mM sucrose, 5 mM trehalose, and 5 mM HEPES (pH 7.1).
Hearts were then fully relaxed by exchange with fresh ADH containing 10 mM EGTA. Larvae
were pinned to Sylgard coated dishes at their anterior and posterior, and a slit was cut along the
ventral midline in the presence of oxygenated ADH. Lateral cuts were then made along the
sides of the animals, and the resulting cuticle flaps were pinned to expose the internal organs.
The gut was removed to expose the beating hearts, which were then relaxed with ADH
containing 10 mM EGTA. Dissected adults and larvae were both fixed for 20 min at room
temperature in PBS containing 4% paraformaldehyde. Following three 10 min washes in PBS
containing 0.1% Triton X-100 (PBSTx) with gentle rotation, the samples were incubated in
PBSTx containing 1.0 µM Alexa Fluor 488 Phalloidin (ThermoFisher) for one hour at room
temperature with gentle shaking. Samples were again washed three times in PBSTx at room
temperature, and mounted on glass slides and coverslips with Vectashield (Vectashield
Laboratories) as described (Alayari et al., 2009). Samples were imaged with a Nikon A1R
confocal microscope using 10X, 0.45 N.A. and 40X, 1.3 NA objectives. Phalloidin was excited
with a 488 nm laser. Z-stacks at 1 µm intervals were collected and images are presented as
maximum intensity projections encompassing the whole heart for larvae or the dorsal half of the
heart for adults to avoid the ventral layer of skeletal muscle. Myofibril density measurements on
adults and third instar larval hearts were taken from the A2 segment of the heart. The number of
myofibrils per 75µm in larvae and 50µm in adults was calculated manually.

Optical Coherence Tomography (OCT)
Adult heart contractility was analyzed using a custom-built OCT apparatus as previously
described (Wolf et al., 2006). In brief, five-day old males were briefly anesthetized with CO2,
embedded in a soft gel support, and allowed to fully awaken based on body movement. Animals
were first imaged in B-mode in the longitudinal orientation to identify the A1 segment of the
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

heart chamber. They were then imaged transversely in M-mode for 3 sec, and multiple Mmodes were recorded for each fly. Animals were then re-imaged in B-mode to ensure proper
orientation of the heart chamber. M-modes were processed in ImageJ by referencing to a 150
µm standard. EDD, ESD, and heart rate were calculated directly from the processed M-mode
traces. FS was calculated as (EDD-ESD) / EDD x 100.

Intravital Fluorescence Microscopy
Intravital fluorescence imaging of adult and third instar larval hearts was carried out
using animals that express tdTomato under control of the cardiomyocyte-specific R94C02
enhancer element (Klassen et al., 2017) Five-day old adult males and third instar larvae were
briefly anesthetized with CO2 for adults or 1 minute cold exposure at 4˚C for larva. Animals were
then adhered dorsal side down to a glass coverslip with Norland Optical Adhesive and cured
with a 365nm 3-watt UV LED light source (brand) for 30 seconds. Animals were allowed to
recover for 10 mins prior to imaging. The heart was imaged through the dorsal cuticle at a rate
of 200 frames per second (fps) for ten seconds using a sCMOS camera (Hamamatsu) on a
Nikon Ti2 inverted microscope controlled with Nikon Elements software. Excitation light at 550
nm was provided by a Spectra-X illuminator (Lumencor) and emission was collected through a
555-635 band-pass filter. The full-time lapse of images acquired at 200 fps were used to
generate M-modes from the A1 segment of the heart chamber in adults and the A2 segment in
third instar larva using ImageJ (NIH). EDD, ESD, and heart rate were calculated directly from
the processed M-mode traces. FS was calculated as (EDD-ESD) / EDD x 100.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

REFERENCES
Abraham, D.M., and Wolf, M.J. (2013). Disruption of sarcoendoplasmic reticulum calcium
ATPase function in Drosophila leads to cardiac dysfunction. PloS one 8, e77785.
Alayari, N.N., Vogler, G., Taghli-Lamallem, O., Ocorr, K., Bodmer, R., and Cammarato, A.
(2009). Fluorescent labeling of Drosophila heart structures. Journal of visualized experiments :
JoVE.
Benard, L., Oh, J.G., Cacheux, M., Lee, A., Nonnenmacher, M., Matasic, D.S., Kohlbrenner, E.,
Kho, C., Pavoine, C., Hajjar, R.J., et al. (2016). Cardiac Stim1 Silencing Impairs Adaptive
Hypertrophy and Promotes Heart Failure Through Inactivation of mTORC2/Akt Signaling.
Circulation 133, 1458-1471; discussion 1471.
Bers, D.M. (2002). Cardiac excitation-contraction coupling. Nature 415, 198-205.
Collins, H.E., He, L., Zou, L., Qu, J., Zhou, L., Litovsky, S.H., Yang, Q., Young, M.E., Marchase,
R.B., and Chatham, J.C. (2014). Stromal interaction molecule 1 is essential for normal cardiac
homeostasis through modulation of ER and mitochondrial function. American journal of
physiology Heart and circulatory physiology 306, H1231-1239.
Correll, R.N., Goonasekera, S.A., van Berlo, J.H., Burr, A.R., Accornero, F., Zhang, H.,
Makarewich, C.A., York, A.J., Sargent, M.A., Chen, X., et al. (2015). STIM1 elevation in the
heart results in aberrant Ca(2)(+) handling and cardiomyopathy. Journal of molecular and
cellular cardiology 87, 38-47.
Garfinkel, A.C., Seidman, J.G., and Seidman, C.E. (2018). Genetic Pathogenesis of
Hypertrophic and Dilated Cardiomyopathy. Heart failure clinics 14, 139-146.
Horton, J.S., Buckley, C.L., Alvarez, E.M., Schorlemmer, A., and Stokes, A.J. (2014). The
calcium release-activated calcium channel Orai1 represents a crucial component in hypertrophic
compensation and the development of dilated cardiomyopathy. Channels (Austin, Tex) 8, 35-48.
Houser, S.R., and Margulies, K.B. (2003). Is depressed myocyte contractility centrally involved
in heart failure? Circulation research 92, 350-358.
Hulot, J.S., Fauconnier, J., Ramanujam, D., Chaanine, A., Aubart, F., Sassi, Y., Merkle, S.,
Cazorla, O., Ouille, A., Dupuis, M., et al. (2011). Critical role for stromal interaction molecule 1 in
cardiac hypertrophy. Circulation 124, 796-805.
Klassen, M.P., Peters, C.J., Zhou, S., Williams, H.H., Jan, L.Y., and Jan, Y.N. (2017). Agedependent diastolic heart failure in an in vivo Drosophila model. eLife 6.
Kranias, E., and Bers, D. (2007). Calcium and Cardiomyopathies, Vol 45.
Limas, C.J., Olivari, M.T., Goldenberg, I.F., Levine, T.B., Benditt, D.G., and Simon, A. (1987).
Calcium uptake by cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum in human dilated cardiomyopathy.
Cardiovascular research 21, 601-605.
Lin, N., Badie, N., Yu, L., Abraham, D., Cheng, H., Bursac, N., Rockman, H.A., and Wolf, M.J.
(2011). A method to measure myocardial calcium handling in adult Drosophila. Circulation
research 108, 1306-1315.
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

Luo, X., Hojayev, B., Jiang, N., Wang, Z.V., Tandan, S., Rakalin, A., Rothermel, B.A., Gillette,
T.G., and Hill, J.A. (2012). STIM1-dependent store-operated Ca(2)(+) entry is required for
pathological cardiac hypertrophy. Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology 52, 136-147.
MacLeod, K.T. (2016). Recent advances in understanding cardiac contractility in health and
disease. F1000Research 5.
McKenna, W.J., Maron, B.J., and Thiene, G. (2017). Classification, Epidemiology, and Global
Burden of Cardiomyopathies. Circulation research 121, 722-730.
Molkentin, J.D., Lu, J.R., Antos, C.L., Markham, B., Richardson, J., Robbins, J., Grant, S.R.,
and Olson, E.N. (1998). A calcineurin-dependent transcriptional pathway for cardiac
hypertrophy. Cell 93, 215-228.
Ocorr, K., Perrin, L., Lim, H.Y., Qian, L., Wu, X., and Bodmer, R. (2007). Genetic control of
heart function and aging in Drosophila. Trends in cardiovascular medicine 17, 177-182.
Ohba, T., Watanabe, H., Murakami, M., Sato, T., Ono, K., and Ito, H. (2009). Essential role of
STIM1 in the development of cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. Biochemical and biophysical research
communications 389, 172-176.
Parks, C., Alam, M.A., Sullivan, R., and Mancarella, S. (2016). STIM1-dependent Ca(2+)
microdomains are required for myofilament remodeling and signaling in the heart. Scientific
reports 6, 25372.
Pathak, T., Trivedi, D., and Hasan, G. (2017). CRISPR-Cas-Induced Mutants Identify a
Requirement for dSTIM in Larval Dopaminergic Cells of Drosophila melanogaster. G3
(Bethesda, Md) 7, 923-933.
Piazza, N., and Wessells, R.J. (2011). Drosophila models of cardiac disease. Progress in
molecular biology and translational science 100, 155-210.
Putney, J.W. (2011). The physiological function of store-operated calcium entry. Neurochemical
research 36, 1157-1165.
Putney, J.W. (2018). Forms and functions of store-operated calcium entry mediators, STIM and
Orai. Adv Biol Regul 68, 88-96.
Rosenberg, P., Katz, D., and Bryson, V. (2019). SOCE and STIM1 signaling in the heart: Timing
and location matter. Cell calcium 77, 20-28.
Rotstein, B., and Paululat, A. (2016). On the Morphology of the Drosophila Heart. Journal of
Cardiovascular Development and Disease 3, 15.
Schulz, R.A., and Yutzey, K.E. (2004). Calcineurin signaling and NFAT activation in
cardiovascular and skeletal muscle development. Developmental biology 266, 1-16.
Smyth, J.T., Hwang, S.Y., Tomita, T., DeHaven, W.I., Mercer, J.C., and Putney, J.W. (2010).
Activation and regulation of store-operated calcium entry. Journal of cellular and molecular
medicine 14, 2337-2349.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

Sussman, M.A., Welch, S., Cambon, N., Klevitsky, R., Hewett, T.E., Price, R., Witt, S.A., and
Kimball, T.R. (1998). Myofibril degeneration caused by tropomodulin overexpression leads to
dilated cardiomyopathy in juvenile mice. The Journal of clinical investigation 101, 51-61.
Tham, Y.K., Bernardo, B.C., Ooi, J.Y., Weeks, K.L., and McMullen, J.R. (2015).
Pathophysiology of cardiac hypertrophy and heart failure: signaling pathways and novel
therapeutic targets. Archives of toxicology 89, 1401-1438.
Togel, M., Meyer, H., Lehmacher, C., Heinisch, J.J., Pass, G., and Paululat, A. (2013). The
bHLH transcription factor hand is required for proper wing heart formation in Drosophila.
Developmental biology 381, 446-459.
Togel, M., Pass, G., and Paululat, A. (2008). The Drosophila wing hearts originate from
pericardial cells and are essential for wing maturation. Developmental biology 318, 29-37.
Vega, R.B., Bassel-Duby, R., and Olson, E.N. (2003). Control of cardiac growth and function by
calcineurin signaling. The Journal of biological chemistry 278, 36981-36984.
Voelkers, M., Salz, M., Herzog, N., Frank, D., Dolatabadi, N., Frey, N., Gude, N., Friedrich, O.,
Koch, W.J., Katus, H.A., et al. (2010). Orai1 and Stim1 regulate normal and hypertrophic growth
in cardiomyocytes. Journal of molecular and cellular cardiology 48, 1329-1334.
Volkers, M., Dolatabadi, N., Gude, N., Most, P., Sussman, M.A., and Hassel, D. (2012). Orai1
deficiency leads to heart failure and skeletal myopathy in zebrafish. Journal of cell science 125,
287-294.
Wilkins, B.J., Dai, Y.S., Bueno, O.F., Parsons, S.A., Xu, J., Plank, D.M., Jones, F., Kimball,
T.R., and Molkentin, J.D. (2004). Calcineurin/NFAT coupling participates in pathological, but not
physiological, cardiac hypertrophy. Circulation research 94, 110-118.
Wolf, M.J., Amrein, H., Izatt, J.A., Choma, M.A., Reedy, M.C., and Rockman, H.A. (2006).
Drosophila as a model for the identification of genes causing adult human heart disease.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103, 13941399.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported by funding from the Collaborative Health Initiative Research Program
to C.E.P. and J.T.S. and from the National Institutes of Health to M.J.W.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1: Heart specific Stim and Orai suppression results in dilated cardiomyopathy in
adults.
A-C. Representative OCT longitudinal B-mode images of five-day old adult male flies with tinCGAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi during diastole (upper panels) and
systole (lower panels). Arrowheads indicate the heart in diastole images. D-F. Representative
M-mode recordings from tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi with red
lines depicting systole and yellow lines diastole. EDD (G), ESD (H), and FS (I) were calculated
from M-mode recordings of five-day old males, and each symbol represents a measurement
from a single animal. Bars indicate mean ± SEM, and p-values were calculated from One-way
ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple Comparison. J-L. Representative OCT longitudinal B-mode
images of five-day old adult male flies with 4xhand-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and
Orai RNAi during diastole (upper panels) and systole (lower panels). Arrowheads indicate the
heart in diastole images. M-O. Representative M-mode recordings from 4xhand-GAL4 driven
non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi with red lines depicting systole and yellow lines
diastole. EDD (P), ESD (Q), and FS (R) were calculated from M-mode recordings of five-day old
males, and each symbol represents a measurement from a single animal. Bars indicate mean ±
SEM, and p-values were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple Comparison.

Figure 2: Larval Stim and Orai suppressed hearts are significantly dilated.
A-C Representative longitudinal images from intravital fluorescence imaging of R94C02-tdTom
expressing third instar larval hearts with tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai
RNAi during diastole (upper panels) and systole (lower panels). Images are presented in
inverted grayscale for added clarity, due to low fluorescence intensity. Yellow arrowheads
indicate heart in diastolic images and red arrowheads in systolic images. D-F. Representative
M-mode images from tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi hearts. Red
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

lines depict systole and yellow lines diastole. EDD (G), ESD (H), FS (I) were calculated from Mmode recordings of third instar larva, and each symbol represents a measurement from a single
animal. Bars indicate mean ± SEM, and p-values were calculated from One-way ANOVA with
Tukey’s Multiple Comparison. J-L. Representative longitudinal images from intravital
fluorescence imaging of R94C02-tdTom expressing third instar larval hearts with 4xhand-GAL4
driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi during diastole (upper panels) and systole
(lower panels). Yellow arrowheads indicate heart in diastolic images and red arrowheads in
systolic images. M-O. Representative M-mode images from 4xhand-GAL4 driven non-targeting
control, Stim, and Orai RNAi hearts. Red lines depict systole and yellow lines diastole. EDD (P),
ESD (Q), FS (R) were calculated from M-mode recordings of third instar larvae, and each
symbol represents a measurement from a single animal. Bars indicate mean ± SEM, and pvalues were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple Comparison.

Figure 3: Stim and Orai suppression results in myofibril disorganization in larval hearts
A. Representative image of a control third instar larval heart stained with Phalloidin to visualize
actin. The box denotes the region shown in the high resolution images. B-D. Representative
high resolution images of the region around the second ostium of third instar larval hearts with
tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi. Arrowheads point to ostia, and
arrows point to regions with disorganized myofibrils. E. Plot of the total number of myofibrils per
75µm in larval hearts with tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim and Orai RNAi. Each
symbol represents a measurement from a single heart, and data are mean ± SEM (p-values
were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple Comparisons Test).

Figure 4: Stim and Orai suppression results in myofibril disorganization in adult hearts
A. Representative image of an adult control heart (indicated by arrows) stained with Phalloidin
to visualize actin. The box denotes the region shown in the high-resolution images. B-D.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

Representative high resolution images of the region around the third ostium of five-day old adult
male hearts with tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi. Arrowheads
point to ostia, and arrows point to regions with disorganized myofibrils. E-G. Representative
high-resolution images of the region around the third ostium of five-day old adult male hearts
with 4xhand-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim, and Orai RNAi. Arrowheads point to ostia,
and arrows point to regions with disorganized myofibrils. H. Plot of the total number of myofibrils
per 50µm in adult hearts with tinC-GAL4 driven non-targeting control, Stim and Orai RNAi. Each
symbol represents a measurement from a single heart, and data are mean ± SEM (p-values
were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple Comparisons Test). I. Plot of the
total number of myofibrils per 50µm in adult hearts with 4xhand-GAL4 driven non-targeting
control, Stim and Orai RNAi. Each symbol represents a measurement from a single heart, and
data are mean ± SEM (p-values were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple
Comparisons Test).

Figure 5: Heart specific Stim and Orai suppression delays post-embryonic animal
development.
A. Plot of the percent of larvae that pupariated on each of the indicated days postembryogenesis for tinC-GAL4 driven Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi. Data are mean
± SEM from three independent experiments, with 25-50 animals per experimental group. B.
Comparison of percent pupariated on day 5 post-embryogenesis for tinC-GAL4 driven Stim,
Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi from three independent replicates (p-values calculated
from One-way ANOVA with Turkey’s Multiple Comparisons Test). C. Plot of the percent of
pupae that eclosed on each of the indicated days post-embryogenesis for tinC-GAL4 driven
Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi. Data are mean ± SEM from three independent
experiments, with 25-50 animals per experimental group. D. Comparison of percent eclosed on

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

day 9 post-embryogenesis for tinC-GAL4 driven Stim, Orai and non-targeting control RNAi from
three independent replicates (p-values calculated from One-way ANOVA with Turkey’s Multiple
Comparisons Test).

Figure 6: Heart specific Stim and Orai suppression results in early adult lethality
A. Representative survival curves in days post-eclosion for adult males with tinC-GAL4 driven
Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi (n = 30 animals per group). B. Plot of the average
adult male median lifespan (MLS), calculated from three independent survival curves, for tinCGAL4 driven Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi. Error bars represent SEM, and pvalues were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Turkey’s Multiple Comparisons Test C.
Representative survival curves in days post-eclosion for adult males with 4xhand-GAL4 driven
Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi (n = 30 animals per group). D. Plot of the average
adult male median lifespan (MLS), calculated from three independent survival curves, for
4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi. Error bars represent SEM, and
p-values were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Turkey’s Multiple Comparisons Test. E.
Representative images of adult males with 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim, Orai, and non-targeting
control RNAi on the day of eclosion. Note the blistered wing on the Stim RNAi animal and the
severely damaged and frayed wings on the Orai RNAi animal (indicated by arrows). F.
Representative survival curves in days post-eclosion for adult males with 4xhand-GAL4 driven
Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control RNAi, with their wings removed on day of eclosion (n = 30
animals per group). G. Plot of the average adult male median lifespan (MLS), calculated from
three independent survival curves, for 4xhand-GAL4 driven Stim, Orai, and non-targeting control
RNAi animals with their wings removed on the day of eclosion. Error bars represent SEM, and
p-values were calculated from One-way ANOVA with Tukey’s Multiple Comparisons Test.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

30

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

32

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/659136; this version posted October 25, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. This article is a US Government work. It is not subject to copyright under 17 USC 105 and is also
made available for use under a CC0 license.

34

