bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Systematic exploration of protein conformational
space using a Distance Geometry approach
Thérèse E. Malliavin,∗,† Antonio Mucherino,‡ Carlile Lavor,¶ and Leo Liberti∗,§
†Unité de Bioinformatique Structurale, Institut Pasteur, UMR 3528, CNRS, Departement
de Bioinformatique, Biostatistique et Biologie Intégrative, Institut Pasteur, USR 3756,
CNRS, Paris, (75015) France
‡IRISA, Rennes, France
¶Applied Math Department, IMECC - University of Campinas, Campinas, SP, Brazil
§LIX CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, Institut Polytechnique de Paris, Route de Saclay, 91128
Palaiseau, France
E-mail: therese.malliavin@pasteur.fr; leo.liberti@lix.polytechnique.fr

Short title
Distance Geometry and protein conformational space

Corresponding authors
Thérèse E Malliavin
Institut Pasteur and CNRS UMR 3528, Unité de Bioinformatique Structurale, 25 rue du Dr
Roux, 75015 Paris, France E-mail address: therese.malliavin@pasteur.fr
Leo Liberti, CNRS LIX (UMR 7161), Ecole Polytechnique, 91128 Palaiseau, France.
E-mail address: leo.liberti@lix.polytechnique.fr
1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The optimisation approaches classically used during the determination of protein
structure encounter various diffculties, specially when the size of the conformational
space is large. Indeed, in such case, algorithmic convergence criteria are more difficult
to set up. Moreover, the size of the search space makes it difficult to achieve a complete
exploration. The interval Branch-and-Prune (iBP) approach, based on the reformulating of the Distance Geometry Problem (DGP) provides a theoretical frame for the generation of protein conformations, by systematically sampling the conformational space.
When an appropriate subset of inter-atomic distances is known exactly, this worst-case
exponential-time algorithm is provably complete and fixed-parameter tractable. These
guarantees, however, immediately disappear as distance measurement errors are introduced. Here we propose an improvement of this approach: the threading-augmented
interval Branch-and-Prune (TAiBP), where the combinatorial explosion of the original
iBP approach arising from its exponential complexity is alleviated by partitioning the
input instances into consecutive peptide fragments and by using Self-Organizing Maps
(SOMs) to obtain clusters of similar solutions. A validation of the TAiBP approach
is presented here on a set of proteins of various sizes and structures. The calculation
inputs are: a uniform covalent geometry extracted from force field covalent terms, the
backbone dihedral angles with error intervals, and a few long-range distances. For most
of the proteins smaller than 50 residues and interval widths of 20◦ , the TAiBP approach
yielded solutions with RMSD values smaller than 3 Å with respect to the initial protein
conformation. The efficiency of TAiBP approach for proteins larger than 50 residues
will require the use of non-uniform covalent geometry, and may have benefits from the
recent development of residue-specific force-fields.

Introduction
Since the early days of structural biology, optimization techniques have been at the heart
of biomolecular structure calculation. Indeed, most of the experimental information is only
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

indirectly related to protein structure. In addition, this information is noisy. Furthermore,
the sparsity of data is made even bigger as most of biophysical techniques concentrates on
time-average or space-average data in order to obtain large enough signal-to-noise ratio.
Several optimization schemes have been used for Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
structure determination, such as simulated annealing 1 and genetic algorithms. 2 Nowadays,
several approaches exist for protein structure determinations by NMR. 3–7 A Bayesian approach, 8 using a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) scheme for the conformational space
sampling, 9,10 allowed the increase of the convergence radius for problems of protein structure determination by NMR. Furthermore, the use of a log-harmonic shape for distance
restraint potential, 11 along with a Bayesian approach for the restraint weighting, 12 allowed
an improvement of the quality of NMR protein structures. 13–15 Log-harmonic restraints defined using Bayesian inference have been also recently 16 proposed for back-mapping from
coarse-grained models to atomic structures.
Most of the optimization methods used so far provide no guarantees of optimality, although they are commonly used in the hope of obtaining the global minimum or several
global minima of the optimization problem. This, however, depends on the choice of a starting point for the computation. Consequently, calculations of protein conformations under
NMR restraints are repeated several times during the procedure of structure determination, 17
and the convergence of these calculations is generally required in order to accept a set of
conformations as a solution. This iterative frame, 6,18 however, encounters difficulties when
the problem has many local minima that are far apart. Such cases started to occur more
frequently in the field of structural biology with the growing interest to disordered regions of
biomolecules. 19–21 Monte Carlo approaches have been proposed for intrinsically disordered
proteins 22–24 and molecular dynamics simulations 25 are also used on all kind of biomolecular
polymers, but they do not provide a definitive answer to the problem of finding all minima.
Since NMR studies biomolecules in solution, and due to the large number of various
parameters it can measure, it is particularly sensitive to the effect of internal mobility. NMR

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

measures are inter-atomic distances and angles, which are closely related parameters. The
problem of protein structure determination by NMR can be thus considered as a Distance
Geometry Problem (DGP). 26,27 The interval Branch-and-Prune (iBP) approach has been
developed 28 for solving the DGP in the framework of the calculation of protein conformations.
In this approach, an atom re-ordering 29,30 ensures that there is a restricted and manageable
locus for the spatial position of every atom. This is achieved by using a “relaxed form” of
trilateration with respect to the three preceding atoms in the order. More precisely, two out
of three of the distances involved in trilateration must be known exactly, and one may be
subject to uncertainty and represented by an interval. Any atom, together with its three
reference predecessors, give rise to a 4-clique in the protein graph: the iBP approach mimics
the approach of exploring protein conformation in torsion angle space. 31–34 In the clique,
exact distances are provided by covalent bond lengths and bond angle values, using the
cosine law. Note that applying this framework using generic information from a force field
instead of measured distances makes the implicit assumption of a uniform covalent geometry
within the protein structure. Analyses of high-resolution crystallographic structures, 35,36
however, have shown that this assumption is not necessarily verified. Independent parallel
work has conducted to the development of residue-specific force field. 37–40
Basing on the atom reordering, it is possible to describe a tree exploration algorithm in
order to find all solutions of a DGP instance. Each tree node represents a spatial position
for an atom. The level of a node in the tree is the index of the atom in the reordering. This
implies that all positions on the same tree level are the possible spatial positions for the
atom having as rank this level. The width of the tree increases exponentially in the worst
case, but it can be bounded to more manageable levels 41 by choosing specific atomic orders.
This yields a fixed-parameter tractable behavior (at least with exact distances). We note
that the exploration of this tree is complete but implicit, in the sense that certain sub-trees
are pruned because the atomic positions at their root nodes are not consistent with long
range distances to preceding atoms. Naturally, each pruned node induces the pruning of the

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sub-tree rooted at that node. It was demonstrated 27,28 that, starting from a set of exact
distances measured in a given PDB structure, the search tree can be completely explored in
a relatively small amount of CPU time.
Here, we employ the iBP algorithm in a setting which is considerably closer to the
protocols of protein structure determination than the mathematical setting in which it was
initially conceived. Instead of exact distances measured on a given PDB structure, this
requires the use of a mixed set of distance intervals and of exact distances arising from
a covalent geometry defined through a force field. Several attempts have been made in
this direction in the recent past. A significant exploration of the conformational space
of some α-helical 15 to 51-residues proteins was performed in Ref., 42 and more recently,
the iBP approach was re-implemented 43 in order to allow its application to real-life cases
of protein structure determination. First, the number of tree branches was reduced 44 by
taking into account the information from improper angles. Second, a parser and a grammar
have been defined to convert the topology, parameter and atom type information used in
molecular modeling to the distance information which is the main input of iBP. Third, a
syntax has been defined to make the atom reordering information a user-defined input of
the calculation. This new implementation makes it possible to perform tree branching on
intervals determined on φ and ψ backbone angles, which may be obtained through chemical
shift measurements. 45 Nevertheless, no systematic exploration of the protein conformational
space has been previously attempted. 43
In the present work, we employ the implementation of Ref. 43 to develop a new strategy
which allows a systematic sampling of the conformational space of small proteins and we
validate this strategy using a set of various protein structures. The expected combinatorial
explosion is prevented by several ingredients: (i) the division of the protein into fragments
which are sampled independently and then assembled, (ii) the extensive use of signed improper angle values to reduce the tree size of each fragment, (iii) the use of self-organizing
maps to cluster conformations of intermediate fragments.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

The geometrical information used for input calculation corresponds to relevant NMR measurements on proteins. Indeed, NMR chemical shifts are easily measurable parameters. The
relationship between chemical shifts and atomic coordinates is not straightforward, but several methods, as the neural network TALOS-N 45 or chemical shift prediction approaches, 46–48
exist for relating chemical shifts and atomic coordinates. Among them, TALOS-N 45 predicts
from chemical shift values, (φ, ψ) likelihood distributions. The existence of such distributions supports the use of intervals on φ and ψ values as inputs for the TAiBP approach. In
addition to the φ and ψ intervals, distance restraints with interval widths of 6 and 10 Å and
defining qualitatively the protein global shape were used as inputs.
The proposed approach is called threading-augmented interval Branch-and-Prune (TAiBP)
approach, as it intends to generate conformations of peptide fragments using iBP, as well as
to thread these fragments in 3D space in order to build protein conformations. The name
was coined in analogy to the threading approach 49 used in protein 3D structure prediction.
We point out that the idea to separate iBP instances in sub-instances is not completely new,
but it was explored so far only in the context of parallel 50 and distributed 51 computing.
Also, the idea of constructing protein conformations from fragment assembly was proposed
initially 52–54 in the Rosetta approach for protein structure modeling.
The proposed methodology is innovative with respect to the state of the art because
it is designed to find all possible configurations compatible with a given set of angle and
distance restraints on a given protein. This is in contrast to classical methods for structure
determination, 1 which might at best produce different protein conformations. The approach
is different with respect to the more recently proposed methods aiming at determining the
global minimum configuration of the system 4,55–59 or at determining all relative positions of
monomers within a protein homo-oligomer. 60 On the contrary, the exhaustive list of conformations generated by TAiBP provides solutions for a larger range of problems.
It is important to note that our purpose is beyond finding a conformation close to the
target one, since we aim instead to the much more ambitious goal of finding many (and

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

hopefully all) incongruent but geometrical consistent conformations. Moreover, because our
algorithm approach is not iterative but based on branching, we have no need for considering
“convergence to a local optimum” a requirement for accepting a conformation. The results
of our computational experiments, however, have been validated by detecting whether conformations close to the target PDB structure have been sampled during the tree exploration,
by Root Mean Square Distance (RMSD) of atomic coordinates to the target structure. The
proposed approach allows us to explore the tree for proteins up to 50 residues. The nonuniform covalent geometry, prevents (by now) our method from being successful on proteins
larger than 50 residues.

Materials and Methods
Test case database
The database of protein structures was built in the following way. The protein structures contained in kinemage.biochem.duke.edu/databases/top100.php 61 have been downloaded.
This database was chosen as high resolution X-ray crystallographic structures on which hydrogens have been added with rotational optimization of OH, SH and NH3+ positions, 61 thus
producing objects corresponding to those iBP is designed to calculate.
Protein structures with number of residues between 21 and 107 have been selected, containing only trans peptidic bonds and corresponding to the following list of 24 proteins:
1aacH, 1benABH, 1bkfH, 1bpiH, 1ckaH, 1cnrH, 1ctjH, 1difH, 1edmBH, 1fxdH, 1igdH, 1iroH,
1isuAH, 1mctIH, 1ptfH, 1ptxH, 1rroH, 256bAH, 2bopAH, 3b5c, 3ebxH, 451cH, bio1rpoH and
bio2wrpH. In 3b5c, the N terminal residue T88 was removed because of missing backbone
atoms. On each structure, the conformation of chain A was selected for preparing the iBP
input, and in the case multiple conformations have been observed for a residue, the A conformation was selected.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Input values for the calculation
The parameters defining the covalent and improper geometries were taken from the geometric
force field PARALLHDG (version 5.3) 62 (Table 1). One should notice that, although these
parameters were proposed more than two decades ago, they still correspond to the state-ofart of molecular force fields with fixed charges, as the covalent bond lengths and bond angles
of most of fixed-point force fields were determined at the same time or earlier. 63 The atom
re-ordering is the same proposed than in the most recent implementation of iBP 43 (Table
2).
Two sets of values were used for the backbone angles φ and ψ in order to evaluate the
effect of assuming a uniform covalent geometry on the TAiBP results.
(i) the φangl , ψangl angles of residue i measured on the X-ray crystallographic structures
as the angles between planes Ci−1 Ni Cαi and Ni Cαi Ci and between planes Ni Cαi Ci and
Cαi Ci Ni+1 using VMD. 64 The plane ABC is defined as the plane passing through the positions of the atoms A, B and C.
(ii) the φdist , ψdist angles calculated from the distances d(Ni ,Ni+1 ) and d(Ci ,Ci+1 ) between
N and C atoms of successive residues, assuming the covalent geometry uniform and described
in Table 1. The dihedral or pseudo-dihedral angle Ω between ordered atoms i-3,i-2,i-1 and
i, is determined using the cosine law from a trihedron: 44

cos Ω =

cos γ − cos α cos β
,
sin α sin β

(1)

where α is the angle between atoms (i-3,i-2,i-1), β is the angle between atoms (i-1,i-2,i),
and γ is the angle between atoms (i-3,i-2,i). For Ω angles being φ or ψ, the angles α, β and
γ are calculated from the bond lengths and bond angles among heavy backbone atoms, as
well as the distances d(Ni ,Ni+1 ) and d(Ci ,Ci+1 ) between successive residues along the protein
sequence. The calculation is described in details in the Supporting Information.
The input restraints for iBP processing of peptide fragments are: (a) the restraints

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

corresponding to the bond lengths and bond angles of the force field PARALLHDG (version
5.3); 62 (b) the backbone angles φ and ψ, determined as described previously; (c) the distances
between Cα atoms located at the two extremities residues of each peptide fragment. The
input restraints for the fragment assembly are: (i) the long-range distances between Cα
atoms of the residues located at the middle of each fragment; (ii) pruning devices avoiding
that Cα atoms belonging to different fragments are closer than 1 Å. The following error
bounds have been used: errors of ± 10◦ , 20◦ and 30◦ for the angles φ and ψ, an error of ±
3 Å for the Cα-Cα distance between extremities of peptide fragments, and error of ± 5 Å
for the long-range Cα-Cα distance between peptides fragments. Examples of inputs in tbl
format are given in the Supporting Information.

Interval Branch-and-Prune calculation of peptide fragments
As the TAiBP approach intends to explore the conformation of protein backbone, the processed protein is initially converted to a poly-Alanine chain. The protein is then divided
in 15-residues peptide fragments, two successive fragments having a sequence of 5 superimposed residues. This fragment size was determined as it permits to obtain tree sizes which
are manageable to explore in the reasonable amount of time, as it will be shown below in
the subsection “Exploring the conformational space of fragments using iBP” of Results. The
number of superimposed residues was chosen to avoid artifacts due to superimposition. The
peptide fragments are assembled together to produce protein conformations, as it will be
described in the next subsection.
For each fragment, the iBP tree of possible conformations is systematically explored. We
employ the most recent implementation of iBP 43 (in the C programming language), which
is tuned for the calculation of protein conformations based on the force field knowledge for
the covalent geometry. The tree branching is performed on the φ and ψ backbone angles.
No branching was performed on the peptidic angle ω. Indeed, analyses of variations of ω
angles in the X-ray crystallographic structures 65–67 show that the angles ω mostly vary in
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intervals of ±8◦ around -180 and 180◦ which are smaller than the intervals sampled in the
present work for φ and ψ.
The position of the atoms were determined as described in Ref. 44 For any atom i in the
order, we seek the atomic coordinates xi , given distances between the three preceding atoms
i − 1, i − 2 and i − 3. As described above, the distances di,i−1 , di,i−2 and di,i−3 between atoms
i,i − 1, atoms i,i − 2 and atoms i,i − 3 are known, where distance di,i−3 between atoms i and
i − 3 is potentially an interval. The variables di , θi and τi , where di denotes di,i−1 , permes
to determine the position of atom i by the following equation:

xi = p1 + τi p2 + σi

q

1 − τi2 p3

where p1 , p2 , p3 ∈ R3 depend only on xi−1 , xi−2 , xi−3 , di and θi ,


 


di
kr12 k
p1 = −
cos(θi ) −
xi−1 − cos(θi ) xi−2
kr12 k
di




di
sin(θi )
p2 = −
kr12 k2 r23 − (r12 · r23 ) r12
kr k
kr × r23 k
 12   12

di
sin(θi )
p3 = −
kr12 k (r12 × r23 )
kr12 k
kr12 × r23 k
and we have introduced the scalars r12 , r23 for notational simplicity,

r12 = xi−1 − xi−2
r23 = xi−2 − xi−3

The angle θi is obtained from the cosine law using the relevant distances,
−1

θi , cos



d2i + d2i−1,i−2 − d2i,i−2
2di di−1,i−2


(2)

The pseudo-dihedral angle ωi formed by the atoms i − 3,i − 2,i − 1 and i is partially
determined by its cosine value cos ωi = τi , which is calculated using the cosine law for a
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

trihedron: 44

2d2i−2,i−1 d2i−3,i−2 + d2i−2,i − d2i−3,i − di−3,i−2,i−1 di−2,i−1,i
q
τi = q
2
2
2
4di−3,i−2 di−2,i−1 − di−3,i−2,i−1 4d2i−2,i−1 d2i−2,i − d2i−2,i−1,i

(3)

where

di−3,i−2,i−1 , d2i−3,i−2 + d2i−2,i−1 − d2i−3,i−1
di−2,i−1,i , d2i−2,i−1 + d2i−2,i − d2i

The determination of the pseudo-dihedral ωi is completed by the sign σi ∈ {−1, +1} of
sin ωi . When ωi is known from either protein chemistry or measurement, we may directly
compute τi , as well as the sign σi ∈ {−1, +1}. This is the case when the angle ωi corresponds
to an improper angle (Table 1) and this allows to reduce the branching to one branch.
The number of saved conformations is reduced by applying a RMSD filter of 3 Å between
two successively saved conformations. In order to avoid pruning due to slight discrepancy
between distance restraints, a tolerance of 0.05 Å has been added to the bounds of distance
intervals. The minimum discretization factor, which is the minimum ratio between each
distance interval to the number of tree branches generated within the interval, was set to
0.05 Å, in order that the branching does not over-sample small intervals. No pruning due
to the van der Waals radii of the force field protein-allhdg5-4 PARALLHDG (version 5.3) 62
was applied. A maximum number of saved conformations of 109 was permitted for each iBP
run. The solutions are stored in a multiframe dcd format. 68

Assembling the peptide fragments and clustering
The generated conformations of neighbouring peptide fragments in the protein sequence are
then assembled by superimposing the five last and initial residues of the fragments located
first and second in the sequence. The conformations of fragments are assembled by root-

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mean-square superimposition of backbone atoms located in the five superimposed residues.
For each superimposition, the residue number for which the smallest distance was observed
between corresponding atoms in the two peptides is used to decide where to stop with the
first peptide and to continue with the second one. The assembled conformation is then
submitted to two pruning devices: (i) a device checking whether there is no clash between
the two fragments, i.e. no Cα atoms closer than 1 Å, (ii) a device checking that longrange Cα-Cα distance restraints between peptide middle residues are verified. The fragment
assembly is implemented using python scripting based on the MDAnalysis 69,70 and numpy 71
python packages.
To scale down the combinatorial explosion of the calculation, a clustering approach,
the Self-Organizing Maps (SOM), 72–75 which is an artificial neural network (ANN) trained
using unsupervised learning, were used to reduce the number of conformations. 76 The SOM
displays the advantage with respect to the k-means clustering approach that it does not
require the predetermined knowledge of the number of clusters. The SOM approach was
used after a iBP calculation or after an assembly step as soon as the number of saved
conformations was larger than 1000. The conformations sampled by iBP were encoded from
the distances dij calculated between the n Cα atoms of the fragment, by diagonalizing the
covariance matrix C:
n

Ci,j
where d̄i =

1
n

Pn

j=1

n

1 XX
(di,k − d̄i )(dl,j − d¯j )
=
n k=1 l=1

(4)

di,j . The information contained in the matrix C is equivalent to its

four largest eigenvalues along with the corresponding eigenvectors. The eigenvalue and
eigenvector descriptors are used to train a periodic Euclidean 2D self-organizing map (SOM),
defined by a three-dimensional matrix. The first two dimensions were chosen to be 100 × 100
and define the map size.
The self-organizing maps were initialized with a random uniform distribution covering
the range of values of the input vectors. At each step, an input vector is presented to the
map, and the neuron closest to this input is updated. The maps are trained in two phases.
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

During the first phase, the input vectors are presented to the SOM in random order to avoid
mapping bias with a learning parameter of 0.5, and a radius parameter of 36. 77 During the
second phase, the learning and radius constants are decreased exponentially from starting
values 0.5 and 36, respectively, during 10 cycles of presentation of all the data in random
order. Once the calculation of the SOM has been realized, the conformations corresponding
to local maxima of homogeneity, are detected and the total set of conformation is replaced
by these representative conformations.

Results
Probing the hypothesis of uniform covalent geometry
The 24 structures extracted from the database of Word et al 61 have been processed to
analyze the geometry of covalent angles (Figure 1a). The distributions of covalent angles
between C-N-Cα (blue curve), N-Cα-C (magenta curve) and Cα-C-N (green curve) (Figure
1a) are centered on 121.3◦ , 110.6◦ and 116.8◦ , with standard deviations of 2.2◦ , 3.0◦ and
2.2◦ . These distributions agrees with the ones observed by Hinsen et al: 78 C-N-Cα (121.4◦
± 1.6◦ ), N-Cα-C (111.1◦ ± 2.9◦ ), Cα-C-N (116.6◦ ± 1.3◦ ), and in agreement to this work,
the largest variability is observed for the bond angle N-Cα-C. The bond angle values were
compared to the B factor values averaged on the corresponding residues (Figure 1b). The
lack of correlation between the values of bond angles and B factors shows that the variations
of covalent geometry cannot be assigned to differences in protein internal mobility.
The variations in covalent geometry were then plotted (Figure 1c-e) along the positions
of protein residues in the Ramachandran diagram, by coloring the point describing the (φ,
ψ) angle values of a given residue, according to the values of the residue bond angles. The
Ramachandran plots are multi-colored according to the values of bond angles C-N-Cα (Figure
1c), N-Cα-C (Figure 1d) and Cα-C-N (Figure 1e). All α-helix regions, around (-60◦ ,-45◦ ),
display a quite monochromatic pattern, with values mostly in the range 100◦ -105◦ for angle
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C-N-Cα (Figure 1c), in the range 125◦ -130◦ for angle N-Cα-C (Figure 1d) and in the range
120◦ -125◦ for angle Cα-C-N (Figure 1e). On the contrary, the β-strand region and the
loops region of each diagram display a larger heterogeneity in bond angle values than the
α-helix region. This heterogeneity has certainly a strong influence on the overall tertiary
structures. Indeed, the β strands are extended structures in which local variations can have
strong influence on the orientation at long distance. Similarly, the change of direction of
protein backbone can be also very sensitive to local loop structure variation. In that way,
both β strand orientations and loop directions have a strong impact on the protein tertiary
structure.
In order to investigate the relevance of the uniform geometry hypothesis for the iBP
calculation, the φangl and ψangl values measured on the top100 conformations have been
compared to the φdist and ψdist values obtained as described in the Materials and Methods
subsection “Input values for the calculation”. For each residue K, the cumulative sums of
the differences between angl and dist backbone angles for residues i, i varying from 1 to K,
were calculated:

ΦK =

K
X

(φiangl − φidist )

(5)

i
(ψangl − ψdist
)

(6)

i=1

ΨK =

K
X
i=1

In Figure 2, the variations of ΦK (green curves) and of ΨK (magenta curves) have been
plotted along K, for the 24 studied proteins. The most important observation from these
curves is that ΦK and ΨK display extraordinary large variations along protein primary
sequence. These variations extend from about 100◦ for the proteins 1benABH, 2bopAH,
1okAaH, bio1rpoH, up to several hundreds of degrees. The drift of ΦK and ΨK depends of
course on the total number of residues in the protein. Another observation is that ΦK and
ΨK curves do not display the same features. ΦK curves are positive and increase along K,
whereas ΨK curves are mostly negative and decrease along K. In addition, for most of the
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

proteins, the comparison of the absolute values of ΦK and Ψk reveals that one absolute value
is larger than the other one, which induces a partial compensation between Ψk and ΦK drift.
To summarize, the analysis of protein structures involved in the present validation reveals
that the hypothesis of uniform covalent geometry is far from being verified even in highresolution crystallographic structures as the ones selected from the database top100 61 with
resolutions in the range 1.0-1.5 Å. Consequently, the differences between angles φangl , φdist
and ψangl , ψdist display large cumulative drifts along the protein sequence.

Exploring the conformational space of fragments using iBP
iBP calculations were performed on individual peptides spanning the analyzed proteins and
the obtained results are presented in Figure 3. The run durations, plotted with decimal
logarithmic scale, are centered around 102 -103 s, for error intervals of 20◦ (blue curve) and
40◦ (magenta curve), and jump to the 103 -104 s range for an error of 60◦ (green curve). The
maximum run duration thus corresponds to about one day, which is not prohibitive.
The tree sizes were reduced using the signed values of improper angles (Table 1), and
are in the range 105 -109 . For each run, a maximal number of 109 conformations to generate
was required as input. The number of conformations saved during each run (Figure 3c) is
in the range of 1 to 106 which is several order of values smaller than this maximal number.
All trees have thus been completely parsed during the iBP calculations.
The number of generated (Figure 3b) and saved (Figure 3c) conformations increase linearly along the run duration. The number of generated conformations is in the range 104 -108 ,
whereas the number of saved conformations is in the range 1-105 . For the largest error intervals (40◦ and 60◦ , magenta and green dots), similar numbers of conformations are generated
(Figure 3b) and these numbers depend mainly on the duration of the run. In the case of the
smallest interval width (20◦ , blue dots in Figure 3b), few runs display much smaller numbers
of generated conformations. The number of saved conformations (Figure 3c) is of course
smaller by two or three orders of magnitude from the number of generated conformations,
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

but is also more dispersed. These numbers sample superimposed ranges for error intervals of
20◦ and 40◦ (blue and magenta dots), whereas they sample larger values for error interval of
60◦ (green dots). The result of tree parsing thus depends only slightly on the interval width,
but the number of saved conformations vary qualitatively for error interval larger than 40◦
(Figure 3c, green points), and this difference is also visible in the run duration (Figure 3a,
green curve).
The loss of information due to interval discretization during iBP calculations was analyzed
(Figure 3d) through the discretization factor, which is the ratio between each distance interval
to the number of tree branches generated within the interval. The standard deviation of this
factor is plotted along its average value, both being calculated for the same individual iBP
tree. Overall, one should notice that the largest discretization factors are smaller than
0.25 Å. According to a recent work, 79 the ensemble-average pairwise backbone RMSD for
the microscopic ensemble underlying a typical protein X-ray structure is about 1 Å. The
discretization factor of 0.25 Å is thus in the range of uncertainty of typical X-ray structures,
and does not induce major loss of information in the iBP calculations.
For the various error intervals, the couples of average and standard deviation values for
the discretization factor (Figure 3d) are clustered around different points: (0.11, 0.11) Å for
the intervals of 20◦ , (0.18, 0.08) Å for the intervals of 40◦ , (0.23, 0.07) Å for the intervals
of 60◦ . As expected, the average value increases with the interval width on φ and ψ angles.
More surprisingly, the standard deviations decrease with the interval width: this is due to
the discretization inputs. Indeed, the maximum number of branches is limited by 4 in all
calculations, but the discretization factor should be always larger than a threshold of 0.05
Å. These two parameters induce the saturation of the number of branches for large widths
as 60◦ . At the contrary, for smaller interval widths, the maximum number of branches is
not attained for all distance intervals due to the required threshold. This induces a larger
variability between the number of tree branches as well as a larger standard deviation.
During each iBP calculation, the conformations generated by branching on the φ and ψ

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

intervals are then pruned or not according to the violation or to the verification of the distance
interval between the Cα atoms located at the N and C terminal residues. Percentages of
pruned conformations (Figure 3e) are observed up to 100%. In the case of interval widths
of 20◦ and 40◦ , three and one runs do not provide any solutions. As all these runs were
performed using as input φdist and ψdist backbone angles, the pruning of all solutions is due to
the inconsistency between the φ and ψ angle restraints and the extremities distance restraint.
This inconsistency arises directly from the non-uniform covalent geometry described in the
first section and is amplified by the use of a small error on backbone angle restraints.
Similarly to the number of runs without solutions, contrasted distributions are observed
(Figure 3e) for the percentages of pruned conformations, depending on the width of intervals
on backbone angles. For the smallest width (20◦ : blue curve), the percentage of pruned conformations displays a weak maximum at around 25%, but a non-negligible number of runs
display percentages of pruned conformations in the 50-90%. Such high pruning percentages
arise because in the case of narrow intervals on backbone angles, the hypothesis of uniform
covalent geometry made by iBP has much more chances to induce solutions which do not
verify the distance restraint between peptide extremities. For the larger interval widths on
backbone angles (40◦ : magenta curve, 60◦ : green curve), the distribution is much more focused on larger percentages with respective ranges of 40-70% and 60-80%. The percentages
larger than 80% are nevertheless vanishing for the largest interval widths. The global picture is that the increase of intervals on backbone restraints induces more pruning, but the
percentage peaks at 50 and 60% obtained for interval widths of 40◦ and 60◦ are promising
for the application of iBP to cases with error on restraints at the level of experimental cases.
After generating peptide conformations using iBP, a procedure based on the self-organizing
map 75 is used to cluster the conformations and to extract representative ones. The distributions of the number of representative conformations (Figure 3f) are centered on the 0-100
and 0-50 range for the widths of 20◦ and 40◦ . Unsurprisingly, in the case of the larger width
60◦ , much larger numbers of representative conformations can be obtained, up to 250. The

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

average number of representative conformations extracted from the SOM clustering of an
iBP run on peptide fragment, is of the order of 102 , which makes the number of maximum
combinations of peptides during the step of fragments assembly to be about 104 , and permits
to overcome the combinatorial explosion, as it will be shown in the following.

Efficiency of the TAiBP assembly strategy
Starting from iBP results, the individual peptide conformations were superimposed on the
backbone atoms of their last and initial five residues, in order to grow the protein structure
incrementally from the N terminal to the C terminal extremity. The proposed fragment
assembly is then conserved or pruned according to two successively applied criteria: (i) the
clashing criterion tests whether Cα atoms of each fragment are farther apart from a given
threshold (1 Å), (ii) the pruning distance criterion tests whether distance between the central
Cα of all inserted peptides is within 5Å of the distances observed in the initial PDB structure.
Several assembly strategies have been used: (a) the fragments are added one by one from
the N terminal to the C terminal extremities of the protein, (b) all possible assemblies of two
fragments are formed along the sequence, and then assembled together successively from N
to C terminal, (c) all possible assemblies of three fragments are formed along the sequence,
and then assembled together successively from N to C terminal. Depending on the protein
target, one approach can be more efficient than the others, but no general trend of efficiency
for one strategy was found during the analysis, so the results of the three strategies are
presented together.
Some statistics on the assembly steps of TAiBP are presented in Figure 4. The numbers,
plotted in decimal logarithmic scale, of distance pruning events (#DistPruning), of clash
pruning events (#ClashPruning) and of processed conformations (#Processed) are plotted
along the number of peptide residues (Figures 4a-c). The numbers of distances (Figure 4a)
and clash pruning (Figure 4b) events are mostly in the range 102 -104 for all fragment sizes
and interval of backbone restraints. In addition, these numbers increase of more than one
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

order of value when the fragment size changes from 25 residues (assembly of two initial iBP
fragments) to larger values. Larger pruning experienced in the case of larger fragments is
probably induced by the excluded volume effect arising from the construction of the protein
fold.
For fragment sizes larger than 25 residues, the numbers of pruning events (#DistPruning
and #ClashPruning) are mostly around 103 -105 (Figures 4a,b), in a range similar to the
number of processed (#Processed) conformations (Figure 4c) which proves a large efficiency
of pruning events for reducing the ensemble of solutions. Interestingly, distance pruning
(Figure 4a) and clash pruning (Figure 4b) events are in similar range, displaying thus similar
efficiency to reduce the number of solutions.
In the case of widths of 40 and 60◦ (magenta and green curves), the shifts observed
for the parameters #DistPruning and #ClashPruning when increasing the interval widths
on backbone angles, are steeper for the distance pruning events (Figure 4a) than for the
clash pruning events (Figure 4b), whereas similar shifts are obtained for the interval width
of 20◦ (blue dots). The widening of intervals has thus a stronger effect on the distance
restraints between the peptide fragments than on the clash level. Finally, for fragments
larger than 50 residues, the assembled fragments vanish except for the smaller intervals of
20◦ (blue dots), due to a pruning of all solutions. This pruning is the consequence of the
discrepancy between non-uniform covalent geometry observed in the PDB structures and of
the hypothesis of uniform covalent geometry made in the frame of iBP calculations.
The two by two comparisons of the events of distance and clash pruning, and of the
number of processed conformations reveal the following trends (Figure 4d-f). The numbers
of pruning events by clashes or by distances do not display any correlation (Figure 4d). At the
contrary, #ClashPruning displays a quite strong correlation with #Processed (Figure 4e),
specially for the largest angle interval (60◦ : green points). A similar tendency is observed for
#DistPruning with two superimposed behaviors (Figure 4f): a correlation similar to the one
observed for #ClashPruning, and other points with relatively smaller numbers of distance

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

pruning events. This second set of points corresponds mostly to the case of the fragments
of 25 residues. Indeed, as these fragments are much smaller than the full protein, they have
less chance to be rejected by pruning distance information.
Each assembled fragment has been compared to the corresponding region in the top100 61
target structure. This comparison was performed using RMSD (Å) between coordinates
of heavy backbone atoms (Figure 5a,b) and not the TM score. 80,81 Indeed, the statistical
validation of TM score was performed on protein structures larger than 80 residues, 81 which
do not correspond to the set of proteins studied here. For each fragment, maximum and
minimum RMSD values are plotted in Figure 5a,b with respect to the fragment size.
For each assembly calculation, the RMSD values to the target conformation were calculated for all TAiBP conformations. The maximum and minimum values of the RMSD
distribution were then analyzed. In the case of narrow intervals (20◦ : blue points) on backbone angle restraints, minimum RMSD values are mostly smaller than 3.0 Å for all fragments
up to 65 residues (Figure 5a). The increase of width in backbone angle intervals induces a
drift of RMSD toward larger values: the RMSD drift is limited to 2-4 Å up to 35 residues,
but jumps up to 5-6 Å for larger fragments. The threading-augmented iBP procedure proposed here thus allows one to obtain fragment conformations close to the PDB conformations
for fragment sizes smaller than 65 residues. In that case, the ΦK and ΨK drifts previously
described (Eqs. 5-6 and Figure 2) have thus been overcome.
The maximum RMSD values (Figure 5b) are located in the 5-20 Å range. These maximum values were put in perspective with a previous analysis 82 in which protein structures
were compared to a representative set of protein-like alternative structures generated using threading. Most of the RMSD R values for an N-residue protein fall in the interval:
3.333N 1/3 − 2.0 ≤ R ≤ 3.333N 1/3 + 2.0, producing distributions of values smaller than 20
Å. This upper limit of 20 Å is similar to the one observed in the present calculation, which
means that the TAiBP approach was able to mostly span the possible range of RMSD values.
At the end of TAiBP calculation, the poly-Ala sequence was replaced by the protein spe-

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cific sequence and the residue sidechains have been added using the relax tool of the Rosetta
suite. 54 The relax protocol consists of five cycles with rotamer repacking and minimization
with progressively higher repulsive contributions within each cycle. 83 The obtained conformations have been analyzed (Table 3) and compared (Figure 6) to the conformation of the
protein present in the database top100. From the 24 top100 structures initially processed,
the 29 calculations realized on the 7 proteins smaller than 50 residues (Figure 6) display
conformations calculated with TAiBP close to top100 conformations. Indeed, 18 runs display RMSD to initial top100 conformation smaller than 3 Å and 23 runs display RMSD
smaller than 3.7 Å. Negative Rosetta total scores calculated according to Alford et al. 84
were obtained for all calculations, except the calculations on 1mctIH with an interval width
of 60◦ .
For a given protein, the origin of φ and ψ restraints: angles or distances, introduced in the
subsection “Probing the hypothesis of uniform covalent geometry” display various influences
(Table 3) on the coordinate RMSD between the TAiBP and top100 conformations. For
1ben1BH and 1bpiH, the RMSD is mostly smaller if the φ and ψ target values were extracted
from the distances d(Ci ,Ci+1 ) and d(Ni ,Ni+1 ), assuming uniform covalent geometry. The
entries 1fxdH, 1mctIH, 1cnrH and 1edmBH display an opposite trend.
The distribution of RMSD values, calculated on the whole sets of conformations obtained
for a given TAiBP calculation (Figure 7) span values up to 10 Å. Due to the pruning events
during the latest step of fragment assembly, this upper bound is smaller than the one observed
for the maximum RMSD in Figure 5b. For the angles φangl , ψangl measured on the initial
top100 conformation, the increase of interval width induces a drift of RMSD toward larger
values (magenta, brown and orange curves). The pattern is less clear for the angles φdist
and ψdist calculated from measured distances in top100 conformations: in that case, many
RMSD curves (blue, green and cyan curves) are more or less superimposed whatever is the
interval width. The different proteins display quite different RMSD distributions which some
distributions quite centered to a narrow interval and other much wider. These contrasted

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

features arise from the various efficiencies of pruning long-range distances in the frame of
different 3D protein topologies.

Influence of uniform covalent geometry
The covalent geometry of the 1benABH, 1cnrH, 1edmBH, 1fxdH, 1igdH, 1isuAH, 1mctlH,
bio1rpoH and 1bpiH conformations obtained using TAiBP and then relaxed using Rosetta
displays some characteristics (Figure 8) quite different with respect to the ones analyzed on
the top100 conformations at the beginning of the present work (Figure 1). Similar trends
in covalent geometry were observed in conformations obtained by TAiBP before adding
sidechains and relaxing (data not shown). In the relaxed conformations, the distribution of
covalent angles (Figure 8a) is much thinner, although some individual deviations are observed
(Figure 8b). These large drifts are observed in the protein regions in which two neighboring
peptide fragments were superimposed. The ω dihedral values (Figure 8c) are distributed
around 180◦ and -180◦ , in a similar way than in the initial structures (data not shown).
These variations of ω dihedral angles have been already observed from various analyses of
X-ray crystallographic structures. 65–67
The comparison of the Ramachandran plots between Figures 1 and 8 reveal two differences. First, the TAiBP Ramachandran plots display a narrower range of colors than the
top100 ones in agreement with the thinner distribution of covalent angles. Second, the (φ,ψ)
distributions are fuzzier in Figures 8d-f than in Figures 1c-e. The convergence toward a
uniform covalent geometry is thus accompanied by a expansion of the regions sampled in
the Ramachandran diagram. Such expansion of allowed regions has been also observed in a
recent analysis of the Ramachandran diagram. 85 In agreement with covalent geometry close
to uniformity, the plots of cumulative sum of the differences: ΦK (Eq. 5) and ΨK (Eq. 6)
display much smaller drifts on the TAiBP conformations with a large majority of the values
ranging between -50◦ and 50◦ (data not shown).
The protein conformations generated by the TAiBP approach and relaxed with Rosetta
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Table 3 and Figure 6), have been used as target conformations for a new run of the TAiBP
approach, in order to investigate whether, in the case of mostly uniform covalent geometry,
different results could be obtained. In a way similar to the previous TAiBP run, the coordinate RMSD (Å) between the new target and TAiBP fragments display a drift toward larger
values for increasing fragment size (data not shown). The minimal and maximal RMSD
distributions calculated for the reconstructed full chains of protein targets (Figure 9) show
that for all targets except 1fxdH, the distribution of minimal values are mostly in the 1-4
Å for the interval width of 20◦ (blue curves). For all targets except 1bpiH and on a lesser
extend 1cnrH, the increase of interval width do not have strong impact on the minimal
RMSD distribution (full lines). Using target conformations closer to the hypothesis of uniform covalent geometry thus reduces the impact of increased intervals for φ and ψ angles.
The distributions of maximal RMSD values (dashed lines) displays more variability than
minimum RMSD distributions. Unsurprisingly, these distributions shift toward larger values
and/or become broader in the case of increased interval width for φ and ψ values.

Discussion-Conclusion
Two main conclusions can be derived from the present work. The most important one is the
design of an approach allowing to systematically parse all conformations of a protein up to
100 residues, using low precision input restraints. The other outcome of the manuscript is
that the variability of covalent local geometry is an essential parameter for building protein
conformations. Until now, this aspect has been discussed only very little in the literature. 78
A method has been described to generate the protein structure by systematically exploring all possible conformations of the protein. This method is based on a threadingaugmented interval Branch-and-Prune (TAiBP) approach in which the interval Branch-andPrune (iBP) 28,44,86 is first used to systematically explore the conformations of 15-residues
peptides fragments of the protein, followed by the construction of protein structure by sys-

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tematically assembling fragment’s conformations, and by pruning conformations displaying
atom steric clashes and violations of few long-range distance restraints.
This two steps approach along with clustering using self-organized maps 75 allows to
overcome the combinatorial explosion arising from the exponential complexity of the iBP
algorithm. The duration of a total calculation is of the order of tenths of hours. This could
be even speed up by using compiled language in place of python scripts used for fragments
assembly and clustering.
The calculations performed using the TAiBP were validated by detecting whether this
approach provides at least one solution close to the target solution. This detection was
performed using the coordinate RMSD between backbone atoms. For most of the proteins
smaller than 50 residues and interval widths of 20◦ for backbone angles, solutions were
obtained with RMSD values smaller than 4 Å. Larger protein sizes and/or larger interval
widths induce drift in the obtained conformations, which usually conduct to a pruning of all
conformations because the long-range distance restraints are no more verified.
The largest problem to which the proposed approach faces is the non-uniformity of covalent geometry among the PDB structures. This aspect of PDB structures looks very minor as
it involves only few degrees variations among the covalent angles, but, as this non-uniformity
induces biases in the direction of extended and loop parts of protein structures, it is obvious that it may have big consequences in fragment assembly. Also, as this non-uniformity is
present since the first days of structural biology and is probably deeply related to amino-acid
type and to the position in the Ramachandran diagram, 66,87–92 it is quite difficult to sort
it out. Nevertheless, it should be noticed that attempts have been made 93 to explore the
relationship between backbone conformations and covalent geometry.
On the other hand, the iBP approach on which we based the conformational sampling of
protein fragments, was developed using the initial hypothesis of a uniform covalent geometry.
This hypothesis permitted to set up an algorithm which displays good scaling properties
in case of a sufficient number of exactly known inter-atomic distances. 28 Modifying the

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

algorithm to take into account possible variations in the covalent geometry would increase
enormously its complexity. Nevertheless, the very recent development of residue-specific
force fields 37–40 opens new avenues for taking into account these aspects.
The present work opens the way to the use of iBP approach for exploring systematically the conformational space of proteins, using geometric restraints analogous to those
experimentally measured by NMR. The validation of this systematic exploration of protein
conformational space deeply changes the perspectives on protein structure calculation.

Acknowledgments
Thérèse Malliavin thanks the Pasteur Foundation for postdoctoral support of Dr Bradley
Worley and thanks Dr Bradley Worley for its implementation of iBP and Dr Guillaume
Bouvier for his support in python scripting. The authors wish to thank Institut Pasteur,
CNRS, Ecole Polytechnique, FAPESP, CNPq and the program Infinity of CNRS for financial
support.

References
(1) Nilges, M.; Clore, G. M.; Gronenborn, A. M. Determination of three-dimensional structures of proteins from interproton distance data by dynamical simulated annealing from
a random array of atoms. Circumventing problems associated with folding. FEBS Lett.
1988, 239, 129–136.
(2) Pearlman, D. A. FINGAR: A new genetic algorithm-based method for fitting NMR
data. J. Biomol. NMR 1996, 8, 49–66.
(3) Guerry, P.; Herrmann, T. Comprehensive automation for NMR structure determination
of proteins. Methods Mol. Biol. 2012, 831, 429–451.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(4) Huang, Y. J.; Mao, B.; Xu, F.; Montelione, G. T. Guiding automated NMR structure
determination using a global optimization metric, the NMR DP score. J. Biomol. NMR
2015, 62, 439–451.
(5) Mareuil, F.; Malliavin, T. E.; Nilges, M.; Bardiaux, B. Improved reliability, accuracy
and quality in automated NMR structure calculation with ARIA. J. Biomol. NMR
2015, 62, 425–438.
(6) Wurz, J. M.; Kazemi, S.; Schmidt, E.; Bagaria, A.; Guntert, P. NMR-based automated
protein structure determination. Arch. Biochem. Biophys. 2017, 628, 24–32.
(7) Schwieters, C. D.; Bermejo, G. A.; Clore, G. M. Xplor-NIH for molecular structure
determination from NMR and other data sources. Protein Sci. 2018, 27, 26–40.
(8) Rieping, W.; Habeck, M.; Nilges, M. Inferential structure determination. Science 2005,
309, 303–306.
(9) Habeck, M.; Nilges, M.; Rieping, W. Bayesian inference applied to macromolecular
structure determination. Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 2005, 72, 031912.
(10) Habeck, M.; Nilges, M.; Rieping, W. Replica-exchange Monte Carlo scheme for bayesian
data analysis. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2005, 94, 018105.
(11) Rieping, W.; Habeck, M.; Nilges, M. Modeling errors in NOE data with a log-normal
distribution improves the quality of NMR structures. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127,
16026–16027.
(12) Habeck, M.; Rieping, W.; Nilges, M. Weighting of experimental evidence in macromolecular structure determination. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2006, 103, 1756–1761.
(13) Nilges, M.; Bernard, A.; Bardiaux, B.; Malliavin, T.; Habeck, M.; Rieping, W. Accurate
NMR structures through minimization of an extended hybrid energy. Structure 2008,
16, 1305–1312.
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(14) Bernard, A.; Vranken, W. F.; Bardiaux, B.; Nilges, M.; Malliavin, T. E. Bayesian
estimation of NMR restraint potential and weight: a validation on a representative set
of protein structures. Proteins 2011, 79, 1525–1537.
(15) Rosato, A; Aramini, J. M.; Arrowsmith, C.; Bagaria, A.; Baker, D.; Cavalli, A.; Doreleijers, J. F.; Eletsky, A.; Giachetti, A.; Guerry, P. et al. Blind testing of routine, fully
automated determination of protein structures from NMR data. Structure 2012, 20,
227–236.
(16) Peng, J.; Yuan, C.; Ma, R.; Zhang, Z. Backmapping from Multiresolution CoarseGrained Models to Atomic Structures of Large Biomolecules by Restrained Molecular
Dynamics Simulations Using Bayesian Inference. J Chem Theory Comput 2019, 15,
3344–3353.
(17) Habeck, M.; Rieping, W.; Linge, J. P.; Nilges, M. NOE assignment with ARIA 2.0: the
nuts and bolts. Methods Mol. Biol. 2004, 278, 379–402.
(18) Linge, J. P.; Habeck, M.; Rieping, W.; Nilges, M. ARIA: automated NOE assignment
and NMR structure calculation. Bioinformatics 2003, 19, 315–316.
(19) Mohan, A.; Oldfield, C. J.; Radivojac, P.; Vacic, V.; Cortese, M. S.; Dunker, A. K.;
Uversky, V. N. Analysis of molecular recognition features (MoRFs). J. Mol. Biol. 2006,
362, 1043–1059.
(20) Cumberworth, A.; Lamour, G.; Babu, M. M.; Gsponer, J. Promiscuity as a functional
trait: intrinsically disordered regions as central players of interactomes. Biochem. J.
2013, 454, 361–369.
(21) Schneider, R.; Blackledge, M.; Jensen, M. R. Elucidating binding mechanisms and
dynamics of intrinsically disordered protein complexes using NMR spectroscopy. Curr.
Opin. Struct. Biol. 2018, 54, 10–18.

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(22) Ozenne, V.; Bauer, F.; Salmon, L.; Huang, J. R.; Jensen, M. R.; Segard, S.; Bernado, P.;
Charavay, C.; Blackledge, M. Flexible-meccano: a tool for the generation of explicit
ensemble descriptions of intrinsically disordered proteins and their associated experimental observables. Bioinformatics 2012, 28, 1463–1470.
(23) Krzeminski, M.; Marsh, J. A.; Neale, C.; Choy, W. Y.; Forman-Kay, J. D. Characterization of disordered proteins with ENSEMBLE. Bioinformatics 2013, 29, 398–399.
(24) Estana, A.; Sibille, N.; Delaforge, E.; Vaisset, M.; Cortes, J.; Bernado, P. Realistic
Ensemble Models of Intrinsically Disordered Proteins Using a Structure-Encoding Coil
Database. Structure 2019, 27, 381–391.
(25) Hollingsworth, S. A.; Dror, R. O. Molecular Dynamics Simulation for All. Neuron 2018,
99, 1129–1143.
(26) Havel, T. F. An evaluation of computational strategies for use in the determination
of protein structure from distance constraints obtained by nuclear magnetic resonance.
Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol. 1991, 56, 43–78.
(27) Liberti, L.; Lavor, C.; Maculan, N.; Mucherino, A. Euclidean Distance Geometry and
Applications. SIAM Rev 2014, 56, 3–69.
(28) Lavor, C.; Liberti, L.; Mucherino, A. The interval Branch-and-Prune algorithm for
the discretizable molecular distance geometry problem with inexact distances. J Glob
Optim 2013, 56, 855–871.
(29) Lavor, C.; Lee, J.; Lee-St.John, A.; Liberti, L.; Mucherino, A.; Sviridenko, M. Discretization orders for distance geometry problems. Optimization Letters 2012, 6, 783–
796.
(30) Lavor, C.; Liberti, L.; Donald, B.; Worley, B.; Bardiaux, B.; Nilges, M. Minimal NMR

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

distance information for rigidity of protein graphs. Discrete Applied Mathematics 2019,
256, 91–104.
(31) Braun, W.; Go, N. Calculation of protein conformations by proton-proton distance
constraints. A new efficient algorithm. J. Mol. Biol. 1985, 186, 611–626.
(32) Abagyan, R.; Totrov, M.; Kuznetsov, D. CMA new method for protein modeling and
design: Applications to docking and structure prediction from the distorted native
conformation. J Comput Chem 1994, 15, 488–506.
(33) Guntert, P. Automated NMR structure calculation with CYANA. Methods Mol. Biol.
2004, 278, 353–378.
(34) Bardiaux, B.; Malliavin, T. E.; Nilges, M.; Mazur, A. K. Comparison of different torsion
angle approaches for NMR structure determination. J. Biomol. NMR 2006, 34, 153–
166.
(35) Berkholz, D. S.; Shapovalov, M. V.; Dunbrack, R. L.; Karplus, P. A. Conformation
dependence of backbone geometry in proteins. Structure 2009, 17, 1316–1325.
(36) Moriarty, N. W.; Tronrud, D. E.; Adams, P. D.; Karplus, P. A. A new default restraint
library for the protein backbone in Phenix: a conformation-dependent geometry goes
mainstream. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol 2016, 72, 176–179.
(37) Zhou, C.; Jiang, F.; Wu, Y. Residue-specific force field based on protein coil library.
RSFF2: modification of AMBER ff99SB. J Phys Chem B 2015, 119, 1035–1047.
(38) Kang, W.; Jiang, F.; Wu, Y. Universal Implementation of a Residue-Specific Force Field
Based on CMAP Potentials and Free Energy Decomposition. J Chem Theory Comput
2018, 14, 4474–4486.
(39) Liu, H.; Song, D.; Lu, H.; Luo, R. Intrinsically disordered protein-specific force field
CHARMM36IDPSFF. Chem Biol Drug Des 2018, 92, 1722–1735.
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(40) Choi, J.; Pappu, R. Improvements to the ABSINTH Force Field for Proteins Based
on Experimentally Derived Amino Acid Specific Backbone Conformational Statistics.
J Chem Theory Comput 2019, 15, 1367–1382.
(41) Liberti, L.; Lavor, C.; Mucherino, A. The discretizable molecular distance geometry
problem seems easier on proteins. Distance Geometry: Theory, Methods and Applications. Mucherino, Lavor, Liberti, Maculan (eds.) 2014, 47–60.
(42) Cassioli, A.; Bardiaux, B.; Bouvier, G.; Mucherino, A.; Alves, R.; Liberti, L.; Nilges, M.;
Lavor, C.; Malliavin, T. An algorithm to enumerate all possible protein conformations
verifying a set of distance constraints. BMC Bioinformatics 2015, 16, 23–37.
(43) Worley, B.; Delhommel, F.; Cordier, F.; Malliavin, T.; Bardiaux, B.; Wolff, N.;
Nilges, M.; Lavor, C.; Liberti, L. Tuning interval Branch-and-Prune for protein structure determination. Journal of Global Optimization 2018, 72, 109–127.
(44) Lavor, C.; Alves, R.; Figueiredo, W.; Petraglia, A.; Maculan, N. Clifford Algebra and
the Discretizable Molecular Distance Geometry Problem. J Glob Optim 2015, 25, 925–
942.
(45) Shen, Y.; Bax, A. Protein backbone and sidechain torsion angles predicted from NMR
chemical shifts using artificial neural networks. J. Biomol. NMR 2013, 56, 227–241.
(46) Kohlhoff, K. J.; Robustelli, P.; Cavalli, A.; Salvatella, X.; Vendruscolo, M. Fast and
accurate predictions of protein NMR chemical shifts from interatomic distances. J. Am.
Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 13894–13895.
(47) Shen, Y.; Bax, A. SPARTA+: a modest improvement in empirical NMR chemical shift
prediction by means of an artificial neural network. J. Biomol. NMR 2010, 48, 13–22.
(48) Han, B.; Liu, Y.; Ginzinger, S. W.; Wishart, D. S. SHIFTX2: significantly improved
protein chemical shift prediction. J. Biomol. NMR 2011, 50, 43–57.
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(49) Baker, D.; Sali, A. Protein structure prediction and structural genomics. Science 2001,
294, 93–96.
(50) Mucherino, A.; Lavor, C.; Liberti, L.; Talbi, E.-G. A Parallel Version of the Branch &
Prune Algorithm for the Molecular Distance Geometry Problem. IEEE Conference Proceedings, ACS/IEEE International Conference on Computer Systems and Applications
(AICCSA10) 2010, 1–6.
(51) Fidalgo, F.; Gonçalves, D.; Lavor, C.; Liberti, L.; Mucherino, A. A Symmetry-based
Splitting Strategy for Discretizable Distance Geometry Problems. Journal of Global
Optimization 2018, 71, 717–733.
(52) Das, R.; Baker, D. Macromolecular modeling with rosetta. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 2008,
77, 363–382.
(53) Ovchinnikov, S.; Park, H.; Kim, D. E.; Liu, Y.; Wang, R. Y.; Baker, D. Structure
prediction using sparse simulated NOE restraints with Rosetta in CASP11. Proteins
2016, 84 Suppl 1, 181–188.
(54) Ovchinnikov, S.; Park, H.; Kim, D. E.; DiMaio, F.; Baker, D. Protein structure prediction using Rosetta in CASP12. Proteins 2018, 86 Suppl 1, 113–121.
(55) Alipanahi, B.; Krislock, N.; Ghodsi, A.; Wolkowicz, H.; Donaldson, L.; Li, M. Determining protein structures from NOESY distance constraints by semidefinite programming.
J. Comput. Biol. 2013, 20, 296–310.
(56) Carr, J. M.; Whittleston, C. S.; Wade, D. C.; Wales, D. J. Energy landscapes of a
hairpin peptide including NMR chemical shift restraints. Phys Chem Chem Phys 2015,
17, 20250–20258.
(57) Joo, K.; Joung, I.; Lee, J.; Lee, J.; Lee, W.; Brooks, B.; Lee, S. J.; Lee, J. Protein struc-

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

ture determination by conformational space annealing using NMR geometric restraints.
Proteins 2015, 83, 2251–2262.
(58) Khoo, Y.; Singer, A.; Cowburn, D. Integrating NOE and RDC using sum-of-squares
relaxation for protein structure determination. J. Biomol. NMR 2017, 68, 163–185.
(59) Hong, S. H.; Joung, I.; Flores-Canales, J. C.; Manavalan, B.; Cheng, Q.; Heo, S.;
Kim, J. Y.; Lee, S. Y.; Nam, M.; Joo, K.; Lee, I. H.; Lee, S. J.; Lee, J. Protein
structure modeling and refinement by global optimization in CASP12. Proteins 2018,
86 Suppl 1, 122–135.
(60) Martin, J. W.; Zhou, P.; Donald, B. R. Systematic solution to homo-oligomeric structures determined by NMR. Proteins 2015, 83, 651–661.
(61) Word, J.; Lowell, S.; LaBean, T.; Taylor, H.; Zalis, M.; Presley, B.; Richardson, J.;
Richardson, D. Visualizing and Quantifying Molecular Goodness-of-Fit: Small-probe
Contact Dots with Explicit Hydrogen Atoms. J Mol Biol 1999, 285, 1713–1733.
(62) Engh, R.; Huber, R. Accurate bond and angle parameters for X-ray protein structure
refinement. Acta Crystallogr A 1991, 47, 392–400.
(63) Riniker, S. Fixed-Charge Atomistic Force Fields for Molecular Dynamics Simulations
in the Condensed Phase: An Overview. J Chem Inf Model 2018, 58, 565–578.
(64) Humphrey, W.; Dalke, A.; Schulten, K. VMD: visual molecular dynamics. J. Mol.
Graph. 1996, 14, 33–38,27–28.
(65) Matthews, B. W. How planar are planar peptide bonds? Protein Sci. 2016, 25, 776–
777.
(66) Brereton, A. E.; Karplus, P. A. On the reliability of peptide nonplanarity seen in ultrahigh resolution crystal structures. Protein Sci. 2016, 25, 926–932.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(67) Berkholz, D. S.; Driggers, C. M.; Shapovalov, M. V.; Dunbrack, R. L.; Karplus, P. A.
Nonplanar peptide bonds in proteins are common and conserved but not biased toward
active sites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2012, 109, 449–453.
(68) Humphrey, W.; Dalke, A.; Schulten, K. VMD – Visual Molecular Dynamics. Journal
of Molecular Graphics 1996, 14, 33–38.
(69) Michaud-Agrawal, N.; Denning, E. J.; Woolf, T. B.; Beckstein, O. MDAnalysis: a
toolkit for the analysis of molecular dynamics simulations. J Comput Chem 2011, 32,
2319–2327.
(70) Richard J. Gowers,; Max Linke,; Jonathan Barnoud,; Tyler J. E. Reddy,; Manuel
N. Melo,; Sean L. Seyler,; Jan Domaski,; David L. Dotson,; Sbastien Buchoux,; Ian
M. Kenney,; Oliver Beckstein, MDAnalysis: A Python Package for the Rapid Analysis of Molecular Dynamics Simulations. Proceedings of the 15th Python in Science
Conference. 2016; pp 98–105.
(71) Oliphant TE, A guide to NumPy; Trelgol Publishing, USA, 2006.
(72) Kohonen, T. Self-Organized formation of topologically correct feature maps. Biol Cybern 1982, 43, 59–69.
(73) Kohonen, T. Self-Organizing Maps. Springer Series in Information Sciences, Heidelberg, Germany. 2001,
(74) Miri, L.; Bouvier, G.; Kettani, A.; Mikou, A.; Wakrim, L.; Nilges, M.; Malliavin, T. E.
Stabilization of the integrase-DNA complex by Mg2+ ions and prediction of key residues
for binding HIV-1 integrase inhibitors. Proteins 2014, 82, 466–478.
(75) Bouvier, G.; Duclert-Savatier, N.; Desdouits, N.; Meziane-Cherif, D.; Blondel, A.; Courvalin, P.; Nilges, M.; Malliavin, T. Functional motions modulating VanA ligand binding
unraveled by self-organizing maps. J Chem Inf Model 2014, 54, 289–301.
33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(76) Bouvier, G.; Desdouits, N.; Ferber, M.; Blondel, A.; Nilges, M. An automatic tool
to analyze and cluster macromolecular conformations based on Self-Organizing Maps.
Bioinformatics 2014, 31, 1–3.
(77) Spill, Y.; Bouvier, G.; Nilges, M. A convective replica-exchange method for sampling
new energy basins. J Comput Chem 2013, 34, 132–140.
(78) Hinsen, K.; Hu, S.; Kneller, G. R.; Niemi, A. J. A comparison of reduced coordinate
sets for describing protein structure. J Chem Phys 2013, 139, 124115.
(79) Kuzmanicâ, A.; Zagrovicâiâ, B. Determination of Ensemble-Average Pairwise Root
Mean-Square Deviation from Experimental B-Factors. Biophys J 2010, 98, 861–871.
(80) Zhang, Y.; Skolnick, J. Scoring function for automated assessment of protein structure
template quality. Proteins 2004, 57, 702–710.
(81) Xu, J.; Zhang, Y. How significant is a protein structure similarity with TM-score =
0.5? Bioinformatics 2010, 26, 889–895.
(82) Reva, B. A.; Finkelstein, A. V.; Skolnick, J. What is the probability of a chance prediction of a protein structure with an rmsd of 6 A? Fold Des 1998, 3, 141–147.
(83) Tyka, M. D.; Keedy, D. A.; Andre, I.; Dimaio, F.; Song, Y.; Richardson, D. C.; Richardson, J. S.; Baker, D. Alternate states of proteins revealed by detailed energy landscape
mapping. J. Mol. Biol. 2011, 405, 607–618.
(84) Alford, R. F.; Leaver-Fay, A.; Jeliazkov, J. R.; O’Meara, M. J.; DiMaio, F. P.; Park, H.;
Shapovalov, M. V.; Renfrew, P. D.; Mulligan, V. K.; Kappel, K. et al. The Rosetta
All-Atom Energy Function for Macromolecular Modeling and Design. J Chem Theory
Comput 2017, 13, 3031–3048.
(85) Hollingsworth, S. A.; Karplus, P. A. A fresh look at the Ramachandran plot and the
occurrence of standard structures in proteins. Biomol Concepts 2010, 1, 271–283.
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(86) Lavor, C.; Liberti, L.; Maculan, N.; Mucherino, A. The Discretizable Molecular Distance
Geometry Problem. Computational Optimization and Applications 2012, 52, 115–146.
(87) Hollingsworth, S. A.; Lewis, M. C.; Karplus, P. A. Beyond basins: φ,ψ preferences of
a residue depend heavily on the φ,ψ values of its neighbors. Protein Sci. 2016, 25,
1757–1762.
(88) Moriarty, N. W.; Tronrud, D. E.; Adams, P. D.; Karplus, P. A. A new default restraint
library for the protein backbone in Phenix: a conformation-dependent geometry goes
mainstream. Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol 2016, 72, 176–179.
(89) Moriarty, N. W.; Tronrud, D. E.; Adams, P. D.; Karplus, P. A. Conformation-dependent
backbone geometry restraints set a new standard for protein crystallographic refinement. FEBS J. 2014, 281, 4061–4071.
(90) Hollingsworth, S. A.; Lewis, M. C.; Berkholz, D. S.; Wong, W. K.; Karplus, P. A. (φ,ψ)2
motifs: a purely conformation-based fine-grained enumeration of protein parts at the
two-residue level. J. Mol. Biol. 2012, 416, 78–93.
(91) Tronrud, D. E.; Karplus, P. A. A conformation-dependent stereochemical library improves crystallographic refinement even at atomic resolution. Acta Crystallogr. D Biol.
Crystallogr. 2011, 67, 699–706.
(92) Berkholz, D. S.; Shapovalov, M. V.; Dunbrack, R. L.; Karplus, P. A. Conformation
dependence of backbone geometry in proteins. Structure 2009, 17, 1316–1325.
(93) Berkholz, D. S.; Krenesky, P. B.; Davidson, J. R.; Karplus, P. A. Protein Geometry
Database: a flexible engine to explore backbone conformations and their relationships
to covalent geometry. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010, 38, D320–325.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 1
Table 1: Geometric parameters for covalent and improper bonds and angles taken from the
force field PARALLHDG (version 5.3). 62
Atom
name
CH1E
C
O
OC
HA
NH1
NH2
H
Bond angle atoms
C-CH1E-HA
C-CH1E-NH1
C-CH1E-NH2
C-NH1-CH1E
CH1E-C-NH1
CH1E-C-O
CH1E-NH1-H
C-NH1-H
C-NH2-H
HA-CH1E-NH1
H-NH2-CH1E
H-NH2-H
NH1-C-O
NH2-CH1E-HA
NH2-C-O
CH1E-C-OC
OC-C-OC

Definition of atom
type
α carbon
carbonyl carbon
carbonyl oxygen
C-terminal carbonyl oxygen
Hα hydrogen
amide nitrogen
N-terminal amide
nitrogen
amide hydrogen
Bond angle value
(◦ )
108.9914
111.1396
106.9610
121.6541
116.1998
120.8258
119.2367
119.2489
118.1853
108.0508
109.5000
107.3000
122.9907
108.4800
122.6277
118.0611
123.3548

36

Bond atoms

Bond length
(Å)
C-CH1E
1.525
CH1E-HA
1.080
CH1E-NH1
1.458
CH1E-NH2
1.486
C-NH1
1.329
C-O
1.231
C-OC
1.249
H-NH1
0.980
H-NH2
0.980
Improper angle
Improper angle
atoms
value (◦ )
C-CH1E-HA-HA
-70.4072
CH1E-C-NH1-HA
66.2535
C-NH1-HA-HA
-70.8745
HA-CH1E-HA-HA
-66.5692
CH1E-C-NH1-CH1E
178.0
O-C-NH1-H
178.0
C-CH1E-NH1-O
0.0
NH1-CH1E-C-HA
119.0
NH2-CH1E-C-HA
119.0
NH1-HA-CH1E-C
121.0
NH2-HA-CH1E-C
116.0
C-NH1-CH1E-H
180.0
CH1E-C-NH1-O
180.0
NH2-H-H-CH1E
41.0
CH1E-OC-C-OC
178.0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 2
Table 2: Atom re-ordering used during the iBP calculation step within the first, the last
and the inner residues of the peptide fragment. The order is described by the list of atoms
names, the signs ”-” and ”+” describing atoms located in the previous and the next residues
in the primary sequence.
Residue position
first
inner
last

order
N, H1, H2, CA, N, HA, CA, C
N, -O, -CA, -C, N, CA, C, +N,
-C, N, CA, H1, N, CA, C, HA, C, CA
N, -O, -CA, -C, N, CA, C,
-C, N, CA, H1, N, CA, C, HA,
C, CA, O, C, O2

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Table 3
Table 3: Analysis of the TAiBP conformations further relaxed using the Rosetta suite. 54 The
Rosetta energy terms are defined from the ref2015 score function. 84 Origin of φ and ψ angles
describes whether their target values have been directly measured from the initial top100
conformation (angles) or whether they have been determined from distances measured on
the top100 conformation using the hypothesis of a uniform covalent geometry (distances).
Protein
1benABH
1benABH
1benABH
1benABH
1benABH
1benABH
1bpiH
1bpiH
1bpiH
bio1rpoH
1fxdH
1fxdH
1fxdH
1mctIH
1mctIH
1mctIH
1mctIH
1mctIH
1mctIH
1cnrH
1cnrH
1cnrH
1cnrH
1cnrH
1edmBH
1edmBH
1edmBH
1edmBH
1edmBH

origin
interval width Number of
φ,ψ
on φ,ψ
residues
◦
angles
20
21
distances
20◦
21
◦
angles
40
21
◦
distances
40
21
angles
60◦
21
◦
distances
60
21
◦
angles
40
55
distances
40◦
55
◦
distances
60
55
◦
angles
20
61
angles
20◦
55
◦
distances
40
55
angles
40◦
55
◦
angles
20
25
◦
distances
20
25
angles
40◦
25
◦
distances
40
25
◦
angles
60
25
distances
60◦
25
◦
angles
20
45
◦
distances
20
45
angles
40◦
45
◦
distances
40
45
distances
60◦
45
◦
angles
20
35
◦
distances
20
35
angles
40◦
35
◦
distances
40
35
◦
distances
60
35

38

Minimal RMSD
value (Å)
1.1
1.0
2.2
3.1
3.7
3.0
6.5
5.0
4.7
1.4
1.7
5.5
4.5
0.7
2.9
0.8
2.6
2.7
2.2
2.0
2.0
3.4
5.0
3.4
1.2
2.0
2.4
3.3
2.7

Rosetta fa atr Rosetta total
(ref2015)
(ref2015)
-55.0
-9.49
-62.0
-12.8
-59.6
-13.6
-58.5
-7.0
-50.0
-4.8
-52.7
-4.7
-142.2
-16.0
-151.4
-22.4
-168.6
-16.3
-207.7
-70.6
-168.2
-39.0
-139.1
-27.8
-150.8
-26.6
-52.7
-6.8
-50.8
-1.9
-53.4
-7.6
-45.9
-1.9
-49.5
9.1
-53.4
0.4
-133.5
-37.6
-123.4
-30.8
-121.9
-24.8
-123.2
-23.6
-115.7
-23.7
-93.9
-25.9
-80.2
-16.6
-78.2
-19.4
-82.6
-18.1
-93.2
-10.6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

110

120

130
120
110

ang_CmNCA
Bond
angle (°)

0.15
0.10
0.05

100

130

0

10

20

−150

●

●

(105,110]
(110,115]
●
(100,105]
●
(115,120]
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
(95,100]
●●
● ●
●
(120,125] ●●●●●

0

50

φ (°)

● ●●
● ●
●

100

150

●

150

150
50
−50

Psiψ
angle
(°) (°)

●
●
●

−150

●
●

−150

●

−50

●

●

●
●

●●

●

●

●

●
● ●
●
●●

●●
●

●

●
●●

●

●

50

●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●

(120,125]
(125,130]
●
(115,120]
●
(110,115]
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
(130,135]
●●
● ●

●

●
●●●
●●

−50

60

●

●

●

●

●

0

φ (°)

50

100

● ●●
● ●
●

●

150

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●●
●
●
●

40

d)

●
●
●●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●

−150

●

Phi angle (°)
●

e)

●●●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●●●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●● ● ●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●● ●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
● ●●
●●
●●
●●
●●● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●

●

Phi angle (°)
●●●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●●●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
● ●●● ●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
● ●●
●●
●●
●●
●●● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●

50

●
● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●

−50

●

Psiψ
angle
(°) (°)

●

●

−50

●

●

●

−150

150
50
−50

Psiψ
angle
(°) (°)

●

●

−150

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●

●

c)

30

● ●

●

°2
B factor
Bfact (A )

Bond
angle (°)
Bond angle (°)
●●●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●●●●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●● ● ●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●● ●
● ●●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●●
● ●●
●●
●●
●●
●●● ●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●

b)

●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●●● ●● ●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●
●
●●●● ●●●●
●●●
●
●● ●● ● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●● ● ● ●● ●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●●● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●● ●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●● ●● ●●● ●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●●●
●●● ●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●
●● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●●
●●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●●●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
● ●●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●● ●●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●

100

a)

0.00

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

0.20

Figures

0

●
● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●

(115,120]
(120,125]
●
(110,115]
●
(125,130]
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
(105,110]
●●
● ●
●
(100,105] ●●●●●

φ (°)

50

100

●
● ●●
● ●
●

●

150

Phi angle (°)

Figure 1: Variability of the covalent geometry within the 24 protein structures analyzed from
the database top100. 61 (a) Distribution of bond angles (◦ ) between atoms C-N-Cα (blue),
N-Cα-C (magenta) and Cα-C-N (green). (b) Comparison between bond angles and B factors
averaged on each residue. The color code is the same in (a) and (b). (c-e) Ramachandran
plots of the protein structures colored according to the value of bond angles (◦ ) between
atoms C-N-Cα (c), N-Cα-C (d) and Cα-C-N (e). On each plot (c-e), the color scale is
defined in the inset legend.

39

−400
60

80

100

0

20

30

40

50

Index

200

−200

isuAH[, 1]

0

200

Index

10

0

40

−200

20

1edmBH,1fxdH,1igdH,1iroH
−400

1isuAH,1mctIH,1ptfH,1ptxH

−400
0

10

20

30

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Index

−300

−400

−200

ebxH[, 1]

0

300

200

Index

−600

1rroH,256bAH,2bopAH,3b5c_modifH
0

20

40

60

80

−100 0 100

edmBH[, 1]
Cumulative
sum

300
ckaH[, 1]

0

1ckaH,1cnrH,1ctjH,1difH

0

rroH[, 1]
Cumulative
sum

ΦK
ΨK

−100 0 100

200

1aacH,benAB,1bkfH,1bpiH

−400 −200

aacH[, 1]
Cumulative
sum

400

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

100

3ebxH,451cH,bio1rpoH,bop2wrpH
0

Index

10

20

30

40

50

60

Index

Residue number

Residue number

Figure 2: Variations of the ΦK (green curves) and ΨK (magenta curves) (◦ ) parameters (Eqs.
5 and 6) plotted along the primary sequences of target proteins. The entries of the analyzed
proteins in the database top100 61 are given on each plot.

40

0

1

3

4

9
8
7
6
5
4

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

2

●

●

●
●

1

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●

●
●

●

● ●
●

●
●
●
● ● ● ●

●

●

●

● ●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

0

●

●

1

●●● ●●●●● ●●●● ● ●●●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●●●
●●●
●
●
● ●●●
● ●●
●●
●●●
●●●●
●●●
●
●
●●● ●●●
●● ●●●
● ●

2

●●
● ● ●● ●●
●●
●

● ●
●●
●●

● ●
●●●●
●
●●

●
●
●●● ●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●●

3

● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●

0.14

●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●●
● ●
●
●
● ●●●●● ●●
●●
●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●●●
● ● ●
●●
●●●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●● ●
● ● ● ●●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ●
● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●●
● ● ●
●
● ●●
●●●
●
●●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●● ●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●●●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●
●●●●●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●●● ● ●●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●●●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●●● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●●●
●●● ●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ● ●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●● ●
● ●● ●● ●●●●
●●●
●● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●●● ●
● ●
● ● ● ● ●●●
●● ●
●● ●
● ●
●●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●● ●●● ●●
●
●
●● ●
● ●● ●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●
●●
●● ●
●●●● ●● ●●●●●
●
●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
● ●●
●● ●
● ●
● ● ● ● ● ●● ●●● ●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
● ●● ● ●
●●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●●
●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●
● ●● ● ●●
●●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●●● ● ●● ●
●● ●● ● ● ●
●● ● ●● ●● ● ● ● ● ●●● ● ● ●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●● ●● ●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●
●● ●●●● ●●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●
●● ●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●●
●●●
● ●●●
● ●●
● ●
●● ● ●
● ●●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
● ● ●●
● ●
●●●● ●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●● ● ●● ● ● ●
●
● ●●●●
●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●
● ● ●● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ● ●
●●
●
● ● ● ●
● ●
● ●●
● ● ● ●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●● ● ●
● ●●
●●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●● ●● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
● ●●●● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●●● ● ● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●● ●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
● ●● ● ● ●
● ●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●●●●●●● ● ● ●●
● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●●● ●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
● ●● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●●●● ●● ●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●
● ●
●● ●
● ● ● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●●
● ●
●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●
● ●●
●● ● ● ● ●
●● ●
●
● ●● ●● ● ●● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ● ●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●●●
●● ●
●
●●
●●
●●●●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●●
● ●●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●

●●

4

d)

●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●●●● ●●●●●
●
● ● ●●
● ●●
●
●
●● ● ●●● ●
●●● ●●●
●
● ●●
●
●●●● ●● ●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●●●
● ●
● ● ●●●●●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●●
●
●
●●●
● ● ●●
●
●●
●●●
● ● ●● ●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
● ●●● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●● ●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
● ● ●●● ● ● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ● ●
●●● ●●
●●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●●
● ●●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●●
● ●
●●●● ● ●
● ●● ●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
● ●●
●●●
●●●
●●
● ●●●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ● ●●●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●● ● ●
●●
●
● ●
●●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●●
●●
●●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●●●●● ●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●●●●
●●●●
●
●
●●●● ●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●●● ●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●

4

0.10

0.15

0.20

●

0.25

°)
Averaged discretization factor (A

0.020

log10(nbconfs)

f)

0.00

0.000

0.02

0.04

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

e)

0.010

0.06

3

●●●

log10(Run duration (s))

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

2

log10(Run
duration (s))
log10(nbconfs)

●

1

●

●

0.10

●

●

●

0.06

●

●

●

0

°)
log10(duration)
Standard
deviation (A

6
5
4
3

●

●

0

log10(#Saved)

●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●

5

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

log10(Run
duration (s))
log10(time)

c)

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

3

log10(duration)
log10(#Generated)
2

●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●●●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●●●●
●
●
●● ●
● ● ●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●●●●●
●
● ●●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
● ●●● ● ●●
●
●●
●
● ●●●●
● ●●
●●
●
● ●●●●●●●●●●●●●●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●●
●● ●●●●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●● ●● ● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●●
●● ●●●
●
● ●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
● ●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

b)

2

0.2

0.4

0.6

a)

0.0

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

0.8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

20

40

60

80

100

Percentage Pruning
of pruned
conformations
percentage

0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

#Representative
conformations
Number of clusters

Figure 3: Analysis of the iBP runs on peptide fragments. The colors of lines/points correspond to the error interval on backbone angles: 20◦ (blue), 40◦ (magenta) and 60◦ (green).
(a) Distribution of the run duration (s) plotted on logarithmic scale. Number of generated
(b) and saved (c) conformations plotted along the run duration (s). Both axes are in decimal logarithmic scale. (d) Standard deviation (Å) of discretization factor along the average
discretization factor (Å). (e) Distribution of the percentage of pruned conformations. (f)
Distribution of the number of representative conformations obtained by clustering through
self-organizing maps.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

3

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

2

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

1

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●

a)

●

●
●

●

●

●

40

50

60

●

●

●

5

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

3.0

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

b)

●

●

20

30

40

50

60

70

Number of residues
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●

c)

●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●

●

30

40

50

60

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●●
●

●
●

●
●

●
●

●
● ●
●
●●
●

●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ● ●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●●
●●
●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
● ●
●●
●● ● ● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●● ●● ●
●●
●
● ●
● ●
● ● ● ●● ●● ● ●●●
●
●
● ●●
●●●●●●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
● ●●● ●● ●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
● ●●●● ● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
● ● ●
●●●●
●
● ●● ●●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●●
●● ● ●●
● ●
●
●●
● ● ● ●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●● ● ● ●
● ●● ●
●●●
● ●
●●
●●●
●
● ● ●
● ●●●●
●●
●
●●●
●
●●
●●●●
● ●●●●●
●● ● ●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●●●●●
●●
●● ●●
●
●
● ●
● ●
● ●● ●●●●●
●● ●●
●
● ●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
● ●
●●●
●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●● ● ● ●● ●
● ● ●● ●●●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ● ●●● ●●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●● ●●●●
●
● ●
●
●●● ● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
● ●
●● ●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●● ●●
●
●●●
●
●●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●● ● ●
● ● ●●●●
●●
●
●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
● ● ●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●● ● ● ●●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●
●
●
●● ● ●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ●
●
● ● ●●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●

5.0

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

4.0

●
●
●

●

3.5

●

●
●

3.0

●

1

● ●
●

e)

2

3

4

●

●

●

●

●

2

d)

●

●

3

4

6.0

5

5

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●● ● ● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●● ● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●●
●
●● ● ● ● ●
●●
●
●
●
●● ● ● ●
●●● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●
● ● ●● ●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
● ●●● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●● ●●● ●
●
●●●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
● ● ● ● ●●
●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●● ● ●● ●●● ●● ●
●
●
●●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●●
● ● ●
●●● ●
●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●●● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
●● ●
● ●
● ●
● ●
●● ●
●
●●
●
● ●●●
●
●
● ●● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●● ●●
●● ●●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●● ●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●

f)

●●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●
●

●
●

●

●● ●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

●

0

log10(#ClashPruning)

●

●

●

●

log10(#Processed)

5.5

●

●

●

●

log10(#ClashPruning)

3.0

6.0

●

●
●
●

●

●
●●
●

●

●

●

●
●●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●
●

1

●

●

●

●

●
●

●

●

70

Number of residues

●

●

●

●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
● ● ●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●●
●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ● ● ●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●●●●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●
●
●
●● ●
●
● ●● ●
●
●●● ●
●●● ●●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●●
●●●● ● ●
●
● ● ● ●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●
●
●●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●●
● ●
● ●●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
● ● ●● ● ●
●● ●
● ●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
● ●●
● ● ●● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●●●● ●●
●●
●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ● ●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●●●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●●
●
●
● ●●
● ●●● ●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●

5

●
●
●

●

4

●

3

●
●
●

●

●
●

2

●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●

4.5

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●

1

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

70

log10(#DistPruning)

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●

0

3.5

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

5.5

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

5.0

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

4.5

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

4.0

5.0
4.5

●

●
●

●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

3.5

6.0
5.5

●
●

●
●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●

●

Number of residues

20

log10(#Processed)

●

4

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

30

●
●
●

4.0

●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

3

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●

2

●
●
●

1

5
4

●

20

log10(#Processed)

●
●
●

●
●

0

log10(#DistPruning)

●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●

log10(#ClashPruning)

●
●
●
●

1

2

3

4

5

log10(#DistPruning)

Figure 4: Analysis of the assembly of protein fragments to build the protein folds. All
parameters except the number of residues in the assembled fragment are expressed in decimal
logarithmic scale. The colors of points correspond to the error interval on backbone angles:
20◦ (blue), 40◦ (magenta) and 60◦ (green). The following plots are displayed: (a) number
of distance pruning versus number of residues, (b) number of clash pruning versus number
of residues, (c) number of processed conformations versus number of residues, (d) number
of distance pruning versus number of clash pruning, (e) number of processed conformations
versus number of clash pruning, (f) number of processed conformations versus number of
distance pruning.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

●

●

6

●
●

4

● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

15
10
5

●
●
●

●
●
●
●

b)

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

50

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
● ● ●
●

●

●

60

●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●

●
●

●
●
●
● ●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

40

20

30

Max RMSD (A)

●
●

● ●

2

Min RMSD (A)

8

a)

●

70

●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●
● ●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

● ●

●

● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●

30

40

50

60

70

Number of residues

Figure 5: Comparison of the assembled fragment conformations to the corresponding regions
in the top100 target structure. For each processed fragment, the minimum (a) and maximum
(b) values of the coordinates RMSD (Å) between heavy backbone atoms are plotted along
the number of residues. Dashed lines have been added at the levels of 2, 3 and 4 Å in
minimum RMSD plot.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1benABH
Origin: distances,
interval width: 20°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 20°

1bpiH

Origin: angles,
interval width: 20°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 40°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 60°

bio1rpoH

Origin: angles,
interval width: 20°
Origin: distances,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 20°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 40°
Origin: distances,
interval width: 60°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 60°

1cnrH
Origin: distances,
interval width: 20°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 20°

1edmBH
Origin: distances,
interval width: 60°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 60°

Origin: distances, Origin: angles,
interval width: 20° interval width: 20°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 40°

1mctIH
Origin: distances,
interval width: 20°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 20°

Origin: distances,
Origin: angles,
interval width: 40° interval width: 40°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 60°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 40°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 60°

1fxdH
Origin: angles,
interval width: 20°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 60°

Origin: distances,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 40°

Origin: angles,
interval width: 60°

Figure 6: Comparison of the TAiBP conformations to the initial top100 conformations. The
TAiBP conformations processed using the relax tool from Rosetta 54 are drawn in red cartoon
and superimposed to the target top100 conformations, drawn in green cartoon. Some residues
of the protein core are drawn in licorice. Close to each superimposed structures, the origin
of the backbone angles restraints φ, ψ is given as distances or angles. If the angles φ, ψ
are measured on the initial top100 conformation, the restraints are of angles origin, whereas
if the angles are calculated from measured distances in top100 conformations, assuming a
uniform covalent geometry, the restraints are of distances origin. The interval widths of φ,
ψ restraints are also given.

44

3.0
6

4

2

6

7

8

RMSD (A)

3.0
4

1fxdH

2.0

5

2

8

Density (AU)

2

4

6

1mctIH

0

Density (AU)

5

1.0

Density (AU)
3

RMSD (A)

Density (AU)

2.0

8

bio1rpoH

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

6

8

10

RMSD (A)

1cnrH

2

4

6
RMSD
(A)
RMSD

RMSD (A)

3.0

4

8

10

(A° )

1.0

2.0

1edmBH

0.0

Density (AU)

1.0

Density (AU)

0.0
4

0.0

Density (AU)

2

RMSD (A)

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8

Density (AU)

0

Density (AU)

1bpiH

0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0

8 10
6
4
0

Density (AU)

1benABH

2

Density (AU)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

°)
RMSD (A

RMSD (A)

Figure 7: Distribution of RMSD values (Å) of each conformation obtained at the end
of TaiBP approach with respect to the conformation of the corresponding protein in the
database top100. 61 The curves are colored according to the origin of the backbone angle restraints (distances or angle) introduced in the subsection “Input values for the calculation”
in Materials and Methods, and to the interval of φ, ψ restraints. The color used are: blue
(distances, 20◦ ), magenta (angles, 20◦ ), green (distances, 30◦ ), brown (angles, 30◦ ), cyan
(distances, 40◦ ), orange (angles, 40◦ ).

45

10

0.08

b)

0.04

20

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

30

a)

0

0.00

5

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

100

110

120

130

80

100

50
−50

0.002

Psiψ
angle
(°) (°)

0.004

c)

●
● ●●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●● ●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●●
● ●●
●
●● ●
●●
●●
●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●●
●
● ●●
●●
● ●● ● ●●
●●
● ●
●●●●
●
●●●
●●
● ●
●●●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●● ●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●●●
●
● ●●
● ●● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●● ●
●●●● ●
●● ● ● ●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
● ●● ●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●● ●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●●
●●●
●● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●● ●
●●
●●
●● ●●●●
●
●●
●●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●
●●
●
● ●●●●
●●●
●
● ●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
● ●●
●● ●
● ●
●●
●
●● ●● ●
●● ● ●
● ●●●●
●●
● ●
●●●●●
●
●● ●●
●
●●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●●
●
● ●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●● ●● ●●
●●●
●
●
●●●●
● ● ●●●● ●●●●● ●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

160

180

●●
●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●●

●

●
●

●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●●●●
●● ●
● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

(90,95]
(95,100]
(100,105]
(105,110]
(110,115]
(115,120]
(120,125]

● ●

●

●●
●
●

●

● ●●●
●
●
● ●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

−150
−200

−100

0

100

●

●

●

●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●● ●
● ●

●

● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●

150

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●●●●
●● ●
● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

(110,115]
(115,120]
(120,125]
(125,130]
(130,135]

● ●

●

●●
●
●

●

● ●●●
●
●
● ●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

50

●●

●

●
●

−50

●
●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●

●

●● ●
● ●

−150

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●

● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●

−50

●
● ●●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●● ●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●●
● ●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●●
●
● ●●
●●
● ●● ● ●●
●●
● ●
●●●●
●
●●●
●●
● ●
●●●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●● ●●
●● ●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●●
●
● ●●
● ●● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●●●
●● ● ● ●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●● ●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●●
●●●
●● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●● ●
●●
●●
●● ●●●●
●
●●
●●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●●●
●
● ●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●●
●● ●● ●
●●●
● ●
● ●●●●
●●
● ●
●●●●●
●
●● ●●
●
●●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●●
●
● ●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●● ●● ●●
●●●
●
●●
●●●●
● ● ●●●● ●●●●● ●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

−50

0

φ (°)

50

●

0

50

φ (°)

●

●

100

150

●●

f)

●
●
●
●

●
●
●

●

●
●
●●

●

●
●

●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●● ●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●● ● ●
●
●●●●
●● ●
● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●

●

●

●
●
●

●

●

●
●

(100,105]
(105,110]
(110,115]
(115,120]
(120,125]
(125,130]

● ●

●

●●
●
●

●

● ●●●
●
●
● ●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

−150

−150

●

●

●
●

●

●

●

●

●

Phi angle (°)

●●

e)

●

●

●

●

−150

Psiψ
angle
(°) (°)

150
50
−50

●
● ●●
●●
●
● ●
●●
●●
●
● ●● ●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●
● ●
●● ●
●● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●
●●
● ●●
●
●●
●● ●
●●
●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●●●●
●
● ●●
●●
● ●● ● ● ●
●●
● ●
●●●●
●
●●●
●●
● ●
●●●
●
●●●●
● ●
●
●●
●
● ● ● ●● ●●
●● ●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●● ● ●
●●●
●
● ●●
● ●● ●● ●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●●
●
●● ●
●●●●
●● ● ● ●● ●●● ●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●
● ●● ●
● ●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●●
● ●
●●
●● ●
●
● ●●● ●●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●●●
●● ●
●
●●
● ● ●●
●●●●●
●
●
●
● ●● ●●●●
●●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●●●
●●●
●● ●
●●
●●
● ●
●● ●
●●
●●
●● ●●●●
●
●●
●●●●●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
● ●●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ●
●●
●
●
● ● ● ●●
●●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
● ●●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
● ● ●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●● ●
●
●
●●
●●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●●
●
●●
● ●●●●
●●●
●
● ●
●
● ●● ●●
●
●
● ●●
● ●
●●
●●
●● ●● ●
●●●
● ●
● ●●●●
●●
● ●
●●●●●
●
●● ●●
●
●●●●
●●●●
●●●
●●●
●
●●● ●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●● ● ●
●
●●●
●
● ●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●
●●● ● ● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●●●●● ●● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
● ● ●● ●●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●●● ●
●●
●
● ●
● ●●●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●
● ●
●
●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●●●
●
●
●
●●●● ●● ●●
●●●
●
●●
●●●●
● ● ●●●● ●●●●● ●
●
●● ●
● ●●
●
●
●
● ●●●
●
●
●
●●
●●
●●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
● ●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●

●
●
●

200

Peptidic angle ω (°)

●

●

Omega angle (°)

Psiψ
angle
(°) (°)

140

d)

● ●●●
●●
●
●

●

0.000

Density (AU)
Density
(AU)

120

Bond
angle (°)
Bond angle (°)
150

Bond
angle (°)
Bond angle (°)

●

100

●

●

150

●

●
●
●
●
●●
●
●
●

●

●● ●
● ●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

●
●

●
●
●

−150

Phi angle (°)

●

●

●

●
●

● ●●
● ●●●
●
●
●●
●● ●
●
●
● ●●
●

●
●

●

●

●

●
●
●
●

●

●
●

−50

0

φ (°)

50

●

100

●

●

150

Phi angle (°)

Figure 8: Variability of the covalent geometry within the set of the conformations obtained on
1benABH, 1cnrH, 1edmBH, 1fxdH, 1igdH, 1isuAH, 1mctlH, bio1rpoH, 1bpiH using TAiBP
and then relaxed using Rosetta. (a) Distribution of bond angles (◦ ) between atoms C-N-Cα
(blue), N-Cα-C (magenta) and Cα-C-N (green). (b) Distribution of bond angles (◦ ) between
atoms C-N-Cα (blue), N-Cα-C (magenta) and Cα-C-N (green) with increased scale to detect
the outlier peaks, (c) Distribution of the ω dihedral angle (◦ ). (d-f) Ramachandran plots of
the protein conformations colored according to the value of bond angles (◦ ) between atoms
C-N-Cα (d), N-Cα-C (e) and Cα-C-N (f). On each plot, the color scale is defined in the
inset legend.

46

3.0

0.8
0.4

Density (AU)

1bpiH

0.0

1.0

2.0

1benABH

0.0

Density
Density (AU)
(AU)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/650903; this version posted August 5, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

0

2

4

6

8

10

0

5

10

0.8
0.4

Density (AU)

10

15

20

0
1.2
Density (AU)

15

1mctIH

0.0

0.2

0.4

1fxdH

10
RMSD (A)

0.8

0.6

RMSD (A)

5

0.4

5

0.0

Density
Density (AU)
(AU)

1edmBH

0.0

0.4

0.8

1cnrH

0

0

5

10

15

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

°
RMSD (A)A
RMSD

( )

RMSD (A)

1.0

2.0

3.0

bio1rpoH

0.0

Density
Density (AU)
(AU)

15

RMSD (A)

0.0

Density
Density
(AU)
(AU)

RMSD (A)

0

5

10

15

°)
RMSD (A
RMSD (A)

Figure 9: Distribution of minimum (full line) and maximum (dotted line) RMSD (Å) values
between the target and the TAiBP protein conformations. These RMSD were obtained
during a TAiBP run using as targets protein conformations generated by the TAiBP approach
and relaxed with Rosetta (Table 3 and Figure 6). The calculations were realized with interval
of 20◦ (blue), 40◦ (green), and 60◦ (magenta) widths on the φ and ψ values.

47

