bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Muscle-secreted G-CSF as a metabolic niche factor
ameliorates loss of muscle stem cell in aged mice

Hu Li1, Qian Chen1, Changyin Li1, Ran Zhong1, Yixia Zhao1, Qianying Zhang1,
Weimin Tong2, Dahai Zhu1,3*, and Yong Zhang1*

1

The State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical

Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, Beijing 100005, P. R. China.
2

Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences Chinese Academy of Medical

Science, School of Basic Medicine Peking Union Medical College; Neuroscience Center,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, P. R. China
3

Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong Laboratory, Guangzhou 510530,

P. R. China.

RUNNING TITLE: Metabolic niche maintains stem cells

To whom correspondence should be addressed: Yong Zhang and Dahai Zhu, The State Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese
Academy of Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College,
5 Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, P R China.
Tel:+86-10-6915-6949; Fax:+86-10-6510-5083; E-mail: yongzhang@ibms.pumc.edu.cn;
dhzhu@pumc.edu.cn
Lead contact: Dahai Zhu, dhzhu@pumc.edu.cn

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Summary
Function and number of muscle stem cells (satellite cells, SCs) declines with muscle aging.
Although SCs are heterogeneous and different subpopulations have been identified, it remains
unknown if a specific subpopulation of muscle SCs selectively decreases during aging. Here,
we find Pax7Hi cells are dramatically reduced in aged mice and this aged-dependent loss of
Pax7Hi cells is metabolically mediated by myofiber-secreted granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor G-CSF as the Pax7Hi SCs are replenished by exercise-induced G-CSF in aged mice.
Mechanistically, we show that transcription of G-CSF (Csf3) gene in myofibers is regulated by
MyoD in a metabolism-dependent manner and the myofibers-secreted G-CSF acts as a
metabolic niche factor required for establishing and maintaining the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation
in adult and physiological aged mice by promoting the asymmetric division of Pax7Hi and
Pax7Mi SCs. Together, our findings uncover a metabolic niche role of muscle metabolism in
regulating Pax7 SC heterogeneity in mice.

Key words: Metabolic Niche, Pax7 Satellite Cells, Heterogeneity, G-CSF, Asymmetric
Division, Aged Mice

Highlights
1) Single cell RNA-seq unveils Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells are two distinct subpopulations.
2) Pax7Hi SCs are enriched in glycolytic fibers and reduced in aging muscle.
3) Metabolic niche factor G-CSF is required for regulating dynamic change of Pax7 SCs.
4) G-CSF replenishes Pax7Hi cells by stimulating asymmetric division of Pax7Mi cells.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Reduced tissue regenerative potential is one of the general hallmarks in mammalian aging
(Rando, 2006) and decline in the number and function of adult stem cells is the major causes
that contribute to the failure of regeneration in several adult tissues during aging (Conboy,
Conboy et al., 2003, Molofsky, Slutsky et al., 2006, Nishimura, Granter et al., 2005, Rossi,
Mash et al., 2005). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this age-dependent loss of
adult stem cells in tissue regeneration are largely unknown. In adult skeletal muscle, muscle
stem cells, also known as satellite cells (SCs), reside in a quiescent state between the basal
lamina and the muscle fiber sarcolemma. SCs are responsible for postnatal muscle growth and
regeneration after injury. SCs are also heterogeneous where different subpopulations have
unique features of self-renewal, proliferation, and differentiation during regeneration (Kuang,
Kuroda et al., 2007, Rocheteau, Gayraud-Morel et al., 2012, Wilson, Laurenti et al., 2008).
Pax7, a transcriptional factor, plays critical roles in regulating SC functions during development
and regeneration (Sambasivan, Yao et al., 2011, Seale, Sabourin et al., 2000, von Maltzahn,
Jones et al., 2013). It has been recently reported that Pax7-positive SCs (Pax7 SCs) are
heterogeneous including Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo subpopulations (Rocheteau et al., 2012, Wu et al.
2015). However, little is known regarding the functional establishment and maintenance of the
heterogeneity of Pax7 SCs during development. During aging, the decline in number and
function of Pax7 SCs is attributable to the loss of skeletal muscle mass and strength as well as
the decreased regenerative capacity. More intriguingly, it remains unclear if a specific
subpopulation of Pax7 SCs decreases during aging and what are the dynamics of this
heterogeneity in aged mice.
The microenvironment, or niche contributes significantly to the behaviors of adult stem
cells, as first reported for germ stem cell niche of the Drosophila ovary (Xie & Spradling, 2000)
and the hematopoietic stem cell niche in mammal (Schofield, 1978). However, little is known
about which niche components are required to regulate the heterogeneity of adult stem cells.
The identification of niche factors will help to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying
the establishment and maintenance of adult stem cell heterogeneity during development and
physiological aging. In skeletal muscle, Pax7 SCs were directly attached with two major types

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of muscle fibers which are defined based on their metabolic capacity: slow-twitch oxidative
fibers and fast-twitch glycolytic fibers (Schiaffino & Reggiani, 2011). Interestingly, there is a
link between the SC numbers/function and fiber metabolism, more SC cells on slow-twitch
oxidative fibers than that on fast-twitch glycolytic fibers (Collins, Olsen et al., 2005, Feldman
& Stockdale, 1991, Lagord, Soulet et al., 1998). Further, decline of SC numbers and function
is correlated with fiber type switch from glycolytic fast-twitch to oxidative slow-twitch fiber
during aging. These observations imply a possible effect of fiber metabolism on SC function
and behavior during aging.
Skeletal muscle is a major secretory organ, and muscle fibers express and secrete various
factors (e.g., IL-6 and FGF-2) that regulate skeletal muscle growth and regeneration in
autocrine, paracrine, or endocrine manners (Pedersen & Febbraio, 2008, Pedersen & Febbraio,
2012). Given that muscle fibers exhibit metabolic heterogeneity, secrete factors that have
paracrine function, and exhibit intimate contact with Pax7 SCs, we hypothesized that muscle
fibers function as a metabolic niche for skeletal muscle SCs by supplying requisite factors that
in turn regulate the heterogeneity of Pax7 SCs during development and aging in mice. In the
present study, we tested this hypothesis using several experimental approaches. First, using
single cell RNA sequencing, we demonstrate that Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells are two distinct
subpopulations of satellite cells. More significantly, we uncover that the number of Pax7Hi
subpopulation satellite cells is significantly reduced in aged mice. Mechanistically, we reveal
that altered heterogeneity of Pax7 SCs is regulated by myofiber-secreted granulocyte-colony
stimulating factor (G-CSF), which is metabolically regulated by MyoD in myofibers and in turn
interacts with its receptor, G-CSFR, on Pax7 SCs. This interaction is required for establishing
and maintaining the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in adult and physiological aged mice by
promoting the asymmetric division of Pax7Hi and Pax7Mi SCs.
Results
Characterization of Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo SCs by single-cell RNA sequencing
Quiescent Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells isolated by FACS based on levels of GFP (Pax7) from
tibialis anterior (TA) muscle of Pax7-nGFP mice (Fig EV1A-D) were subjected to single cell
RNA sequencing (scRNA-Seq). We profiled 1,243 Pax7Hi cells and 3,960 Pax7Lo cells. The

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

typical number of detectable genes ranged approximately from 1000 to 2000 genes in individual
cells. Unsupervised hierarchal clustering analysis with the single-cell RNA transcriptome
indicated that quiescent Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells belonged to two distinctly clustered
subpopulations (Fig 1A) as indicated with quiescent marker Vcam1 (Fig EV1E). Transcriptome
comparisons between Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo subpopulations identified 428 differentially expression
genes (LogFC>0.25), which exhibit distinct gene signatures (Fig 1B). Furthermore, GOenriched analysis of the differentially expressed genes between those two subpopulations
consistently validated the previously described features (Fig EV1F-H). Genes related to
stemness were highly expressed in the Pax7Hi subpopulation and genes related to myogenic
differentiation were highly expressed in the Pax7Lo subpopulation (Fig 1C). Additionally, we
found that Pax7Hi cells expressed high levels of mitochondrial genes (Figs 1D and EV1I),
suggesting that Pax7Hi cells were adapted to oxidative metabolism. Finally, several molecular
markers for either Pax7Hi or Pax7Lo cells were identified in this study. Ptprb, Pvalb, Acta1, Hbbbt are for Pax7Hi cells and Cdh15, Rcan2, Rps28, Acta2 for Pax7Lo cells (Fig 1E and F). The
expression patterns of these genes were validated by real-time PCR (Fig EV1J). Together, the
high resolution analysis using single-cell RNA sequencing provides evidence that Pax7Hi and
Pax7Lo cells represent two distinct subpopulations in mice. Therefore, the Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo
cells used in the following experiments were FACS-sorted based on the levels of Pax7
expression as previously reported (Rocheteau et al., 2012, Wu et al., 2015).
Pax7Hi cells are significantly reduced in aged mice
Given that the number and functionality of Pax7 SCs decline with age and Pax7Hi cells with
more stem-like properties represent a reversible dormant stem cell state and generate distinct
daughter cell fates by asymmetrically segregating template DNA during muscle regeneration.
We assessed whether the percentage of Pax7Hi cells was altered in aged mice. Satellite cells
were sorted from TA muscle of young and aged Pax7-nGFP mice, respectively. FACS profiling
revealed that the percentage of Pax7Hi SCs was severely reduced in the TA muscle fibers of
aged mice compared to young mice (Fig2 A-C). Consistent with this, we observed low levels

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of Pax7 and stemness-related genes CD34, but high levels of myogenic differentiation-related
genes (MyoD and MyoG) in Pax7 SCs freshly isolated from aged TA muscle fibers versus young
TA muscle fibers (Fig 2D). We also examined expression of newly identified genes as markers
for either Pax7Hi or Pax7Lo cells, respectively. We found lower levels of Pax7Hi marker genes
expression (mt-Nd1, mt-Co2 and mt-Co3) but higher levels of Pax7Lo marker genes expression
(Rcan2 and Cdh15) in Pax7 SCs freshly isolated from aged TA muscle fibers versus young TA
muscle fibers (Fig 2E). Consistently, we observed that the activation of Pax7 SCs was
significantly accelerated in the cells freshly isolated from aged TA muscle fibers versus the
young TA muscle fibers (Fig 2F and G).Taken together, these results demonstrate that Pax7Hi
cells were significant reduced in aged mice.
Glycolytic metabolism of myofiber is required for the maintenance of Pax7Hi SC
To identify niche components in skeletal muscle that might be required for the maintenance
of Pax7Hi cells in aged mice, we analyzed the transcriptomes of aged TA muscle and young TA
muscle by RNA sequencing. RNA-seq results from aged TA muscle and young TA muscle
identified a large number of differentially regulated genes (Fig 2H). Gene ontology (GO)
analyses of biological processes highlighted the changes in a number of genes encoding
metabolic regulators in the transition from young to aged muscle (Fig 2I and J). The expression
of genes corresponding to proteins that regulate lipid metabolic processes was upregulated (Figs
2I and EV2A), whereas that of genes regulating glucose metabolic processes was
downregulated in aged TA muscle (Figs 2J and EV 2B and C).To further confirm the metabolic
shift during aging, we performed histochemical staining for α-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase
(α-GPDH) and succinate dehydrogenase (SDH), which are enriched in glycolytic and oxidative
myofibers, respectively. Aged TA muscle had higher SDH and lower α-GPDH enzymatic
activities compared to young TA muscles (Fig EV2D). Altogether, these results indicate that
muscle metabolism was shifted from a glycolytic to oxidative state during aging as previously
reported (Holloszy, Chen et al., 1991).
Since skeletal muscle composed of glycolytic myofiber and oxidative myofiber and SCs

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were directly attached with muscle fibers, we reasoned that metabolism of muscle fibers as a
metabolic niche regulating the heterogeneity of Pax7 SC cells. To this end, we examined the
distributions of the Pax7Hi subpopulations in TA (predominantly glycolytic) and soleus (Sol,
mainly oxidative) muscle fibers from the same individual Pax7-nGFP reporter mice.
Interestingly, the percentage of Pax7Hi SCs sorted from glycolytic TA muscle fibers was
significantly higher than that sorted from oxidative Sol muscle fibers of the same animal (Fig
3A-C), indicating that the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation was enriched in glycolytic muscle fibers of
these mice. Consistent with this, we observed higher levels of Pax7 and stemness-related genes
(CXCR4 and CD34) but lower levels of myogenic differentiation-related genes (MyoG) in Pax7
SCs freshly isolated from TA muscle fibers versus Sol muscle fibers of the same mice (Fig 3D).
We also examined expression of newly identified genes as markers for either Pax7 Hi or Pax7Lo
cells, respectively. We found higher levels of Pax7Hi marker genes expression (mt-Nd1, mt-Co2,
mt-Co3, Ptprb and Hbb-bt) but lower levels of Pax7Lo marker genes expression (Rcan2 and
Cdh15) in Pax7 SCs freshly isolated from TA muscle fibers versus Sol muscle fibers of the
same animal (Fig 3E). Consistently, we observed that the activation of Pax7 SCs was
significantly delayed in the cells freshly isolated from TA muscle fibers versus the
corresponding Sol muscle fibers (Fig 3F and G). To rule out the possibility that enrichment of
Pax7Hi SCs in glycolytic TA muscle fibers is mediated by fiber type per se, we examined
correlation between fiber type/fiber metabolism and the heterogeneity of Pax7 SC cells in TA
and Sol muscle at 3 and 10 weeks, respectively. We found that the fiber type had been
remarkably different between TA and Sol muscle of 3 weeks mice (Fig EV3A and B), but the
significant difference in muscle metabolism was occurred till 10 weeks (Fig EV3C-E).
Interestingly, the significant difference in the percentage of Pax7Hi cells between TA and Sol
muscle was only observed at 10 weeks but not at 3 weeks (Fig 3H), indicating that metabolic
features of myofibers rather than muscle contraction associated with establishment of Pax7Hi
subpopulations in TA muscle. Our results show for the first time that Pax7 SCs are remarkably
heterogeneous between glycolytic and oxidative muscle fibers. This heterogeneity may be

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

related to the metabolic activity of these muscle fibers under normal physiological conditions.
To further confirm the causal effects of fiber metabolism on Pax7 SC heterogeneity in mice,
we examined the distribution of the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in the TA muscle of the wellcharacterized PPARβ transgenic (TG) mice, which exhibits significantly enriched oxidative
muscle fibers and dramatically decreased glycolytic muscle fibers (Fig S3F-H) (Gan, Rumsey
et al., 2013). Consistent with the remarkably reduced glycolytic metabolism seen in PPARβ TG
mice, the percentage of Pax7Hi SCs was significantly reduced in the TA muscle fibers of PPARβ
TG mice compared to those of wild-type (WT) littermates (Fig 3I-K). In agreement with this
finding, the mRNA levels of Pax7, CXCR4 and CD34 were also lower, but the levels of MyoD
and MyoG were higher in Pax7 SCs freshly isolated from the TA muscle of PPARβ TG mice
compared to those of WT mice (Fig EV3I). Moreover, the activation of Pax7 SCs isolated from
the TA muscle fibers of both WT and PPARβ TG mice was comparatively analyzed by
immunostaining the Pax7 SCs cultured for 18 hr in growth medium with MyoD antibody.
Activation of Pax7 SCs isolated from the TA muscle fibers of PPARβ TG mice was significantly
faster than that observed in WT littermates (Fig EV3J and K). Together, these results support
the notion that glycolytic metabolism favors the establishment and maintenance of Pax7Hi cells
in mice.
Muscle-released G-CSF is a metabolic niche factor required for establishment and
maintenance of Pax7Hi SCs in mice
Based on the above observations, we hypothesized that cytokines highly expressed and
secreted by glycolytic muscle fibers might function as niche factors required to maintain Pax7Hi
SC subpopulation in aged mice. To identify the muscle-secreted factors responsible for the loss
of Pax7 SCs during aging, we analyzed the global gene expression changes occurring within
TA muscle during physiological aging. We found that Csf3 gene encoding granulocyte colonystimulating factor (G-CSF) was particularly interesting because it was significant
downregulated in aged TA muscle than young TA muscle (Fig 4A). Also, Csf3 was more highly
expressed by glycolytic TA muscle versus oxidative Sol muscle in adult mice (Fig 4B), and was

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

remarkably reduced in the TA muscle of PPARβ TG versus WT adult mice (Fig 4C), suggesting
Csf3 gene is predominantly expressed in glycolytic muscle fibers. To further corroborate this,
we isolated single myofibers from Sol and glycolytic EDL muscle and directly examined Csf3
gene expression in single myofibers by qRT-PCR (Fig 4D). The identity of each myofibers was
verified by measuring Myh1 and Myh7 genes expression, respectively (Fig EV4A and B).
Indeed, Csf3 was highly expressed in glycolytic single myofibers isolated from EDL (Fig 4D).
Together, we reasoned that G-CSF might be a Pax7 SCs niche factor required for the established
enrichment of Pax7Hi SCs in glycolytic TA muscle in adult mice.
To test this possibility, we freshly isolated Pax7 SCs from total muscle tissues of Pax7-nGFP
mice, and treated the cells with either G-CSF or PBS (control) for 48 hr. G-CSF treatment
significantly increased the percentage of Pax7Hi SCs compared to the PBS control (Fig4E and
F), indicating that G-CSF plays a functional role in modulating Pax7Hi SCs in vitro. This was
further supported by significant upregulation of Pax7 in SCs treated with G-CSF for 48 hr (Fig
EV4C). To further confirm that G-CSF is a niche factor required for Pax7Hi SCs establishment,
we generated Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/-mice by crossing Csf3r-/- mice (G-CSF receptor KO mice)
with Pax7-nGFP reporter mice. When Pax7 SCs isolated from the Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice
were treated with either G-CSF or PBS for 48 hr, G-CSF failed to increase the percentage of
Pax7Hi SCs from Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice (Fig 4E and F). Consistent with these in vitro
findings, when we compared the distribution of Pax7Hi SCs in glycolytic TA of WT mice and
Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice, the percentage of Pax7Hi SCs was significantly reduced in those of
Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice (Fig 4G and H). We next examined the mRNA levels of Csf3 and
marker genes for the muscle fiber type (Myh4) and muscle fiber metabolism (HK2 and PFK1)
in the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- and Pax7-nGFP WT mice. Our results ruled out the
possibility that the observed effects in the Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice were due to a reduction
inCsf3 expression or an alteration of muscle fiber metabolism (Fig EV4D and E). Moreover,
we did not find any difference in the Csf3 mRNA levels of immune cells sorted from the TA or
Sol muscle fibers of Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice (Fig EV4F and G). Collectively, these findings

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

demonstrate that muscle-released G-CSF and its receptor on Pax7 SCs are required to establish
the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in mice.
Expression of Csf3 gene encoding G-CSF is metabolically regulated by MyoD in muscle
cells
We then asked if G-CSF is indeed a metabolic niche factor secreted by muscle fibers, then
the Csf3 gene encoding G-CSF should be metabolically regulated in muscle cells. To test this,
we examined Csf3 gene expression in C2C12 myotubes with enhanced glycolytic activity by
culturing them in pyruvate-free medium (Fig EV5A and B) (Chen, Freinkman et al., 2016). The
expression of Csf3 gene was significantly increased in myotubes that exhibited higher
glycolytic activity (Fig 5A), indicating that the transcription of Csf3 gene was indeed regulated
by the enhancement of glycolytic metabolism in myotubes. To determine how expression of
Csf3 gene is metabolically controlled by glycolytic activity of myofiber, we analyzed the 2-kb
upstream of the transcriptional start site of the Csf3 promoter and six E-boxes were found in
this region (Fig EV5C), suggesting that metabolically-mediated expression of Csf3 gene might
be regulated by myogenic regulatory factors such as MyoD in myotubes. Therefore, we
examined MyoD expression in myotubes cultured with pyruvate-free medium and found that
enhanced glycolytic activity in the myotubes cultured with pyruvate-free medium also
significantly elevated MyoD expression (Fig 5A). In addition, we also observed that similar to
Csf3, MyoD was also more prominently expressed in glycolytic TA muscle fibers compared to
oxidative Sol muscle fibers in mice (Fig EV5D and E). MyoD and Csf3 had a similar expression
pattern, highly expressed in the glycolytic single fibers isolated from EDL than in the oxidative
single fibers from Sol muscles (Fig EV5F). To directly determine if MyoD metabolically
regulates Csf3 expression in vivo, expression of Csf3 was assessed in TA muscles of MyoDknockout (MyoD-KO) mice and WT mice. Consistently, levels of Csf3 mRNA were
significantly reduced in the glycolytic TA muscles of MyoD-KO mice compared to WT mice
(Fig 5B), indicating that MyoD was a transcriptional factor for regulating Csf3 expression in
muscle cells. To further confirm this possibility, we overexpressed MyoD in C2C12 muscle

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cells and found that MyoD overexpression remarkably augmented Csf3 transcription (Fig
EV5G). MyoD-mediated transcription of Csf3 gene was further corroborated by using a
luciferase reporter system driven by the E-box-containing 2-kb region upstream of the Csf3
promoter. Luciferase reporter activity was assayed in both C3H-10T1/2 fibroblasts and C2C12
cells transiently transfected with MyoD in the presence of the reporter construct. Forced
expression of MyoD in either fibroblasts or C2C12 cells significantly activated the luciferase
reporter gene driven by the 2-kb Csf3 promoter, compared with the negative control (Fig 5C
and EV5H). In addition, we examined luciferase reporter gene activity in the TA muscles of
MyoD-KO and WT mice. Consistent with the results of our in vitro assays, the TA muscles of
MyoD-KO mice showed significantly less luciferase activity than those of WT mice (Fig 5D).
Together, our in vitro and in vivo analyses reveal that MyoD regulates the Csf3 gene
transcription in muscle cells.
Next we examined whether the glycolytically-mediated transcription of the Csf3 gene is
regulated by MyoD in muscle cells. First, we checked Csf3 expression in both MyoD-KD and
control C2C12 myotubes with enhanced glycolytic activity. The metabolic reprogramminginduced upregulation of Csf3 expression seen in control myotubes was completely abolished in
the MyoD-KD myotubes (Fig EV5I and J), indicating that MyoD is required for the
metabolically induced expression of Csf3 gene in myotubes. To further confirm this observation,
we assessed luciferase reporter gene activity driven by the Csf3 promoter in MyoD-KD and
control C2C12 myotubes cultured in the presence or absence of pyruvate. Indeed, significantly
increased reporter gene activity was found to be induced by glycolytic metabolism only in
control myotubes, but not in MyoD-KD myotubes (Fig 5E). Interestingly, enhanced glycolytic
activity did not alter the expression of the endogenous MyoG gene (Fig EV5K) or the activity
of a luciferase reporter gene driven by the MyoG proximal promoter (Fig EV5L), revealing that
metabolically-mediated Csf3 transcription is specifically regulated by MyoD in the muscle cells.
Finally, functional analysis of Csf3 gene promoter for identifying the E-boxes in its promoter
required for MyoD-controlled metabolic transcription was performed by reporter gene assays

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

with various truncated mutants of the Csf3 gene promoter. Reporter assay showed that
truncations of Csf3 promoter containing the E-box (-1519bp, -1791bp, -1853bp) were response
to glycolytic metabolism, suggesting that the E-boxes (-1519bp, -1791bp, -1853bp) were
required for MyoD-mediated Csf3 transcription (Figs 5F and EV5C). To further corroborate
the observation, we performed MyoD ChIP-seq on differentiated myotubes cultured in the
presence or absence of pyruvate. Significantly, we found that enhanced glycolytic metabolism
enriched MyoD binding on Csf3 promoter but not on MyoG promoter (Fig 5G). This was further
confirmed by MyoD ChIP-PCR on Csf3 promoter and MyoG promoter (Fig 5H and EV5M and
N). Taken together, our results not only provide molecular evidence to confirm that G-CSF is
a muscle fiber secreted niche factor but also most interestingly uncover an unexpected
metabolic role for MyoD as a transcriptional factor in regulating Csf3 gene expression in mature
muscle.
Muscle-derived G-CSF promotes the asymmetric division of Pax7 SCs
Next, we explored the molecular mechanism through which muscle-derived and MyoDregulated G-CSF acts as a Pax7 SC niche factor to modulate the heterogeneity of Pax7 SCs. We
first assessed the expression of Pax7 in SCs following G-CSF treatment. Interestingly, at 24 hr
post-treatment, there was no obvious change in Pax7 mRNA levels in Pax7 SCs sorted from
Pax7-nGFP mice (Fig EV6A), but these levels were significantly enhanced at 48 hr posttreatment (Fig EV4C). These results suggested that the G-CSF-mediated enrichment of the
Pax7Hi SC subpopulation most likely occurs through cell division of Pax7SCs rather than
through an increase of Pax7 expression in these cells.
As the self-renewal of the SCs was proposed to be regulated by asymmetric division
(Kuang et al., 2007, Troy, Cadwallader et al., 2012) and G-CSF receptor was recently reported
to be asymmetrically distributed in about 20% activated Pax7 SCs (Hayashiji, Yuasa et al.,
2015), we hypothesized that G-CSF might mediate the heterogeneity of Pax7 SCs by promoting
their asymmetric division via its interaction with the asymmetrically distributed G-CSFR on
the Pax7 SCs. To test this possibility, we first performed time-lapse imaging of cell division in

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

cultured Pax7 SCs sorted from Pax7-nGFP mice (Fig 6A-C and Movie1) and in single fibers
isolated from the extensor digitorum longus (EDL) muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice (Fig EV6B-D
and Movie 2). As expected, SCs underwent asymmetric division, each giving rise to one Pax7Hi
cell and one Pax7Lo cell (Fig 6A-C and EV6B-D). Next, we used several approaches to
experimentally test our notion that G-CSF regulated the percentage of the Pax7Hi SC
subpopulation by promoting their asymmetric division. Firstly, we assayed co-segregation of
template DNA strands in the Pax7 cells. The TA muscles of 10-week-old Pax7-nGFP mice
were injured by intramuscular injection of CTX. EdU labeling was used to monitor the cosegregation of template DNA (72 hr post injury), and BrdU was added to ensure that cells
continued to divide during this period (8 hr post EdU) (Fig 6D). We ensured that all of the cells
were EdU positive cells by performing immunostaining of EdU at T1 (Fig EV6E). To determine
whether Pax7 cell displayed asymmetric division in response to G-CSF, we sorted Pax7 SCs
and treated them with G-CSF in growth medium for 12 hr to complete cell division. In this
paradigm, template DNA-retaining and -excluding cells would be EdU-positive or -negative,
respectively (Fig 6E). We found that 12.5% of cells generated from Pax7 SCs were EdUnegative, suggesting that a subpopulation of Pax7SCs underwent co-segregation of template
DNA (Fig 6F). Notably, the EdU-negative daughter cells were primarily Pax7Lo SCs (Fig 6E).
Significantly, G-CSF treatment increased the percentage of template DNA co-segregation in
Pax7 SCs (Fig 6F), suggesting that G-CSF maintained Pax7Hi SCs by promoting the asymmetric
divisions.
As G-CSFR was recently reported to be asymmetrically distributed in about 20% of
activated Pax7 SCs (Hayashiji et al., 2015), we reasoned that the asymmetric distribution of GCSFR response to G-CSF mediated asymmetric division. Firstly, single fibers isolated from the
EDL muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice were treated with G-CSF for 48 hr and immunostained with
anti-G-CSFR (Fig 6G). Notably, G-CSF treatment significantly increased the percentage of
asymmetrically dividing Pax7 SCs, as characterized by the asymmetric distributions of GCSFR (Fig 6H).To further substantiate this observation, we calculated the percentage of EdU+/-

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

doublets with asymmetric distribution of G-CSFR. Indeed, the EdU+/- doublets exhibited a
lower percentage of G-CSFR+/+ cells with symmetrically distributed G-CSFR, and a
significantly higher percentage of G-CSFR-/+ cells with asymmetric distribution of G-CSFR
(Fig 6I and J). The frequency of asymmetric G-CSFR distribution was consistent with the cosegregation of template DNA. Together, these results demonstrate that G-CSF promotes the
asymmetric division of Pax7 SCs.
The G-CSF replenishes Pax7Hi cells by stimulating asymmetric division of Pax7Mi cells
Since reduced Pax7Hi cells in aged mice is correlated with fiber metabolism shift from
glycolytic to oxidative, we then test whether enhanced glycolytic fiber metabolism could
rejuvenate Pax7Hi cells in aged mice. As endurance exercise can significantly increase the
glycolytic activity of muscle fibers (Heath, Gavin et al., 1983), we examined percentage of
Pax7Hi SCs in TA muscles of aged mice in which glycolytic muscle metabolism was enhanced
by endurance exercise. As expected, exercise significantly augmented the glycolytic activity in
the TA muscles of aged mice compared to those of sedentary aged mice (Fig EV7A). Notably,
FACS analysis revealed that the percentage of Pax7Hi SC subpopulation was dramatically
increased in the TA muscles of exercised aged mice compared to sedentary aged mice (Fig 7A
and B). Most significantly, we found that the percentage of Pax7Hi SCs in the TA muscles of
exercised aged mice was replenished almost to the level seen in untrained young mice (Fig 7A
and B). These results indicate that enhanced glycolytic metabolism of myofiber rejuvenate
Pax7Hi cells in aged mice.
Given that exercise replenished Pax7Hi cells through enhanced glycolytic metabolism of
myofiber in aged mice (Fig 7A and B) and more interestingly, we also found that expression of
Csf3 was significantly reduced in TA muscles of aged mice and exercise significantly restored
Csf3 expression in the same fibers of aged mice (Fig EV7B). Based on those observations, it is
conceivable that exercise-induced G-CSF might functionally restore Pax7Hi cells in TA muscles
of aged mice. To test this, we subjected Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- and Pax7-nGFP WT mice to
endurance exercise. Indeed, exercise significantly augmented the Csf3 RNA levels of TA

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

muscles from both exercised Pax7-nGFP WT and Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice compared to those
of sedentary Pax7-nGFP WT and Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice (Fig EV7C). However, the
percentage of Pax7Hi SCs was only increased in the TA muscles of exercised Pax7-nGFP WT
mice, but not in those of exercised Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice (Fig7 C-E). Collectively, our
results reveal that muscle-derived G-CSF acts as a metabolic niche factor required for
maintaining the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in physiologically aged mice. These results indicate
that enhanced glycolytic metabolism of myofiber rejuvenate Pax7Hi cells in aged SCs by
regulating Csf3 expression.
Next, we asked from which subpopulations Pax7 SCs (Pax7Lo, Pax7Mi and Pax7Hi)
contribute to the replenishment of Pax7Hi SCs in aged mice after exercise. For this purpose, we
further sorted Pax7Mi from Pax7-nGFP mice, and performed single cell RNA-seq. We profiled
5212 Pax7Mi cells and the detectable genes ranged approximately from 1000 to 2000 in
individual cells. Then we combined the data of Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo (Fig 1A) with the data of
Pax7Mi and visualized the cells in two dimensions according to their expression profiles by tSNE projections. Our result showed that Pax7Mi cells are more closed to Pax7Hi cells (Fig 7F).
Heatmaps of SCs profiles revealed normalized expression of the top variable genes in each
subtype, and the expression pattern of Pax7Mi cells were similar with Pax7Hi cells (Fig 7G). Also,
the markers of Pax7Hi cells in Pax7Mi cells were higher than Pax7Lo cells (Fig EV7D). Hence,
we reasoned that both Pax7Hi and Pax7Mi cells response to G-CSF to undergo asymmetric
division. Consistently, we found that Pax7Mi SCs had more cells with asymmetric distribution
of G-CSFR, followed by the Pax7Hi subpopulation, and then the Pax7Lo cell subpopulation,
which had a very low percentage (Fig 7H and I).To further determine which cell
subpopulation(s) displayed asymmetric division in response to G-CSF, we used FACS to sort
Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi and Pax7Lo SCs and treated them with G-CSF, respectively. We found that 36%
of cells generated from Pax7Hi SCs and 10% of those generated from Pax7Mi SCs were EdUnegative, suggesting that most Pax7Hi SCs and some Pax7Mi SCs underwent co-segregation of
template DNA (Fig 7J), indicating G-CSF treatment increased the percentage of template DNA

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

co-segregation in both Pax7Hi and Pax7Mi SCs (Fig 7J). To further confirm these observations,
we used flow cytometry to analyze template DNA co-segregation. After the cells finished their
first cell division in vitro, ~56% of the Pax7Hi daughter cells were EdU+/BrdU+ and ~44% were
EdU-/BrdU+, whereas ~18% of the Pax7Mi generated cells were EdU-/BrdU+ (Fig EV7E). We
also found that G-CSF treatment increased the percentage of template DNA co-segregation in
both Pax7Hi and Pax7Mi SCs (Fig EV7E). As Pax7Hi SCs generate distinct daughter cell fates by
asymmetrically segregating template DNA strands to the stem cell (Rocheteau et al., 2012),
only the Pax7Hi cells themselves are not sufficient to enrich Pax7Hi cells. The remarkable
number of Pax7Mi SCs with asymmetric distribution of G-CSFR provides a molecular basis for
the G-CSF-mediated enrichment of Pax7Hi SCs, which are generated through the asymmetric
division of Pax7 SCs from the Pax7Mi SC subpopulation. Finally, we examined the signaling
pathway(s) involved in the G-CSF-mediated enrichment and maintenance of Pax7Hi SCs. As
G-CSF is known to activate the Stat3 signaling pathway in Pax7 SCs (Hara, Yuasa et al., 2011),
we tested whether G-CSF regulated Pax7Hi subpopulation through this pathway.
As reported, G-CSF activated Stat3 pathway and upregulated the downstream target genes
in Pax7 SCs, but the Stat3 inhibitor significantly blocked effects of G-CSF (Fig EV7F and G).
FACS-sorted Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi, and Pax7Lo SCs were further treated with G-CSF in the presence
or absence of the Stat3 inhibitor 5,15 DPP. G-CSF enriched the Pax7Hi cell subpopulations in
both Pax7Hi and Pax7Mi cell cultures, as indicated above, but treatment with the Stat3 inhibitor
significantly abolished this enrichment (Fig 7K). These data indicate that G-CSF enriches
Pax7Hi cells through the G-CSF-G-CSFR-Stat3 axis. Collectively, our results offer multiple
lines of experimental evidence showing that the G-CSF/G-CSFR/Stat3 axis is indispensably
required to establish Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in mice, and that it acts by promoting the
asymmetric division of Pax7SCs.

Discussion
Cell metabolism has been shown to intrinsically and cell-autonomously regulate cellular
functions in various types of cells, especially in cancer cells (Carey, Finley et al., 2015,
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Moussaieff, Rouleau et al., 2015, Ryall, Dell'Orso et al., 2015). However, it was not previously
known whether tissue metabolism plays an extrinsic and non-cell-autonomous role in
modulating cell functions in vivo. A recent in vitro study reported that stem cell functions are
modulated by the metabolic interplay between supporting Paneth cells and intestinal Lgr5+
crypt base columnar cell (Lgr5+CBCs) (Rodriguez-Colman, Schewe et al., 2017, Roper &
Yilmaz, 2017). Here, we used various mouse genetic models to show for the first time that
muscle fiber metabolism plays an in situ metabolic niche role in establishing and maintaining
Pax7 SC heterogeneity in adult and physiologically aged mice. Thus, we reveal that the local
metabolic activity of a tissue can provide in situ niche signaling to regulate stem cell functions
in vivo. To our knowledge, our findings provide the first evidence that a tissue metabolism per
se can act as a metabolic niche in regulating behaviors of stem cells during development and
aging in a living organism.
Skeletal muscle is the most abundant endocrine organ and exerts its functional roles by
secreting various factors (Pedersen & Febbraio, 2008, Pedersen & Febbraio, 2012). Muscle SCs
are located between the sarcolemma and the basal lamina of the muscle fibers, which provide
an immediate niche for the SCs by secreting different kinds of factors (Chakkalakal, Jones et
al., 2012). However, only a few of the niche factors have been identified. For example, FGF2
was an aged muscle fiber-released cytokine that acts locally as an extrinsic factor to regulate
muscle stem cell quiescence in aged mice (Chakkalakal et al., 2012). Actually, the muscle SCs
are directly associated with two types of metabolically different fibers: glycolytic fibers and
oxidative fibers. This locally metabolic environment of muscle fibers with different metabolic
activity has been considered as a metabolic stem cell niche; however, this metabolic niche
hypothesis has not been investigated experimentally. Using this unique metabolic system, we
herein report on identification and molecular characterization of the metabolic niche factor GCSF. We show that the G-CSF is highly secreted from glycolytic muscle fibers and its
expression is metabolically regulated by MyoD in muscle fibers. Functionally, the muscle fibersecreted G-CSF is required for establishing and maintaining the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in
adult and physiological aged mice. Mechanistically, the muscle fiber-released G-CSF promotes
the asymmetric division of Pax7Hi and Pax7Mi SCs by interacting with its receptor, G-CSFR, on
Pax7 SCs in mice. To our knowledge, this is the first identified metabolic niche factor which is
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

functionally required for regulating stem cell heterogeneity. The significance of our findings in
general is that we provide molecular mechanism to conceptually prove metabolic niche
hypothesis.
An unexpected finding of this study is the transcriptional activity of MyoD in mature muscle
in mice. MyoD has long been regarded only as a master transcription factor with critical roles
in controlling myogenic lineage specification during embryonic skeletal muscle development
and activation of Pax7 SCs in response to muscle injury in adult mice (Cornelison, Olwin et al.,
2000, Megeney, Kablar et al., 1996). Herein, we intriguingly found that MyoD predominately
expressed in glycolytic muscle and metabolically regulated transcription of muscle-secreted GCSF gene Csf3 in mature muscle. Mechanistically, we show that enhanced glycolytic
metabolism of myotube significantly enriched MyoD binding on Csf3 promoter but not on the
promoter of myogenic differentiation gene MyoG. These results for the first time reveal that
MyoD is a multifunctional transcription factor involved in regulating expression of either
myogenic genes or metabolic-regulated genes in mature muscle. A major question for future
studies is how the specificity of MyoD transcriptional activity is achieved in different biological
contexts. Better understanding of this question will be greatly facilitated by identification of
MyoD-interacting cofactors in various biological settings. Taken together, these findings
provide a framework to investigate the unanticipated and novel role of MyoD and examine the
broad function of this cell-lineage specific transcription factor.
Heterogeneity is one hallmark of adult stem cells. However, it remains unclear how this
heterogeneity is established and maintained during development and aging. In this report, using
single cell RNA seq, we are the first to demonstrate that Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo muscle stem cells
sorted based on the levels of Pax7 expression represent two distinct bona fide subpopulations
in mice and Pax7Mi cells were more similar to Pax7Hi cells. Most strikingly, our approaches in
this study allow us to reveal the dramatically decreased percentage of Pax7Hi SCs in the
glycolytic muscle fibers of physiologically aged mice (from 10% in adult mice to 2.7% in aged
mice). Aging causes a deterioration of muscle function and regeneration that most likely reflects
a decline in stem cell number and function. Pax7Hi SCs are characterized as quiescent SCs with
a high regenerative capacity, so the age-related reduction of Pax7Hi SCs could account for the
decline in muscle regeneration and repair in the aged mice. More remarkably, the reduction of
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation in the muscle fibers of aged mice can be rescued by the exerciseinduced up-regulation of G-CSF. A recent study showed that G-CSFR is asymmetrically
distributed in about 20% of activated Pax7 SCs (Hayashiji et al., 2015). Interestingly, we found
that the percentage of Pax7 SCs with asymmetrically distributed G-CSFR differed significantly
among the three Pax7 SC subpopulations; it was highest in Pax7Mi, followed by Pax7Hi, and
then Pax7Lo. In addition, we also found that Pax7Mi cells are very similar to Pax7Hi cells based
on the gene expression signatures from single cell RNA sequencing. It therefore seems logical
to propose a model in which Pax7Mi SCs might represent an intermediate population of
transitionally amplified Pax7 SCs that function as a reserve of Pax7 SCs from which active SCs
are replenished, protecting the muscle stem cells from becoming exhausted under homeostasis
and particularly following injury or during aging. Taken together our findings not only decipher
a molecular mechanism that contributes to maintaining quiescent Pax7Hi SCs in aged mice, but
also suggest a subpopulation-based targeting strategy for treating age-related muscle loss (e.g.,
sarcopenia) or muscular dystrophy.

Materials and Methods
Mouse lines and animal care
Pax7-nGFP Tg mice were kindly gifted by Dr. Shahragim Tajbakhsh (Institute Pasteur,
France). The Pax7-nGFP mice used throughout of this study were generated by crossing the
C57BL/6J mice with the Pax7-nGFP Tg mice (C57BL6:SJL/J). MCK-PPARβ transgenic (TG)
mice were kindly gifted by Dr. Zhenji Gan (Nanjing University, China). Csf3r-/- (#017838) and
MyoD-/- (#002523) mice were obtained from the Jackson Laboratory. Mice were housed in an
animal facility and given free access to water and standard rodent chow. All animal procedures
were approved by the Animal Ethics Committee of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing
(China).
Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS)
Pax7 SCs from the skeletal muscles of Pax7-nGFP, Pax7-nGFP;MCK-PPARβ TG, and
Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/-mice were fluorescently sorted as previously described (Wu et al., 2015).
Briefly, mononuclear muscle-derived cells were isolated from the tibialis anterior (TA) and
soleus (Sol) muscles of Pax7-nGFP reporter mice (3 month and 18 month ) by dispase and
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

collagenase digestion, filtered through 70-µm and 40-µm cell strainers, and directly sorted with
a BD Aria II Cell Sorting System. Three subpopulations of Pax7 SCs were sorted from Pax7nGFP reporter mice by FACS based on intensity of GFP expression levels as previously
described (Rocheteau et al., 2012). Briefly, Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo two subpopulations were sorted
by FACS at opposite ends of the spectrum of GFP expression levels. They each corresponded
to 10% of the total population and named as Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo, respectively. Rest of 80% of
SC in the middle were isolated and designated as Pax7Mi.

To sort immune cells from TA and Sol muscles, single-cell suspensions were prepared using
dispase and collagenase, blocked with goat serum for 10 min, and co-incubated with CD11bPECy7 (BD, 561098) and Ly-6G-FITC (BD, 561105) in DMEM supplemented with 2% FBS
for 15 min at 4°C. The immunostained cells were briefly washed, passed through a 40-μm nylon
mesh (Falcon), suspended at 103-107 cells/ml, and further separated with the BD Aria II. The
sorting gates were strictly defined on the basis of mono-antibody-stained control cells and the
forward- and side-scatter patterns obtained from the cells of interest in preliminary tests.
Single cell RNA Seq using the 10x Genomics Chromium Platform
scRNA-seq libraries were prepared with the Single Cell 30 Reagent Kit as instruction from
User Guide v2 (10x Genomics). Cellular suspensions of Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi and Pax7Lo were loaded
on a Chromium Controller instrument (10x Genomics) to generate single-cell gel bead-in
emulsions (GEMs), respectively. GEM-reverse transcriptions (GEM-RTs) were performed in a
Veriti 96-well thermal cycler (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After RT, GEMs were harvested and
the cDNAs were amplified and cleaned up with the SPRIselect Reagent Kit (Beckman Coulter).
Indexed sequencing libraries were constructed using the Chromium Single-Cell 30 Library Kit
(10x Genomics) for enzymatic fragmentation, end-repair, A-tailing, adaptor ligation, ligation
cleanup, sample index PCR, and PCR cleanup. Sequencing libraries were loaded on a
HiSeqX10 (Illumina). Reads were aligned to mm10 reference assembly. Primary assessment
with this software for the Pax7Hi sample reported 1469 cell-barcodes with 4466 median unique
molecular identifiers (UMIs, transcripts) per cell and 1496 median genes per cell sequenced to
96.7% sequencing saturation with 313,083 mean reads per cell. Primary assessment with this
software for the Pax7Mi sample reported 5859 cell-barcodes with 3465 median unique
molecular identifiers (UMIs, transcripts) per cell and 1260 median genes per cell sequenced to
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

94.9% sequencing saturation with 354,032 mean reads per cell. Primary assessment with this
software for the Pax7Lo sample reported 2982 cell-barcodes with 4317 median unique molecular
identifiers (UMIs, transcripts) per cell and 1478 median genes per cell sequenced to 97.1%
sequencing saturation with 300,302 mean reads per cell.
Statistical method of Single cell RNA Seq
We used Cell Ranger version 1.3.1 (10x Genomics) to process raw sequencing data and
Seurat suite version 2.0.0 for downstream analysis. The Seurat R package were used for graphbased clustering and visualizations, all functions mentioned were from this package or the
standard R version 3.4.2 package unless otherwise noted and were used with the default
parameters unless otherwise noted. Initially, we merged the three libraries by Seurat and we
analyzed only cells (unique barcodes) that passed quality control processing (above) and
expressed at least 500 genes and only genes that were expressed in at least 3 cells. We also
removed cells with greater than 1% mitochondrial genes. We applied library-size normalization
to each cell with NormalizeData. Normalized expression for gene i in cell j was calculated by
taking the natural log of the UMI counts for gene i in cell j divided by the total UMI counts in
cell j multiplied by 10,000 and added to 1. To reduce the influence of variability in the number
of UMIs, mitochondrial gene expression between cells on the clustering, we used the ScaleData
function to linearly regress out these sources of variation before scaling and centering the data
for dimensionality reduction. Principle component analysis was run using RunPCA on the
variable genes calculated with FindVariableGenes ( x = (0.1,6), y = (0.5, 15) and then extended
to the full dataset with ProjectPCA. Based on the PCElbowPlot result we decided to use 1 and
10 principle components (PCs) for the clustering of cells. We ran FindClusters to apply shared
nearest neighbor (SNN) graph-based clustering to each sample (0.6).
RNA seq
Total RNA was isolated from TA muscle of young (3-month-old) and aged (18-month-old)
mice with Trizol reagent (Invitrogen). Sequencing libraries were generated using NEBNext
super speed RNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina following the manufacturer’s recommendations.
Raw-sequencing data were mapped to the mouse genome mm10 assembly using the HISAT
with default parameters. DEGSeq45 was used to calculate the read coverage for each gene.
Differentially expressed genes were filtered using a change greater than twofold and p-value
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(0.05) as a criterion for differential expression. Differentially expressed genes were validated
using the iQ5 Multicolor Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad). The primer sequences
were

designed

using

DNAMAN.

GAGCACTCGGCTAATCGAAC;

MyoD-(s)

GGTCTGGGTTCCCTGTTCT;
CCCTTCCCTGCCTGTTCC;

Pax7-(s)

CCGTGTTTCTCATGGTTGTG ， (as)
CAACGCCATCCGCTACAT,

MyoG-(s)-CCATTCACATAAGGCTAACAC,
Csf3-(s)-AGTGCACTATGGTCAGGACGAG

(as)
(as)-

，

(as)

GGATCTTCCTCACTTGCTCCA;

Nd1-(s)

CATACCCCCGATTCCGCTAC,

(as)

GTTTGAGGGGGAATGCTGGA;

Co3-(s)

ACCAATGATGGCGCGATGTA,

(as)

GGCTGGAGTGGTAAAAGGCT;

Co2-(s)

CCGTCTGAACTATCCTGCCC,

(as)

GAGGGATCGTTGACCTCGTC;
CTCTGCCACTCCAGTCTGC;

Ptprb-(s)
Pvalb-(s)

AGGAGTCTGCAGCAGCAAAGG;

Rps28-(s)

GCTGCCACGGCCCTT;
ACACTGCAGCGCTGGTCATA,
GGTGACGTGCTCACCCTATT,

(as)
(as)
(as)

CCAGAACCCAGCTGCAAGAT.
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
ChIP analyses were performed on chromatin extracts from myotube cultured with or without
pyruvate according to the manufacturer’s standard protocol (Millipore, Cat. #17-610) using
antibodies against MyoD (Santa Cruz, SC-760). Briefly, cells were lysed in RIPA buffer (PBS,
1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS) and centrifuged at 800 × g for 5 min. The
chromatin fraction was sheared by sonication in 1.5 ml siliconized Eppendorf tubes. The
resulting sheared chromatin samples were cleared for 1 hr, immunoprecipitated overnight, and
washed in buffer I (20 mM Tris HCl [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, 1%
Triton X-100), buffer II (20 mM TrisHCl [pH 8.0], 500 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS,
1% Triton X-100), buffer III (10 mM TrisHCl [pH 8.0], 250 mM LiCl, 1% NP- 40; 1% sodium
deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA), and Tris-EDTA (pH 8.0). All washes were performed at 4℃ for
5 min. Finally, crosslinking was reversed in elution buffer (100 mM sodium bicarbonate
[NaHCO3], 1% SDS) at 65℃ overnight. The resulting DNA were subjected to library
construction for sequencing.
Analysis of ChIP sequencing (ChIP-Seq)
ChIP-Seq data were obtained using an Illumina HiSeq 2000, with samples de-multiplexed
via the Illumina pipeline, and mapped to the mouse genome (UCSC genome browser, mm9
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

version) using the Bowtie algorithm. ChIP-Seq data generated from mock DNA
immunoprecipitates (input DNA) were used against the sample data in calling enriched regions
and to control for the false-positive detection rate (FDR). MyoD peaks were called using MACS
version 1.4.1, with p-value set to 10-5 for enrichment against the input genomic DNA,
background reads were shuffled and randomly down sampled to adjust for the difference in
read coverage between samples. Downstream analyses to generate intensity profile around the
transcriptional start site (TSS), and correlative analysis with RNA-Seq data was completed
using custom written codes in MATLAB. Fold enrichment was also quantified using qRT–PCR.
The

primer

sequences

were

designed

using

DNAMAN.

G-CSF

Primer

1-(s)

ATCACAAATGAAGGGCAGAG, (as) CAAGACTGCTTCTGTCTCTCC; G-CSF Primer 2(s) ATGAGCAGAGATCGTCGGGA, (as) CACATTACCTCGATGTCGTG; G-CSF Primer 3(s) TGTCCTCTCAAGCAGAGGCTAT, (as) GATGTTGAGGCATACCTGATG; G-CSF
Primer 4-(s) CGCAAGATGTCTATCTG, (as) CCATGCCCGGCGAGATTTAATTC; G-CSF
Primer 5-(s) CTTGTGCAGCTCATCAAGGC, (as) GTGGTGGGGATCTTTTGCTG; G-CSF
Primer 6-(s) GCTACATTCTGAACGCTGCC, (as) GCCTTGATGAGCTGCACAAG.
SDH and GPDH staining
For measurement of succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) activity, muscles were harvested and
serial tissue cross-sections (10-µm) were cut at -20°C and adhered to glass coverslips. The
coverslips were inverted and placed over a microscope slide reaction chamber. The tissue was
first incubated in the dark at 23°C in a substrate-free blank solution consisting of 1 mM sodium
azide, 1 mM l-methoxyphenazinemethosulfate (MPMS), 1.5 mM NBT, and 5 mM EDTA in
100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.6). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 10 min to
allow the nonspecific staining to plateau. The blank was then replaced with a substrate solution
consisting of the above reagents plus 48 mM succinic acid. Images were captured every 3times
for 10 min. For measurement of α-glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (α-GPDH) activity, serial
sections (14-µm) were cut, adhered to glass coverslips, and distributed between two Coplin jars
kept at -20°C. A blank solution consisting of 1 mM sodium azide, 1 mM MPMS, and 1.2 mM
NBT in 100 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4, 37ºC) was added to one jar while a solution
of the above reagents plus 9.3 mM α-glycerophosphate was introduced into the other for the
substrate reaction. The tissue sections were incubated in the dark for 24 min at 37°C, the
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

reactions were stopped by extensive rinsing with distilled water. The images were captured
using a microscope (Olympus).
Isolation and staining of single myofibers
Single myofibers were isolated from the EDL muscles of 3 month Pax7-nGFP mice by
digestion with collagenase I (Sigma, C-0130), as previously described (Wu et al., 2015). Briefly,
each muscle sample was incubated in 3 ml of 0.2% collagenase I in serum-free DMEM in a
shaking water bath at 37°C for 45-60 min. Digestion was considered complete when the muscle
looked less defined and slightly swollen, with hair-like single fibers flowing away from the
edges. The digested muscles were placed in a Petri dish, and myofibers were isolated under a
microscope. Single fibers were placed in six-well plates pre-coated with horse serum, and then
given 2 ml/well of fiber medium (DMEM supplemented with 20% FBS, 0.5% chick embryo
extract, 10 pg/ml G-CSF, and penicillin-streptomycin). The fibers were cultured for 48hr at
37°C in a 5% CO2 atmosphere, fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde, and stained for G-CSFR. The
fibers were then washed with PBS containing 0.1% BSA and incubated for 2 hr with
fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibodies (Zhongshanjinqiao Corporation) and Hoechst or
DAPI. For statistical analyses, the cells with symmetric and asymmetric distribution of G-CSFR
were counted in at least 100 doublets per mouse. Five mice were assayed in each set of
experiments.
Immunofluorescence
FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs were seeded on collagen-coated glass slides in 24-well plates
(2104 cells/cm2) in growth medium (F-10 containing 20% FBS) for 24 hr, fixed with 4%
formaldehyde for 5 min, permeabilized in 0.1% Triton-X100 in PBS for 15 min at room
temperature, and then blocked with 3% bovine serum albumin for 30 min. For BrdU
immunostaining, the cells were unmasked with 2 N HCl for 20 min at room temperature and
neutralized with 0.1 M sodium tetraborate. The cells were incubated with primary antibodies
against MyoD (Santa Cruz, SC-760), G-CSFR (Santa Cruz, SC-9173), EdU (Invitrogen,
C10640) and BrdU (Abcam, ab6326) overnight at 4ºC. The cells were then washed with PBS
containing 0.1% BSA and incubated for 2 hr with fluorescein-conjugated secondary antibodies
(Zhongshanjinqiao Corporation) and Hoechst or DAPI. After several washes with PBS, the
cells were examined under a fluorescence microscope (Olympus).
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Western blot analysis
TA and Sol muscles from C57BL/6 mice were homogenized in a buffer containing 50 mM
Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Nonidet P40, and protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The
muscle homogenates were clarified by centrifugation at 12,000 × g for 10 min. Total proteins
(40 µg) were resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to a polyvinylidene fluoride membrane, and
immunoblotted with primary antibodies against MyoD (Santa Cruz, SC-760) and -tubulin
(Santa Cruz, SC-5274) overnight at 4ºC. For Stat3 detection, the FACS-sorted Pax7 SCs were
treated with G-CSF (10 pg/ml) in presence or absence of Stat3 inhibitor, 5,15 DPP (50 μM,
Sigma-Aldrich), in growth medium for 48 hr. Subsequently, the nuclear and cytoplasmic
fractions were further isolated from the treated SCs with the kit (Thermo, 78835). The nuclear
(10 µg) and cytoplasmic protein (15 µg) were resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to a
polyvinylidene fluoride membrane, and immunoblotted with primary antibodies against Stat3
(Abcam, ab19352), p-Stat3 (CST, 9154), histone H3 (Abcam, ab1791) and GAPDH (Millipore,
Mab374). Membranes were washed for 30 min, incubated with horseradish peroxidaseconjugated secondary antibodies (Zhongshanjinqiao Corporation) for 1 hr at room temperature,
and washed for 30 min. Each membrane was then placed into Detection Solution (Thermo),
incubated for 1 min at room temperature, and exposed to X-ray film.
RNA extraction and qRT-PCR
Total RNA was extracted from skeletal muscles using the TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) and
reverse transcribed with reverse transcriptase (Fermentas). Real-time quantitative PCR
analyses were performed in triplicate using the Fast Eva Green qPCR Master Mix (BioRad).
GAPDH was used as an internal control for qRT-PCR analyses.
Treadmill
Young (3-month-old) and aged (18-month-old) Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice, their wild-type
littermates (Pax7-nGFP) were subjected to treadmill exercise using an Exer3/6 (Columbus
Instruments). Mice were acclimated to treadmill running four times (every other day) before
the test. Each mouse ran on the treadmill at 20°downhill, starting at a speed of 10 cm/s. After
3 min, the speed was increased by 2 cm/s to a final speed of 20 cm/s. Then the mice were
allowed to run 25 min. After exercise training, the mice were sampled for purification and
analysis of Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo SCs.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Cell culture and treatments
FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs were cultured in F-10 medium containing 20% FBS and 2.5 ng/ml
bFGF (Invitrogen) in the presence or absence of G-CSF (10 pg/ml, Santa Cruz) at 37°C in a 5%
CO2 atmosphere. Fibroblasts (C3H-10T1/2, ATCC) were cultured in DMEM (Gibco)
supplemented with 4.5 g/L glucose, 10% FBS, and 1% penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in a 5%
CO2 atmosphere. C2C12 cells (ATCC) were cultured in growth medium consisting of DMEM
supplemented with 20% FBS and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. At 70–80% confluence, the
C2C12 cells were switched to differentiation medium (DMEM with 2% horse serum). After 5
days of differentiation, the C2C12 myotubes were cultured in differentiation medium with or
without pyruvate for 24 hr. For MyoD overexpression or knockdown, C2C12 myotubes were
transiently transfected with pEGFPN1-MyoD or LV-sh-MyoD using Lipofectamine2000
(Invitrogen). The empty vector served as the negative control (NC).
Luciferase reporter assay
To test promoter activity, a 2-kb sequence upstream of the Csf3 gene was retrieved from the
University of California Santa Cruz genome browser and cloned into the pGL3 Basic vector
carrying the firefly luciferase gene (Promega). The generated pGL3-G-CSF-2k was used to
transfect C3H-10T1/2 cells or C2C12 myotubes in differentiation medium with or without
pyruvate. Empty pGL-3 vector was used as a negative control, and co-transfection with a
Renilla luciferase plasmid (Promega) served as a transfection control. The results are expressed
as the activity of firefly luciferase relative to that of Renilla luciferase. For promoter reporter
gene assays in vivo, mouse TA muscles were injected with 20 μg of pGL3-G-CSF-2k plasmid
DNA with electroporation. Briefly, plate electrodes were positioned on each side of the leg over
the TA muscle, in contact with the skin. TA muscles were stimulated eight times (parameters:
100 V, duration 20 ms, interval 100 ms) with a stimulator (EM830, BTX). The same amount of
empty pGL3 Basic vector served as a negative control. 5μg of Renilla luciferase plasmid were
co-injected as a normalization control. Luciferase activity assays were performed with
homogenates of TA muscle 24 hr after electroporation.
Time-lapse imaging
Sorted Pax7 SCs or isolated single fibers from Pax7-nGFP mice were plated on a 24-well
plate pre-coated with matrigel. After incubation overnight, the cells were filmed with a Real26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Time Cell History Recorder (JuLi stage, NanoEnTek Inc., Korea) inside an incubator. Images
were taken every 15 min using the bright and GFP channels. The raw data were transformed
and were presented as a video.
Template DNA strand segregation (TDSS)
Template DNA strand segregation was analyzed as previously reported (Rocheteau et al.,
2012). Briefly, the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice (3month) were injured by intramuscular
injection of cardiotoxin (CTX; 50 μl of 10-μM CTX per TA muscle). Mice were injected
intraperitoneally 3 days post injury with EdU (five times, 200 mg/injection, 8 hr apart) followed
by injection of BrdU (twice, 8 hr apart). Then Pax7 SCs were sorted, cultured in DMEM for a
further 24 hr, and immunostained with anti-BrdU (1:300, Abcam) and EdU (1:300, Invitrogen).
Measurement of NAD
NAD+ and NADH were determined using commercially available kits (Biovision, Milpitas)
according to the provider’s instructions.
Statistical analysis
Data are presented as means +s.e.m. For statistical comparisons of two conditions, the twotail Student’s t-test was used. Comparisons of multiple groups were made using a 1- or 2-way
ANOVA. All experiments were repeated at least 3 times, and representative experiments are
shown. Statistical analysis was performed in GraphPad Prism.
Data availability
Related data were submitted to GEO with the accession number GSE134253.
Acknowledgments
We greatly thank Yunning Geng and Huimin Liao from Bio-reach Co., Ltd., for their
technical support of our time-pulse imaging experiments, and Dr. Shahragim Tajbakhsh and Dr.
Zhenji Gan for providing the Pax7-nGFP mice and PPARβ transgenic mice. This work was
supported by grants from the National Basic Research Program of China (2015CB943103,
2016YFA0100703), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91540206, 31471289,
31471377), and the CAMS Initiative for Innovative Medicine (2016-I2M-1-017).
Author contributions
DZ conceived the project, coordinated the study, and wrote the paper. HL designed and
performed the experiments. QC performed single cell RNA library construction and ChIP DNA
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

library construction. CL performed the screening of muscle-secreted factors. RZ and YXZ
performed the luciferase reporter gene assays. QZ performed analysis of SCs from aged Pax7nGFP mice. WT gave constructive discussion and helped to draft the manuscript. YZ helped
draft the figure legends and experimental procedures of the manuscript. All authors approved
the final version of the manuscript.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
Carey BW, Finley LW, Cross JR, Allis CD, Thompson CB (2015) Intracellular alpha-ketoglutarate
maintains the pluripotency of embryonic stem cells. Nature 518: 413-6
Chakkalakal JV, Jones KM, Basson MA, Brack AS (2012) The aged niche disrupts muscle stem cell
quiescence. Nature 490: 355-60
Chen WW, Freinkman E, Wang T, Birsoy K, Sabatini DM (2016) Absolute Quantification of Matrix
Metabolites Reveals the Dynamics of Mitochondrial Metabolism. Cell 166: 1324-1337 e11
Collins CA, Olsen I, Zammit PS, Heslop L, Petrie A, Partridge TA, Morgan JE (2005) Stem cell function,
self-renewal, and behavioral heterogeneity of cells from the adult muscle satellite cell niche. Cell 122:
289-301
Conboy IM, Conboy MJ, Smythe GM, Rando TA (2003) Notch-mediated restoration of regenerative
potential to aged muscle. Science 302: 1575-7
Cornelison DD, Olwin BB, Rudnicki MA, Wold BJ (2000) MyoD(-/-) satellite cells in single-fiber
culture are differentiation defective and MRF4 deficient. Dev Biol 224: 122-37
Feldman JL, Stockdale FE (1991) Skeletal muscle satellite cell diversity: satellite cells form fibers of
different types in cell culture. Dev Biol 143: 320-34
Gan Z, Rumsey J, Hazen BC, Lai L, Leone TC, Vega RB, Xie H, Conley KE, Auwerx J, Smith SR,
Olson EN, Kralli A, Kelly DP (2013) Nuclear receptor/microRNA circuitry links muscle fiber type to
energy metabolism. The Journal of clinical investigation 123: 2564-75
Hara M, Yuasa S, Shimoji K, Onizuka T, Hayashiji N, Ohno Y, Arai T, Hattori F, Kaneda R, Kimura K,
Makino S, Sano M, Fukuda K (2011) G-CSF influences mouse skeletal muscle development and
regeneration by stimulating myoblast proliferation. The Journal of experimental medicine 208: 715-27
Hayashiji N, Yuasa S, Miyagoe-Suzuki Y, Hara M, Ito N, Hashimoto H, Kusumoto D, Seki T, Tohyama
S, Kodaira M, Kunitomi A, Kashimura S, Takei M, Saito Y, Okata S, Egashira T, Endo J, Sasaoka T,
Takeda S, Fukuda K (2015) G-CSF supports long-term muscle regeneration in mouse models of
muscular dystrophy. Nat Commun 6: 6745
Heath GW, Gavin JR, 3rd, Hinderliter JM, Hagberg JM, Bloomfield SA, Holloszy JO (1983) Effects of
exercise and lack of exercise on glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity. J Appl Physiol Respir Environ
Exerc Physiol 55: 512-7
Holloszy JO, Chen M, Cartee GD, Young JC (1991) Skeletal muscle atrophy in old rats: differential
changes in the three fiber types. Mech Ageing Dev 60: 199-213
Kuang S, Kuroda K, Le Grand F, Rudnicki MA (2007) Asymmetric self-renewal and commitment of
satellite stem cells in muscle. Cell 129: 999-1010
Lagord C, Soulet L, Bonavaud S, Bassaglia Y, Rey C, Barlovatz-Meimon G, Gautron J, Martelly I (1998)
Differential myogenicity of satellite cells isolated from extensor digitorum longus (EDL) and soleus rat
muscles revealed in vitro. Cell Tissue Res 291: 455-68
Megeney LA, Kablar B, Garrett K, Anderson JE, Rudnicki MA (1996) MyoD is required for myogenic
stem cell function in adult skeletal muscle. Genes Dev 10: 1173-83
Molofsky AV, Slutsky SG, Joseph NM, He S, Pardal R, Krishnamurthy J, Sharpless NE, Morrison SJ
(2006) Increasing p16INK4a expression decreases forebrain progenitors and neurogenesis during ageing.
Nature 443: 448-52
Moussaieff A, Rouleau M, Kitsberg D, Cohen M, Levy G, Barasch D, Nemirovski A, Shen-Orr S,
Laevsky I, Amit M, Bomze D, Elena-Herrmann B, Scherf T, Nissim-Rafinia M, Kempa S, ItskovitzEldor J, Meshorer E, Aberdam D, Nahmias Y (2015) Glycolysis-mediated changes in acetyl-CoA and

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

histone acetylation control the early differentiation of embryonic stem cells. Cell Metab 21: 392-402
Nishimura EK, Granter SR, Fisher DE (2005) Mechanisms of hair graying: incomplete melanocyte stem
cell maintenance in the niche. Science 307: 720-4
Pedersen BK, Febbraio MA (2008) Muscle as an endocrine organ: focus on muscle-derived interleukin6. Physiological reviews 88: 1379-406
Pedersen BK, Febbraio MA (2012) Muscles, exercise and obesity: skeletal muscle as a secretory organ.
Nature reviews Endocrinology 8: 457-65
Rando TA (2006) Stem cells, ageing and the quest for immortality. Nature 441: 1080-6
Rocheteau P, Gayraud-Morel B, Siegl-Cachedenier I, Blasco MA, Tajbakhsh S (2012) A subpopulation
of adult skeletal muscle stem cells retains all template DNA strands after cell division. Cell 148: 112-25
Rodriguez-Colman MJ, Schewe M, Meerlo M, Stigter E, Gerrits J, Pras-Raves M, Sacchetti A, Hornsveld
M, Oost KC, Snippert HJ, Verhoeven-Duif N, Fodde R, Burgering BM (2017) Interplay between
metabolic identities in the intestinal crypt supports stem cell function. Nature 543: 424-427
Roper J, Yilmaz OH (2017) Metabolic Teamwork in the Stem Cell Niche. Cell Metab 25: 993-994
Rossi MA, Mash DC, deToledo-Morrell L (2005) Spatial memory in aged rats is related to PKCgammadependent G-protein coupling of the M1 receptor. Neurobiol Aging 26: 53-68
Ryall JG, Dell'Orso S, Derfoul A, Juan A, Zare H, Feng X, Clermont D, Koulnis M, Gutierrez-Cruz G,
Fulco M, Sartorelli V (2015) The NAD(+)-dependent SIRT1 deacetylase translates a metabolic switch
into regulatory epigenetics in skeletal muscle stem cells. Cell Stem Cell 16: 171-83
Sambasivan R, Yao R, Kissenpfennig A, Van Wittenberghe L, Paldi A, Gayraud-Morel B, Guenou H,
Malissen B, Tajbakhsh S, Galy A (2011) Pax7-expressing satellite cells are indispensable for adult
skeletal muscle regeneration. Development 138: 3647-56
Schiaffino S, Reggiani C (2011) Fiber types in mammalian skeletal muscles. Physiological reviews 91:
1447-531
Schofield R (1978) The relationship between the spleen colony-forming cell and the haemopoietic stem
cell. Blood cells 4: 7-25
Seale P, Sabourin LA, Girgis-Gabardo A, Mansouri A, Gruss P, Rudnicki MA (2000) Pax7 is required
for the specification of myogenic satellite cells. Cell 102: 777-86
Troy A, Cadwallader AB, Fedorov Y, Tyner K, Tanaka KK, Olwin BB (2012) Coordination of satellite
cell activation and self-renewal by Par-complex-dependent asymmetric activation of p38alpha/beta
MAPK. Cell stem cell 11: 541-53
von Maltzahn J, Jones AE, Parks RJ, Rudnicki MA (2013) Pax7 is critical for the normal function of
satellite cells in adult skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110: 16474-9
Wilson A, Laurenti E, Oser G, van der Wath RC, Blanco-Bose W, Jaworski M, Offner S, Dunant CF,
Eshkind L, Bockamp E, Lio P, Macdonald HR, Trumpp A (2008) Hematopoietic stem cells reversibly
switch from dormancy to self-renewal during homeostasis and repair. Cell 135: 1118-29
Wu R, Li H, Zhai L, Zou X, Meng J, Zhong R, Li C, Wang H, Zhang Y, Zhu D (2015) MicroRNA-431
accelerates muscle regeneration and ameliorates muscular dystrophy by targeting Pax7 in mice. Nat
Commun 6: 7713
Xie T, Spradling AC (2000) A niche maintaining germ line stem cells in the Drosophila ovary. Science
290: 328-30

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 1. Transcriptional profile of Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells by single cell RNA seq.
A Two-dimensional (2D) visualization of single-cell profiles inferred from RNA-seq data for Pax7Hi and
Pax7Lo cells sorted from the TA muscle of young (3-month-old) Pax7-nGFP mice. Each point is a single
cell colored by cluster assignment.
B Heatmaps of normalized genes show Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo by top genes (columns) for individual cells
(rows).
31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C Differentially expressed genes between Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells in heatmap view. Genes were labeled
with the molecular function, as indicated.
D Expression patterns of mt-Nd1, mt-Co3, mt-Co2 and mt-Atp6 were visualized by t-SNE plots.
E Top unique expressed genes in Pax7Hi cells were visualized by t-SNE plots.
F Top unique expressed genes in Pax7Lo cells were visualized by t-SNE plots.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 2．Reduced Pax7Hi cells in aged mice.
A Representative FACS profiles of Pax7 SCs from the TA muscles of aged (18-month-old) and young (3month-old) Pax7-nGFP mice.
B The percentages of Pax7Hi SCs in (A) were calculated. n = 5 for each group. *p< 0.05. Unpaired twosided t-test.
C Representative overall profiles of the Pax7 SCs described in (A).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

D Relative expressions of molecular markers for stemness and differentiation in FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs
from the TA muscles of aged and young Pax7-nGFP mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
E Relative expression of molecular markers for Pax7Hi cells and Pax7Lo cells in FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs
from the TA muscles of aged and young Pax7-nGFP mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
F Representative images of MyoD immunostaining (red) for FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs cultured in growth
medium (GM) for 18 hr. DAPI was used to visualize nuclei (blue). Scale bar represents 20 µm.
G The percentages of MyoD-positive cells in (F) were calculated from 3 independent experiments. *p<
0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
H Volcano plot displayed the differentially expressed genes between aged and young TA muscles. Each
point represents the log2FoldChange and log10(padj) from three independent biological replicates. Red is
upregulated genes in aged muscle compared to young one. Green is downregulated genes in aged
muscle compared to young one. Blue represents genes with no change between aged and young muscle.
I,J Gene ontology (GO) analyses of the differentially expressed genes between aged and young TA
muscle were shown as biological process (BP). The enriched GO terms for genes with high expression in
aged or young TA muscle were shown in (I) and (J), respectively. “Count” stand for the number of genes
enriched in the indicated GO term. The differentially expressed genes between aged and young TA muscle
were identified with cutoff (fold change > 1.5, padj< 0.05).

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 3. Glycolytic metabolism of myofiber associates with Pax7Hi SC subpopulation.
A Representative FACS profiles of Pax7 SCs sorted from Sol or TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice. GFP,
green fluorescence protein (488 channel); PE, phycoerythrin (594 channel).
B Average percentages of Pax7Hi SC subpopulations obtained from 3 independent FACS experiments,
performed as described in panel (A). *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
C Representative FACS profiles of total Pax7 SCs sorted from the Sol or TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice.
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

GFP, green fluorescence protein (488 channel).
D Relative expression of molecular markers for stemness and differentiation in FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs
from the TA and Sol muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05. **p< 0.01.
***p< 0.001. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
E Relative expression of molecular markers in Pax7Hi cells and Pax7Lo cells of FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs
from the TA and Sol muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05. **p< 0.01.
***p< 0.001. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
F Representative images of MyoD immunostaining (red) for FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs cultured in growth
medium (GM) for 18 hr. DAPI was used to visualize nuclei (blue). Scale bar represents 20 µm.
G The percentages of MyoD-positive cells in (F) were calculated from three independent experiments.
H Average percentages of Pax7Hi SC subpopulations in TA and Sol muscle from 3 weeks and 10 weeks
Pax7-nGFP mice. Data were obtained from 3 independent FACS experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired twosided t-test.
I Representative FACS profiles of total Pax7 SCs sorted from the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP;MCK-PPARβ
transgenic (TG) and Pax7-nGFP wild-type (WT) littermates. GFP, green fluorescence protein (488
channel).
J The percentages of Pax7Hi SCs in (I) were calculated from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
K Representative FACS profiles of total Pax7 SCs sorted from the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP;MCKPPARβ transgenic (TG) and Pax7-nGFP wild-type (WT) littermates. GFP, green fluorescence protein (488
channel). *p< 0.05. **p< 0.01. ***p< 0.001. Unpaired two-sided t-test.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 4. Muscle-released G-CSF is a Pax7 SC niche factor required for Pax7Hi SCs.
A Relative expression of Csf3 gene in TA muscles from young (3-month-old) and aged (18-month-old)
C57BL/6 mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
B Relative expression of Csf3 gene in myofibers isolated from TA and Sol muscles were determined by
qRT-PCR. n = 5. **p< 0.01. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
C Relative expression of Csf3 gene in TA muscles from Pax7-nGFP;MCK-PPARβ-TG and Pax7-nGFP
WT mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. **p< 0.01. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
D Relative expression of Csf3 gene in isolated single fiber from Sol muscle and EDL muscle were
determined by qRT-PCR, each dot represent one single myofiber. n=25 in Sol group, n=23 in TA group.
*p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

E Representative FACS profile of Pax7 SCs treated with G-CSF in GM for 48 hr. Pax7 SCs were sorted
from Pax7-nGFP WT and Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/-, respectively. PBS served as a negative control (NC).
F Average percentages of Pax7Hi SC subpopulations obtained from 3 independent FACS experiments,
performed as described in panel (E). *p< 0.05. 2-way ANOVA.
G Representative FACS profiles of Pax7 SCs from the TA muscles of 10-week-old Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- or
Pax7-nGFP WT mice.
H The percentages of Pax7Hi SCs in (G) were calculated. n = 3 for each genotype. *p< 0.05. Unpaired
two-sided t-test.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 5. Expression of Csf3gene is metabolically regulated by MyoD in muscle cells.
A Relative expression of Csf3 and MyoD genes in C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or without
pyruvate, as determined by qRT-PCR. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
B Relative expression of Csf3 gene in TA muscles from MyoD-/- mice and WT littermates were determined
by qRT-PCR. n = 5 for each genotype. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
C Relative Csf3 promoter activities in C2C12 myotubes overexpressing MyoD were measured by dual
luciferase assay. Empty vector served as a negative control (NC). Data were obtained from 3 independent
experiments. **p< 0.01. 2-way ANOVA.
D Relative Csf3 promoter activities in the TA muscles of MyoD-/- and WT littermates were measured by
39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dual luciferase assay. n=3 for each genotype. *p< 0.05, **p< 0.01. 1-way ANOVA.
E Relative Csf3 promoter activities in MyoD-knockdown C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or
without pyruvate. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05, **p< 0.01. 2-way ANOVA.
F Relative activities of truncated Csf3 promoters in C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or without
pyruvate. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
G ChIP-seq profiles of the Csf3 and MyoG gene loci. Top to bottom: MyoD ChIP-seq profile in myotube
cultured in presence of pyruvate (black signals) and absence of pyruvate (blue signals) on the promoter
of Csf3 (top panel) and MyoG (bottom panel).
H ChIP assays were performed using chromatin from myotube cultured in medium with or without pyruvate.
Chromatin was immunoprecipitated using antibodies against MyoD. The immunoprecipitated DNA was
amplified using primers for Csf3 gene promoter covering each indicated E-box, respectively. Data were
obtained from 3 independent experiments.*p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 6. Muscle-derived G-CSF mediates the maintenance of the Pax7Hi SC subpopulation by
promoting the asymmetric division of Pax7 SCs.
A-C Time-lapse imaging was used to trace the division of Pax7 SCs sorted from Pax7-nGFP mice. A-C
were filmed in GFP channels and A’-C’ were filmed in bright channels, n=4. Scale bar represents 20 µm.
D The timing of EdU and BrdU injections (8 hr apart) used to define TDSS.
E Representative views showing the co-segregation of template DNA strands during the cell division of
FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs from Pax7-nGFP mice pulse-labeled with EdU and BrdU, as characterized by
EdU and BrdU staining. When old template DNA strands co-segregate, one daughter cell (EdU+/BrdU+)
is a Pax7Hi SC and the other (EdU-/BrdU+) is a Pax7Lo SC. DAPI (blue) was used to visualize nuclei.
Scale bar represents 5 µm.
F The percentages of EdU+/BrdU+ and EdU-/BrdU+ daughter cells observed during the cell divisions of
Pax7 SCs treated with G-CSF for 24 hr. PBS treatment served as a negative control (NC). The Pax7 SCs
41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were FACS-resolved from Pax7-nGFP mice pulse-labeled with EdU and BrdU. Data were obtained from
3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
G Representative views showing the separation of G-CSFR signals (green) during the cell division of Pax7
SCs on ex vivo-cultured single muscle fibers. DAPI (blue) indicates nuclei. Scale bar represents 10 µm.
H The percentages of Pax7 SCs that show asymmetric separation of G-CSFR during cell division on ex
vivo-cultured single fibers treated with G-CSF were calculated from 3 independent experiments. PBS was
served as a negative control (NC).*p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
I Representative views of the asymmetric division of G-CSFR (yellow) and co-segregation of template
DNA strands (EdU-) during the cell division of FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs from Pax7-nGFP mice that had
been pulse-labeled with EdU and cultured in GM for 24 hr. DAPI (blue) indicates nuclei. Scale bar
represents 10 µm.
J Correlation between the asymmetric division of G-CSFR in daughter cells and the co-segregation of
EdU-labeled template DNA during cell division. EdU+/- GCSFR-/+ represents a doublet in which one
daughter is G-CSFR-negative and EdU positive (Pax7Hi) while the other is G-CSFR-positive and EdU
negative (Pax7Lo).

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig 7. G-CSF replenishes Pax7Hi cells by stimulating asymmetric division of Pax7Mi cells.
A Representative FACS profile of Pax7 SCs sorted from the TA muscles of young, aged exercised (agedex), and aged sedentary (aged-Sed) of Pax7-nGFP mice.
B The percentages of Pax7Hi SCs in A were calculated. n = 5 for each group. *p< 0.05. 1-way ANOVA.
C-D Representative FACS profiles of Pax7 SCs from the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- or Pax7nGFP WT mice subjected to exercise (Ex). Sedentary (Sed) mice served as a control. n = 5.
43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

E The percentages of Pax7Hi SCs in C and D were calculated. n = 3. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
F Unsupervised clustering of Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi and Pax7Lo cells visualized with tSNE. Each point was a
single cell colored by cluster assignment.
G Heatmaps of normalized signal show Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi, Pax7Lo by top genes (columns) for individual cells
(rows).
H Representative views of the asymmetric and symmetric distributions of G-CSFR (red) in FACS-resolved
Pax7 SCs obtained from Pax7-nGFP mice and cultured in GM for 24 hr. DAPI (blue) indicates nuclei.
Scale bar represents 2.5 µm.
I The percentages of Pax7 SCs with asymmetric distribution of G-CSFR among FACS-resolved Pax7Hi,
Pax7Mi, and Pax7Lo SCs cultured in GM for 24 hr.
J The percentages of EdU+/BrdU+ and EdU-/BrdU+ daughter cells observed during the cell divisions of
Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi, and Pax7Lo SCs treated with G-CSF for 24 hr. PBS served as a negative control (NC).
The three subpopulations of Pax7 SCs were FACS-resolved from Pax7-nGFP mice pulse-labeled with
EdU and BrdU. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
K The percentages of Pax7Hi SCs after the three subpopulations of Pax7 SCs were treated with G-CSF
for 24 hr in the presence or absence of a Stat3 inhibitor, as calculated from 3 independent experiments.
*p< 0.05. 2-way ANOVA.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV1. Characterization of FACS-sorted Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells.
A-D Strategy used for FACS sorting GFP+ cells fromPax7-nGFP mice. Negative control for GFP gating

was shown in B. Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo two subpopulations were sorted by FACS at opposite ends of
the spectrum of GFP expression levels. They each corresponded to 10% of the total population and
named as Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo, respectively. Rest of 80% of SC in the middle were isolated and
designated as Pax7Mi (C and D).

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

E Expression pattern of quiescent markers of satellite cells was visualized by t-SNE plots.
F Relative expression of molecular markers for stemness and differentiation in FACS-resolved Pax7Hi and
Pax7Lo SCs from the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
G Representative images of MyoD immunostaining (red) for FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs cultured in growth
medium (GM) for 18 hr. DAPI was used to visualize nuclei (blue). Scale bar represents 20 µm.
H The percentages of MyoD-positive cells in G were calculated from three independent experiments. *p<
0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
I Expression pattern of mitochondrial genes in Pax7Hi and Pax7Lo cells was visualized by t-SNE plots.
J Relative expression of molecular markers in Pax7Hi cells and Pax7Lo cells FACS-resolved from Pax7nGFP mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. **p< 0.01. ***p< 0.001. Unpaired two-sided t-test.

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV2. Muscle metabolism shift from glycolytic to oxidative activity during ageing.
A,B Heatmaps indicated absolute gene expression (Log2[FPKM]) of specific metabolic regulators in aged
and young muscle. Each gene listed had a mean fold change of greater than 1.5.
C Relative expression of PFK1, HK2, Myh7 and Myh4 in TA muscles from young (3-month-old) and aged
(18-month-old) mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p < 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
D Representative histochemical staining of α-GPDH and SDH enzymatic activity in TA muscle of aged
and young mice.

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV3. Fiber type composition and metabolic status in TA and Sol muscle and in TA muscle of
MCK-PPARβ-TG.
A Relative expression of Myh7 in TA and Sol muscles from 3 weeks and 10 weeks C57BL/6 mice, as
determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. **p< 0.01. ***p < 0.001. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
B Representative immunostaining of type I myofibers in TA and Sol muscle from 3 weeks and 10 weeks
mice.
48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C-D Relative expression of HK2 (C) and PFK1 (D) in TA and Sol muscles from 3 weeks and 10 weeks
mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p < 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
E Representative histochemical staining of α-GPDH enzymatic activity in TA and Sol muscles from 3
weeks and 10 weeks mice.
F-H Relative expressions of PPARβ (F), PFK1 (G), and Myh7 (H) in TA muscles from Pax7-nGFP;MCKPPARβ-TG (TG) and Pax7-nGFP WT mice, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05. ***p < 0.001.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
I Relative expression of molecular markers for stemness and differentiation in FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs
from the TA muscle of Pax7-nGFP;MCK-PPARβ transgenic (TG) and Pax7-nGFP wild-type (WT)
littermates, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5. *p< 0.05. **p < 0.01. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
J Representative images of MyoD immunostaining (red) for FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs cultured in growth
medium (GM) for 18 hr. DAPI was used to visualize nuclei (blue). Scale bar represents 20 µm.
K The percentages of MyoD-positive cells in (J) were calculated from 3 independent experiments.*p <
0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV4. Muscle-released G-CSF is a Pax7 SC niche factor required for Pax7Hi SCs.
A Relative expression of Myh7 gene in isolated single fiber from Sol and EDL muscles was determined
by qRT-PCR, each dot represented one single myofiber. n=25 in Sol group. n=24 in EDL group.*p < 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
B Relative expression of Myh1 gene in isolated single fiber from Sol and EDL muscles was determined
by qRT-PCR, each dot represented one single myofiber. n=25 in Sol group. n=24 in EDL group. *p < 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
C Relative expression of Pax7 in sorted Pax7 SCs treated with G-CSF in growth medium (GM) for 48 hr,
as determined by qRT-PCR. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired
two-sided t-test.
D Relative expression of Csf3 gene in TA muscle from Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice and Pax7-nGFP WT
littermates, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 5.
E Relative expression of genes related to fiber type (Myh 4) and muscle metabolism (HK2 and PFK1) in
TA muscles from Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice and Pax7-nGFP WT littermates, as determined by qRT-PCR.
n = 4.
F Representative FACS profiles of neutrophils and macrophages. Gating for CD11b+/Ly-6G+ (neutrophils)
and CD11b+/Ly-6G- (macrophages) is indicated. FITC, GFP (488 channel); PEcy7, phycoerythrin (594
channel).

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

G Relative expression of Csf3 gene in the neutrophils and macrophages sorted from TA muscle of Pax7nGFP;Csf3r-/- mice and Pax7-nGFP WT littermates, as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 4.

51

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV5. MyoD metabolically regulates Csf3 gene expression in skeletal muscle cells.
A NAD+ levels in C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or without pyruvate for 24 hr. Data were
obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
B Relative expression of PDK4 and HK2 genes in the C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or without
pyruvate for 24 hr. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided ttest.
C E-boxes (CANNTG) within the 2-kb sequence upstream of the mouse Csf3 gene.
D Protein levels of MyoD in TA and Sol muscles, as determined by Western blotting. β-Tubulin served as
a loading control.
E mRNA levels of MyoD in TA and Sol muscles, as determined by qRT-PCR. β-Actin served as an internal
control. n=4. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
F Relative expression of MyoD gene in isolated single fiber from Sol and EDL muscles was determined
52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

by qRT-PCR. Each dot represented one single myofiber. n=25 in Sol group. n=24 in EDL group. *p< 0.05.
Unpaired two-sided t-test.
G Relative expression of Csf3 in C2C12 myotubes overexpressing MyoD. Empty vector as negative
control (NC). Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
H Relative promoter activities of the 2-kb sequence upstream of Csf3 in fibroblasts with transient ectopic
expression of MyoD. Transfection with empty vector served as a negative control (NC). Data were
obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
I Relative expression of Csf3 in MyoD-knockdown C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or without
pyruvate. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments. *p< 0.05. 2-way ANOVA.
J MyoD protein levels in the MyoD-knockdown C2C12 myotubes. β-Actin served as a loading control.
K Relative expressions of MyoG in C2C12 myotubes cultured in medium with or without pyruvate for 24
hr.
L Relative promoter activities of MyoG in C2C12 myotubes cultured in basal or pyruvate-free medium for
24 hr.
M,N ChIP-qPCR were performed using chromatin from myotube cultured in presence or absence of
pyruvate. Chromatin was immunoprecipitated using antibodies against MyoD. The immunoprecipitated
DNA was amplified using primers for MyoG (M) and GAPDH (N) genes promoter.

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV6. G-CSF promotes asymmetric division of Pax7 SCs.
A Relative expression of Pax7 in FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs cultured in GM containing G-CSF for 24 hr,
as determined by qRT-PCR. Data were obtained from 3 independent experiments.
B-D Time-lapse images were used to trace the division of Pax7 SCs on single fibers isolated from Pax7nGFP mice, n=4.
E Representative EdU staining in FACS-resolved Pax7 SCs from Pax7-nGFP mice at T1. Scale bar
represents 40 µm.

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fig EV7. G-CSF replenished Pax7Hi cells by promoting asymmetric division of Pax7Mi cells.
A Relative expression of Myh7, Myh4, HK2, and PFK1 in TA muscles from young (Young), aged exercised
(Aged-Ex), and aged sedentary (Aged-Sed) Pax7-nGFP mice. n = 5. *p< 0.05. 1-way ANOVA.
B Relative expression of Csf3 in TA muscles from young (Young), aged exercised (Aged-Ex), and aged
sedentary (Aged-Sed) Pax7-nGFP mice. n = 5. *p< 0.05. 1-way ANOVA.

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/488874; this version posted July 19, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C Relative expression of Csf3 gene in the TA muscles of Pax7-nGFP;Csf3r-/- or Pax7-nGFP WT mice
subjected to exercise (Ex), as determined by qRT-PCR. n = 4. *p< 0.05. Unpaired two-sided t-test.
D Representative genes in Pax7Hi, Pax7Mi and Pax7Lo cells were visualized by Ridge plots.
E Flow cytometric analysis of the three subpopulations of Pax7 SCs treated with G-CSF for 24 hr and
subjected to EdU and BrdU immunostaining. Numbers in corners represented percentages (%) of the
cells. The three subpopulations of Pax7 SCs were sorted from Pax7-nGFP mice and pulse-labeled with
EdU and BrdU.
F Protein levels of Stat3 and p-Stat3 in Pax7 SCs treated with G-CSF in the presence or absence of the
Stat3 inhibitor, 5,15 DPP, as determined by Western blotting. GAPDH and histone H3 served as loading
controls for the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions, respectively.
G Relative expression of BCL2, BCL6, Pim1, Socs3, and Myc in Pax7 SCs treated with G-CSF in the
presence or absence of 5,15 DPP, as determined by qRT-PCR. Values were presented as the mean ±
SEM. Data from three independent experiments. *p< 0.05. 2-way ANOVA.

56

