bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

High-fat diet enhances starvation-induced hyperactivity via
sensitizing hunger-sensing neurons in Drosophila

Rui Huang1,2,3,5,*, Tingting Song3,5, Haifeng Su4,5, and Liming Wang3, *

1

Medical school, Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030, China

2

Key Laboratory for Biorheological Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, State
and Local Joint Engineering Laboratory for Vascular Implants, Bioengineering College,
Chongqing University, Chongqing, 400030, China

3

MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection and Innovation Center for
Cell Signaling Network, Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310058,
Zhejiang, China.
4

Institute of Neuroscience, State Key Laboratory of Neuroscience, CAS Center for

Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China.

5

These authors contribute equally to this work.

*

For correspondence: huangrui85@cqu.edu.cn; lmwang83@zju.edu.cn

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT
Proper regulation of food intake can be disrupted by sustained metabolic challenges such as
high-fat diet (HFD), which may result in various metabolic disorders. Previously, we showed
that starvation induced sustained hyperactivity, an exploratory component of food-seeking
behavior, via a specific group of octopamingeric (OA) neurons (Yu et al., 2016). In the
present study, we found that HFD greatly enhanced starvation-induced hyperactivity. HFD
increased the excitability of these OA neurons to a hunger hormone named adipokinetic
hormone (AKH), via increasing the accumulation of AKH receptor (AKHR) in these
neurons. Upon HFD, excess dietary lipids were transported by a lipoprotein LTP to enter
these OA neurons via the cognate receptor LpR1, which activated AMPK-TOR signaling and
suppressed autophagy-dependent degradation of AKHR. Taken together, we uncovered a
mechanism that linked HFD and starvation-induced hyperactivity, providing insight in the
reshaping of neural circuitry under metabolic challenges and the progression of metabolic
diseases.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
Obesity and obesity-associated metabolic disorders such as type 2 diabetes and
cardiovascular diseases have become a global epidemic. Chronic over-nutrition, especially
excessive intake of dietary lipids, is one of the leading causes of these metabolic disturbances
(Bray and Popkin, 1998; Hill et al., 2000). Accumulating evidence has shown that HFD
imposes adverse effects on the physiology and metabolism of liver, skeletal muscle, the
adipose tissue, and the nervous system (Dietrich et al., 2013; Gomez-Perez et al., 2012; Liu et
al., 2015; Shimobayashi et al., 2018). It is therefore of importance to understand the
mechanisms underlying HFD-induced changes in different organs and cell types, which will
offer critical insight into the diagnosis and treatment of obesity and other metabolic diseases.

The central nervous system plays a critical role in regulating food intake, energy
homeostasis, and organismal metabolism (Gao and Horvath, 2007). In rodent models,
neurons located in the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus, particularly neurons expressing
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) and Agouti-Related Neuropeptide (AgRP) or those expressing Proopiomelanocortin (POMC), are important behavioral and metabolic regulators (Belgardt et
al., 2009; Ollmann et al., 1997; Stanley and Leibowitz, 1984). These neurons detect various
neural and hormonal cues such as circulating glucose and fatty acids, leptin, and ghrelin, and
modulate food consumption and energy expenditure accordingly (Belgardt et al., 2009).
Upon the reduction of the internal energy state, NPY/AgRP neurons are activated and exert a
robust orexigenic effect (Belgardt et al., 2009). Genetic ablation of NPY/AgRP neurons in
neonatal mice completely abolishes food consumption whereas acute activation of these
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

neurons significantly enhances food consumption (Aponte et al., 2011; Krashes et al., 2011).
NPY/AgRP neurons also antagonize the function of POMC neurons that plays a suppressive
role on food consumption (Roseberry et al., 2004). Taken together, these two groups of
neurons, among other neuronal populations, work in synergy to ensure a refined balance
between energy intake and expenditure, and hence organismal metabolism.

In spite of their critical roles, the function of the nervous system to accurately regulate
appetite and metabolism may be disrupted by sustained metabolic stress, resulting in eating
disorders and various metabolic diseases such as obesity and type 2 diabetes. Several lines of
evidence have begun to reveal the underlying neural mechanisms. For example, HFD
increases the intrinsic excitability of orexigenic NPY/AgRP neurons (Vernia et al., 2016),
induces leptin resistance (Mazor et al., 2018; Olofsson et al., 2013), and enhances their
inhibitory innervations with anorexigenic POMC neurons (Newton et al., 2013), altogether
resulting in hypersensitivity to starvation and increased food consumption. Interestingly,
besides HFD, other metabolic challenges, including maternal HFD, alcohol consumption, as
well as aging, also disrupt normal food intake via affecting the excitability and/or innervation
of NPY/AgRP neurons (Cains et al., 2017; Furedi et al., 2018; Rivera et al., 2015). All these
interventions may contribute to the onset and progression of metabolic disorders.

Proceeding the actual food consumption, food-seeking behavior is a critical yet largely
overlooked behavioral component for the localization and occupation of desirable food
sources. Food-seeking behavior has been characterized in rodent models, primarily by the
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

elevation of locomotor activity and increased food approach of starved animals (Davidson,
2009; Mistlberger, 2011). It has been reported that NPY/AgRP neurons also play a role in
food-seeking behavior (Aponte et al., 2011). However, to ensure adequate food intake, food
seeking and food consumption are temporarily separated and even reciprocally inhibited
(Betley et al., 2015; Chen et al., 2015). It remains largely unclear how the neural circuitry of
food seeking and food consumption segregated and independently regulated in rodent
models. Furthermore, it remains unknown whether HFD also affects food seeking, and if so
whether its effects on both food seeking and food consumption share common mechanisms
or not. To fully understand the intervention of energy homeostasis by sustained metabolic
stress, we need to dissect the neural circuitry underlying food seeking and examine whether
and how it is affected by HFD.

Fruit flies Drosophila melanogaster share fundamental analogy to vertebrate counterparts on
the regulation of energy homeostasis and organismal metabolism despite that they diverged
several hundred million years ago (Pandey and Nichols, 2011; Rajan and Perrimon, 2013;
Reiter et al., 2001). Therefore, it offers a good model to characterize food-seeking behavior
in depth and provide insight onto the regulation of energy intake and the pathogenesis of
metabolic disorders in more complex organisms such as rodents and human.

Our previous work has shown that fruit flies exhibit robust starvation-induced hyperactivity
that was directed towards the localization and acquisition of food sources, therefore
resembling an important aspect of food-seeking behavior upon starvation (Yang et al., 2015).
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

We have also identified a small subset of OA neurons in the fly brain that specifically
regulate starvation-induced hyperactivity (Yu et al., 2016). Analogous to mammalian
systems, a number of neural and hormonal cues are involved in the systemic control of
nutrient metabolism and food intake. Among them, Neuropeptide F (NPF), short NPF
(sNPF), Leucokinin, and Allatostatin A (AstA), have been shown to regulate food
consumption, all of which have known mammalian homologs that regulate food intake (Pool
and Scott, 2014). In particular, starvation-induced hyperactivity is regulated by two classes of
neuroendocrine cells (Yu et al., 2016). One is functionally analogous to pancreatic  cells
and produce AKH upon starvation, whereas the other produce Drosophila insulin-like
peptides (DILPs), resembling the function of pancreatic  cells. These two classes of
Drosophila hormones exert antagonistic functions on starvation-induced hyperactivity via the
same group of OA neurons in the fly brain (Yu et al., 2016).

Based on these findings, we therefore sought to examine whether HFD disrupted the
regulation of starvation-induced hyperactivity in fruit flies and aimed to investigate the
underlying mechanism. In this present study, we found that HFD-fed flies rapidly became
significantly more sensitive to starvation and exhibited starvation-induced hyperactivity
much earlier than flies fed with normal food (ND). Meanwhile, HFD did not alter flies’ food
consumption, suggesting that starvation-induced hyperactivity and food consumption are
independently affected by HFD. Several days of HFD treatment did not alter the production
of important hormonal cues like AKH and DILPs, but rather increased the sensitivity of the
OA neurons that regulated starvation-induced hyperactivity to the hunger hormone AKH. In
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

these OA neurons, constitutive autophagy maintained the level of AKHR protein, which
determined their sensitivity to AKH and hence starvation. HFD feeding suppressed neuronal
autophagy via AMPK-TOR signaling and in turn increased the level of AKHR in these OA
neurons. Consistently, eliminating autophagy in these neurons mimicked the effect of HFD
on starvation-induced hyperactivity whereas promoting autophagy inhibited the induction of
hyperactivity by starvation. Furthermore, we also showed that a specific lipoprotein LTP and
its cognate receptor LpR1 likely mediated the effect of HFD on the neuronal autophagy of
OA neurons and hence its effect on starvation-induced hyperactivity. Taken together, we
uncovered a novel mechanism that linked HFD, AMPK-TOR signaling, neuronal autophagy,
and starvation-induced hyperactivity, shedding crucial light on the reshaping of neural
circuitry under metabolic stress and the progression of metabolic diseases.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

RESULTS
HFD specifically enhanced starvation-induced hyperactivity
We have previously reported that starvation induced hyperactivity in fruit flies Drosophila

melanogaster, which facilitated the localization and acquisition of food and hence partly
resembled food-seeking behavior (Yang et al., 2015; Yu et al., 2016). In this present study,
we first asked whether HFD affected starvation-induced hyperactivity in fruit flies.

Flies were fed with normal fly food (ND) or HFD (by adding 20% coconut oil in the ND) for
five consecutive days before tested in a locomotion assay that measured the frequency to
cross the midline of tubes in the Drosophila Activity Monitor System (DAMS, Trikinetics)
(Figure 1A). The midline-crossing frequency assayed by DAMS offered a reliable measure of
flies’ locomotor activity and hence starvation-induced hyperactivity (Yang et al., 2015; Yu et
al., 2016). ND-fed flies exhibited a robust increase in locomotion upon starvation (Figure 1AB, blue, Day 1 and Day 2), which was consistent with our previous findings. Meanwhile, flies
fed with HFD exhibited further enhanced hyperactivity upon starvation, while their baseline
activity was comparable to ND-fed flies (Figure 1A-B, orange, Day 1 and Day 2). These
results suggest that HFD-fed flies are behaviorally more sensitive to starvation.

We then sought to understand how HFD feeding enhanced starvation-induced hyperactivity.
One possible explanation was that HFD might decrease flies’ energy storage or increase flies’
energy expenditure, reducing their resistence to starvation. It seemed unlikely, since flies’
body weight was not affected by HFD and their lipid storage was actually slightly elevated
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

by HFD (Figure 1C-D). Meanwhile, HFD-fed flies exhibited comparable feeding activity in
the FLIC assay (Ro et al., 2014) as well as CO2 production compared to ND-fed flies,
suggesting that their energy intake and expenditure remained unaffected (Figure 1E-F).

Upon starvation, ND-fed and HFD-fed flies exhibited comparable survival rate (Figure 1figure supplement 1), suggesting that prior experience of HFD feeding did not alter starvation
resistance. Consistently, upon starvation, the body weight and lipid storage of both ND-fed
and HFD-fed flies decreased (Figure 1G-H) whereas the food consumption of these two
group of flies increased in the MAFE assay in comparable manners (Figure 1I, note that fed
flies did not exhibit food ingestion in the MAFE assays so we tested them in the FLIC assay,
see Figure 1E) (Qi et al., 2015). Taken together, these results suggest that five days of HFD
feeding specifically enhances the onset of starvation-induced hyperactivity, without altering
flies’ resistence to starvation or food-consumption behavior.

HFD increased the sensitivity of hunger-sensing, AKHR+ neurons
We have shown in a previous study that starvation-induced hyperactivity of adult flies was
driven by a specific group of OA neurons in the fly brain (Yu et al., 2016). As a hunger
sensor, the activity of these OA+ neurons is regulated by two groups of functionally
antagonizing hormones, the hunger-induced hormone AKH and the satiety hormones DILPs.
Therefore, we reasoned that HFD might enhance starvation-induced hyperactivity via
modulating the signaling of these two groups of hormones.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

We first tested whether the expression of AKH and DILP2 (the major DILP expressed in the
fly brain) was modulated by HFD feeding. As shown in Figure 2A-B, ND-fed and HFD-fed
flies showed comparable AKH and DILP2 mRNA production as revealed by both RNAseq
(Figure 2A) and quantitative RT-PCR (Figure 2B) using head tissues. Moreover, circulating
AKH and DILP2 in flies’ hemolymph remained unaffected by HFD feeding, as shown by the
dot blot using antibodies against AKH and DILP2 proteins (Figure 2C). Therefore, the
production of these hormones that regulated starvation-induced hyperactivity was not
regulated by HFD feeding.

We then asked whether the cognate receptors of AKH and DILP2, named AKHR and dInR
(Drosophila insulin-like receptor), were affected by HFD feeding. While AKHR mRNA
levels remained unchanged after HFD feeding, as revealed by RNAseq and quantitative RTPCR (Figure 2D-E), AKHR protein was significantly elevated in the head tissue of HFD-fed
flies vs. that of ND-fed flies, as demonstrated by western blot (Figure 2F). The production of
dInR was not affected by HFD at both the transcriptional and translational levels (Figure 2DF). These data suggest that HFD exerts a robust effect on AKHR protein accumulation
without altering its mRNA production in the fly head.

We have previously shown that AKHR was expressed in two clusters of OA neurons in the
subesophageal zone (SEZ) region of the fly brain (Yu et al., 2016). These neurons were
responsive to the hunger hormone AKH and exerted a robust effect in inducing starvationinduced hyperactivity. Since AKHR protein levels were upregulated by HFD feeding, we
10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

reasoned that these AKHR+ neurons might be more sensitive to AKH upon HFD feeding.
Indeed, by using a calcium imaging setup with ex vivo brain preparations, we found that these
AKHR+ neurons in HFD-fed flies exhibited more robust calcium transients when stimulated
with synthetic AKH than those in ND-fed flies (Figure 2G-I). Taken together, HFD leads to
increased AKHR protein accumulation in the fly brain and enhanced sensitivity of AKHR+
neurons to the hunger hormone AKH. These results may account for the observations that
HFD-fed flies become more sensitive to starvation and exhibit enhanced hyperactivity upon
starvation (Figure 1).

HFD enhanced AKHR accumulation by suppressing neuronal autophagy
We then sought to understand how HFD enhanced AKHR protein accumulation without
promoting its mRNA production. One plausible hypothesis was that the degradation of
AKHR via lysosome and/or proteasome was suppressed by HFD feeding. To examine this
possibility, we ectopically expressed HA-tagged AKHR protein in cultured Drosophila S2
cells, and found that blocking lysosome-mediated protein degradation by lysosome inhibitors
chloroquine (CQ) and NH4Cl increased AKHR protein levels dramatically, while MG132
treatment to disturb proteasome function exerted no effect (Figure 3A). Therefore, AKHR is
specifically degraded via the lysosome pathway.

We next asked whether AKHR was degraded via autophagy, a specific lysosome-dependent
protein degradation pathway (Klionsky, 2007). When treated with rapamycin, a robust
inducer of autophagy, cultured S2 cells quickly formed characteristic autophagosomes, as
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

indicated by the formation of dotted fluorescent GFP-ATG8 (the fly homolog of mammalian
LC3) (Figure 3B, green). Notably, upon rapamycin treatment, HA-tagged AKHR protein was
also enriched in these autophagosomes (Figure 3B, red). Moreover, inducing autophagy by
both starvation and rapamycin resulted in significantly decreased AKHR protein levels in
cultured S2 cells (Figure 3C). Therefore, the degradation of AKHR was solely mediated by
the lysosome-dependent autophagy pathway in vitro. Notably, although it was widely
accepted that membrane proteins were mainly degraded by endocytosis and then lysosome
(e.g. LDLR and EGFR) (Beguinot et al., 1984), it has also been reported that certain
membrane proteins can be degraded via autophagy, such as GABA and AMPA receptor
subunits (Jin et al., 2018).

We then aimed to confirm these in vitro results and asked whether HFD induced AKHR
accumulation in AKHR+ neurons via suppressing its degradation by the autophagy pathway
in vivo. Indeed, HFD suppressed autophagy in the AKHR+ neurons, as evident by the
decrease of membrane-associated ATG8 upon HFD feeding (lower band of GFP-ATG8,
Figure 3D). Additionally, suppressing autophagy specifically in AKHR+ neurons, by RNAi
knock-down of two critical autophagy initiators ATG5 and ATG7, significantly enhanced
AKHR accumulation (Figure 3E), phenocopying the effect of HFD feeding. Taken together,
HFD feeding suppresses neuronal autophagy and enhances AKHR accumulation in AKHR+
neurons.

Suppression of autophagy in AKHR+ neurons enhanced their sensitivity to starvation
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Since HFD enhanced AKHR accumulation in AKHR+ neurons via suppressing autophagy,
we hypothesized that blocking autophagy in AKHR+ neurons in ND-fed flies would mimic
the effect of HFD feeding, leading to higher AKHR accumulation, enhanced AKH
sensitivity, and hence stronger starvation-induced hyperactivity.

We first tested this hypothesis in the calcium imaging setup using the ex vivo brain
preparation. Indeed, RNAi knock-down of ATG5 and ATG7 in AKHR+ neurons led to
significantly enhanced calcium transients upon AKH administration in ND-fed flies (Figure
4A), phenocopying the effect of HFD feeding.

Consistent with these results, blocking autophagy in AKHR+ neurons via RNAi knock-down
of ATG5 significantly enhanced starvation-induced hyperactivity in ND-fed flies (Figure
4B), again phenocopying the effect of HFD feeding. ATG7 knock-down exerted similar
behavioral results (Figure 4-figure supplement 1). In both conditions, HFD feeding did not
further enhance starvation-induced hyperactivity (Figure 4B and Figure 4-figure supplement
1). Taken together, suppressing neuronal autophagy in AKHR+ neurons resembles the effect
of HFD feeding, enhancing the sensitivity of AKHR+ neurons as well as starvation-induced
hyperactivity.

HFD suppressed autophagy via activating AMPK-TOR signaling
To further examine the cellular mechanism underlying HFD-induced suppression of neuronal
autophagy, we carried out RNAseq analysis of fly heads harvested from ND-fed and HFD13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

fed flies. As shown in Figure 5-figure supplement 1 and 2, we found that a collection of
genes related to anabolic activities were upregulated while a collection of catabolic genes
were downregulated in HFD-fed flies. These results hinted a possibility that TOR signaling,
the key regulator of anabolism, was activated by HFD. Notably, TOR signaling is also a
robust inducer of autophagy (Wullschleger et al., 2006). Therefore, TOR signaling may
mediate the effect of HFD on autophagy.

To further confirm this hypothesis, we examined p70S6K phosphorylation in vivo, which was
a reliable indicator of TOR activation (Wullschleger et al., 2006). Indeed, the head tissues of
HFD-fed flies exhibited higher levels of p70S6K phosphorylation (Figure 5A), suggesting
that HFD indeed activated TOR signaling. TOR signaling could be modulated by two major
upstream signals, negatively by AMPK (AMP-activated protein kinase) signaling and
positively by AKT signaling (Wullschleger et al., 2006). We found that upon HFD feeding,
AMPK signaling was suppressed, whereas AKT signaling remained unaffected (Figure 5B),
suggesting that HFD modulated TOR signaling via the suppression of AMPK signaling.

Since AMPK-TOR signaling was known to modulate autophagy and the degradation of
specific proteins, it was therefore possible that HFD suppressed neuronal autophagy and
hence enhanced AKHR accumulation via modulating AMPK-TOR signaling. If this was the
case, manipulating AMPK-TOR signaling would exert robust effect on AKHR accumulation
just as HFD-feeding. Indeed, pharmacological activation of TOR signaling by MHY and
suppression of AMPK by Dorsomorphin both resulted in AKHR accumulation in cultured S2
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

cells, whereas suppression of TOR signaling by rapamycin and activation of AMPK by
AICAR exerted the opposite effect (Figure 5C). Consistent with these in vitro results,
rapamycin treatment in the ex vivo brain preparation led to decreased AKH sensitivity in
AKHR+ neurons (Figure 5D), further confirming that AMPK-TOR signaling plays an
important role in regulating AKHR accumulation and hence the sensitivity of AKHR+
neurons.

AMPK-TOR signaling mediated the effect of HFD on starvation-induced hyperactivity
Since AMPK-TOR signaling mediated the effect of HFD on AKHR accumulation, we
reasoned that manipulating AMPK-TOR signaling in vivo would affect the onset of
starvation-induced hyperactivity.

Indeed, suppressing TOR signaling in AKHR+ neurons by ectopic expression of dominant
negative TORTED (Hennig and Neufeld, 2002) resulted in significantly decreased starvationinduced hyperactivity in ND-fed flies, and HFD feeding did not further enhance starvationinduced hyperactivity in these flies (Figure 6A). Rapamycin feeding exerted similar effect
(Figure 6B). These results were consistent with our findings that suppression of TOR
signaling led to much reduced AKHR levels (Figure 5C) and AKH sensitivity (Figure 5D).

To further confirm these results, we genetically activated TOR signaling in AKHR+ neurons,
by RNAi knock-down of TSC1, a suppressor of TOR signaling (Wullschleger et al., 2006)
and by the ectopic expression of a dominant negative form of AMPK protein (AMPKDN)
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(Wullschleger et al., 2006). Both manipulations resulted in upregulated starvation-induced
hyperactivity in ND-fed flies (Figure 6-figure supplement 1 and 2), phenocopying the effect
of HFD feeding (Figure 1A). Collectively, these data further confirm that HFD enhances
starvation-induced hyperactivity via modulating AMPK-TOR signaling in AKHR+ neurons.

A lipoprotein LTP and its cognate receptor LpR1 linked HFD feeding to enhanced
starvation-induced hyperactivity
We next sought to understand how HFD feeding exerted a robust effect on the autophagy
pathway of a small group of brain neurons expressing AKHR. Since dietary lipids needed to
enter the circulating system and different fly organs via specific carriers named lipoproteins,
we asked whether certain lipoprotein(s) played a role in mediating the behavioral effect of
HFD feeding.

Three lipophorins, the main Drosophila lipoprotein, circulate in the hemolymph and transport
lipids to different fly organs (Rodriguez-Vazquez et al., 2015). We performed proteomic
analysis of circulating proteins in flies’ hemolymph by mass spectrometry and found that
only one of the three lipoproteins, named Lipid Transfer Particle (LTP), but not the other two
[Lipophorin (LPP) and Microsomal Triglyceride Transfer Protein (MTP)], was significantly
upregulated in HFD-fed flies vs. ND-fed flies (Figure 7A-7B). Meanwhile, both triglycerides
and cholesterol were enriched in the hemolymph of HFD-fed flies (Figure 7C-7D).
Therefore, it was possible that LTP was the major carrier for excess circulating lipids after
HFD feeding.
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Recruitment of lipoproteins to cell membranes mediated by its receptors is a key event that
initiates the transfer of neutral lipids to cells (Rodriguez-Vazquez et al., 2015). To understand
the role of excess circulating lipids in suppressing autophagy of AKHR+ neurons, it was
necessary to identify lipoprotein receptor expressed in these cells. To this aim, we carried out
single cell RNAseq analysis for individual AKHR+ neurons harvested from the fly brains in
situ. Among seven identified lipophorin receptors in Drosophila, lipophorin receptor 1
(LpR1) was most abundantly expressed in AKHR+ neurons (Figure 7E).

We thus examined the potential role of LpR1 in mediating the effect of HFD feeding on
AKHR accumulation and starvation-induced hyperactivity. RNAi knock-down of LpR1 in
AKHR+ neurons eliminated the effect of HFD on AKHR accumulation (Figure 7F).
Consistently, these flies did not show an enhancement of starvation-induced hyperactivity by
HFD feeding (Figure 7G). Therefore, we concluded that a specific lipoprotein LTP and its
cognate receptor LpR1 mediated the effect of HFD on neuronal autophagy, AKHR protein
accumulation, and therefore the onset of starvation-induced hyperactivity upon starvation.

Diet-independent hyperlipidemia also enhanced starvation-induced hyperactivity
HFD is known to be a robust reward signal and can induce food craving (de Macedo et al.,
2016). We therefore asked whether enhanced starvation-induced hyperactivity by HFD
feeding was solely mediated by excess lipid uptake, or HFD feeding also exerted other nonmetabolic effects. By knocking down LpR1 in the fat body (ppl-GAL4/UAS-LpR1 RNAi), the
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

major organ for lipid storage and metabolism, we generated diet-independent hyperlipidemia
in ND-fed flies (Figure 8A-B). Notably, similar effect was also observed in mouse models
(Wang et al., 2016)

We then asked whether diet-independent hyperlipidemia had similar effects on AKHR
accumulation and starvation-induced hyperactivity as HFD feeding. Compared with the
control group, the phosphorylation of p70S6K in the diet-independent hyperlipidemia group
was significantly up-regulated (Figure 8C). These results showed that like HFD feeding, dietindependent hyperlipidemia also activated TOR signaling (Figure 8C). In addition, dietindependent hyperlipidemia led to upregulated AKHR accumulation (Figure 8D), mimicking
the effect of HFD feeding. Consistent with these results, these ND-fed, hyperlipidemic flies
showed significantly stronger starvation-induced hyperactivity than the two control groups
(Figure 8E), which was comparable to HFD-fed flies (Figure 1A). Taken together, dietindependent hyperlipidemia phenocopies the effect of HFD feeding, further confirming that
HFD feeding reshapes the circuitry underlying starvation-induced hyperactivity through
excess dietary lipid intake.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

DISCUSSION
There is accumulating evidence that notes the effect of HFD on food consumption from
insects to human, which results in obesity and obesity-associated metabolic diseases. But the
effect of HFD on another critical food intake related behavior, food seeking, remains largely
uncharacterized. Conceptually, food-seeking behavior in the fruit fly is composed of two
behavioral components, increased sensitivity to food cues, and enhanced exploratory
locomotion, which altogether facilitates the localization and acquisition of desirable food
sources (Root et al., 2011; Yu et al., 2016). Previous work from our lab has shown that
starvation promotes starvation-induced hyperactivity, the exploratory component of foodseeking behavior, in fruit flies via a small group of OA neurons in the fly brain. These
hunger-sensing OA neurons sample the metabolic status by detecting two groups of
functionally antagonistic hormones, AKH and DILPs, and promote starvation-induced
hyperactivity (Yu et al., 2016).

In this present study, we demonstrated that this behavior was affected by metabolic
challenges. After a few days of HFD feeding, flies became behaviorally hypersensitive to
starvation and as a result their starvation-induced hyperactivity was greatly enhanced, despite
that their energy storage was not reduced and their food consumption was not affected. These
results suggested that HFD feeding might specifically modulate the activity of the neural
circuitry underlying starvation-induced hyperactivity and offered us an opportunity to further
elucidate the cellular and circuitry mechanisms underlying behavioral abnormalities upon
metabolic challenges.
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

As an insect counterpart of mammalian glucagon, AKH acts as a hunger signal to activate its
cognate receptor AKHR expressed in the fat body and subsequently triggers lipid
mobilization and energy allocation (Bharucha et al., 2008). In the fly brain, a small number
of OA neurons also express AKHR. We and other labs have shown that these neurons are
responsive to starvation and modulate various behaviors including food seeking and drinking
(Jourjine et al., 2016; Yu et al., 2016). In that sense, these OA+AKHR+ neurons are
functionally analogous to mammalian NPY/AgRP neurons in the hypothalamus, which also
senses organismal metabolic states and regulates specific food intake behaviors. In this
present study, we found that OA+AKHR+ neurons exhibited a higher AKHR protein
accumulation and became hypersensitive to AKH after HFD feeding. Notably, HFD feeding
in mammals also increases the excitability of NPY/AgRP neurons, which contributes to the
hypersensitivity to starvation and increased food consumption (Vernia et al., 2016). Thus,
HFD may play a conserved role in the regulation of neuronal excitability and food intake
related behaviors in both fruit flies and mammals.

Autophagy, a lysosomal degradative process that maintains cellular homeostasis, is critical
for energy homeostasis. Upon cellular starvation, autophagy generates additional energy
supply by breaking down macromolecules and subcellular organelles (Klionsky, 2007). At
the organismal level, autophagy also contributes to the regulation of food intake and hence
organismal energy homeostasis. For example, fasting induces autophagy in NPY/AgRP
neurons via fatty acid uptake and promotes AgRP expression, which in turn enhances food
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

intake (Kaushik et al., 2011). In line with these results, eliminating autophagy in NPY/AgRP
neurons reduces food intake and hence body weight and fat deposits (Kaushik et al., 2011).
Conversely, loss of autophagy in POMC neurons displays increased food intake and
adiposity (Coupe et al., 2012). In this present study, we showed that in fruit flies neuronal
autophagy is critical for the function of OA+AKHR+ neurons to sense hunger and regulate
starvation-induced hyperactivity. Meanwhile, HFD feeding attenuated autophagy in these
OA+AKHR+ neurons and exerted behavioral and metabolic effects.

Accumulating evidence suggests that HFD suppresses autophagy in different peripheral
tissue types such as liver, skeletal muscle, and the adipose tissue (Feng et al., 2016; He et al.,
2012; Liu et al., 2009). Similarly, HFD suppresses autophagy in the hypothalamus, whereas
blocking hypothalamic autophagy, particularly in POMC neurons, exacerbates HFD induced
obesity (Coupe et al., 2012). In this present study, we showed that HFD suppressed neuronal
autophagy in OA+AKHR+ neurons and enhanced AKHR accumulation in these neurons. As a
result, OA+AKHR+ neurons became hypersensitive to starvation and enhanced starvationinduced hyperactivity. It would be of interest to examine whether HFD also reduces
autophagy and increases the accumulation of specific membrane receptors in mammalian
NPY/AgRP neurons.

We also sought to examine the cellular mechanism that linked HFD feeding to the reduction
of autophagy. We found that HFD feeding activated TOR signaling as evident by both
RNAseq and western blot. TOR, a highly conserved serine-threonine kinase, controls
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

numerous anabolic cellular processes. We found in this present study that TOR signaling was
tightly associated with the activity of AKHR+ neurons and the behavioral responses upon
HFD feeding. Genetic enhancement of TOR activity in AKHR+ neurons increased AKHR
protein accumulation, the sensitivity of these neurons to AKH, and hence starvation-induced
hyperactivity, all of which mimicked the effect of HFD feeding. Inhibiting TOR activity
exerted an opposite effect. In addition, we also found that the effect of HFD on TOR
signaling was mediated by AMPK signaling. These results altogether suggest that AMPKTOR signaling in AKHR+ neurons plays an important role in maintaining the homeostasis of
these neurons and determining the responsiveness to HFD feeding. Similarly, rodent studies
have shown that manipulating AMPK-TOR signaling resulted in the dysfunction of
NPY/AgRP neurons as well as POMC neurons, which led to abnormal food consumption and
adiposity (Kong et al., 2016; Yang et al., 2012). It would be of interest to examine whether
HFD also modulates AMPK-TOR signaling in specific hypothalamic neurons.

We next sought to understand how AKHR+ neurons detected HFD, or more specifically,
excess lipid ingested by the flies. As an essential nutrient and important energy reserve,
dietary lipids were transported via their carrier proteins, named lipoproteins, in the circulation
system and regulate multiple cellular signaling pathways. Proteomic analysis helped us to
identify that one lipoprotein LTP was enriched in flies’ hemolymph after HFD feeding.
Single-cell RNAseq of AKHR+ neurons identified a number of lipoprotein receptors,
especially LpR1, were highly expressed in these neurons. Therefore, we proposed that
AKHR+ neurons might sense HFD feeding via LTP-LpR1 signaling. Evidently, we found that
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

eliminating LpR1 in AKHR+ neurons could protect flies from HFD, reducing AKHR
accumulation and starvation-induced hyperactivity. Conversely, eliminating LpR1 in the fat
body, the major lipid reservoir of flies, created diet-independent hyperlipidemia and
mimicked the effect of HFD feeding on flies’ starvation-induced hyperactivity. Taken
together, we propose a working model that upon HFD feeding, excess dietary lipids are
transported by LTP in the hemolymph, which interacts with its cognate receptor LpR1 in
OA+AKHR+ neurons. As a result, these neurons undergo a number of cellular signaling
processes and eventually become hypersensitive to starvation (Figure 8-figure supplement 1).

To summarize, our present study established a link between an unhealthy diet and
abnormalities of food intake related behaviors in a model organism. We have also deciphered
the underlying mechanism involving intracellular AMPK-TOR signaling, reduced neuronal
autophagy, accumulation of a specific hormone receptor, and increased excitability of a small
group of hunger-sensing neurons. Our study will shed crucial light on the pathological
changes in the central nervous system upon metabolic challenges. Given that the central
control of metabolism and food intake related behaviors are highly conserved across different
species, it will be of importance to further examine whether similar mechanisms also mediate
the effect of HFD feeding on food intake and metabolic diseases in mammals.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Flies
Flies were reared on standard fly food made of yeast, corn, and agar at 25°C and 60%
humidity on a 12-hr light-12-hr dark cycle. Unless otherwise specified, virgin female flies
were collected shortly after eclosion and placed in standard fly food (ND) vials (20 flies per
vial) for 5-6 d prior to experiments. High fat diet (HFD)-fed flies were kept in vials with
HFD medium containing 20% coconut oil and 80% ND for 5 d. The flies of rapamycin group
were fed in ND containing 400 μM rapamycin for 5 d.

nSyb-AD-AKHR-BD was described previously (Yu et al., 2016). UAS-TSC1 RNAi (#5074),
UAS-ATG7 RNAi (#2793) and UAS-LpR1 RNAi (#2568) were obtained from the Tsinghua
Fly Center. UAS-TORTED (#7013), UAS-AMPK-DN (#32112), UAS-mCD8GFP (#32186)
and ppl-GAL4 (#58768) were provided by the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center at
Indiana University. UAS-ATG5 RNAi flies were from Chao Tong (Zhejiang University).

Chemicals, plasmids, and antibodies
If not otherwise indicated, all chemicals were from Sigma. MG132 (10 μM; Beyotime
Biotechnology) and CQ (100 μM) exposure was for 4 hr. Rapamycin (200 nM; Sangon
Biotech), AICAR (500 μM; Beyotime Biotechnology), MHY (5 μM) and Dorsomorphin (5
μM) were add to the medium for 12 hr.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

pAC5.1-flag and pAC5.1-HA vectors were kindly provided by Xiaohang Yang (Zhejiang
University). AKHR-HA was made by cloning the cDNA of AKHR into a pAC5.1-HA vector
using SalI and NotI. The cDNA of ATG8 was from Chao Tong (Zhejiang University) and
cloned into a pAC5.1-HA vector using EcoRI and BamHI to generate HA-ATG8.

The following antibodies were used: rabbit polyclonal antibodies to p-AKT, p-AMPK, HA,
Flag, GFP and mouse monoclonal antibody to HA (Cell Signaling Technology); mouse
monoclonal antibodies to Flag (MBL) and to actin (sigma); rabbit polyclonal antibody to
AKH (biorbyt); rabbit polyclonal antibody to Dilp2 was kindly provided by Zhefeng Gong
(Zhejiang University).

Cell culture and transfection
S2 cells were grown in Schneider's Insect Medium (sigma) supplemented with 10% fetal
bovine serum (FBS) at 25°C. Transfections were performed using Lipofectamine 3000
according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen). Cells were analyzed 24–48 hr after
transfection.

Behavioral assays
DAMS-based locomotion assay was performed as described in our earlier report (Yu et al.,
2016). Briefly, individual virgin female flies were introduced into 5 mm × 65 mm
polycarbonate tubes (Trikinetics) after being lightly anesthetized. One end of these tubes was
filled with medium containing 2% (wt/vol) agar ± 5% (wt/vol) sucrose and the other end was
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

blocked using cotton wool. These tubes were then inserted into DAMS monitors placing in
fly incubators. The passage of flies through the middle of the tube was counted by an infrared
beam through the midline of the tubes.

The MAFE assay was performed as described previously (Qi et al., 2015). Briefly, individual
flies were gently aspirated and introduced into a 200 μL pipette tip. After exposing the
proboscis by cutting the pipette tip, the flies were first sated with water and then presented
with 100mM sucrose containing 2% blue dye (McCormick) filled in a graduated capillary
(VWR, #53432-604). Until the flies became unresponsive to 10 serial food stimuli, food
consumption was calculated according to the total volume of ingested food.

The FLIC assay was performed as described previously (Qi et al., 2015). Briefly, both
feeding channels in the Drosophila Feeding Monitors (DFM) were filled with 5% sucrose.
Individual flies were then gently aspirated into each feeding arena and their feeding activity
was recorded for 24 hr. An electrical current generated by the physical contact between flies’
proboscis and the liquid food was recorded by the DFMs. From the original report, electrical
current more than 120 a.u. was considered as actual feeding, and the total feeding bouts and
the duration of feeding time were calculated accordingly.

In vivo two-photon calcium imaging
The ﬂies were lightly anesthetized on ice, and brains were dissected in oxygen
saturation (95% O2, 5% CO2) buffer extracellular saline solution [103 mM NaCl, 3
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

mM KCl, 5 mM N-Tris (hydroxymethyl) methyl-2-aminoethane-sulfonic acid, 10
mM trehalose, 8 mM glucose, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1 mM NaH2PO4, 1.5 mM CaCl2, and
4 mM MgCl2, The pH was adjusted to 7.5 and osmolarity to 265 mOsm].

Dissected brains were adhered to a dish. Dorsal view is upward. Micropipettes (glass
capillaries, Harvard Apparatus, 300092) with an opening diameter of approximately
10 m were connected to a picospritzer III (Intracell). The tip of the pipette was
positioned 50 μm to the cell body (Figure 2G). Air pressure on the picospritzer (III)
was set to 3.3 psi, duration was 300 ms, the proper parameter required to eject
solution from the pipette to induce the calcium response in AKHR promoter driven
calcium indicator GCamp6m. Electrode was perfused by microloader. Alexa fluor
568 was mixed in the AKH solution (3.16 mM) to verify the eject area could cover
the target AKHR neuron’s cell body (Figure 2G).

Images were acquired on Nikon's Eclipse FN1 confocal microscopes with 40×/0.8
objectives. Time series were acquired at 1 Hz with 256 × 256 pixels and 12 bit, a
resolution of 0.83 μm/ pixel, controlled by NIS elements. Laser power density on the
scanned area of laser wavelength 488 nm was lower than 0.3 mW/ mm2, and 561 nm
was 10 mW/mm2.

Total image acquired duration is 4 minute, first 1minute set to pre-puff drug time
followed by 300 ms drug delivered. Image stacks were subsequently analyzed by Fiji
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

(http://fiji.sc). ROIs were manually drawn around AKHR+ neuron cell body, and the
intensity of 30 frames before puff time average to be F0, individual ΔF/F0 response
traces were extracted, and the peak ΔF/F0 was obtained for significance analysis.

Immunofluorescence staining
For immunostaining, Drosophila S2 cells were fixed in 4% formaldehyde. After washing thrice
in PBS, cells were blocked in PBS/FBS (PBS, pH 7.4, containing 10% FBS). The cells were
then incubated with appropriate primary and secondary antibodies in PBS/FBS with 0.1%
saponin.

RNAseq
Total RNA from fly heads was extracted from 5-day-old female flies using the Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen, USA), subjected to poly(A) mRNA isolation, cDNA synthesization, library
preparation (NEBNext Ultra DNA Library Prep Kit for Illumina, NEB), and sequencing
(Illumina Hiseq2500/4000 platform). Sequence data were subsequently mapped to
Drosophila genome and uniquely mapped reads were collected for further analysis. Gene
expression was calculated by the RPKM (Reads Per Kilobase of exon per Million reads
mapped). The genes with p-value less 0.05 were considered as the differentially expressed
gene. The RNAseq data of fly heads were deposited in GEO under the accession code
GSE129602.

Single-cell RNAseq
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

As described in our previously report (Yu et al., 2016), individual AKHR+ cells (marked by
GFP expression) were picked from dissected fly brain under a fluorescence microscope using
a glass micropipette pulled from thick-walled borosilicate capillaries (BF120-69-10, Sutter
Instruments). Separated cells were transferred to lysate buffer immediately, followed by
reverse transcription and cDNA amplification (SMARTer Ultra Low RNA Kit for
Sequencing, Clonetech). The amplified cDNA underwent library preparation
using the NEBNext Ultra II DNALibrar kit and subject to sequencing by Illumina Hiseq 2500
platform. The sequenced raw data were purified to remove low-quality reads, adaptor
sequences and amplification primer before mapping to Drosophila genome. Only mapped
reads were selected for further analysis. FPKM (Fragments Per Kilobase Of Exon Per Million
Fragments Mapped) was used to quantify gene expression. The single-cell RNAseq data were
deposited in GEO under the accession code GSE129601.

Measurements of CO2 production
The CO2 production was performed as described previously (Takeuchi et al., 2009). 1 ml
plastic syringes were used for the respirometers after filling a small amount of CO2 absorbent
(Soda lime, Sigma) between two pieces of sponge in the body of the syringe. A 5 μl fine
graduated capillary connected to the plastic adaptor attached to the syringe. Five flies were
gently aspirated into the syringe body and plunger inserted to form a closed chamber. After
being kept on the flat surface at 25ºC for 15 min to equilibrate, a little ink was placed at the
end of the micropipet. The CO2 production was calculated based on the rate of movement of
the ink.
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Triglyceride and cholesterol measurement
For whole fly bodies, single fly was anesthetized and transferred to 400 μL of 0.5% PBST,
subject to homogenization (Tissuelyser 24, Qiagen, USA) and incubation at 92°C for 10 min.
After centrifugation, the supernatant was measured by Triglyceride Quantification
Colorimetric/ Fluorometric Kit (BioVision, USA).

For fly hemolymph, extracted hemolymph was directly measured by Triglyceride Assay or
Cholesterol Assay Kit (Nanjing Jiancheng Bioengineering Institute, China).

Hemolymph extraction
40 flies were decapitated and transferred to a punctured 0.5 ml tube. The tube was then
placed into 1.5 ml eppendorf tube, subjected to centrifugation for 5 min at 2500 × g at

4 °C. Collected hemolymph in 1.5 ml eppendorf tube was used for further analysis.

LC-MS/MS
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on HPLC chromatography system named Thermo Fisher
Easy-nLC 1000 equipped with a C18 colume (1.8 mm, 0.15×1.00 mm). The MS/MS data
were searched with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). The following parameters were used: (i)
enzyme: trypsin; (ii) fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); (iii) variable modifications:
oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ); (iv) mass tolerance for precursor ions: 20 ppm; (v)
mass tolerance for fragment ions: 4.5 ppm; (vi) peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+; (vii)
30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

instrument: ESI-LTQ; (viii) allowing up to two missed cleavage. (ix) minimal peptide length:
sixe amino acid. (x) the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identifications:
0.01. The intensity for each protein was obtained from three technical repeats. The global
analysis was carried by in-house program. The criteria for the interesting proteins were: the
ratio of intensity between the experimental and control samples larger than 2 and p-value <
0.05 was considered to be statistically significant.

Western blotting and Dot blotting
For western blot, total protein was extracted from fly heads or cultured S2 cells. Samples
were denatured, separated by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to a polyvinylidene difluoride
membrane. After being blocked in TBST containing 5% milk, the membrane was incubated
with the specific primary antibody followed by HRP-conjugated goat-anti-rabbit or goat antimouse antibody. The specific bands were detected by an ECL western blotting detection
system (Bio-rad, USA).

For dot blot, hemolymph was extracted and spotted onto nitrocellulose membrane and let dry
for 20 min. After washing, blocking, incubation with the corresponding primary and
secondary antibodies, the membranes were also analyzed by an ECL western blotting
detection system.

Quantitative RT-PCR

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Total RNA from fly heads was isolated from 5-day-old female flies with TRIzol reagent
(Invitrogen, USA). Reverse transcription of RNA to cDNA was achieved using 2 μg of total
RNA with random hexamer primers using RT-PCR SuperMix Kit (TransGen Biotech,
China). Q-PCR was performed with SYBR premix Ex TaqTM (Takara, China) on CFX96
Touch™ Real-Time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, USA). The primers used are presented
as follows: DILP2 F: 5′-GCCTTTGTCCTTCATCTCG-3′, DILP2 R: 5′CCATACTCAGCACCTCGTTG-3′; AKH F: 5′- ATCCCAAGAGCGAAGTCC -3′, AKH R:
5′- CCTGAGATTGCACGAAGC -3′; AKHR F: 5′- ACTGCTACGGAGCCATTT -3′,
AKHR R: 5′- TGTCCAGCCAGTACCACA -3′; InR F: 5′GCAGCAATGAATGCGACGAT -3′, InR R: 5′- CCTGCGTCGCTTGTTGAAAA -3′;
GAPDH F: 5′-GAATCCTGGGCTACACCG-3′, GAPDH R: 5′-CTTATCGTTCAGAATGC3′.

Statistical analysis
Data presented in this study were verified for normal distribution by D’Agostino–Pearson
omnibus test. Student’s t test, one-way ANOVA and two-way ANOVA (for comparisons
among three or more groups and comparisons with more than one variant) were used. The
post hoc test with Bonferroni correction was performed for multiple comparisons following
ANOVA.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank members of the Neuroscience Pioneer Club for insightful discussions throughout
the course of the study. We thank all Wang Lab members and Chen Pan (Zhejiang
University) for helpful discussions and technical assistance. We thank Fuchou Tang (Peking
University) for help with the single cell analysis. We thank Yeguang Chen (Tsinghua
University) and Wei Liu (Zhejiang University) for helpful comments. Ye Wu provide
scientific and administrative support in the laboratory. This study was funded by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 31522026 for L.W. and No. 31800883 for R.H.),
the Thousand Young Talents Plan (L.W.), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
Universities (No. 2016QN81010 and No. 2015XZZX004-33 for L.W.), and the 100 Talents
Program of Chongqing University (R.H.).

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

REFERENCES
Aponte, Y., Atasoy, D., and Sternson, S.M. (2011). AGRP neurons are sufficient to
orchestrate feeding behavior rapidly and without training. Nature neuroscience 14, 351-355.
Beguinot, L., Lyall, R.M., Willingham, M.C., and Pastan, I. (1984). Down-regulation of the
epidermal growth factor receptor in KB cells is due to receptor internalization and subsequent
degradation in lysosomes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 81, 2384-2388.
Belgardt, B.F., Okamura, T., and Bruning, J.C. (2009). Hormone and glucose signalling in
POMC and AgRP neurons. The Journal of physiology 587, 5305-5314.
Betley, J.N., Xu, S., Cao, Z.F.H., Gong, R., Magnus, C.J., Yu, Y., and Sternson, S.M. (2015).
Neurons for hunger and thirst transmit a negative-valence teaching signal. Nature 521, 180185.
Bharucha, K.N., Tarr, P., and Zipursky, S.L. (2008). A glucagon-like endocrine pathway in
Drosophila modulates both lipid and carbohydrate homeostasis. The Journal of experimental
biology 211, 3103-3110.
Bray, G.A., and Popkin, B.M. (1998). Dietary fat intake does affect obesity! The American
journal of clinical nutrition 68, 1157-1173.
Cains, S., Blomeley, C., Kollo, M., Racz, R., and Burdakov, D. (2017). Agrp neuron activity
is required for alcohol-induced overeating. Nature communications 8, 14014.
Chen, Y., Lin, Y.C., Kuo, T.W., and Knight, Z.A. (2015). Sensory detection of food rapidly
modulates arcuate feeding circuits. Cell 160, 829-841.
Coupe, B., Ishii, Y., Dietrich, M.O., Komatsu, M., Horvath, T.L., and Bouret, S.G. (2012).
Loss of autophagy in pro-opiomelanocortin neurons perturbs axon growth and causes
metabolic dysregulation. Cell metabolism 15, 247-255.
Davidson, A.J. (2009). Lesion studies targeting food-anticipatory activity. The European
journal of neuroscience 30, 1658-1664.
de Macedo, I.C., de Freitas, J.S., and da Silva Torres, I.L. (2016). The Influence of Palatable
Diets in Reward System Activation: A Mini Review. Advances in pharmacological sciences
2016, 7238679.
Dietrich, M.O., Liu, Z.W., and Horvath, T.L. (2013). Mitochondrial dynamics controlled by
mitofusins regulate Agrp neuronal activity and diet-induced obesity. Cell 155, 188-199.
Feng, H., Yu, L., Zhang, G., Liu, G., Yang, C., Wang, H., and Song, X. (2016). Regulation of
Autophagy-Related Protein and Cell Differentiation by High Mobility Group Box 1 Protein
in Adipocytes. Mediators of inflammation 2016, 1936386.
Furedi, N., Miko, A., Gaszner, B., Feller, D., Rostas, I., Tenk, J., Solymar, M., Balasko, M.,
and Petervari, E. (2018). Activity of the Hypothalamic Melanocortin System Decreases in
Middle-Aged and Increases in Old Rats. The journals of gerontology. Series A, Biological
sciences and medical sciences 73, 438-445.
Gao, Q., and Horvath, T.L. (2007). Neurobiology of feeding and energy expenditure. Annual
review of neuroscience 30, 367-398.
Gomez-Perez, Y., Capllonch-Amer, G., Gianotti, M., Llado, I., and Proenza, A.M. (2012).
Long-term high-fat-diet feeding induces skeletal muscle mitochondrial biogenesis in rats in a
sex-dependent and muscle-type specific manner. Nutrition & metabolism 9, 15.
He, C., Bassik, M.C., Moresi, V., Sun, K., Wei, Y., Zou, Z., An, Z., Loh, J., Fisher, J., Sun, Q.,
34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

et al. (2012). Exercise-induced BCL2-regulated autophagy is required for muscle glucose
homeostasis. Nature 481, 511-515.
Hennig, K.M., and Neufeld, T.P. (2002). Inhibition of cellular growth and proliferation by
dTOR overexpression in Drosophila. Genesis 34, 107-110.
Hill, J.O., Melanson, E.L., and Wyatt, H.T. (2000). Dietary fat intake and regulation of
energy balance: implications for obesity. The Journal of nutrition 130, 284S-288S.
Jin, E.J., Kiral, F.R., and Hiesinger, P.R. (2018). The where, what, and when of membrane
protein degradation in neurons. Developmental neurobiology 78, 283-297.
Jourjine, N., Mullaney, B.C., Mann, K., and Scott, K. (2016). Coupled Sensing of Hunger
and Thirst Signals Balances Sugar and Water Consumption. Cell 166, 855-866.
Kaushik, S., Rodriguez-Navarro, J.A., Arias, E., Kiffin, R., Sahu, S., Schwartz, G.J., Cuervo,
A.M., and Singh, R. (2011). Autophagy in hypothalamic AgRP neurons regulates food intake
and energy balance. Cell metabolism 14, 173-183.
Klionsky, D.J. (2007). Autophagy: from phenomenology to molecular understanding in less
than a decade. Nature reviews. Molecular cell biology 8, 931-937.
Kong, D., Dagon, Y., Campbell, J.N., Guo, Y., Yang, Z., Yi, X., Aryal, P., Wellenstein, K.,
Kahn, B.B., Sabatini, B.L., et al. (2016). A Postsynaptic AMPK-->p21-Activated Kinase
Pathway Drives Fasting-Induced Synaptic Plasticity in AgRP Neurons. Neuron 91, 25-33.
Krashes, M.J., Koda, S., Ye, C., Rogan, S.C., Adams, A.C., Cusher, D.S., Maratos-Flier, E.,
Roth, B.L., and Lowell, B.B. (2011). Rapid, reversible activation of AgRP neurons drives
feeding behavior in mice. The Journal of clinical investigation 121, 1424-1428.
Liu, H.Y., Han, J., Cao, S.Y., Hong, T., Zhuo, D., Shi, J., Liu, Z., and Cao, W. (2009). Hepatic
autophagy is suppressed in the presence of insulin resistance and hyperinsulinemia: inhibition
of FoxO1-dependent expression of key autophagy genes by insulin. The Journal of biological
chemistry 284, 31484-31492.
Liu, Z., Patil, I.Y., Jiang, T., Sancheti, H., Walsh, J.P., Stiles, B.L., Yin, F., and Cadenas, E.
(2015). High-fat diet induces hepatic insulin resistance and impairment of synaptic plasticity.
PloS one 10, e0128274.
Mazor, R., Friedmann-Morvinski, D., Alsaigh, T., Kleifeld, O., Kistler, E.B., Rousso-Noori,
L., Huang, C., Li, J.B., Verma, I.M., and Schmid-Schonbein, G.W. (2018). Cleavage of the
leptin receptor by matrix metalloproteinase-2 promotes leptin resistance and obesity in mice.
Science translational medicine 10.
Mistlberger, R.E. (2011). Neurobiology of food anticipatory circadian rhythms. Physiology &
behavior 104, 535-545.
Newton, A.J., Hess, S., Paeger, L., Vogt, M.C., Fleming Lascano, J., Nillni, E.A., Bruning,
J.C., Kloppenburg, P., and Xu, A.W. (2013). AgRP innervation onto POMC neurons increases
with age and is accelerated with chronic high-fat feeding in male mice. Endocrinology 154,
172-183.
Ollmann, M.M., Wilson, B.D., Yang, Y.K., Kerns, J.A., Chen, Y., Gantz, I., and Barsh, G.S.
(1997). Antagonism of central melanocortin receptors in vitro and in vivo by agouti-related
protein. Science 278, 135-138.
Olofsson, L.E., Unger, E.K., Cheung, C.C., and Xu, A.W. (2013). Modulation of AgRPneuronal function by SOCS3 as an initiating event in diet-induced hypothalamic leptin
resistance. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America
35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

110, E697-706.
Pandey, U.B., and Nichols, C.D. (2011). Human disease models in Drosophila melanogaster
and the role of the fly in therapeutic drug discovery. Pharmacological reviews 63, 411-436.
Pool, A.H., and Scott, K. (2014). Feeding regulation in Drosophila. Current opinion in
neurobiology 29, 57-63.
Qi, W., Yang, Z., Lin, Z., Park, J.-Y., Suh, G.S.B., and Wang, L. (2015). A quantitative
feeding assay in adult Drosophila reveals rapid modulation of food ingestion by its nutritional
value. Molecular Brain 8, 87.
Rajan, A., and Perrimon, N. (2013). Of flies and men: insights on organismal metabolism
from fruit flies. BMC biology 11, 38.
Reiter, L.T., Potocki, L., Chien, S., Gribskov, M., and Bier, E. (2001). A systematic analysis
of human disease-associated gene sequences in Drosophila melanogaster. Genome research
11, 1114-1125.
Rivera, H.M., Christiansen, K.J., and Sullivan, E.L. (2015). The role of maternal obesity in
the risk of neuropsychiatric disorders. Frontiers in neuroscience 9, 194.
Ro, J., Harvanek, Z.M., and Pletcher, S.D. (2014). FLIC: high-throughput, continuous
analysis of feeding behaviors in Drosophila. PloS one 9, e101107.
Rodriguez-Vazquez, M., Vaquero, D., Parra-Peralbo, E., Mejia-Morales, J.E., and Culi, J.
(2015). Drosophila Lipophorin Receptors Recruit the Lipoprotein LTP to the Plasma
Membrane to Mediate Lipid Uptake. PLoS genetics 11, e1005356.
Root, C.M., Ko, K.I., Jafari, A., and Wang, J.W. (2011). Presynaptic Facilitation by
Neuropeptide Signaling Mediates Odor-Driven Food Search. Cell 145, 133-144.
Roseberry, A.G., Liu, H., Jackson, A.C., Cai, X., and Friedman, J.M. (2004). Neuropeptide Ymediated inhibition of proopiomelanocortin neurons in the arcuate nucleus shows enhanced
desensitization in ob/ob mice. Neuron 41, 711-722.
Shimobayashi, M., Albert, V., Woelnerhanssen, B., Frei, I.C., Weissenberger, D., MeyerGerspach, A.C., Clement, N., Moes, S., Colombi, M., Meier, J.A., et al. (2018). Insulin
resistance causes inflammation in adipose tissue. The Journal of clinical investigation 128,
1538-1550.
Stanley, B.G., and Leibowitz, S.F. (1984). Neuropeptide Y: stimulation of feeding and
drinking by injection into the paraventricular nucleus. Life sciences 35, 2635-2642.
Takeuchi, K., Nakano, Y., Kato, U., Kaneda, M., Aizu, M., Awano, W., Yonemura, S.,
Kiyonaka, S., Mori, Y., Yamamoto, D., et al. (2009). Changes in temperature preferences and
energy homeostasis in dystroglycan mutants. Science 323, 1740-1743.
Vernia, S., Morel, C., Madara, J.C., Cavanagh-Kyros, J., Barrett, T., Chase, K., Kennedy,
N.J., Jung, D.Y., Kim, J.K., Aronin, N., et al. (2016). Excitatory transmission onto AgRP
neurons is regulated by cJun NH2-terminal kinase 3 in response to metabolic stress. eLife 5,
e10031.
Wang, M., Gao, M., Liao, J., Qi, Y., Du, X., Wang, Y., Li, L., Liu, G., and Yang, H. (2016).
Adipose tissue deficiency results in severe hyperlipidemia and atherosclerosis in the lowdensity lipoprotein receptor knockout mice. Biochimica et biophysica acta 1861, 410-418.
Wullschleger, S., Loewith, R., and Hall, M.N. (2006). TOR signaling in growth and
metabolism. Cell 124, 471-484.
Yang, S.B., Tien, A.C., Boddupalli, G., Xu, A.W., Jan, Y.N., and Jan, L.Y. (2012). Rapamycin
36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

ameliorates age-dependent obesity associated with increased mTOR signaling in
hypothalamic POMC neurons. Neuron 75, 425-436.
Yang, Z., Yu, Y., Zhang, V., Tian, Y., Qi, W., and Wang, L. (2015). Octopamine mediates
starvation-induced hyperactivity in adult Drosophila. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 112, 5219-5224.
Yu, Y., Huang, R., Ye, J., Zhang, V., Wu, C., Cheng, G., Jia, J., and Wang, L. (2016).
Regulation of starvation-induced hyperactivity by insulin and glucagon signaling in adult
Drosophila. eLife 5.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

FIGURE LEGENDS
Figure 1. HFD promotes starvation-induced hyperactivity in adult Drosophila
(A) Wild-type Oregon-R virgin female flies fed with normal fly food (ND, blue) or high-fat
diet (HFD, orange) were assayed in the presence (dark color) and absence (light color) of 5%
sucrose using DAMS-based locomotion assay (n = 46-63). Midline crossing activity of
indicated flies were shown. Yellow bars represent 12 hr light-on period in this and following
figures. (B) Average daily midline crossing activity of flies assayed in A (left), and
starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD feeding vs. ND feeding experience (right).
Data were broken down to Day 1 (upper) and Day 2 (lower). In the following figures only
Day 1 data was presented. (C-D) Average body weight (C) and triglyceride storage (D) of
indicated flies fed ad libitum (n = 6-18). (E) Total duration of feeding time during 24 hr
recording in the FLIC assay (n = 38-47). (F) Total CO2 production for 1 hr of flies fed with
ND or HFD (n = 12-14). (G-I) Average body weight (G, n = 18), triglyceride storage (H, n =
6), and 100 mM sucrose consumption (I, n = 30-35) of indicated flies starved for 36 hr (ST:
starvation). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Student’s t-test and oneway ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise
and multiple comparisons, respectively.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2. HFD increases neuronal AKHR protein
(A-B) AKH and DILP2 mRNA levels of wild-type virgin female flies fed with ND or HFD
for 5 days. The fly heads and associated tissues were collected and subjected to RNAseq (A)
or quantitative RT-PCR (B) (n = 3). (C) AKH and DILP2 protein levels in the hemolymph of
wild-type virgin female flies, fed and starved (n = 3). Hemolymph samples were collected
from the flies and AKH and DILP2 protein levels were analyzed with dot blot by using AKH
and DILP2 antibodies. (D-E) AKHR and InR mRNA levels were analyzed similar to A-B (n
= 3). (F) AKHR and dInR protein levels of fly heads were analyzed by western blot (n = 3).
Note that AKHR-flag knock-in flies were generated by inserting FLAG sequence into the C
terminal of AKHR gene via CRISPR/cas9 mediated gene editing. Antibodies against FLAG
and dInR were used in the western blot. (G) Schematic diagram of the ex vivo calcium
imaging. Green signals indicate AKHR+ neurons expressing GCaMP6 (AKHR:BD/+;
nSyb:AD/UAS-GCaMP6m). Dotted red circle indicates the position of the pipette delivering
synthetic AKH. (H-I) Representative traces (H) and quantification (I) of peak calcium
transients of AKHR+ neurons upon AKH administration (n = 10-12). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05;
***p < 0.001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith
Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. AKHR accumulation is induced by the suppression of autophagy
(A) Quantification of AKHR protein levels in cultured Drosophila S2 cells upon the
treatment of proteasome and lysosome inhibitors (n = 3). Cultured cells transiently
expressing AKHR-HA were treated with the indicated chemicals. The lysates were analyzed
by western blot with HA antibody. (B) Formation of autophagosome in cultured S2 cells.
Cultured cells transiently expressing AKHR-HA and GFP-ATG8 were treated with 200 nM
rapamycin for 12 hr and stained for HA antibody. (C) Quantification of AKHR protein levels
in Cultured Drosophila S2 cells upon starvation and the treatment of rapamycin (n = 3).
Cultured S2 cells transiently expressing AKHR-HA were starved or treated with rapamycin,
and AKHR-HA was analyzed by western blot. (D) Quantification of ATG8 activation in the
head tissues of flies in vivo (n = 3-4). GFP-ATG8 was specifically expressed in AKHR+
neurons by using the GAL4-UAS system. Flies were fed with ND or HFD and their heads
were collected for western blot with GFP antibody. The ratio between ATG8-II and ATG8-I
bands indicates the level of autophagy. (E) Quantification of AKHR protein levels upon
suppressing neuronal autophagy in AKHR+ neurons in vivo (n = 3). ATG5 and ATG7 were
knocked down by the expression of RNAi constructs in AKHR+ neurons. AKHR-flag
expression was assayed by western blot. ns, p >0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ****p < 0.0001.
Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith Bonferroni correction
were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Inhibition of autophagy increases starvation-induced hyperactivity
(A) Representative traces (left) and quantification (right) of peak calcium responses of
AKHR+ neurons to AKH upon suppressing neuronal autophagy in AKHR+ neurons (n = 1011). The detailed genotypes: UAS- ATG5(7) RNAi/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/UAS-GCaMP6m.
For the Ctrl group, UAS-RNAi transgene was not introduced. (B) Midline crossing activity
(upper) of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of 5% sucrose in Day 1 (n
= 43-62). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD feeding vs. ND feeding
experience is also shown (lower). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001; ****p <
0.0001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith Bonferroni
correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 5. HFD activates TOR signaling
(A-B) p70s6k/AKT/AMPK phosphorylation under ND vs. HFD feeding conditions in vivo.
The head tissues of wild-type flies fed with ND or HFD were harvested and subjected to
western blot with phosphorylated p70s6k antibody (A) and AKT/AMPK antibodies (B) (n =
3). *Nonspecific bands. (C) AKHR accumulation upon pharmacological manipulation of
AMPK-TOR signaling in cultured Drosophila S2 cells (n = 3). Cultured S2 cells transiently
expressing AKHR-HA were treated with the indicated chemicals and then analyzed by
western blot with HA antibody. (D) Representative traces (left) and quantification (right) of
peak calcium responses of AKHR+ neurons to AKH, with or without rapamycin treatment (n
= 10-12). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Student’s t-test and one-way
ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and
multiple comparisons, respectively.

42

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6. AMPK-TOR signaling modulates starvation-induced hyperactivity
(A) Midline crossing activity of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of
5% sucrose in Day 1 (left) (n = 35-58). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD
feeding vs. ND feeding experience is also shown (right). (B) Midline crossing activity of
wild-type virgin females (pre-fed with or without rapamycin) assayed in the presence or
absence of 5% sucrose in Day 1 (left) (n = 48-64). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5day HFD feeding vs. ND feeding experience is also shown (right). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05;
**p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test
weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 7. LpR1 is required for HFD-strengthened hyperactivity under starvation
(A-B) LTP protein levels in the hemolymph. Hemolymph was collected from flies fed with
ND or HFD and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Volcano plot (A) shows peptides with
differential enrichment (under ND vs. HFD feeding conditions). The horizontal line indicates
the significance threshold (p = 0.01) and the vertical lines indicate two-fold change. Green
and red dots represent down-regulated and up-regulated peptides, respectively. Arrows
indicate three lipoproteins (LTP, LPP and MTP). The level of LTP was shown in B (n = 3).
(C-D) The cholesterol level (C) and triglyceride level (D) in the hemolymph harvested from
ND vs. HFD fed flies (n= 4-6). (E) Single cell RNAseq shows the gene expression level of
candidate lipoprotein receptors in AKHR+ neurons (n = 5). (F) AKHR protein levels from the
head tissues of the indicated genotypes fed with ND or HFD (n = 3). (G) Midline crossing
activity of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of 5% sucrose in Day 1
(upper) (n = 43-57). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD feeding vs. ND
feeding experience is also shown (lower). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01. Student’s t-test
and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith Bonferroni correction were used for
pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 8. Diet-independent hyperlipidemia promotes the excitability of AKHR+ neurons
and starvation-induced hyperactivity
(A-B) Average levels of cholesterol (A) and triglyceride (B) in the hemolymph of the
indicated genotypes (n = 4-11). (C-D) The levels of phosphorylated p70s6k (C) and AKHRflag (D) from the head tissues of indicated genotypes (n = 4). (E) Midline crossing activity
of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of 5% sucrose in Day 1 (upper) (n
= 41-63). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD feeding vs. ND feeding
experience is also shown (lower). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; ***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001.
Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test weith Bonferroni correction
were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1-figure supplement 1. HFD-feeding does not affect flies’ survival
(A) The survival curves of Wild-type Oregon-R virgin female flies fed with normal fly food
(ND, blue) or high-fat diet (HFD, orange) for five days and then assayed in the presence
(dark color) and absence (light color) of 5% sucrose using DAMS-based locomotion assay (n
= 46-63). (B) The percentage of live flies at different time points. ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05;
***p < 0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc
test weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons,
respectively.

Figure 4-figure supplement 1. Knocking down ATG7 in AKHR+ neurons promotes
starvation-induced hyperactivity
Midline crossing activity of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of 5%
sucrose in Day 1 (upper) (n = 30-60). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD
feeding vs. ND feeding experience is also shown (lower). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; ***p <
0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test
weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

Figure 5-figure supplement 1. TOR signaling pathway-related genes that are
differentially expressed in the head tissues of flies fed with ND vs. HFD
Wild-type virgin female flies were fed with ND or HFD. Their head tissues were harvested
and subjected to RNAseq analysis. GO categories and KEGG pathway analysis were used to
46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

identify TOR signaling pathway-related genes, whose expression levels were further
analyzed in Figure 5-figure supplement 2. Red and blue colors indicate anabolism and
catabolism genes, respectively.

Figure 5-figure supplement 2. Differentially expressed genes in TOR signaling pathways
in the head tissues of flies fed with ND vs. HFD
Heat map of differentially expressed genes enriched in TOR signaling pathways. Wild-type
virgin female flies were fed with ND or HFD. Their head tissues were harvested and
subjected to RNAseq analysis. Green and red columns represent down-regulated genes and
up-regulated genes, respectively. Red and blue font colors indicate anabolism and catabolism
genes, respectively. Note that most anabolism related genes were up-regulated while most
catabolism related genes were down-regulated upon HFD feeding. See Figue 5-figure
supplement 1 for the identification/classification of these genes.

Figure 6-figure supplement 1. Activation of TOR signaling in AKHR+ neurons
promotes starvation-induced hyperactivity
Midline crossing activity of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of 5%
sucrose in Day 1 (upper) (n = 36-46). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD
feeding vs. ND feeding experience is also shown (lower). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; ***p <
0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test
weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.
47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612234; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 6-figure supplement 2. Inhibition of AMPK signaling in AKHR+ neurons
promotes starvation-induced hyperactivity
Midline crossing activity of indicated genotypes assayed in the presence or absence of 5%
sucrose in Day 1 (upper) (n = 40-59). Starvation-induced hyperactivity after 5-day HFD
feeding vs. ND feeding experience is also shown (lower). ns, p > 0.05; *p < 0.05; ***p <
0.001; ****p < 0.0001. Student’s t-test and one-way ANOVA followed by post hoc test
weith Bonferroni correction were used for pair-wise and multiple comparisons, respectively.

Figure 8-figure supplement 1. A working model
We propose the following working model based on our results. AKHR protein levels in
AKHR+ neurons are well maintained via protein expression and autophagic degradation.
Under ND feeding, starvation induces the expression and release of AKH, which in turn
activates AKHR+ neurons and hence the release of OA. OA signaling promotes starvationinduced hyperactivity in these starved flies. Upon HFD feeding, however, the regulation of
starvation-induced hyperactivity is disrupted and greatly enhanced. Mechanistically, LTP
delivers excess dietary lipids to AKHR+ neurons via its cognate receptor LpR1. Subsequently,
neuronal autophagy is suppressed in AKHR+ neurons via AMPK-TOR signaling, which leads
to AKHR accumulation. As a result, AKHR+ neurons become hyper sensitive to AKH and
therefore starvation-induced hyperactivity is enhanced.

48

Figure 1

A

60
40
20
0

****
1

60
40
20
0

0.5
0

1.5

0

E
Feeding time (s)

ND
HFD
200
150
100
50
0

*

75
50
25
0

F

ND
HFD
0.5

ns

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

ns

Body weight (mg)

0.5

100

**
****

0.5
0

G

ND
HFD

1.5

+
+

Day 1
***

200
100
0

HFD ND

-

+

ND, Starved H
HFD, Starved
ns

0.5
0

0.3
0.2
0.1
0

ND, Starved
HFD, Starved
ns

Day 2
***

200
100

0

-

1

0.4

300

HFD ND

-

I
Food consumption (μL)

1

Triglyceride content
(μg/fly)

1.5

D

CO2 production
(μL/30min)

Body weight (mg)

2

ND
HFD
ns

Day 2
****

1

HFD
Sucrose

C

****

300

Day 2
HFD Oregon R, +Sucrose
HFD Oregon R, -Sucrose

Light cycle

***

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

80

Day 1

100

Triglyceride content
(μg/fly)

Crossings per 30 min

Day 1

1.5

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

ND Oregon R, +Sucrose
ND Oregon R, -Sucrose

Light cycle

Daily crossings (Χ1,000)
千

80

Daily crossings (Χ1,000)
千

Crossings per 30 min

B

75
50
25
0

ND, Starved
HFD, Starved
ns

Figure 2

0.50.5

DILP2

00.0

LSP-1α
d

DILP2

Legend

22

1
11

0
0

0

Fed

3

Starved
*

2

t st

3
1
1

0
0

Fed

Starved

HFD
40.096
(±2.351)
2.294
(±0.235)

1 .5
1.5

ND

ns

11.0

HFD

AKHR
-flag
dInR

0.5
0 .5
Actin
0 .0
0

AKHR

dInR

ND
HFD
****

3
3

22

ns

11
00
AKHR-flag dInR
R

d

K

H

I

A

5

H

G

5

d

-f

In

la

R

g

AKHR

InR

s

0

AKHR

ND
30.924
(±5.02)
2.329
(±0.363)

ND
HFD
ns

22.0

D ilp 2 p r o t e in le v e l ( f o ld c h a n g e )

Gene

mRNA level
(fold change)

ns

F
protein expression
(fold change)

E

m R N A le v e l ( f o ld c h a n g e )

D

N D -H F D

1.2

dorsal

ND
anterior

HFD

1 .5
1.5

△F/F0

△F/F0

0.8

***

2

2 .0

0.4

1

1 .0

0 .5
0.5

0
0

-0.2

0 .0

Sec

40

50

ND

HFD
D

30

F

20

H

10

D

0

N

AKHR Gal4 >
GCamp6m

Legend
Legend

2

h

5

5

d

AKH

Legend

2

s

AKH

HFD

*

33

t

11.0

ND

3

0
h h

DILP2 level in AKH level in
hemolymph hemolymph

ns

HFD-ST

1.51.5

ND-ST

HFD
101.542
(±3.877)
67.145
(±3.355)

ND
HFD
ns

ND

ND
110.403
AKH
(±10.814)
65.414
DILP2
(±7.202)

22.0

mRNA level
(fold change)

Gene

fo ld
H 2p ro
K
h aa nn ggee))
ld cc h
p roteteininlelevveel l ((fo
) ilp
D ilp 2 p ro te in le v e l (fo ld c h a n gAeD

C
A K H D lip 2 以 5 d N D 以 以 以 5 d a y Q -P C R g ro u p

0

B
ns

HFD

A

Figure 3

A

B

HA-AKHR

GFP-ATG8

MERGE

Control

HA-AKHR
Actin

HA-AKHR protein
expression (fold change)

D a ta 3

2.52.5

*

*

2.0

2.0

Rapamycin

ns

1.01.0
0.50.5
l
4C

D
HFD

AKHR-gal4>
GFP-ATG8-Ⅰ
GFP-ATG8-Ⅱ

HA-AKHR
Actin

Actin

0.20 .2
00 .0

ATG7

Actin

D ata 11
2.5
2.5

****

2.0
2.0

****

1.51.5
1.01.0
0.5
0.5

00.0
i
G7

i
AT

G5

rl

FD

ND HFD
H

pa

ST
FB

S-

-C
BS
%F

2%

Ra

trl

00.0

0 .4
0.4

D

0.50.5

**

0.60 .6

N

Ratio of
GFP-ATG8-II / I

***
1.01.0

ATG5

AKHR-flag

AKHR-flag protein
expression (fold change)

0.80 .8

****

10

HA-AKHR protein
expression (fold change)

Ctrl

D a ta 6

D ata 4

1.51.5

RNAi

E
ND

AT

C

NH

2
13

Ct
M

G

CQ

rl

00.0

Ct

1.51.5

Figure 4

A

ATG i

0.9
0.7

**
1.5
1 .5

0.5

△F/F0

0.3

1 .0
1

0 .5
0.5

0.1
0
-0.1

0 .0
0

Ctrl

60

UAS-ATG5 RNAi
/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

40
20
0
80

UAS-ATG5 RNAi/AKHR:BD

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

0

80
60

ns

***

-

+

i

A

N

0
80

UAS-ATG5 RNAi/AKHR:BD

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40

20
0

*

0
+
+
+

+
+
- +

R

20

50

UAS-ATG5 RNAi
AKHR:BD
nSyb:AD
HFD

7

40

**

100

g

UAS-ATG5 RNAi
/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

****

150

5

R

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

80

Light cycle

g

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

Light cycle

ATG7
ATG5
RNAi
RNAi
HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose
N

N

B

50（Sec）

40

at

30

i

20

A

10

D

0

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

*

at

△F/F0

22
.0

Ctrl
ATG5 RNAi
ATG7 RNAi

+
+
- +

Figure 5

B

A

C

HFD
p-AMPK

0.50 .5

*

0 .6
0.6

Ctrl

0.3

0 .4
0.4

Rap

△F/F0

0.2
0.1

0 .2
0.2
0 .0
0

0
--0.2
0 .2

-0.1
--0.4
0 .4

Ctrl

Rapamycin
a

50（Sec）

p

40

a

30

R

20

D

10

N

0

a

Y
H

ap

or
D

M

so

l

R ap

0.4

R

00 .0
A

D

FD

N

D

△F/F0

**

1.01 .0

tr

0

0 .0

*

1.51 .5

A

0 .5
0.5

**
***

2.02 .0

C

ns

2.52 .5

IC

2

D a ta 2

H

H

1

1 .0
1.0

H

FD

D

00

p-AKT

**

1 .5
1.5

FD

1.01

p-AMPK

D

2.02

2 .0
2.0

N

Phosphorylated kinase
expression (fold change)

*

N

p-p70S6K protein
expression (fold change)

c o p y d a ta 8

4.04
3.03

Actin

Actin

Actin

p -p 7 0

HA-AKHR

*
p-AKT

p-p70S6K

R

HFD

HA-AKHR protein
expression (fold change)

ND

ND

Figure 6

80

UAS-TOR TED/+; nSyb-AD/+

60
40
20
0
UAS-TOR TED /BD-AKHR

60
40
20

0

120
80
40
0

Light cycle
Oregon-R, +Sucrose
Oregon-R, -Sucrose

80

80

60

UAS-TOR TED/AKHR:BD;
nSyb:AD/+

40
20
0
UAS-TOR TED/+; nSyb-AD/+

60
40
20
0
UAS-TOR TED /BD-AKHR

60

*
200

*

*
*

150
100

ns

50
0

UAS-TOR TED
AKHR:BD
nSyb:AD
HFD

+
+
+

+
+

-

+

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

0

80

HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

20

Crossings per 30 min

40

B
Crossings per 30 min

UAS-TOR TED/AKHR:BD;
nSyb:AD/+

Light cycle

Crossings per 30 min

80

60

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

Crossings per 30 min

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

80

Crossings per 30 min

Light cycle

Crossings per 30 min

A

150

-

+

40
20
0

120
80
40
0

Light cycle
Oregon-R (+Rap), +Sucrose
Oregon-R (+Rap), -Sucrose

***

100
50
0

Rapamycin

-

+

+
+
- +

Figure 7

LTP

ND HFD
H

D

TG ND&HFD

1 .0
1.0
0 .5
0.5

0

0 .0

303 0
202 0

101 0
00

D

ND
D

HFD

N

FPKM

LpR1

50.338(±14.278)

LpR2

41.753(±27.684)

CG8909

28.405(±22.308)

Megalin

15.185(±8.319)

arr

14.705(±12.975)

LRP1
yl
AKHR

0.835(±0.793)
0
6.36(±4.16)

F

LpR1 RNAi

AKHR-gal4>

HFD

H

H

N

Gene

Actin
-

-

+ + +

-

44
33
22
11
Ctrl
l
tr
C

1

i

LpR1 RNAi
R

00

40

20
0

**

-

+

+ +

ND
HFD

UAS-LpR1 RNAi /AKHR:BD

60
40

20
0
AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0

150
*

ns

100

**

50
0

UAS-LpR1 RNAi
AKHR:BD
nSyb:AD
HFD

ns

p

AKHR-flag protein
A K H R - fla g
expression
change)
change)
e l ( fo ld
p r o te in le v(fold

-

80

UAS-LpR1 RNAi /AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

60

Ctrl

AKHR-flag

HFD

80

HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

*

404 0

F

ND

80

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

1 .5
1.5

505 0

D

Triglyceride content
(mmol/L)

*

D

Cholesterol content
(mmol/L)

2 .0
2.0

FD

D

Log Ratio

T -C H O 2N D & H F D

C

00

1

0

N

-1

11

Crossings per 30 min

1

22

F

2

MTP

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

Crossings per 30 min

LTP expression
(fold change)

LPP

3

Light cycle

G

**

LTP

4

0

E

L T P /M S fo ld c h a n g e

33

Crossings per 30 min

B

5

L

-log 10 (p value)

A

+
+
+
-

+
+
+

-

+
+
+

-

+

Figure 8

B

T G 2 5 6 8 (L p R 1 i)& p p l

T -C H O 2 5 6 8 (L p R 1 i)& p p l

*p

*2

25

25

W

68

W

W

56

pl
*p

pl

8

*p

56
*2
W

ppl>W+

C

ppl>LpR1i
p-p70S6K
Actin

p-p70S6K expression
(fold change)

D a ta 9
2 .5
2.5

***

2 .0
2.0

p p l< W +
ppl>W+
p p l< L p R 1 i
ppl>LpR1i

p -p 7 0

1 .5
1.5

1.0
1 .0

0 .5
0.5

0
p

l<

p

L

p

l<

R

W

+

D

1i

0 .0

ppl-gal4>

LpR1i

p

p

Ctrl

Crossings per 30 min

00

Crossings per 30 min

101 0

Crossings per 30 min

202 0

pl

00

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

30

*p

11

Light cycle
HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

30

8

Cholesterol content
(mmol/L)

22

404 0

pl

3

Triglyceride content
(mmol/L)

*
*

3

E

***
***

68

A

80

UAS-LpR1 RNAi /ppl-GAL4

60
40
20
0
UAS-LpR1 RNAi /+

80
60
40
20
0
80

+/ppl-GAL4

60
40
20
0

AKHR-flag

D a ta 1 2
2 .5
2.5

**

2 .0
2.0
1 .5
1.5
1 .0
1.0

ppl>W+
pppl>LpR1i
p l< L p R 1 i
p p l< W +

200

0 .5
0.5

0
l<

p

L

p

l<

R

W

+

1i

0 .0

p
p

****
ns

150

*

100
50
0

UAS-LpR1 RNAi
ppl-GAL4
HFD

p

p r o t e in le v e l ( fo ld c h a n g e )

AKHR-flag protein
- f la g change)
AKHR
(fold
expression

Actin

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

**** ****

+
+
-

+
+

-

+
+

-

+

n

g

ig

li

h

h

h

t

t

t

2

2

1

100
100

ig

T r i g ly c e r i d e c o n t e n t ( n m o l/f ly )

00
150
150

n

50
50

Survival rates (%)

ns

1

2

2

100
100

t

t

t

ND, +Sucrose
HFD, +Sucrose
ns
ns
ns

h

h

h

1

1

Survival (%) Survival (%)

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

g

ig

g

t

t

Light cycle

li

n

li

h

h

150
150

ig

g

A

n

li

Survival rates (%)

B
T r i g ly c e r i d e c o n t e n t ( n m o l/f ly )

Figure 1-figure supplement 1

HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

0.5
1

0

0.5
1

0

ND, -Sucrose
HFD, -Sucrose
ns
ns
ns
ns

50
50

00

60

Light cycle

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

80

Light cycle

UAS-ATG7 RNAi
/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

40

20
0
80

UAS-ATG7 RNAi/AKHR:BD

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

Figure 4-figure supplement 1

80

UAS-ATG7 RNAi
/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0
80

UAS-ATG7 RNAi/AKHR:BD

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0

***

150

**
ns

100

**
*

50
0

UAS-ATG7 RNAi
AKHR:BD
nSyb:AD
HFD

+
+
+
-

+

+
+
- +

+
+
- +

Figure 5-figure supplement 1

Cellular response to starvation

Catabolism

Ubiquitin mediated proteolysis

CG11999

CG9107

Bka

ns1

CG13185

to

l(2)k09022

whd

CG7220

eff

Cdc23

shtd

Ube3a
Autophagy

Bruce

Mitf

CG6878

hiw

Sec61gamma
negative regulation of gene expression

Lipid biosynthesis

TOR signaling
pathway

lin-52

sbb

Upf1

ttk

CG5508

fu12

CG33110

shd

ScpX

spo

CG2781

Multicellular organism reproduction

Anabolism

CG1124

PebIII

CG13965

Yp2

CG2650

Yp3

CG31189

cact

CG5867

grk

CG5945

wun

CG9029

biosynthetic process

AGO2

Gs1

CG15547

Odc2

mRpL49

Rel

CG32103

eg

CG8026

sug

l(2)efl

slp2

CG32121

sun

Figure 5-figure supplement 2

ND 1-3

HFD 1-3

Anabolism

Catabolism

CG11999
Bka
CG13185
to
CG9107
ns1
l(2)k09022
whd
CG7220
Cdc23
Ube3a
eff
shtd
Bruce
Mitf
CG6878
Sec61gamma
hiw
lin-52
Upf1
sbb
ttk
CG5508
fu12
shd
CG33110
ScpX
CG2781
spo
CG1124
CG13965
CG2650
CG31189
CG5867
CG5945
CG9029
PebIII
Yp2
Yp3
cact
grk
wun
AGO2
CG15547
sug
CG32103
CG8026
l(2)efl
CG32121
Gs1
Odc2
Rel
eg
mRpL49
slp2
sun
Gene expression change

-2

-1

0

1

2

Cellular response to starvation

Ubiquitin mediated proteolysis

Autophagy

negative regulation of gene expression

Lipid biosynthesis

Multicellular organism reproduction

biosynthetic process

Figure 6-figure supplement 1

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

80

60

UAS-TSC1 RNAi /AKHR:BD;
nSyb:AD/+

40
20
0
80

UAS-TSC1 RNAi /AKHR:BD

60
40
20
0
AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60

40
20
0

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

Light cycle
80

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

80

Crossings per 30 min

Light cycle

UAS-TSC1 RNAi /AKHR:BD;
nSyb:AD/+

60

40
20
0

80

UAS-TSC1 RNAi /AKHR:BD

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0
***

200
**

*

150
ns

100

*

50
0

UAS-TSC1 RNAi
AKHR:BD
nSyb:AD
HFD

+
+
+
-

+
+
+

-

HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

+
+
+

-

+

Figure 6-figure supplement 2

ND; +Sucrose
ND; -Sucrose

UAS-AMPK-DN/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/UAS-AMPK-DN

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60

40
20
0

Crossings per 30 min

Light cycle
80

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

80

(ST-FED)/FED (%)

Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min Crossings per 30 min

Light cycle

80

UAS-AMPK-DN/AKHR:BD; nSyb:AD/+

60
40

20
0
AKHR:BD/UAS-AMPK-DN

60
40
20
0
80

AKHR:BD/+; nSyb:AD/+

60
40
20
0
***

150
**
100

*

ns

**

50
0

UAS-AMPK-DN
AKHR:BD
nSyb:AD
HFD

+
+
+
-

+
+
+

-

+
+
+

HFD; +Sucrose
HFD; -Sucrose

-

+

Figure 8-figure supplement 1

HFD

Starvation

LTP-lipid
LpR1

Hyperactivity

AKH
AKHR

Neuronal
activation

AMPK

Autophagosomes
TOR

OA

AKHR neuron

