bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

Running Head: AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY

Developmental changes in connectivity between the amygdala subnuclei and
occipitotemporal cortex
Heather A. Hansen and Zeynep M. Saygin
The Ohio State University

Please address correspondence to:
Heather A. Hansen, Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 225 Psychology
Building, 1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH, 43210. E-mail: hansen.508@osu.edu
and
Zeynep M. Saygin, Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 225 Psychology
Building, 1835 Neil Avenue, Columbus, OH, 43210. E-mail: saygin.3@osu.edu
Word Count: XXXX, including main body and references

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

2
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Abstract
The amygdala, a subcortical structure known for social and emotional processing, can be
subdivided into multiple nuclei with unique functions and connectivity patterns. Tracer studies in
adult macaques have shown that the lateral and basal amygdala subnuclei decrease in
connectivity to visual cortical areas moving from anterior to posterior, and that infants have
similar adult-like projections plus additional connections that are refined with development. Can
we delineate the connectivity between the amygdala subnuclei and occipitotemporal cortex in
humans, and will it show similar developmental differences as macaques? If so, what functional
regions may be contributing to this pattern of connectivity? To address these questions, we
anatomically defined the lateral and basal amygdala subnuclei in 20 adult subjects, 27 kids (aged
7-8), and 15 neonates. We then defined the occipitotemporal region in each individual’s native
anatomy, and split this entire region into five equal sections from anterior to posterior. We also
defined visual functional parcellations in the occipitotemporal cortex (e.g. FFA, PPA) and
anatomically defined primary visual cortex (i.e., V1). Using Diffusion Weighted Imaging data,
we ran probabilistic tractography with FSL between the amygdala subnuclei as seeds and the
occipitotemporal cortical parcellations as targets. Results showed that like macaques, the mean
connectivity across subjects to the occipitotemporal cortex significantly decreased on a gradient
from anterior to posterior, and that connectivity in kids and neonates was adult-like but became
more refined across development. Further, refinement of connectivity to mid and posterior
occipitotemporal cortex was largely driven by anterior PPA, LO, and V1, with connectivity to
higher order visual areas increasing with age. The functional maturation of these regions may
contribute to the continued refinement of these connections, in line with Interactive
Specialization hypotheses of brain development.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

3
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
1. Introduction
How does emotional valence influence visual perception? Whether it be driving by an
emotionally salient car crash or happening upon an animal carcass in the jungle, perceiving
visual stimuli through an emotional lens can be critical for quick motor responses and ultimate
survival. It has been shown that emotionally salient cues preceding a target actually enhance
target perception (e.g., Phelps et al., 2006), and that perceiving aversive stimuli enhances blood
flow to the middle temporal gyrus, for example (e.g., Kosslyn et al., 1996). Developmentally, not
only does visual acuity improve with age (Teller et al., 1986), but visual perceptual mechanisms
of emotional stimuli are also fine-tuned with experience (e.g., Leppänen & Nelson, 2009).
Emotional valence is canonically tied to the amygdala, an evolutionarily preserved neural
structure known for emotional processing and regulation (e.g., Ochsner, Silvers, & Buhle, 2012;
Phillips et al., 2003). The amygdala has been additionally implicated in social cognition and
attention (e.g., Adolphs & Spezio, 2006), fear recognition and conditioning (e.g., Adolphs et al.,
2005; Phillips & LeDoux, 1992), stimulus-value learning and reward (e.g., Baxter & Murray,
2002; Paton et al., 2006), and novelty detection (e.g., Kiehl et al., 2005; Schwartz et al., 2003).
The functions of the amygdala and the way in which the amygdala assigns valence to stimuli
change across development (Tottenham, Hare, & Casey, 2009). Similarly, visual perceptual
skills and their neural correlates also change across development (Atkinson, 2000). Perceiving
the identity of visual stimuli is commonly attributed to the occipitotemporal cortex, the location
of the ventral visual stream and “what” pathway (e.g., Goodale & Milner, 1992). It has been
suggested that emotionally enhanced visual perception may occur via cortical feedback
connections between the amygdala and visual cortex (Vuilleumier, 2005).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

4
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Probing these connections, work in macaques shows that visual cortical areas that are
more rostral receive heavier amygdalar projections than visual cortical areas that are more caudal
(Amaral & Price, 1984; Iwai & Yukie, 1987). Projections from the amygdala subnuclei to
ventral stream visual cortical areas are topographically organized on a gradient, such that more
rostral subnuclei project more strongly to rostral visual areas and more caudal subnuclei project
more strongly to caudal visual areas (Amaral & Price, 1984; Amaral, 2002; Amaral, Behniea, &
Kelly, 2003; Freese & Amaral, 2005, Figure 1). Amaral and colleagues found the basal
subnucleus of the amygdala to especially follow this pattern, but noted additional projections
from area TE to the lateral subnucleus that creates a feedforward/feedback loop. Other work in
adult macaques has similarly shown projections from areas TEO and TE to the lateral nucleus of
the amygdala, and from area TE to the basal nucleus (Webster et al., 1991a).

Figure 1. Line drawing summarizing
the organization of projections between
the amygdala and ventral stream visual
cortical areas in adult macaques
(reproduced from Freese & Amaral,
2005, pending approval)

Interestingly, these connections change over development. Experiments comparing adult
to juvenile animals, specifically in nonhuman primates (e.g., Webster et al., 1991a; Webster et
al., 1991b; Kalin et al., 2001; Kalin et al., 1991) and rats (e.g., Bouwmeester et al., 2002a;
Bouwmeester et al., 2002b), reveal that amygdalar projections are adult-like in juveniles, but that
juveniles also have additional connections that are either totally eliminated with maturation or
more refined in their distribution.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

5
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Do these connections show a similar pattern in human development? We know that
macaque cortex is differently oriented than human cortex, and although homologies exist, the
connectivity pattern in macaques may not necessarily perfectly map to humans (Passingham,
2009; Van Essen et al., 2016). Moreover, in humans, it is more challenging to study amygdalar
connections, especially with respect to the basal vs. lateral nucleus and their connections to
visual cortex. As tracer studies are invasive, studies exploring the structural connectivity of the
amygdala and its developmental changes in humans have only been possible more recently,
using non-invasive methods such as Diffusion Weighted Imaging (DWI) data. Several groups
have used a variety of methods to parcellate the amygdala into two to four subunits (e.g., Saygin
et al. 2011; Bach et al., 2011; Brown et al., 2014; Qin et al., 2012; Qin et al., 2014; GabardDurnam et al., 2014; Gabard-Durnam et al., 2018). More recent work has made it possible to use
local intensity differences in a typical T1 scan to divide the human amygdala into nine separate
subunits (Saygin et al., 2017), thus allowing a way to parcellate the amygdala using a T1 and
explore the connectivity of these subunits with a separate (independent) connectivity scan. It is
advantageous to parcellate the amygdala into its subnuclei because they are functionally distinct.
For instance, the lateral subnucleus has been shown to be involved in learning new stimulusaffect associations in humans (Johansen et al., 2010), whereas the basal subnucleus may be the
site of convergence of sensory and cognitive information (Stefanacci & Amaral, 2002).
There is some previous work in humans that explores the developmental changes of
amygdalar connectivity. A study that explored a cross-sectional sample of 5-30 year olds showed
that DWI connectivity of the lateral and basal nuclei to cortical areas becomes increasingly
sparse and localized with age (Saygin et al., 2015). A functional connectivity study in 7-9 year
olds vs. adults found that the basolateral amygdala had stronger connectivity with temporal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

6
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
regions than the centromedial amygdala, and that overall connectivity was stronger in adults
compared to children (Qin et al., 2012). Another study showed that basolateral functional
connectivity to regions including parahippocampal gyrus, superior temporal cortex, and occipital
lobe decreases with age across 4-23-year-olds (Gabard-Durnam et al., 2014), but that the
basolateral amygdala showed increasing functional connectivity to occipital cortex between ages
3 months to 5 years Gabard-Durnam et al., 2018). This last study is the opposite pattern than
what was found in macaque development (i.e., decreasing connectivity across age, e.g., Webster
et al., 1991a), and may be due to the differences between functional vs. white-matter
connectivity or due to interesting differences between macaques and humans. Moreover, it
remains unclear why these connections change with development; it is possible that they change
with respect to functionally specific parts of occipitotemporal cortex that show increasing
developmental specialization. To date, no study has investigated neonatal structural connectivity
of the amygdala subnuclei and no study has investigated this connectivity with respect to
functional regions within visual cortex.
Does the rostrocaudal gradient of connectivity from the lateral and basal subnuclei
observed by Amaral and colleagues in macaques match that of humans, or will a different pattern
emerge? More specifically, can we delineate the connectivity between the amygdala subnuclei
and the occipitotemporal cortex using noninvasive methods in humans, and does the connectivity
differ across development? Moreover, the occipitotemporal cortex contains a multitude of wellstudied functional areas in the ventral visual stream; are the developmental changes in
connectivity specific to certain functional parcels located within the occipitotemporal cortex?
Here we investigate the developmental changes in the connectivity between the lateral and basal
amygdalar subnuclei and the occipitotemporal cortex using DWI probabilistic tractography on a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

7
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
cross-sectional sample of adults, kids, and neonates. In Experiment 1, we target the entire cortex
anatomically to noninvasively recreate the tracer work done in macaques. In Experiment 2, we
apply a unique approach by targeting functionally defined parcels in the ventral visual stream in
order to draw conclusions about what might be driving the observed pattern of structural
connectivity. To get an even finer-grained idea of the connectivity patterns, we target both the
whole parcels and the parcels subdivided into anterior and posterior sections.
2. Experiment 1
2.1 Method
2.1.1 Participants
Adults. Twenty adults (10 female, mean age = 24.6 years) from the greater Boston area
were used as part of a larger study exploring the development of the visual word form area.
Participants had no neurological, neuropsychological, or developmental diagnoses. The study
was approved by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and participants gave consent to
participate.
Kids. Twenty-seven kids from the greater Boston area were used as part of a larger study.
Kids were scanned after the completion of second grade (14 female, mean age = 8.4 years).
All participants were born after at least 36 weeks gestation and had no neurological,
neuropsychological, or developmental diagnoses. The study was approved by the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Boston Children’s Hospital. Parents gave written
consent and children gave verbal assent to participate.
Neonates. Neonatal data were acquired from the initial release of 40 neonatal subjects
from the Developmental Human Connectome Project. Neonates were scanned at the Evelina
Neonatal Imaging Center in London, and the study was approved by the UK Health Research

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

8
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Authority. The present study excludes data from neonates in which Freesurfer’s aparc+aseg
anatomical segmentation was misaligned, resulting in 15 total participants. All neonates were
born and at term age when imaged (of the 15: 5 female, mean gestational age at birth =
38.21, mean gestational age at scan = 39.05 weeks).
2.1.2. Acquisition
For the adult and kid participants, diffusion-weighted data were acquired using echo
planar imaging (64 slices, voxel size 2mm3, 128x128 base resolution, b-value 700s/mm2,
diffusion weighting isotropically distributed along 60 directions) on a 3T Siemens scanner
with a 32-channel head-coil. Images were processed using FSL’s FDT software.
Additionally, a high-resolution (1 mm3) 3D magnetization-prepared rapid acquisition with
gradient echo (MPRAGE) scan was also acquired on all participants. An online prospective
motion algorithm reduced the effect of motion artifacts during the structural scan, and 10
selective reacquisition images were acquired and included to replace images that were
affected by head motion. Structural MRI data were processed in FreeSurfer v.5.2.0
(http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/) using a semiautomated processing stream with default
parameters, which includes motion and intensity correction, surface coregistration, spatial
smoothing, subcortical segmentation, and cortical parcellation based on spherical template
registration. The resulting cortical parcellations were reviewed for quality control.
For the neonate participants, the diffusion-weighted data used here were acquired using a
spherically optimized set of directions on 4 shells with b-values of 0 (20 slices), 400 (64
slices), 1000 (88 slices), and 2600 (128 slices) (Tournier et al., 2015). These directions were
split into four optimal subsets, one per phase encoding direction. The phase encoding
directions were spread temporally, accounting for motion and duty cycle considerations.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

9
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Additional motion correction reconstruction techniques were developed and interruption
robustness was accomplished using a restart capability with user-selected set back from the
break time point (Hutter et al., 2015, Hughes et al., 2017b). Slices were 3mm with 1.5mm
overlap and 1.5x1.5mm resolution, with TE=90 and TR=3800ms. Additionally, a highresolution (0.8 mm3) MPRAGE scan was also acquired on all participants. Images were
acquired on a Philips 3T Achieva scanner using a specially designed neonatal 32 channel
phased array head coil with dedicated slim immobilization pieces to reduce gross motion
(Hughes et al., 2017b). Neonates were scanned while in natural sleep. Structural MRI data
were processed in FreeSurfer v.6.0.0 (http://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/infantFS)
using a dedicated infant processing pipeline (Zöllei et al., 2017; de Macedo Rodrigues et al.,
2015; Makropoulos et al., 2018) which includes motion and intensity correction, surface
coregistration, spatial smoothing, subcortical segmentation, and cortical parcellation based on
spherical template registration. The resulting cortical parcellations were reviewed for quality
control, and only neonates with correctly labeled cortical parcellations were used in the
analysis.
2.1.3. Defining seeds and targets for tractography
Using automated segmentation (Saygin et al., 2017), nine amygdala subnuclei (lateral,
basal, accessory basal, central, medial, cortical, paralaminar, cortico-amygdaloid transition
area, anterior amygdala area) were parcellated in each individual’s native space. In an
attempt to replicate the gradient diagram from Freese and Amaral (2005, Figure 1) in
humans, and because the lateral and basal subnuclei are associated with sensory and
cognitive processes (Johansen et al., 2010; Stefanacci & Amaral, 2002) and thus likely

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

10
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
contribute to emotional visual perception, the lateral and basal subnuclei were the two main
seeds of interest in the present experiment (Figure 2A).

Figure 2. Seeds (A) and targets (B) used for tractography. A) Using the atlas developed by Saygin et al., 2017, an
example parcellation of the lateral (LA, blue) and basal (BA, red) subnuclei in a representative subject, viewed
coronally. B) Depiction of the 5 occipitotemporal cortex (OTC) labels in a representative subject viewed axially (left)
and sagittally (right). Labels marked from most anterior (OTC 5, dark blue) to most posterior (OTC 1, dark green).

To explore the structural connectivity of the amygdala subnuclei to occipitotemporal
cortex (OTC), an OTC label was made for each individual that combined all Freesurfer
anatomical regions (using aparc+aseg) in the occipital and temporal cortices. In order to track
differences in connectivity across the region, the label was split (separately for each
individual and each hemisphere) into five equal sections from anterior to posterior (Figure
2B). These five OTC sections were the targets used for tractography.
Using the diffusion-weighted imaging data for each subject, principal diffusion
directions were calculated per voxel. Probabilistic tractography was carried out using FSLFDT (Behrens et al., 2003; Behrens et al., 2007; Tomassini et al., 2007) on the Ohio
Supercomputer (Ohio Supercomputer Center, 1987) between the two amygdala subnuclei as
seeds and five anatomical OTC sections as targets. Each seed voxel had 10,000 streamline
samples to create a connectivity distribution to each of the target regions, while avoiding a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

11
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
mask consisting of the ventricles and cerebellum. The connection probability to each of the
of the target regions was calculated for each amygdala voxel in each participant, producing a
connectivity vector for each voxel. To account for differing connection probabilities in the
deepest parts of the amygdala and to allow for relative comparison within and across
participants (e.g., Croxson et al., 2005; Tomassini et al., 2007; Bach et al., 2011), each
connectivity vector was normalized to [0,1] by dividing by the maximum connection
probability of that amygdala voxel to all the other target regions (see Saygin et al., 2011).
2.2. Results and Discussion

Figure 3. Connectivity between the lateral subnucleus and the entire occipitotemporal cortex, averaged across
all adults (N = 20, top panel), kids (N = 27, middle panel), and neonates (N = 15, bottom panel). All views are
of an inflated left hemisphere. Connectivity values are on a log scale thresholded for each sample such that
yellow corresponds to a max percentile of 0.99, and red represents a min percentile of 0.85.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

12
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Figure 3 depicts the mean connectivity that results from seeding the lateral subnucleus to
the entire OTC in all three samples, projected onto a representative individual from each sample.
Figure 4 depicts how the magnitude of this connectivity changes slice by slice in the entire OTC.
A gradient-like decrease in connectivity was immediately apparent in the adults and kids, but
neonates exhibited additional connectivity to the posterior cortex not found in the older samples.

Figure 4. Connectivity between the lateral subnucleus and the entire occipitotemporal cortex,
meaned across each slice in the OTC, moving coronally from anterior to posterior. Slices are
normalized using z-scores of mean connectivity for each sample, thus accounting for
differences in head size and allowing for comparison across samples. Lines represent the
mean connectivity, shading represents standard error of the mean.

To reduce the amount of multiple comparisons, further analyses were conducted by
binning the OTC into the five sections used as targets for tractography. A 3 (Sample: adults vs.
kids vs. neonates, between-subjects) x 2 (Amygdala subnucleus: lateral vs. basal, within-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

13
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
subjects) x 5 (OTC label: 5 [anterior] vs. 4 vs. 3 vs. 2 vs. 1 [posterior], within-subjects) ANOVA
was conducted, to assess changes in mean connectivity from the amygdala subnuclei to the OTC
across development. For analyses in which multiple comparisons were conducted, we used the
Holm-Bonferroni method (Holm, 1979) to control the familywise Type I error rate (corrected pvalues are denoted by pHB).
Results showed that indeed, across all seeds and samples and collapsed across
hemispheres, there was a main effect of OTC label, F(4,590) = 559.25, p < 5 x 10-199 (Figure 5).
More specifically, connectivity to each of the sections decreased on a gradient from anterior to
posterior, with significantly more connectivity to OTC 5 than OTC 4 (t(123) = 17.01, pHB < 2 x
10-33), to OTC 4 than OTC 3 (t(123) = 8.96, pHB < 2 x 10-14), and to OTC 3 than OTC 2 (t(123) =

Figure 5. Mean connectivity, calculated separately in each individual and averaged
across each sample, between the lateral (LA) and basal (BA) amygdala subnuclei and
each of the five anatomical OTC labels. Error bars depict standard error of the mean.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

14
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
5.41, pHB < 7 x 10-7). However, there was marginally more connectivity to OTC 1 than OTC 2
(t(123) = -1.94, pHB = 0.054), although not significant.
This break in the gradient is reflected in a significant sample x OTC label interaction
(F(8,590) = 10.67, p < 5 x 10-14), and as evidenced by Figure 5, can be attributed to the relatively
higher connectivity to OTC 1 in neonates. In fact, when broken down by sample, adults and kids
both show significant decreases across the entire OTC region (see Table 1). Neonates, however,
display a U-shaped trend: connectivity in neonates significantly decreases from anterior- to midOTC, then increases to posterior-OTC (Table 1). This suggests that all connections in kids and
anterior connections in neonates are already adult-like since they follow a similar gradient
pattern, but become more refined with age given significantly more connections to posterior
regions in the neonates.
Table 1
t-test results and corresponding p-values comparing mean connectivity between each adjacent
OTC label, collapsed across seed and broken down by sample.
Sample

OTC comparison

t

df

p

Adults

5–4
4–3
3–2
2–1
5–4
4–3
3–2
2–1
5–4
4–3
3–2
2–1

8.467
3.870
7.568
2.657
12.813
8.210
3.332
2.706
8.705
5.091
-1.570
-3.229

39
39
39
39
53
53
53
53
29
29
29
29

9.118 x 10-10
8.058 x 10-4
1.080 x 10-8
0.011
2.924 x 10-17
1.552 x 10-10
0.003
0.009
5.562 x 10-9
5.914 x 10-5
0.127
0.006

Kids

Neonates

Note: p-values are Holm-Bonferroni corrected.

Lastly, there was a significant main effect of mean connectivity between the two
amygdala subnuclei seeds (F(1,590) = 183.83, p < 2 x 10-36), with the lateral subnucleus

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

15
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
showing higher connectivity overall than the basal subnucleus, supporting previous research that
each subnucleus has unique functions and connectivity patterns. Overall, the development of
amygdalar connectivity to the OTC in humans resembles that of macaques, with certain
exceptions that may correspond to differences in functional specialization of the OTC targets.
3. Experiment 2
Both macaques and humans exhibit a noteworthy pattern of connectivity between the
lateral and basal subnuclei and OTC, and the connectivity changes are consistent across
development between the two species. However, both of these findings probe structural
connections to anatomical cortical targets. Further, Experiment 1 also revealed that neonates
have significantly more connections to posterior cortex relative to kids and adults. Is there a
functional explanation as to why the connectivity is organized in such a pattern? Or, more
specifically, what functional regions in the OTC might be driving the developmental change in
structural connectivity in humans revealed in Experiment 1?
Additionally, it is possible that an underlying scaffold exists within each parcel, matching
the anatomical gradient, such that anterior sections of the parcels receive more connections than
posterior sections. Does the functional specialization of these parcels as a whole explain the
observed connectivity, or will dividing the parcels into anterior and posterior sections tell more
of the story?
3.1. Method
3.1.1. Participants/Acquisition.
The same participants were used as in Experiment 1. The same diffusion scans (i.e., same
acquisition parameters) as Experiment 1 were used in Experiment 2.
3.1.2. Defining seeds and targets for tractography.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

16
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
As in Experiment 1, the lateral and basal amygdala subnuclei were the main seeds of
interest. To explore what functional cortical regions in the OTC might be driving the gradient
of connectivity observed by Freese and Amaral (2005) in Macaques and by Experiment 1 in
humans, functional parcels were used as targets in Experiment 2. Functional parcels were
chosen that were shown to encompass individually defined regions in the OTC associated
with the visual processing of faces, scenes, and objects (Julian et al., 2012). These parcels
included the Fusiform Face Area (FFA), Occipital Face Area (OFA), and Superior Temporal
Sulcus (STS), regions known for processing faces over objects (e.g., Kanwisher, McDermott
& Chun, 1997; Gauthier et al., 2000; Hoffman & Haxby, 2000); Lateral Occipital (LO), a
subdivision of the Lateral Occipital Complex known for processing objects over scrambled
objects (e.g., Grill-Spector et al., 1999); and Parahippocampal Place Area (PPA) and
Retrosplenial Cortex (RSC), which process scenes over objects and are activated in tasks
such as navigation (e.g., Epstein & Kanwisher, 1998; Epstein, 2008). Parcels were excluded
if they overlapped more than 50% with another parcel; for this reason, we elected not to use
the Posterior Fusiform Sulcus (PFS), the other subdivision of the Lateral Occipital Complex,
due to its high overlap with FFA.
The functional selectivity of these parcels was validated in the adult subjects with four
different localizer tasks. Once confirmed, the six parcels, originally in CVS average-35
MNI152 anatomical space, were then overlaid onto each individual’s anatomical MPRAGE
scan using the inverse transform of Freesurfer’s CVS toolbox (Postelnicu et al., 2009; Zöllei
et al., 2010; https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/mri_cvs_register) to the CVS average35 in MNI152 template in adults and kids, and Advanced Normalization Tools software
(ANTs, Avants et al., 2011) in neonates. Then, the parcels were transformed to native

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

17
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
diffusion space using nearest neighbor interpolation with Freesurfer’s bbregister function
(Greve et al., 2009; https://surfer.nmr.mgh.harvard.edu/fswiki/bbregister) in adults and kids,
and ANTs in neonates. It is worth noting that although neonates may not have functionallyspecific cortical areas yet, registering the parcels into each individual’s native anatomy
allows us to align the regions to a common space and approximate where the regions will
eventually be located in neonates.
In addition to these six functional parcels, we sought to explore connectivity to primary
visual cortex (V1); since the location of V1 is evolutionarily preserved, V1 was anatomically
defined in each subject using the pericalcarine cortex.
Because some of these parcels overlap with each other, the seven targets were pruned by
comparing each parcel against every other in each individual subject, locating any
intersecting voxels, and assigning the voxels in question to whichever of the parcels was
smaller; this eliminated ambiguity with tractography so that no voxel belonged to more than
one target. Additionally, any white matter voxels contained within the parcels were also
removed.
For continuity with Experiment 1, we wanted to determine the location of these seven
parcels along the sagittal axis in order to sort them into OTC labels. This was done by
loading each original parcel from the CVS average brain alongside the five OTC labels –
which were anatomically defined in the CVS average brain as in Experiment 1 – and
calculating the proportion of overlap between each parcel and each of the five labels. A given
parcel was assigned to the OTC label with which it contained the highest proportion of
overlapping voxels, thereby representing where most of the parcel’s mass was. These
functional parcels are all located exclusively in the posterior half of the OTC (i.e., between

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

18
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
OTC 1 and OTC 3); as such, we are not drawing functional conclusions about the anterior
portions of the OTC. The functional parcels were sorted into the following OTC labels,
collapsed across hemispheres: OTC 3 (STS, PPA), OTC 2 (RSC, FFA, LO), and OTC 1
(OFA,V1). See Figure 6 for parcel locations.

Figure 6. A 3D rendering of each of the seven functional parcels in the left
hemisphere, viewed ventrally and overlaid on an axial slice. For reference,
the right hemisphere contains the entire OTC. The seven parcels are sorted
by their location, from anterior (OTC 3) to posterior (OTC 1).

As before, using the diffusion-weighted imaging data for each subject, probabilistic
tractography was run with FSL, this time with the amygdala subnuclei as seeds and functional
parcels as targets (using the same procedures as in Exp. 1)

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

19
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Additionally, in a separate analysis exporing an underlying connectivity scaffold within
the parcels, the seven functional parcels were divided in half in native diffusion space, creating
separate anterior and posterior sections for each parcel. Probabilistic tractography was again run
with FSL, using the amygdala subnuclei as seeds and these anterior and posterior subdivisions as
targets.
3.2. Results and Discussion
First, a 3 (Sample: adults vs. kids vs. neonates, between-subjects) x 2 (Amygdala
subnucleus: lateral vs. basal, within-subjects) x 3 (OTC label: 3 [anterior] vs. 2 vs. 1 [posterior],
within-subjects) ANOVA was conducted to assess developmental changes in mean connectivity
from the amygdala subnuclei to functional parcels located in the OTC. If these functional parcels
were at least somewhat contributing to the gradient found in Experiment 1, then results should be
similar to the anatomical findings; if the connectivity to anatomical targets is irrespective of the
functional specialization of the cortex, then a different pattern might emerge.
Results showed that indeed, across all seeds and samples and collapsed across
hemispheres, there was a main effect of OTC label, F(2,354) = 22.98, p < 5 x 10-10 (Figure 7A).
OTC 3 had significantly higher mean connectivity that OTC 2 (t(123) = 5.14, pHB < 4 x 10-6) and
OTC 1 (t(123) = 3.83, pHB < 5 x 10-4). However, connectivity differences were not significantly
different between OTC 2 and OTC 1 (t(123) = -1.11, pHB = 0.27) when collapsed across samples.
As evidenced by the graphs of mean connectivity in Figure 5 and Figure 7A, these results mirror
the anatomical findings from Experiment 1. This confirms that the functional parcels used here
contributed at least somewhat to the observed anatomical gradient. To discern which functional
parcels were driving the gradient, additional analyses were done comparing the connectivity to
the parcels located within each OTC label separately.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

20
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY

Figure 7. Mean connectivity, calculated separately in each individual and averaged across each sample, between the lateral
(LA) and basal (BA) amygdala subnuclei and the three OTC labels that were the primary locations of functional parcels. A)
Connectivity collapsed across parcels. OTC 3 averages connectivity across STS and PPA. OTC 2 averages connectivity
across RSC, FFA, and LO. OTC 1 averages connectivity across OFA and V1. B-D) Connectivity to the functional parcels
individually, split depending on whether the parcel was located primarily in OTC 3 (B), OTC 2 (C), or OTC 1 (D). Error
bars depict standard error of the mean.

In OTC 3 (Figure 7B), collapsing across seeds and samples, connectivity was
significantly higher to PPA than it was to STS (t(123) = -6.71, p < 7 x 10-10). Within PPA,
connectivity was significantly higher in adults than kids (t(92) = 3.65, pHB < 5 x 10-4) and in kids
than neonates (t(82) = 4.14, pHB < 2 x 10-4). This suggests that the connectivity to the middle of

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

21
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
the OTC is largely driven by connections to PPA (a region known for processing scenes) relative
to STS, and that this connectivity increases across development.
In OTC 2 (Figure 7C), LO had significantly more connectivity from the lateral and basal
subnuclei, collapsed across samples, compared to both FFA (t(123) = -2.15, pHB = 0.03) and RSC
(t(129) = -3.71, pHB < 1 x 10-3). Within LO, connectivity was significantly lower in adults than
kids (t(92) = -2.62, pHB = 0.01) and in kids than neonates (t(82) = -3.09, pHB = 0.005). This
suggests that connectivity to mid-to-posterior OTC is largely driven by connections to LO (a
region known for processing objects) more than it is by connections to FFA or RSC, and that
these connections to LO decrease across development.
In OTC 1 (Figure 7D), V1 had significantly more connectivity from the lateral and basal
subnuclei than did OFA, collapsed across samples and hemispheres (t(123) = -3.66, p < 4 x 10-4).
Within V1, connectivity was marginally lower in adults than kids (t(92) = -1.88, pHB = 0.063)
and significantly lower in kids than neonates (t(82) = -4.03, pHB < 4 x 10-4). This suggests that
connectivity to posterior OTC is largely driven by connections to primary visual cortex, more so
than by connections to OFA, and that this connectivity decreases across development.
Further, we explored how connectivity was distributed across the functional parcels by
looking at anterior and posterior divisions separately, using a 3 (Sample: adults vs. kids vs.
neonates, between-subjects) x 2 (Amygdala subnucleus: lateral vs. basal, within-subjects) x 2
(subdivision: anterior vs. posterior, within-subjects) ANOVA. Connectivity differences between
the parcel subdivisions are depicted in Figure 8. Noteably, there was a significant sample x
subdivision interaction (F(2,1652) = 23.28, p < 2 x 10-10), as well as a significant parcel x
subdivision interaction (F(6,1652) = 35.28, p < 3 x 10-40). Collapsed across seeds and parcels,
adults and kids had significantly higher connectivity to the anterior subdivisions (adults: t(279) =

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

22
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
4.73, pHB < 8 x 10-6, kids: t(377) = 5.23, pHB < 9 x 10-7), whereas neonates had marginally higher
connectivity to posterior subdivisions (t(209) = -1.64, pHB = 0.102). For simplicity, we report
results for the three parcels determined above to have the highest contribution to the observed
connectivity: PPA, LO, and V1.

Figure 8. Mean connectivity from the lateral (LA) and basal (BA) subnuclei to the anterior (dark bars) and posterior (light
bars) subdivisions of each functional parcel, within each sample. Error bars depict standard error of the mean.

Within PPA, collapsing across seeds and samples, connectivity was significantly higher
to the anterior half than to the posterior half (t(123) = 6.35, pHB < 3 x 10-8). There was a
significant sample x subdivision interaction (F(2,236) = 27.18, p < 3 x 10-11); adults and kids had
significantly higher connectivity to the anterior section (adults: t(39) = 5.73, pHB < 4 x 10-6, kids:
t(53) = 5.16, pHB < 8 x 10-6), whereas neonates had marginally higher connectivity to the
posterior section (t(29) = -2.01, pHB = 0.054).
Within LO, collapsing across seeds and samples, connectivity was not significantly
different between the anterior half and the posterior half (t(123) = 1.95, pHB = 0.266). There was
also no sample x subdivision interaction (F(2,236) = 0.88, p = 0.416).
Within V1, collapsing across seeds and samples, connectivity was likewise not
significantly different between the anterior half and the posterior half (t(123) = -2.17, pHB =

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

23
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
0.127). However, there was a significant sample x subdivision interaction (F(2,236) = 6.65, p =
0.002); neonates had marginally higher connectivity to the posterior section (t(29) = -2.27, pHB =
0.092), whereas adults and kids had no significant differences.
Overall, analysis of the parcel subdivisions suggests that the functional specialization of
the posterior OTC is equally distributed across the entirety of the most connected parcels,
whereas connectivity to functional parcels in the mid-OTC has more of an anterior bias.
Moreover, the connectivity distributions of these parcels seem to undergo a developmental shift,
from more distributed/posterior to more anterior, after early development.
Lastly, as in Experiment 1, there was a significant main effect of mean connectivity
between the two amygdala subnuclei seeds, in both the whole parcel analysis (F(1,354) = 99.72,
p < 8 x 10-21) and in the subdivided parcel anaylsis (F(1,1652) = 132.97, p < 2 x 10-29). The
lateral subnucleus showed higher connectivity overall than the basal subnucleus, supporting
again that the lateral and basal subnuclei have unique functions and connectivity patterns.
4. General Discussion
Investigating the structural connectivity between the amygdala and occipitotemporal
cortex will help us better understand the amygdala’s role in perceiving and processing emotional
visual stimuli, which has ecological relevance and certainly changes across development. Many
functionally specialized visual regions exist within occipitotemporal cortex, but it was previously
unknown how connectivity to these regions develops from birth in humans. Previous work in
macaques had revealed connections between the lateral and basal amygdala subnuclei and the
occipitotemporal cortex, noting a rostrocaudal topographic organization of the connections (e.g.,
Freese & Amaral, 2005) and refinement across development (e.g., Webster et al., 1991a). In this
paper, we explored this topographic organization in humans using noninvasive methods, and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

24
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
further investigated specific functional cortical areas located within the occipitotemporal region
that may be contributing to the observed pattern of structural connectivity.
In our study, connectivity between the lateral and basal subnuclei and occipitotemporal
cortex in human adults significantly decreased on a gradient, replicating the finding in macaques.
Likewise, kids displayed a significantly decreasing gradient, upholding previous conclusions that
connections are already adult-like early in development. However, one notable result in our
findings was an almost U-shaped trend in neonates: although neonates had significantly
decreasing connectivity moving from anterior to middle occipitotemporal cortex, connectivity
significantly increased again to posterior cortex. These results support previous work in animals
(e.g., Webster et al., 1991a; 1991b) and humans (Saygin et al., 2015; Gabard-Durnam et al.,
2018) that infants and kids show similar patterns of connectivity as adults, as well as similar
functional organization of visual cortex (Deen et al., 2017), with additional refinement and
pruning that occurs through typical development after relevant cognitive milestones and
functional specialization occur (Gogtay et al., 2004; O’Leary, 1992; Khundrakpam et al., 2013).
Splitting the cortex into functionally defined parcels allowed us to hone in on why
developmental changes in this pattern might exist. As evidenced by our Experiment 2, functional
maturation of particular regions, specifically PPA, LO, and V1, likely contributes heavily to the
refinement of connectivity to mid- to posterior occipitotemporal cortex. Our results match what
is known for adults, for example that RSC and the occipital lobe do not project to the amygdala
(Stefanacci & Amaral, 2000; Stefanacci & Amaral, 2002), that STS has very weak projections
(Stefanacci & Amaral, 2000), and that the parahippocampal cortex has high connections (Saygin
et al., 2015).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

25
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Further analyses exploring anterior and posterior subdivisions of the functional regions
revealed that connections to PPA are especially driven by the anterior portion of the parcel,
whereas connections to LO and V1 are distributed across the entire parcel. This finding is not
unlike the results from Freese and Amaral (2005), which noted that most amygdaloid fibers that
extend to area TE in macaques enter gray matter at more rostral levels of area TE, whereas
amygdaloid fibers to area V1 are evenly distributed throughout the rostrocaudal and dorsoventral
extent of the region. Alternatively, the subdivision analyses presented here may elucidate what
part of the parcel likely represents the location of the true functional region in each subject:
perhaps the cortex containing a subject’s actual PPA is more anterior, whereas a subject’s LO is
better captured by the entire parcel.
As a whole, each of these parcels exhibited noteworthy changes in connectivity across
development. Adults and kids exhibit significantly higher connectivity to PPA (a region known
for processing scenes) and neonates exhibit drastically higher connectivity to both LO (a region
known for processing objects) and primary visual cortex. Given that these neonates were scanned
soon after birth, visual input was still novel, visual acuity was still poor, and experience with
real-world objects was lacking. Thus, we speculate that this is why V1 shows the biggest
developmental trend in our data; perhaps V1 is strongly influenced by the amygdala in
processing emotional visual stimuli at birth, and thus has more connections to the amygdala than
is necessary later in development.
Other work exploring anatomical and functional cortical maturation may additionally
explain the developmental trends in our results. For instance, it has been shown in a longitudinal
study of 4- to 21-year-olds that occipitotemporal cortex matures differentially across
development, with occipital and temporal poles maturing earliest and the rest of the temporal

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

26
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
cortex maturing later, after memory association areas develop (Gogtay et al., 2004). This may
inform the relatively high connections we found in neonates to the most anterior and posterior
sections of the occipitotemporal cortex, given that these cortical areas are the first to mature and
memory systems are immature in infants. Further, within the ventral visual stream, Scherf and
colleagues (2007) showed that the developmental trajectory of category-specific functional areas
differs across category, such that children (aged 5-8) show mature object- and place-selective
regions but not adult-like face-selective regions. Thus, it could be likely that our results were
driven by PPA and LO because these areas are some of the earliest of the functionally-selective
regions to mature. However, it is quite possible that adult-like refinement to PPA and LO
happens before age 5. Future work is needed to explore the age at which this transition happens,
and how soon after birth maturation and pruning occurs.
The developmental origins of amygdalar-occipitotemporal connectivity may offer
additional insight into how human cortex develops its specificity and functional organization. It
has been shown that connectivity is largely established at birth: structural connectivity between
the amygdala and temporal regions already exists in utero, by 13 weeks post-conception (Vasung
et al., 2010). However, as evidenced by the present experiments, although the same connections
are largely in place at birth, activity-dependent interactions between cortical regions may finetune their functionality. Experience with the environment postnatally may lead to notable agerelated changes. The functional maturation of the occipitotemporal regions that were studied in
the present experiments may contribute to the continued refinement of the amygdalar subregions,
the amygdalar connections to these regions, and to the functional specialization of
occipitotemporal regions themselves (e.g. in line with Interactive Specialization theories of
development; Johnson 2010).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

27
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Additionally, the present experiments contribute to our understanding of the functional
specification of the amygdala subnuclei. As noted previously, the human amygdala can be
subdivided into at least nine unique subnuclei with distinct connectivity and functional patterns;
here, we focused on the lateral and basal subnuclei, given their involvement with visual
processing and the high connections between the basolateral subunit and occipitotemporal
regions found in previous studies – but now at an unprecedented finer level than what was
previously studied in humans. In both Experiments 1 and 2, we observed significant main effects
of subnucleus: lateral had significantly higher connectivity to the occipitotemporal anatomical
and functional targets than basal did. These results are concordant with the results of Stefanacci
and Amaral (2000; 2002), who used lesion experiments in macaques to investigate the roles of
cortical inputs to the amygdala subnuclei and hypothesized the functional significance of these
inputs. They proposed that the primary function of the lateral subnucleus is to receive visual
sensory input and transmit this information to the basal subnucleus. The basal subnucleus then
integrates this sensory input with contextual information, via connections with the orbitofrontal
and medial temporal cortices, and evaluates whether a “fear response” is necessary – recruiting
the central subnucleus, if so (Stefanacci & Amaral, 2002). Our results in humans corroborate this
hypothesis and support the functional distinction between lateral and basal, given that the lateral
subnucleus was more connected to visual sensory areas than the basal subnucleus across all
stages of development.
Overall, the present experiments make apparent a decreasing pattern of structural
connectivity between the amygdala subnuclei and occipitotemporal cortex, evidence for which
has been repeatedly shown in macaques but was otherwise lacking in humans. Further, we use
multiple cross-sectional samples to gauge the progression of this connectivity across

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

28
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
development, and offer specific functional cortical areas in the ventral visual stream that might
be driving the observed pattern of connectivity changes. This work has important clinical
applications: Given the role of the amygdala in many psychiatric disorders – many of which have
early onsets, such as autism and anxiety (e.g., Baron-Cohen et al., 2000; Lonigan & Phillips,
2001; Pine, 2007; Qin et al., 2014; Warnell et al., 2018) – it is crucial to fully understand how the
amygdala connects to the rest of the brain across early development. Even more so, given that
the amygdala subnuclei are distinct in their functions and connections, studying the amygdala at
this finer level can elucidate even more information than would otherwise be gotten from treating
the amygdala as a whole contiguous structure or as larger subunits, which is often done. If we
can know the developmental progression of structural connectivity between the amygdala
subnuclei and occipitotemporal cortex in typically-developing humans, we can better understand
disorders or deficits caused when these connections are abnormal or lacking. Further research
can seek to explore this connectivity in patient populations, classify differences between patients
and controls, and offer new diagnostic or treatment interventions.
4.1. Limitations
One noteable limitation of the present study is that neonatal data were acquired with
different scan parameters than the adult and kid data, and tractography may operate differently in
this special population. However, previous studies have demonstrated the use of tractography
and diffusion data to explore structural connectivity in neonates (e.g., Pannek et al., 2012;
Mukherjee et al., 2002; Ratnarajah et al., 2013; Batalle et al., 2017), and the data presented here
were processed with the recommended infant preprocessing and analysis pipelines (Zöllei et al.,
2017; de Macedo Rodrigues et al., 2015; Makropoulos et al., 2018; Avants et al., 2011), so it is
reasonable to assume the obtained results are legitimate. Further, we use functional parcels

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

29
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
originally defined in adults, and recognize that overlaying them onto neonates may have the
potential to overestimate or mischaracterize certain cortex. However, we use ANTs to register
the functional parcels to each neonate’s native space, which has been shown to be highly
effective and reliable (Tustison et al., 2014). These limitations can only be overcome by
scanning participants from all samples within the same study, and by functionally defining
regions of interest individually, which may not be reliable in a sample of newborns (see Batalle
et al., 2018 for a review of neuroimaging methods in adults vs. neonates).
4.2. Conclusions
The present experiments use DWI data to explore the structural connectivity between the
lateral and basal subnuclei of the amygdala and the occipitotemporal cortex, which has been
studied extensively in macaques but is otherwise lacking in humans. We first replicate in adult
humans the connectivity gradient observed in adult macaques, and additionally show the
developmental progression of this connectivity using cross-sectional samples of 8-year old kids
as well as neonates. Additionally, we investigate a functional explanation for the observed
anatomical gradient by targeting functionally defined parcels in the ventral visual stream,
followed by an even finer-grained approach by splitting the parcels into anterior and posterior
subsections. Our results suggest that, although connectivity between the amygdala subnuclei and
occipitotemporal cortex in humans is largely adult-like at birth, the functional maturation of
connections to anterior PPA, LO, and V1 seem to be driving the developmental changes that do
occur.

Acknowledgements
Support was provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (to Z.M.S).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

30
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
References
Adolphs, R., Gosselin, F., Buchanan, T. W., Tranel, D., Schyns, P., & Damasio, A. R. (2005). A
mechanism for impaired fear recognition after amygdala damage. Letters to Nature, 433,
68–72. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03051
Adolphs, R., & Spezio, M. (2006). Role of the amygdala in processing visual social stimuli.
Progress in Brain Research, 156, 363–378. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0079-6123(06)56020-0
Amaral, D. G. (2002). The Primate Amygdala and the Neurobiology of Social Behavior:
Implications for Understanding Social Anxiety. Biological Psychiatry, 51, 11–17.
Amaral, D. G., Behniea, H., & Kelly, J. L. (2003). Topographic organization of projections from
the amygdala to the visual cortex in the macaque monkey. Neuroscience, 118(4), 1099–
1120. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4522(02)01001-1
Amaral, D. G., Price, J. L. (1984). Amygdalo-Cortical projections in the monkey (Macaca
fascicularis) J. Comp. Neurol. 230, 465-496.
Atkinson J ( 2000): The Developing Visual Brain. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Avants, B. B., Tustison, N. J., Song, G., Cook, P. A., Klein, A., & Gee, J. C. (2011). A
reproducible evaluation of ANTs similarity metric performance in brain image registration.
NeuroImage, 54(3), 2033–2044. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.025
Bach, D. R., Behrens, T. E., Garrido, L., Weiskopf, N., & Dolan, R. J. (2011). Deep and
Superficial Amygdala Nuclei Projections Revealed In Vivo by Probabilistic Tractography.
Journal of Neuroscience, 31(2), 618–623. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.274410.2011
Baron-Cohen, S., Ring, H. A., Bullmore, E. T., Wheelwright, S., Ashwin, C., & Williams, S. C.
R. (2000). The amygdala theory of autism. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 24,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

31
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
355–364. Retrieved from papers2://publication/uuid/DA1D308F-7F1E-4C34-A17CA86DBE70D978
Batalle, D., Edwards, A. D., & O’Muircheartaigh, J. O. (2018). Annual Research Review: Not
just a small adult brain: understanding later neurodevelopment through imaging the
neonatal brain. The Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 59(4), 350–371.
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcpp.12838
Batalle, D., Hughes, E. J., Zhang, H., Tournier, J.-D., Tusor, N., Aljabar, P., … Counsell, S. J.
(2017). Early development of structural networks and the impact of prematurity on brain
connectivity. NeuroImage, 149, 379–392. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.01.065
Baxter, M. G., & Murray, E. A. (2007). The amygdala, reward and emotion. Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 11(11), 489–497. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2007.08.013
Behrens, T. E. J., Berg, H. J., Jbabdi, S., Rushworth, M. F. S., & Woolrich, M. W. (2007).
Probabilistic diffusion tractography with multiple fiber orientations: What can we gain?
NeuroImage, 34, 144–155. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2006.09.018
Behrens, T. E. J., Woolrich, M. W., Smith, S. M., Boulby, P. A., Barker, G. J., Sillery, E. L., …
Matthews, P. M. (2003). Non-invasive mapping of connections between human thalamus
and cortex using diffusion imaging. Nature Neuroscience, 6(7), 750–757.
Bouwmeester, H., Smits, K., & Ree, J. M. Van. (2002). Neonatal Development of Projections to
the Basolateral Amygdala From Prefrontal and Thalamic Structures in Rat. The Journal of
Comparative Neurology, 450, 241–255. https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.10321
Bouwmeester, H., Wolterink, G., & Ree, J. M. V. R. (2002). Neonatal Development of
Projections From the Basolateral Amygdala to Prefrontal , Striatal , and Thalamic. The
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 442, 239–249. https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.10084

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

32
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Brown, V. M., Labar, K. S., Haswell, C. C., Gold, A. L., Beall, S. K., Van Voorhees, E., …
Morey, R. A. (2014). Altered resting-state functional connectivity of basolateral and
centromedial amygdala complexes in posttraumatic stress disorder.
Neuropsychopharmacology, 39(2), 351–359. https://doi.org/10.1038/npp.2013.197
Croxson, P. L., Johansen-Berg, H., Behrens, T. E. J., Robson, M. D., Pinsk, M. A., Gross, C. G.,
… Rushworth, M. F. S. (2005). Quantitative Investigation of Connections of the Prefrontal
Cortex in the Human and Macaque using Probabilistic Diffusion Tractography. The Journal
of Neuroscience, 25(39), 8854–8866. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1311-05.2005
de Macedo Rodrigues, K., Ben-Avi, E., Sliva, D. D., Choe, M., Drottar, M., Wang, R., … Zöllei,
L. (2015). A FreeSurfer-compliant consistent manual segmentation of infant brains
spanning the 0 – 2 year age range. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9(February), 1–12.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00021
Epstein, R. A. (2008). Parahippocampal and retrosplenial contributions to human spatial
navigation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 12(10), 388–396.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2008.07.004
Epstein, R., & Kanwisher, N. (1998). A cortical representation of the local visual environment.
Letters to Nature, 392(April), 6–9.
Freese, J. L., & Amaral, D. G. (2005). Synaptic organization of projections from the amygdala to
visual cortical areas TE and V1 in the macaque monkey. Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 496(5), 655–667. https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.20945
Gabard-Durnam, L. J., Flannery, J., Goff, B., Gee, D. G., Humphreys, K. L., Telzer, E., …
Tottenham, N. (2014). The development of human amygdala functional connectivity at rest

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

33
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
from 4 to 23 years: A cross-sectional study. NeuroImage, 95, 193–207.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.03.038
Gabard-Durnam, L. J., O’Muircheartaigh, J., Dirks, H., Dean, D. C., Tottenham, N., & Deoni, S.
(2018). Human amygdala functional network development: A cross-sectional study from 3
months to 5 years of age. Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 34(June), 63–74.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2018.06.004
Gauthier, I., Tarr, M. J., Skudlarski, P., & Anderson, A. (2000). The Fusiform “ Face Area ” is
Part of a Network that Processes Faces at the Individual Level. Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience, (June 2014). https://doi.org/10.1162/089892900562165
Gogtay, N., Giedd, J. N., Lusk, L., Hayashi, K. M., Greenstein, D., Vaituzis, A. C., …
Thompson, P. M. (2004). Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during
childhood through early adulthood. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
101(21), 8174–8179.
Goodale, M. A., & Milner, A. D. (1992). Separate visual pathways for perception and action.
Trends in Neurosciences, 15(1), 20–25.
Greve, D. N., & Fischl, B. (2009). NeuroImage Accurate and robust brain image alignment using
boundary-based registration. NeuroImage, 48(1), 63–72.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.06.060
Grill-Spector, K., Kushnir, T., Edelman, S., Avidan, G., Itzchak, Y., & Malach, R. (1999).
Differential Processing of Objects under Various Viewing Conditions in the Human Lateral
Occipital Complex. Neuron, 24, 187–203.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

34
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Hoffman, E. A., & Haxby, J. V. (2000). Distinct representations of eye gaze and identity in the
distributed human neural system for face perception. Nature Neuroscience, 3(1), 80–84.
https://doi.org/10.1038/71152
Holm, S. (1979). A simple sequentially rejective multiple test procedure. Scandinavian Journal
of Statistics, 6, 65–70.
Hughes, E. J., Winchman, T., Padormo, F., Teixeira, R., Wurie, J., Sharma, M., … Hajnal, J. V.
(2017). A Dedicated Neonatal Brain Imaging System. Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, 78,
794–804. https://doi.org/10.1002/mrm.26462
Hutter J.T. et al (2015). Optimized Multi-Shell HARDI Acquisition with Alternating Phase
Encoding Directions for Neonatal dMRI. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Meeting of
ISMRM, Toronto, Ontario, Canada: 3460.
Iwai, E., Yukie, M. (1987). Amygdalofugal and amygdalopetal connections with modalityspecific visual cortical areas in macaques (macaca fuscata, M. mulatta, and M.
fascicularis). The Journal of Comparative Neurology, 261(3), 362-387.
Iwai, E., Yukie, M., Suyama, H., & Shirakawa, S. (1987). Amygdalar connections with middle
and inferior temporal gyri of the monkey. Neuroscience Letters, 83(1–2), 25–29.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3940(87)90210-2
Johansen, J. P., Hamanaka, H., Monfils, M. H., Behnia, R., Deisseroth, K., Blair, H. T., &
LeDoux, J. E. (2010). Optical activation of lateral amygdala pyramidal cells instructs
associative fear learning. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 107(28),
12692–12697. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1002418107

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

35
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Johnson, M. H. (2011). Interactive Specialization: A domain-general framework for human
functional brain development? Developmental Cognitive Neuroscience, 1, 7–21.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2010.07.003
Julian, J. B., Fedorenko, E., Webster, J., & Kanwisher, N. (2012). An algorithmic method for
functionally defining regions of interest in the ventral visual pathway. NeuroImage, 60(4),
2357–2364. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.02.055
Kalin, N. H., Shelton, S. E., & Takahashi, L. K. (1991). Defensive Behaviors in Infant Rhesus
Monkeys : Ontogeny and Context-Dependent Selective Expression. Child Development,
62(5), 1175–1183.
Kalin, N. H., Shelton, S. E., Davidson, R. J., & Kelley, A. E. (2001). The Primate Amygdala
Mediates Acute Fear But Not the Behavioral and Physiological Components of Anxious
Temperament. The Journal of Neuroscience, 21(6), 2067–2074.
Kanwisher, N., McDermott, J., & Chun, M. M. (1997). The Fusiform Face Area: A Module in
Human Extrastriate Cortex Specialized for Face Perception. The Journal of Neuroscience,
17(11), 4302–4311.
Khundrakpam, B. S., Reid, A., Brauer, J., Carbonell, F., Lewis, J., Ameis, S., … Development,
B. C. G. (2013). Developmental Changes in Organization of Structural Brain Networks.
Cerebral Cortex, 23, 2072–2085. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhs187
Kiehl, K. A., Stevens, M. C., Laurens, K. R., Pearlson, G., Calhoun, V. D., & Liddle, P. F.
(2005). An adaptive reflexive processing model of neurocognitive function: supporting
evidence from a large scale (n = 100) fMRI study of an auditory oddball task. NeuroImage,
25, 899–915. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.12.035

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

36
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Kosslyn, S. M., Shin, L. M., Thompson, W. L., McNally, R. J., Rauch, S. L., Pitman, R. K., &
Alpert, N. M. (1996). Neural effects of visualizing and perceiving aversive stimuli (PET).
NeuroReport, 7(10), 1569–1576.
Leppänen, J. M., & Nelson, C. A. (2010). Tuning the developing brain to social signals of
emotions. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 10(1), 37–47.
https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2554.Tuning
Lonigan C. J., Phillips B. M. (2001). Temperamental influences on the development of anxiety
disorders. 4.
Makropoulos, A., Robinson, E. C., Schuh, A., Wright, R., Fitzgibbon, S., Bozek, J., … Rueckert,
D. (2018). The developing human connectome project: A minimal processing pipeline for
neonatal cortical surface reconstruction. NeuroImage, 173, 88–112.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2018.01.054
Mukherjee, P., Miller, J. H., Shimony, J. S., Philip, J. V, Nehra, D., Snyder, A. Z., … Mckinstry,
R. C. (2002). Diffusion-Tensor MR Imaging of Gray and White Matter Development during
Normal Human Brain Maturation. American Journal of Neuroradiology, 23, 1445–1456.
Ochsner, K. N., Silvers, J. A., & Buhle, J. T. (2012). Functional imaging studies of emotion
regulation: a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emotion.
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1251, 1–24. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.17496632.2012.06751.x
Ohio Supercomputer Center. (1987). Ohio Supercomputer Center. Columbus OH: Ohio
Supercomputer Center. http://osc.edu/ark:/19495/f5s1ph73.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

37
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
O’Leary, D. D. M. (1992). Development of connectional diversity and specificity in the
mammalian brain by the pruning of collateral projections. Current Opinion in
Neurobiology, 2, 70–77.
Pannek, K., Guzzetta, A., Colditz, P. B., & Rose, S. E. (2012). Diffusion MRI of the neonate
brain: acquisition, processing and analysis techniques. Pediatric Radiology, 42, 1169–1182.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00247-012-2427-x
Passingham, R. (2009). How good is the macaque monkey model of the human brain? Current
Opinion in Neurobiology, 19(1), 6–11.
Paton, J. J., Belova, M. A., Morrison, S. E., & Salzman, C. D. (2006). The primate amygdala
represents the positive and negative value of visual stimuli during learning. Nature,
439(February), 865–870. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04490
Phelps, E. A., Ling, S., & Carrasco, M. (2006). Emotion facilitates perception and potentiates the
perceptual benefits of attention. Psychological Science, 17(4), 292–299.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9280.2006.01701.x.Emotion
Phillips, M. L., Drevets, W. C., Rauch, S. L., & Lane, R. (2003). Neurobiology of Emotion
Perception I: The Neural Basis of Normal Emotion Perception. Biological Psychiatry, 54,
504–514. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3223(03)00168-9
Phillips, R. G., & Ledoux, J. E. (1992). Differential Contribution of Amygdala and Hippocampus
to Cued and Contextual Fear Conditioning. Behavioral Neuroscience, 106(2), 274–285.
Pine, D. S. (2007). Research Review : A neuroscience framework for pediatric anxiety disorders.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 48(7), 631–648.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.2007.01751.x

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

38
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Postelnicu, G., Zöllei, L., & Fischl, B. (2009). Combined Volumetric and Surface Registration.
IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging, 28(4), 508–522.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TMI.2008.2004426.Combined
Qin, S., Young, C. B., Duan, X., Chen, T., Supekar, K., & Menon, V. (2014). Amygdala
subregional structure and intrinsic functional connectivity predicts individual differences in
anxiety during early childhood. Biological Psychiatry, 75(11), 892–900.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.10.006
Qin, S., Young, C. B., Supekar, K., Uddin, L. Q., & Menon, V. (2012). Immature integration and
segregation of emotion-related brain circuitry in young children. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 109(20), 7941–7946.
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1120408109
Ratnarajah, N., Rifkin-Graboi, A., Fortier, M. V, Chong, Y. S., Kwek, K., Saw, S., … Qiu, A.
(2014). Structural Connectivity Asymmetry in the Neonatal Brain. NeuroImage, 75, 187–
194. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.02.052.Structural
Saygin, Z. M., Kliemann, D., Iglesias, J. E., van der Kouwe, A. J. W., Boyd, E., Reuter, M., …
Augustinack, J. C. (2017). High-resolution magnetic resonance imaging reveals nuclei of
the human amygdala: manual segmentation to automatic atlas. NeuroImage, 155(May),
370–382. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2017.04.046
Saygin, Z. M., Osher, D. E., Augustinack, J., Fischl, B., & Gabrieli, J. D. E. (2011).
Connectivity-based segmentation of human amygdala nuclei using probabilistic
tractography. NeuroImage, 56(3), 1353–1361.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.03.006

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

39
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Saygin, Z. M., Osher, D. E., Koldewyn, K., Martin, R. E., Finn, A., Saxe, R., … Sheridan, M.
(2015). Structural connectivity of the developing human amygdala. PLoS ONE, 10(4), 1–19.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0125170
Scherf, K. S., Behrmann, M., Humphreys, K., & Luna, B. (2007). Visual category-selectivity for
faces, places and objects emerges along different developmental trajectories. Developmental
Science, 10(4), F15–F30. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2007.00595.x
Schwartz, C. E., Wright, C. I., Shin, L. M., Kagan, J., Whalen, P. J., Mcmullin, K. G., & Rauch,
S. L. (2003). Differential Amygdalar Response to Novel versus Newly Familiar Neutral
Faces: A Functional MRI Probe Developed for Studying Inhibited Temperament. Biological
Psychiatry, 3223(53), 854–862. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0006-3223(02)01906-6
Stefanacci, L., & Amaral, D. G. (2000). Topographic Organization of Cortical Inputs to the
Lateral Nucleus of the Macaque Monkey Amygdala: A Retrograde Tracing Study. The
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 79, 52–79.
Stefanacci, L., & Amaral, D. G. (2002). Some Observations on Cortical Inputs to the Macaque
Monkey Amygdala: An Anterograde Tracing Study. The Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 451(May), 301–323. https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.10339
Teller, D. Y., McDonald, M., Preston, K., Sebris, S. L., & Dobson, V. (1986). Assessment of
visual acuity in infants and children: The acuity card procedure. Developmental Medicine &
Child Neurology, 28, 779–789.
Tomassini, V., Jbabdi, S., Klein, J. C., Behrens, T. E. J., Pozzilli, C., Matthews, P. M., …
Johansen-Berg, H. (2007). Diffusion-Weighted Imaging Tractography-Based Parcellation of
the Human Lateral Premotor Cortex Identifies Dorsal and Ventral Subregions with

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

40
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Anatomical and Functional Specializations. The Journal of Neuroscience, 27(38), 10259–
10269. https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2144-07.2007
Tottenham, N., Hare, T. A., & Casey, B. J. (2009). A developmental perspective on human
amygdala function. In P. J. Whalen & E. A. Phelps (Eds.), The human amygdala (pp.
107-117). New York, NY, US: Guilford Press.
Tournier, J.D. et al (2015). Data-driven optimisation of multi-shell HARDI, In Proceedings of
the 23rd Annual Meeting of ISMRM, Toronto, Ontario, Canada: 2897.
Tustison, N. J., Cook, P. A., Klein, A., Song, G., Das, S. R., Duda, J. T., … Avants, B. B.
(2014). Large-scale evaluation of ANTs and FreeSurfer cortical thickness measurements.
NeuroImage, 99, 166–179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2014.05.044
Van Essen DC, Donahue C, Dierker DL, et al. (2016). Parcellations and Connectivity Patterns in
Human and Macaque Cerebral Cortex. In: Kennedy H, Van Essen DC, Christen Y, editors.
Micro-, Meso- and Macro-Connectomics of the Brain [Internet]. Cham (CH): Springer;
2016. Available from: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK435771/ doi: 10.1007/9783-319-27777-6_7
Vasung, L., Huang, H., Jovanov-Milošević, N., Pletikos, M., Mori, S., & Kostović, I. (2010).
Development of axonal pathways in the human fetal fronto-limbic brain: Histochemical
characterization and diffusion tensor imaging. Journal of Anatomy, 217(4), 400–417.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7580.2010.01260.x
Vuilleumier, P. (2005). How brains beware: neural mechanisms of emotional attention. Trends in
Cognitive Sciences, 9(12), 585-594. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2005.10.011

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/636894; this version posted May 14, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC 4.0 International license.

41
AMYGDALA SUBNUCLEI CONNECTIVITY
Warnell, K. R., Pecukonis, M., & Redcay, E. (2018). Developmental relations between amygdala
volume and anxiety traits: Effects of informant, sex, and age. Development and
Psychopathology, 30, 1503–1515. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0954579417001626
Webster, M. J., Ungerleider, L. G., & Bachevalier, J. (1991). Connections of Inferior Temporal
Areas TE and TEO with Medial Temporal-Lobe Structures in Infant and Adult Monkeys.
The Journal of Neuroscience, 11(4), 1095–1116. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/4.5.470
Webster, M. J., Ungerleider, L. G., & Bachevalier, J. (1991). Lesions of inferior temporal area
TE in infant monkeys alter cortico-amygdalar projections. NeuroReport, 2, 769–772.
Zöllei et al (2017). FreeSurfer image processing pipeline for infant clinical MRI images. Human
Brain Mapping, Vancouver, Canada.
Zöllei, L., Stevens, A., Huber, K., Kakunoori, S., & Fischl, B. (2010). Improved tractography
alignment using combined volumetric and surface registration. NeuroImage, 51(1), 206–
213. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.01.101

