bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Regeneration of dorsal spinal cord neurons after injury via in situ NeuroD1-mediated
astrocyte-to-neuron conversion
Brendan Puls†, Yan Ding†, Fengyu Zhang, Mengjie Pan, Zhuofan Lei, Zifei Pei, Mei Jiang, Yuting
Bai, Cody Forsyth, Morgan Metzger, Tanvi Rana, Lei Zhang, Xiaoyun Ding, Matthew Keefe, Alice
Cai, Austin Redilla, Michael Lai, Kevin He, Hedong Li*, Gong Chen*
†Co-first author
*Co-senior author
All authors part of the Department of Biology, Huck Institutes of Life Sciences, The Pennsylvania
State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
Short title: Astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in the spinal cord dorsal horn
Keywords: Spinal cord, NeuroD1, astrocyte, neuronal conversion, in vivo reprogramming
Correspondence should be addressed to:
Gong Chen, PhD
Professor and Verne M. Willaman Chair in Life Sciences
Department of Biology
Huck Institutes of Life Sciences
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
Phone: 814-865-2488
Email: gongchen@psu.edu
Or
Hedong Li, PhD
Department of Biology
Huck Institutes of Life Sciences
The Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802, USA
Email: hul40@psu.edu

Conflict of Interest: G.C. is a co-founder of NeuExcell Therapeutics.
Acknowledgement:
This work was mainly supported by Charles H. Smith Endowment Fund for Brain Repair (G.C.)
and Verne M. Willaman Endowment Fund from the Pennsylvania State University (G.C.), as well
as a grant from National Institutes of Health R21NS104394 (H.L.).

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract:

Spinal cord injury (SCI) often leads to impaired motor and sensory functions, partially because
the injury-induced neuronal loss cannot be easily replenished through endogenous
mechanisms. In vivo neuronal reprogramming has emerged as a novel technology to regenerate
neurons from endogenous glial cells by forced expression of neurogenic transcription factors.
We have previously demonstrated successful astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in mouse brains
with injury or Alzheimer’s disease by overexpressing a single neural transcription factor
NeuroD1 via retroviruses. Here we demonstrate regeneration of dorsal spinal cord neurons
from reactive astrocytes after SCI via adeno-associated virus (AAV), a more clinically relevant
gene delivery system. We find that NeuroD1 converts reactive astrocytes into neurons in the
dorsal horn of stab-injured spinal cord with high efficiency (~95%). Interestingly, NeuroD1converted neurons in the dorsal horn mostly acquire glutamatergic neuronal subtype,
expressing spinal cord-specific markers such as Tlx3 but not brain-specific markers such as Tbr1,
suggesting that the astrocytic lineage and local microenvironment affect the cell fate of
conversion. Electrophysiological recordings show that the NeuroD1-converted neurons can
functionally mature and integrate into local spinal cord circuitry by displaying repetitive action
potentials and spontaneous synaptic responses. We further show that NeuroD1-mediated
neuronal conversion can occur in the contusive SCI model, allowing future studies of evaluating
this reprogramming technology for functional recovery after SCI. In conclusion, this study may
suggest a paradigm shift for spinal cord repair using in vivo astrocyte-to-neuron conversion
technology to generate functional neurons in the grey matter.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction:

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is a devastating central nervous system (CNS) disorder and often leads to
loss of motor and sensory functions below the injury site, even paralysis depending on the
severity of the injury (Adams and Hicks, 2005). The pathophysiological process after SCI is
rather complex, resulting in neuronal loss, neuroinflammation, demyelination, and Wallerian
degeneration of the axons (Norenberg et al., 2004). Reactive astrogliosis is common to CNS
injury, and particularly severe after SCI. Resident astrocytes react to injury-induced cytokines
and dramatically upregulate the expression of a number of proteins such as the astrocytic
marker GFAP and the neural progenitor markers Nestin and Vimentin (Sofroniew, 2009). These
reactive astrocytes also become proliferative and hypertrophic in cell morphology. In the acute
phase of SCI, reactive astrocytes play important roles in repairing the blood-spinal cord barrier
and restricting the size of the primary injury (Herrmann et al., 2008; Okada et al., 2006).
However, in the sub-acute or chronic phase, reactive astrocytes constitute the major
component of the glial scar, a dense tissue structure that is inhibitory to axonal regeneration
(Silver and Miller, 2004). Therefore, for decades, substantial effort has been made to overcome
the glial scar and promote regrowth of severed axons through the injury site (Filous and
Schwab, 2017). On the other hand, the spinal neurons that are lost during and after the injury
need to be replaced in order to rebuild the local neuronal circuits. In this regard, stem cell
transplantation has been reported to achieve certain success (Lu et al., 2017; Tuszynski et al.,
2014), however long-term survival of transplanted cells in the injury site has been an unsolved
issue (Goldman, 2016).
In vivo neuronal reprogramming has recently emerged as a novel technology to regenerate
functional new neurons from endogenous glial cells by overexpressing neurogenic transcription
factors in the CNS (Barker et al., 2018; Gascon et al., 2016; Grande et al., 2013; Guo et al., 2014;
Lei et al., 2019; Li and Chen, 2016; Liu et al., 2015; Niu et al., 2013). In the injured spinal cord, a
combination of growth factor treatment and forced expression of the neurogenic transcription
factor Neurogenin 2 (Ngn2) has been reported to stimulate neurogenesis from neural
progenitors (Ohori et al., 2006). However, these newly generated neurons suffer from poor
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

long-term survival. More recently, the transcription factor Sox2 has been shown to reprogram
astrocytes into proliferating neuroblasts, which require further treatment with a histone
deacetylase inhibitor, valproic acid (VPA), to differentiate into mature neurons (Su et al., 2014).
With additional treatment of neurotrophic factors, Sox2-converted neurons can express several
neuronal subtype markers, but predominately VGluT, a marker for glutamatergic neurons
(Wang et al., 2016).

Our group has previously demonstrated that the neurogenic transcription factor NeuroD1 can
reprogram reactive astrocytes into functional neurons in the stab-injured brain and in a mouse
model for Alzheimer’s disease (Guo et al., 2014). Following studies demonstrated that
NeuroD1-mediated in vivo astrocyte-to-neuron conversion can reverse glial scar back to neural
tissue (Zhang et al., 2018) and repair the damaged motor cortex after ischemic stroke (Chen et
al., 2018). The major goal of the current study is to determine whether NeuroD1 can reprogram
reactive astrocytes into functional neurons in the injured spinal cord. Using adeno-associated
virus (AAV) for gene delivery and a Cre-Flex system with GFAP promoter to target reactive
astrocytes specifically, our results indicate that NeuroD1 can mediate direct astrocyte-toneuron conversion with high efficiency in both stab and contusive SCI models. The NeuroD1converted neurons preferentially acquire glutamatergic phenotype in the dorsal horn and
express neuronal subtype markers specific to the spinal cord such as Tlx3. Patch clamp
recordings further demonstrate that the NeuroD1-converted neurons can functionally mature
and integrate into spinal cord circuitry. Together, our results indicate that NeuroD1-mediated
neuronal conversion opens an avenue to treat SCI with internal glial cells through AAV-based
gene therapy that may regenerate a diversity of neuronal subtypes for functional repair.

Materials and methods:
Animal use
GAD-GFP mice (Tg[Gad1-EGFP]94Agmo/J) and wild-type C57BL/6 mice were purchased from
the Jackson Laboratory and bred in house. Mice of 2-4 months old (both male and female) were
used. Mice were housed in a 12 hr light/dark cycle and supplied with sufficient food and water.
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All animal use and studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee
(IACUC) of the Pennsylvania State University. All procedures were carried out in accordance
with the approved protocols and guidelines of National Institute of Health (NIH).
Retrovirus and AAV production
Retroviral vectors expressing GFP and NeuroD1-GFP under the CAG promoter (pCAG) were
previously described (Guo et al., 2014). Retrovirus packaging, purification and titering were
performed as previously described (Guo et al., 2014).
For AAV-mediated gene expression, the Cre-Flex system was applied to target transgene
expression specifically to reactive astrocytes using the human GFAP (hGFAP) promoter. To
generate pAAV-hGFAP::Cre vector, the hGFAP promoter was first amplified from pDRIVE-hGFAP
plasmid (InvivoGen) by PCR and inserted into pAAV-MCS (Cell Biolab) between the MluI and
SacII sites to replace the CMV promoter. The Cre gene coding fragment was then similarly
subcloned from phGFAP-Cre (Addgene plasmid #40591) and inserted into pAAV MCS between
the EcoRI and SalI sites. To construct pAAV-FLEX vectors expressing transgenes, the coding
sequences of NeuroD1, mCherry or GFP were amplified by PCR from the corresponding
retroviral constructs. The NeuroD1 fragment was fused with either P2A-mCherry or P2A-GFP
and subcloned into the pAAV-FLEX-GFP vector (Addgene plasmid #28304) between the KpnI
and XhoI sites. All plasmid constructs were confirmed by sequencing. The AAV-CamKII-GFP
plasmid was purchased from Addgene (#64545). For AAV production, HEK 293T cells were
transfected with the pAAV expression vectors, pAAV9-RC vector (Cell Biolab), and pHelper
vector (Cell Biolab) to generate AAV particles carrying our transgenes. Three days after
transfection, the cells were scraped in their medium and centrifuged. The supernatant was then
discarded and the cell pellet was frozen and thawed four times, resuspended in a discontinuous
iodixanol gradient, and centrifuged at 54,000 rpm for two hours. Finally, the virus-containing
layer was extracted, and the viruses were concentrated using Millipore Amicon Ultra
Centrifugal Filters. The viral titers were determined using the QuickTiter™ AAV Quantitation Kit
(Cell Biolabs) and then diluted to a final concentration of 1×1010 genome copy (GC)/ml for
injection.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Laminectomy, injury, and stereotaxic viral injection
Mice were anesthetized by intraperitoneal injection of ketamine/xylazine (80-120 mg/kg
ketamine; 10-16 mg/kg xylazine). A laminectomy was then performed at the T11-T12 vertebrae
to expose dorsal surface of the spinal cord, and a stab or contusion injury was performed. The
stab injury was conducted with a 31-gauge needle at the center of the exposed surface, 0.4 mm
lateral to the central artery with a depth of 0.4 mm, while the contusion injury was generated
with a force of 45 kdyn on an Infinite Horizon Impactor (IH-0400, Precision Systems and
Instrumentation) directly at the center of the exposed surface. Either immediately following the
injury or at a specified delay, 1.0 μL of concentrated virus was injected using a 50 μl Hamilton
syringe with a 34-gauge injection needle at a rate of 0.05 μL/min at the same coordinates for
the stab injury or 1 mm away for the contusion injury. The needle was then kept in place for
three minutes after injection to prevent drawing out the virus during withdrawal. The surgical
area was then treated with antibiotic ointment and the skin was clipped for a week to allow the
skin to re-suture. The mice were kept on a heating pad and treated with Carprofen for pain
relieve via subcutaneous injection (5 mg/kg) on the day of surgery and drinking water (10
mg/kg) for three days after surgery and closely monitored for one week to ensure full recovery
of health.
Electrophysiology
Mice were sacrificed at defined time points by anesthetization with 2.5% Avertin and
decapitation. The spinal cord segment was then removed from the spine into cutting solution
(125 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.3 mM MgSO4, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 2.0 mM CaCl2
and 10 mM glucose adjusted to pH 7.4 and 295 mOsm/L and bubbled for one hour with 95%
O2/5% CO2) cooled on ice, where it was encased in an agarose matrix (Sigma) and cut into 300
µm thickness slices using a VT3000 vibratome (Leica). Slices were then incubated for one hour
in holding solution (92 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4 , 30 mM NaHCO3 , 20 mM
HEPES, 15 mM glucose, 12 mM N-Acetyl-L-cysteine, 5 mM Sodium ascorbate, 2 mM Thiourea, 3
mM Sodium pyruvate, 2 mM MgSO4 , and 2 mM CaCl2, adjusted to pH 7.4 and 295 mOsm/L and
bubbled continuously with 95% O2/5% CO2) at room temperature before patch-clamp recording
in standard ACSF (125 mM NaCl, 2.5 mM KCl, 1.25 mM NaH2PO4, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.3 MgSO4,
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2.5 mM CaCl2, and 10 mM glucose adjusted to pH 7.4 and 295 mOsm/L and bubbled for one
hour with 95% O2/5% CO2). Both native and converted cells were recorded by whole-cell
recording using standard inner solution (135 mM K-gluconate, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM Naphosphocreatine, 10 mM HEPES, 2 mM EGTA, 4 mM MgATP, and 0.5 mM Na2GTP, adjusted to
pH 7.4 and 295 mOsm/L) with the membrane potential held at −70 mV. Typical values for the
pipette and total series resistances were 2-10 MΩ and 20-60 MΩ, respectively. Data were
collected using the pClamp 9 software (Molecular Devices) by sampling at 10 kHz and filtering
at 1 kHz. Data were then analyzed and plotted with the Clampﬁt 9.0 software (Molecular
Devices).

Immunohistochemistry, immunocytochemistry, and microscopy
After perfusion, the target region of the spinal cord (~ 0.5 cm in length) was surgically dissected,
fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS for one day, dehydrated in 30% sucrose solution for
one day, and sectioned into 30 μm coronal or horizontal slices using a Leica CM1950 cryostat.
The slices were collected serially in 24-well plates so that distance from the injury site could
later be ascertained. The samples were then stored at 4 °C in 0.02% sodium azide (NaN 3) in PBS
to prevent bacterial degradation. Spinal cord slices were chosen for immunohistochemistry
based on infection of the dorsal horn by inspecting the reporter protein (mCherry or GFP) in the
storage solution under a fluorescent microscope. For the stab injury experiments, care was
taken to select coronal slices at least 100 μm from the injury site to ensure tissue integrity. On
the first day of staining, samples were washed in PBS three times for five minutes per wash,
permeablized with 2% Triton X-100 in PBS for 20 minutes, and blocked using a 5% normal
donkey serum (NDS) and 0.1% Triton-X in PBS for two hours to reduce non-specific binding of
the antibodies. The samples were then incubated with primary antibodies diluted in the same
blocking buffer at 4 °C for two nights to allow thorough penetration of the antibodies. On the
third day, the samples were recovered to room temperature, washed in PBS three times for five
minutes per wash, and incubated with secondary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer for one
hour. Finally, the samples were washed in PBS three more times for ten minutes per wash and
mounted on glass slides with coverslips using anti-fading mounting solution (Invitrogen). The

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

immunostained samples were examined and imaged using Olympus FV1200 and Zeiss LSM 800
laser confocal microscopes. Z-stacks were collected for the in vivo images for the whole
thickness of the samples and maximum intensity and z-stack projections were used for image
preparation and analysis.
Quantification and data analysis
As a result of our carefully selected injection coordinates described above, infected cells were
mostly found in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord, Rexed laminae 1-6 (Rexed, 1954). For most
of the quantification, including cell conversion and NeuN acquisition, cells were counted if they
appeared in any part of this region. For quantification based on cell subtype (Figs. 3, 4), cells
were only counted if they appeared in Rexed laminae 1-3, centered about the substantia
gelatinosa, a region dominated by small, excitatory interneurons and easily demarcated due to
its high cell density (Santos et al., 2007). This region was chosen for its ease of demarcation and
so that a consistent local population of neuronal subtypes could be expected from sample to
sample. Quantification was performed on collected images using the z-stacked images as a
guide and the layered stacks to check the vertical dimension. Strict background cutoffs for
positive signals were calculated for each channel as three times the average background
intensity for the relevant tissue and antibody. Cells were binned by presence (i.e., above the
background cutoff) or absence (i.e., below the background cutoff) for each marker in question,
using the viral fluorophore (mCherry or GFP) to identify infected cells and DAPI to confirm each
cell for counting. To estimate the total number of converted neurons per infection for our
contusion experiments, we multiplied the average number of NeuN+ infected cells per
horizontal section, calculated from one dorsal, one central, and one ventral section, by the total
number of horizontal sections per sample. All quantification was performed on three biological
replicates per data point and is reported as the means and standard deviations of the three
replicates.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results:
NeuroD1 reprograms reactive astrocytes into neurons in the injured spinal cord
SCI has been studied for decades but so far there is still limited therapy to treat SCI patients.
Besides axonal degeneration, neuronal loss following SCI is a major obstacle for functional
recovery. We previously demonstrated that expressing NeuroD1 in reactive astrocytes after
brain injury can directly convert astrocytes into neurons (Guo et al., 2014). In this study, we
investigated whether such in vivo direct conversion technology can regenerate functional new
neurons in injured spinal cord. To target the dividing reactive astrocytes after injury, we
employed retroviruses that mainly express ectopic genes in dividing cells but not in neurons,
which cannot divide. We injected NeuroD1-expressing retroviruses at 4 days post-stab injury
(dpi), when many dividing reactive astrocytes have been detected (Chen et al., 2008; Hong et
al., 2014), and analyzed samples at 1, 3, and 6 weeks post-injection (wpi) (Fig. 1A). In this study,
we chose the spinal cord dorsal horn as our major region of interest because it is composed of
both excitatory and inhibitory neurons and is critical to afferent sensory information processing
(Fig. 1B). We are currently investigating motor neuron regeneration in the spinal cord ventral
horn in a separate study. We first explored the cell types infected by our control CAG::GFP
retroviruses. At 1 wpi, we found that the control GFP retroviruses infected a mixture of glial cell
types including reactive astrocytes (GFAP+ and some GFAP+/Olig2+), oligodendrocyte
progenitor cells (OPCs) (Olig2+) and microglia (Iba1+) (Fig. 1C, D), but not NeuN+ neurons (Fig.
1D). In contrast, cells infected by the CAG::NeuroD1-GFP retrovirus showed an increasing
number of NeuN+ cells with neuronal morphology over time (Fig. 1E), and quantitatively
reached 93.5% at 6 wpi (Fig. 1F), indicating a successful glia-to-neuron conversion in the injured
spinal cord.
While retroviruses can target reactive glial cells, the number of dividing glial cells at the
time of viral infection may be limited. In order to move our in vivo reprogramming technology
towards clinical settings in the future, we adopted an AAV gene delivery system in which the
transgene expression is controlled by an astrocyte-specific GFAP promoter (Fig. 2A). Specifically,
we used a Cre-Flex gene expression system, which contains two AAV vectors, with one encoding

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

GFAP-Cre and the other encoding the transgene in reverse form flanked by double LoxP sites
(FLEX vector) (Atasoy et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2018; Liu et al., 2015). Thus, when the two AAVs
are co-injected into the spinal cord, Cre recombinase will be expressed in the infected reactive
astrocytes and turn on the transgene expression in FLEX vector by flipping the transgene
sequence into the correct form for transcription (Fig. 2B). We first confirmed the specificity of
the Cre-Flex AAV system in the spinal cord by co-injecting AAV GFAP::Cre and AAV FLEXCAG::mCherry (or ::GFP) into the stab-injured dorsal horn. The control virus infected cells were
mostly GFAP+, NeuN− astrocytes at 4 wpi (Fig. 2C). Next, we co-injected AAV GFAP::Cre with
AAV FLEX-CAG::NeuroD1-P2A-mCherry into the stab-injured dorsal horn. In contrast to the
control AAV, the NeuroD1-mCherry infected cells were mostly NeuN+/GFAP− neurons with
clear neuronal morphology at 4 wpi (Fig. 2D). NeuroD1 overexpression in the infected cells was
confirmed by immunostaining (Supp. Fig. 1). Interestingly, besides NeuN+/GFAP− converted
neurons, we also observed many NeuroD1-AAV-infected cells at 2 wpi with co-immunostaining
of both GFAP+ and NeuN+ (Fig. 2E), suggesting a potential intermediate stage during astrocyteto-neuron conversion. We termed these GFAP+/NeuN+ cells induced by NeuroD1 expression in
astrocytes as “AtN transitional cells”. We did not observe any such transitional cells in the
control mCherry-infected spinal cord after injury, suggesting that AtN conversion does not
happen following neural injury but can be induced by ectopic expression of transcription factors
such as NeuroD1. Quantitative analysis revealed that the control AAV-infected cells were
mostly GFAP+ astrocytes by 8 wpi (Fig. 2F, left red bar), whereas NeuroD1 AAV-infected cells
showed a progressive increase in the percentage of neurons (NeuN+/GFAP−, blue bar in Fig. 2F)
from 2 to 8 wpi, reaching ~95% at 8 wpi (Fig. 2F, right blue bar). Note that at 2 wpi, over 60% of
NeuroD1-infected cells were GFAP+/NeuN+ transitional cells (green bar in Fig. 2F), which
gradually decreased at 4 wpi and 8 wpi together with a decrease of GFAP+ astrocytes (red bar
in Fig. 2F) among the NeuroD1-infected cell population. Further analysis showed that neither
transitional cells nor converted neurons exhibited significant cell death suggesting that
apoptosis does not play a significant role during the NeuroD1-mediated cell conversion process
(Supp. Fig. 2). Comparing to Ngn2-mediated or Ascl1-mediated AtN conversion (Gascon et al.,
2016), less apoptosis was detected during NeuroD1-mediated conversion process, which may

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

suggest that different transcription factors act through different signaling and metabolic
pathways to carry out cell conversion.
NeuroD1 converts dorsal spinal astrocytes into Tlx3+ glutamatergic neurons
After demonstrating astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in the spinal cord, we next investigated
which subtypes of neurons were generated through NeuroD1-mediated conversion. The dorsal
horn of the spinal cord contains two main neuronal subtypes: glutamatergic and GABAergic
neurons (Abraira and Ginty, 2013). During spinal cord development, two transcription factors,
Tlx3 and Pax2, appear to play critical roles in determining cell fate specification in the dorsal
horn (Cheng et al., 2005; Huang et al., 2008). Interestingly, by examining AAV NeuroD1-GFPinfected cells in the dorsal horn at 8 wpi, we found that the majority of NeuroD1-converted
neurons were Tlx3+ (62.6 ± 3.3%), suggesting a majority glutamatergic neuronal subtype (Fig.
3A). In contrast, only a small percentage of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the dorsal horn
were Pax2+ (8.8 ± 1.3%), suggesting a minority GABAergic neuronal subtype (Fig. 3A). Because
AAV might infect a small proportion of neurons (Fig. 2F, control), we further examined
retrovirus NeuroD1-GFP-infected cells in the dorsal horn at 6 wpi and found that, similar to our
AAV experiments, the retrovirus NeuroD1-converted neurons were mainly Tlx3+ (Fig. 3B). As a
control, we quantified the proportion of Tlx3+ and Pax2+ neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn
of uninjured and untreated mice, and found that the native proportions of Tlx3+ and Pax2+ cells
were 62.0 ± 6.4% and 14.2 ± 2.0%, respectively (Fig. 3C, left two bars). In comparison, the
proportion of Tlx3+ and Pax2+ neurons among the AAV NeuroD1-converted neurons were 62.6
± 3.3% and 8.8 ± 1.3%, respectively (Fig. 3C, middle two bars); and among the retrovirus
NeuroD1-converted neurons were 50.3 ± 17.0% of Tlx3+ and 16.4 ± 4.3% Pax2+ (Fig. 3C, right
two bars). These results suggest that the majority of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the dorsal
horn of spinal cord are Tlx3+ neurons, with a small proportion being Pax2+ neurons.
We further confirmed the neuronal subtypes after NeuroD1 conversion using AAV
CaMKII-GFP to identify glutamatergic neurons and GAD-GFP transgenic mice to identify
GABAergic neurons. When co-injecting AAV GFAP::Cre and Flex-NeuroD1-mCherry together
with AAV CaMKII::GFP (Dittgen et al., 2004), we observed 89.5 ± 5.2% (n=3) of GFP+ cells coexpressing Tlx3+, confirming that these Tlx3+ neurons are indeed glutamatergic (Fig. 3D). Many
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NeuroD1-mCherry converted neurons were also colocalizing with CaMKII-GFP (Fig. 3D),
suggesting that they were glutamatergic neurons. When injecting AAV GFAP::Cre and FlexNeuroD1-mCherry in GAD-GFP mice (n = 3), in which GABAergic neurons are genetically labeled
with GFP, we did not observe GAD-GFP co-expression with Tlx3+, as expected. Indeed, the
CaMKII and GAD markers co-stained consistently with endogenous Tlx3+ and Pax2+ neurons as
well, which we observed in the dorsal horn of spinal cord in uninjured, untreated mice (Supp.
Fig. 3). Therefore, the majority of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the dorsal horn of the spinal
cord are glutamatergic neurons, consistent with our finding in the mouse cortex (Chen et al.,
2018).
NeuroD1-converted neurons express region-specific neuronal subtype markers
While NeuroD1-converted neurons appear to be mainly glutamatergic neurons in both the
mouse cortex and spinal cord, we further investigated whether they are the same type of
glutamatergic neurons or not. For this purpose, we injected the same AAV GFAP::Cre and AAV
FLEX-NeuroD1-mCherry into the mouse M1 motor cortex and the spinal cord, and then
performed a serial immunostaining using both cortical neuronal markers (FoxG1 and Tbr1) and
spinal neuronal markers (Tlx3 and Pax2) at 4 wpi (Fig. 4). The majority of NeuroD1-infected cells
were converted into neurons in both the brain and the spinal cord at 4 wpi (Fig. 4A, C).
Strikingly, when we compared the neuronal subtypes resulting from NeuroD1-mediated
conversion in the brain versus the spinal cord side-by-side, a distinct pattern emerged: the
converted neurons in the mouse cortex acquired cortical neuron markers such as FoxG1 (66.1 ±
14.3%) and Tbr1 (17.1 ± 1.9%), but not spinal neuron markers such as Tlx3 (0%) or Pax2 (0%)
(Fig. 4A, B); in contrast, the converted neurons in the spinal cord acquired spinal neuron
markers Tlx3 (46.4 ± 2.2%) and Pax2 (4.2 ± 0.3%), but not cortical neuron markers FoxG1 (0%)
or Tbr1 (0.6 ± 0.5%) (Fig. 4C, D). Morphologically, the converted neurons in the brain resembled
cortical pyramidal neurons with larger cell bodies (Fig. 4A), while those in the spinal cord
resembled dorsal horn interneurons with smaller cell bodies (Fig. 4C). The relative lower
percentage of Tbr1+ cells among the converted neurons in the cortex suggest that the newly
converted neurons may not be mature enough at 4 wpi and may take longer time to fully
acquire their neuronal identity. These distinct differences in the neuronal identity after
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

conversion by the same transcription factor in the brain versus the spinal cord suggest that the
glial cell lineage, here cortical lineage versus spinal lineage, as well as the local environment
may exert an important influence on the resulting subtypes of converted neurons.
NeuroD1-converted neurons are physiologically functional
To test the functionality and circuit-integration of NeuroD1-converted neurons, we performed
patch-clamp electrophysiological recordings of native and converted neurons on spinal cord
slices from mice sacrificed at 8-10 wpi (Fig. 5A). The converted neurons could generate
repetitive action potentials (Fig. 5B) and displayed large Na+ and K+ currents (Fig. 5C).
Moreover, we detected robust spontaneous EPSCs from the NeuroD1-converted neurons (Fig.
5D). Quantitatively, we found that the NeuroD1-converted neurons showed similar levels of Na+
currents (Fig. 5E) and spontaneous EPSCs to their neighboring native neurons (Fig. 5F).
Immunostaining with a series of synaptic markers including SV2 and VGlut1/VGlut2 further
confirmed that the NeuroD1-converted neurons were surrounded by numerous synaptic
puncta with many of them directly innervating the neuronal soma and dendrites (Fig. 5G, H,
cyan and yellow dots). Finally, cFos, an immediate early gene that is typically activated by
neuronal activity during functional tasks, was clearly detected in some of the NeuroD1converted neurons, indicating that they were functionally active in the local spinal cord circuits
(Fig. 5I). Altogether, our results demonstrate that NeuroD1 can reprogram reactive astrocytes
into functional neurons in the dorsal horn of the injured spinal cord.
NeuroD1-mediated cell conversion in the contusive SCI model
To move closer towards clinical situations, we evaluated NeuroD1-mediated neuronal
conversion in the contusive SCI model. Compared with stab injury, contusive injury creates a
much more severe injury environment, which could affect the efficiency of neuronal conversion
and the survival of converted neurons. We therefore performed two experiments to test our
AAV GFAP::Cre and Flex-NeuroD1-GFP system after contusive SCI: one short-delay injection to
test our treatment as a response to acute injury (Fig. 6) and one long-delay injection to test our
treatment as a response to chronic injury (Fig. 7). The advantage of the short-delay experiment
is to maximize infection rate by taking advantage of the post-injury proliferation of reactive

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

astrocytes, while the advantage of the long-delay experiment is to maximize the neuronal
survival after conversion by allowing injury-induced neuroinflammation to taper down and
minimize the secondary effects of the contusion injury. In our short-delay experiment, viral
injection was conducted at 10 days post-contusive injury and tissues were collected at 6 weeks
post-viral infection (Fig. 6A). Viral injections were performed 1 mm away from the contusion
site to avoid the injury core (Fig. 6B). The injury core is apparent after contusion and is
characterized by the loss of NeuN+ neuronal cell bodies (Fig. 6C, labeled by *). Viral injection at
10 days post-contusion resulted in many GFP+ cells surrounding the injury core in both control
GFP and NeuroD1-GFP groups (Fig. 6C), indicating good infection rate and survival of the AAVinfected cells in the contusive SCI model. On the other hand, the AAV NeuroD1-GFP infected
cells showed a dramatic morphological difference from the control GFP group (Fig. 6C). As
illustrated in the enlarged images in Fig. 6C, the GFP infected cells in the control group showed
typical astrocytic morphology and colocalization with GFAP signal (magenta), but rarely showed
any colocalization with the neuronal marker NeuN (red). In contrast, NeuroD1-GFP infected
cells were often colocalized with NeuN but rarely colocalized with GFAP (Fig. 6C), indicating
successful neuronal conversion. Quantitatively, we counted the total number of converted
neurons to be ~2,600 cells surrounding the lesion core areas (Fig. 6D). The efficiency of
NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion in the short-delay experiment as measured by NeuN
immunoreactivity was ~55% (Fig. 6E), while the remaining cells were mostly GFAP+ (Fig. 6F). In
contrast, the GFP-infected cells were mostly GFAP+ astrocytes and rarely NeuN+ neurons (only
3.9% NeuN+ in GFP group) (Fig. 6E, F).
In our long-delay experiment, viral injection was conducted at 4 months post-contusive
injury, when glial scar has been well formed after contusion, and tissues were collected at 10
weeks post-viral infection (Fig. 7A). Fig. 7B illustrates the overall morphology of the spinal cord
with immunostaining of GFP, NeuN, and GFAP. As in the short-delay experiment, the lesion core
(labeled by *) also lacked NeuN+ neurons. In the control AAV GFP alone group, the viral
infected cells were mainly S100b+ astrocytes (Fig. 7C), but rarely showed any NeuN+ signal (Fig.
7D, top row). In contrast, the majority of NeuroD1-GFP infected cells were converted into
NeuN+ neurons (Fig. 7D, bottom row; quantified in Fig. 7E). The NeuroD1-mediated conversion

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

efficiency reached >95% (Fig. 7E). Immunostaining confirmed the NeuroD1 overexpression in
the NeuroD1-GFP infected cells (Fig. 7F). Furthermore, NeuroD1-converted neurons at 10 wpi
were surrounded by many synaptic puncta (SV2) with some of them directly innervating the
soma and dendrites (Fig. 7G, yellow dots). We also identified c-Fos+ cells among NeuroD1converted neurons (Fig. 7H), indicating that they were able to integrate into the local spinal
cord functional circuitry. Lastly, some of the NeuroD1-converted neurons in the contusive SCI
model at 10 wpi showed glutamatergic subtype through expression of Tlx3 in the dorsal horn
(Fig. 7I), consistent with our stab injury model. Altogether, these results indicate that NeuroD1
overexpression can reprogram reactive astrocytes into functional neurons after contusive SCI
under both acute and chronic treatment conditions, with higher conversion efficiency achieved
after glial scar formation. This clinically relevant model can be used in future studies to further
test functional improvement after SCI using in vivo cell conversion technology.

Discussion:
In the current study, we have demonstrated in different SCI models that overexpression of
NeuroD1 in the reactive astrocytes can convert them into Tlx3-positive glutamatergic neurons
in the dorsal horn of the injured spinal cord. Other ongoing studies are also testing different
transcription factors to reprogram spinal astrocytes into GABAergic neurons or motor neurons.
Using the AAV Cre-Flex system, we efficiently reprogrammed reactive astrocytes around the
injury site in the dorsal horn of the spinal cord into functional neurons that integrate into the
local synaptic network. Importantly, we also observed highly efficient NeuroD1-mediated
neuronal conversion in the contusive SCI model making this technique a feasible intervention
for regenerating functional new neurons in the grey matter to treat SCI. Consistent with our in
vivo cell conversion work in the brain (Chen et al., 2018; Guo et al., 2014), the NeuroD1converted neurons in the dorsal horn of the injured spinal cord were also glutamatergic, but
Tlx3+ spinal neurons instead of Tbr1+ cortical neurons. The fact that the same neural
transcription factor NeuroD1 can convert cortical astrocytes into cortical neurons and spinal
astrocytes into spinal neurons may hold the key to a region-flexible neural repair by using

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

internal glial cells for neuroregeneration. In contrast, transplantation of external cells does not
have this advantage of intrinsic cell lineage.

AAV gene delivery system for neuronal conversion
We have accomplished successful NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion with retroviral
vectors in both this and previous studies (Guo et al., 2014). However, since retrovirus particles
are relatively large, limiting the viral titer, and since retrovirus only infects proliferating cells,
the viral injection timing is confined to a narrow time window after the injury during which glial
cell proliferation is increased. In contrast, because AAV infects both proliferating and quiescent
cells, the AAV injection depends less on timing and can be performed in both acute and chronic
conditions. Additionally, AAV has passed clinical trials and elicits little immune response when
applied in vivo (High and Roncarolo, 2019; Zaiss et al., 2002). AAV particles are small and can be
prepared at very high titer, therefore high dosage of conversion factors can be achieved when
multiple AAV particles infect a single cell. Consistent with this, we observed a slower neuronal
conversion when a lower titer of AAV-NeuroD1 was injected in the injured spinal cord
(unpublished observation). Since certain serotypes of AAV can cross the blood-brain-barrier
(BBB), intravenous delivery of conversion factors has make it possible to reach a broader area
of the CNS (Chan et al., 2017; Foust et al., 2009). Following our earlier report of efficient
conversion of reactive astrocytes into functional neurons by NeuroD1 through retroviral
infection (Guo et al., 2014), intravenous injection of AAV9 expressing NeuroD1 has been
reported to infect a small but significant number of resting astrocytes in the striatum and
convert them into neurons (Brulet et al., 2017). On the other hand, our intracranial injection of
AAV9 expressing NeuroD1 in stab injury model (Zhang et al., 2018) and ischemic injury model
(Chen et al., 2018) have both resulted in high conversion efficiency, suggesting that reactive
astrocytes are more likely converted into neurons than the resting astrocytes. Consistent with
this hypothesis, our results in this study also support that reactive astrocytes in injured spinal
cord can be effectively converted into neurons with ~95% efficiency, regardless of retrovirus or
AAV delivery system.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Distinct functions of NeuroD1 during neuronal conversion
Neuronal conversion can be achieved by several neurogenic transcription factors (Li and Chen,
2016). Besides NeuroD1, Sox2, Ngn2, and Ascl1 have all been reported to convert glial cells into
neurons (Gascon et al., 2016; Grande et al., 2013; Guo et al., 2014; Heinrich et al., 2014; Liu et
al., 2015; Niu et al., 2013; Su et al., 2014). Sox2 is expressed in neural progenitors and functions
to maintain progenitor identity (Bani-Yaghoub et al., 2006; Bylund et al., 2003; Graham et al.,
2003). Therefore, it is not surprising that Sox2-mediated neuronal conversion has to go through
a proliferation stage as shown by incorporation of BrdU and the expression of Ki67 (Su et al.,
2014). In contrast, NeuroD1 is a neuronal differentiation transcription factor that instructs
terminal differentiation of neuroprogenitors into neurons during early neural development
(Gao et al., 2009; Miyata et al., 1999; Morrow et al., 1999). This might partially explain why
NeuroD1 can achieve high neuronal conversion efficiency (>90%) comparing to ~6% in the case
of Sox2 (Su et al., 2014). An earlier report also showed that Ngn2-expressing retrovirus was able
to promote neurogenesis in the injured spinal cord, but the number of newly generated
neurons greatly decreases over time even when combined with growth factor treatment (Ohori
et al., 2006). When combined with Bcl2, an anti-apoptotic gene, Ngn2-mediated neuronal
conversion acquires a much higher efficiency, although the authors claim that Bcl2 plays a role
independent of apoptotic pathways (Gascon et al., 2016). In sharp contrast, we rarely observe
apoptotic cells during and after NeuroD1-mediated conversion as determined by TUNEL assay.
The difference of cell survival in converted neurons between different transcription factors may
be explained by the fact that NeuroD1 is not only a conversion factor but also a survival factor.
During development, NeuroD1 is required for survival of a variety of neuronal subtypes in the
developing and adult CNS (Gao et al., 2009; Miyata et al., 1999; Morrow et al., 1999). This dual
role of NeuroD1 during neuronal conversion and neuronal survival may explain its higher
conversion efficiency over Sox2 and Ngn2. Ascl1 has also been reported to induce high
efficiency of in vivo astrocyte-to-neuron conversion in the midbrain (Liu et al., 2015), suggesting
that Ascl1 might share certain common properties with NeuroD1. Since long-term survival of
converted neurons is essential to their integration into local neuronal circuitry in order to have

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

a role in functional repair, future studies on clinical translation must pay much attention to the
total number of newly generated neurons that can survive for years to have effective therapies.
Environmental cues to impact neuronal conversion in addition to intrinsic factors
Transcription factor-mediated in vivo neuronal reprogramming illustrates intrinsic power to
convert reactive astrocytes into neurons. However, environmental cues also play a role in the
success of neuronal conversion (Heinrich et al., 2014) as well as the phenotype of converted
neurons (Grande et al., 2013). In this study, we found that NeuroD1-converted neurons in the
injured mouse cortex were Tbr1+ cortical neurons, but in the injured spinal cord the NeuroD1converted neurons were Tlx3+ spinal neurons. Therefore, the local environment, together with
astroglial lineage, may be essential to functional integration of converted neurons into the local
neuronal circuitry as they mature. Together, a complete neuronal conversion would need both
intrinsic factors (transcription factors and glial lineage factors) and extrinsic factors (local cues)
to solidify the identity of converted neurons.
Even within the spinal cord, local environment can be drastically different between the
grey matter versus the white matter, with neuronal soma confined to the grey matter and
neuronal axons occupying the white matter. In our experiments using AAV, we rarely observed
converted neurons in the white matter; using retrovirus, we observed some converted neurons
in the white matter at early time points, but they rarely survived to 6 wpi. This has been
similarly observed in cell conversion studies in the white matter (corpus callosum) of mouse
brains (Liu et al., 2020). Reasons for the lack of conversion in the white matter in this study
could include our targeted injection technique which delivers virus precisely into the dorsal
horn of the grey matter or the lack of appropriate viral receptors in the white matter. White
matter may also lack sufficient trophic factors for the survival of newly generated neurons. On
the other hand, Sox2-mediated neuronal conversion can result in many newborn neurons
located in the white matter of the spinal cord, particularly in p21 knockout mice (Wang et al.,
2016). An interesting feature of these neurons is that they appear as clusters, which, by
providing trophic factors to each other, could be the reason they survive. It is also possible that
the local environment in the white matter of p21 knockout mice has been altered during Sox2mediated neuronal conversion in combination with BDNF and noggin. Further studies will be
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

required to determine the differential effects of not only grey matter versus white matter but
also dorsal horn versus ventral horn on neuronal conversion.
Generation of neuronal subtypes via NeuroD1-mediated conversion
We demonstrate here that NeuroD1 converts reactive astrocytes into primarily Tlx3-positive
glutamatergic neurons in the dorsal horn of the injured spinal cord. Interestingly, Sox2converted neurons in the injured spinal cord are also mainly glutamatergic (Wang et al., 2016),
raising the possibility that glutamatergic neurons might be a default subtype of converted
neurons. On the other hand, one cannot ignore the small yet significant component of
GABAergic neurons (~10-15%) generated by NeuroD1 in the dorsal horn of spinal cord, which
we found to be roughly equal to the population in our non-injured control and might still play a
meaningful role in the local circuitry. Although NeuroD1 overexpression has been shown to
inhibit GABAergic neuronal differentiation by suppressing Ascl1 (Mash1) (Roybon et al., 2010),
we have consistently found that NeuroD1 can convert at least 10% of glial cells into GABAergic
neurons, suggesting that astrocyte-to-neuron conversion is distinct from stem cell
differentiation in terms of potential mechanisms. Of course, in order to generate more
GABAergic neurons, combinations with other transcription factors may be necessary; this is
indeed an ongoing study in this lab.

Conclusion

In summary, our study demonstrates that NeuroD1 can convert reactive astrocytes into
neurons in the injured spinal cord, and that the AAV gene delivery system does so with high
conversion efficiency. Furthermore, the AAV-NeuroD1 converted neurons can functionally
mature and integrate into the local spinal cord network. We also show that AAV NeuroD1converted neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn mainly acquire a Tlx3+ glutamatergic neuronal
subtype. However, we believe that a diversity of neuronal subtypes including GABAergic
neurons and ventral horn motor neurons are needed to replenish lost neurons after SCI in order
to reconstruct damaged neuronal circuitry and restore spinal cord functions. With a therapeutic

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

aim in mind, our next challenge is to optimize this in vivo neuronal conversion technology in
terms of combinations with other factors, viral injection dosage and timing, and ultimately its
ability to lead to beneficial effect and functional improvement in various SCI models.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure legend:

Figure 1: Neuronal conversion using NeuroD1-expressing retrovirus after stab injury in the
spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Experiment paradigm. (B) Schematic of dorsal horn injury and
injection. Coordinates are 0.4 mm lateral of central artery and 0.4 mm below the tissue surface.
Stab injury was performed with a 32-guage needle followed by stereotaxic injection at the injury
site. Scale bar 500 µm. (C) Three main types of proliferating cells at 1 wpi after injection of Retro
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

GFP: astrocytes, OPCs, and microglia. GFAP, Olig2, and Iba1 staining show markers for these cell
types. Arrows show examples of each. Scale bar 50 µm. (D) Quantification based on staining for
Retro GFP, 1 wpi samples. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of three replicates. (E)
Converting cells in the dorsal horn 1 wpi, 3 wpi, and 6 wpi after Retro ND1-GFP injection.
Maturing cells gradually up-regulate NeuN, adapt neuronal morphology, and reorganize. Arrows
show example NeuN+ cells. Scale bar 500 µm. (F) Quantification based on staining for Retro
ND1-GFP, 1W samples. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of three replicates.

Figure 2: Neuronal conversion using NeuroD1-expressing AAV9 after stab injury in the spinal
cord dorsal horn. (A) Experiment paradigm. (B) AAV9 FLEX-NeuroD1-mCherry/AAV9 GFAP::Cre
system (abbreviated elsewhere as AAV9 ND1-mCh). GFAP promoter restricts infected cells to
astrocytes. Control virus replaces the ND1 transgene with an additional mCh. (C) Infected

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

astrocytes in the dorsal horn 4 wpi after AAV9 mCh injection. Arrows and inset (2×mag) show an
example GFAP+ cell. Scale bar 50 µm. (D) Converted neurons in the dorsal horn 4 wpi after
AAV9-ND1-mChy injection. Arrows and inset (2×mag) show an example NeuN+ cell. Scale bar 50
µm. (E) Converting cells in the dorsal horn 2 wpi after AAV9-ND1-mChy injection. Arrows and
inset (4×mag) show an example NeuN+/GFAP+ cell. Scale bar 50 µm. (F) Quantification based on
staining for AAV9 ND1-mCh, 2 wpi and 4 wpi, and AAV9 ND1-GFP or AAV9 GFP (Control), 8 wpi
samples. Bars show the mean and standard deviation of three replicates. Infected cells at 2 wpi
are mostly transitional, staining positive for NeuN and GFAP, and by 4 wpi are mostly converted,
staining positive for only NeuN.

Figure 3: Subtypes of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn. (A) Tlx3
(glutamatergic) and Pax2 (GABAergic) subtype staining for converted neurons in the dorsal horn
8 wpi after AAV9 ND1-GFP injection. Z-projection targets an example Tlx3+ neuron. Scale bar 50
µm. (B) Tlx3 and Pax2 subtype staining for converted neurons in the dorsal horn 6 wpi after
Retro ND1-GFP injection. Z-projection targets an example Pax2+ neuron. Scale bar 50 µm. (C)
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Quantification based on subtype staining for AAV9 ND1-GFP, 8 wpi and Retro ND1-GFP, 6 wpi
samples. Control data is based on NeuN+ cells in uninjured, untreated tissue. Bars show the
mean and standard deviation of three replicates. (D) AAV9 ND1-mCy and CaMK2-GFP coinjection at 4 wpi with strong (89.5±5.2%) co-labeling of CaMK2 for converted, Tlx3+ cells. Zprojection targets an example Tlx3+, CaMK2+ neuron. Scale bar 50 µm.

Figure 4: Region-specific subtypes of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the brain versus the
spinal cord. (A) Subtype staining for converted neurons in the cortex 4 wpi after AAV9 ND1-mCh
injection. Arrows show examples of cells positive for each subtype. Scale bar 50 µm. (B)

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Quantification based on subtype staining in the cortex for AAV9 ND1-mCh, 4 wpi samples. Bars
show the mean and standard deviation of three replicates. (C) Subtype staining for converted
neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn 4 wpi after AAV9 ND1-mChy injection. Arrows show
examples of cells positive for each subtype. Scale bar 50 µm. (D) Quantification based on
subtype staining in the spinal cord for AAV9 ND1-mCh, 4 wpi samples. Bars show the mean and
standard deviation of three replicates.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5: Maturation and functionality of NeuroD1-converted neurons in the spinal cord
dorsal horn. (A) Fluorescent/transmitted light image of a patch-clamped converted neuron. (B)
Sample action potentials of a converted neuron. (C) Sample Na+ and K+ currents of a converted
neuron. (D) Sample EPSCs of a converted neuron. (E) Na+ current amplitudes for converted and
native neurons. (F) EPSC amplitudes and frequencies for converted and native neurons. (G)
Synaptic SV2 and VGluT1 puncta for converted neurons in the dorsal horn 8 wpi after AAV9
ND1-GFP injection. Arrows and inset (4×mag) show an example cell with puncta visible on its
soma and processes. Scale bar 50 µm. (H) Synaptic SV2 and VGluT2 puncta for converted
neurons in the dorsal horn 8 wpi after AAV9 ND1-GFP injection. Arrows and inset (4×mag) show
an example cell with puncta visible on its soma and processes. Scale bar 50 µm. (I) Integration
of converted neurons into local network in the dorsal horn 8 wpi after AAV9 ND1-GFP injection.
Activated neurons indicated by cFos staining are only a small subset of all neurons.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 6. NeuroD1 converts reactive astrocytes into neurons around the injury core with a
short delay of viral injection after contusive SCI. (A) AAV9 FLEX expressing either GFP reporter
alone or NeuroD1-GFP were injected along with AAV9 GFAP::Cre to target reactive astrocytes at
10 days after a contusive SCI (30 Kdyn force). Spinal cords were analyzed at 6 wpi. (B)

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Experiment paradigm. (C) Many infected cells survived around the injury core (indicated by *)
and showing distinct cellular morphology between the two groups. Immunostaining of the
neuronal markers GFAP and NeuN indicates successful neuronal conversion from reactive
astrocytes by ND1-GFP. Scale bars 50 µm at low-mag, 20 µm at high-mag. (D) Estimated
number of converted neurons per infection (average number of NeuN+ infected cells per
horizontal section, calculated from one dorsal, one central, and one ventral section, multiplied
by the total number of horizontal sections per sample (n=3 for each group; *, p<0.01). (E) NeuN
acquisition at 6 wpi (n=3 for each group; *, p<0.01). (F) GFAP loss at 6 wpi (n=3 for each group;
*, p<0.01).

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7. NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion with a long delay of viral injection after
contusive SCI. (A) AAV9 FLEX expressing either GFP reporter alone or NeuroD1-GFP were
injected along with AAV9 GFAP::Cre to target reactive astrocytes at 16 weeks after a contusive
SCI (30 Kdyn force). The spinal cords were analyzed at 10 wpi. (B) Many infected cells survived
around the injury core (indicated by *) and showing distinct cellular morphology between the
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

two groups. (C) Co-expression of the astrocyte marker S100b in control GFP+ cells. Scale bar 50
µm. (D) Immunostaining of the neuronal marker NeuN indicates successful neuronal conversion
from reactive astrocytes by ND1-GFP with high efficiency. Scale bar 50 µm. (E) NeuN acquisition
at 10 wpi (n=4 for each group; ***, p<0.005). (F) Co-expression of ND1 protein in the ND1-GFP+
cells with a typical neuronal morphology. Scale bar 20 µm. (G) Co-expression of the mature
neuronal marker SV2 in the ND1-GFP+ cells. (H) Co-expression of the neuronal activity marker
cFos in the ND1-GFP+ cells. Scale bar 20 µm. (I) Co-expression of the glutamatergic subtype
marker Tlx3 in ND1-GFP+ neurons in the spinal cord dorsal horn. Arrows show an example Tlx3+
cell. Scale bar 20 µm.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References:

1. Abraira, V.E., and Ginty, D.D. (2013). The sensory neurons of touch. Neuron 79, 618-639.
2. Adams, M.M., and Hicks, A.L. (2005). Spasticity after spinal cord injury. Spinal cord 43, 577-586.
3. Atasoy, D., Aponte, Y., Su, H.H., and Sternson, S.M. (2008). A FLEX switch targets Channelrhodopsin2 to multiple cell types for imaging and long-range circuit mapping. The Journal of neuroscience : the
official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 28, 7025-7030.
4. Bani-Yaghoub, M., Tremblay, R.G., Lei, J.X., Zhang, D., Zurakowski, B., Sandhu, J.K., Smith, B.,
Ribecco-Lutkiewicz, M., Kennedy, J., Walker, P.R., et al. (2006). Role of Sox2 in the development of
the mouse neocortex. Developmental biology 295, 52-66.
5. Barker, R.A., Gotz, M., and Parmar, M. (2018). New approaches for brain repair-from rescue to
reprogramming. Nature 557, 329-334.
6. Brulet, R., Matsuda, T., Zhang, L., Miranda, C., Giacca, M., Kaspar, B.K., Nakashima, K., and Hsieh, J.
(2017). NEUROD1 Instructs Neuronal Conversion in Non-Reactive Astrocytes. Stem cell reports 8,
1506-1515.
7. Bylund, M., Andersson, E., Novitch, B.G., and Muhr, J. (2003). Vertebrate neurogenesis is
counteracted by Sox1-3 activity. Nature neuroscience 6, 1162-1168.
8. Chan, K.Y., Jang, M.J., Yoo, B.B., Greenbaum, A., Ravi, N., Wu, W.L., Sanchez-Guardado, L., Lois, C.,
Mazmanian, S.K., Deverman, B.E., et al. (2017). Engineered AAVs for efficient noninvasive gene
delivery to the central and peripheral nervous systems. Nature neuroscience 20, 1172-1179.
9. Chen, Y., Ma, N., Pei, Z., Wu, Z., Do-Monte, F., Huang, P., Yellin, E., Chen, M., Yin, J., Lee, G., et al.
(2018). Functional repair after ischemic injury through high efficiency in situ astrocyte-to-neuron
conversion. BioRxiv April 4th.
10. Chen, Y., Miles, D.K., Hoang, T., Shi, J., Hurlock, E., Kernie, S.G., and Lu, Q.R. (2008). The basic helixloop-helix transcription factor olig2 is critical for reactive astrocyte proliferation after cortical injury.
The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 28, 10983-10989.
11. Cheng, L., Samad, O.A., Xu, Y., Mizuguchi, R., Luo, P., Shirasawa, S., Goulding, M., and Ma, Q. (2005).
Lbx1 and Tlx3 are opposing switches in determining GABAergic versus glutamatergic transmitter
phenotypes. Nature neuroscience 8, 1510-1515.
12. Dittgen, T., Nimmerjahn, A., Komai, S., Licznerski, P., Waters, J., Margrie, T.W., Helmchen, F., Denk,
W., Brecht, M., and Osten, P. (2004). Lentivirus-based genetic manipulations of cortical neurons and
their optical and electrophysiological monitoring in vivo. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 101, 18206-18211.
13. Filous, A.R., and Schwab, J.M. (2017). Determinants of Axon Growth, Plasticity, and Regeneration in
the Context of Spinal Cord Injury. The American journal of pathology.
14. Foust, K.D., Nurre, E., Montgomery, C.L., Hernandez, A., Chan, C.M., and Kaspar, B.K. (2009).
Intravascular AAV9 preferentially targets neonatal neurons and adult astrocytes. Nature
biotechnology 27, 59-65.
15. Gao, Z., Ure, K., Ables, J.L., Lagace, D.C., Nave, K.A., Goebbels, S., Eisch, A.J., and Hsieh, J. (2009).
Neurod1 is essential for the survival and maturation of adult-born neurons. Nature neuroscience 12,
1090-1092.
16. Gascon, S., Murenu, E., Masserdotti, G., Ortega, F., Russo, G.L., Petrik, D., Deshpande, A., Heinrich,
C., Karow, M., Robertson, S.P., et al. (2016). Identification and Successful Negotiation of a Metabolic
Checkpoint in Direct Neuronal Reprogramming. Cell Stem Cell 18, 396-409.
17. Goldman, S.A. (2016). Stem and Progenitor Cell-Based Therapy of the Central Nervous System:
Hopes, Hype, and Wishful Thinking. Cell Stem Cell 18, 174-188.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

18. Graham, V., Khudyakov, J., Ellis, P., and Pevny, L. (2003). SOX2 functions to maintain neural
progenitor identity. Neuron 39, 749-765.
19. Grande, A., Sumiyoshi, K., Lopez-Juarez, A., Howard, J., Sakthivel, B., Aronow, B., Campbell, K., and
Nakafuku, M. (2013). Environmental impact on direct neuronal reprogramming in vivo in the adult
brain. Nat Commun 4, 2373.
20. Guo, Z., Zhang, L., Wu, Z., Chen, Y., Wang, F., and Chen, G. (2014). In Vivo direct reprogramming of
reactive glial cells into functional neurons after brain injury and in an Alzheimer's disease model. Cell
Stem Cell 14, 188-202. .
21. Heinrich, C., Bergami, M., Gascon, S., Lepier, A., Vigano, F., Dimou, L., Sutor, B., Berninger, B., and
Gotz, M. (2014). Sox2-mediated conversion of NG2 glia into induced neurons in the injured adult
cerebral cortex. Stem cell reports 3, 1000-1014.
22. Herrmann, J.E., Imura, T., Song, B., Qi, J., Ao, Y., Nguyen, T.K., Korsak, R.A., Takeda, K., Akira, S., and
Sofroniew, M.V. (2008). STAT3 is a critical regulator of astrogliosis and scar formation after spinal
cord injury. The Journal of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 28,
7231-7243.
23. High, K.A., and Roncarolo, M.G. (2019). Gene Therapy. The New England journal of medicine 381,
455-464.
24. Hong, P., Jiang, M., and Li, H. (2014). Functional requirement of dicer1 and miR-17-5p in reactive
astrocyte proliferation after spinal cord injury in the mouse. Glia 62, 2044-2060.
25. Huang, M., Huang, T., Xiang, Y., Xie, Z., Chen, Y., Yan, R., Xu, J., and Cheng, L. (2008). Ptf1a, Lbx1 and
Pax2 coordinate glycinergic and peptidergic transmitter phenotypes in dorsal spinal inhibitory
neurons. Developmental biology 322, 394-405.
26. Lei, W., Li, W., Ge, L., and Chen, G. (2019). Non-engineered and Engineered Adult Neurogenesis in
Mammalian Brains. Frontiers in neuroscience 13, 131.
27. Li, H., and Chen, G. (2016). In Vivo Reprogramming for CNS Repair: Regenerating Neurons from
Endogenous Glial Cells. Neuron 91, 728-738.
28. Liu, M., Li, W., Zheng, J., Xu, Y., He, Q., and Chen, G. (2020). Differential neuronal reprogramming
induced by NeuroD1 from astrocytes in grey matter versus white matter. Neural Regen Res
29. Liu, Y., Miao, Q., Yuan, J., Han, S., Zhang, P., Li, S., Rao, Z., Zhao, W., Ye, Q., Geng, J., et al. (2015).
Ascl1 Converts Dorsal Midbrain Astrocytes into Functional Neurons In Vivo. The Journal of
neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 35, 9336-9355.
30. Lu, P., Ceto, S., Wang, Y., Graham, L., Wu, D., Kumamaru, H., Staufenberg, E., and Tuszynski, M.H.
(2017). Prolonged human neural stem cell maturation supports recovery in injured rodent CNS. The
Journal of clinical investigation 127, 3287-3299.
31. Miyata, T., Maeda, T., and Lee, J.E. (1999). NeuroD is required for differentiation of the granule cells
in the cerebellum and hippocampus. Genes & development 13, 1647-1652.
32. Morrow, E.M., Furukawa, T., Lee, J.E., and Cepko, C.L. (1999). NeuroD regulates multiple functions in
the developing neural retina in rodent. Development 126, 23-36.
33. Niu, W., Zang, T., Zou, Y., Fang, S., Smith, D.K., Bachoo, R., and Zhang, C.L. (2013). In vivo
reprogramming of astrocytes to neuroblasts in the adult brain. Nature cell biology 15, 1164-1175.
34. Norenberg, M.D., Smith, J., and Marcillo, A. (2004). The pathology of human spinal cord injury:
defining the problems. Journal of neurotrauma 21, 429-440.
35. Ohori, Y., Yamamoto, S., Nagao, M., Sugimori, M., Yamamoto, N., Nakamura, K., and Nakafuku, M.
(2006). Growth factor treatment and genetic manipulation stimulate neurogenesis and
oligodendrogenesis by endogenous neural progenitors in the injured adult spinal cord. The Journal
of neuroscience : the official journal of the Society for Neuroscience 26, 11948-11960.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

36. Okada, S., Nakamura, M., Katoh, H., Miyao, T., Shimazaki, T., Ishii, K., Yamane, J., Yoshimura, A.,
Iwamoto, Y., Toyama, Y., et al. (2006). Conditional ablation of Stat3 or Socs3 discloses a dual role for
reactive astrocytes after spinal cord injury. Nature medicine 12, 829-834.
37. Rexed, B. (1954). A cytoarchitectonic atlas of the spinal cord in the cat. The Journal of comparative
neurology 100, 297-379.
38. Roybon, L., Mastracci, T.L., Ribeiro, D., Sussel, L., Brundin, P., and Li, J.Y. (2010). GABAergic
differentiation induced by Mash1 is compromised by the bHLH proteins Neurogenin2, NeuroD1, and
NeuroD2. Cerebral cortex 20, 1234-1244.
39. Santos, S.F., Rebelo, S., Derkach, V.A., and Safronov, B.V. (2007). Excitatory interneurons dominate
sensory processing in the spinal substantia gelatinosa of rat. The Journal of physiology 581, 241-254.
40. Silver, J., and Miller, J.H. (2004). Regeneration beyond the glial scar. Nature reviews Neuroscience 5,
146-156.
41. Sofroniew, M.V. (2009). Molecular dissection of reactive astrogliosis and glial scar formation. Trends
in neurosciences 32, 638-647.
42. Su, Z., Niu, W., Liu, M.L., Zou, Y., and Zhang, C.L. (2014). In vivo conversion of astrocytes to neurons
in the injured adult spinal cord. Nat Commun 5, 3338.
43. Tuszynski, M.H., Wang, Y., Graham, L., Gao, M., Wu, D., Brock, J., Blesch, A., Rosenzweig, E.S.,
Havton, L.A., Zheng, B., et al. (2014). Neural stem cell dissemination after grafting to CNS injury sites.
Cell 156, 388-389.
44. Wang, L.L., Su, Z., Tai, W., Zou, Y., Xu, X.M., and Zhang, C.L. (2016). The p53 Pathway Controls SOX2Mediated Reprogramming in the Adult Mouse Spinal Cord. Cell reports 17, 891-903.
45. Zaiss, A.K., Liu, Q., Bowen, G.P., Wong, N.C., Bartlett, J.S., and Muruve, D.A. (2002). Differential
activation of innate immune responses by adenovirus and adeno-associated virus vectors. Journal of
virology 76, 4580-4590.
46. Zhang, L., Lei, Z., Guo, Z., Pei, Z., Chen, Y., Zhang, F., Cai, A., Mok, Y., Lee, G., Swaminnathan, V., et al.
(2018). Reversing Glial Scar Back To Neural Tissue Through NeuroD1-Mediated Astrocyte-To-Neuron
Conversion. BioRxiv February 7th.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental figures:

Supplemental Figure 1. Infected cells by AAV9-ND1-mChy overexpress ND1 protein in the
injured spinal cord. (A) Immunostaining analysis confirmed that the infected cells by AAV9
ND1-mCh expressed the neuronal marker NeuN indicating neuronal conversion in the dorsal
horn of injured spinal cord at 4 wpi. Scale bar 200 µm. (B) Infected cells overexpressed ND1
protein at 4 wpi. Scale bar 50 µm.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 2. NeuroD1-mediated neuronal conversion does not involve severe
apoptosis. TUNEL assays were performed to detect apoptotic cells at different stages of
neuronal conversion by AAV9 ND1-mCh in the injured spinal cord. Arrows show infected cells
that are NeuN+ but TUNEL−.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/818823; this version posted November 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplemental Figure 3. CaMK2-GFP virus and GAD-GFP mice can be used to confirm neuronal
subtype. (A) CaMK2-GFP (from co-injected AAV9 virus) co-stains with Tlx3 while (B) GAD-GFP
(from GAD-GFP transgenic mouse) co-stains with Pax2, indicating that these markers can be
used to confirm glutamatergic and GABAergic subtypes in the dorsal horn. Scale bar 200 µm.
Dotted boxes at 4×mag below.

36

