bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Indirect actuation reduces flight power requirements in Manduca sexta
via elastic energy exchange
Jeff Gau1 , Nick Gravish2 , and Simon Sponberg3
1

Interdisciplinary Bioengineering Graduate Program & Woodruff School of Mechanical
Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA
2
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA
92161, USA
3
School of Physics & School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
30332 USA

Abstract
In the vast majority of flying insects, wing movements are generated indirectly via the deformations of
the exoskeleton. Indirect measurements of inertial and aerodynamic power requirements suggest that elastic
energy exchange in spring-like structures may reduce the high power requirements of flight by recovering energy
from one wingstroke to the next. We directly measured deformation mechanics and elastic energy storage in a
hawkmoth Manduca sexta thorax by recording the force required to deform the thorax over a frequency range
encompassing typical wingbeat frequencies. We found that a structural damping model, not a viscoelastic
model, accurately describes the thorax’s linear spring-like properties and frequency independent dissipation.
The energy recovered from thorax deformations is sufficient to minimize flight power requirements. By removing
the passive musculature, we find that the exoskeleton determines thorax mechanics. To assess the factors that
determine the exoskeleton’s spring-like properties, we isolated functional thorax regions, disrupted strain in
an otherwise intact thorax, and compared results to a homogeneous hemisphere. We found that mechanical
coupling between spatially separated thorax regions improves energy exchange performance. Furthermore, local
mechanical properties depend on global strain patterns. Finally, the addition of scutum deformations via indirect
actuation provides additional energy recovery without added dissipation.

1

Introduction

Indirect actuation is a prevalent feature among flying insects. Unlike traditional skeletal muscle, the power muscles
in many species indirectly generate wing movements by deforming a continuous exoskeleton surrounding the thorax
[1]. Like the complex interactions between power limited muscles, non-ideal latches, and imperfect springs in power
amplified biological systems, the introduction of the deformable exoskeleton could have significant consequences
on flight mechanics [2]. For instance, the thorax’s frequency response may cause some wingbeat frequencies to be
energetically favorable, thereby encouraging flight within a narrow band as seen in Manduca sexta [3]. In addition,
for the past 60 years, it has been thought that these exoskeletal deformations may reduce the energy required
for flight by providing elastic energy storage and return. However, it is unclear what factors give rise to springlike properties in a materially heterogeneous structure with complex geometry. Despite the prevalence of indirect
actuation in insect flight, it is unknown how the integrated mechanical system responds to changes in wingbeat
frequencies, how thorax mechanics affect flight energetics, and what factors give rise to the thorax’s spring-like
properties.
To fly, insects must provide power to accelerate and decelerate their oscillating wings (Pinertial ) as well as to move
the surrounding air (Paero ). Assuming symmetric upstroke and downstrokes, no energetic costs of wing deceleration,
Paero < Pinertial , and zero elastic energy exchange, the total power required for flight is Ptotal = 21 (Paero + Pinertial )
[4, 5]. Under these conditions, the insect must only provide mechanical power during the acceleration phase of

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a)

Scutum

b)
DLM
DVM
Phragma
Thorax
Downstroke

Upstroke

Figure 1: Insects with indirect actuation deform their exoskeleton to move their wings. a) The hawkmoth Manduca
sexta utilizes indirect actuation to fly. b) Two sets of muscles, the dorsolongitudinal (DLM) and dorsoventral
(DVM) attach to the thorax. The DLM attaches to the posterior phragma, which is an insertion of the exoskeleton
into the thorax. The DVM attaches to the scutum, a smooth plate on the top of the thorax. The DLM and DVM
act against each other to drive the upstroke and downstroke movements by deforming the thorax.
each half stroke because Pinertial is converted into Paero during deceleration. If there is elastic energy exchange,
excess wing kinetic energy can be absorbed and returned by elastic elements in the flight system (Preturn ). In an
ideal case, Ptotal = Paero . Because Paero < Pinertial , this corresponds to a net reduction in Ptotal . In this case, all
excess inertial power (Pinertial − Paero ) is stored in spring-like structures and returned to reduce Pinertial for the
subsequent half stroke [4, 5].
Several modeling and indirect mechanical measures have estimated the potential benefits of elastic energy exchange afforded by the thorax and muscles during flight [6, 7, 8, 9]. Blade element models, computational fluid
dynamics, and tomographic particle image velocimetry estimates suggest that perfect elastic energy exchange could
reduce Ptotal by up to 20 - 35% in Manduca sexta [8, 9, 7]. These estimates indicate the potential benefits of elastic
energy storage in flapping wing systems. However, there is a lack of direct mechanical measurements of the insect
thorax to determine if elastic energy storage and recovery occurs during flight.
There are several potential sources of elastic energy exchange in insect flight. The antagonistic extension of
elastic elements in both passive and active muscle as well as exoskeletal deformations may store and return elastic
energy (Fig. 1 b) [10, 11, 12, 13]. In particular, temperature gradients in Manduca sexta enables crossbridges
to remain bound and function as springs, although the energy exchange capacity has not been quantified [13].
Unlike muscle, it is unclear what factors would enable substantial elastic energy exchange in the exoskeleton.
While the exoskeleton is composed of resilient materials, such as resilin and chitin, material properties are not
the sole determinant of bulk mechanical properties [14, 15, 16, 17]. For instance, mechanical coupling of bending
and stretching due to a structure’s shape can significantly alter bulk mechanics [18]. In addition, large amplitude
heterogeneous strain may concentrate deformations in regions with unfavorable properties for energy exchange (Fig.
2 d) [19]. Thus, interactions between exoskeletal shape and material composition are significant for determining
elastic energy exchange capacity. While all three sources may recycle elastic energy, there is a maximum useful
elastic energy return beyond which Ptotal is not affected.
In addition to energy recovery, energy loss during thorax deformations may substantially alter flight power
requirements. Under the large strain conditions (9% peak-to-peak) observed in Manduca sexta, biological springs
are often far from ideal [20]. Instead, they typically introduce substantial, and often, frequency dependent damping
[17, 21]. Similar to Paero , any dissipation in the thorax is unrecoverable. If Plost exceeds Preturn , then the net effect
of thorax deformations is an increase in Ptotal . Furthermore, if damping is frequency dependent as seen in passive
and active flight muscle [21], then there may be energetically preferable wingbeat frequencies and possible limits on
the range of energetically attainable wingbeat frequencies.
We hypothesize that the thorax acts as a damped spring that substantially reduces Ptotal . To test this hypothesis,
we employ a custom vibration apparatus to measure the thorax’s passive mechanical properties under physiological
conditions. We provide an oscillatory displacement to the thorax, mimicking the action of the flight power muscles.
We measured the force required to deform the thorax to determine elastic energy storage and recovery in a typical

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a)

b)

force transducer
A
Force (mN)

3

f = 25Hz

0

-3
-0.6

0

0.6

D

V

Position (mm)

P

hall effect sensor
shaker head
magnet

c)

d)
A

Preturn

D

V
P

Plost
1 mm

Figure 2: Experimental overview. a) Experimental setup. The thorax is mounted between a dynamic mechanical
testing device and a force transducer. We prescribe a sinusoidal length input to physiological amplitudes and
measure the force required to deform the thorax. b) Representative force and displacement measurements from an
intact thorax with passive musculature at 25 Hz. c) Force-displacement plot from the same data as b), but averaged
over all oscillations. Blue area denotes Preturn while red area denotes Plost . The displacements are asymmetric
because the operating length of downstroke muscles is 0.21 mm shorter than rest length [22]. d) Visualization of
strain through the second thoracic segment during a physiological oscillation at 1 Hz. We recorded high speed video
at 200 fps. White and black dots were painted on the thorax to aid in tracking. Color denotes deformation angle
off of the vertical while traces highlight the movement of each tracked point.
wingbeat. Through frequency sweeps encompassing the typical wing beat frequency, we develop a model of thorax
elasticity and damping. In addition, we employ a series of thorax manipulations to identify how different exoskeleton
regions contribute to flight energetics. We compare these manipulations to an ideal homogeneous hemisphere (ping
pong ball) to assess the effects of shape and material. Lastly, we repeat mechanical testing experiments on a thorax
with removed musculature to determine the relative importance of passive muscles on flight energetics.

2
2.1

Methods
Animals

Manduca sexta used in these experiments were obtained as pupae from colonies maintained at the University of
Washington and Case Western Reserve University. Moths were kept on a 12h:12h day:night cycle. We used 7 males
and 27 females between 1 and 7 days post-eclosion. Moth mass equaled 2.13 ± 0.47 g.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2.2

Thorax preparation

Following a 30 minute cold anesthesia, we removed the head, abdomen, wings, and legs from each moth to isolate
the thorax. In some preparations (N = 10), we removed the flight musculature, while in others we left the muscle
intact (N = 24). For the intact muscle preparations, we silenced neural activity by cutting the outward projections
of the thoracic ganglion to the flight musculature. We then removed the first thoracic section, leaving only the
thorax segments involved in flight (pterothorax). Finally, we used damp wipes and compressed air to remove scales
from the exoskeleton.
2.2.1

Muscle Removal

The anterior and posterior ends of the pterothorax have large openings to remove muscle. We used forceps and
scalpels to remove flight muscle from the pterothorax. We ensured that we removed at least 0.1 g of muscle, which is
in rough agreement with previous reports of DLM muscle mass [20]. Any remaining pieces of muscle were negligible
because we ensured that they only had one intact attachment point. Therefore, these muscle remnants could not
be stretched and generate significant force during our experiments.

2.3
2.3.1

Thorax manipulations
Strain disruption cuts

For these manipulations, we used a series of cuts to disrupt strain through the exoskeleton without removing
material (Fig. 7 a & b). The objective of these cuts was to disrupt the transverse arch, which is known to increase
longitudinal stiffness. For the longitudinal cut condition, we used a razor blade to cut a single anterior-posterior
cut along the midline of the scutum. We then performed the triple longitudinal cut condition in which two parallel
cuts are made on either side of the first longitudinal cut. This created three anterior-posterior cuts on the scutum.
2.3.2

Wing joint and scutum isolation cuts

These cuts removed material in the exoskeleton to isolate strain to certain functional regions (Fig. 6 a & b). For
the isolated joint condition, we removed the scutum to isolate strain to the wing joint. For the isolated scutum
condition, we removed the wing joint to isolate strain to the scutum. The total material displaced in the isolated
joint plus isolated scutum conditions should equal that of an intact thorax because the dorsal regions of the thorax
are largely decoupled from the ventral.

2.4

Shaker preparation

We used cyanoacrylate glue to secure a 3D printed shaft to the posterior phragma (Fig. 1 b and Fig. 2 A & D).
This shaft was then mounted to the head of a custom shaker mechanism as described in [23]. On the anterior
end, we used cyanoacrylate to rigidly attach the anterior phragma to a cantilever beam force transducer rated to
10 N with a resonance frequency of 300 Hz (FORT1000, World Precision Instruments, Sarasota, FL). The force
transducer itself was mounted to a 3-axis micromanipulator, which enabled us to precisely set the rest length of the
thorax. Using the force transducer, we weighed the ABS attachment pieces plus cyanoacralyte. After mounting the
thorax vertically, we returned the force to match this weight. The micromanipulator also allowed us to precompress
the thorax to physiological amplitudes [22]. To measure thorax compression and tension, we used an analog hall
effect sensor (DVR5053-Q1, Texas Instruments, Dallas, Tx). This sensor was calibrated to measure the position
of a permanent magnet attached to the shaker head. We drove the shaker head with an electrodynamic vibration
testing system (VTS 600, Vibration Test Systems, Aurora, OH). Critically, the anterior and posterior phragmas
are the structures to which the downstroke power muscles attach in vivo. Attaching our experimental apparatus
to these structures and displacing along the contraction axis of the main downstroke muscle (DLM) axis ensured
physiologically relevant deformations.

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

2.5

Dynamic mechanical testing

After procompressing the thorax, we prescribed sinusoidal displacements to a physiological amplitude of 0.46 mm
over a frequency sweep from 0.1 to 90 Hz [22]. This frequency range encompasses the hawkmoth’s wingbeat
frequency of 25 Hz. At each frequency, we ensured the thorax reached steady state and simultaneously measured
forces and displacements, as described above.

2.6

Strain mapping

In one thorax, we mapped 2D strain in the parasagittal plane. We removed the third thoracic segment to visualize
the phragma and left the flight muscle intact. We then painted small white and black dots on the thorax to aid
strain visualization (Fig. 2 d). We deformed the thorax at 1 Hz while recording from from a machine vision camera
at 200 Hz (BlackFly S BFS-U3-4S2M-CS, FLIR Integrated Imaging Solutions, Inc. Richmond, BC, Canada).

2.7

Ping pong ball preparation

We repeated the analogous procedures to prepare ping pong balls. We chose ping pong balls because they are highly
uniform, precisely spherical, and made of a material, celluloid, known to have structurally damped properties [24].
Because ping pong balls are spherical and homogeneous, there is no true “scutum” or “wing hinge”. We therefore
visually determined analogous “scutum” and ”wing hinge regions. Similar to the thorax, we used ABS shafts to
attach the ping pong ball to the custom shaker. For dynamic material testing, we used a displacement of 0.5 mm
and precompression of 0.2 mm. We found that ping pong balls had similar peak forces to the thoraxes, indicating
the the thorax and ping pong ball experiments were in similar dynamic regimes for the shaker apparatus.

2.8

Desiccation verification

To assess the effects of desiccation on thorax properties, we report Preturn and Plost on three thoraxes with passive
musculature (Fig. S1). Following the dynamic mechanical testing procedure outlined above, we repeatedly measured
Preturn and Plost to assess the effects of desiccation on elastic energy exchange. We found that both Preturn and
Plost increased with time, but that the conclusions in this report hold true regardless of desiccation effects.

2.9
2.9.1

Data analysis
Empirical calculations of power exchange

∗
We calculated three body mass-specific powers: power required to drive the displacements (Pin
), power returned via
∗
∗
), and power dissipated during an oscillation (Plost
). Because the wings
elastic energy storage and return (Preturn
∗
∗
have been removed, Pin
is just the power necessary to deform the thorax and accelerate thoracic mass. Pin
is the
∗
∗
sum of Preturn
and Plost
. We begin by empirically integrating force over displacement to determine the analogous
energy metrics (Fig. 2 c). We multiply energy by oscillation frequency to arrive at power. We then normalize by
body mass to arrive at body mass-specific powers (P ∗ ). Finally, we calculate resilience (R), which is a measure of
spring efficiency, as

R=
2.9.2

Preturn
.
Pin

(1)

Thorax elastic linearity

To assess linearity, we compare resilience values between those derived from empirical force-displacement data versus
resilience values of a linear fit to the force-displacement data (Fig. 4 D). For the linear fit, force and displacement
amplitude are calculated as the maximum amplitude of the corresponding Fourier transforms. Phase lag between
00
force and displacement (φ) is determined by φ = tan−1 ( EE 0 ). From the phase lag, E, and strain measurements,
we generate a force-displacement ellipse. Because precompression affects R, we offset this ellipse by the force and
displacement offsets measured in the thoraxes. Finally, we empirically integrate to determine R.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A)

B)

Figure 3: Force-displacement traces at representative frequencies from 0.1 to 90 Hz for an intact thorax with a)
passive muscle (N = 24) and b) removed muscle (N = 10). For each frequency, the traces represent the average
force and average displacement at each time point. Positive displacement denotes compression.
2.9.3

Statistics

To determine the frequency dependence of data, we used a linear mixed effects model [25]. In this model, each
trial was represented as a random variable. To compare data at wingbeat frequency, we used two-sided t-tests. All
reported errors are one standard deviation.

3
3.1

Results
The thorax behaves like a linear, structurally damped spring

The force-displacement traces provide a preliminary assessment of the thorax’s mechanical properties (Fig. 3 a &
b). The thorax is stiff, requiring 2 N to compress under physiological conditions. This force magnitude agrees with
muscle force output previously reported for Manduca sexta [20]. Despite its structural complexity, the thorax is
well-approximated as a linear material, both with and without passive musculature. Under both conditions, there
is evidence of Preturn and Plost in the thorax. Because we precompressed the thoraxes to physiological conditions,
the majority of the elastic energy returned occurs during the down stroke. Finally, for both the passive and
removed musculature conditions, the force-displacement relationship is largely frequency independent, with only
visible differences evident between the 0.1 and 90 Hz trials. From mixed linear model regression, we found that force
does increases very shallowly by 1.693 ± 0.11 mN per Hz (p < 0.001) and resilience decreases by -0.052 ± 0.002
% per Hz (p < 0.001) in thoraxes with passive musculature. This indicates that stiffness and damping are weakly
frequency dependent over this range, but that the magnitude of change from 0.1 to 90 Hz (9% for stiffness and 6%
for resilience) is likely biologically insignificant, especially because Manduca sexta fly within a narrow frequency
range around 25 Hz [3].
To better characterize these observations, we sought a mathematical model of thorax elasticity and damping. A
linear force-displacement model requires a minimum of two parameters (storage and loss). Therefore, we considered
two classical two-parameter models. The Kelvin-Voigt model consists of a parallel spring and viscous damper (Fig.
4 a, inset), as defined in Eq. 2, where m is the mass of the object, c is the damping coefficient, and k is the spring
stiffness. The damping force in this system is velocity dependent.
F (t) = mẍ + cẋ + kx.

(2)

Next, we considered a structural damping model (Fig. 4 b, inset and Eq. 3) because it accurately characterized
the bending of cockroach legs over a wide frequency range [26]. In this model, m is the mass of the object, γ is the

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a)

K

b)

K

iγ

C

d)

c)

Figure 4: Frequency response and mechanical characterization of intact thorax with passive musculature (N = 24).
Each line denotes one individual. a) Damping coefficient c for a Kelvin-Voigt model fit to experimental data. b)
Damping coefficient γ for a structural damping model fit to experimental data. c) Normalized peak force required
to deform the thorax versus frequency. For each individual, force is normalized to the peak force at 90 Hz. d)
Resilience versus calculated for experimental force-displacement data (blue) and for a linear fit (gray). Shaded area
denotes one standard deviation above and below the mean.

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

structural damping coefficient, and k is the spring stiffness. In this model, damping force is position dependent.
F (t) = mẍ + k(1 + iγ)x

(3)

Both models are linear viscoelastic models but have significantly different frequency predictions. To determine
the efficacy of each model, we assumed negligible mass and fit the stiffness k and loss coefficient (c or γ) at each
oscillation frequency.
To calculate the structural damping coefficient (γ), the Kelvin-Voigt damping coefficient c, and Young’s Modulus
E, we first determine the storage modulus E’ and the loss modulus E”. We took the Fourier transform of stress and
strain at each oscillation frequency. We then divided the peak complex stress by peak complex strain to determine
the complex modulus, where E’ is the real portion and E” is the imaginary component. Assuming m is negligible,
00
00
E = E 0 . Next we calculated the damping coefficients as γ = Ek and c = Ew , where w is the angular frequency of
oscillation [26].
The Kelvin-Voigt damping parameter, c changed by nearly three-orders of magnitude over the driving frequency
range (Fig. 4 a). The strong frequency dependence of c indicates that the Kelvin-Voigt model is a poor representation of thorax mechanics because the thorax itself is not changing as a function of oscillation frequency. In contrast,
the structural damping parameter γ was nearly constant over the entire driving frequency range (Fig. 4 c). These
results suggest that the thorax is best described by a structural damping model because this model has frequency
independent parameters.
There is strong agreement between resilience values from empirical force-displacement data and resilience values
calculated from a linear fit of the same data (Fig. 4 d). This suggest that deviations from linearity observed in the
force-displacement data (Fig. 4 a) do not significantly affect energetics. In summary, we conclude that the thorax
behaves as a structurally damped, linear spring.

3.2

Passive muscle is negligible for elastic energy exchange

To assess the relative contributions of the exoskeleton and passive muscle on thorax elasticity under physiological
conditions, we compared power measurements for thoraxes with passive (N = 24) and removed (N = 10) musculature.
We found that removing the passive musculature significantly reduced the peak force to deform the thorax from 1730
± 430 mN to 1350 ± 250 mN (p = 0.015) (Fig. 5 a). However, there was no statistical difference in resilience values
between thoraxes with passive and removed musculature (p = 0.277) (Fig. 5 b). Although passive muscle added
significant stiffness, when we divided the force-displacement plots into the respective power metrics and normalized
∗
∗
∗
by body mass, we found no statistically significant difference in Pin
(p = 0.053), Preturn
(p = 0.055), or Plost
(p
= 0.131) (Fig. 5 c). These results suggest that the passive thorax’s energy exchange capacity is dominated by the
exoskeleton and passive muscle is negligible. However, activating muscle can engage additional elastic elements,
such as crossbridges, to increase thorax stiffness [13].
Furthermore, the high stiffness and resilience of the passive thorax indicates substantial elastic energy exchange
under physiological conditions. With passive musculature, we obtained a Pin of 10.9 ± 2.8 W kg−1 , Preturn of 8.5
± 2.4 W kg−1 , and a Plost of 2.4 ± 0.5 W kg−1 . With muscle removed, we found a Pin of 8.7 ± 3.0, Preturn of 6.7
± 2.4, and Plost of 2.1 ± 0.6 W kg−1 .

3.3

Isolation of thorax regions reduces regional energy exchange performance

From visualizations of thorax strain patterns (Fig. 2 d), it is evident that the wing joint and scutum move
orthogonally as the thorax is stretched and compressed (Fig. 6 a & b). To assess how interactions between these
regions affect bulk mechanics, we performed dynamic mechanical testing on thoraxes with isolated wing joints and
isolated scutums. We performed analogous experiments on a homogeneous hemisphere to ground our interpretation
of these results. We used ping pong balls because they are homogeneous, structurally damped hemispheres [24].
Although ping pong balls do not naturally possess scutums or wing hinges, we removed the analogous regions to
gain intuition on how a thorax with reduced complexity might behave.
For the ping pong ball, the isolated scutum (N = 5) had a Preturn of only 25.6 ± 6.5% (p = 0.002) of the intact
system and a and Plost of 28.5 ± 3.5% (p < 0.001). Similarly, the isolated joint (N = 7) had a Preturn of 27.7 ±
5.1% (p = 0.001) and Plost of 22.8 ± 2.5% (p = 0.001). Notably, strain coupling between ping pong ball regions
affects both Preturn and Plost because the sum of the joint and scutum regions is less than 1 for both measures.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a)

b)

c)

Figure 5: Mechanics of passive muscle are negligible. All data was taken at oscillation frequencies at 25 Hz.
Boxplots denote the mean, quartiles, and range of the raw data while circles are individual data points. a) Peak
force required to deform the thorax with passive (N = 24) and removed (N = 10) musculature. b) Resilience for
thoraxes with passive and removed musculature. c) Mass-specific power measures for thoraxes with passive and
removed musculature.
The near monotonic decrease in Preturn and Plost led to normalized resilience values of 99.0 ± 2.6% for the isolated
scutum and 102.7 ± 2.0% for the isolated joint. There was no statistically significant difference between the isolated
scutum and the intact ping pong ball (p = 0.474), but resilience for the isolated joint significantly increased (p =
0.015). Although there is a slight increase in resilience in the ping pong ball under the isolated joint condition, these
results indicate that the mechanical properties of both regions are nearly identical to that an intact ping pong ball.
Unlike the intuition developed from the ping pong balls, isolated thorax regions see sharp decreases in spring
performance. The isolated scutum (N = 8) and isolated joint (N = 7) had normalized resilience values of only
76.6 ± 4.1% (p < 0.001) and 82.5 ± 3.6% (p < 0.001), respectively. The reduction in resilience is evident in the
non-proportional changes in Preturn and Plost . Similar to the ping pong ball, when we isolated the scutum, Preturn
fell to 21.9 ± 5.5% (p < 0.001) but Plost only decreased to 56.3 ± 14.4% (p < 0.001). When we isolated the joint,
Preturn for the isolated joint was 47.5 ± 9.1% (p < 0.001) of the intact thorax. Contrary to expectations, Plost
remained unchanged (p = 0.349). This suggests that the majority of energy dissipation occurs in the wing joints
and the addition of a scutum therefore provides free Preturn . Similar to the ping pong balls, Preturn benefits from
mechanical coupling between regions.

3.4

Disruption of thoracic shape reduces energy exchange performance

Isolating thorax regions alters bulk mechanics, but is is unclear whether these effects are due to changes in strain
propagation or removal of material. Therefore, we performed a series of manipulations that disrupt strain but do
not remove material. In the thorax, the longitudinal cut disrupts the transverse arch, while the triple cut disrupts
strain between the wing joint and scutum.
For ping pong balls, disrupting the transverse arch via a longitudinal cut (N = 7) led to a Preturn of 81.7 ±
3.8% of the intact system (p = 0.001) and Plost of 74.2 ± 9.8 % (p = 0.013). When we added two parallel cuts
for the triple cut condition (N = 7), Preturn was only 71.9 ± 3.6% (p < 0.001) of the intact ping pong ball and
Plost dropped to 68.1 ± 10.8 % (p = 0.012). Similar to the region removal experiments, the nearly proportional
decrease in Preturn and Plost led to normalized resilience values identical to the intact ping pong ball for both the
longitudinal (p = 0.243) and triple (p = 0.935) cut conditions. This indicates that changes in strain propagation
does not affect spring performance.
Similar to the ping pong balls, altering strain without removing material reduced Preturn in thoraxes. However,
Plost was unchanged. For thoraxes, the longitudinal cut (N = 8) reduced Preturn to 88.1 ± 7.6% (p = 0.010) while
Plost was unaffected (p = 0.803). Similarly, the triple cut (N = 7) reduced Preturn to 75.1 ± 9.9% (p = 0.002)
while Plost remained constant (p = 0.984). Unlike the ping pong ball, changes in strain propagation did not affect
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a)

wing joint

b)

wing joint

c)

scutum

wing joint
phragma

scutum

wing base
A

D

DLM
P

wing base

A
V

mediolateral

scutum

P

d)

e)
**
**
*

f)

*

*

**
*

*

*

*

g)
*

**

**
*

*

Figure 6: Region isolation experiments. a) Dorsal view of the second thoracic segment, which contains the majority
of flight muscle and forewings. The wing joint is in pink, scutum in blue, and wing base in purple. b) Lateral
view of the second thoracic segment. In addition to the regions labeled in a), the phragma is visible. c) Analogous
dorsal view of a ping pong ball highlighting the regions labeled in a). d) Representative force-displacement plots
for an intact, isolated joint, and isolated scutum thorax. At each time point, we plot the average force against the
average displacement for each condition. Positive displacement denotes compression. e) Effects of regions isolation
on resilience, Preturn , and Plost in thoraxes with passive musculature and isolated scutums (N = 8) or isolated wing
joints (N = 7). All data was normalized to the paired, intact thorax and taken at an oscillation frequency of 25 Hz.
Boxplots denote the mean, quartiles, and range of the raw data while circles are individual data points. Single *
denote a significant difference from the paired, intact thorax while ** mark differences between conditions. f) Same
as d) but for a ping pong ball. g) Same measures as e) but for ping pong balls with isolated scutums (N = 7) or
isolated joints (N = 5).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a)

b)

triple cut

longitudinal cut
triple cut

D

A
P

longitudinal cut

d)

mediolateral

A
V

P

longitudinal cut

e)
*

f)

triple cut

c)

**

*

*

**

*

g)
*

**

*

*

*

Figure 7: Strain disruption experiments. Dorsal a) and lateral b) views of the second thoracic segment. In addition
to the features described in Fig. 6, the green line marks the longitudinal cut condition while red lines mark the triple
cut. c) analogous dorsal view of a ping pong ball highlighting the cuts labeled in a). d) Average force-displacement
plots for an intact, longitudinal cut, and triple cut thorax. At each time point, we plot the average force against the
average displacement for each condition. Positive displacement denotes compression. e) Effects of strain disruption
on resilience, Preturn , and Plost in thoraxes with passive musculature and a longitudinal cut (N = 8) or triple cut (N
= 7). All data was normalized to the paired, intact thorax and taken at an oscillation frequency of 25 Hz. Boxplots
denote the mean, quartiles, and range of the raw data while circles are individual data points. Single * denote a
significant difference from the paired, intact thorax while ** mark differences between conditions. f) Same as d)
but for ping pong balls. g) Same measures as e) but for ping pong balls with longitudinal cuts (N = 7) or triple
cuts (N = 7).

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Plost . A constant Plost but reduced Preturn led to normalized resilience values of 96.9 ± 2.3% (p = 0.008) for
the longitudinal cut and 93.1 ± 3.4% (p = 0.002) for the triple cut condition. These results indicate that strain
propagation is critical for thorax mechanics because strain disruption without the removal of material significantly
alters bulk mechanical properties.

4
4.1

Discussion
Frequency dependent consequences of frequency independent thorax mechanics

The thorax’s frequency response is an important mechanical property for flight because insects may utilize wingbeat
frequency modulation to overcome flapping wing instabilities [27, 28]. In air, oscillating systems typically exhibit
frequency independent damping [24]. However, the introduction of fluids causes velocity dependencies. For instance,
isolated, passive muscle exhibits strong frequency dependent damping, in part due to its high water content [29,
30, 31]. However, despite the presence of viscoelastic muscle, a cockroach leg is well characterized by a structural
damping model, not a viscoelastic one [26]. Despite larger amounts of muscle, we find that the hawkmoth’s
exoskeleton still dominates thorax properties, behaves as a structurally damped material, and leads to frequency
independent mechanics (Fig. 4 b, c, & d) like in the cockroach leg.
The interactions of a frequency independent thorax with frequency dependent power requirements bounds the
range of energetically preferable wingbeat frequencies. Unlike Preturn and Plost , both Pinertial and Paero scale
cubically with wingbeat frequency [5]. Because Preturn is frequency independent, there is only one wingbeat
frequency that minimizes Pinertial via elastic energy exchange. At higher wingbeat frequencies, the energy reduction
from elastic energy exchange becomes negligible. Although moths do not possess a clutch mechanism in the wing
joint, it is unclear whether this energetically optimal frequency corresponds to a true resonance because of nonlinear
aerodynamic damping, lack of accurate estimates of effective wing mass, and uncertainties about transmission ratio
between the muscles and wings. Unlike a viscously damped system, Plost places a lower bound on wingbeat
frequencies. In this regime, a larger portion of energy expenditure would be spent overcoming thorax dissipation.
Beyond just hawkmoths, frequency independent damping may be ubiquitous in insect joints. At many length
scales, components of the insect flight apparatus have frequency independent mechanical properties. Proteins [17],
composite structures [32], and now our data on Manduca sexta thoraxes all demonstrate frequency independent
damping. Extending beyond insect flight, both resilin and chitin are found in the spring-like structures of many
arthropods [33]. Although Burrows et al. did not perform frequency sweep experiments, they found that froghopper
insects store elastic energy in a composite structure composed predominantly of chitin and resilin [34]. In addition,
resilin is found in the joints of cockroach legs [35], which is known to exhibit frequency independent damping [26].
The building blocks of insect joints are structurally damped, which is maintained as the systems are built up into
an entire flight apparatus. Perhaps frequency independent damping is a ubiquitous property of insect joints.
While the structural damping model accurately represents harmonic thoracic deformations, the model is nonphysical. Under harmonic oscillations, the imaginary γ term manifests as a phase lag between force and displacement. However, for non-harmonic conditions, the complex stiffness indicates that a non-physical complex force is
required for a real displacement. In addition, the model is non-causal because it requires future states to predict
its current state [36]. Therefore, the structural damping model cannot be used as an equation of motion to model
oscillatory dynamics beyond harmonic oscillations, even if it provides a good phenomological fit for the behavior
of the system. Mechanistic equations of motion for structurally damped materials (strain-dependent dissipation)
remain a challenging frontier. Physically, frequency independent damping can occur if a system has many stress
relaxation time constants [37]. At each oscillation frequency, the nearest time constant dominates, effectively leading to frequency independent damping. However, to the best of our knowledge these conditions have not yet been
translated into a widely accepted mechanistic and mathematical formulation. Despite these limitations, a structural
damping model provides a mathematical basis for investigating energy exchange under harmonic conditions.

4.2

Thoracic exoskeleton returns the maximum amount of beneficial elastic energy

The general approach to quantify elastic energy exchange is to estimate Ptotal assuming first with no elastic energy
exchange and then with perfect elastic energy exchange. The difference between the two Ptotal values represents
the maximum energetic benefit of elastic energy exchange. Using this general strategy in Manduca sexta but

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

with different experimental approaches, Willmott & Ellington (blade element models), Sun & Du (computational
fluid dynamics), and Warfvinge et al. (particle image velocimetry) concluded that elastic energy exchange can
reduce Ptotal by up to 20 - 35% [8, 7, 9]. To extend upon this work, Dickinson & Lighton utilized respirometric
measurements combined with model based estimates of Paero and Pinertial [5]. They found that 11% elastic energy
exchange accounted for the differences in blade element model and respirometric estimates of Ptotal in Drosophila
hydei. However, these estimates rest on the assumption that muscle efficiency is constant. A following study shows
muscle efficiency in the closely related Drosophila melanogaster can vary by three-fold depending on motor output
[38]. In addition to modeling, Weis-Fogh reported preliminary measurements of the static relationship between
wing angle and torque in locusts (Schistocera gregaria), privet hawk moths Sphinx ligustri, and dragonflies Aeshna
grandis [39]. He concluded that the exoskeleton was stiff but was unable to quantify elastic energy exchange. In
addition, it is unlikely that artificially backdriving the wings accurately reproduces thorax deformations seen in
vivo because muscles are necessary to properly engage the wings into flight position [40].
We have found that the Manduca sexta thoracic exoskeleton returns 8.6 ± 2.4 W kg−1 . Compared to computational fluid dynamics [41], robophysical [42], and kinematic estimates [8, 43] of body mass specific inertial
∗
∗
power requirements (Pinertial
), the passive thorax has the capacity to reduce Pinertial
by 25 - 60% (Fig. 8). Our
results agree with the previously discussed estimates of the maximum useful elastic energy exchange in Manduca
∗
sexta. For example, Willmott & Ellington estimated a maximum Pinertial
reduction 6 ± 3 W kg−1 . In addition,
−1
Sun & Du predict that elastic structures return 9 W kg [7]. Because the thorax itself returns the maximum
beneficial energy, energy exchange from other structures or increased thorax stiffness would not affect flight power
requirements. Therefore, exoskeletal deformations alone are sufficient for reducing Ptotal to a minimum.
Adding a stiff exoskeleton has potential detriments to insect flight. Although the thorax returns significant
energy, it also dissipates 2.4 ± 0.5 W kg−1 that cannot be recovered (Fig. 8). In Manduca sexta, thorax elasticity
leads to a net reduction in Ptotal , but it is possible to dissipate more energy than recovered. In addition, before
the wings have built up sufficient kinetic energy to deform the exoskeleton, insects must expend additional power
to deform the thorax. Similarly, to rapidly accelerate the wings from a stop, Manduca sexta must now deform the
stiff exoskeleton in addition to providing Pinertial and Paero . To bring the wings to a sudden stop, Manduca sexta
must rapidly dissipate stored elastic energy. However, for Manduca sexta, the benefits of minimizing Ptotal during
sustained, steady flight may outweigh these drawbacks.
These results provide an updated perspective on the power requirements of Manduca sexta flight. Due to
experimental challenges in estimating Pinertial and Paero , there is wide variability in the literature (Fig. 8) [43, 8,
42, 41, 9]. This variation has led some authors to argue that there is no benefit of elastic energy exchange because
they find that Paero exceeds Pinertial and the wing therefore has no excess kinetic energy [41, 42]. However, this
argument depends on the time course of Pinertial and Paero and not the wingbeat averaged values. In support
of the elastic energy exchange hypothesis, our results show that the passive flight system has substantial energy
exchange capacity. If the energy to deform the thorax does not come from excess wing kinetic energy, then Manduca
sexta would need to provide this energy from muscles, which goes against an energy minimization strategy [44]. In
addition, compared to the most recent and only direct measurement of power transferred to the surrounding air,
dissipation in the thorax accounts for nearly 20% of power dissipation [9]. By dissipating substantial energy, losses
in the thorax aid in wing deceleration, but reduce the maximum useful Preturn . Therefore, under the perfect energy
exchange condition, Ptotal must supply Plost in addition to Paero .

4.3

Strain coupling improves energy exchange performance

Elastic energy exchange is a common theme in biology, yet animals do not possess ideal springs [44, 2]. Instead,
spring-like behavior arises from physical interactions across many length scales. For instance, the composite structure of invertebrate cuticle contributes to its material properties and some authors point to material testing results
as a predictor of function [45, 17, 46]. However, a structure’s macroscopic shape can significantly alter bulk mechanics by coupling stretching and bending modes [47, 18]. For invertebrates, spring-like structures are frequently
materially heterogeneous and possess complex geometry, which makes it difficult to determine the factors governing
spring-like behavior [48, 49, 50]. Our dynamic mechanical testing experiments have identified a simple mechanical
model of thorax mechanics, but it is unclear what properties of the multifunctional thorax give rise to its bulk
mechanical properties.
To unravel the determinants of spring-like properties in the thoracic exoskeleton, we began by isolating two of

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Ptotal (W kg-1)
Pinertial (W kg-1)

Preturn (W kg-1)

zero elastic energy exchange
36.4 (Casey 1981)
31.8 (Willmott & Ellington 1997)
16.4 (Zhao & Deng (2009)
27.3 (Liu & Anno 2009)

Paero (W kg-1)

14.6 (Casey 1981)
18.2 (Willmott & Ellington 1997)
19.7 (Zhao & Deng 2009)
39.5 (Liu & Anno 2009)
11.0 (Warfvinge et. al 2017)

Plost (W kg-1)

Intact:
2.4
Wing joint: 2.4
Scutum:
1.2

Intact:
8.5
Wing joint: 4.5
Scutum:
2.0

Figure 8: Power measurements during Manduca sexta flight. The total mechanical power produced by the muscles
(Ptotal ) must supply Pinertial and Paero . In addition, our results show that Plost is non-negligible and substantial
recycling of Pinertial via elastic energy exchange (Preturn ).
the main functional thoracic regions and grounding our interpretation by comparing to a homogeneous hemisphere.
We found that both ping pong balls and thoraxes exhibit shape dependent coupling of strain between spatially
separated regions, which is evident in the nonlinear summation of Preturn between regions (Fig. 6 e & g). This
strain coupling is also evident in thorax strain visualization (Fig. 2 d). As the phragma compresses the thorax
(Fig. 1 b), the wing joint and scutum separate (Fig. 2 d). This separation leads to tension that couples the two
regions. Unlike a homogeneous hemisphere, both isolated thorax regions had lower resilience than the intact thorax.
This suggests that local mechanical properties depend on global structure, perhaps due to the thorax’s complex
shape or material heterogeneity. To disentangle the effects of shape and material, we disrupted strain in both
systems without removing material. We again observed that, unlike the homogeneous hemisphere, local resilience
and therefore mechanical properties are dependent on global strain propagation (Fig. 7 e & g). In addition to
expected changes in stiffness, we observe that altering strain patterns in the homogeneous hemisphere can affect
dissipation, but does not in the thorax.
Although the exoskeleton is a single, continuous structure, functional specialization of thorax regions decouples
Preturn and Plost . For instance, the wing joint must withstand the high strains necessary for wing movement whereas
the scutum may be optimized for spring-like behavior [19]. Because dissipation occurs primarily in the wing joint,
the addition of scutum deformations via indirect actuation increases Preturn by 50% but does does not increase
Plost . The exoskeletal’s ability to return the maximum useful elastic energy may explain the general lack of tendons
in insects with indirect musculature [45]. Although active muscle may recycle substantial energy, our results in
tandem with previous estimates of the maximum useful elastic energy exchange suggest that energy exchange from
other sources would not affect Ptotal [8, 7, 9].
These results indicate that coupling between functional regions can have significant energetic consequences for
biological systems. For instance, Manduca sexta benefits from the nonlinear summation of Preturn . Beyond insect
flight, elastic energy exchange in exoskeletal structures is a key component of power amplified behavior [48, 49, 50, 2].
Like other biological structures with complex geometry, the performance of spring-like structures in the thorax may
be highly dependent on their integration with the global system and cannot be characterized in isolation [51, 18].

5

Conclusion

For Manduca sexta and insects with indirect actuation, the power requirements directly related to wing movement
(Pinertial and Ptotal ) as well as those associated with thorax deformations (Preturn and Plost ) are critical for flight
energetics. At a minimum, an insect requires its wing joints to fly. By adding scutum deformations via indirect

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

actuation, we find that Manduca sexta substantially increases elastic energy recovery. In many systems, such as a
homogeneous hemisphere, increasing elastic energy recovery requires a proportional increase in energy dissipation.
However, we find that elastic energy recovery and dissipation are decoupled in the Manduca sexta thorax, likely
due to regional specialization of the exoskeleton. Because of this decoupling, there is no energetic cost to increasing
Preturn . By adopting an indirect actuation strategy, insects can independently tune Preturn to minimize Ptotal . Via
dynamic mechanical testing, we also establish that the thorax’s mechanical properties are well approximated as
a structurally damped, elastic material, which provides a useful characterization for integrated models of flapping
wing flight in insects.

5.1

Acknowledgements

The authors thank James Lynch for helpful discussions.

5.2

Funding sources

This work was supported by U.S. National Science Foundation CAREER grant (Physics of Living Systems 1554790)
to S.S. and the NSF Physics of Living Systems SAVI student research network (GT node grant — 1205878)

References
[1] Pringle JWS. Insect Flight; 1957.
[2] Ilton M, Bhamla MS, Ma X, Cox SM, Fitchett LL, Kim Y, et al. The principles of cascading power limits in
small, fast biological and engineered systems. Science. 2018;1082.
[3] Willmott AP, Ellington CP. The mechanics of flight in the hawkmoth ¡i¿Manduca sexta¡/i¿ I. Kinematics of hovering and forward flight. Journal of Experimental Biology. 1997;200:2705–2722. Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9418029.
[4] Ellington CP. The Aerodynamics of Hovering Insect Flight. VI. Lift and Power Requirements. Phil Trans R
Soc London B. 1984;305(1122):1–15.
[5] Dickinson
MH,
Lighton
JRB.
Muscle
efficiency
and
elastic
flight
motor
of
Drosophila.
Science.
1995;268(5207):87–90.
http://www.sciencemag.org.ezproxy.library.ubc.ca/content/268/5207/87.short.

storage
in
the
Available
from:

[6] Sotavalta O. The essential factor regulating the wing-stroke frequency of insects in wing mutilation and loading
experiments and in experiments at subatmospheric pressure. Ann Zool Soc Vanamo. 1952;15(2):1–66.
[7] Mao S, Gang D. Lift and power requirements of hovering insect flight. Acta Mechanica Sinica. 2003;19(5):458–
469. Available from: http://link.springer.com/10.1007/BF02484580.
[8] Willmott AP, Ellington CP. The mechanics of flight in the hawkmoth Manduca sexta II. Aerodynamic consequences of kinematic and morphological variation. The Journal of Experimental Biology. 1997;200:2723–2745.
[9] Warfvinge K, KleinHeerenbrink M, Hedenström A. The power-speed relationship is U-shaped in two free-flying
hawkmoths (Manduca sexta). Journal of the Royal Society Interface. 2017;14(134).
[10] Zajac FE. Muscle and Tendon: Properties, Models, Scaling, and Application to Biomechanics and Motor
Control. Critical Reviews in Biomedical Engineering. 1989;17(4):359–411.
[11] Dickinson M, Farman G, Frye M, Bekyarova T, Gore D, Maughan D, et al. Molecular dynamics of cyclically
contracting insect flight muscle ¡i¿ in vivo¡/i¿. Nature. 2005;433(7023):330–333.
[12] Perz-Edwards RJ, Irving TC, Baumann BAJ, Gore D, Hutchinson DC, Krzic U, et al. X-ray diffraction evidence for myosin-troponin connections and tropomyosin movement during stretch activation of insect flight muscle. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2011;108(1):120–125. Available from:
http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1014599107.
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[13] George NT, Irving TC, Williams CD, Daniel TL. The Cross-Bridge Spring: Can Cool Muscles Store Elastic
Energy? Science. 2013;340(6137):1217–1220.
[14] Weis-Fough T. The ventilatory mechanisms during flight of insects in relation to the call for oxygen. Proc XIV
Int Congr Zool. 1956;1953:283–285.
[15] Weis-Fogh T. A rubber-like protein in insect cuticle. Journal of Experimental Biology. 1960;37(4):889–
907.
Available from: http://jeb.biologists.org/content/37/4/889.abstract?sid=8d119e9f-1176-4bfa-8c843644d6e6f915.
[16] Weis-Fogh T. Power in Flapping Flight. In: The Cell and the Organism. Cambridge University Press London;
1961. p. 283–300.
[17] Gosline J, Lillie M, Carrington E, Guerette P, Ortlepp C, Savage K. Elastic proteins: biological roles and mechanical properties. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 2002;357(1418):121–
132. Available from: http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/cgi/doi/10.1098/rstb.2001.1022.
[18] Nguyen K, Yu N, Bandi MM, Venkadesan M, Mandre S. Curvature-induced stiffening of a fish fin. Journal of
the Royal Society Interface. 2017;14(130).
[19] Ando N, Kanzaki R. Flexibility and control of thorax deformation during hawkmoth flight. Biology Letters.
2016 1;12(1). Available from: http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/lookup/doi/10.1098/rsbl.2015.0733.
[20] Tu MS, Daniel TL. Submaximal power output from the dorsolongitudinal flight muscles of the hawkmoth Manduca sexta.
Journal of Experimental Biology. 2004;207(26):4651–4662.
Available from:
http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/doi/10.1242/jeb.01321.
[21] White DC. The elasticity of relaxed insect fibrillar flight muscle. The Journal of Physiology. 1983;343(1):31–57.
[22] Tu MS, Daniel TL. Cardiac-like behavior of an insect flight muscle. The Journal of Experimental Biology.
2004;207(14):2455–2464.
[23] Gravish N, Franklin SV, Hu DL, Goldman DI.
2012;20(108):341–354.

Entangled granular media.

Physical Review Letters.

[24] Kimball AL, Lovell DE. Internal Friction in Solids. 1927;82(7):676–682.
[25] Lindstrom MJ, Bates DM. Newton-Raphson and EM Algorithms for Linear Models for Repeated-Measures
Data. Journal of the American Statistical Association. 1988;83(404):1014–1022.
[26] Dudek DM, Full RJ. Passive mechanical properties of legs from running insects. Journal of Experimental
Biology. 2006;209(8):1502–1515. Available from: http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/doi/10.1242/jeb.02146.
[27] Sun M, Xiong Y. Dynamic flight stability of a hovering bumblebee. Journal of Experimental Biology.
2005;208(3):447–459. Available from: http://jeb.biologists.org/cgi/doi/10.1242/jeb.01407.
[28] Dickinson MH, Lehmann FO, Chan WP.
The
sect flight.
Integrative and Comparative Biology.
http://icb.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/doi/10.1093/icb/38.4.718.

control of mechanical power in in1998;38(4):718–728.
Available from:

[29] Rack PMH. The behaviour of a mammalian muscle during sinusoidal stretching. The Journal of Physiology.
1966;183(1):1–14.
[30] Meyer GA, McCulloch AD, Lieber RL. A Nonlinear Model of Passive Muscle Viscosity. Journal of Biomechanical Engineering. 2011;133(9):091007.
[31] Rehorn MR, Schroer AK, Blemker SS. The passive properties of muscle fibers are velocity dependent. Journal
of Biomechanics. 2014;47(3):687–693. Available from: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2013.11.044.

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/727743; this version posted September 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[32] Jensen M, Weis-Fogh T. Biology and Physics of Locust Flight. V. Strength and Elasticity of Locust Cuticle.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences. 1962;245(721):137–169.
[33] Andersen SO, Weis-Fogh T. Resilin. A Rubberlike Protein in Arthropod Cuticle. Advances in Insect Physiology.
1964;2(C):1–65.
[34] Burrows M, Shaw SR, Sutton GP.
Resilin and chitinous cuticle form a composite structure for
energy storage in jumping by froghopper insects.
BMC Biology. 2008;6(1):41.
Available from:
http://bmcbiol.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1741-7007-6-41.
[35] Neff D, Frazier SF, Quimby L, Wang RT, Zill S. Identification of resilin in the leg of cockroach, Periplaneta
americana: Confirmation by a simple method using pH dependence of UV fluorescence. Arthropod Structure
and Development. 2000;29(1):75–83.
[36] Crandall SH. The role of damping in vibration theory. Journal of Sound and Vibration. 1970;11(1):3–18.
[37] Neubert HKP. A simple model representing internal damping in solid materials. The Aeronautical Quarterly.
1963;14(2):187–210.
[38] Lehmann FOO, Dickinson MH. The changes in power requirements and muscle efficiency during elevated force
production in the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster. Journal of Experimental Biology. 1997;200(7):1133–1143.
[39] Weis-Fogh T. Energetics of Hovering Flight in Hummingbirds and Drosophila. 1972;p. 79–104.
[40] Deora T, Singh AK, Sane SP.
Biomechanical basis of wing and haltere coordination in flies.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences. 2015 2;112(5):1481–1486.
Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/25605915.
[41] Liu H, Aono H. Size effects on insect hovering aerodynamics: An integrated computational study. Bioinspiration
and Biomimetics. 2009;4(1).
[42] Zhao L, Deng X. Power distribution in the hovering flight of the hawk moth Manduca sexta. Bioinspiration
and Biomimetics. 2009;4(4).
[43] Casey TM. A Comparison of Mechanical and Energetic Estimates of Flight Cost for Hovering Sphinx Moths.
Journal of Experimental Biology. 1981;91:117–129.
[44] Dickinson MH, Farley CT, Full RJ, Koehl MAR, Kram R, Lehman
mals Move:
An Integrative View.
Science. 2000;288(5463):100–106.
http://www.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.288.5463.100.

S.

[45] Dudley R. The Biomechanics of Insect Flight. Form, Function, Evolution; 2000.
http://books.google.com/books?hl=en

How AniAvailable from:
Available from:

[46] Hollenbeck AC, Palazotto AN. Mechanical Characterization of Flight Mechanism in the Hawkmoth Manduca
Sexta. Experimental Mechanics. 2013;53(7):1189–1199.
[47] Yawar A, Korpas L, Lugo-Bolanos M, Mandre S, Venkadesan M. Contribution of the transverse arch to foot
stiffness in humans. 2017;p. 1–21. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1706.04610.
[48] Gronenberg W.
The trap-jaw mechanism in the dacetine ants Daceton armigerum and Strumigenys sp.
The Journal of experimental biology. 1996;199(Pt 9):2021–33.
Available from:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9319931.
[49] Patek SN, Nowroozi BN, Baio JE, Caldwell RL, Summers AP. Linkage mechanics and power amplification of
the mantis shrimp’s strike. Journal of Experimental Biology. 2007;210(20):3677–3688.
[50] Burrows M, Shaw SR, Sutton GP. Resilin and chitinous cuticle form a composite structure for energy storage
in jumping by froghopper insects. BMC Biology. 2008;6:1–16.
[51] Venkadesan M, Dias MA, Singh DK, Bandi MM, Mandre S. Stiffness of the human foot and evolution of the
transverse arch. 2017;p. 1–22. Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1705.10371.

17

