bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Motor behaviour selectively inhibits hair cells activated by
forward motion in the lateral line of Zebrafish

Paul Pichler & Leon Lagnado*
Sussex Neuroscience, School of Life Sciences, University of Sussex,
Brighton BN1 9QG, UK
*Correspondence

Summary
How do sensory systems disambiguate events in the external world from signals generated
by the motor behaviour of the animal? One strategy is to suppress the sensory input
whenever the motor system is active, but the cellular mechanisms remain unclear. We
investigated how motor behaviour modulates signals transmitted by the lateral line of
zebrafish, which senses pressure changes around the body of the animal. Activation of motor
neurons during fictive swimming caused co-activation of efferent fibers and suppression of
synaptic transmission from the primary mechanoreceptors, the hair cells. In some hair cells,
a single motor spike inhibited glutamate release by about 50% and block was often complete
within 50-100 ms of the start of swimming. All hair cells polarized to be activated by posterior
deflections, as would occur during forward swimming, were suppressed by >90%, while only
half of those polarized in the anterior direction were inhibited and by an average of just 45%.
The selective inhibition of hair cells activated during motor behaviour provides a mechanism
for the suppression of self-generated signals while maintaining sensitivity to stimuli originating
in the external world.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
Animals need to distinguish sensory signals originating in their environment from signals
generated by their own behaviour within that environment. During vision, for example,
backwards-drifting optic flow can be the result of active forward locomotion or the animal’s
displacement caused by external forces such as wind or water flow. These two situations are
handled very differently: when a fish or a fly experiences passive optic flow the optomotor
response is triggered to stabilize its position relative to the visual world, but when the animal
actively engages motor systems to move forward this innate behaviour becomes counterproductive and is therefore suppressed. Such a behavioral switch could in principle be
generated if a copy of the motor command was transmitted to the sensory apparatus to alter
processing of the self-induced sensory signals and strong evidence for this has recently
emerged in the visual system of Drosophila (Erich and Horst, 1950; Kim et al., 2017; Kim et
al., 2015). But the cellular mechanisms by which an efference copy acts on the sensory
apparatus are still unclear.
A second sensory system in which active locomotion must be disambiguated from
external events is the lateral line of fish and amphibians. The lateral line senses pressure
changes in the water around the body and is involved in a number of behaviors and reflexes,
such as obstacle and predator avoidance and startle and escape responses (Burgess and
Granato, 2007; Haehnel-Taguchi et al., 2014; Troconis et al., 2017). Of particular importance
is rheotaxis, whereby an aquatic animal stabilizes itself in the face of water flow by making
compensatory swimming motions (McHenry et al., 2009; Stewart et al., 2013). In larval
zebrafish, rheotaxis can occur in the dark, driven by the lateral line detecting flow velocity
gradients around the body (Oteiza et al., 2017). Forward swimming motions required for
rheotaxis will, however, themselves activate the lateral line. How effectively are such reafferent signals prevented from triggering a reflex? And does this come at the cost of also
blocking transmission of external signals?
The end organs of the lateral line, the neuromasts, are distributed over the body
surface. Each contains ~15-20 hair cells projecting their ciliary bundles into a single structure,
the cupula. Hair cells are polarized to be activated either by posterior deflection of the cupula,
as occurs during swimming, or by anterior deflection: signals transmitted from hair cells of
each polarity are segregated through afferent fibres selective for that polarity. Neuromasts
also receive inputs from cholinergic efferents that modulate the sensory signal transmitted to
the hindbrain (Bricaud et al., 2001; Chagnaud et al., 2015; Flock and Russell, 1976). The
mechanical sensitivity of hair cells varies, but some detect displacements of just a few tens
of nanometers (Pichler and Lagnado, 2019).
Here we investigate how motor behaviour modulates the transmission of mechanical
information in the lateral line of larval zebrafish by in vivo imaging of both neural and synaptic
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

activity. We demonstrate that efferent neurons transmit a precise copy of the motor signal to
the neuromast to modulate glutamate release from hair cells and that the sensitivity of the
modulatory system is such that a single spike in the motor nerve inhibits release by ~50%
within 50 ms. The efference copy signal does not, however, act uniformly within the
neuromast: hair cells polarized to be activated by posterior deflections, as would occur during
forward swimming, are suppressed by >90% while only half of those polarized in the anterior
direction are inhibited and by an average of just 45%. These results demonstrate that the
efference copy can completely suppress re-afferent signals generated by motor behaviour
while preserving some sensitivity to stimuli originating in the external world.

Results
Neuromasts receive an almost exact copy of the motor signal
Cholinergic efferents entering neuromasts are thought to be co-activated with motor neurons
to provide feedforward control of the sensitivity of the lateral line (Chagnaud et al., 2015) but
the quantitative relationship between motor activity and the efferent and afferent signals are
not known. To under these aspects of the systems operation, we made simultaneous
measurements of activity in the motor nerve and efferent neurons and then related these to
the stimulus-evoked output from hair cells as well as responses transmitted by afferent
neurons. We used an in vivo preparation of transgenic zebrafish larvae (5-9 dpf) that undergo
fictive swimming while neuromuscular transmission is blocked (Masino and Fetcho, 2005).
Motor nerve activity was measured electrophysiologically while optical reporters were
targeted genetically to measure calcium activity in efferent and/or afferent neurons as well as
glutamate release from the synapses of hair cells in neuromasts towards the back of the tail
(the posterior lateral line). These various measurements were combined with the application
of mechanical stimuli to individual neuromasts to assess changes in sensitivity (Fig 1A - D;
Pichler and Lagnado, 2019).
Figure 1 near here
To monitor the efferent signal we used the elevl3::GCaMP6f line of fish that express
the calcium indicator GCaMP6f in afferent and efferent fibres but not hair cells (Faucherre et
al., 2009) Fig 1D). Pre-synaptic boutons of efferent fibres could be distinguished from the
post-synaptic varicosities of afferent neurons both by their smaller and rounder shape (Nagiel
et al., 2008) ; red regions in Fig 1D) and by the effects of a mechanical stimulus - afferents
were excited while efferents were not affected (Fig S1). In all 15 neuromasts tested, fictive
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

swimming caused efferent synapses to be activated in a burst-like fashion in close synchrony
with the spiking activity of the motor nerve (Fig 1E). Activity in the motor nerve and efferent
fibre was tightly coupled: each burst of spikes in the motor nerve was associated with a
calcium transient in efferent synapses (Fig 1F) and the number of spikes in a bout was
directly proportional to the time-integral of the signal from GCaMP6f (Fig 1G). As few as 6
spikes within a motor burst was sufficient to generate a sizeable calcium signal in the efferent
synapses (asterisk in Fig 1E). These results demonstrate that the efference copy signal
transmitted to the neuromast copies the motor signal driving locomotion both quantitatively
and temporally. Further, activity across all the efferent synapses within a single field of view
were closely synchronized indicating that all hair cells within the neuromast receive a similar
modulatory signal irrespective of their polarity (Fig S2).
The efference copy suppresses both spontaneous and stimulus-evoked transmission
from hair cells
To what extent does the efference copy modulate the output from a neuromast? To
investigate this question we monitored the synaptic output from hair cells by expressing the
glutamate sensor iGluSnFR (Marvin et al., 2013) under the control of the Sill promoter (Pichler
and Lagnado, 2019; Pujol-Marti and Lopez-Schier, 2013); Fig 1B & C and Fig 2A & B). In
these experiments we did not paralyze fish by the usual method of applying the
neuromuscular blocker α-BTX because this agent has also been reported to block the α9/α10
isoforms of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) present in hair cells (Erickson and
Nicolson, 2015; Verbitsky et al., 2000). Instead, we expressed iGluSnFR in the background
of the relaxed mutant (cacnbts25/ts25) in which defective dihydropyridine receptors block
excitation-contraction coupling in muscles (Bohm et al., 2016; Granato et al., 1996;
Schredelseker et al., 2005).

Figure 2 near here
Bouts of fictive swimming reduced the spontaneous release of glutamate from hair cells
occurring in the absence of a stimulus, as shown by the example in Fig 2C. Suppression was
evident for each burst of motor activity (Fig 2D), and the integral of the decrease in the
iGluSnFR signal during a burst was directly proportional to the number of spikes it contained
(Fig 2E). Cross-correlating the iGluSnFR signal with the motor nerve recording revealed that
suppression was maximal within 50 ms of a spike, which was within the temporal resolution
of image acquisition (Fig 2F). The suppressive effect of the efference signal was rapidly
reversible: spontaneous release of glutamate from the hair cell recovered within ~100 ms of
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the end of a burst of spikes (Fig 2D). Similar suppression of spontaneous activity was
observed in four neuromasts out of eight, and could also be observed by monitoring
glutamate release at the output of afferent neurons in the Medial Octavolateralis Nucleus
(MON) (Fig S3). Synaptic activity in the absence of a mechanical stimulus is a key aspect of
the "push-pull" system by which a population of hair cells of opposite polarity signals stimulus
direction (Pichler and Lagnado, 2019) and blocking spontaneous release will prevent the
signalling of direction by the hair cells inhibited by a particular direction of motion.
Stimulus-evoked release of glutamate from hair cells was also suppressed during
fictive swimming. In these experiments, we stimulated individual neuromasts with positive
and negative pressure steps that deflected the cupula along the anterior-posterior axis while
simultaneously measuring motor nerve activity and synaptic release of glutamate onto
afferent neurons (Fig 3).

These pressure steps were sufficient to generate maximal

responses, and examples of glutamate signals from two neuromasts are shown in Figure
3A and B and Figure 3D and E, respectively. In each case we show signals from two hair
cells, one polarised to be excited by posterior deflections of the cupula (green traces) and the
other to anterior deflections (red traces). In neuromast 1, the hair cell signalling posterior
deflections was markedly suppressed whenever mechanical stimulation overlapped with
periods of motor nerve activity (Fig. 3B, highlighted in blue). In contrast, the hair cell signalling
anterior deflections was unaffected. Responses in the boxed areas ‘1’ and ‘2’ are shown on
an expanded time-scale in Fig 3E (left), where they have been superimposed on the average
response of the same synapse in the absence of fictive swimming (dashed lines). In the
affected hair cell, the iGluSnFR signal was strongly reduced within 50 ms of the onset of
motor activity.
In neuromast 2, the two hair cells polarized to anterior and posterior deflections were
both suppressed during fictive swimming (Fig 3 D, and boxed areas ‘3’ and ‘4’ in E). A
particularly profound reduction in gain is evident in the examples highlighted in box 3, where
the response to the mechanical stimulus was not simply nulled: glutamate release fell below
the pre-stimulus baseline indicating that the efference copy signal was strong enough to also
block a relatively high rate of spontaneous synaptic activity. Again, the suppressive effect of
the efference copy signal could also be observed at later stages of signal transmission
through the lateral line: glutamatergic output from afferent projections to the MON was
strongly suppressed (Fig S4).
Figure 3 near here
We surveyed the effects of motor activity on the output from 41 hair cell synapses from
8 neuromasts in 6 fish, and found that in 29 (71%) the response to a strong mechanical
5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

stimulus was significantly suppressed (Fig. 4). This assessment began by quantifying the
relationship between motor activity and glutamate release using a metric, the Suppression
Index (SI), that was calculated for each application of a mechanical stimulus. If Ro(t) is the
average iGluSnFR signal at time t in the absence of motor activity and Rm(t) is the signal
during a single stimulus trial, then SI at each time t during the trial was calculated as

SI =

%&(() *%+(()
,-(()

Eqn 1

Thus, SI = 0 indicates no suppression, SI = 1 indicates full suppression and SI > 1 indicates
suppression below the pre-stimulus baseline (i.e inhibition of glutamate release occuring at
rest as well as complete nulling of the stimulus-evoked response). We only had limited
control over the timing of fictive swimming relative to the application of the mechanical
stimulus so SI could only be calculated when the two overlapped. Three examples of the
calculation of SI are shown in Fig. 4D, based on responses shown in Fig. 4A-C. Each SI
measurement over a 50 ms interval was then placed into one of two populations: intervals
that coincided with at least one spike in the motor nerve and those that did not. These two
populations were then compared using a one-tailed non-parametric Mann-Whitney U-test to
assess whether motor activity had a significant effect on a stimulus-evoked response using
a significance level of a=0.05. These results demonstrate that the efferent copy of the motor
signal does not act uniformly on all hair cells within the neuromast.
Figure 4 near here
Instantaneous spike rates of ~20 Hz in the motor nerve were sufficient to block the
sensory signal transmitted by hair cells. This property of the efferent system was revealed
by measuring the relation between the SI at each time point during a mechanical stimulus
and the number of spikes in the preceding 50 ms time window. Fig. 4G shows collected
results from 29 synapses in 7 fish. Half-maximal suppression was associated with an
average of just 1.1 spike in the preceding 50 ms and 5 spikes were sufficient to cause an
average of 80% suppression. Together, the results in Figures 1-4 demonstrate that motor
activity acts rapidly and efficiently to block transmission of self-generated stimuli at the first
synapse in the lateral line system.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Efferent modulation is biased towards hair cells activated by posterior deflection
Ultrastructural studies indicate that all hair cells within a neuromast are innervated by efferent
neurons (Dow et al 2018), but we found that motor activity only inhibited transmission from
~70% (Fig. 4F). To investigate this apparent discrepancy, we asked whether the effect of
motor activity might depend on the polarity of the hair cell and found that it did: whereas 16/16
synapses polarized to posterior deflection were suppressed during motor activity, only 13/25
polarized to anterior deflection were affected (Fig 4F). Considering all synapses irrespective
of polarity, the average probability of suppression was 29/41 = 0.7. Taking the null hypothesis
as polarity having no bearing on suppression, the probability of observing suppression in all
16 synapses would be expected to be p = 0.716 = 0.003: the null hypothesis can therefore be
rejected. Further, of the 29 hair cells in which motor activity exerted a significant suppressive
effect, the SI was greater in synapses activated by posterior deflection of the cupula (SI =
1.20 ± 0.03) compared to those activated by anterior deflection (Fig. 4G, SI = 0.54 ± 0.07; a
difference significant at p < 0.0001 using Mann-Whitney U test). In other words, a burst of
motor activity completely and selectively blocked transmission of a mechanical stimulus by
the hair cells that would be most strongly activated by forward swimming motion while those
of opposite polarity were still capable of signaling a stimulus.

Discussion
Behavioural modulation of sensory information will necessarily involve a variety of different
mechanisms, depending on the sensory modality (Chagnaud et al., 2015; Flock and Russell,
1976; Fujiwara et al., 2017; Keller et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2015; Saleem et al., 2013). Using
the lateral line of zebrafish, we have found that efferents modulating the output of neuromasts
are very tightly synchronized with motor activity (Fig. 1) and can rapidly and reversibly
suppress transmission of mechanical signals from hair cells (Figs. 2 and 3) through to the
central nucleus the MON (Figs. S3 and S4). Efferent modulation was strongly selective for
hair cells activated by deflection towards the tail, and will therefore preferentially suppress
self-generated signals occurring during forward swimming motion (Fig. 4).
The variable sensitivity of hair cells to the efference copy signal was unexpected
because efferent fibres innervate all hair cells irrespective of their polarity (Faucherre et al.,
2009). It appears that not all anatomical connections are equally effective in inhibiting hair
cell activity. This might reflect presynaptic differences in the efficiency with which spikes
trigger acetylcholine release and/or postsynaptic differences in the density of nicotinic
receptors mediating calcium influx or calcium-activated potassium channels directly causing
hyperpolarization (Dawkins et al., 2005).

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Efferent modulation of hair cell activity will serve at least two functions. First, it will
protect the lateral system from overstimulation (Roberts, 1989). In the absence of efferent
modulation, swimming would generate a strong stimulus that would induce adaptation by, for
instance, depletion of synaptic vesicles at the ribbon synapse of hair cells (Goutman, 2017;
Pichler and Lagnado, 2019; Schnee et al., 2011; Schnee et al., 2005). At the ribbon synapse
of auditory hair cells, recovery from synaptic depression is only complete after seconds of
rest (Cho et al., 2011), which would introduce a "dead-time" at the end of a swimming bout
when the lateral line was not signaling effectively. Secondly, the efference copy will prevent
activation of reflexes normally triggered by the posterior lateral line, such as the escape
response (Burgess and Granato, 2007; Troconis et al., 2017) or more gentle swimming
triggered by stimulation of a single neuromast (Haehnel-Taguchi et al., 2014). These reflexes
would cause positive feedback activation of motor activity if the efference copy signal did not
break the loop by blocking the self-generated (re-afferent) signal. Blocking the lateral line
system at source - the hair cells - will achieve this while preventing inappropriate activation
of afferents or other downstream neurons.
The fact that only hair cells activated by anterior deflections of the cupula retained
appreciable sensitivity does not mean that the lateral line system was unable to encode
forward motion. We have previously demonstrated that hair cells within a neuromast form a
heterogeneous population in terms of their sensitivity and set-point determining glutamate
release at rest (Pichler and Lagnado, 2019). While some hair cells rectify completely and only
encode deflections in their preferred orientation, others are able to encode opposing
directions of motion by increasing or decreasing their glutamate release from a relatively high
baseline. In the most extreme cases, ~40% of a hair cells dynamic range was occupied by
deflections in their non-preferred direction. These cells would be able to encode forward
swimming by decreasing glutamate release. Furthermore, some hair cells were found to
generate a strong rebound release of glutamate on cessation of a stimulus in their nonpreferred orientation, encoding both its magnitude and duration (Pichler and Lagnado, 2019).
These signals would allow hair cells activated by anterior deflection to encode the strength
of a preceding swim episode.
Of the hair cells activated by anterior deflection, about 50% were unaffected and the
other 50% only partially suppressed. A key question, therefore, is whether this population
allow the lateral line to continue signaling mechanical stimuli while the fish is swimming;
behavioural experiments by Feitl et al., (2010) indicate that the answer is yes. Using a suction
source to mimic a predator they presented stimuli perpendicular to the body and compared
escape responses in fish at rest and during swimming: an escape response was still triggered
by a suction source while the larvae were swimming, although the probability decreased from
80% at rest to 40% when swimming. These behavioural observations are consistent with our
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

neurophysiological results and indicate that suppression of self-generated signals does not
come at the cost of losing all sensitivity to stimuli originating in the external world.

References
Bohm, U.L., Prendergast, A., Djenoune, L., Nunes Figueiredo, S., Gomez, J., Stokes, C.,
Kaiser, S., Suster, M., Kawakami, K., Charpentier, M., et al. (2016). CSF-contacting
neurons regulate locomotion by relaying mechanical stimuli to spinal circuits. Nat
Commun 7, 10866.
Bricaud, O., Chaar, V., Dambly-Chaudiere, C., and Ghysen, A. (2001). Early efferent
innervation of the zebrafish lateral line. J Comp Neurol 434, 253-261.
Burgess, H.A., and Granato, M. (2007). Sensorimotor gating in larval zebrafish. J Neurosci
27, 4984-4994.
Chagnaud, B.P., Banchi, R., Simmers, J., and Straka, H. (2015). Spinal corollary discharge
modulates motion sensing during vertebrate locomotion. Nat Commun 6, 7982.
Cho, S., Li, G.L., and von Gersdorff, H. (2011). Recovery from short-term depression and
facilitation is ultrafast and Ca2+ dependent at auditory hair cell synapses. J Neurosci 31,
5682-5692.
Dawkins, R., Keller, S.L., and Sewell, W.F. (

2005). Pharmacology of acetylcholine-

mediated cell signaling in the lateral line organ following efferent stimulation. J
Neurophysiol 93, 2541-2551.
Erich, v.H., and Horst, M. (1950). The reafference principle. The Bahavioural Physiology of
Animals and Men.
Erickson, T., and Nicolson, T. (2015). Identification of sensory hair-cell transcripts by
thiouracil-tagging in zebrafish. BMC Genomics 16, 842.
Faucherre, A., Pujol-Marti, J., Kawakami, K., and Lopez-Schier, H. (2009). Afferent neurons
of the zebrafish lateral line are strict selectors of hair-cell orientation. PLoS One 4, e4477.
Flock, A., and Russell, I. (1976). Inhibition by efferent nerve fibres: action on hair cells and
afferent synaptic transmission in the lateral line canal organ of the burbot Lota lota. J
Physiol 257, 45-62.
Fujiwara, T., Cruz, T.L., Bohnslav, J.P., and Chiappe, M.E. (2017). A faithful internal
representation of walking movements in the Drosophila visual system. Nat Neurosci 20,
72-81.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Goutman, J.D. (2017). Mechanisms of synaptic depression at the hair cell ribbon synapse
that support auditory nerve function. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114, 9719-9724.
Granato, M., van Eeden, F.J., Schach, U., Trowe, T., Brand, M., Furutani-Seiki, M., Haffter,
P., Hammerschmidt, M., Heisenberg, C.P., Jiang, Y.J., et al. (1996). Genes controlling
and mediating locomotion behavior of the zebrafish embryo and larva. Development 123,
399-413.
Haehnel-Taguchi, M., Akanyeti, O., and Liao, J.C. (2014). Afferent and motoneuron activity
in response to single neuromast stimulation in the posterior lateral line of larval zebrafish.
J Neurophysiol 112, 1329-1339.
Keller, G.B., Bonhoeffer, T., and Hubener, M. (2012). Sensorimotor mismatch signals in
primary visual cortex of the behaving mouse. Neuron 74, 809-815.
Kim, A.J., Fenk, L.M., Lyu, C., and Maimon, G. (2017). Quantitative Predictions Orchestrate
Visual Signaling in Drosophila. Cell 168, 280-294.e212.
Kim, A.J., Fitzgerald, J.K., and Maimon, G. (2015). Cellular evidence for efference copy in
Drosophila visuomotor processing. Nat Neurosci 18, 1247-1255.
Marvin, J.S., Borghuis, B.G., Tian, L., Cichon, J., Harnett, M.T., Akerboom, J., Gordus, A.,
Renninger, S.L., Chen, T.W., Bargmann, C.I., et al. (2013). An optimized fluorescent
probe for visualizing glutamate neurotransmission. Nat Methods 10, 162-170.
Masino, M.A., and Fetcho, J.R. (2005). Fictive swimming motor patterns in wild type and
mutant larval zebrafish. J Neurophysiol 93, 3177-3188.
McHenry, M.J., Feitl, K.E., Strother, J.A., and Van Trump, W.J. (2009). Larval zebrafish
rapidly sense the water flow of a predator's strike. Biol Lett 5, 477-479.
Nagiel, A., Andor-Ardo, D., and Hudspeth, A.J. (2008). Specificity of afferent synapses onto
plane-polarized hair cells in the posterior lateral line of the zebrafish. J Neurosci 28,
8442-8453.
Oteiza, P., Odstrcil, I., Lauder, G., Portugues, R., and Engert, F. (2017). A novel mechanism
for mechanosensory-based rheotaxis in larval zebrafish. Nature.
Pichler, P., and Lagnado, L. (2019). The Transfer Characteristics of Hair Cells Encoding
Mechanical Stimuli in the Lateral Line of Zebrafish. J Neurosci 39, 112-124.
Pujol-Marti, J., and Lopez-Schier, H. (2013). Developmental and architectural principles of
the lateral-line neural map. Front Neural Circuits 7, 47.
Roberts, B.L.a.M., G. E. (1989). The efferent system. In In The Mechanosensory Lateral Line
S. (ed. Coombs, Görner, P. and Münz, H.), ed. (New York: Springer-Verlag), pp. 445459.
Saleem, A.B., Ayaz, A., Jeffery, K.J., Harris, K.D., and Carandini, M. (2013). Integration of
visual motion and locomotion in mouse visual cortex. Nat Neurosci 16, 1864-1869.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Schnee, M.E., Castellano-Munoz, M., Kong, J.H., Santos-Sacchi, J., and Ricci, A.J. (2011).
Tracking vesicle fusion from hair cell ribbon synapses using a high frequency, dual sine
wave stimulus paradigm. Commun Integr Biol 4, 785-787.
Schnee, M.E., Lawton, D.M., Furness, D.N., Benke, T.A., and Ricci, A.J. (2005). Auditory hair
cell-afferent fiber synapses are specialized to operate at their best frequencies. Neuron
47, 243-254.
Schredelseker, J., Di Biase, V., Obermair, G.J., Felder, E.T., Flucher, B.E., FranziniArmstrong, C., and Grabner, M. (2005). The beta 1a subunit is essential for the assembly
of dihydropyridine-receptor arrays in skeletal muscle. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102,
17219-17224.
Stewart, W.J., Cardenas, G.S., and McHenry, M.J. (2013). Zebrafish larvae evade predators
by sensing water flow. J Exp Biol 216, 388-398.
Troconis, E.L., Ordoobadi, A.J., Sommers, T.F., Aziz-Bose, R., Carter, A.R., and Trapani,
J.G. (2017). Intensity-dependent timing and precision of startle response latency in larval
zebrafish. J Physiol 595, 265-282.
Verbitsky, M., Rothlin, C.V., Katz, E., and Elgoyhen, A.B. (2000). Mixed nicotinic-muscarinic
properties of the alpha9 nicotinic cholinergic receptor. Neuropharmacology 39, 25152524.

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure Legends
Figure 1. The efferent signal is an almost exact copy of the motor signal during fictive
swimming
(A) At 7 dpf, the posterior lateral line of larval zebrafish consists of 14 neuromasts on each
side (red dots). Each neuromast is innervated by at least two afferent neurons (yellow) and
an efferent (blue). We imaged glutamate release of individual hair cells in a neuromasts while
measuring motor neuron activity through a suction pipette. A second pipette applied pressure
steps to the neuromast. (B, C) Average projections of the afferent synapses in the hindbrain
(B), and a neuromast (C) of a larva expressing iGluSnFR under transcriptional control of the
SILL promoter (Tg[Sill2, UAS::iGluSnFR]). (D) Average projection of a neuromast in a larva
expressing GCaMP6f under the transcriptional control of the HuC (elavl3) promoter
(Tg[HuC::GCaMP6f]), in which afferents and efferents (but not hair cells) are labelled. Red
dots indicate efferent ROIs identified based on their firing pattern. (E) Top trace (red):
spontaneous activity of the synapses in (D) over a five-minute period without visual or
mechanical stimulation. The lower traces (black) depict the raw motor activity and the spike
rate. The asterisk indicates a signal in the efferent synapses that correlates to six spikes in
the motor nerve. (F) Magnified view of the dashed area in (E), showing that efferent synapses
in the neuromast are activated at each swim-bout. (G) The number of spikes per swimming
bout and the integral of the fluorescent signal during that episode were strongly correlated
(r=0.9, n=155 bouts from 4 NMs, each depicted in a different colour).

Figure 2. Spontaneous release of glutamate from hair cells is suppressed during
fictive swimming.
(A) Experiments were carried out in ‘relaxed’ mutants that express the glutamate reporter
iGluSnFR in afferent neurons (Tg[Sill2, UAS::iGluSnFR], cacnbts25/ts25) at 5 dpf. (B) A
representative synapse, labelled in red, whose activity is presented in (C). (C) Spontaneous
glutamate release of a hair cell over a period of two minutes (top panel) and motor neuron
activity (lower panel). Blue areas indicate episodes of motor neuron activity. (D) Magnified
view of boxed area in (C). The maximum suppression of glutamate release was similar for
each burst of motor activity. (E) Relationship between the number of spikes in a burst and
the negative integral of the iGluSnFR signal from the MON depicted in B (n = 28 swimming
episodes, r = -0.95). (F) Cross-correlation of iGlusnFR signal and the number of spikes
(downsampled to match imaging frequency). Inset shows that the peak is at 50 ms, the
imaging interval.

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3. Motor behaviour blocks synaptic transmission from a subset of hair cells.
(A and B) Image of iGluSnFR expression in afferents of neuromast 1 (A). Two representative
synaptic inputs are highlighted in red (activated by anterior deflection) and green (activated
by posterior deflection). The responses of these synapses to mechanical stimuli are shown
in (B), together with motor nerve activity (black traces) and pressure steps applied to the
neuromast. Positive pressure steps correspond to posterior deflections of the cupula and
negative steps to anterior deflections. Blue shading indicates periods of motor nerve activity
and numbered boxes indicate the stimulation episodes that are magnified in (E). (C and D)
A corresponding representation of hair cell activity in neuromast 2. (E) Expansion of records
in boxes 1-4 in B and D. The superimposed dashed red and green traces indicate the
average mechanically-induced response of that synapse in the absence of motor nerve
activity. Shaded areas represent the SEM. In example 2, inhibition of glutamate release is
almost complete within 50 ms of the beginning of the motor burst. In example 3 suppression
is complete within 50 ms, and further motor activity reduces glutamate release below resting
levels. In example 4, glutamate release begins to recover within 50 ms of the end of the motor
burst.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. Motor behaviour selectively modulates hair cells activated by deflection in
the posterior direction.
(A-C) Three examples of synapses whose response was (A) unaffected, (B) suppressed
during the entire stimulation episode and (C) suppressed only during the initial part of the
stimulus. (Shaded areas represent the SEM.) (D) The suppression index (SI), calculated on
a point-by-point basis during mechanical stimulation (equation 1). The red, green and blue
traces show synapses from three different hair cells, with the corresponding motor activity
shown below. Glutamate release from the blue synapse was not significantly suppressed (SI
~0); stimulated release from the red synapse was nulled during motor activity (SI ~1) but then
recovered at the end of the burst of spikes; glutamate release from the green synapse was
reduced to below resting levels (SI >1). (E) Plot of the relation between the SI at each time
point during a mechanical stimulus and the number of spikes in the motor nerve in the
preceding 50 ms time interval. Only synapses classified as suppressed were analyzed.
Collected results from 29 synapses in 7 fish. The data could be described by a Hill equation
of the form SI(Ns) = (SImax*Ns)/(Ns + N1/2) where Ns is the number of spikes, SImax is the
maximum SI (1.05 ± 0.08) and N1/2 is the number of spikes coinciding with half-maximal
suppression (1.12 ± 0.42). Error bars show SEM. (F) The effects of motor activity on synaptic
transmission from hair cells of opposing polarity. Column 1: The number of synapses
activated by deflection in the posterior and anterior directions. Measurements were made in
a total of 41 synapses in 8 neuromasts in 6 fish. Column 2: The number of synapses
suppressed during motor activity, classified as described in the text. Column 3: The number
of synapses unaffected by motor activity. Considering all synapses irrespective of polarity,
the average probability of suppression was 29/41 = 0.7. Taking the null hypothesis as polarity
having no bearing on suppression, the probability of observing suppression in all 16 synapses
would be p = 0.716 = 0.003. The null hypothesis can be rejected. (G) Comparison of the
magnitude of the suppressive effect in hair cells polarized for anterior and posterior deflection.
Only the 29 hair cells in which motor activity exerted a significant suppressive effect were
analyzed. Suppression was stronger in posterior synapses (SI = 1.20 ± 0.03, n = 579 points)
than in anterior synapses (SI = 0.54 ± 0.07, n = 709 points), a difference significant at p <
0.0001 using Mann-Whitney U test. Bars show SEM.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

STAR Methods
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will
be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Leon Lagnado (L.Lagnado@sussex.ac.uk).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Zebrafish
All procedures were in accordance with the UK Animal Act 1986 and were approved by the
Home Office and the University of Sussex Ethical Review Committee.
Three zebrafish lines were used in this study. (1) The Tg[HuC::GCaMP6f] expresses
GCaMP6f in all neurons (except for a small number of neuronal sub-types, including hair
cells) and was kindly provided by Dr Isaac Bianco. (2) The Tg[Sill2, UAS::iGluSnFR]
expresses the glutamate sensor iGluSnFR (Marvin et al 2013) under the control of the SILL
promoter, which specifically targets afferent neurons of the posterior and anterior lateral line
(Pujol-Marti et al 2012) and allows to measure hair cell glutamate release onto the afferents
in the neuromast, as well as glutamate release by the afferent neurons in the hhindbrain. The
generation of this line is described in Pichler & Lagnado (2019). (3) The (Tg[Sill2,
UAS::iGluSnFR], cacnbts25/ts25), is the same as (2) only in the background of the ‘relaxed’
(cacnbts25/ts25) mutation (Granato et al 1996, Schredelseker et al 2005), which yields immotile
homozygotes, due to a point-mutation in the b1a subunit of the dihydropyridine receptor
involved in excitation-contraction coupling of skeletal muscle. It was generated by co-injecting
the Sill2 and the 10xUAS::iGluSnFR plasmids (12 ng/µl) as well as the Tol2 transposase (40
ng/µl) (Kawakami 2007) into one-cell stage embryos originating from an in-cross of
heterozygous relaxed mutants (cacnbts25/+). Larvae were screened for expression of the
iGluSnFR transgene and reared to adulthood. Founder fish, heterozygous for the relaxed
mutation and carrying the Sill2 and iGluSnFR transgenes in their germline, were identified by
outcrossing to heterozygous relaxed fish and screening the offspring for immobility (only the
homozygotes are immotile) as well as the expression of iGluSnFR in lateral line afferents. As
the homozygous relaxed larvae are not viable and die at 5 - 6 days post fertilization (dpf), the
line was maintained in a heterozygous background and in-crossed to yield homozygotes,
necessary for experiments.
Adult zebrafish were maintained in fish water at 28.5°C under a 14:10 hour light:dark
cycle under standard conditions (Brand et al 2002). Fish were bred naturally, and fertilized
eggs were collected, washed with distilled water and transferred into 50 ml of E2 medium
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(concentrations in mM: 0.05 Na2HPO4, 1 MgSO4 7H2O, 0.15 KH2PO4, 0.5 KCl, 15 NaCl, 1
CaCl2, 0.7 NaHCO3, pH7-7.5). At 24 hours post fertilisation (hpf) 1-phenyl2-thiourea (pTU)
was added to yield a final concentration of 0.2 mM to inhibit pigment formation.

METHODS DETAILS
Sample preparation
Sample preparation differed slightly between larvae in the wild-type background
(Tg[HuC::GCaMP6f], Tg[Sill2, UAS::iGluSnFR]) and those in the immotile relaxed
background (Tg[Sill2, UAS::iGluSnFR], cacnbts25/ts25). Larvae of either sex were used in all
experiments. The former were prepared as described earlier (Pichler & Lagnado, 2019), In
brief, experiments were performed between 7-9 dpf, on larvae that were screened for the
strongest expression of the respective transgene. They were anaesthetized in in 0.016%
tricaine (MS-222) and were placed ‘side-down’ in a ‘fish-shaped’ pit, carved out of a thin layer
of PDMS (Sylgard184, Dow Crowning) on a coverslip and held down by a ‘harp’ (Warner
Instruments). Pressure of the Nylon strings was adjusted so that blood circulation was not
compromised. Then, 0.25 mM a-Bungarotoxin (Tocris Bioscience) was injected into the heart
to induce paralysis. Special care was taken to not touch the upward facing side of the fish, to
avoid damaging the cupula.
Experiments on homozygote relaxed larvae were performed at 5 dpf. They were
identified by the absence of movement upon tactile stimulation at 2 dpf and subsequently
screened for the strongest expression of the iGluSnR transgene at 4 dpf. Preparation was
carried out as mentioned above, only without using tricaine or a-Bungarotoxin.
Two-Photon Imaging
Two-photon imaging was performed as previously described (Pichler & Lagnado 2019). In
short, a custom built two-photon microscope driven by a mode-locked Titanium-sapphire
laser (Chameleon 2, Coherent) tuned to 915 nm (Odermatt et al 2012) was used. In
experiments on larvae of the wild-type background excitation was delivered through a 40x
water immersion objective (Olympus, 40x LUMIPlanF, NA: 0.8) and in experiments on the
relaxed larvae, a 25 x objective (Nikon N25X-APO-MP 1.1NA ) was used. To improve the
signal-to-noise emitted photons were collected through the objective as well as through an
oil condenser (NA 1.4, Olympus), below the sample. Green emission filters (525/70 nm at the
objective and 530/60 nm at the condensor) were used in front of GaAsP photodetectors
(H10770PA-40, Hamamatsu). The photocurrents of the two detectors were summed and

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

passed through a transimpedance amplifier (Model SR570, Stanford Research Systems) and
low-pass filtered (300 kHz). The microscope was controlled by ScanImage v3.8 (Pologruto
et al 2003), synchronised with the stimulus application and operated at acquisition rates of
20-50 Hz. In this study, only neuromasts from the posterior lateral line (L3 – L6) with a
directional sensitivity along the anterior-posterior axis were examined.
Mechanical stimulation
Mechanical stimulation was performed as described earlier (Pichler & Lagnado, 2019).
Briefly, neuromasts were stimulated with positive and negative pressure steps, applied
through a glass pipette (GC150T-10, Harvard Apparatus) with a tip diameter of ~30 µm,
attached to a high-speed pressure clamp (HSPC-1, ALA scientific) (Trapani et al 2009).
Output pressure was controlled through mafPC (courtesy of M. A. Xu-Friedman) running on
IgorPro (Wavemetrics), which also triggered acquisition in ScanImage via a TTL pulse. The
pipette tip, which was bent through ~30° using a micro forge (Narishige) to stimulate the
neuromast approximately parallel to the body surface of the fish, was positioned ~ 20 µm
above the body and ~100 µm away from the neuromast. The pressure clamp was manually
zeroed before the start of an experiments so that no net flow was produced. We chose
stimulus strengths that elicited near saturating responses in hair cells, assessed by a coarse
protocol consisting of three positive and negative pressure steps of increasing amplitude
(Pichler and Lagnado, 2019). Furthermore, the direction of the pipette relative to the fish
(pointing anteriorly or posteriorly) was changed during the course of the experiments and no
difference was observed.
Visual stimulation
In some experiments, we engaged the optomotor response by projecting a moving grating
directly onto the larva, moving in the tail to head direction. A microprojector (Pico PK320,
Optoma) from which the blue and green LED channels were removed was used to project a
grating (12 mm wide bars at 100% contrast that moved at 5 mm/s) at an intensity that did not
lead to bleed-through in the PMTs. The visual stimulus was controlled via the PsychoPy
toolbox running in Python 3.6 and synchronized to the mafPC, controlling the mechanical
stimulus, via a TTL pulse. In the set of experiments on the relaxed larvae, in which the 20x
objective was used, visual stimulation was not as efficient in triggering fictive locomotion. This
is most likely due to the objective being significantly wider and therefor restricted the light
from the projector that actually reached the larvae.

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Motor nerve recordings
Motor nerve recordings were performed as described by Masino & Fetcho (2005) with only
minor modifications. Recording electrodes were pulled to a tip diameter of ~30 µm (from
borosilicate glass, GC150T-10, Harvard Apparatus) and subsequently fire polished using a
micro forge (Narishige). It was filled with extracellular recording solution (concentrations in
mM: 134 NaCl, 2.9 KCl, 1.2 MgCl2, 2.1 CaCl2, 10 HEPES buffer, adjusted to pH 7.8 with
NaOH). The pipette was positioned dorsally of the larva, above myotomal cleft 8-14 at a 45°
angle and perpendicular to the longitudinal body axis. Using a plastic syringe, slight positive
pressure was applied during the approach and upon contacting the skin changed to negative
pressures between -30 and -70 mmHg. On average spontaneous motor nerve activity could
be observed after 10-15 minutes. Using a BVC-700A (Dagan, USA) in current-clamp mode
the extracellular voltage was measured. The signal was filtered (Brownlee model 440,
Neurophase) with a high and low-pass cut off frequency of 300 Hz and 1 kHz, respectively
and recorded using mafPC at a sample rate of 5 kHz (synchronously with the mechanical
stimulation

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Image segmentation and analysis
Images sequences (movies) were analyzed in Igor Pro. Small drifts in the x/y dimension were
registered, using the SARFIA toolbox (Dorostkar et al 2010). Movies with large drifts, and
potential z-drifts were discarded. Regions of Interest (ROIs) were determined using a custom
written procedure (analogous to Portugues et al 2014, and described in Johnson et al 2019)
that identifies pixels with the highest correlation value (to neighboring pixels) as ‘seeds’ and
extends these to form ROIs, based on a threshold, manually defined by the experimenter.
These ROIs corresponded to sites of maximal glutamate release which occur in apposition
to hair cell ribbon synapses (Pichler & Lagnado, 2019).
Background fluorescence was subtracted manually. Baseline fluorescence (F) was defined
as the average fluorescence in the first 10 s of imaging and preceding the first stimulation
interval; the ratio of change in fluorescence (∆F) was calculated relative to that value (∆F/F)
and used for further analysis. Contrast in images was adjusted for presentation purposes.
The motor nerve recordings were further digitally filtered (300 Hz high-pass 1kHz low-pass
and 50 Hz notch). Spikes were extracted using a custom written procedure that applied a
simple threshold to the filtered signal and detected when it was crossed by the signal. This
temporal filter was a Gaussian with FWHM = 100 ms.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 1

Relating to Figure 1
Figure S1. Efferent synapses can be identified based on their morphology and firing
pattern, which is independent of mechanical stimulation.
(A) Zebrafish larvae expressing the calcium indicator GCaMP6f under the control of the HuC
promoter (Tg[HuC::GCamP6f]) were paralyzed with a-BTX. An average projection of a NM,
highlighting irregularly shaped varicosities belonging to two afferents with opposing
directional sensitivity (blue and green) as well as small and round efferent boutons (red).
(B) The average signals from the respective ROIs in (A). Blue ROIs are sensitive to posterior
deflections and green ROIs to anterior, confirming that they are afferents. Red ROIs fired
independent of the mechanical stimulation, confirming that they were efferent. Shaded area
represents SEM.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 2

Relating to Figure 1
Figure S2. Activity is strongly synchronized across efferent synapses
(A) Zebrafish larvae expressing the calcium indicator GCaMP6f under the control of the HuC
promoter (Tg[HuC::GCamP6f]) were paralyzed with a-BTX. Efferent ROIs were identified
based on their, small, roundish morphology as well as their ‘spontaneous’ activity in the
absence of mechanical stimulation.
(B) Response profile of the 5 ROIs depicted in (A) over 145 s time window. These were all
"spontaneously" activity in the absence of mechanical stimulation.
(C) Plot of the instantaneous signal in each of the five synapses as a function of the average
activity of all five. Activity in B was down-sampled into time bins of 2 s. Each set of data
points could be fit by a straight line through the origin with r > 0.9 revealing a high degree of
synchronicity.

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 3

Relating to Figure 2
Figure S3. Motor activity suppressed spontaneous activity in afferent fiber synapses
transmitting to the medial octavolateralis nucleus (MON).
(A) Experiments were carried out in larvae that expressed the glutamate reporter iGluSnFR
in afferent neurons (Tg[Sill2, UAS::iGluSnFR] and which were paralyzed with a-BTX.
(B) An average projection of the posterior arm of the MON, highlighting the synapse whose
response is depicted in (C). (C) An example of a synapse, whose baseline glutamate release,
in the absence of a mechanical stimulus, was suppressed by fictive swimming (grey-shaded
area). The absence of suppression during the third presentation of a visual grating (*)
indicated that the visual stimulus did not directly affect the encoding of mechanical
information. (D) Magnification of the dashed box in (C) reveals that each individual swimburst leads to a transient suppression of the glutamate release. (E) The number of spikes in
the motor neuron during a swim-bout (episode) and the integral of the suppressive effect in
the hindbrain synapse is tightly correlated (r=-0.95, n=49 bouts from 4 synapses).

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Supplementary Figure 4

Relating to Figure 3
Figure S4. Motor activity suppressed stimulus-evoked activation of afferent fiber synapses
transmitting to the medial octavolateralis nucleus (MON) in the hindbrain.
Experiments were carried out in larvae that expressed the glutamate reporter iGluSnFR in afferent
neurons (Tg[Sill::Gal4, UAS::iGluSnFR] and which were paralyzed with a-BTX. A given neuromast
was stimulated with positive and negative pressure steps while the output of afferent neurons in the
MON was imaged with a two-photon microscope. (A and C) Average projections of synapses in the
posterior part of the MON. Highlighted in (A) is the synapse whose response is depicted in (C) and
highlighted in (C) is the synapse whose response is depicted in (D). (B and D) Two representative
examples of afferent synapses in the MON, which are sensitive to posterior deflections. The bottom
trace represents the mechanical stimulation of the NM (positive pressure corresponds to posterior and
negative pressure steps to anterior deflection of the cupula, respectively). The middle two traces depict

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/772129; this version posted September 16, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

the raw motor signal and average spike rate, respectively, and the top trace shows the synaptic activity
of the synapse. Blue-shaded areas indicate periods in which mechanical stimulation coincided with
fictive swimming and red-shaded areas indicate periods in which it did not. The first third and fifth
mechanical stimulation period always overlapped with the presentation of a moving grating to induce
fictive locomotion. (B) The activity of this synapse was not affected by fictive locomotion. This is
quantified in (E), which depicts the mean responses of this synapse in the presence and absence of
fictive locomotion.

(D) Example of a synapse whose response to mechanical stimulation was

suppressed when it coincided with fictive locomotion, quantified in (F). Asterisks indicate periods in
which visual stimulation failed to induce locomotion. (F) The peak amplitude of the IGluSnFR signal
in the MON was reduced by 42% during fictive locomotion (P<0.005, Mann-Whitney U-test). (G) The
mechanically induced iGluSnFR signal in three hindbrain synapses while still (left) and during ‘fictive
swimming’ (right). All these afferents were activated by posterior deflections of the cupula. Open
circles represent the response to individual stimulations and filled circles their average (*** P<0.0001,
** P<0.001, Mann-Whitney U-test). (Shaded areas in (E) and (F) represent the SEM).

27

