bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Perinatal Inflammation Influences but Does Not Arrest Rapid Immune
Development in Preterm Babies

S. Kamdar1, R. Hutchinson2,3, A. Laing1, F. Stacey2, K. Ansbro3,5, M.R. Millar3, K.
Costeloe3, W.G. Wade4, P. Fleming2, 3 #, D. L. Gibbons1 #*

Affiliations:
1

Peter Gorer Department of Immunobiology, King’s College London, London, UK; 2Department of

Neonatology, Homerton University Hospital, London, UK; 3Barts and the London School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK. 4Centre for Host‐
Microbiome Interactions, Faculty of Dentistry, Oral & Craniofacial Sciences, King’s College London,
London, UK.5 author now at University of Sheffield
#these authors contributed equally to the paper.
*Correspondence should be addressed to: deena.gibbons@kcl.ac.uk; 020 7848 9608 (phone)

1|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Infection and infection‐related complications are important causes of death and morbidity following
preterm birth. Despite this, there is limited understanding of the development of the immune system in
those born prematurely and how it is influenced by perinatal factors. To investigate this, we prospectively
and longitudinally followed a cohort of babies born before 32 weeks of gestation. We demonstrated that
preterm babies, including those born extremely prematurely, were capable of rapidly acquiring adult levels
of immune functionality; that immune maturation appeared to occur independently of the developing
microbiome, which was highly heterogeneous across different infants; and that the biggest drivers of
change in the trajectory of perinatal immune development was exposure to infection in utero or post‐
natally. Conspicuously, a unifying factor among infants who developed infection despite their growing
immune potentials was an inability to mount adequate T cell CXCL8 responses. Because this defect was
present at birth, it may predict those babies likely to have poor clinical outcomes.
1

Introduction

Longitudinal data consistently show overall mortality following preterm birth to be falling, however among
babies who die the proportion attributed to infection and infection‐related complication such as
necrotising enterocolitis is fixed or increasing 1, 2. It is estimated that up to 30% of preterm babies born
before 32 weeks’ gestation develop at least one clinical or microbiologically confirmed episode of sepsis 3,
but the course of individual babies through the perinatal period is unpredictable, some progressing
smoothly while others succumb to multiple pathologies including late‐onset sepsis and necrotising
enterocolitis.
There is clinical need both to identify around the time of birth those preterm infants most likely to develop
infective complications and to develop therapies to prevent and ameliorate infection in this vulnerable
group, ideally through promoting the baby’s own immune capabilities. Understanding the development of
the immune system in the healthy preterm infant, how it differs in those with complicated courses and how
it is modified by peri and postnatal factors is fundamental to these aims. Furthermore, not only are these
issues acutely relevant to the infant, but increasing evidence suggests that the nature of the infant immune
2|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

response in early life, where rapid immune development has been observed 4, 5, may profoundly influence
later susceptibility to immune mediated diseases 6, 7. Thus, infants born before 32 weeks’ gestational age
[GA] show a greater susceptibility to asthma in later life and yet a decreased risk of developing food allergy
8, 9

.

Despite these drivers, understanding of how the preterm immune system develops is incomplete and the
impacts on the developing immune system of exposure to infection in utero, and the postnatal clinical
course have not been comprehensively evaluated.
It is increasingly acknowledged that the preterm immune system is not just an immature version of the
adult but is both qualitatively and quantitatively distinct with overt functional potentials 10. To address how
the immune system develops and to assess the impacts upon this of preterm birth, we prospectively
followed a cohort of preterm babies born before 32 weeks’ gestation and compared their immune function
over time. During the three months we studied this cohort, we demonstrate that preterm babies (even
those born at the earliest gestation) rapidly acquire some adult levels of immune function; have immune
functions that progress towards but do not reach adult levels; or have immune functions, conspicuously
CXCL8‐producing T cells, that remain significantly distinct from adults. Babies born at an earlier GA showed
immune profiles that changed more dramatically when compared to those born at later gestation, thus
reducing any negative impact of extreme prematurity. Immune development occurred independently of
specific changes within the developing microbiome, suggesting other factors have a greater bearing on
immune development in the first few months of life. A defining feature of those infants that did develop
infection was a lower level of CXCL8‐producing T cells at birth thus identifying a potential biomarker for
infants at greater risk of sepsis.

3|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

2
2.1

Methods
Ethical Approval and Funding

Funding was granted by Barts Charity (Ref: 764/2306) for the undertaking of a study named “Investigating
Microbial Colonisation and Immune Conditioning in Preterm Babies”. Ethical and regulatory approvals
were granted by the London (Chelsea) Research Ethics Committee (Ref: 15/LO/1924) and the local Research
and Development department at Homerton University Hospital NHS Foundation Trust.

2.2

Participant Enrolment

Subjects were recruited from the neonatal intensive care unit at Homerton University Hospital between
January 2016 until December 2017. Babies born between 23 weeks and 4 days and 31 weeks and 6 days of
gestation admitted to the NICU before 72 hours’ postnatal age, including those born at other hospitals,
were included in this study. Infants with a probable lethal congenital abnormality, thought to have no
realistic chance of survival, or with known exposure to either HIV or hepatitis B infection were excluded.
Written informed consent was obtained from parents before 72 hours of age.

2.3

Sample collection and storage

Blood samples (0.5 ml whole blood) were collected on a weekly basis, with additional samples taken at
times of suspected infection, up to cessation of the subjects’ participation. These were stored at room
temperature (on average for 12 hrs and up to a maximum of 30 hrs) prior to Ficoll separation of PBMCs,
and were frozen in Cryostore (Sigma) and stored in liquid nitrogen. Faecal samples were collected on a
daily basis (when available) from birth up to cessation of the subjects’ participation in the study (i.e.
discharge or transfer). Samples were immediately stored at 4°C for <72hrs, before transferral to long‐term
storage at ‐80C.

2.4

Clinical data

Detailed demographic, antenatal and daily postnatal data were collected prospectively. Once each subject
completed their hospital stay, their clinical course was reviewed by the clinical team and the subjects
classified a priori into one three clinical cohorts:

4|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

 Stable infants
‐

infants receiving a single course of antibiotics only in the immediate postnatal period, with no
episodes of suspected late onset sepsis or antibiotic exposure thereafter



Unstable infants
‐

infants who did not meet the stable criteria, having received additional courses of antibiotics for
suspected late‐onset sepsis

‐

Unstable infants were subsequently divided into those with, or without, a history of clinical or
histologically confirmed chorioamnionitis.



The collaborating immunology team was not aware of the clinical status of babies when blood samples
were collected and/or analysed. Once the analyses were completed, the subjects’ clinical courses were
provided.

2.5

Cell stimulation

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells were stimulated with Phorbol Myristate Acetate (PMA) and ionomycin
as described below. Cells were stimulated in RPMI 1640 medium (Invitrogen) containing 10% (vol/vol) FCS
(StemCell Technologies), 2 mM L‐glutamine (Sigma), 100 U penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin
(Invitrogen) (complete medium, CM) containing 10 ng/ml phorbol 12‐myristate 13‐acetate (Sigma) and 1
μg/ml ionomycin (Sigma) for 4 h at 37°C, 5% CO2 in the presence of 20 μg/ml brefeldin A (Sigma). For
spontaneous cytokine production, cells were incubated in CM in the presence of brefeldin A only.

2.6

Flow cytometry

All samples from individual babies were analysed simultaneously to avoid introducing any unnecessary
experimental variation. Single‐cell suspensions were prepared in FACS buffer (PBS plus 2.5% (vol/vol) FCS
and 2 mM EDTA) and then split into 9 aliquots for staining with 9 different 11‐colour flow cytometry panels.
To one of the aliquots, 50 μl of Countbright Absolute counting beads (Catalogue no.C36950, Life
Technologies) was added. Initially, cells were incubated on ice for 15 minutes with Zombie NIR Fixable
viability kit (Biolegend) to allow live/dead discrimination. For panels containing V1, the surface staining

5|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

antibody was added along with the live/dead discrimination stain. Cells were then surface stained on ice for
30 min with antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 1. Following surface staining, cells were fixed (Cell
Fix, BD) and then permeabilised using Perm buffer (BioLegend). For panels containing transcription factor
FoxP3, cells were fixed and permeablilised using fixation and permeabilising reagents from Invitrogen’s
Intracellular Fixation & Permeabilisation Buffer Set (Catalogue no. 88‐8824‐00) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Following permeabilisation, cells were then intracellulary stained for cytokines
and transcription factor FoxP3 with antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 1. All samples were run on a 4
laser BD LSRFortessa X20 flow cytometer. To minimize impact of temporal variation in instrument
sensitivity, cytometer performance was monitored using CS+T beads (BD) and experiments were run using
applications settings. Data were analysed using FlowJo software.

2.7

Laboratory methodology for faecal DNA extraction

Faecal samples were selected for analysis on a pragmatic basis to provide regularity of assessment
throughout the subjects’ admissions, with increased resolution at times of clinical instability; and subject to
availability – samples were taken approximately every three days (where possible), with additional samples
taken before/during/after courses of antibiotics, feeding type changes, ventilation changes, and blood
transfusions, to capture possible associated microbiome changes.
Faecal bacterial DNA was extracted using the DNeasy PowerSoil Kit (Qiagen, Netherlands), following
treatment with propidium monoazide, to prevent downstream amplification of contaminant or non‐viable
free bacterial DNA. The V4 hypervariable region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified using PCR with a dual‐
indexing strategy, and sequencing of the subsequent amplicons was performed using Illumina MiSeq
technology (2x 250 bp flow‐cell for paired‐end sequencing with 5% PhiX DNA).

2.8

Faecal microbiome analysis

Sequencing data were processed using the DADA2 pipeline and all analyses and graphics were produced by
means of R packages (DADA2, decontam, tidyr, dplyr, ggplot2 and mblm) 11 12 13 14‐17. Microbiome analyses
were performed on 10 stable (100% of eligible subjects), 10 unstable (63%) and 11 unstable
chorioamnionitis (84%) subjects.
6|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Biometrics of microbiome structure were used to describe the development of bacterial communities
within the cohort: for the description of constituent taxa, analysis was performed at family‐level, as this
represented the lowest taxonomic level with the highest level of read identification (99.9% of amplicons
were identified at family level; only 74% were identified at genus level); only those taxa with a mean
relative abundance of >1% across all samples were included in the analyses. Diversity was estimated using
the inverse Simpson statistic, and was derived from all taxa (regardless of relative abundance). The
longitudinal progression of the relative abundances of individual family‐level taxa were described.

2.9

Statistical Analysis

Longitudinally changing datasets: To identify immune parameters that changed significantly over time,
longitudinal models of the cell‐subset frequencies and total numbers at the group level were constructed.
Group level slopes were estimated using mixed linear models of the cellular frequencies/numbers versus
post‐natal age, with a random intercept and slope at an individual level (LME4 R package) 18. The regression
lines were weighted by the number of samples/per baby which varied between subjects. To determine
whether a given immune parameter changed significantly between one timepoint and another, a
nonparametric Wilcoxon matched‐pairs signed rank test was used.
To assess the longitudinal development of microbial communities over time, regression coefficients (Theil‐
Sen non‐parametric regression coefficient) for diversity and Enterobacteriaceae relative abundance against
time were calculated as summary measures to describe the longitudinal progression of individual subjects.
These summary measures were then used to derive group level summary statistics (i.e. median), and to
allow statistical comparison between the groups [by weighted Mann‐Whitney U‐test]. Summary measures
were weighted to account for the number of originating data points (corresponding to numbers of samples)
from which the individual measures were derived. Only the family Enterobacteriaceae was examined in this
manner, as it was the only taxon widely distributed across the data set in significant relative abundances
(>40% mean abundance in >90% of all subjects) to allow comparison between the three clinical groups.
Longitudinal progression of individual taxa in the three clinical cohorts is represented by a plot of relative
abundance of individual taxa at each time point. In recognition of the bimodal distribution of some taxa,
7|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

we highlighted the subjects who were essentially not colonised with specific taxa at any time point
(maximum relative abundance <1%).
To understand the relationships that exist between immune parameters and microbiome parameters,
intra‐individual Spearman correlation was performed. To account for variation in the sampling schedule
between blood and stool we binned the data into 5‐day time windows to match blood and
contemporaneous stool samples. In the event of more than one sample per individual occurring in any
given bin, mean values were calculated for every parameter measured. Spearman correlation analyses
were performed across all parameters barring those directly linked to one another owing to the nested
nature of flow cytometry analysis. A mean value was derived for the correlation coefficient between all
parameters across all individuals. For a relationship to be considered significant it would have to
consistently yield a p‐value of <0.2 in every individual tested, the aggregate of this across all individuals
equates to a p value threshold of p=0.008. Stool passage was unpredictable among babies recruited to
the study so not all infants had sufficient samples to perform a 100% match between immunological and
microbiome parameters.

2.10 Acknowledgements and Author contributions
We thank S. Evans for help with statistical analyses; I. Jogee for illustrations; A. Das and F. Kyle for some
sample processing; and A Hayday (KCL) for critical review of the manuscript. PF, RH, FS, KA, KC and MM
were all supported by a strategic research grant from Barts Charity; SK and DG by Cancer Research UK
(grant A20730); AL by the Wellcome Trust (grant 100156/Z/12/Z to A Hayday), and WGW by Queen Mary
University of London.
PF, RH and FS did all the patient and sample recruitment; SK did blood processing, all the flow cytometry
experiments and data analysis; RH and KA did DNA extraction from stool, Next Generation Sequencing and
RH analysed the microbiome data; AL helped design and optimise flow cytometry panels and analysed large
data sets; WGW, MM and KC provided critical review of the data; PF set up the study, evaluated the clinical
data and co‐wrote the manuscript; DG designed the immunology study, evaluated the results and co‐wrote
the manuscript.
There are no competing interests to declare.
8|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

3
3.1

Results
Patient Demographic and Clinical Characteristics

Thirty‐nine babies with a median gestation of 28.7 weeks (IQR 25.7‐30.4) and a mean (SD) birthweight of
1060g (383) were enrolled between January 2016 until December 2017. Participant demographic and
clinical data are provided in Table 1. Ten babies were classified as stable (receiving only the standard single
course of antibiotics in the immediate postnatal period) and 29 were unstable, having received additional
courses of antibiotics for suspected late‐onset sepsis. Of the 29 unstable babies, 13 were born to mothers
with histological or clinically confirmed chorioamnionitis. Of note, babies in the stable group were
generally born at later gestation, had higher birth weights and all were delivered by caesarean section.

3.2

Postnatal Immune Development in All Babies

186 different peripheral blood immune populations were analysed, with and without in vitro stimulation,
by use of 11‐colour flow cytometry panels. Samples were taken longitudinally (mean of 8 samples/baby)
from the infant cohort until discharge from the NICU or until 36 weeks’ postmenstrual age. The sampling
regime, analysis pipeline and clinical groupings are depicted in Supplementary Fig 1. Initially we identified
immune parameters that were most distinct between adults and preterm infants at birth (or within the first
week of birth) (Supplementary Fig 2). Unsurprisingly, CXCL8 (a cytokine known to be pivotal in this
demographic 10) was one of the most divergent parameters, significantly elevated in infants compared to
adults.
Changes in immune parameters over time
We then studied any alterations in these immune parameters over time. To address which parameters
changed most significantly with postnatal age, we compared the regression coefficients of each parameter
in each baby and plotted the mean value in relation to how different they were from adult at birth (Fig 1A).
Over half of all parameters studied showed significant changes in this time period. Many parameters that
were reduced at birth (anything below the half way line on y axis) increased (and hence appeared in lower
right hand quadrant), and conversely those that were elevated at birth (anything above the half way line on
9|Page

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

y axis), decreased towards adult levels ‐located in the upper left hand quadrant. Conspicuously, although
CXCL8‐producing NK and  cells that were elevated at birth subsequently decreased with time, this was
not true for CXCL8‐producing CD4 and CD8 T cells of various phenotypes. These populations started
elevated compared to adults and remained so, highlighting their potential functional importance in the
neonatal immune response.
Parameters that increased over time included B cells that increased in both percentage (Fig 1B) and
absolute number (Supplementary Fig 3A); HLADR expression on monocytes (Fig 1C and Supplementary Fig
3B); NK cells (Fig 1D [%] and Supplementary Fig 3C [absolute number]); and NKG2D expression on NK cells
(Fig 1E [%] and Supplementary Fig 3D [absolute number]). Consistent with the observation that the
CD4:CD8 ratio is much greater in (term) neonates than adults 19, the percent representation of CD8+ T cells
also increased over time coincident with a decrease in CD4+ T cells (Supplementary Fig 3E/F). CD161
expression on CD8 T cells decreased in the 3‐month study period (Fig 1F).
With respect to changes in functionality that occurred postnatally (determined by assessing cytokine
production following in vitro stimulation with PMA and Ionomycin [P/I]), we observed significantly
increased percentages of IFN‐‐producing NK cells [Fig 1G] and  T cells (Fig 1H and Supplementary Fig
4A). However, levels of IFN‐‐producing CD4 T cells in these babies remained extremely low even at 3
months of age and there was no reproducible increase in the capacity of CD4 T cells to produce IFN‐ over
time (Fig 1I and Supplementary Fig 4B). CD4 T cells continued to produce CXCL8, however, and levels did
not diminish towards that seen in adult in the time frame studied (Fig 1J).
Effect of extreme prematurity
To identify whether the consensus pattern of immune development that we observed in our infant cohort
also occurred in the event of extreme prematurity, we performed PCA analyses using all the flow cytometry
parameters to generate immune profiles for each baby at each time point. By comparing the immune
profile generated in the first week of life compared to that generated at around 6 weeks of age, we
observed that the babies’ immune profiles progressed in a similar direction as they aged (Fig 2A).
Importantly, this trajectory was generally followed by all the babies, independent of the infant’s GA at
10 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

birth. In fact, when we examined distance travelled along this trajectory, babies born at the earliest GA
tended to exhibit a greater degree of movement over a similar time period to those born at later
gestational ages (Fig 2B). tSNE analyses suggested that even though all babies progressed down this shared
developmental pathway, samples taken from the same baby (represented by individual colours) appeared
to retain unique features sufficient to cluster samples most closely according to their individual profile. This
distinction of babies one from another was sustained throughout their time in the NICU (Fig 2C).

Associations between immune parameters

To identify any immune cell populations that may associate with each other (either positively or negatively)
in our infant cohort, we performed Spearman correlation coefficients (R=>0.3 0r R=<‐0.3) across our whole
data set. We identified significant associations (p<0.008) between several immune parameters, many of
which were to be expected (e.g. negative correlation between naïve and memory T cells). These
associations were grouped into nodes based on cell type (see Fig 2D). Some populations (e.g. intermediate
monocytes) showed no correlation with others and were subsequently lost from this network analysis.
Examples of unanticipated positive correlations included the expression of CD161 on  T cells correlating
with their production of IFN‐ [R=0.5] and between IFN‐ producing (CXCL8‐)  and CD8 T cells [R=0.41]
(Fig 2E). There was also a good correlation between CXCL8‐producing CD4 and CD8 T cells [R=0.62]) (Fig
2E).

3.3

Potential Sources Controlling Immune Profile Variation

There were extensive differences identified between our preterm infants at birth and the equivalent adult
immune profile. However, whilst some immune parameters exhibited rapid maturation over the time
frame of our study, even in those infants born extremely preterm, others showed little change. Considering
the links previously suggested between immune cell development, immune homeostasis and the
microbiome 20, we considered the developing microbiome as a potential driver of these changes in immune
profile. Similarly, many immune parameters are sexually dimorphic, at least in mice 21. Hence, we also
considered the influence of sex on these developing immune profiles.
11 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Microbiome analyses were performed on 10 stable infants (100% of eligible cohort); 10 unstable infants
(63% of eligible cohort); and 11 unstable infants born to mothers with chorioamnionitis (85% of eligible
cohort). Initially, we analysed the development of the microbiome by assessing the range of different taxa
that appeared over time (longitudinal development of diversity). In the stable group, microbiome diversity
increased at a rate of 0.56 units/week (95%CI 0.3‐0.9). Conversely, there was significantly restricted growth
in diversity in both the unstable (median 0.035 vs. 0.56 units/week, p<0.0001) and the unstable
chorioamnionitis group (0.065 vs. 0.56, p<0.0001), with no significant difference in the rate of diversity
progression between these cohorts (Fig 3A).
When assessing the emergence of taxa in our cohort, the family Enterobacteriaceae was the dominant
family across all the groups. Fig 3B shows representative examples of taxa progression in individual babies
from the three clinical classifications. When the longitudinal progression of Enterobacteriaceae was
compared between the groups, Enterobacteriaceae relative abundance fell much quicker in the stable
cohort (median 5.6%/week) than either the unstable (‐5.6 vs. 0.16, p=0.02), or the unstable
chorioamnionitis groups (‐5.6 vs. 0.38 p=0.06). (Fig 3C).
As Enterobacteriaceae relative abundance fell in the stable cohort, a shift towards higher proportions of
other families was observed. The next most prevalent were Veillonellaceae (which gradually increased over
time) and Bifidobacteriaceae, (which increased from approximately day 30) having a maximum relative
abundance of >1% in 9/10 and 10/10 subjects respectively (Supplementary Fig 5). Conversely,
Staphylococcaceae were highly prevalent (>1% maximum abundance in 8/10 subjects) in early life,
becoming almost absent beyond day 20. Other notable families (Clostridiaceae 8/10; Enterococcaceae
9/10), changed minimally over time, and generally maintained low median abundances. In the unstable
groups, these consistent patterns of microbial community progression were not observed (Supplementary
Fig 5), although a strikingly decreased prevalence of Bifidobacteriaceae was noted (38% of unstable
subjects were never colonised with Bifidobacteriaceae i.e. never had a relative abundance in any sample
>1%.).

12 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

When the microbiome structure was assessed in conjunction with the immune parameters, we could
identify very few correlations between the two data sets (Supplementary Fig 6). The only weak association
identified was between Enterococcaceae and B cells.
To try to establish additional factors driving the different immune profiles in our preterm infant cohort, we
analysed for differences driven by sex. Perhaps surprisingly, the majority of immune parameters showed no
significant sexual dimorphism, but there were three notable exceptions. Both CD31 and CD38 expression
on CD4 T cells were significantly elevated in female infants compared to their male counterparts
(Supplementary Fig 7A/B). In contrast, CD161 expression on CD8 T cells was higher in males and then
subsequently decreased more dramatically in expression over time than in females (Supplementary Fig 7C).
3.3.1 In‐utero and post‐natal exposure to Inflammation
Having shown limited associations between immune parameters and sex/microbiome we considered the
effects of both pre‐ and post‐natal exposure to infection on the developing immune system. Analyses of the
whole immune profiles by PCA for the different clinical groups described in Table 2 identified distinct
immune signatures in babies who had experienced different pre‐ and post‐natal exposures to the stable
infants (Fig 4A/B). Babies who had an unstable course or those born in the context of chorioamnionitis,
showed elevated levels of the activation marker CD69 on all T cell populations (CD4, CD8 and ) as well as
on NK cells (Fig 4C‐F) when compared to babies who had a stable postnatal course. CD35, (also known to
increase upon cell activation) was also elevated on both CD4 and CD8 T cells, significantly so in those
infants exposed to chorioamnionitis (Supplementary Fig 8A). There was no difference in CD25 expression,
however, on either CD4 or CD8 T cells between the different clinical groups.
Stable infants exhibited low levels of proliferation at birth (<10% of CD4 T cells were Ki67 positive).
However, there was a consistent proliferative burst (to nearly a quarter of CD4 T cells) around 2 weeks after
birth which rapidly returned to post birth levels, seen in nearly all infants (Fig 4G). Elevated CD4 T cell
proliferation was also observed immediately post birth in infants born to mothers with chorioamnionitis
(Fig 4G). Similarly, elevated levels of intermediate monocytes, particularly in the immediate perinatal
period, were seen in babies born to mothers with chorioamnionitis (p=0.0004, Fig 4H) both suggestive of
13 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

in‐utero activation. However, levels of HLADR expression on these perinatal monocytes were significantly
lower than that seen in stable infants (Supplementary Fig 8B). Despite no significant changes in regulatory
T cell (T‐reg) numbers between the different clinical groups (data not shown), FOXP3 expression was
significantly reduced on T‐regs isolated from infants born to mothers with chorioamnionitis (Fig 4I). CD8
expression was maintained on  T cells (both V2 and V1) in unstable infants compared to those with a
stable clinical course (where levels decreased rapidly post birth, Fig 4J,K).
To identify any changes in functionality between the different clinical groups, cytokine production following
in vitro stimulation with PMA and Ionomycin was assessed. The ability of CD4 T cells to produce TNF‐ and
IL‐2 (Fig 5A/B) upon in vitro stimulation was indistinguishable between the three clinical groups yet, in
contrast, the ability to produce CXCL8 was severely and significantly reduced in both the chorioamnionitis
and unstable groups when compared to stable infants (Fig 5C). It has been previously suggested that the
capacity of T cells to produce TNF‐ and CXCL8 was reciprocally regulated based on GA 22. However, we did
not see significant changes in the capacity of CD4 T cells to make TNF‐ or CXCL8 based on their GA at birth
in this cohort (Supplementary Fig 9A/B). Similarly, babies born at the same GA exhibited very different
percentages of T cells with the capability to produce either CXCL8 or TNF‐ (Supplementary Fig 9C/D). In
every case, despite an equivalent GA at birth, those babies exhibiting the lowest levels of CXCL8‐producing
T cells (but not TNF‐ producing T cells) were those infants with an unstable clinical course (Supplementary
Fig 9C/D). Furthermore, those infants demonstrating the lowest levels of CXCL8‐producing T cells at birth
were those that subsequently developed the most severe infections despite an equivalent capacity to
produce TNF‐ or IL‐2 (Fig 5D‐F). When compared to stable infants, significantly lower CXCL8‐producing
CD4 T cells were seen in infants with clinically suspected sepsis 3 (n=16, p=0.007) and in those infants with
microbiologically confirmed sepsis caused by either coagulase negative Staphylococcus (CONS, n=9,
p=0.039) or other bacteria (n=4, p=0.0007) such as Group B streptococcus [GBS], Escherichia coli or
Streptococcus anginosus.

14 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

4

Discussion

The consequences of preterm birth on immune development and function are not well established 23. In
this study, we demonstrate that preterm babies, even those born at 23 and 24 weeks’ gestation, were
capable of rapidly acquiring several components of immune function. The immune profiles for babies born
at earlier gestation changed more dramatically over a similar time period to those born at later gestations
which suggests that extremely preterm babies are capable of rapid progression to ‘catch up’ immune
function. This corroborates data suggesting that the immune profiles of preterm and term babies converge
in a similar time frame 4 and indeed that rapid immune development in term babies follows a set
trajectory5. However, despite this immune development, some babies developed infection. Strikingly, this
was associated with a reduced T cell capacity to produce CXCL8, highlighting the CXCL8 pathway as a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of infection in preterm babies.
Immune development occurred apparently independently of changes within the developing microbiome.
Prolonged broad‐spectrum antibiotic treatment of the unstable infants likely transformed the developing
microbiome and yet those infants were still capable of immune maturation along the established
trajectory. Given the generally naïve nature of the neonatal immune system, it is conceivable that exposure
to any environmental stimulus is sufficient to drive the observed maturation of the immune system during
this period. Indeed, the sudden increase in proliferation of CD4 T cells and other T cells, that we observed
at around 2 weeks of age may be related to microbial colonisation. Rapid colonisation with myriad
microbial species would most likely far eclipse any differences driven by specific individual colonisers.
Alternatively, microbial‐immune relationships may exist below family level. Similarly, although the stable
infants showed some consistency in microbial profiles with decreased Enterobacteriacae over time, these
were replaced by a variety of different obligate anaerobes.
Whilst mode of birth has been associated with the development of specific microbiomes 24, we were unable
to dissociate mode of birth from other exposures as all stable (but not all unstable) infants in our cohort
were born by caesarean section. Similarly, whilst breast‐feeding (either wholly or partially) is also known to

15 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

significantly influence microbiome development 25, almost all of our babies received at least some maternal
breast milk.
Aspects of both innate and adaptive immunity developed rapidly during the period of study. B cells
increased in numbers after birth as did T cells whose function (as determined by IFN‐ production) was
enhanced over time. We identified a decrease in CD8 expression on  T cells, but interestingly, only in
stable babies. This suggests either clonal expansion of an existing CD8+ population and/or increased CD8
expression upon activation in those infants experiencing episodes of infection. It is intriguing that we see
significant changes in the  T cell population in our cohort as we and others have suggested these cells are
of particular importance in providing protection to infants in early life 26 27 28. In contrast,  CD4 T cells
showed scant, if any, development over this time period. There was little change in their ability to produce
CXCL8, which, if anything, increased over the time frame, presumably as a result of increased T cell export
from the thymus post birth 29 30 and they were still unable to produce IFN‐ upon ex vivo stimulation. This
relative inability to produce IFN‐ may be related to hypermethylation of the IFN‐ promoter previously
observed in human newborn infants 31. Although, we did not see any significant increase in IFN‐ producing
CD8 T cells over postnatal age there was a significant association between IFN‐ producing  T cells and
IFN‐ producing CD8 T cells suggesting some maturation in the latter, albeit at a slower rate than that
observed for  T cells.
In this study, an individual baby’s subsequent clinical course could not have been predicted at the time of
birth. Babies with an unstable postnatal clinical course and those born in the context of chorioamnionitis
both succumbed to higher rates of microbiologically confirmed sepsis and chronic lung disease when
compared to the stable cohort. Our data highlight the influence of both the in‐utero environment and the
post‐natal clinical course on the developing immune profiles of preterm infants. Bacteria implicated in
chorioamnionitis (such as E. coli) have also been shown to produce histone modifying enzymes that down
regulate protein expression with increased evidence that sepsis can induce epigenetic changes that alter
immune responses through a range of mechanisms 32,33.

16 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

An activated immune profile at birth, as suggested by several parameters (for example expression of CD69,
CD35 and proliferation) and previously observed 34 was seen in infants born to mothers with
chorioamnionitis. Furthermore, significantly elevated intermediate monocytes were also observed in this
group. However, although increased in number, their functional potentials may be poor as we identified
significantly reduced HLADR expression on these cells, as has also been observed previously 35. Indeed,
monocytes developing in the context of chorioamnionitis have shown hyporesponsiveness to different
stimuli 35,36 perhaps explaining the increased susceptibility to early onset sepsis observed in this patient
group 37. Similarly, those infants born to mothers with chorioamnionitis also exhibited significantly lower
levels of FOXP3 expression in T‐regs suggesting reduced functionality 38.
Sex is known to have a significant bearing on neonatal outcomes with male preterm infants experiencing
more adverse outcomes than females 39, and yet we saw very few significant differences in immune
parameters between male and female infants. The few immune differences that were identified may,
therefore, be functionally relevant. Both CD31, and its binding partner, CD38, were significantly lower in
male CD4 T cells compared to their female counterparts, suggesting the whole pathway may be less
efficient. Interestingly, CD38 has been shown to enhance T cell (and NK) activation by contributing to
immune synapse formation 40 41 and CD31 deficient mice show enhanced susceptibility to LPS induced
endotoxic shock 42. The only other factor that appeared to be sexually dimorphic was CD161 expression on
CD8 T cells, which decreased in both male and female infants postnatally (albeit from an increased starting
level in males). The expression of CD161 is thought to evoke a particular functional profile 43 irrelevant of
the cell type. It is interesting therefore, that expression was enhanced postnatally on NK cells and T cells
(where it correlated with IFN‐ production) but decreased on CD8 T cells. It is possible that some CD161+
CD8+ T cells represent mucosal associated invariant T (MAIT) cells and thus the rapid decrease may be
associated with migration out of the blood into the intestine.
The principal effector chemokine of neonatal CD4 T cells is CXCL8 10. CXCL8 expression was highly divergent
between infants and adults, and there was a strong correlation between CXCL8 producing CD4 and CD8 T
cells in our babies. Levels of CXCL8‐producing  T cells did not decrease over the time period studied
towards the adult levels, despite reductions in CXCL8‐producing NK and  T cells. This notwithstanding,
17 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

when compared to stable infants, both groups of unstable infants exhibited significantly reduced CXCL8‐
producing CD4 and CD8 T cells. There may be several reasons for this observation. It is possible that these
cells are somehow exhausted in the unstable cohorts. This is unlikely to be the case as the ability of the
same cells to produce TNF‐ or IL2 was not reduced. Furthermore, both infection and inflammation may
themselves be implicated. In this study, we show that babies born in the context of chorioamnionitis
(inflammation) and those with repeated episodes of infection have lower CXCL8 responses but we do not
know what mechanisms link this association. The observation that CXCL8 and TNF‐ production may be
reciprocally associated with GA 22 and that unstable infants in this cohort were generally born at an earlier
GA, may also be an explanation. However, amongst this cohort, there appeared to be no correlation
between GA and the ability of CD4 T cells to produce CXCL8 or TNF‐ around birth. Nevertheless, a reduced
number of CXCL8‐producing T cells was consistently observed in those infants with an unstable clinical
course who were more likely to develop serious postnatal complications. This inability to mount adequate T
cell CXCL8 responses at birth (for whatever reason) may therefore predict a poor outcome. This finding may
have particular clinical relevance, both identifying CXCL8 as a potential therapeutic target but also as a
biomarker to predict subsequent outcomes for babies born prematurely, heretofore a challenging area.

18 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

5. References
1.

Berrington, J.E., Hearn, R.I., Bythell, M., Wright, C. & Embleton, N.D. Deaths in preterm
infants: changing pathology over 2 decades. J Pediatr 160, 49‐53 e41 (2012).

2.

Patel, R.M., et al. Causes and timing of death in extremely premature infants from 2000
through 2011. N Engl J Med 372, 331‐340 (2015).

3.

group, E.t.i. Enteral lactoferrin supplementation for very preterm infants: a randomised
placebo‐controlled trial. Lancet 393, 423‐433 (2019).

4.

Olin, A., et al. Stereotypic Immune System Development in Newborn Children. Cell 174,
1277‐1292 e1214 (2018).

5.

Lee, A.H., et al. Dynamic molecular changes during the first week of human life follow a
robust developmental trajectory. Nat Commun 10, 1092 (2019).

6.

Arrieta, M.C., et al. Early infancy microbial and metabolic alterations affect risk of
childhood asthma. Science translational medicine 7, 307ra152 (2015).

7.

Torow, N. & Hornef, M.W. The Neonatal Window of Opportunity: Setting the Stage for Life‐
Long Host‐Microbial Interaction and Immune Homeostasis. J Immunol 198, 557‐563 (2017).

8.

Been, J.V., et al. Preterm birth and childhood wheezing disorders: a systematic review and
meta‐analysis. PLoS Med 11, e1001596 (2014).

9.

Mitselou, N., et al. Cesarean delivery, preterm birth, and risk of food allergy: Nationwide
Swedish cohort study of more than 1 million children. J Allergy Clin Immunol 142, 1510‐
1514 e1512 (2018).

10.

Gibbons, D., et al. Interleukin‐8 (CXCL8) production is a signatory T cell effector function of
human newborn infants. Nat Med 20, 1206‐1210 (2014).

11.

Team, R.C. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria., 2019).

12.

Wickham, H. ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis, (Springer‐Verlag New York,
2016).

13.

Davis NM, P.D., Holmes SP, Relman DA, Callahan BJ Simple statistical identification and
removal of contaminant sequences in marker‐gene and metagenomics data. bioRxiv,
221499(2017).

14.

Callahan, B.J., et al. DADA2: High‐resolution sample inference from Illumina amplicon data.
Nat Methods 13, 581‐583 (2016).

15.

Komsta, L. mblm: Median‐Based linear models. R package version 0.12.1. https://CRAN.R‐
project.org/package=mblm (2019).
19 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

16.

Wickham, H., Francois, R, Henry, L and Muller K. dplyr: A Grammar of Data Manipulaton. R
package version 0.8.0.1. https://CRAN.R‐project.org/package=dplyr (2019).

17.

Wickham, H.a.H.L. tidyr: Easily Tidy data with 'spread()' and 'gather()' Fuctions. R package
version 0.8.3. https://CRAN.R‐project.org/package=tidyr (2019).

18.

Bates, D., Machler, M., Bolker, B.M., Walker, S.C. Fitting linear mixed‐effects models using
lme4. Journal of Statistical Software 67, 44949 (2015).

19.

Shearer, W.T., et al. Lymphocyte subsets in healthy children from birth through 18 years of
age: the Pediatric AIDS Clinical Trials Group P1009 study. J Allergy Clin Immunol 112, 973‐
980 (2003).

20.

Hill, D.A. & Artis, D. Intestinal bacteria and the regulation of immune cell homeostasis.
Annu Rev Immunol 28, 623‐667 (2010).

21.

Abeler‐Dörner, L., et al. High‐throughput phenotyping reveals expansive genetic and
structural underpinnings of

immune variation. BioRxiv
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2019/07/02/688010.full.pdf(2019).
22.

Scheible, K.M., et al. T cell developmental arrest in former premature infants increases risk
of respiratory morbidity later in infancy. JCI Insight 3(2018).

23.

Melville, J.M. & Moss, T.J. The immune consequences of preterm birth. Frontiers in
neuroscience 7, 79 (2013).

24.

Dominguez‐Bello, M.G., et al. Delivery mode shapes the acquisition and structure of the
initial microbiota across multiple body habitats in newborns. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107,
11971‐11975 (2010).

25.

Stewart, C.J., et al. Temporal development of the gut microbiome in early childhood from
the TEDDY study. Nature 562, 583‐588 (2018).

26.

Gibbons, D.L., et al. Neonates harbour highly active gammadelta T cells with selective
impairments in preterm infants. Eur J Immunol 39, 1794‐1806 (2009).

27.

Ramsburg, E., Tigelaar, R., Craft, J. & Hayday, A. Age‐dependent requirement for
gammadelta T cells in the primary but not secondary protective immune response against
an intestinal parasite. J Exp Med 198, 1403‐1414 (2003).

28.

Guo, X.J., et al. Lung gammadelta T Cells Mediate Protective Responses during Neonatal
Influenza Infection that Are Associated with Type 2 Immunity. Immunity 49, 531‐544 e536
(2018).

29.

Bains, I., Thiebaut, R., Yates, A.J. & Callard, R. Quantifying thymic export: combining models
of naive T cell proliferation and TCR excision circle dynamics gives an explicit measure of
thymic output. J Immunol 183, 4329‐4336 (2009).
20 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

30.

Das, A., et al. Adaptive from Innate: Human IFN‐gamma+CD4+ T Cells Can Arise Directly
from CXCL8‐Producing Recent Thymic Emigrants in Babies and Adults. J Immunol 199,
1696‐1705 (2017).

31.

White, G.P., Watt, P.M., Holt, B.J. & Holt, P.G. Differential patterns of methylation of the
IFN‐gamma promoter at CpG and non‐CpG sites underlie differences in IFN‐gamma gene
expression between human neonatal and adult CD45RO‐ T cells. J Immunol 168, 2820‐2827
(2002).

32.

Cross, D., Drury, R., Hill, J. & Pollard, A.J. Epigenetics in Sepsis: Understanding Its Role in
Endothelial Dysfunction, Immunosuppression, and Potential Therapeutics. Frontiers in
immunology 10, 1363 (2019).

33.

Grabiec, A.M. & Potempa, J. Epigenetic regulation in bacterial infections: targeting histone
deacetylases. Critical reviews in microbiology 44, 336‐350 (2018).

34.

Luciano, A.A., Yu, H., Jackson, L.W., Wolfe, L.A. & Bernstein, H.B. Preterm labor and
chorioamnionitis are associated with neonatal T cell activation. PLoS One 6, e16698 (2011).

35.

Azizia, M., Lloyd, J., Allen, M., Klein, N. & Peebles, D. Immune status in very preterm
neonates. Pediatrics 129, e967‐974 (2012).

36.

de Jong, E., et al. Exposure to chorioamnionitis alters the monocyte transcriptional
response to the neonatal pathogen Staphylococcus epidermidis. Immunol Cell Biol 96, 792‐
804 (2018).

37.

Korbage de Araujo, M.C., Schultz, R., do Rosario Dias de Oliveira, L., Ramos, J.L. & Vaz, F.A.
A risk factor for early‐onset infection in premature newborns: invasion of chorioamniotic
tissues by leukocytes. Early Hum Dev 56, 1‐15 (1999).

38.

Rueda, C.M., et al. Effect of chorioamnionitis on regulatory T cells in moderate/late
preterm neonates. Hum Immunol 76, 65‐73 (2015).

39.

O'Driscoll, D.N., McGovern, M., Greene, C.M. & Molloy, E.J. Gender disparities in preterm
neonatal outcomes. Acta Paediatr (2018).

40.

Munoz, P., et al. Antigen‐induced clustering of surface CD38 and recruitment of
intracellular CD38 to the immunologic synapse. Blood 111, 3653‐3664 (2008).

41.

Mathieu Le Gars, C.S., et al. CD38 contributes to human natural killer cell responses
through a role in immune synapse formation http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/349084 (2019).

42.

Carrithers, M., et al. Enhanced susceptibility to endotoxic shock and impaired STAT3
signaling in CD31‐deficient mice. Am J Pathol 166, 185‐196 (2005).

43.

Fergusson, J.R., et al. CD161 defines a transcriptional and functional phenotype across
distinct human T cell lineages. Cell Rep 9, 1075‐1088 (2014).

21 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

6. Figure legends
Figure 1: Phenotypic and functional maturation of distinct immune parameters
Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were phenotyped for 186 different immune
populations by flow cytometry following surface and intracellular staining. For cytokine detection, samples
were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of BFA) prior to staining. (A) Postnatal Immune cell
trajectories relative to their deviation, at birth, from adult levels. Position along y axis indicates deviation
from adult (the Log2 fold difference) at birth, position along x axis indicates whether the population has
increased or decreased significantly in the infant over time. Thus, immune populations in the top left
quadrant start higher than adult levels and then decrease over time towards the adult level. Populations in
the bottom right start below adult levels and increase over time towards that of the adult. Colour indicates
p value for correlation with age with large circles indicating CXCL8 producing cell types. Amongst the
CXCL8‐producing populations, the red outline indicates NK and  T cells whereas the blue outline CD4 or
CD8  T cells.
(B‐J) Changes in individual immune parameters over time depicted by scatter plots showing
frequencies/MFI (as indicated) in preterm babies (left panel;cyan circles) as a function of postnatal age
compared to adults (right panel; black circles) (B) CD19+ B cells, (C) HLADR MFI in classical monocytes, (D)
NK cells, (E) NKG2D+ NK cells, (F) CD161+ CD8 T cells, (G) IFN‐+ NK cells, (H) IFN‐+  T cells, (I) IFN‐+ CD4
T cells and (J) CXCL8+ CD4 T cells. In the figure, cyan circles represent a pool of longitudinal samples from
39 preterm babies where each circle represents an individual sample and on average there are 8
longitudinal samples/baby. Black circles are a pool of samples from 9 adults. *** p< 0.001, **p < 0.01 and
*p< 0.05 as determined by linear mixed effect modelling using the lmer package in R.
Figure 2: Development of whole immune profiles and correlations
Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were phenotyped for 186 different immune
populations by flow cytometry following surface and intracellular staining. For cytokine detection, samples
22 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of BFA) prior to staining. (A and B) Analyses of the
immune parameters from 39 preterm babies shows that the immune profile of extremely preterm babies
(lighter colour) travels a longer distance but on the same trajectory compared to their less preterm
counterparts (darker colour) to reach the common immune profile as depicted by: (A) PCA of the immune
parameters showing the immune profile of the sample taken in the first week (small circle, mean=3.8days)
to the immune profile of the sample taken 5 weeks later (large circle, mean=37days) for each baby. The
colour gradient represents how many days preterm the baby was at birth (counting down from 40 weeks)
as described in the figure. Each circle represents a sample from an individual baby and the size of the circle
represents postnatal age of the baby at the time the sample was taken. Individual babies are linked by
lines. (B) Scatter plot quantifying the Euclidian distance moved in PC1 and PC2 for each baby. The colour
gradient represents how many days preterm the baby was at birth. Each symbol represents an individual
baby. (C) tSNE analysis of the immune parameters shows that babies have their own individual profile that
distinguishes them from each other. Each circle represents a sample from an individual baby (the size of the
circle depicts the postnatal age of the baby when the sample was taken) and each colour represents
longitudinal samples from the same baby. (D) Network represents statistically significant (p<0.008)
spearman correlation coefficients (R=>0.3 or R=<‐0.3) between immune parameters. Each node represents
an immune parameter. Nodes are grouped by lineage and coloured by function, node size relates to
number of relationships. (E) Plots depicting correlation between frequency of (left panel) IFN‐+ T cells
and CD161‐expressing T cells; (middle panel) IFN‐+ CXCL8‐ CD8 T cells and IFN‐+  T cells; and (right
panel) CXCL8‐producing CD4 and CD8 T cells. The data shown are a pool of longitudinal samples from 39
preterm babies where each circle represents an individual sample and on average there are 8 longitudinal
samples/baby. Individual babies are in different colours.
Figure 3: Microbiome development
Faecal samples (672) were longitudinally collected from 31 babies across the duration of the study.
Bacterial DNA was extracted, and the 16S rRNA gene (hypervariable region V4) was amplified, sequenced
and compared against the sequence database to ascertain the relative abundance of bacterial taxa in

23 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

samples. Subjects were classified into three groups based on their clinical progress: stable, unstable, and
unstable with chorioamnionitis.
(A) The progression of diversity against postnatal age across the three groups (Stable – grey; Unstable –
blue; Unstable with chorioamnionitis – red). Dot plot represents individual sample diversity indices. Thin
lines represent individual subjects’ regression coefficients through their diversity data points, as assessed
by Theil‐Sen estimator. Thick lines represent the median/mean of the individual trajectories within each
clinical group.
(B) Stacked bar charts of relative abundance of taxa in typical subjects from the three clinical groups. Only
taxa with >1% mean abundance across all samples represented.
(C) Enterobacteriaceae relative abundance against postnatal age across the three groups (Stable – grey;
Unstable – blue; Unstable with chorioamnionitis – red). Dot plot represents individual sample
Enterobacteriaceae proportions. Thin lines represent individual subjects’ regression coefficients through
their Enterobacteriaceae proportions data points, as assessed by Theil‐Sen estimator. Thick lines represent
the median/mean of the individual trajectories within each clinical group.
Figure 4: Immune parameters altered by different pre‐ and/or post‐natal exposures.
Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were phenotyped for 186 different immune
populations by flow cytometry following surface and intracellular staining. For cytokine detection, samples
were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of BFA) prior to staining. PCA of 186 immune
parameters from longitudinal samples derived from: (A) Stable (grey circles; n=10 babies) and Unstable
(blue circles, n=16) babies (B) Stable (grey circles; n=10) and Unstable BCM (red circles, n=13) babies. In
Figures C‐F, scatter plots depict frequencies of CD69 positive cells in Stable babies (left panel; grey circles,
n=10), Unstable babies (middle panel; blue circles, n=16) and Unstable BCM babies (right panel; red circles,
n=13) as a function of postnatal age: (C) CD69+ CD4 T cells, (D) CD69+ CD8 T cells, (E) CD69+ T cells, (F)
CD69+ NK cells are depicted from the three clinical groups. (G) Proliferation (as depicted by the boxplot
showing frequency of Ki67 expression in CD4+ T cells) was elevated immediately post birth in infants born
to mothers with chorioamnionitis whereas stable (and to a lesser extent unstable) infants showed a
24 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

proliferative burst at around 14 days of age. Compared to Stable babies, Unstable and Unstable BCM babies
show significantly higher frequencies of Intermediate monocytes (H) and significantly lower FoxP3 MFI in
Tregs (I) and higher frequencies of CD8 expressing  T cells over time in both (J) v1+  T cells, (K) v2+
 T cells. Data shown are a pool of longitudinal samples from each clinical group where on average there
are 8 samples/baby in the Stable cohort (n=10) and 9 samples per baby in the Unstable cohort (n=16) and
the Unstable BCM cohort (n=13). For all figures except (G) *** p< 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p< 0.05 as
determined by linear mixed effect modelling using the lmer package in R. For (G) **p < 0.01 and *p< 0.05 as
determined by a non‐parametric Wilcoxon matched‐pairs signed rank test.
Figure 5: T cells from unstable infants have a significantly reduced ability to produce CXCL8 compared to
stable babies.
Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of
BFA) and expression of CXCL8, TNF‐ and IL‐2 assessed by flow cytometry. Compared to Stable babies,
Unstable and Unstable BCM babies show a significantly reduced ability to produce CXCL8 but not TNF‐ or
IL‐2 as depicted by scatter plots showing frequencies of (A) TNF‐, (B) IL‐2 and (C) CXCL8 in Stable babies
(left panel; grey circles, n=10), Unstable babies (middle panel; blue circles, n=16) and Unstable BCM babies
(right panel; red circles, n=13) as a function of postnatal age. In Figures A‐C, data shown are a pool of
longitudinal samples from each clinical group where each circle represents a longitudinal sample from an
individual baby and on average there are 6 samples/baby in the Stable cohort and 9 samples per baby in
the Unstable cohort and the Unstable BCM cohort. Preterm babies with the lowest levels of CXCL8
developed the most severe infections as depicted by scatter plots showing the frequencies of (D) CXCL8, (E)
TNF‐ and (F) IL‐2 in Stable babies (far left panel; grey circles, n=10 babies with mean of 8 longitudinal
samples/baby), babies with microbiologically confirmed serious infections (second panel; n=4 with mean of
11 longitudinal samples/baby), babies with coagulase negative staphylococcus infections (CONS) (third
panel, n=9 with mean of 10 longitudinal samples/baby) and babies with suspected infections (far right
panel; n=16 with mean of 7 longitudinal samples/baby). The colour of the circles depicts the type of
infection as described in the figure. In figures D‐F, each circle represents a longitudinal sample from an

25 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

individual baby and linked circles represent longitudinal samples from the same baby. *** p< 0.001, **p <
0.01 and *p< 0.05 as determined by linear mixed effect modelling using the lmer package in R

7. Supplementary figure legends
Supplementary Figure 1: Schematic of study design
Supplementary Figure 2: Comparison of neonatal and adult immune parameters
Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were phenotyped for 186 different immune
populations by flow cytometry following surface and intracellular staining. For cytokine detection, samples
were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of BFA) prior to staining. (A) Bar chart depicting the
deviation of the neonatal immune profile from adult levels. Plot represents Log2 fold difference of mean
neonatal immune cell subset frequencies (n=39 infants) relative to mean adult levels (n=9 adults). Colour
indicates –Log10 adjusted p value of difference in mean values between the two groups. Populations
highlighted in blue text indicate adaptive CXCL8+ cells and those highlighted in red indicate innate (NK and
) CXCL8+ cells.
Supplementary Figure 3: Immune parameters that increase with age
The mean fluorescence intensity of HLADR expression in classical monocytes and the frequencies of CD19+
B cells, NK cells and NKG2D+ NK cells were examined in longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies
by flow cytometry. (A) Scatter plot depicting actual numbers/ml of CD19+ B cells. (B) Representative
histograms depicting HLADR MFI in classical monocytes with increasing postnatal age in a Stable (left
panel), Unstable (middle panel) and Unstable BCM (right panel) baby. Scatter plots depicting actual
numbers/ml of (C) NK cells and (D) NKG2D+ NK cells in preterm babies as a function of postnatal age. Data
shown in Figures (A) and (B‐C) are a pool of longitudinal samples from 39 preterm babies where each circle
represents an individual sample. *** p< 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p< 0.05 as determined by linear mixed
effect modelling using the lmer package in R
Supplementary Figure 4: IFN‐ expression in  and CD4 T cells

26 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of
BFA) and expression of IFN‐ in  or CD4 T cells assessed by flow cytometry. Dot plots showing
representative staining of IFN‐ expression by (A)  T cells and (B) CD4+ T cells in longitudinal samples from
a single preterm baby. The postnatal age of the baby at the time the sample was taken is indicated above
each dot plot.
Supplementary Figure 5: Microbiome development
Faecal samples (672) were longitudinally collected from 31 babies across the duration of the study.
Bacterial DNA was extracted, and the 16S rRNA gene (hypervariable region V4) was amplified, sequenced
and compared against the sequence database to ascertain the relative abundance of bacterial taxa in
samples. We have utilised our own curated database, created to focus upon species previously
encountered in preterm intestinal microbiome studies. Mean abundance of minority taxa was plotted
against time for all samples and subjects. Dot plot represents individual samples ‐ colours represent
samples originating from same subject; subjects who were never colonised with that taxon (i.e. relative
abundance always <1%) are uniformly coloured in black.
Supplementary Figure 6: Immune microbiome correlations
Heat map depicting aggregate intra‐individual spearman correlations between microbiome parameters and
immune parameters. Samples from 24 babies were included in this analysis to ensure > 4 samples were
included per baby.
Supplementary Figure 7: Sexual dimorphism in immune parameters
Surface expression of CD31, CD38 on CD4 T cells and CD161 on CD8 T cells was examined by flow cytometry
in longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies. Compared to males, female babies express
significantly higher levels of CD31 and CD38 on CD4+ T cells and significantly lower levels of CD161 on CD8+
T cells as depicted by scatter plots showing frequencies of (A) CD31 and (B) CD38 in CD4 T cells and (C)
CD161 on CD8+ T cells in males (left panel, n=23 babies with mean of 8 samples/baby) compared to
females (right panel, n=16 with mean of 8 samples/baby) as a function of postnatal age. Data shown are a
27 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

pool of longitudinal samples from 39 preterm babies where each circle represents an individual sample.
*** p< 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p< 0.05 as determined by linear mixed effect modelling using the lmer
package in R.
Supplementary Figure 8: CD35 expression in CD4 and CD8 T cells and HLADR MFI in intermediate
monocytes
The frequency of CD35‐expressing CD4 and CD8 T cells and HLADR MFI in monocytes was examined by flow
cytometry in longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies. Scatter plots depicting the frequency/MFI
(as indicated) of (A) CD35+ CD4+ T cells, (B) CD35+ CD8+ T cells and (C) HLADR MFI in intermediate
monocytes in Stable babies (left panel; grey circles, n=10), Unstable babies (middle panel; blue circles,
n=16) and Unstable BCM babies (right panel; red circles, n=13) as a function of postnatal age. Data shown
are a pool of longitudinal samples from 39 preterm babies where each circle represents an individual
sample and on average there are 8 longitudinal samples/baby. *** p< 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p< 0.05 as
determined by linear mixed effect modelling using the lmer package in R.
Supplementary Figure 9: T cell expression of CXCL8 or TNF‐ is not dependent on gestational age at birth
Longitudinal PBMC samples from 39 preterm babies were activated in vitro with PI (4 h, in the presence of
BFA) and expression of CXCL8 and TNF‐ in CD4+ T cells was assessed by flow cytometry. Scatter plots show
frequencies of CD4 T cells expressing (A) TNF‐ and (B) CXCL8 in preterm babies as a function of corrected
gestational age (cGA). Data shown are a pool of samples taken in the first week of life from 39 preterm
babies where each circle represents an individual sample. Linked samples indicate consecutive samples
from the same baby within the first week of birth. Circles are coloured based on the gestational age of the
baby at birth. The colour gradient is from dark (babies born at earlier gestational ages) to light (babies born
at later gestational ages). Unstable and Unstable BCM babies born at the same gestational age as stable
babies consistently express lower frequencies of CXCL8 but not TNF‐ as depicted by scatter plots showing
frequencies of CD4+ T cells expressing: (C) CXCL8 and (D) TNF‐ as a function of cGA in babies born at 29
weeks cGA (left panel), 30 weeks cGA (middle panel) and 31 weeks cGA (right panel). In figures C‐D, circles
depict individual samples from each baby. Linked samples are longitudinal samples from the same baby.
28 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Grey circles represents Stable babies, blue circles represent Unstable babies and Red circles represent
Unstable BCM babies. *** p< 0.001, **p < 0.01 and *p< 0.05 as determined by linear mixed effect
modelling using the lmer package in R.

29 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Supplementary Table 1

Marker

Fluorochrome

Company

Catalogue
No.

Clone

Dilution

N/A

Biolegend

422302

N/A

2.5ul/test

CD3

AF700

Biolegend

317339

OKT3

1:200

CD4

PE‐Cy7

Biolegend

317413

OKt4

1:50

CD4

BV786

Biolegend

317442

Okt4

1:50

CD8

BV510

Biolegend

301047

RPA‐T8

1:400

V1

FITC

Thermo Scientific

TCR2730

TS8.2

1:100

V2

PerCP

Biolegend

331410

B6

1:50

CD45RA

BV786

Biolegend

304139

HI 100

1:50

CD45RA

BV650

Biolegend

304135

H100

1:250

CCR7

BV650

Biolegend

353233

GO43H7

1:50

CD95

BV421

Biolegend

305623

dx2

1:50

CD25

PE

Biolegend

356103

MA‐251

1:50

Ki67
CD27
CD19
CD14
CD16
CD14
CD16
HLADR
CD86
CD40
CD1c(BDCA‐1)
CD56
CD123
CD303
CD11c

BV421
PE
BV786
BV421
APC/CY7
APC/CY7
PE‐Cy7
AF488
PE
BV510
APC
BV650
PerCP Cy5.5
FITC
BV650
PE‐Cy7
APC
BV650
BV421
PerCP‐Cy5.5
AF488
BV510
BV650

Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend
Biolegend

350505
356103
302239
301829
301819
302017
302015
307619
305405
334329
331523
362532
306015
307619
301637
331222
320807
362532
362551
310925
339923
301047
356619

Ki‐67
MA‐251
HIB 19
M5E2
M5E2
3g8
3g8
L243
IT2.2
5c3
L161
5.1h11
6H6
L243
3.9
B1
1D11
5.1h11
5.1h11
FN50
HP‐3G10
HP‐3G10
HB‐7

1:50
1:50
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:200
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:100
1:50
1:50
1:100
1:50
1:50
1:50
1:50
1:200
1:50
1:50
1:40
1:100

Surface markers
Human
Trustain Fcx

Pan 
NKG2D
CD56
CD56
CD69
CD161
CD161
CD38

30 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

CD31
PerCP‐Cy5.5
CD35
AF647
Intracellular markers: cytokines

Biolegend
BD

303131
565329

WM59
E11

1:400
1:50

BV421
Biolegend
IFN
PerCP‐Cy5.5
Biolegend
TNF
IL17A
AF647
Biolegend
IL‐13
PE
Biolegend
IL‐8
FITC
Biolegend
IL‐2
PE‐CY7
Biolegend
IL‐4
PE
Biolegend
IL‐10
BV421
Biolegend
Intracellular markers: transcription factors

502531
502925
512309
501903
511406
500325
500808
501421

4S.B3
MAB11
BL168
JES10‐5A2
E8N1
MQ1‐17H12
MP425d2
Jes3‐97d

1:50
1:50
1:50
1:50
1:50
1:50
1:50
1:50

320214

259 d

1:50

FoxP3

APC

Biolegend

31 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table 1.

Total Babies
(n=39)

Stable Babies
(n=10)

Unstable Babies
(n=16)

Gestation, median (IQR)
Birthweight, mean (SD)
Sex
Male
Female
Multiple births
Singleton
Multiple
Apgar 5 mins (median
IQR)
Maternal ethnicity
White
Black
Asian
Other
Antenatal steroids
Any

28.7 (25.7‐30.4)
1060 g (383)

30.5 (30.13‐31.08)
1366 g (242)

28 (25.78‐30.63)
1062 g (422)

Chorioamnionitis
(Unstable BCM,
n=13)
25.7 (24.8‐26.75)
821 g (241)

23 (59%)
16 (41%)

6 (60%)
4 (40%)

11 (69%)
5 (31%)

6 (46%)
7 (54%)

29 (73%)
10 (27%)
9 (7‐10)

5 (50%)
5 (50%)
10 (9‐10)

11 (69%)
5 (31%)
9 (7‐10)

13 (100%)

9 (23%)
20 (51%)
7 (18%)
3 (8%)

1 (10%)
4 (40%)
4 (40%)
1 (10%)

4 (25%)
10 (63%)
1 (6%)
1 (6%)

4 (31%)
6 (46%)
2 (15%)
1 (8%)

36 (92%)

10 (100%)

13 (81%)

13 (100%)

>24 hours before
delivery
None
Delivery by caesarean
Yes
No
Chorioamnionitis
Histologically confirmed
Microbiologically
confirmed sepsis (any
episode)

18 (46%)

6 (60%)

7 (44%)

5 (38%)

3 (8%)

0 (0%)

3 (19%)

0 (0%)

24 (62%)
15 (38%)
13 (33%)
12 (31%)
14/39 (36%)

10 (100%)
0 (0%)
0 (0%)

12 (75%)
4 (25%)
0 (0%)

0 (0%)

7 (44%)

2 (15%)
11 (85%)
13 (100%)
12 (92%)
7 (54%)

9 (8‐10)

Days antibiotics, median 15 (6‐22)
4 (3.75‐7.25)
19 (10.5‐29.25)
19 (14.5‐27.5)
(IQR)
Suspected GI pathology
7/39 (18%)
0 (0%)
5 (31%)
2 (15%)
(any episode) *
Days to full enteral
14 (11‐19)
12 (7‐14.5)
16.5 (11‐20.5)
15 (12.5‐21)
feeds**
Received any maternal
37/39 (95%)
10 (100%)
14 (87.5%)
13 (100%)
breast milk
Abnormalities on CrUSS
IVH***
6 (15%)
1 (10%)
2 (12.5%)
3 (23%)
HPI
2 (5%)
0
1 (6%)
1 (8%)
PVL
3 (8%)
0
1 (6%)
2 (15%)
Chronic lung
14 (36%)
0 (0%)
8 (50%)
6 (46%)
disease****
ROP*****
16 (10%)
1 (10%)
8 (50%)
7 (54%)
Table 2: Data are presented as means (standard deviation); medians (interquartile ranges); n=number and
percentages. *Suspected GI pathology is defined as ‘any abdominal concerns necessitating nil by mouth for more
than 5 days’. **Full enteral feeds defined as ‘the first day on which 100% of fluid volume was administered enterally’;
CRUSS=cranial ultrasound; ***IVH= intraventricular haemorrhage defined as ‘bleeding contained within and not
extending beyond the ventricular system’; HPI= haemorrhagic parenchymal infarction; PVL=periventricular
leukomalacia; ****CLD= chronic lung disease defined as ‘the need for supplemental oxygen at 36 weeks
postmenstrual age’; *****ROP=retinopathy of prematurity defined as ‘any stage ROP recorded on formal eye
examination’.

32 | P a g e

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
A

Figure 1

Postnatal Immune cell trajectories relative to their deviation,
at birth, from adult level
CXCL8-neg

Adaptive CXCL8-pos

Innate CXCL8-pos
-log10 p-value
15
10

Log2 deviation from adult levels

2.5

10
10
5
10

0.0

0
10

-2.5

-5.0

-0.5

0.0

0.5

Correlation coefficient with Age

***

Adult

1e+05

30

20

_

10

0
2

E

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Preterm baby

**

% CD161+ cells (of CD8 T cells)

60
50
40
30
20
10

6e+04

_

5e+04
4e+04
3e+04
2e+04

2

H

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

12

Preterm baby

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Preterm baby

***

2

20

_

10

20
10
0
6
8
10
4
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

12 Adult

***

Adult

_

80
70
60
50
40
30
20

2

12 Adult

J

% IFNγ+ CD4 T cells

Preterm baby

50

40
30

_

20
10

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

12 Adult

Adult

***

40
30
20

_

10

0
2

12 Adult

% CXCL8+ CD4 T cells

Adult

0
2

Preterm baby

0
4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Preterm baby

% IFNγ+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

30

12 Adult

10

I

40

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)
% IFNγ+ NK cells

Adult

30

Adult

_

50

10

G

90

60

_

20

12 Adult

50

70

30

90

Adult

80

40

100

2

*

Adult

0
2

% CD161+ CD8 T cells

Adult

% IFNγ+ γδ T cells

***

1e+04

0

0

% IFNγ+ cells (of γδ T cells)

7e+04

% CXCL8+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

% NKG2D+ cells (of NK cells)

_

70

100

8e+04

40

80

Preterm baby

9e+04

Adult

90

% NK cells

Adult

50

F

% NKG2D+ NK cells

100

Preterm baby

***

0e+00

12 Adult

D

HLADR MFI in Classical Monocytes

% NK cells (of Non T cells)

Preterm baby

HLADR MFI in classical monocytes

40
% CD19+ B cells (of live cells)

C

% B cells

% IFNγ+ cells (of NK cells)

B

2

4
6
8
10
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

12 Adult

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
B

A
Age (days)
10

C

30

Age (days)

Days Premature

Days Premature
20

Figure 2

40

10

20

30

40

110

90

100

80

70

110

90

100

80

70

10
5

0

−5

y

Distance Moved

Distance Moved

5
10

5

0

−5

−10

−10

−5
0
Distance Moved

5

40

60

80
100
Days Premature

120

−10
−10

−5

0

5

10

x

D
Activated

B cells

IFNγ+ CXCL8+

IFNγ+
CD4
T cells

IL-2+
CXCL8+ IL-2+
NK cells

CXCL8+ TNFα+

CXCL8+

IL-13+
Regulatory

Monocyte

TNFα+

CD8
T cells

Miscellaneous
DC
Proliferating

γδ T cells

E

Correlation between
CD161+ γδ T cells and IFNγ+ γδ T cells

Correlation between
CXCL8+ CD4 T cells and CXCL8+ CD8 T cells

Correlation between
IFNγ+ CXCL8- CD8 T cells and IFNγ+ γδ T cells

75

50

25

10

% CXCL8+ cells (of CD8 T cells)

% IFNγ+ CXCL8- cells (of CD8 T cells)

% CD161+ cells (of γδ T cells)

40

5

0
0

20
40
60
% IFNγ+ cells (of γδ T cells)

80

0

20
40
60
% IFNγ+ cells (of γδ T cells)

80

30

20

10

0
0

10

20
30
40
% CXCL8+ cells (of CD4 T cells)

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
A

Diversity Progression against time in the three clinical cohorts

Inverse Simpson Index

7.5

5.0

Classification
p<0.0001

Unstable BCM
Unstable
Stable

p<0.0001

2.5

p=0.49

0.0

0

20

40

80

60

Day of life

B

Stable

Unstable

Unstable BCM

100

100

75

75

75

% Relative Abundance

100

Taxon
50

50

50

25

25

25

Enterobacteriaceae
Bifidobacteriaceae
Veillonellaceae
Staphylococcaceae
Enterococcaceae
Clostridiaceae_[I]
Bacteroidaceae
Streptococcaceae
Other

0

0
0

4

8

12

16

20

24

28

32

36

40

0
0

44

4

8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76

Day of life

Enterobacteriaceae Proportional Abundance

C

Day of life

p=0.62

p=0.06

75

p=0.62
p=0.02

p=0.02
p=0.06

50

Classification
Unstable BCM
Unstable
Stable

25

0
0

20

40
Day of life

60

80

4

8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 48 52 56 60 64 68 72 76

Day of life

Enterobacteriaceae Progression against time in the three clinical cohorts
100

0

Figure 3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
A

B

Stable Vs Unstable

C

Stable Vs Unstable BCM

CD69+ CD4 T cells
Stable

0.1

0.0

PC2

PC2

0.0
−0.1

-0.1
−0.2
-0.2

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

−0.3

D

0.1

Unstable

**

0
−0.2

0.2

% CD69+ CD8 T cells

Stable

−0.1

0.0

E

F

% CD69+ γδ T cells

Unstable BCM

Stable

Unstable

Stable

Unstable BCM

100

90

90

90

80

80

60
50
40
30
20

70
60
50
40
30
20

10

10

0

0

% Ki67+ CD4 T cells

Stable
50 *

Unstable

% CD69+ cells (of NK cells)

70

% Intermediate Monocytes

***

Stable

20

10

Unstable

70
60
50
40
30
20
0

Stable

Unstable

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

K

% CD8α+ cells in Vδ2+ γδ T cells

Unstable BCM
100

90

90

% CD8α+ cells (of vδ2+ γδ T cells)

100
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Stable

*

Unstable

Unstable BCM

80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

20

I

FoxP3 MFI in Tregs

*

Unstable BCM

80

2 4 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 10 12 2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

% CD8α+ cells in Vδ1+ γδ T cells

30

**

10
0

J

40

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Stable

100
% CD14+ CD16+ Monohyctes
(of CD86+ Non T cells)

30

50

0

90
40

60

10

H

** **

Unstable BCM

70

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Unstable BCM

*

Unstable

100

% FoxP3 MFI (in FoxP3+ CD25+ Tregs)

80

G

% Ki67+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

% CD69+ NK cells

Sick BCM

100

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

% CD8α+ cells (of vδ1+ γδ T cells)

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

0.1

PC1

% CD69+ cells (of γδ T cells)

% CD69+ cells (of CD8+ T cells)

0.0
PC1

Unstable BCM

90

% CD69+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

0.1

−0.1

Unstable

100

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Unstable

**

Unstable BCM

5000

4000

3000

2000

1000
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

Figure 4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/720888; this version posted July 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.
A

TNFα expressing CD4+ T cells

B

C

IL-2 expressing CD4+ T cells

CXCL8 expressing CD4+ T cells

Stable
Unstable

Unstable BCM

Stable

90

80

80
% IL−2+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

90

% TNFα+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

100

70
60
50
40
30

Unstable BCM

50
40
30
20

10

10

2 4 6 8 10 12

Postnatal Age (Weeks)

D

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

F

CXCL8 expressing CD4+ T cells

*

Confirmed Confirmed Suspected
mixed
CONS
Infection

% TNFα+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

40

20

10

0

Confirmed
mixed

Stable

50

30

IL-2 expressing CD4+ T cells

TNFα expressing CD4+ T cells

**

Confirmed Suspected
CONS
Infection

100

100

90

90

80

80

70
60
50
40
30

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

Ecoli

60
50
40
30
20

10

10
0
2 4 6 8 1012

Postnatal Age (Weeks)
None

Confirmed Confirmed Suspected
mixed
CONS
Infection

70

20

0
2 4 6 8 1012

Stable

% IL−2+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

Stable

*

20

0

E

***

30

2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
2 4 6 8 10 12
Postnatal Age (Weeks)

2 4 6 8 10 12

Unstable BCM

10

0
2 4 6 8 10 12

Unstable

40

60

20

Stable

**

50

70

0

% CXCL8+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

Unstable

% CXCL8+ cells (of CD4+ T cells)

Stable

100

*

Group B streptococcus and CONS

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

Postnatal Age (Weeks)
Streptococcus Anginosis

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

2 4 6 8 1012

Postnatal Age (Weeks)
Coagulase negative staphylococcus (CONS)

Suspected

Figure 5

