bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Telomeric small RNAs in the genus Caenorhabditis

Stephen Frenk1,2, Evan H. Lister-Shimauchi and Shawn Ahmed1,2

1

Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

2

Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC, USA

To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: shawn@med.unc.edu

Running title: Caenorhabditis telomeric small RNAs
Keywords: small RNA, telomere, interstitial telomere sequence, ITS

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
Telomeric DNA is composed of simple tandem repeat sequences and has a G-rich strand that
runs 5' to 3' towards the chromosome terminus. Small RNAs with homology to telomeres
have been observed in several organisms and could originate from telomeres or from
interstitial telomere sequences (ITSs), which are composites of degenerate and perfect
telomere repeat sequences found on chromosome arms. We identified C. elegans small
RNAs composed of the Caenorhabditis telomere sequence (TTAGGC)n with up to three
mismatches, which might interact with telomeres. We rigorously defined ITSs for genomes of
C. elegans and for two closely related nematodes, C. briggsae and C. remanei. We found that
most telomeric small RNAs with mismatches originated from ITSs, which were depleted from
mRNAs and but were enriched in introns whose genes often displayed hallmarks of genomic
silencing. C. elegans small RNAs composed of perfect telomere repeats were very rare but
were increased by several orders of magnitude in C. briggsae and C. remanei. Major small
RNA species in C. elegans begin with a 5' guanine nucleotide, which was strongly depleted
from perfect telomeric small RNAs of all three Caenorhabditis species. Perfect telomeric small
RNAs corresponding to the G-rich strand of the telomere commonly began with 5' UAGGCU
and 5'UUAGGC, whereas C-rich strand RNAs commonly begin with 5’CUAAGC. In contrast,
telomeric small RNAs with mismatches had a mixture of all four 5' nucleotides. Together, our
results imply that perfect telomeric small RNAs have a mechanism of biogenesis that is
distinct from known classes of small RNAs and that a dramatic change in their regulation
occurred during recent Caenorhabditis evolution.

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction

Telomeres are repetitive sequences at the end of linear eukaryotic chromosomes that
possess a G-rich strand that runs 5’ to 3’ towards chromosome termini (Smogorzewska and
de Lange, 2004). These sequences play an essential role in the maintenance of genome
stability by protecting chromosomes ends from recognition by DNA damage response
pathways, thereby preventing chromosome fusions (Palm and de Lange, 2008). Due to the
end replication problem, telomeres are eroded with each cell division. Persistent telomere
erosion triggers DNA damage response activation and results in senescence. To counteract
telomere erosion, the reverse transcriptase telomerase uses an RNA template to add de novo
telomeric repeats to chromosome termini. Although telomerase is essential for maintenance
of proper germline function across generations, this enzyme is absent from most human
somatic cells. Somatic silencing of telomerase and associated telomere shortening represents
a barrier to tumorigenesis in large mammals (Gomes et al., 2011; Seluanov et al., 2007).
Telomere maintenance in around 90% of cancers is achieved through activation of
telomerase, while the remaining 10% utilize a telomerase-independent mechanism that is less
well understood known as Alternative Lengthening of Telomeres (ALT) (Pickett and Reddel,
2015).
The protective function of telomeres depends in part on binding of a protein complex
known as Shelterin, composed of POT1, TRF1, TRF2, TIN2, TPP1 and RAP1, that interacts
with single- (POT1) and double-stranded (TRF1 and TRF2) telomeric DNA to promote
telomere capping as well as the maintenance of a repressive chromatin environment (de
Lange, 2018; Dyer et al., 2017). Heterochromatin associated histone modifications such as
H3K9me3, H3k20me3 and hypoacetlyation of H3 and H4 are a common feature of telomeres
(Schoeftner and Blasco, 2010). Somewhat paradoxically, transcription by RNA polymerase II

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

has also been observed at telomeres, leading to formation of the G-rich telomere repeat
containing long non-coding RNA TERRA, which is composed of subtelomeric DNA
sequences and some perfect telomere repeats, as well as the less abundant C-rich antisense
telomeric transcript ARRET (Azzalin et al., 2007; Bah et al., 2012). TERRA expression is
upregulated at critically short and damaged telomeres, where it may recruit telomerase and
chromatin modifiers in order to promote telomere elongation and protect telomeres (Azzalin
and Lingner, 2015; Cusanelli et al., 2013). It has been observed that TERRA prominently
coats telomeres of the silent X chromosome in mammals and may promote X chromosome
inactivation, but also localizes to autosomal telomeres and to non-telomeric regions of the
genome (Chu et al., 2017; Schoeftner and Blasco, 2008; Zhang et al., 2009).
Silencing of certain repetitive regions of the genome such as pericentromeres have
been shown to require transcription of long non-coding transcripts that interact with
homologous small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) that are bound to Argonaute proteins (Holoch
and Moazed, 2015; Reinhart and Bartel, 2002). siRNAs can also promote mRNA destruction
or translational repression in the cytoplasm.
Endogenous small RNA pathways have been well characterized in the nemotode worm
Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) (Billi et al., 2014). Primary siRNAs can be created by
DCR-1, the C. elegans homologue of the highly conserved RNAse class III enzyme Dicer,
which cleaves double stranded RNA transcripts to create 26 nucleotide long siRNAs
beginning with a 5’ guanine nucleotide (26G RNAs) (Bernstein et al., 2001; Ketting et al.,
2001; Knight and Bass, 2001). These primary siRNAs are loaded onto Argonaute proteins
that bind to a target transcript through complementary base pairing, and then recruit RNA
dependent RNA polymerases to promote formation of 22 nucelotide long secondary RNAs
with a 5’ guanine (22G RNAs), which bear perfect complementarity to their targets. A distinct
class of germline primary siRNAs termed piRNAs are 21 nucleotide small RNAs with a 5’

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Uracil termed that are created from thousands of loci in the genome. piRNAs contribute to
genome defence by silencing non-self transcripts such as transposons (Batista et al., 2008;
Das et al., 2008; Shi et al., 2013; Wang and Reinke, 2008). piRNAs interact with the
conserved Argonaute PIWI and can bind target RNAs with up to 3 mismatches, thereby
triggering by recruitment of RDRPs and formation of 22G RNAs that are perfectly homologous
to their targets and promote genomic silencing, similar to secondary siRNA formation in
response to Dicer-dependent 26G primary siRNAs (Ruby et al., 2006; Shen et al., 2018;
Zhang et al., 2018).
Consistent with a potential role of TERRA in telomere maintenance, siRNAs with
homology to telomeres have been observed in a variety of organisms, where they may
contribute to telomere maintenance. Small RNAs produced from telomere repeat-containing
transcripts were found to promote DNA methylation at Arabidopsis telomeres (Vrbsky et al.,
2010). Telomeric small RNAs have also been detected in mouse embryonic stem cells (Cao
et al., 2009). Telomere dysfunction can induce production of telomeric siRNAs with perfect
homology to the vertebrate telomere repeat sequence (TTAGGC)n, which are created by
dsRNAs that arise from sites of DNA damage and are processsed by Dicer into siRNAs that
promote the DNA damage response (Rossiello et al., 2017). However, the origin of small
RNAs with homology to telomeres that are present under standard growth conditions of
wildtype metazoan cells is not well understood.
Interstitial telomere sequences (ITSs) are degenerate telomeric sequences that are
scattered along chromosome arms and are distinct from chromosome termini. A pioneering
study by Meyne et al. identified cytologically visible ITSs in 55 different vertebrate species
using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) (Lin and Yan, 2008; Meyne et al., 1990).
Azzalin et al. identified a number of ITS sites in the human genome by cloning methods and
found that ITSs could be divided into three categories representing different putative

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

mechanisms of origin: short, subtelomeric and fusion (Azzalin et al., 2001). Short ITSs are 24130bp in length and display few mismatches with perfect telomere sequence. The authors
suggested that these ITSs may be formed during DNA double-strand break repair.
Subtelomeric ITSs comprise longer, more degenerate repeats that are found close to
chromosome termini, and are likely to have originated from telomere recombination events.
Fusion ITSs are likely a consequence of ancestral head-to-head telomere fusion events.
Notably, only a single fusion-type ITS was identified in the human genome at 2q13, which led
to the creation of chromosome 2 from two ancestral Hominid chromosomes (JW et al., 1991).
A number of studies have suggested a link between ITS sites and genome instability
(Ashley and Ward, 1993; Bosco and de Lange, 2012; Kilburn et al., 2001; Lin and Yan, 2008).
High mutation rates were observed at a region of telomeric sequence that was inserted into a
yeast chromosome close to the left telomere (Aksenova et al., 2013; Moore et al., 2018).
Intriguingly, the types of mutation observed depended on the orientation of the telomeric
sequence. Insertion of the G-rich strand (with respect to the real left telomere on the
chromosome) resulted in a high rate of indels and gross chromosomal translocations and
inversions, while telomeric sequence inserted in the C-rich orientation experienced high rates
of repeat loss and gain (Aksenova et al., 2015). Although ITSs can promote genomic
instability, Shelterin components in mammals bind ITSs where they may act to stabilize these
sequences by preventing the formation of secondary structures that interfere with DNA
replication (Yang et al., 2011).
Inactivation of telomerase in C. elegans causes progressive sterility in the vast majority
of animals. However, a small number manage to reproduce indefinitely in the absence of
telomerase due to activation of ALT. In an analysis of stable C. elegans ALT strains, several
strains were shown to have amplified a region of DNA between a telomere and an ITS
sequence, which had then been trans-duplicated to the ends of the other chromosomes,

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

where it acted as a surrogate telomere (Seo et al., 2015). This event is believed to have
initiated from recombination between a critically shortened telomere and the ITS site,
indicating that the high degree of similarity of ITS sites and telomeres has the potential to
contribute to tumorogenesis and genome evolution by promoting a form of ALT-mediated
telomere maintenance. However, despite the presence of ITSs in diverse species, the
evolutionary origin and biological significance of these sequences remains mysterious.
Due to the combination of a wide availability of sequencing data and a genome that
has been fully sequenced and assembled end-to-end, C. elegans provides a highly
convenient model system in which to study small RNAs and genome biology. In this study, we
analyzed published C. elegans small RNA-seq datasets and found numerous examples of
small RNA species that map to perfect telomere sequence with up to three mismatches. We
found that the majority of these small RNAs map to ITS sites, which are enriched for
repressive chromatin marks and found mainly in the introns of protein-coding genes. We
show that the closely related nematodes C. briggsae and C. remanei possess less abundant
and generally more degenerate ITS sites than those in C. elegans, but display a substantially
higher abundance of small RNAs that map perfectly to telomeres. We speculate that telomeric
small RNAs may represent part of a functional pathway that has been significantly altered in
C. elegans but retained in closely related species.

Results

Identification of small RNAs with high levels of telomere homology
We interrogated 75 publicly available small RNA sequencing libraries created from RNA
isolated from various C. elegans strains and found rare reads that mapped perfectly to the C.
elegans telomere repeat (TTAGGC)n, occurring at a frequency of 1 per 10,000,000 reads

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(Fischer et al., 2011; Gent et al., 2010; Gu et al., 2009; Phillips et al., 2015; Phillips et al.,
2014; Sapetschnig et al., 2015; Seth et al., 2013) (Table S9). As piRNAs with up to 3
mismatches can target regions of the C. elegans genome for silencing (Bagijn et al., 2012),
we counted telomeric siRNAs with up to 3 mismatches and found that these were
substantially more abundant than those composed of perfect telomere repeat sequence (1
per 100,000) (FIg 1A). In total, 2352 distinct telomeric small RNA species were detected.
Telomeric siRNAs with zero to two mismatches were significantly more likely to be composed
of the telomeric G-strand sequence than would be expected by chance (p < 2.2e-16, binomial
test) (Fig 1D). The proportion of telomeric siRNAs with one to three mismatches beginning
with a G nucleotide was significantly greater than that for all siRNAs that could be mapped to
the genome (p < 1e-15, Fisher’s exact test for all comparisons) and the median length for
telomeric siRNAs with 1-3 mismatches RNAs was 22 nucleotides (Fig 1B,C). Therefore,
telomeric siRNAs with 1-3 mismatches are enriched for the effector 22G RNA species, which
has been established to promote either post-transcriptional or genomic silencing depending
on the Argonaute they associate with (Billi et al., 2014). In contrast, rare telomeric siRNAs
with 0 mismatches (perfect telomeric siRNAs) were not enriched for 22G RNAs but displayed
peak lengths of 18 and 23 nt.

ITS sites explain the origin of most telomeric small RNAs
Telomeric small RNAs could be divided into those that map to unique locations in the
genome, which amounted to 10% and 57% of telomeric small RNAs with 2 or 3 mismatches,
respectively, and whereas those that map to multiple locations, which amounted to 100% of
telomeric small RNAs with 0 or 1 mismatches and 90% and 33% of telomeric small RNAs with
2 or 3 mismatches, respectively. The overall mapping frequency of telomeric small RNAs

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

compares favorably with mapping frequency of all reads in a small RNA library, which
generally amounts to 75-80% in our experience.
As unique telomeric small RNA reads mapped to loci that were scattered along
chromosome arms, we reasoned that these loci may represent ITS sites that were previously
shown to be concentrated on C. elegans chromosomes arms, based on the Ce000094 repeat
sites that were automatically detected using the RECON algorithm (Bao and Eddy, 2002;
Lowden et al., 2011) (https://wormbase.org/). Although the Ce000094 motif corresponds to
telomeric DNA, we later noticed that there were many ITS sites that were covered only
partially by this motif or not at all. This is likely a consequence of the degeneracy of ITS sites,
which makes them challenging to detect de-novo using automated algorithms. In order to
more thoroughly map ITS sites genome-wide, we located all instances of the telomeric
hexanucleotide “TTAGGC” in the genome. We sought to capture perfect runs of telomere
repeats as well as more degenerate sequences consisting of clusters of perfect repeats
interspersed with non-telomeric sequence. TTAGGC hexanucleotides located on the same
strand and within 100 nucleotides of each other were merged to form ITS contigs, and contigs
that contained at least four perfect telomeric hexanucleotides were retained, resulting in 1229
ITS sites (Sup File 1).
ITS lengths ranged from 24 to 1204 nucleotides with a median length of 134
nucleotides (Fig 2F). ITS sites were found to be largely localized to the autosome arms, which
have been shown to be largely heterochromatic and enriched for repetitive sequences (Fig
2A) (Garrigues et al., 2015). There was a fivefold depletion of ITS sites on the X chromosome
(Fig 2B), consistent with lower levels of constitutive heterochromatin on this chromosome and
an enrichment for Polycomb marks that silence the X chromosome in germ cells (Gaydos et
al., 2012).

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Although the mechanism by which ITS sites are created is unclear, these could be
created by translocation of a telomere to an internal segment of the genome or by telomerase
activity that acts at a double-strand break. Therefore, ITS sites are likely to be initially
composed of perfect telomere repeats that degenerate over evolutionary time scales, such
that they accumulate mutations in the absence of selective pressure. To obtain an estimate of
the relative ages of ITS sites, we assigned a “homology score” to each site by performing
local alignment between the ITS site and perfect telomere sequence of the same strand and
length. The homology score was defined as the percent sequence identity between the two
sequences. Homology scores ranged from 28.6 to 100, with a median score of 84.2 (Fig 2G,
Sup File 1). Just over half (650) of ITSs had two or fewer consecutive perfect telomere
repeats, although 25 ITS sites contained 7-15 consecutive perfect telomere repeats (Table 1).
We found no obvious genome localization patterns in terms of homology score or sequence
length. ITS sites therefore represent abundant repetitive sequences displaying a broad range
of degeneracy (and therefore age) and genome localization patterns consistent with other
types of repetitive sequence (Garrigues et al., 2015; Ikegami et al., 2010).
The origin of ITS sites is poorly understood. One proposed mechanism for ITS
formation is the fusion of two chromosomes, although there currently exists evidence for only
one such event in the human genome (JW et al., 1991). We sought to determine whether
ancestral chromosome fusion events could account for the presence of ITSs in the C. elegans
genome. However, we could find no example of an ITS site arranged head-to-head, and
therefore conclude that ITS sites in the C. elegans genome are unlikely to arise as a result of
chromosome fusions.
To determine whether ITS sites are a source of telomeric small RNAs, we mapped all
small RNAs to the genome using a pipeline that assigns multi-mapping reads probabilistically
based on the local density of uniquely mapped reads (Axtell, 2014). 76%, 91%, 83% and 68%

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

of small RNAs mapping to telomeres with zero, one, two and three mismatches respectively
were assigned to ITS sites (Table 1), whereas 92% and 75% of uniquely mapping small RNA
reads with 2 or 3 mismatches respectively could be assigned to ITS sites. Although it is
impossible to determine whether perfect telomeric small RNAs originate from telomeres or
internal regions with certainty, these results suggest that such small RNAs are more likely to
be produced from internal genomic regions. This is because many ITS sites are in
heterochromatic segments of the genome and are surrounded by high densities of siRNAs,
whereas few siRNAs map closely to subtelomeres. Furthermore, we looked for uniquelymapping reads that overlapped with regions of perfect telomere repeat sequence of at least
30 bases in length, of which there were 95 in ITSs, and found 18 reads within internal regions,
while only three reads could be found that overlapped telomere-subtelomere boundaries. As
each ITS tract has two borders, this means that 18 small RNAs were present at these 190 ITS
tract borders (1%), whereas 3 siRNAs were present at 12 telomere-sub-telomere boundaries
(25%). These results suggest that perfect telomeric small RNAs could originate from either
telomeres or ITS sites.
We asked whether telomeric small RNA abundance varied across ITS sites. Due to the
uncertainties associated with multi-mapping reads, we decided to focus on the uniquelymapping subset of telomeric small RNAs with two or three mismatches. We could find no
strong correlation between telomere homology score and small RNA mapping frequency for
ITS (Spearman's ρ = 0.068), although the ITS sites with the highest telomeric small RNA
abundance had homology scores of around 80% and no telomeric small RNAs were found at
sites with scores less than 53.8% (Fig 3A). For example, all ITS tracts with >10 telomeric
small RNAs had homology scores of >76% (Table 3). The abundance of uniquely mapping
telomeric small RNAs correlated well with total small RNA abundance at an ITS tract
(Spearman's ρ = 0.70), indicating that ITS sites that produce high numbers of telomeric small

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RNAs are likely to be sites of high small RNA production in general. Of the top 10 ITSs with
the highest overall small RNA abundance, seven also displayed high telomeric small RNA
abundance. The remaining three ITSs that had no telomeric small RNAs assigned had
homology scores of less than 56%. We found one ITS site (ITS_60) which displayed an
unusually high frequency of small RNA mapping, 5- to 13-fold greater than other ITS tracts
with abundant siRNAs and accounting for 43% and 18% of total telomeric small RNAs with
two and three mismatches respectively (Fig 3, Table 3). This ITS is intergenic and fully
overlaps two annotated converging non-coding RNAs, whose transcripts could anneal to
produce dsRNA that can be processed into abundant ITS siRNAs. (Fig 3B). As telomeric
small RNAs did not map exclusively to ITS sites, we also looked at the genome-wide
distribution of telomeric small RNAs (Fig 3C). We found three peaks of high coverage that did
not overlap any ITS sites. Two of these, located on the left arms of chromosomes III and V,
contained two consecutive perfect telomeric repeats and were assigned a number of reads
with two or three mismatches to telomeres, but none with zero or one. The other peak,
located on the right arm of chromosome I, contained three consecutive perfect telomere
repeats next to a degenerate one, narrowly missing the criteria for being detected as an ITS
site. Therefore, telomeric small RNAs that do not originate from ITS sites are likely to
originate from non-ITS regions which happen to have short stretches of telomeric DNA.

ITS sites are mainly found in introns and are enriched for repressive chromatin marks
We looked for overlap between ITS sites and annotated genomic features and found that they
were enriched in introns and in intergenic sequences. Surprisingly, 796 ITS sites (63% of
total) were located in introns of protein coding genes (Fig 2C). In terms of sequence
coverage, this represents almost a two-fold enrichment for ITS sequence at introns based on
the proportion of the genome that is comprised of intronic sequence. In contrast, only two ITS

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sites (0.16%) were found in protein-coding exons, indicating that ITS sites are depleted from
exome, possibly because they are deleterious for mRNA expression. Consistently, ITS sites
were also significantly depleted from both 5’ and 3’ UTRs. Such a pattern could be a general
feature of blocks of DNA comprised largely of degenerate hexanucleotide repeats. To test
this, we repeated the ITS detection pipeline with 100 random hexanucleotide combinations.
For each hexamer, we defined degenerate repeat sites using the same method used to detect
ITS sites and looked for overlap between these sites and annotated genomic features. The
simulated repeat sites did not show an overall enrichment at introns or depletion at exons (Fig
2D), indicating that this pattern of localization is specific to ITS sites. Genes containing
intronic ITS sites were not significantly enriched for any GO terms.
Features of eukaryotic chromatin such as histone modifications and nucleosome
occupancy drive spatio-temporal regulation of genomic regions. Ho et al. employed a hidden
Markov model based algorithm to classify chromatin into a series of “states” based on the
integration of various CHIP-seq and microarray datasets (Ho et al., 2014). The 16 states were
grouped into six categories: promoter, enhancer, gene body, Polycomb-repressed,
heterochromatin, and weak or low signal. We assigned chromatin states to each ITS
sequence using the C. elegans dataset. To determine statistically significant enrichment for
chromatin states, we performed 1000 simulations in which a new set of 1219 sequences with
the same length distribution as the ITS sequences was randomly selected from the genome
and assigned chromatin states. Both intronic and intergenic ITS sites were enriched two to
four-fold for Polycomb-repressed chromatin states in both the early embryo and at the L3
larval stage of development relative to the corresponding simulated sites (p < 0.0003 for all
classes), with the highest enrichment in the L3 stage (Fig 2E, Table S1). Intronic but not
intergenic ITS sites were enriched two-fold for heterochromatin chromatin states (p = 0.008
and 0.02 for early embryo and L3 respectively) and were depleted for enhancer chromatin

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

states. The chromatin state of intronic ITSs matched that of the nearest exon in over 99% of
cases for both early embryo and L3, indicating that the chromatin environment of intronic ITSs
is almost always shared by the entire gene. Intergenic ITS sites were enriched 1.5-fold and
two-fold for enhancer states in early embryo and L3 larvae respectively (p < 0.00048, p =
0.0003 for L3 larvae and early embryo respectively). We looked at the genes most proximal
to intergenic ITSs with enhancer chromatin states but found no significantly enriched GO
terms amongst these genes. Both intronic and intergenic ITS sites were strongly depleted for
promoter chromatin states at both stages (p < 0.001 in each case). We found no significant
relationship between chromatin state and proportion of ITSs that produce at least five small
RNAs (p = 0.1, Chi Square test for both early embryo and L3 stages). We conclude that ITS
sites are generally associated with repressive chromatin, that intronic ITS sites may promote
repressive chromatin formation via heterochromatin or Polycomb pathways, but that some
intergenic ITS sites may possess enhancer function.

C. briggsae and C. remanei ITS sites are less common and more degenerate than those
of C. elegans
We sought to gain insights into the evolutionary conservation of ITS sites and the relationship
between ITS sites and small RNA production in nematodes. C. briggsae is one of the closest
known living relatives of C. elegans, and diverged from C. elegans between 18-100 million
years ago (Cutter, 2008; Stein et al., 2003). It is physically virtually indistinguishable from C.
elegans and similarly reproduces through selfing. C. remanei is another close relative of C.
elegans. Although C. briggsae and C. remanei may have shared a recent common ancestor
that diverged from C. elegans, C. remanei reproduces by gonochoristic male-female sexual
reproduction, whereas C. elegans and C. briggsae are both hermaphroditic selfers (Fierst et
al., 2015).

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

We applied the same method for detecting ITS sites in C. briggsae and C. remanei and
found only 372 and 292 sites respectively, less than one third of the number found in C.
elegans in each case. ITS sites in C. briggsae and C. remanei were significantly more
divergent than those from C. elegans, with median homology scores of 49.5 and 57.1 (p <
2.2e-16, Mann-Whitney U test for both comparisons) (Fig 4A), while the median length for ITS
sites was slightly higher for C. briggsae and C. remanei at 206 (p < 2.2e-16, Mann-Whitney U
test) and 178 nucleotides (p = 6.058e-09, Mann-Whitney U test), respectively (Fig 4B).
Interestingly, although 93% and 57% of ITSs in C. briggsae and C. remanei contained no
consecutive telomere repeats, both species possessed a handful of 36-228 nucleotide ITSs
with perfect telomere homology (Table 1, Sup file 1). Although C. remanei had the longest
perfect telomere tracts of the three species, C. remanei and C. briggsae possessed few ITS
tracts with long stretches of perfect telomere repeats in comparison to C. elegans (Table 1).
All three nematode genomes showed an intron bias for ITS sites, which in comparison to C.
elegans was stronger for C. briggase and weaker for C. remanei. (Fig 4C, D). It was not
possible to determine an enhancer bias, because the other genomes have not been
annotated for this feature.
To gain insights into the evolutionary history of ITSs across different species, we
looked for intronic ITSs that are shared within orthologous genes. We could not identify genes
for which orthologues between all three species contained ITS sites. We performed pairwise
comparisons between the three nemotode species and found a handful of genes in each case
for which orthologous genes between the two species contained ITS sites in both species,
which we termed “shared” ITS sites as opposed to “unique” sites (Fig 4E, Table S2). We
found that the median score was slightly but significantly lower for shared sites compared with
unique sites in C. elegans (78.7 versus 84, p = 0.008443, Mann-Whitney U test), although no
significant difference was noted for C. briggsae or C. remanei (Figure S1). Notably, there

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

were no shared ITS sites with scores greater than 94.4%, consistant with unique ITS sites
having been formed more recently in evolution. We performed GO term analysis on C.
elegans genes orthologous of C. briggsae and C. remanei genes that contain ITSs. The C.
briggsae gene set was enriched for GO terms related to reproduction cell cycle and organelle
organization. No significant GO terms were enriched in the C. remanei gene set. Therefore,
the mechanism of ITS formation is ancient in origin but ITSs themselves are divergent among
nematode species, suggesting that a possible function of ITS tracts in regulation of chromatin
if present diverges rapidly between species.

Telomeric small RNAs are more abundant in C. elegans relatives
We then interogated small RNA libraries in C. briggsae and C. elegans (Shi et al., 2013) and
looked for small RNAs that map to telomeres. The same dataset contained a C. elegans
library, which we also analyzed as a control. Consistent with our previous analysis, reads
mapping perfectly to telomeres were exceedingly rare in the C. elegans libraries; three were
detected in hermaphrodites, one in embryos and none in males, corresponding to a total of
around one read per 10,000,000 small RNA reads. Strikingly, libraries from C. briggsae and
C. remanei contained several orders of magnitude more perfect telomeric small RNAs
compared with C. elegans (Fig 5A, Sup file 2). Perfect telomeric small RNAs were detected at
an abundance of more than 22 per million in C. briggsae embryos and mixed male/female C.
remanei adults. The C. elegans perfect telomeric small RNAs detected in control libraries
from the briggsae and remanei datasets showed the same G-rich strand bias as found in the
libraries described earlier. However, the C. briggsae and C. remanei libraries showed a strong
bias for the C-rich strand bias for siRNAs composed perfect telomere repeats (Fig 5B).
Despite this strong distinction in strand bias, perfect telomeric small RNAs from all three
species showed a striking depletion of perfect telomeric small RNAs species that begin with a

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

5' G, whereas abundant levels of small RNAs with a 5’ guanine were observed for telomeric
siRNAs with mismatches.
If the perfect telomeric siRNAs are split into G- and C-strand categories, the G-rich
RNAs from all three species were enriched for RNAs beginning with 5’ UAGGCU or
5'UUAGGC, ranging in size from 18-29 nucleotides. The most abundant sRNAs from all three
species were 23 nt RNA UUAGGCUUAGGCUUAGGCUUAGG and 22nt RNA
UAGGCUUAGGCUUAGGCUUAGG (Fig 6). On the other hand, C-rich telomeric RNAs of C.
briggsae and C. remanei species showed enrichment for 22 nucleotide perfect telomeric small
RNAs beginning with a C (Fig. 5C,D) of 30% and 32%, respectively. Most perfect C-rich
telomeric RNAs both C. briggsae and C. remanei began with 5’ CUAAGC and ranged from
18-24 nt in length, with the most abundant C-rich RNA being the 22 nucleotide sequence
CUAAGCCUAAGCCUAAGCCUAA, which comprised 22% and 29% of all sequences for C.
briggsae and C. remanei respectively (Table S2). This sequence reflects the majority of 22 nt
perfect telomeric small RNAs for each species (52% and 57%, respectively). Given that there
are only six permutations of a perfect telomeric sequence of a given length, each permutation
would be expected to occur at a probability of 1/6 if the sequence distribution was random.
We conclude that the general depletion of 5’G nucleotides from perfect telomeric siRNAs can
be largely explained by the fact that G-rich RNAs commonly begin with 5’UAGGCU and 5'
UUAGGC, whereas C-rich RNAs commonly begin with 5’CUAAGC (Fig. 6 and Table S2).
Due to the relatively small number of available small RNA libraries for C. briggsae and
C. remanei and the fact that telomeres have not been assembled in the reference genomes
for these species, we could not make inferences about whether telomeric small RNAs were
more likely to originate from telomeres or ITSs based on siRNAs that map to borders of
perfect telomere repeat tracts. If perfect telomeric small RNAs originate from ITS sites, an
increase in abundance for these RNAs could be due to an increase in the amount of ITS

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sequence that is capable of producing them. However, the C. elegans genome contains a
combined total of 3666 bases of perfect telomere existing in stretches of at least 30
nucleotides in length, compared with 1596 for C. briggsae and 708 for C. remanei, indicating
that increased levels of perfect telomeric ITS sequence cannot account for the increase in
perfect telomeric small RNA abundance. We conclude that the composition of telomeric small
RNAs in C. elegans has diverged substantially from its close relatives, but that both classes of
small RNAs are dramatically depleted for 5' G RNA species, which could reflect either a
toxicity of this species or its mechanism of biogenesis.
Argonaute proteins can promote the biogenesis of specific classes of small RNAs. For
example, ALG-3 and ALG-4 associate with 26G RNAs and PRG-1/Piwi associate with 21U
RNAs, whose levels are dramatically reduced in response to deficiency for prg-1 (Batista et
al., 2008; Das et al., 2008; Han et al., 2009; Ruby et al., 2006; Vasale et al., 2010). We
studied small RNAs that immunoprecipitate with Argonaute proteins PRG-1, WAGO-1,
HRDE-1 and CSR-1 (Ashe et al., 2012; Batista et al., 2008; Buckley et al., 2012; Claycomb et
al., 2009; Das et al., 2008; Gu et al., 2009). Perfect telomeric small RNAs were exceedingly
rare in the input RNA datasets, as expected, and we found no enrichment for C- or G-strand
telomeric RNAs in any IP dataset (Table S3). However, these datasets revealed the only
three C. elegans examples that we observed of the major C-strand RNA species found in C.
briggsae and C. remanei, 23 nt 5’ CUAAGC RNA. The IP datasets brought the total number
of C. elegans C-rich telomeric RNAs to 14 (Fig. 6, Tables S2 and S3). Significantly numbers
of telomeric small RNAs with mismatches were associated with PRG-1, WAGO-1, HRDE-1
and CSR-1 Argonaute proteins.

Evolution of telomeric small RNAs

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Perfect telomeric siRNAs have been previously reported to associate with the
Tetrahymena Argonaute protein Twi10, were of lengths 23-24nt and 33-36nt and all
possessed the sequence 5’UGGGGU (Couvillion et al., 2009), potentially similar to the 5’
UAGGCU G-rich RNAs that were present in Caenorhabditis species. Telomeric siRNAs have
been previously reported to be rare in mammals, where they may promote the response to
DNA damage at telomeres. We therefore examined ~650,000,000 reads in 77 small RNA
libraries from mouse and found 156, 56, 88 and 860 telomeric reads with 0, 1, 2 and 3
mismatches, respectively (Tables S5-S6,S9) (Manakov et al., 2015; Pandey et al., 2013;
Watanabe et al., 2015; Wenda et al., 2017). Perfect telomeric siRNAs occurred at a frequency
of ~1 in 4,170,000 reads and were therefore almost as rare of C. elegans perfect telomeric
siRNAs. G-rich perfect telomeric siRNA were also more common in mammalian telomeric
siRNAs with the most abundant beginning with 5’ GUUAGG and were 19 and 23 nt in length
(Tables S7). The most common C-rich telomeric siRNA species from mammals begin with
5’UAACCC and were 24, 28 and 30 nt in length (Table S8). Other permutations of 5’ ends
were represented for both G- and C-rich perfect telomeric RNAs from mammals.
We speculated that the striking difference in telomeric small RNA composition between
C. elegans and its relatives could occur in response to a functional difference in telomere
biology between these species. The C. elegans shelterin complex contains the OB-fold
containing proteins POT-1 and POT-2, and mutation of either pot-1 or pot-2 results in
successive telomere elongation over multiple generations (Raices et al., 2008; Shtessel et al.,
2013). Variants in the pot-2 gene have also been found to have a prominent effect on
telomere length in wild C. elegans strains, suggesting that this protein may affect fitness in the
wild (Cook et al., 2016). A third C. elegans homolog of human Pot1, MRT-1,is required for
telomerase activity (Cook et al., 2016). We performed tBLASTX searches for orthologues of
the POT-2 protein in C. briggsae and C. remanei genomes, respectively. Surprisingly, we

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

found that the reference genomes of C. briggsae and C. remanei do not contain pot-2
homologues. Instead, these species each posses two copies of MRT-1, which has an
SNM1DNA interstrand crosslink repair nuclease fused to the POT-2 OB-fold protein (FIg. 4F)
(Meier et al., 2009). It is possible that the absence of pot-2 or presence of an extra mrt-1
paralogue in C. briggsae and C. remanei could represent a fundamental difference in
telomere biology that is related to the increased abundance of perfect telomeric small RNAs
in these species.
We examined telomeres of several wild isolates of C. briggsae and C. remanei and
found that the AF16 strain that has high levels of perfect telomeric siRNAs had elongated
telomeres, whereas the other strains examined had generally short telomeres, similar in size
to those of C. elegans. However, several C. briggsae and C. remanei strains possessed weak
telomeric DNA signals that failed to migrate into the gel and that ran at limit mobility, which
are not observed in the genomic DNA from the Bristol N2 wildtype C. elegans strain, but
commonly occur in genomic DNA from C. elegans strains of trt-1 mutants whose telomeres
are maintained by the telomerase-independent telomere maintenance pathway ALT (Fig. 7)
(Cheng et al., 2012).

Discussion
Small RNAs have been shown to occur at telomeres in several different organisms (Couvillion
et al., 2009; Rossiello et al., 2017; Vrbsky et al., 2010). We interrogated a number of
published C. elegans small RNA sequencing datasets and found rare examples of small
RNAs mapping perfectly to telomeres as well as more abundant species mapping to
telomeres with up to three mismatches. Telomeric small RNAs with an increasing number of
mismatches correlated with an increasing enrichment for 22G small RNA species, which
represent secondary 'effector' siRNA molecules that are produced de novo by RNA-

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

dependent RNA polymerases during both exogenous and endogenous RNA inteference. All
telomeric small RNAs mapping to telomeres with zero or one mismatches and the majority of
species with two or three mismatches could be mapped to ITS sites using a method that
randomly distributes non-unique reads, suggesting that ITS sites could be responsible for the
formation of perfect telomeric small RNAs. However, mapping of siRNAs to borders of ITS
tracts and of telomeres suggested that while long stretches of perfect telomere repeats at
either ITS tracts or at telomeres can give rise to siRNAs, telomeres could represent the more
abundant source of perfect telomeric small RNAs. Perfect telomeric small RNAs that are
created from ITS tracts might possess characteristics of small RNAs derived from ITS tracts,
such as beginning with any 5' nucleotide, which could explain the range of 5' nucleotides that
were observed for perfect G- or C-strand telomeric small RNAs.
Strikingly, perfect telomeric small RNAs were substantially more abundant in C.
briggsae and C. remanei, whereas telomeric small RNAs with mismatches were generally of
comparable abundance to C. elegans. However, perfect telomere repeat sequences within
ITSs were depleted in C. briggsae and C. remanei relative to C. elegans (Table 1), suggesting
that telomeres rather than perfect telomere sequence within ITS tracts are likely to be the
source of the majority of perfect telomeric small RNAs. In parallel with their altered level of
abundance, perfect telomeric small RNAs of C. briggsae and C. remanei displayed a
substantial bias for being composed of the C-rich strand, which contrasts from the G-rich bias
of small RNAs from C. elegans. The overrepresentation of C-rich telomeric small RNAs in C.
briggsae and C. remanei is puzzling, possibly reflecting a change to the mechanism of
telomeric small RNA biogenesis. In this regard, the C-rich telomere small RNA species would
be complementary to the telomeric non-coding RNA TERRA, which is considered to be the
most abundant telomeric RNA (Azzalin and Lingner, 2015). We note that mammalian
telomeric small RNAs were more frequently composed of the G-rich telomeric sequence and

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

that their levels were very low, as observed for C. elegans. Together, our results argue that
small RNA classes that are very rare may be functionally significant, which is consistent with
a proposed role for telomeric small RNAs in responding to DNA damage at mammalian
telomeres (Rossiello et al., 2017).
Perfect telomeric G-rich RNAs from all three Caenorhabditis species commonly began
with 5’UAGGCU and 5' UUAGGC. C-rich telomeric small RNAs of C. briggsae and C. remanei
were enriched for 5' ends that began with 5’CUAAGC, which occurred at 6 of 14 in C. elegans
C-rich RNAs (Fig. 6). Despite having prominent 5' end sequences, both G- and C-rich
telomeric RNAs displayed a wide range of lengths, suggesting that they may have a common
mechanism of biogenesis that may be distinct from other known C. elegans pathways that
often display pronounced enrichment for a discrete RNA length. Perhaps consistently,
Tetrahymena possesses telomeric small RNAs with 5' UGGGGU ends that also displayed a
range of sizes (Couvillion et al., 2009). While we did not observe consistent 5' sequences for
mammalian perfect telomeric small RNAs, these were biased towards the G-rich telomeric
siRNAs and were extremely rare, as observed for C. elegans telomeric small RNAs. We
found that 3' ends for major species of G-rich small RNAs for Caenorhabditis species and
mammals aligned perfectly with the 5' end of the C-rich DNA base at the chromosome
terminus (Fig. 8).
Given that C. briggsae and C. remanei are more closely related to each other than to
C. elegans, we examined their genomes and found consistent loss of the POT-2 protein that
represses telomerase activity and ALT in C. elegans. Some wild isolates of C. elegans have
long telomeres (Raices et al., 2005), and this is sometimes due to a loss of function mutation
in pot-2 (Cook et al., 2016). We examined telomeric DNA from several wild isolates of C.
briggsae and C. remanei and found it to be distinct from Bristol N2 C. elegans DNA in that
minor fraction of their telomeres adopted were long or unusually structured, similar to what is

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

observed in telomerase-negative strains where ALT is active. Together, there results suggest
that either loss of pot-2 or high levels of telomeric small RNAs is associated with ALT-like
telomeric DNA observed in C. briggsae and C. remanei strains. It is possible that loss of POT2 in C. elegans promotes turnover of telomeric small RNAs or that the second MRT-1
homolog of C. briggsae and C. remanei promotes biogenesis of telomeric siRNAs. Both POT2 and MRT-1 have OB2-folds that are predicted to interact with 3' ends of single-stranded
telomeric DNA (Lei et al., 2003), and Argonaute proteins possesses a PAZ domain that uses
a variant OB fold to interact with the 3' termini of single-stranded RNA (Song et al., 2003).
We found that ITS sites are a shared feature amongst close relatives of C. elegans,
although their compositions bare some striking differences. ITSs in both C. briggsae and C.
remanei are rarer and generally more degenerate than in C. elegans, although both species
contain examples of more recently created ITS sites with long stretches of perfect telomere
homology. It is intriguing that there should be such a discrepancy in ITS divergence between
these species, and this observation suggests ITS tract creation may be under selective
pressures. Although it may be a coincidence that perfect telomeric small RNAs are far more
abundant in C. briggsae and C. remanei, it is possible that these RNAs are functionally linked
to ITS formation and/or evolution. For example, perfect telomeric small RNAs may actively
inhibit formation or expansion of ITS sites, meaning that their reduced levels in C. elegans
has led to an altered landscape of ITSs in the C. elegans genome, many of which have been
formed relatively recently.
ITS sites have been observed in number of different species but have not been
comprehensively characterized within a fully assembled metazoan genome. We located over
one thousand ITS sites in the C. elegans genome and found a conspicuous depletion of ITS
sites at exons and UTRs and enrichment at introns. This localization pattern is not a general
feature of hexanulceotide repeats, and is suggestive of specific formation mechanisms and/or

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

selection pressures involved in ITS formation. These data suggest that ITS sites may be toxic
to mRNAs, possibly because RNA composed of telomere repeats may form high order
structures such as G-quadruplexes (Fay et al., 2017), and may also contribute to intron
evolution. Although the origin of ITSs is uncertain, our data suggest that these genome
sequences may function to promote gene silencing when in introns and to promote gene
expression during development when in enhancers. Alternatively, it is possible that new ITS
sites are created in regions of the genome that are silenced or heterochromatic, and that their
association with silencing marks is a consequence of their mechanism of biogenesis. Given
the abundance of telomeric siRNAs with mismatches that map to ITS tracts and the depletion
of ITSs from 3’UTRs, we favor the possibility that ITS tracts may actively promote
transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene silencing, a topic that could be addressed by
nuclease-mediated genome engineering. Although telomerase generally functions at
telomeres, there is evidence to suggest that its reverse transcriptase activity can result in the
insertion of telomeric sequence double-strand breaks, although this generally results in the
creation of a new telomere (Churikov and Geli, 2017). Therefore, ITSs may represent a
contribution to intron and enhancer evolution by the telomerase enzyme.
We found that ITS sites are a shared feature amongst close relatives of C. elegans,
although their compositions bare some striking differences. ITSs in both C. briggsae and C.
remanei are rarer and generally more degenerate than in C. elegans, although both species
contain examples of ITS sites with perfect telomere homology. It is intriguing that there should
be such a discrepancy in ITS divergence between these species, and this observation
suggests differing selective pressures. Although it may be a coincidence that perfect telomeric
small RNAs are far more abundant in C. briggsae and C. remanei, it is also possible that
these RNAs are functionally linked to ITS formation and/or evolution. Telomeric small RNAs
may actively inhibit formation or expansion of ITS sites, meaning that their very low levels in

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

C. elegans could have led to an increasing number of ITSs in the C. elegans genome, many
of which have been formed relatively recently.

Materials and Methods

Analysis of high throughput sequencing data
Publicly available RNA-seq datasets were download from the Gene Expression Omnibus
(https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) (see supplemental file 3 for library information). Adapter
trimming was performed as required using the bbduk.sh script from the bbmap suite3 and
custom scripts. Reads were then converted to fasta format and mapped to the C. elegans
genome (WS251) using Butter (https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/007427v1). To detect
telomere-mapping sRNAs, reads were mapped to seven repeats of perfect telomere
sequence (TTAGGC) with Bowtie (Langmead et al., 2009), allowing for up to three
mismatches. Sequence pipelines were built using the Snakemake framework (Koster and
Rahmann, 2012) .

Genomewide mapping of ITS sites
Bowtie was used to find all instances of the TTAGGC hexamer sequence in the genome.
Hexamers located within 100 nucleotides of each other and situated on the same strand were
merged into clusters using bedtools (Quinlan and Hall, 2010) and clusters containing four or
TTAGGC hexamers were retained. Telomeres or potential telomeres, defined as any ITS that
begins or ends within 50 nucleotides of the end of a contig, were removed. In the cases of
clashes in which ITSs on opposite strands overlap with one another, the ITS site with the
most repeats was retained. Homology scores were assigned to the final set of ITS sites by

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

performing local sequence alignment between each ITS and a stretch of telomere sequence
of the same length using the EMBOSS water algorithm
http://emboss.sourceforge.net/apps/release/6.6/emboss/apps/water.html.

The method was performed on the C. elegans (WS251) C. briggsae (WS263) and C. remanei
(WS263) genomes.

Analysis of genomic features at ITS sites
Genomic features such as introns, exons etc. were assigned to ITS sites using the
GenomicRanges R package [23950696]. Assignment of a particular genomic feature required
that at least 50% of the length of the ITS site overlapped with this feature.

Chromatin state data was obtained from
http://compbio.med.harvard.edu/modencode/webpage/hihmm/. Chromatin states were
assigned to ITS sites using bedtools, requiring that at least 50% of the length of the ITS
overlap with the particular chromatin state. To determine enrichment of particular chromatin
states in the ITS set, 10000 simulations were performed in which the ITS set was permuted
using bedtools shuffle, resulting in a set of random genomic regions with the same lengths as
the real ITS set. The regions were divided into intergenic and intronic regions and were
assigned chromatin states. Enrichment for a particular chromatin state was calculated by
dividing the number of ITS sites with that chromatin state by the average number of sites with
the same state in the simulated data. P-values were obtained by determining the percentage
of simulations in which the number of sites that were assigned a particular chromatin state
was equal to or more (for enrichment) or equal to or fewer (for depletion) than the real ITS
set. P-values were adjusted using Benjamini–Hochberg procedure (FDR). Given that 10000

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

simulations were performed, the rarest possible event that can be detected is one that occurs
one in 10000 simulations, corresponding to a rate of 0.0001. After Benjamini–Hochberg
correction, this value becomes 0.00048. Therefore, “p < 0.00048” was assigned in the cases
in which the number of ITS sites with a particular chromatin state was more extreme than any
of the 10000 simulations.

Lists of orthologous genes between C. elegans, C. briggsae and C. remanei were obtained
from Parasite.

Statistics and data visualization
Analysis of sequencing data was performed using the R statistical computing environment.
Genome regions were visualized using the Gviz R package (Hahne and Ivanek, 2016) . GO
term enrichment analysis was performed using the RDAVIDWebService R package (Fresno
and Fernandez, 2013).

Southern Blotting
Genomic DNA was prepared from C. elegans strain Bristol N2, C. remanei strains PB4641,
EM464 and SB146, and C. briggsae strains MK104 and AF16, which were grown at 20oC on
NGM plates. Southern blotting was performed using genomic DNA prepared from a Gentra kit
and a digoxygenin-labelled TTAGGC probe, as previously described (Meier et al., 2009).

References

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Askenova, A.Y., Greenwell, P.W., Dominska, M., Shishkin, A.A., Kim, J.C., Petes, T.D., and
Mirkin, S.M. (2013). Genome rearrangements caused by interstitial telomeric sequences in
yeast. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, 19866-19871.
Aksenova, A.Y., Han, G., Shishkin, A.A., Volkov, K.V., and Mirkin, S.M. (2015). Expansion of
Interstitial Telomeric Sequences in Yeast. Cell Rep 13, 1545-1551.
Ashe, A., Sapetschnig, A., Weick, E.M., Mitchell, J., Bagijn, M.P., Cording, A.C., Doebley,
A.L., Goldstein, L.D., Lehrbach, N.J., Le Pen, J., et al. (2012). piRNAs Can Trigger a
Multigenerational Epigenetic Memory in the Germline of C. elegans. Cell 150, 88-99.
Ashley, T., and Ward, D.C. (1993). A "hot spot" of recombination coincides with an interstitial
telomeric sequence in the Armenian hamster. Cytogenet Cell Genet 62, 169-171.
Axtell, M.J. (2014). Butter: High precision genomic alignment of small RNA-seq data.
bioRXIV.
Azzalin, C.M., and Lingner, J. (2015). Telomere functions grounding on TERRA firma. Trends
Cell Biol 25, 29-36.
Azzalin, C.M., Nergadze, S.G., and Giulotto, E. (2001). Human intrachromosomal telomericlike repeats: sequence organization and mechanisms of origin. Chromosoma 110, 75-82.
Azzalin, C.M., Reichenbach, P., Khoriauli, L., Giulotto, E., and Lingner, J. (2007). Telomeric
repeat containing RNA and RNA surveillance factors at mammalian chromosome ends.
Science 318, 798-801.
Bagijn, M.P., Goldstein, L.D., Sapetschnig, A., Weick, E.M., Bouasker, S., Lehrbach, N.J.,
Simard, M.J., and Miska, E.A. (2012). Function, targets, and evolution of Caenorhabditis
elegans piRNAs. Science 337, 574-578.
Bah, A., Wischnewski, H., Shchepachev, V., and Azzalin, C.M. (2012). The telomeric
transcriptome of Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Nucleic Acids Res 40, 2995-3005.

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Bao, Z., and Eddy, S.R. (2002). Automated de novo identification of repeat sequence families
in sequenced genomes. Genome Res 12, 1269-1276.
Batista, P.J., Ruby, J.G., Claycomb, J.M., Chiang, R., Fahlgren, N., Kasschau, K.D., Chaves,
D.A., Gu, W., Vasale, J.J., Duan, S., et al. (2008). PRG-1 and 21U-RNAs interact to form the
piRNA complex required for fertility in C. elegans. Mol Cell 31, 67-78.
Bernstein, E., Caudy, A.A., Hammond, S.M., and Hannon, G.J. (2001). Role for a bidentate
ribonuclease in the initiation step of RNA interference. Nature 409, 363-366.
Billi, A.C., Fischer, S.E., and Kim, J.K. (2014). Endogenous RNAi pathways in C. elegans.
WormBook, 1-49.
Bosco, N., and de Lange, T. (2012). A TRF1-controlled common fragile site containing
interstitial telomeric sequences. Chromosoma 121, 465-474.
Buckley, B.A., Burkhart, K.B., Gu, S.G., Spracklin, G., Kershner, A., Fritz, H., Kimble, J., Fire,
A., and Kennedy, S. (2012). A nuclear Argonaute promotes multigenerational epigenetic
inheritance and germline immortality. Nature 489, 447-451.
Cao, F., Li, X., Hiew, S., Brady, H., Liu, Y., and Dou, Y. (2009). Dicer independent small
RNAs associate with telomeric heterochromatin. RNA 15, 1274-1281.
Cheng, C., Shtessel, L., Brady, M.M., and Ahmed, S. (2012). Caenorhabditis elegans POT-2
telomere protein represses a mode of alternative lengthening of telomeres with normal
telomere lengths. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 7805-7810.
Chu, H.P., Cifuentes-Rojas, C., Kesner, B., Aeby, E., Lee, H.G., Wei, C., Oh, H.J., Boukhali,
M., Haas, W., and Lee, J.T. (2017). TERRA RNA Antagonizes ATRX and Protects
Telomeres. Cell 170, 86-101 e116.
Churikov, D., and Geli, V. (2017). De novo telomere addition at chromosome breaks:
Dangerous Liaisons. J Cell Biol 216, 2243-2245.

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Claycomb, J.M., Batista, P.J., Pang, K.M., Gu, W., Vasale, J.J., van Wolfswinkel, J.C.,
Chaves, D.A., Shirayama, M., Mitani, S., Ketting, R.F., et al. (2009). The Argonaute CSR-1
and its 22G-RNA cofactors are required for holocentric chromosome segregation. Cell 139,
123-134.
Cook, D.E., Zdraljevic, S., Tanny, R.E., Seo, B., Riccardi, D.D., Noble, L.M., Rockman, M.V.,
Alkema, M.J., Braendle, C., Kammenga, J.E., et al. (2016). The Genetic Basis of Natural
Variation in Caenorhabditis elegans Telomere Length. Genetics 204, 371-383.
Couvillion, M.T., Lee, S.R., Hogstad, B., Malone, C.D., Tonkin, L.A., Sachidanandam, R.,
Hannon, G.J., and Collins, K. (2009). Sequence, biogenesis, and function of diverse small
RNA classes bound to the Piwi family proteins of Tetrahymena thermophila. Genes Dev 23,
2016-2032.
Cusanelli, E., Romero, C.A., and Chartrand, P. (2013). Telomeric noncoding RNA TERRA is
induced by telomere shortening to nucleate telomerase molecules at short telomeres. Mol
Cell 51, 780-791.
Cutter, A.D. (2008). Divergence times in Caenorhabditis and Drosophila inferred from direct
estimates of the neutral mutation rate. Mol Biol Evol 25, 778-786.
Das, P.P., Bagijn, M.P., Goldstein, L.D., Woolford, J.R., Lehrbach, N.J., Sapetschnig, A.,
Buhecha, H.R., Gilchrist, M.J., Howe, K.L., Stark, R., et al. (2008). Piwi and piRNAs act
upstream of an endogenous siRNA pathway to suppress Tc3 transposon mobility in the
Caenorhabditis elegans germline. Mol Cell 31, 79-90.
de Lange, T. (2018). Shelterin-Mediated Telomere Protection. Annu Rev Genet 52, 223-247.
Dyer, M.A., Qadeer, Z.A., Valle-Garcia, D., and Bernstein, E. (2017). ATRX and DAXX:
Mechanisms and Mutations. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med 7.
Fay, M.M., Lyons, S.M., and Ivanov, P. (2017). RNA G-Quadruplexes in Biology: Principles
and Molecular Mechanisms. J Mol Biol 429, 2127-2147.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Fierst, J.L., Willis, J.H., Thomas, C.G., Wang, W., Reynolds, R.M., Ahearne, T.E., Cutter,
A.D., and Phillips, P.C. (2015). Reproductive Mode and the Evolution of Genome Size and
Structure in Caenorhabditis Nematodes. PLoS Genet 11, e1005323.
Fischer, S.E., Montgomery, T.A., Zhang, C., Fahlgren, N., Breen, P.C., Hwang, A., Sullivan,
C.M., Carrington, J.C., and Ruvkun, G. (2011). The ERI-6/7 helicase acts at the first stage of
an siRNA amplification pathway that targets recent gene duplications. PLoS Genet 7,
e1002369.
Fresno, C., and Fernandez, E.A. (2013). RDAVIDWebService: a versatile R interface to
DAVID. Bioinformatics 29, 2810-2811.
Garrigues, J.M., Sidoli, S., Garcia, B.A., and Strome, S. (2015). Defining heterochromatin in
C. elegans through genome-wide analysis of the heterochromatin protein 1 homolog HPL-2.
Genome Res 25, 76-88.
Gaydos, L.J., Rechtsteiner, A., Egelhofer, T.A., Carroll, C.R., and Strome, S. (2012).
Antagonism between MES-4 and Polycomb repressive complex 2 promotes appropriate gene
expression in C. elegans germ cells. Cell Rep 2, 1169-1177.
Gent, J.I., Lamm, A.T., Pavelec, D.M., Maniar, J.M., Parameswaran, P., Tao, L., Kennedy, S.,
and Fire, A.Z. (2010). Distinct phases of siRNA synthesis in an endogenous RNAi pathway in
C. elegans soma. Mol Cell 37, 679-689.
Gomes, N.M., Ryder, O.A., Houck, M.L., Charter, S.J., Walker, W., Forsyth, N.R., Austad,
S.N., Venditti, C., Pagel, M., Shay, J.W., et al. (2011). Comparative biology of mammalian
telomeres: hypotheses on ancestral states and the roles of telomeres in longevity
determination. Aging Cell 10, 761-768.
Gu, W., Shirayama, M., Conte, D., Jr., Vasale, J., Batista, P.J., Claycomb, J.M., Moresco,
J.J., Youngman, E.M., Keys, J., Stoltz, M.J., et al. (2009). Distinct argonaute-mediated 22GRNA pathways direct genome surveillance in the C. elegans germline. Mol Cell 36, 231-244.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Hahne, F., and Ivanek, R. (2016). Visualizing Genomic Data Using Gviz and Bioconductor.
Methods Mol Biol 1418, 335-351.
Han, T., Manoharan, A.P., Harkins, T.T., Bouffard, P., Fitzpatrick, C., Chu, D.S., Thierry-Mieg,
D., Thierry-Mieg, J., and Kim, J.K. (2009). 26G endo-siRNAs regulate spermatogenic and
zygotic gene expression in Caenorhabditis elegans. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 106, 1867418679.
Ho, J.W., Jung, Y.L., Liu, T., Alver, B.H., Lee, S., Ikegami, K., Sohn, K.A., Minoda, A.,
Tolstorukov, M.Y., Appert, A., et al. (2014). Comparative analysis of metazoan chromatin
organization. Nature 512, 449-452.
Holoch, D., and Moazed, D. (2015). RNA-mediated epigenetic regulation of gene expression.
Nat Rev Genet 16, 71-84.
Ikegami, K., Egelhofer, T.A., Strome, S., and Lieb, J.D. (2010). Caenorhabditis elegans
chromosome arms are anchored to the nuclear membrane via discontinuous association with
LEM-2. Genome Biol 11, R120.
Jacob, N.K., Kirk, K.E., and Price, C.M. (2003). Generation of telomeric G strand overhangs
involves both G and C strand cleavage. Mol Cell 11, 1021-1032.
Jacob, N.K., Skopp, R., and Price, C.M. (2001). G-overhang dynamics at Tetrahymena
telomeres. EMBO J 20, 4299-4308.
JW, I.J., Baldini, A., Ward, D.C., Reeders, S.T., and Wells, R.A. (1991). Origin of human
chromosome 2: an ancestral telomere-telomere fusion. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 88, 90519055.
Ketting, R.F., Fischer, S.E., Bernstein, E., Sijen, T., Hannon, G.J., and Plasterk, R.H. (2001).
Dicer functions in RNA interference and in synthesis of small RNA involved in developmental
timing in C. elegans. Genes Dev 15, 2654-2659.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Kilburn, A.E., Shea, M.J., Sargent, R.G., and Wilson, J.H. (2001). Insertion of a telomere
repeat sequence into a mammalian gene causes chromosome instability. Mol Cell Biol 21,
126-135.
Knight, S.W., and Bass, B.L. (2001). A role for the RNase III enzyme DCR-1 in RNA
interference and germ line development in Caenorhabditis elegans. Science 293, 2269-2271.
Koster, J., and Rahmann, S. (2012). Snakemake--a scalable bioinformatics workflow engine.
Bioinformatics 28, 2520-2522.
Langmead, B., Trapnell, C., Pop, M., and Salzberg, S.L. (2009). Ultrafast and memoryefficient alignment of short DNA sequences to the human genome. Genome Biol 10, R25.
Lei, M., Podell, E.R., Baumann, P., and Cech, T.R. (2003). DNA self-recognition in the
structure of Pot1 bound to telomeric single-stranded DNA. Nature 426, 198-203.
Lin, K.W., and Yan, J. (2008). Endings in the middle: current knowledge of interstitial
telomeric sequences. Mutat Res 658, 95-110.
Lowden, M.R., Flibotte, S., Moerman, D.G., and Ahmed, S. (2011). DNA synthesis generates
terminal duplications that seal end-to-end chromosome fusions. Science 332, 468-471.
Manakov, S.A., Pezic, D., Marinov, G.K., Pastor, W.A., Sachidanandam, R., and Aravin, A.A.
(2015). MIWI2 and MILI Have Differential Effects on piRNA Biogenesis and DNA Methylation.
Cell Rep 12, 1234-1243.
Meier, B., Barber, L.J., Liu, Y., Shtessel, L., Boulton, S.J., Gartner, A., and Ahmed, S. (2009).
The MRT-1 nuclease is required for DNA crosslink repair and telomerase activity in vivo in
Caenorhabditis elegans. Embo J 28, 3549-3563.
Meyne, J., Baker, R.J., Hobart, H.H., Hsu, T.C., Ryder, O.A., Ward, O.G., Wiley, J.E.,
Wurster-Hill, D.H., Yates, T.L., and Moyzis, R.K. (1990). Distribution of non-telomeric sites of
the (TTAGGG)n telomeric sequence in vertebrate chromosomes. Chromosoma 99, 3-10.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Moore, A., Dominska, M., Greenwell, P., Aksenova, A.Y., Mirkin, S., and Petes, T. (2018).
Genetic Control of Genomic Alterations Induced in Yeast by Interstitial Telomeric Sequences.
Genetics 209, 425-438.
Palm, W., and de Lange, T. (2008). How shelterin protects mammalian telomeres. Annu Rev
Genet 42, 301-334.
Pandey, R.R., Tokuzawa, Y., Yang, Z., Hayashi, E., Ichisaka, T., Kajita, S., Asano, Y.,
Kunieda, T., Sachidanandam, R., Chuma, S., et al. (2013). Tudor domain containing 12
(TDRD12) is essential for secondary PIWI interacting RNA biogenesis in mice. Proc Natl
Acad Sci U S A 110, 16492-16497.
Phillips, C.M., Brown, K.C., Montgomery, B.E., Ruvkun, G., and Montgomery, T.A. (2015).
piRNAs and piRNA-Dependent siRNAs Protect Conserved and Essential C. elegans Genes
from Misrouting into the RNAi Pathway. Dev Cell 34, 457-465.
Phillips, C.M., Montgomery, B.E., Breen, P.C., Roovers, E.F., Rim, Y.S., Ohsumi, T.K.,
Newman, M.A., van Wolfswinkel, J.C., Ketting, R.F., Ruvkun, G., et al. (2014). MUT-14 and
SMUT-1 DEAD box RNA helicases have overlapping roles in germline RNAi and endogenous
siRNA formation. Curr Biol 24, 839-844.
Pickett, H.A., and Reddel, R.R. (2015). Molecular mechanisms of activity and derepression of
alternative lengthening of telomeres. Nat Struct Mol Biol 22, 875-880.
Quinlan, A.R., and Hall, I.M. (2010). BEDTools: a flexible suite of utilities for comparing
genomic features. Bioinformatics 26, 841-842.
Raices, M., Maruyama, H., Dillin, A., and Karlseder, J. (2005). Uncoupling of longevity and
telomere length in C. elegans. PLoS Genet 1, e30.
Raices, M., Verdun, R.E., Compton, S.A., Haggblom, C.I., Griffith, J.D., Dillin, A., and
Karlseder, J. (2008). C. elegans telomeres contain G-strand and C-strand overhangs that are
bound by distinct proteins. Cell 132, 745-757.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Reinhart, B.J., and Bartel, D.P. (2002). Small RNAs correspond to centromere
heterochromatic repeats. Science 297, 1831.
Rossiello, F., Aguado, J., Sepe, S., Iannelli, F., Nguyen, Q., Pitchiaya, S., Carninci, P., and
d'Adda di Fagagna, F. (2017). DNA damage response inhibition at dysfunctional telomeres by
modulation of telomeric DNA damage response RNAs. Nat Commun 8, 13980.
Ruby, J.G., Jan, C., Player, C., Axtell, M.J., Lee, W., Nusbaum, C., Ge, H., and Bartel, D.P.
(2006). Large-scale sequencing reveals 21U-RNAs and additional microRNAs and
endogenous siRNAs in C. elegans. Cell 127, 1193-1207.
Sapetschnig, A., Sarkies, P., Lehrbach, N.J., and Miska, E.A. (2015). Tertiary siRNAs
mediate paramutation in C. elegans. PLoS Genet 11, e1005078.
Schoeftner, S., and Blasco, M.A. (2008). Developmentally regulated transcription of
mammalian telomeres by DNA-dependent RNA polymerase II. Nat Cell Biol 10, 228-236.
Schoeftner, S., and Blasco, M.A. (2010). Chromatin regulation and non-coding RNAs at
mammalian telomeres. Semin Cell Dev Biol 21, 186-193.
Seluanov, A., Chen, Z., Hine, C., Sasahara, T.H., Ribeiro, A.A., Catania, K.C., Presgraves,
D.C., and Gorbunova, V. (2007). Telomerase activity coevolves with body mass not lifespan.
Aging Cell 6, 45-52.
Seo, B., Kim, C., Hills, M., Sung, S., Kim, H., Kim, E., Lim, D.S., Oh, H.S., Choi, R.M., Chun,
J., et al. (2015). Telomere maintenance through recruitment of internal genomic regions. Nat
Commun 6, 8189.
Seth, M., Shirayama, M., Gu, W., Ishidate, T., Conte, D., Jr., and Mello, C.C. (2013). The C.
elegans CSR-1 argonaute pathway counteracts epigenetic silencing to promote germline
gene expression. Dev Cell 27, 656-663.
Sfeir, A.J., Chai, W., Shay, J.W., and Wright, W.E. (2005). Telomere-end processing the
terminal nucleotides of human chromosomes. Mol Cell 18, 131-138.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Shen, E.Z., Chen, H., Ozturk, A.R., Tu, S., Shirayama, M., Tang, W., Ding, Y.H., Dai, S.Y.,
Weng, Z., and Mello, C.C. (2018). Identification of piRNA Binding Sites Reveals the
Argonaute Regulatory Landscape of the C. elegans Germline. Cell 172, 937-951 e918.
Shi, Z., Montgomery, T.A., Qi, Y., and Ruvkun, G. (2013). High-throughput sequencing
reveals extraordinary fluidity of miRNA, piRNA, and siRNA pathways in nematodes. Genome
Res 23, 497-508.
Shtessel, L., Lowden, M.R., Cheng, C., Simon, M., Wang, K., and Ahmed, S. (2013).
Caenorhabditis elegans POT-1 and POT-2 repress telomere maintenance pathways. G3
(Bethesda) 3, 305-313.
Smogorzewska, A., and de Lange, T. (2004). Regulation of telomerase by telomeric proteins.
Annu Rev Biochem 73, 177-208.
Song, J.J., Liu, J., Tolia, N.H., Schneiderman, J., Smith, S.K., Martienssen, R.A., Hannon,
G.J., and Joshua-Tor, L. (2003). The crystal structure of the Argonaute2 PAZ domain reveals
an RNA binding motif in RNAi effector complexes. Nat Struct Biol 10, 1026-1032.
Stein, L.D., Bao, Z., Blasiar, D., Blumenthal, T., Brent, M.R., Chen, N., Chinwalla, A., Clarke,
L., Clee, C., Coghlan, A., et al. (2003). The genome sequence of Caenorhabditis briggsae: a
platform for comparative genomics. PLoS Biol 1, E45.
Vasale, J.J., Gu, W., Thivierge, C., Batista, P.J., Claycomb, J.M., Youngman, E.M., Duchaine,
T.F., Mello, C.C., and Conte, D., Jr. (2010). Sequential rounds of RNA-dependent RNA
transcription drive endogenous small-RNA biogenesis in the ERGO-1/Argonaute pathway.
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 3582-3587.
Vrbsky, J., Akimcheva, S., Watson, J.M., Turner, T.L., Daxinger, L., Vyskot, B., Aufsatz, W.,
and Riha, K. (2010). siRNA-mediated methylation of Arabidopsis telomeres. PLoS Genet 6,
e1000986.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Wang, G., and Reinke, V. (2008). A C. elegans Piwi, PRG-1, regulates 21U-RNAs during
spermatogenesis. Curr Biol 18, 861-867.
Watanabe, T., Cheng, E.C., Zhong, M., and Lin, H. (2015). Retrotransposons and
pseudogenes regulate mRNAs and lncRNAs via the piRNA pathway in the germline. Genome
Res 25, 368-380.
Wenda, J.M., Homolka, D., Yang, Z., Spinelli, P., Sachidanandam, R., Pandey, R.R., and
Pillai, R.S. (2017). Distinct Roles of RNA Helicases MVH and TDRD9 in PIWI SlicingTriggered Mammalian piRNA Biogenesis and Function. Dev Cell 41, 623-637 e629.
Yang, D., Xiong, Y., Kim, H., He, Q., Li, Y., Chen, R., and Songyang, Z. (2011). Human
telomeric proteins occupy selective interstitial sites. Cell Res 21, 1013-1027.
Zhang, D., Tu, S., Stubna, M., Wu, W.S., Huang, W.C., Weng, Z., and Lee, H.C. (2018). The
piRNA targeting rules and the resistance to piRNA silencing in endogenous genes. Science
359, 587-592.
Zhang, L.F., Ogawa, Y., Ahn, J.Y., Namekawa, S.H., Silva, S.S., and Lee, J.T. (2009).
Telomeric RNAs mark sex chromosomes in stem cells. Genetics 182, 685-698.

Acknowledgements
We thank Yun Li, Will Valdar and Erin Osborne for advice concerning genome analysis. This
work was supported by NIH R01 GM066228 to SA.

Author Contributions
S.F. and S.A. designed the experiments. S.F. and E.H.L.-S. carried out the experiments, S.F.
performed computational analysis and E.H.L.-S. performed Southern blotting, S.F. and S.A.
wrote the manuscript.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Competing Interests
The authors declare no competing interests.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Maximum consecutive perfect repeats
Species

1

2

3

4 5 6 7 8 9 10 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 21 28 29 38

C. elegans 214 436 344 140 53 17 6 5 3 4 1 2 3 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
C. briggsae 344 15

0

0 2 2110 2 1 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0

C. remanei 164 99

7

0 1 2211 1 1 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

Table 1: Tally of the maximum number of consecutive perfect telomere repeats in ITS sites.

mismatches reads ITS % ITS assignment
0

29

23

79.3

1

182 167

91.8

2

769 640

83.2

3

1372 933

68.0

Table 2: Summary of unique telomeric small RNA reads. Percentage of reads assigned
mapping to ITS sites is shown.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

telomeric small RNAs
ID

chromosome

start

end

length score

type

2

3

all

ITS_60

I

1974471

1975116

645

81.9

intergenic

30

105

135

ITS_813

IV

1752185

1752299

114

86.8

intergenic

5

22

27

ITS_238

I

14733054 14733310

256

78.7

intron

0

22

22

ITS_1226

X

17527653 17527730

77

75.6

3' UTR

0

22

22

ITS_576

III

1881503

1881935

432

82.9

intron

2

19

21

ITS_544

III

953856

953988

132

76.1

intergenic

0

18

18

ITS_316

II

2859211

2859720

509

79.5

intergenic

3

13

16

ITS_739

III

12856138 12856366

228

79.4

intron

0

16

16

ITS_315

II

2847764

2848131

367

79.6

intron

2

13

15

ITS_314

II

2846566

2846973

407

76.4

intron

0

11

11

Table 3: ITS sites with more than 10 telomeric small RNAs.

40

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1: Identification of telomeric small RNAs in C. elegans. (A) Quantification of small
RNA species in published datasets that map to telomere sequence with different numbers of
mismatches. (B) Proportion of telomere-mapping small RNA reads in published data
beginning with a particular nucleotide. (C) Distribution of telomeric small RNA length. (D)
Proportion of telomeric small RNA reads mapping to the G-rich (TTAGGC) or C-rich
(GCCTAA) telomeric strand. (E) Enrichment (IP/input) of reads mapping to perfect telomere
sequence with up to three mismatches in published immunoprecipitation datasets for three
different Argonaute proteins.

41

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

A

B

Chromosome I

Chromosome X

400
Length (bases)

Length (bases)

500

0

-500

-400
0

C

5

10

0

15

5

10

15

D
0.75

Proportion

0.75

Proportion

0
-200

-1000

0.50
genome

0.25

its

0.50

0.25

0.00

0.00

r
te
in

200

ge

c n n 5 3 a n n
ni xo tro utr utr crn xo tro
e in
n e in
pseudogene

E

en
rg

ITS sites

intron

intergenic
1%

7%

15% 14%

ut

t
in

r3

ut

ex

on

n

tro

in

pseudogene

20%

3%
5%

8%
36%

41%

Enhancer

48%

10%

29%

15%

5%
6%

10%
21%

27%
47%

intron

ee

9%

r5

n
ro

on
ex

Simulated sites

intergenic

15%

ic

te
in

7%

Gene body
Heterochromatin

8%

25%

13%

26%

13%

29%

28%

28%

24%

22%

13%

1%
7%

40%

Polycomb

40%

Promoter
11%

13%

G
80

100

60

75

count

count

F

Low signal
l3

6%
12%

30%

3%
7%

40
20

50

25

0

0

0

250

500

750

1000

1250

40

length

60

score

42

80

100

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 2: Characterization of ITSs in C. elegans. (A) Localization of ITS sites on
chromosome I. regions in the sense orientation (TTAGGC) are shown in black, antisense in
red. (B) Localization of ITS sites on the X chromosome. (C) Proportion of ITS sites
overlapping different genome features (blue bars) and amount of genomic space taken up by
genomic features (pink). (D) Average proportion of features overlapped by hexanucleotide
repeat sequences from 1000 simulations. Error bars show standard deviation. (E) Percentage
of real or permuted (“simulation”) ITS sites that are covered by a particular chromatin state.
(F) Distribution of ITS length and score.

43

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

44

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 3: Telomeric small RNAs map to ITS sites. () Scatter plots showing ITS score
versus uniquely-mapping small telomeric small RNAs count as a percentage of total
abundance for each category for ITS sites with at least one small RNA read. ITS_60 is shown
in red. (B) Genome track showing the top four ITSs with the highest uniquely-mapping
telomeric small RNA count. Total small RNA coverage and telomeric small RNA reads are
shown as separate tracks (C) Genome-wide distribution of ITS sites. Y-axis shows uniquelybinding telomeric small RNA count.

45

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4: ITS sites in C. briggsae and C. remanei. (A) Distribution of ITS scores. (B)
Distribution of ITS lengths. (C) Proportion of ITS sites overlapping different genome features
(blue bars) and amount of genomic space taken up by genomic features (pink). (D) As (C) but
for C. remanei. (E) Number of genes for which orthologous genes in two species containin
intronic ITS sites in both species. (F) Domain structures of C. elegans, C. briggsae and C.
remanei pot-2 homologues

46

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

B
C. elegans

C. briggsae

C. elegans

C. remanei

C. briggsae

C. remanei

1.00

1

20

2
3

0

ale

he

C

G-rich

0.25
0.00

m

fe

C-rich

0.50

al
es

s

ale
m

0.75

m

s&

Proportion

0

40

mismatches

60

rm em
ap bry
hr os
od
ite
m s
al
es
he e
rm m
ap bry
hr os
od
ite
m s
al
e
em s
br
yo
s

Reads per million

A

0 1 2 3

0 1 2 3

0 1 2 3

mismatches

C. elegans

C. briggsae

C. remanei

1.00

first
base
A
C
G
T

Proportion

0.75
0.50
0.25
0.00

0

D

1

2

C. elegans

3

0

1
2
3
mismatches
C. briggsae

0

1

2

3

C. remanei

0.5

0.3

0
1
2
3

0.2

mismatches

Proportion

0.4

0.1
0.0

18 20 22

25

18 20 22

25

18 20 22

25

length

Figure 5: Comparison of telomeric small RNAs between three Caenorhabditis species.
(A) Telomeric small RNA abundance in small RNA sequencing libraries (REF) from three
Caenorhabditis species. (B) Proportion of telomeric small RNA reads mapping to the G-rich
(TTAGGC) or C-rich (GCCTAA) telomeric strand. (C) Proportion of telomere-mapping small

47

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

RNA reads in published data beginning with a particular nucleotide. (D) Distribution of
telomeric small RNA length.

Figure 6: Perfect telomeric small RNAs of the genus Caenorhabditis. Total observed Grich (A) and C-rich (B) telomeric small RNAs from RNA seq and IP data sets. (C) Abundant
telomeric sRNAs can anneal to form duplexes.

48

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 7: Telomere length of C. elegans, C. briggsae and C. remanei strains. (A)
Southern blot analysis of Hinf1-digested genomic DNA isolated from C. elegans, C. briggsae
and C. remanei strains using a (TTAGGC)n probe. (B) Southern blot analysis of two C.
elegans trt-1 telomerase mutant strains whose telomeres are maintained via ALT. Positions of
telomeric bands located in the well or at limit mobility are noted by arrows.

49

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8: Models of telomere RNAs and chromosome termini. Comparisons of prominent
species of small RNAs (orange) and chromosome termini (lavender) for (A) Caenorhabditis
(Raices et al., 2008) (B) Tetrahymena (Jacob et al., 2003; Jacob et al., 2001), and (C)
mammals (Sfeir et al., 2005). The Caenorhabditis terminal (TA) dinucleotide indicates
uncertain nucleotides at the end of the 3' overhang, whereas the Tetrahymena and
mammalian 3' nucleotides have been confirmed experimentally, the most frequent indicated
based on highest vertical position.

50

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

stage

state

feature count

enrichment

p-value

ee

Enhancer

intergenic

59

0.6778360552

0.00048

ee

Enhancer

intron

55

-0.1570874597 0.3279272727

ee

Gene body

intergenic

57

-0.4570613948

ee

Gene body

intron

0.0006

209 -0.3705784898 0.0066857143

ee

Heterochromatin intergenic

34

ee

Heterochromatin

119 1.2496763643

ee

Low signal

ee

Low signal

intron

227

-0.449121839

0.0075

ee

Polycomb

intergenic

52

1.1496090691

0.0003

ee

Polycomb

intron

160 2.1278433535

0.0003

ee

Promoter

intergenic

2

-3.1452021959

ee

Promoter

intron

9

-1.2488723695 0.0219789474

l3

Enhancer

intergenic

98

0.9958072399

0.0003

l3

Enhancer

intron

66

-0.4703345716

0.19668

l3

Gene body

intergenic

22

-2.0003681619

0.0003

l3

Gene body

intron

intron

-0.0892991405 0.3279272727
0.0075

intergenic 182 0.0156254583 0.4227130435

0.0003

214 -0.4505126037 0.0051692308

l3

Heterochromatin intergenic

46

-0.0289542175

0.4245

l3

Heterochromatin

172 1.1047287454

0.0168

l3

Low signal

intergenic 102 -0.5127075469

0.0006

l3

Low signal

l3

Polycomb

l3

Polycomb

intron

l3

Promoter

intergenic

intron

intron

97

-1.0541539975

0.00048

intergenic 116 2.0772017409

0.0003

228 2.1816948244
2

-2.4362512894

51

0.0003
0.0003

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

l3

Promoter

intron

2

-2.4225137827

0.0196

Table S1. Chromatin state enrichment for ITS sites based on simulations

52

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

gene name
C. elegans C. briggsae
ego-2

Cbr-ego-2

sri-54
sri-54
tsr-1

ITS present
C.remanei
Cre-ego-2

C. elegans C. briggsae C.remanei
1

1

0

Cbr-sri-54 WBGene00068079

1

1

0

CBG30920 WBGene00068079

1

1

0

1

1

0

Cbr-tsr-1

best-8

Cbr-best-8 WBGene00056079

1

1

0

usp-39

Cbr-usp-39 WBGene00068095

1

1

0

F54A3.2

CBG21459 WBGene00067022

1

1

0

cutl-20

Cbr-cutl-20

Cre-cutl-20

1

1

0

pmt-2

Cbr-pmt-2

Cre-pmt-2

1

1

0

fmil-1

Cbr-fmil-1 WBGene00059166

1

1

0

Y94H6A.5 CBG13909 WBGene00071875

1

1

0

1

1

0

srab-25

Cbr-srab-25

Cre-srab-25

srab-25

Cbr-srab-25 WBGene00063629

1

1

0

aat-9

Cbr-aat-9 WBGene00072979

1

0

1

cmk-1

Cbr-cmk-1

Cre-cmk-1

1

0

1

fat-5

Cbr-fat-5

Cre-fat-5

1

0

1

pqn-48

Cbr-pqn-48

Cre-pqn-48

1

0

1

rhgf-2

Cbr-rhgf-2

Cre-rhgf-2

1

0

1

twk-33

Cbr-twk-33

Cre-twk-33

1

0

1

kcnl-1

Cbr-kcnl-1 WBGene00065967

1

0

1

F56G4.6

CBG08045 WBGene00069984

1

0

1

F30B5.4

CBG05349 WBGene00080036

1

0

1

F30B5.4

CBG24006 WBGene00080036

1

0

1

53

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

lin-42

Cbr-lin-42

Cre-lin-42

1

0

1

K07D4.5

WBGene00064962

1

0

1

T06A4.1

CBG18554 WBGene00060957

1

0

1

Y50D4B.1 CBG01105 WBGene00061109

1

0

1

mlt-7

Cbr-mlt-7

Cre-mlt-7

1

0

1

abu-14

Cbr-abu-14

Cre-pqn-95

0

1

1

CBG00931 WBGene00072743

0

1

1

ipla-1

Cbr-ipla-1

Cre-ipla-1

0

1

1

vps-18

Cbr-vps-18

Cre-vps-18

0

1

1

vha-19

Cbr-vha-19

Cre-vha-19

0

1

1

Y54H5A.2 CBG21315 WBGene00071936

0

1

1

Y32B12B.2 CBG23974 WBGene00067598

0

1

1

F33H1.4

Table S2. Genes which contain ITS sites in more than one species

54

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sample_id

mismatches freq

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_input_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s7

0

1

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_input_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s7

1

6

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_input_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s7

2

17

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_input_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s7

3

49

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_IP_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s6

1

10

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_IP_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s6

2

49

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_IP_CIPPNK_seq_prb_s6

3

125

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_input

0

3

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_input

1

1

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_input

2

31

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_input

3

147

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_IP

1

5

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_IP

2

40

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_IP

3

138

0

1

1

2

2

7

1_male_herm_input

3

12

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_herm_IP

3

15

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg1_male_herm_input
phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg1_male_herm_input
phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg1_male_herm_input
phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-

55

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_input

0

2

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_input

1

9

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_input

2

32

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_input

3

62

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_IP

0

1

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_IP

1

9

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_IP

2

47

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_IP

3

82

sapetsching_2015_hrde_1_HRDE_1RIP

3

3

sapetsching_2015_WT_HRDE_1RIP

2

2

sapetsching_2015_WT_HRDE_1RIP

3

19

seth_2013_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

0

2

seth_2013_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

2

8

seth_2013_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

3

15

seth_2013_CSR_1_IP_oma_1gfp

2

10

seth_2013_CSR_1_IP_oma_1gfp

3

24

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

0

2

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

2

13

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

3

31

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_oma_1gfp

1

1

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_oma_1gfp

2

2

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_oma_1gfp

3

19

seth_2013_total_oma_1gfp

2

6

seth_2013_total_oma_1gfp

3

41

56

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

seth_2013_total_oma_1gfp_csr_1

1

2

seth_2013_total_oma_1gfp_csr_1

2

7

seth_2013_total_oma_1gfp_csr_1

3

20

seth_2013_total_oma_1gfp_rde_3

2

2

Table S3. Total telomere sRNAs from input and IP datasets.

57

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sample_id

sequence

fre

lengt

q

h

gu_2009A_WAGO_1_input_CIPPNK_seq_pr
b_s7

TTAGGCTTAGGCTTAGGCTT

1

20

AGGCTTAGGCTTAGGCTTAG
phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_input

G

2

21

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_input

CTTAGGCTTAGGCTTAGGC

1

19

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-

CTAAGCCTAAGCCTAAGCCT

1_male_herm_input

AAG

1

23

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-

AAGCCTAAGCCTAAGCCTAA

1_male_input

G

1

21

phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-

TAAGCCTAAGCCTAAGCCTA

1_male_input

AGC

1

23

1

23

TTAGGCTTAGGCTTAGGCTTA
phillips_2015_FLAGHRDE-1_prg-1_male_IP

GG
CTAAGCCTAAGCCTAAGCCT

seth_2013_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

AAG

2

23

seth_2013_input_for_CSR_1_IP_gfpcdk_1

CTAAGCCTAAGCCTAAGC

2

18

Table S4. Perfect telomeric sRNAs from input and IP datasets.

58

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sample_id

0

1

2

3

miwi2HET_E165_Testis_smallRNA

36

7

10

59

miwi2HET_P10_Testis_smallRNA

2

1

2

37

miwi2KO_E165_Testis_smallRNA

91

13

11

70

BmTdrd12_IP

0

0

0

3

HA_BmTdrd12_IP

0

0

0

7

MILI_IP

0

1

2

9

MILI_IP_

0

2

3

6

TDRD12_IP_

0

4

1

9

Total_small_RNA_14_40_nt_rep1

0

0

1

37

Total_small_RNA_14_40_nt_rep2

0

0

1

43

trimmed_10_dpp

1

0

1

0

trimmed_15_dpp

2

2

4

3

trimmed_18_dpp

0

0

1

1

trimmed_40_dpp

2

3

3

9

trimmed_6_dpp

2

0

0

1

trimmed_Input_Miwi_ADH__1

1

0

0

0

trimmed_LZ

1

0

0

0

trimmed_MIWI_IP_Miwi___1

1

0

0

0

trimmed_MIWI_IP_Miwi___2

2

0

0

1

trimmed_MIWI_IP_Miwi____2

0

0

0

1

trimmed_MIWI_IP_Miwi_ADH__1

0

0

1

0

trimmed_Miwi___late_sc_rep1

0

0

0

1

59

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MVH__adultMILI_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

0

1

MVH__adultMILI_IPpiRNAs

0

0

0

1

MVH__adultMIWI_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

0

10

MVH__adultMIWI_IPpiRNAs

0

0

0

23

MVH_adultMVH_IPlonger_RNAs

2

0

1

20

MVH_adultMVH_IPpiRNAs

0

1

0

15

MVH_KIadultMILI_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

0

1

MVH_KIadultMILI_IPpiRNAs

0

0

0

2

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPlonger_RNAsrep1

0

0

0

3

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPlonger_RNAsrep3

0

0

1

3

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPpiRNAsrep1

1

0

0

3

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPpiRNAsrep2

0

0

0

1

MVH__KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

1

6

MVH_KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

1

5

MVH__KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

2

1

3

14

MVH_KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

0

2

3

25

MVH_KIP0MIWI2_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

1

32

MVH_KIP0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

0

1

3

129

MVH__P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

0

1

0

12

MVH__P0MIWI2_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

2

16

MVH__P0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

0

2

0

32

s

0

0

0

5

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH_KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

1

0

0

4

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNA

60

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

2

5

3

32

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH_KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

2

3

4

40

s

1

1

5

8

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__P0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

0

0

1

10

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH___P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

1

2

5

53

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

3

3

7

22

Tdrd9_KIKIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

0

1

0

3

Tdrd9_KIKIP0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

0

0

1

14

Tdrd9_KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

0

0

2

5

Tdrd9_KIP0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

0

0

1

6

Tdrd9___P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

0

0

0

1

Tdrd9___P0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

0

0

2

6

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH___P0MILI_IPlonger_RNA

Table S5. Telomeric reads from 77 small RNA libraries from mouse with 0, 1, 2 or 3
mismatches.

61

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

total_mappe

telo_read

d

s

name

dataset

6_dpp

watanabe_2014

965453

3

MIWI_IP_Miwi___2

watanabe_2014

1951904

3

Miwi___early_RS_rep2

watanabe_2014

17939

0

MIWI_IP_Miwi_ADH__1

watanabe_2014

582024

1

Miwi__early_RS_rep2

watanabe_2014

12284

0

early_P

watanabe_2014

5329

0

15_dpp

watanabe_2014

2258599

11

40_dpp

watanabe_2014

2532418

17

Input_Miwi_ADH__1

watanabe_2014

171962

1

Input_Miwi___1

watanabe_2014

228486

0

22_dpp

watanabe_2014

275686

0

MIWI_IP_Miwi_ADH__2

watanabe_2014

747319

0

Input_Miwi____2

watanabe_2014

169922

0

Miwi___early_RS_rep1

watanabe_2014

22573

0

late_PD

watanabe_2014

16586

0

MIWI_IP_Miwi____2

watanabe_2014

1440884

1

Miwi___late_sc_rep1

watanabe_2014

163379

1

10_dpp

watanabe_2014

529654

2

Input_Miwi_ADH__2

watanabe_2014

46804

0

Miwi__early_RS_rep1

watanabe_2014

18688

0

18_dpp

watanabe_2014

540617

2

Miwi__early_RS_rep3

watanabe_2014

18883

0

mid_P

watanabe_2014

24147

0

Miwi___early_RS_rep3

watanabe_2014

18864

0

LZ

watanabe_2014

12885

1

62

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

MIWI_IP_Miwi___1

watanabe_2014

959010

1

Miwi__late_sc_rep1

watanabe_2014

103609

0

Input_Miwi___2

watanabe_2014

407209

0

28_dpp

watanabe_2014

641072

0

Input_Miwi____1

watanabe_2014

156467

0

MIWI_IP_Miwi____1

watanabe_2014

884287

0

MILI_IP_

pandey_2013

17659714

11

BmTdrd12_IP

pandey_2013

25859314

3

Total_small_RNA_14_40_nt_rep2

pandey_2013

21771414

44

TDRD12_IP_

pandey_2013

11657018

14

Total_small_RNA_14_40_nt_rep1

pandey_2013

15775465

38

HA_BmTdrd12_IP

pandey_2013

25035732

7

MILI_IP

pandey_2013

16782336

12

MVH__P0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

13084791

34

MVH__P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

14351656

13

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH_KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

22398538

49

MVH__adultMILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

29317491

1

MVH_KIadultMILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

20743492

2

MVH__KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

5908535

7

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPlonger_RNAsrep3

wenda_2017

33749110

4

MVH_KIP0MIWI2_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

3136830

33

MVH__adultMIWI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

24360585

23

Tdrd9___P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

10302314

1

MVH__adultMILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

19677190

1

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

14466903

42

MVH_KIadultMILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

11187973

1

MVH_KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

4254928

6

Tdrd9_KIKIP0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

10382704

15

63

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tdrd9_KIKIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

9434523

4

MVH_adultMVH_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

7508372

16

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPpiRNAsrep1

wenda_2017

16375488

4

Tdrd9_KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

8232034

7

MVH_KIP0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

9100669

133

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

16236562

35

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

2204031

5

MVH__P0MIWI2_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

7613869

18

Tdrd9_KIP0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

12678748

7

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPlonger_RNAsrep1

wenda_2017

11915289

3

MVH_KIadultMVH_IPpiRNAsrep2

wenda_2017

15206654

1

MVH__KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

11313520

20

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH_KIP0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

4210652

5

MVH_KIP0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

11715236

30

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH___P0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

5375843

15

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH__P0MILI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

3850038

11

MVH__adultMIWI_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

16844161

10

Rosa26_pi_reporterMVH___P0MILI_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

22267409

61

MVH_adultMVH_IPlonger_RNAs

wenda_2017

12500461

23

Tdrd9___P0MIWI2_IPpiRNAs

wenda_2017

8456563

8

miwi2KO_E165_Testis_smallRNA

manakov_2015

17357284

185

miwi2HET_P10_Testis_smallRNA

manakov_2015

15540073

42

miwi2KO_P10_Testis_smallRNA

manakov_2015

989182

0

miwi2HET_E165_Testis_smallRNA

manakov_2015

14841295

112

Table S6. Sample information for mouse small RNA analysis.

64

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sequence

length

freq

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGG

19

77

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

23

10

TTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

22

5

GGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

19

4

GGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT

22

3

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT

21

3

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA

22

3

TAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

21

3

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

20

2

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGG

24

2

TAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGG

22

2

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA

19

1

AGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT

30

1

GGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

25

1

GGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

18

1

GGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGG

19

1

GGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGG

20

1

GGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGT

21

1

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGT

20

1

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGG

25

1

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT

27

1

GTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAG

29

1

65

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

TAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTA

20

1

TAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGT

30

1

TTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGG

18

1

TTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTT

20

1

TTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGGGTTAGG

29

1

Table S7. Perfect G-rich telomeric sRNAs from mouse small RNA datasets.

66

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

sequence

length

freq

TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCC

24

4

TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCC

30

4

TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC

28

3

TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC

22

2

AACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCT

24

1

AACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC

27

1

AACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCT

30

1

ACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCC

22

1

ACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCT

29

1

CCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC

19

1

CCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCC

27

1

CCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTA

28

1

CTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTA

21

1

CTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAAC

23

1

CTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCT

26

1

TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCT

25

1

TAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACCCTAACC

29

1

Table S8. Perfect C-rich telomeric sRNAs from mouse small RNA datasets.

67

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Dataset

GEO accession

PMID

Wanatabe (2014)

GSE42004

25480952

Pandey (2013)

GSE50544

24067652

Wenda (2017)

GSE95580

28633017

Manakov (2015)

GSE70731

26279574

Fischer (2011)

GSE32366

22102828

Gent (2010)

GSE19414

20116306

Gu (2009)

GSE18215

19800275

Phillips (2014)

GSE54320

24684932

Phillips (2015)

GSE63114

26279487

Sapetsching (2015)

GSE66344

25811365

Seth (2013)

GSE49532

24360782

McMurchy (2017)

GSE87524

28294943

Zeller (2017)

NA

27668659

Table S9. Accession numbers for data sets analyzed in this study. Top 4 for mouse sRNAs
and bottom 9 for C. elegans sRNAs.

68

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/612820; this version posted April 18, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure S1: Telomere homology scores for intronic ITS sites broke down by whether or not a
homologue of the gene containing the ITS site also contains an ITS site in another species
(“shared” versus “unique” respectively).

69

