bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Distinct polysaccharide growth profiles of human intestinal Prevotella copri
isolates

Hannah Fehlner-Peach1, Cara Magnabosco2,9, Varsha Raghavan1,9, Jose U. Scher3,
Adrian Tett4, Laura M. Cox5, Claire Gottsegen1, Aaron Watters2, John D. WiltshireGordon6, Nicola Segata4, Richard Bonneau2,7, and Dan R. Littman1,8,10,*

1

Molecular Pathogenesis Program, The Kimmel Center for Biology and Medicine of the
Skirball Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA
2

Flatiron Institute Center for Computational Biology, Simons Foundation, New York, NY
10010, USA
3

Department of Medicine, New York University School of Medicine, New York, NY
10016, USA
4

CIBIO Department, University of Trento, Italy

5

Harvard Medical School, Brigham & Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA

6

Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, Madison, WI 53706,
USA
7

New York University, Center for Genomics and Systems Biology, New York, NY 10003,
USA
8

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine, New York,
NY 10016, USA
9

These authors contributed equally

10

Lead contact

*Correspondence: Dan.Littman@med.nyu.edu

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Summary:
The gut-dwelling Prevotella copri, the most prevalent Prevotella species in human gut, have
been associated with diet as well as disease, but our understanding of their diversity and
functional roles remains rudimentary, as studies have been limited to 16S and metagenomic
surveys and experiments using a single type strain. Here, we describe the genomic diversity of
83 P. copri isolates from 11 donors. We demonstrate that genomically distinct isolates, which
can be categorized into different P. copri complex clades, utilize defined sets of plant
polysaccharides that can be predicted in part from their genomes and from metagenomic data.
This study thus reveals both genomic and functional differences in polysaccharide utilization
between several novel human intestinal P. copri strains.

Keywords:
human microbiome, intestinal commensals, whole genome sequencing, diet

Introduction:
Humans live in close association with a teeming bacterial ecosystem known as the gut
microbiome. The diverse inhabitants of this extraordinary environment perform beneficial and
remarkable services for their host, out-competing harmful bacteria and digesting the majority of
dietary fiber (El Kaoutari et al., 2013; Martens et al., 2008). The relative abundance of two
genera, Bacteroides and Prevotella, is inversely correlated in the intestine (Arumugam et al.,
2011; Costea et al., 2018). Although a Bacteroides-dominated microbiome is more common,
Prevotella are present at >10% relative abundance in the stool of 10-25% of healthy American
and European individuals (Koren et al., 2013). Compared to at least 25 species of Prevotella in

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

the oral cavity, and at least 17 species of intestinal Bacteroides, only five Prevotella species have
been reported in human intestine, with Prevotella copri being the most abundant (Accetto and
Avgustin, 2015; Ferrocino et al., 2015; Ibrahim et al., 2017; Li et al., 2009; Lin et al., 2013; Liu
et al., 2018). Although mechanistic models of metabolism, growth, and colonization have been
established for several intestinal Bacteroides and oral Prevotella, studies of intestinal Prevotella
have lacked experimental tools and relied heavily on only two strains (Hayashi et al., 2007).

Many researchers have observed Prevotella’s presence and abundance by 16S sequencing, but its
genomic diversity and biological properties have not been described. Because Prevotella copri
are highly sensitive to oxygen, and difficult to isolate and cultivate, previous studies have been
limited to the single commercially available type strain, DSM 18205, to perform metagenomic
comparisons and draw experimental conclusions. Prevotella spp. have extensive gene acquisition
and loss (Gupta et al., 2015; Zhu et al., 2015). In fact, accessory genes within the P. copri DSM
18205 genome account for around 40% of all genes encoded within the genome, the highest
proportion of accessory genes identified in a comparison of 11 gut-associated species (Zhu et al.,
2015). This estimate should be revised, however, since a metagenomic study (supplemented by
whole genome sequencing data from the present study) affirms that P. copri is diverse,
comprising four genomically distinct clades (Tett et al., 2019). Further improvements in genomic
comparisons of P. copri may be expected soon, since another study reports a closed genome of
P. copri, generated from long-read sequencing of whole microbiomes (Moss and Bhatt, 2018).
Whether the genomic diversity in human P. copri translates to functional diversity has not yet
been fully explored. This is particularly relevant in light of elevated frequency of P. copri
colonization in some cohorts of treatment-naïve rheumatoid arthritis patients (Maeda et al., 2016;

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Scher et al., 2013). A better understanding of whether there are functional differences in strains
from patients compared to healthy subjects will contribute to determining whether there is a
causal relationship between P. copri and this autoimmune disease.

Several studies have found associations between diets and the presence of intestinal Prevotella.
Prevotella have been positively associated with diets high in plant fiber and carbohydrates, and
negatively associated with fat and amino acid diets (De Filippo et al., 2010; Ruengsomwong S,
2016; Wu et al., 2011). Genes associated with carbohydrate catabolism were identified in P.
copri metagenomes and correlated with vegan diets (De Filippis et al., 2019). The plant
polysaccharide xylan has been used to select for growth of human Prevotella (Tan et al., 2018).
Prevotella isolates from livestock grow in the presence of plant polysaccharides and encode gene
products capable of breaking down these polysaccharides (Accetto and Avgustin, 2019). Thus,
diet may be an important factor promoting growth of intestinal Prevotella. Whether human P.
copri are uniquely suited to digest dietary components highly abundant in plant-based diets
remains unsubstantiated by experimental and genomic evidence.

Intestinal commensal bacterial genomes encode a system of genes, often clustered, that
collaborate to harness energy from carbohydrates present in the host’s intestinal lumen.
Extensive and careful work in Bacteroides species has identified several polysaccharide
utilization loci (PULs) that are specific for glycans derived from plant, animal, and host sources
(Martens et al., 2008; Martens et al., 2011). Bacteria lacking one of several critical genes in any
polysaccharide-specific PUL fail to grow when the polysaccharide is provided as the sole carbon
source (Martens et al., 2011; Raghavan et al., 2014). PULs have been linked to diet and

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

subsequently exploited in experimental systems. Notably, a seaweed-utilizing PUL was
horizontally transferred from marine bacteria to intestinal bacteria of seaweed-ingesting hosts
(Hehemann et al., 2010). This PUL was experimentally introduced to B. thetaiotaomicron, and
seaweed-selective growth was demonstrated in laboratory mice (Shepherd et al., 2018). Although
by far the most extensive work on PULs has been performed in Bacteroides species, PULs have
been annotated in Prevotella type strains and used to predict growth on plant polysaccharides in
Prevotella isolates from livestock (Accetto and Avgustin, 2015, 2019). Despite their association
with plant diet and PUL predictions, the functional capabilities of human intestinal Prevotella
have not been tested, due to a dearth of cultured human intestinal Prevotella isolates.

Previous studies have been limited to analysis and experimentation with the available genomes
and strains of Prevotella species found in human, two of which were isolated from the same
individual (Hayashi et al., 2007). Here, we report whole genome sequencing of 83 Prevotella
copri isolates from the stool of eleven individuals. We observe extensive genomic diversity of P.
copri isolates within and between hosts. This genomic variation was exemplified by specific
gene clusters and linked to functional growth of isolates on predicted plant polysaccharides,
explaining the association of colonization of Prevotella with a plant-rich diet.
Results:
Isolation of Prevotella from human stool
To investigate the genomic diversity of Prevotella copri and also identify strains for functional
analysis, we developed a qPCR screening and isolation strategy for P. copri from human stool
(Figure S1, Table S1, Methods). P. copri was identified in 31/63 individuals by qPCR (Figure
S1). 16S rRNA gene sequencing of the hypervariable V3-V4 region found P. copri in 41/63

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

individuals, with 18/63 individuals harboring P. copri at levels >10% relative abundance (Figure
1A). Relative abundance ranged from < 0.01 to 0.766. From the V3-V4 16S rRNA gene data,
five P. copri 16S variants were identified (Figure 1A, Supplemental file 1). The P. copri 16S
variants displayed 2-6 single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) within the 253 bp region, corresponding
to >97% sequence-sequence identity (Callahan et al., 2016). P. copri variants 1 and 2 were the
most abundant ones in the stool samples. P. copri detection by qPCR positively correlated with
P. copri detection by 16S sequencing (Figure 1B). The qPCR screen reliably detected P. copri
in samples with >1% P. copri, as determined by 16S sequencing, but was less sensitive for
samples containing P. copri at lower relative abundance. We collected 83 isolates from eleven
individuals harboring P. copri (Table 1), one of whom had <1% P. copri (Methods).

Variability in P. copri isolates
Our earlier study indicated differences in the P. copri genomes from new onset rheumatoid
arthritis and healthy individuals (Scher et al., 2013). Other studies have since described genetic
variation between strains from healthy individuals (De Filippis et al., 2019; Zhao et al., 2019).
We assessed whether genetic diversity existed between P. copri isolates from different
individuals, or, furthermore, between isolates from the same individual, by sequencing the full
genomes of the isolates. Alignment of filtered isolate sequencing reads to the P. copri PanPhlAn
database revealed that fewer than 60% of reads mapped to the reference genome, indicating
unexpected and unexplored diversity of P. copri genomes in our isolates (Figure 2A) (Scholz et
al., 2016).

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Evaluation of the de novo assembled genomes revealed low contamination and similar genome
size among all isolates (Table S2) (Bankevich et al., 2012; Parks et al., 2015). Phylogenetic
analysis based on the 16S rRNA gene revealed that most of the isolates clustered with Prevotella
copri DSM 18205 (Figure 2B). One isolate clustered with Paraprevotella, and three isolates
clustered with other species of Prevotella; these four isolates were excluded from the rest of the
analysis. A separate phylogenetic analysis based on 30 conserved ribosomal proteins further
confirmed that the isolates clustered with P. copri, and also revealed distinct clades (Figure 2C).
Comparison with a catalog of P. copri genomes from metagenomic assembly confirmed that
most isolates were in a main clade (clade A), four isolates were in another clade (clade C), and
one isolate each was in two additional clades (clades B and D) (Tett et al., 2019). Hosts AQ, A,
and AA harbored isolates belonging to more than one clade (Figure 2C).

P. copri genomic diversity between hosts
Despite close phylogenetic placement, most isolates exhibited striking genetic dissimilarities to
the P. copri reference strain (Figure 2A). To better understand the differences in the P. copri
genomes, we compared the presence and absence of predicted ORFs in all the isolates (Figure
2D). This analysis revealed a core genome of approximately 1750 genes, suggesting accessory
genomes ranging from approximately 1250-2250 genes per isolate.

Clustering of the isolates by presence/absence of predicted ORFs revealed that isolates often
clustered by donor. When isolates from the same donor fell into the same clade, accessory
genomes were often unique to isolates from individual hosts, as visualized by blocks of genes in
the accessory genomes in Figure 2D. Host AK had isolates with distinct accessory genomes

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

within the same clade (Figures 2C and 2D). Annotation of the genomes revealed that, among
other functions, many of the host-specific genes were involved in polysaccharide transport, as
indicated by the high frequency of susC genes (Figure 2D).

Polysaccharide utilization prediction
SusC is the bacterial transmembrane protein that transports polysaccharides into the periplasm.
SusC collaborates with the outer-membrane glycan-binding protein SusD, as well as other
proteins, to bind and digest polysaccharides. Conveniently, the genes for this polysaccharide
utilization machinery usually occur grouped in close proximity to one another in the genome in
polysaccharide utilization loci (PULs) in Bacteroidetes, although occasionally genes encoding
polysaccharide catabolism enzymes are located elsewhere in the genome (Sonnenburg et al.,
2010). We hypothesized that the genetic diversity of susC genes might indicate functional
diversity in polysaccharide utilization by the isolates. We surveyed the susC and surrounding
genes in the isolate genomes to predict the repertoire of PULs and, by extension, polysaccharide
substrates for the P. copri isolates.

By clustering susC genes at 90% identity, and examining the neighboring gene products within
each genome, we identified 125 susC gene clusters with a neighboring susD gene, which we
called predicted PULs (pPULs) (Methods, Figure S2, Table S3). Based on the genes flanking
susC in each pPUL, we predicted the substrate for 87 pPULs. Due to a high frequency of
hypothetical proteins, we were unable to predict substrates for 38 pPULs, which were classified
as “PULs of unknown substrate.” The predicted substrate, as well as the distribution within
isolate genomes, was analyzed for each pPUL (Figure 3A). The same substrate was often

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

predicted to be targeted by PULs with different susC clusters in different isolate genomes. For
example, xylan was the pPUL substrate for susC clusters 2, 65, and 3. SusC cluster 2 was only
in isolate genomes from individual BU, susC cluster 65 was only in the genome of isolate A622,
and susC cluster 3 was only in isolate genomes from individual P. We identified unique pPULs
for beta-glucanases and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidases (Figure 3B). Although beta-glucanases
break down linkages in beta-glucan, and alpha-L-arabinofuranosidases break down linkages in
rhamnogalacturonan and arabinan, a polysaccharide substrate containing both linkages has not
been described. In contrast with several Bacteroides species, which catabolize polysaccharides
from both animal and plant sources, all identified pPUL substrates for P. copri isolates were
from plant sources, and none were from animal sources (Martens et al., 2011; Salyers AA, 1982).
Consistent with this prediction, the V1-V3 16S sequences of select isolates were most closely
related to two previously reported non-omnivore-associated P. copri 16S sequences (De Filippis
et al., 2016) (Figure S3, Supplemental file 2).

Consistent with the 17 predicted PULs for P. copri DSM 18205, the number of predicted PULs
per isolate ranged from 14-28, with a median of 23 (Terrapon et al., 2018). Intestinal Prevotella
have been reported to utilize xylan and, as expected, xylan pPULs were ubiquitously represented
throughout the isolate genomes (Tan et al., 2018). A survey of the xylan pPULs in our dataset
revealed additional features (Figure S4): All isolates contained xylan pPULs, as many as seven.
Each genome contained 4-5 xylan catabolism enzymes that were present in pPULs. SusC/D
pairs in xylan pPULs often occurred in tandem.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Polysaccharide utilization in vitro
Based on the pPUL analysis, we predicted that P. copri isolates would grow in the presence of
plant polysaccharides identified in the pPUL substrate repertoire (Figure 3A). We therefore
tested the ability of P. copri isolates to use predicted polysaccharides as the sole carbon source in
vitro (Table S4, substrates in bold in Figure 3A). Growth on individual polysaccharide
substrates revealed functional diversity between isolates (Figure 4A, 4B, Figure S5). For
example, isolate AA108 reached a high OD when pullulan was provided as the sole carbon
source, but isolates P54 and T2112 did not. Interestingly, isolates from the same individual grew
in the presence of different polysaccharides: compared to isolate AK1212, isolate AK2718 grew
to a higher OD in the presence of PGA and rhamnogalacturonan, and a lower OD in the presence
of beta-glucan and starch. As predicted, none of the isolates grew when the animal
polysaccharides chondroitin or heparin were provided as the sole carbon source (Figure S5).
Growth (or lack of growth) on particular polysaccharides distinguished isolates from each clade
(Figure 4B, Table 2). In particular, arabinan, levan, inulin, xyloglucan, beta-glucan, and
glucomannan growth distinguished isolates from each clade. All isolates except AQ1173 (which
fell into clade B) grew on arabinoxylan and arabinan (Figure 4A and 4B). Isolate AQ1173 also
failed to grow on xyloglucan and glucomannan. Isolate A622 (which fell into clade D) failed to
grow on both levan and inulin. Tested isolates from clade C failed to grow on beta-glucan,
xyloglucan, glucomannan, and rhamnogalacturonan I. Tested isolates from clade A grew well on
most substrates, although there was a range of growth among clade A isolates on several
polysaccharide sources.

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Isolates AQ1173 and A622 were the only isolates that fell into clades B and D, respectively.
Since growth data from single isolates limited our ability to generalize to those clades, we asked
whether pPULs for relevant polysaccharides were present or absent in these clades using P. copri
metagenome-assembled genomes (MAGs) reconstructed from metagenomic datasets (Tett et al.,
2019) (Methods, Figure 4D). Consistent with our observation that isolate AQ1173 (Clade B)
lacked arabinan, arabinoxylan, and glucomannan PULs and also did not grow in the presence of
those polysaccharides (Figure 4), the Clade B P. copri MAGS lacked pPULs capable of
degrading those polysaccharides. The Clade B MAGs did contain pPULs capable of degrading
beta-glucan, however, consistent with our pPUL analysis and growth observations. pPULs were
found for glucomannan and arabinan in the Clade D P. copri MAGs consistent with our
predictions and growth observations for isolate A622 (Clade D) (Figure 4).

Polysaccharide growth predictions
We next evaluated how well the pPULs analysis predicted in vitro growth: 170
isolate/polysaccharide conditions matched predictions while 85 did not (Figure 4C). We
observed 42 instances in which we did not predict particular polysaccharide utilization by the
isolate, yet we observed growth. For 29 of these cases of unpredicted growth, we found genes
encoding relevant polysaccharide breakdown enzymes elsewhere in the genome. Perhaps the
genes are part of fragmented PULs (as has been observed in Bacteroides fructan PULs
(Sonnenburg et al., 2010)), or are simply located on a contig separate from the rest of the PUL.
More puzzlingly, we observed isolates that failed to grow on a particular substrate, despite
presence of a corresponding intact pPUL in the genome. For example, we predicted
arabinogalactan PULs in most of genomes of clade A, yet most failed to grow on this substrate,

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and those that did, particularly P. copri isolate BVe41210, grew poorly. Perhaps P. copri
isolates prefer a different form or source of arabinogalactan. Additionally, substrate predictions
were based on gene annotations that may be incomplete or inaccurate. Overall, the pPUL
analysis performed well in predicting growth. Welch’s t-test on predicted growth or unpredicted
growth had a p-value < 0.0001 (Methods).

Discussion:
In this study, we observed genomic and functional diversity of human intestinal P. copri isolates.
Whole genome sequencing exposed diversity of P. copri isolates, demonstrated by the low
percentage of isolate whole genome reads that mapped to the P. copri PanPhlAn database.
Within-species genomic variation, both between individuals and within individuals, was
demonstrated by genetic diversity of susC genes and PULs and linked to functional growth of
isolates on predicted plant polysaccharides. PULs predicted for several polysaccharides in large
metagenomic datasets support our predictions and growth data for representative isolates,
indicating that the results of this study may be generalizable beyond the isolates shown here.

Variability in P. copri genomes
ORF presence/absence among isolates revealed host-specific genes in the accessory genome,
several of which were susC transport protein genes. The variability of the susC genes associated
with P. copri strains in different hosts is intriguing, given their common function of transporting
glycans across the outer membrane. Since susC gene products are on the cell surface, they may
be susceptible to selective pressure from the immune system, e.g. antibodies. Another possibility

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

is that susC products from different isolates have slightly different substrates, as has been
observed in two closely related B. thetaiotaomicron strains (Joglekar et al., 2018).

In addition to susC genes, we also observed integrases, transposases, and transcriptional
regulators among the host-specific genes in the accessory genome. These genes may reflect the
way P. copri behaves within the host intestine, which may be influenced by the host diet or other
microbes. Isolates from host AK all fell into the same clade and possessed two distinct
accessory genomes (Figure 2D), suggesting distinct niches for each type of isolate. Perhaps one
type of isolate inhabits the cecum, the other the colon; alternatively, one type could reside in the
lumen, while the other could be mucosa-associated. Further investigation of the genes unique to
each host or isolate may reveal unique roles for individual isolates.

P. copri presence in the human intestine may be diet-dependent
In humans, differences in P. copri 16S sequences and metagenomes have been correlated with
host diet (De Filippis et al., 2019; De Filippis et al., 2016). Although our study lacks host diet
information, the PUL analysis predicted and in vitro growth experiments confirmed that the P.
copri isolates used only plant polysaccharides. A previous study found that particular P. copri
V1-V3 16S sequences were associated with diet (De Filippis et al., 2016). The V1-V3 sequences
of select isolates from different clades in this study were most closely related to two nonomnivore-associated sequences, consistent with their growth on plant polysaccharides (Figure
S3). Although the dynamics of dietary and intestinal growth of P. copri within a complex
microbiome require experimental validation, in vitro data presented here suggest that plant
polysaccharides promote P. copri growth, but animal polysaccharides do not. These data

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

provide a possible mechanism for the correlation between vegetable-rich diets and abundance of
intestinal Prevotella: perhaps continuous availability of dietary plant polysaccharides is required
to maintain Prevotella presence in the gut, and their absence may result in elimination of
Prevotella from the human intestinal microbiome.

In hosts with more than one strain of P. copri, representative isolates often complemented each
other to grow in the presence of more polysaccharides than any individual isolate. This point
was illustrated best by isolates from donor AQ: isolates AQ1173 and AQ1179 did not grow on
xyloglucan or glucomannan, but AQ1149 grew on both polysaccharides (Figure 4A). These
results suggest that the total P. copri population in hosts with multiple strains of P. copri was
capable of catabolizing a greater diversity of polysaccharides than any individual P. copri strain.
Indeed, a separate study found that non-Western microbiomes contained multiple P. copri
clades, and that some carbohydrate active enzymes were differentially represented between
clades (Tett et al., 2019). Whether microbiomes of individuals with only one P. copri strain
completely lack the ability to break down additional polysaccharides or rely on other bacterial
species to maintain a full complement of polysaccharide digestion should be the subject of future
metagenomic studies.

Prevotella polysaccharide utilization
Although the pPUL analysis predicted growth surprisingly well, incorrect predictions may
indicate interesting biology or areas in need of technical improvements. In cases in which PULs
were predicted but growth was not observed, perhaps mutations in the genes encoding the
enzymes or regulators have rendered the gene products non-functional. Future studies should aim

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

to evaluate how often and how rapidly such mutations might occur in intestinal commensals.
Open genomes may account for some cases in which polysaccharide utilization was not
predicted by the presence of a PUL, yet growth was observed. If a PUL were split across
contigs, it would be impossible to accurately predict its substrate. Recent closure of a P. copri
genome from metagenomic analysis may help reduce such instances in future studies (Moss and
Bhatt, 2018).

Utilization of xylan, which is found in cereal grains, has been repeatedly established in
Prevotella species and in P. copri specifically (Accetto and Avgustin, 2019; da Silva et al., 2012;
Dodd et al., 2011; Tan et al., 2018). Two distinct PULs encoding enzymes not previously
associated with xylan catabolism were identified for corn xylan, birchwood xylan, and
arabinoxylan in multiple B. ovatus and B. xylanisolvens strains (Rogowski et al., 2015). The
numerous xylan-degrading enzymes and xylan pPULs identified in P. copri isolates in this study
suggest that P. copri may have an expanded xylan degrading enzyme repertoire, and possibly a
superior ability to target xylans, compared to other intestinal bacteria.

We identified three separate pPULs with enzymes capable of breaking down linkages found in
beta-glucan, rhamnogalacturonan, and arabinan. The structure of the corresponding
polysaccharide is mysterious. Arabinose and xylose decorate the beta-glucan backbone of
xyloglucan. Accordingly, xyloglucan degrading PULs with beta-glucan, xylan, and arabinan
catabolizing enzymes are well described in Bacteroides (Larsbrink et al., 2014; Nishinari et al.,
2007). Structures and corresponding enzymes for beta-glucan, arabinan, and rhamnose, but not
xylose have not yet been described. Arabinose and rhamnose cleavage enzymes imply that the

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

PUL might act on a complex pectin, although beta-glucan linkages have not been described in
pectins. One possibility is that some of the genes in these pPULs are non-functional. A more
intriguing possibility is that these pPULs are unique to Prevotella and utilize a yet undescribed
polysaccharide.

Xyloglucan is an abundant polysaccharide in vascularized plants, seeds, and food additives, yet
xyloglucan utilization by known intestinal microbes is relatively rare, demonstrated only in a low
proportion of Bacteroides species (Larsbrink et al., 2014; Nishinari et al., 2007). Despite its
abundance in the human diet, xyloglucan utilization was overwhelmingly difficult to predict
(Figure 4C). In fact, we observed the keystone xyloglucan endo-beta-1,4-glucanase enzyme in
pPULs only in isolates A624 and AQ1179 which did not grow in the presence of xyloglucan
(Larsbrink et al., 2014). The same enzyme was encoded in the genomes of isolates AA615,
AA917, and A622, although not in close proximity to susC and susD genes. All other genomes
lacked this enzyme. Perhaps Prevotella possess novel xyloglucan PUL structures or enzymes for
this abundant dietary polysaccharide. Given the rarity of xyloglucan catabolism genes reported
to date in Bacteroides, perhaps P. copri is responsible for xyloglucan degradation in hosts
lacking Bacteroides species possessing xyloglucan-breakdown genes.

Implications
The collection of P. copri isolates and their corresponding polysaccharide preferences described
herein enable future experimentation in vitro and in vivo with isolates whose cultivation was
previously elusive perhaps because of the absence of their required specific plant
polysaccharides. The human genome encodes enzymes that break down only starch, sucrose,

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

and lactose (El Kaoutari et al., 2013). Carbohydrates make up 45-65% of typical human diets
(Board., 2005). Therefore, the ability of intestinal microbes to break down polysaccharides is
critical for human survival. Whether P. copri strain-type and presence is meaningful to human
health, or simply an indication of diet, requires further investigation. Future studies that aim to
assess human microbiome interactions with disease will require dietary intervention or, at
minimum, collection of patient dietary habits or records. To avoid confounding effects of diet,
future metagenomic analyses may better illuminate disease-associated genes by excluding genes
known to interact with host diet. If P. copri does exacerbate or ameliorate disease in specific
populations, diet may be readily manipulated to decrease or increase P. copri growth.
Establishment of polysaccharide substrate preferences for genetically diverse human P. copri
isolates allows for informed experimentation in vitro and in vivo, as well as clinical study design
and interpretation.
Acknowledgements:
We thank Paul Zappile and Adriana Heguy at the NYU Genome Technology Center for
sequencing support. We thank Rhina Medina and Lucy Alvarado for sample collection, Michael
Fischbach for Bacteroides strains, Gretchen Diehl for critical reading of the manuscript, and
Dawn Hershey for helpful discussions about dietary fiber. We thank Curtis Huttenhower for
helpful discussions and for connecting us with NS and AT.

The NYU Genome Technology Center was partially supported by the Cancer Center Support Grant
P30CA016087. HF-P was supported by an NYU-HCC CTSI grant (1TL1TR001447). JUS is
funded through NIH/NIAMS R01AR074500. JUS is further supported by The Riley Family
Foundation, The Beatriz Snyder Foundation, the Rheumatology Research Foundation and The

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Judith and Stewart Colton Center for Autoimmunity. LMC was supported by NIH
Grant 1UL1RR029893. NS was supported by European Research Council (ERC-STG project
MetaPG-716575). RB was supported by the Simons Foundation. DRL was supported by the
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, the Colton Center for Autoimmunity, and the Rainin
Foundation.

Author contributions:
HF-P, VR, and CM designed the study with input from DRL and RB. HF-P isolated Prevotella
and designed and performed all experiments, with isolation strategy by LMC. JUS provided stool
samples from NORA patients. CM analyzed 16S sequencing data and genomes. VR predicted
PULs from the isolate genomes and helped design growth experiments. AT and NS identified
susC clusters in metagenomic data. CG provided technical assistance for growth experiments
and analysis of PULs. AW and JDW-G helped analyze genome and growth data. HF-P wrote
the manuscript with contributions from VR, CM, and DRL, and input from all other authors.

Declaration of interests:
The authors declare no competing interests.

Figure legends:
Figure 1. Identification of Prevotella copri in human stool. A. Relative abundance of
Prevotella copri 16S SNVs in human stool quantified by 16S sequencing. Percentage of total
reads from 16S rRNA gene sequencing is shown. Stars indicate individuals from whom P. copri

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

was isolated. B. Correlation of P. copri abundance determined by 16S sequencing and qPCR
using each qPCR primer set (Table S1).

Figure 2. Hidden diversity in Prevotella copri whole genome sequences. A. Alignment of
whole genome sequencing reads of each isolate to the P. copri PanPhlAn database. Each point
represents alignment of a single isolate genome. B. Phylogenetic tree based on the 16S rRNA
gene sequences. P. copri isolates are shown in blue. Three Prevotella isolates and one
Paraprevotella isolate that were not P. copri are shown in red. These isolates were excluded
from further analyses. C. Phylogenetic tree based on the concatenated alignment of 30
conserved ribosomal protein gene sequences. D. Heatmap of P. copri isolate whole genomes
showing presence and absence of predicted proteins, and highlighting susC genes. Predicted
proteins were clustered at 90% amino acid identity. Blue = present; white = absent; orange =
susC. Isolates from the same donor are indicated by color in line 1 above the heatmap, as well as
by the first letters of the isolate name below the heatmap.

Figure 3. Annotation of polysaccharide utilization loci in P. copri isolates. A. PUL substrates
were predicted for each susC cluster gene group (Figure S2, Table S3, and Methods).
Predicted substrate usage for each isolate or group of isolates is indicated by a blue box. Stars
next to cluster IDs indicate susC genes that have different surrounding enzyme genes in different
isolates. B. Schematic of modified beta-glucan pPULs (polysaccharide source not yet
identified). Protein families are labeled, and specific predicted functions are listed beneath
relevant genes. Hypothetical proteins are unlabeled in black. Genes unlikely to be relevant to
polysaccharide utilization are labeled and colored gray.

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4. Growth of P. copri isolates on polysaccharides. Isolates were cultured anaerobically
at 37 degrees C in YCFA media supplemented with individual polysaccharides as the sole carbon
source. OD600 was measured at 24, 48, and 72h. Data represent 2-3 experiments, with each
condition tested in duplicate or triplicate. The highest OD from 24, 48, or 72h for each condition
for each experiment is shown. AS: media prepared by Anaerobe Systems. Heatmap (A) shows
the mean of the highest OD for each condition of each experiment. P. copri complex clades are
indicated above the heatmap. Graphs (B) show the highest measured OD on select
polysaccharide substrates. Isolates from the same P. copri complex clade are plotted in the same
color (Tett et al., 2019). C. Growth data were matched to growth predictions based on the
presence or absence of pPULs in the genomes. Growth was considered positive if the OD was
statistically significant, as determined by one-way ANOVA and post hoc Dunnett’s test using the
H2O (no carbon source) as the control (Methods). D. PULs were predicted in P. copri MAGs.
Proportion of P. copri MAGs within each clade containing pPULs for select polysaccharides is
shown.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Tables:
Table 1. Number of Prevotella copri isolates collected from individual donors.
Donor
K

Number of P. copri isolates
6

AK
AU
A
P
AA
T
AP
AQ
BU
BVe

28
1
2
2
3
17
10
8
3
3

Total

83

Table 2. Summary of P. copri isolate growth by P. copri complex clade
clade
Substrate
B D C A
Corn xylan
+ + +/- +/Beechwood xylan
- + +/- +/Arabinoxylan
- + +/- +/Levan
- - +/Inulin
+ - + +/Pectin
+ + + +/Polygalacturonic acid
- - + +/Rhamnogalacturonan I + + - +/Arabinan
- + + +/Arabinogalactan
- - + +/Xyloglucan
- + - +/Beta-glucan
+ + - +/Starch
+ + + +/Pullulan
- - + +/Glucomannan
- + - +/Chondroitin
- Heparin
+ -

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

STAR Methods:
KEY RESOURCES TABLE
REAGENT or RESOURCE
Biological Samples
Fecal samples from new onset rheumatoid
arthritis patients and healthy controls

SOURCE

IDENTIFIER

This study

N/A

Qiagen
Illumina, California,
USA
Fisher Scientific

Cat No./ID: 12888-100
20015962

Fisher Scientific

352059

Bio-Rad

2239391

Deposited Data
P. copri isolate genomes

This study

16S sequencing

This study

NCBI-BioProject:
PRJNA559898 and PATRIC:
https://www.patricbrc.org/
NCBI-BioProject:
PRJNA559898

Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Prevotella copri DSM 18205
Bacteroides ovatus ATCC8482

DSMZ
Michael Fischbach

DSM 18205

Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron VPI-5482
P. copri isolates

Michael Fischbach
This study

N/A
N/A

Oligonucleotides
Primers for Prevotella and P. copri screen, see
Table S1

This study

N/A

Software and Algorithms
DADA2

Callahan et al., 2016

Trimmomatic

Bolger et al., 2014

SPAdes

Bankevich et al., 2012

PanPhlAn

Scholz et al., 2016

CheckM

Parks et al., 2015

PATRIC
MUSCLE

(Wattam et al., 2014)
Edgar, 2004

https://benjjneb.github.io/dada
2/
http://www.usadellab.org/cms/
?page=trimmomatic
http://cab.spbu.ru/software/sp
ades/
https://bitbucket.org/CibioCM/
panphlan/src/default/
https://ecogenomics.github.io/
CheckM/
https://www.patricbrc.org/
https://www.drive5.com/muscl
e/

Critical Commercial Assays
PowerSoil DNA isolation kit
TruSeq DNA PCR-free Library Prep Kit
Wheaton™ CryoELITE™ Cryogenic Storage
Vials
FALCON 14 ml Polypropylene Round-Bottom
Tubes
Titertube® Micro Test Tubes

22

02-912-737

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

RAxML

Stamatakis, 2014

Silva SINA aligner

(Pruesse et al., 2012)

Other
Anaerobic Tissue Transport Medium Surgery
Pack – ATTMSP
Brucella Blood Agar - BRU
Laked Brucella Blood Agar w/ Kanamycin and
Vancomycin – LKV
Peptone Yeast Broth with Glucose - PYG
Yeast Casitone Fatty Acids Broth with
Carbohydrates – YCFAC Broth
Polysaccharides, see Table S4

https://cme.hits.org/exelixis/web/software/r
axml/index.html
https://www.arbsilva.de/aligner/

Anaerobe Systems

AS-915

Anaerobe Systems
Anaerobe Systems

AS-141
AS-112

Anaerobe Systems
Anaerobe Systems

AS-822
AS-680

see Table S4

see Table S4

LEAD CONTACT AND MATERIALS AVAILABILITY
Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be
fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Dan R. Littman (Dan.Littman@med.nyu.edu).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
Subjects enrolled in this study included new onset rheumatoid arthritis patients and healthy
controls, as described in STAR methods. Ethical approval was granted by the Institutional
Review Board of New York University School of Medicine.

METHOD DETAILS
Sample collection
Stool was collected into anaerobic collection tubes (Anaerobe Systems) from healthy controls
and new onset rheumatoid arthritis patients, deidentified, and frozen at -80°C. New onset
rheumatoid arthritis patients were untreated, presenting with symptoms, seropositive for anticitrullinated protein antibodies, and not on antibiotics in the previous six months.

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

qPCR Screen for Prevotella
Genomic fecal DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the MoBio PowerSoil DNA
extraction kit. Fecal DNA was screened for the presence of P. copri using qPCR primers
designed for six conserved regions of the P. copri genome (Scher et al., 2013), as well as two
conserved regions of the Prevotella 16S gene (Table S1). Universal primers specific for the 16S
rRNA gene were used to quantify total bacterial load in each sample. qPCR was performed with
the SYBR green master mix on the Roche Lightcycler 480, with the following cycle conditions:
90°C for 5 minutes, then 40 cycles of 95°C for 10 seconds, 60°C for 30 seconds, and 72°C for 30
seconds. Genomic DNA from P. copri DSM 18205 was used to generate a standard curve. The
standard curve was used to determine the absolute quantity of Prevotella and 16S in a sample.
Fold change was calculated by dividing absolute quantity of Prevotella by absolute quantity of
16S. Feces with a fold change > 0.1 for any Prevotella-specific primer set were considered
positive and used to isolate P. copri, with the exception of sample AU, which had a lower fold
change.

Isolation of Prevotella
P. copri was isolated from Prevotella-positive feces by anaerobic quadrant streaking of PBSdiluted and undiluted stool on BRU and LKV plates (Anaerobe Systems), then incubated
anaerobically at 37°C for 24-48 h. Isolate colonies were picked, enumerated, streaked on a fresh
plate, and the inoculation loop dipped into PCR grade water. The loop-dipped PCR water was
used with the qPCR primer sets (above) to screen for P. copri. Prevotella-positive-screened
isolates were confirmed by Sanger sequencing of the V3-V4 hypervariable region of the 16S

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

rRNA gene, and finding >97% identity to known Prevotella species. Glycerol stocks of
Prevotella isolates were frozen at -80°C.

16S rRNA gene sequencing
Genomic fecal DNA was extracted from fecal samples using the MoBio PowerSoil DNA
extraction kit. TheV3-V4 region of the 16S rRNA gene was amplified, purified, and sequenced
on Illumina MiSeq (Caporaso et al., 2012). Sequences generated from amplicon sequencing
were trimmed (maxN=0, truncQ=2) and denoised using DADA2 (Callahan et al., 2016).
Sequences were annotated using the Silva nr v128 database.

Whole genome sequencing
Isolates were grown on BRU plates for 24-48 hours, until a healthy lawn was present. The lawn
was suspended in PYG media (Anaerobe Systems), pelleted, and DNA was isolated with the
MoBio PowerSoil DNA isolation kit. Libraries were prepared for sequencing with the TruSeq
PCR-free library preparation kit and sheared to 500bp fragment length. Prepared libraries were
sequenced on Illumina HiSeq2500 2x100 bp. Paired-end sequences were trimmed using
Trimmomatic (Bolger et al., 2014), then whole genomes were assembled using SPAdes
(Bankevich et al., 2012). Trimmed reads were also mapped to the panphlan_pcopri_16 database
(https://bitbucket.org/CibioCM/panphlan/wiki/Pangenome%20databases) using PanPhlAn
(default parameters, Figure 2A) (Scholz et al., 2016). Quality and completeness of the
assemblies were evaluated using CheckM (Parks et al., 2015). Genomes were annotated in
PATRIC and are available at https://www.patricbrc.org/ and under BioProject PRJNA559898.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Presence and absence of predicted proteins can be visualized at
https://flatironinstitute.github.io/genome_cluster_array_visualization/.

Phylogenetic Trees
Representative genomes for the Prevotella and Bacteroides genera were downloaded from
NCBI. For each genome, a set of 30 ribosomal protein genes (LSU ribosomal proteins L1, L2,
L3, L4, L5, L6, L10, L13, L14, L15, L18, L22, L23, L24, L29, and SSU ribosomal proteins S2,
S3, S4, S5, S7, S8, S9, S10, S11, S12, S13, S14, S15, S17, S19) were identified and aligned
using MUSCLE (Edgar, 2004). A maximum-likelihood tree was calculated using RAxML (-m
GTRCAT; (Stamatakis, 2014)) from a concatenated alignment of the 30 ribosomal protein genes.
A 16S rRNA gene tree was also estimated from the alignment of full length 16S rRNA gene
sequences using Silva’s SINA aligner (https://www.arb-silva.de/aligner/) and RAxML (-m
GTRCAT).

SusC analysis and polysaccharide utilization prediction
All annotated susC genes in the isolate genomes were clustered at >90% identity. This analysis
revealed 168 susC gene clusters throughout all the genomes (Figure S2). For each susC gene
cluster, ten flanking genes on either side were pulled from the genome and annotated (Table S3).
Flanking genes were examined and classified according to predicted substrate. SusC clusters
lacking a companion susD gene, as well as those comprised of genes unrelated to polysaccharide
catabolism, were excluded from the pPUL repertoire analysis.

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

In vitro polysaccharide growth assays
B. thetaiotaomicron, B. ovatus (both from Michael Fischbach), Prevotella copri DSM 18205
(DSMZ), and P. copri isolates were grown anaerobically on BRU plates (Anaerobe Systems) for
48h at 37 degrees C. Strains were passaged to YCFAC liquid media (Anaerobe Systems). 48h
later, cultures were passaged to pre-reduced YCFA +/- 0.5% (w/v) individual polysaccharides
(Table S4) at a dilution of 1:100 in a total volume of 1ml (Browne et al., 2016). Cultures were
incubated anaerobically in sterile polypropylene tubes at 37 degrees C. Importantly, P. copri
grew in Wheaton™ CryoELITE™ Cryogenic Storage Vials, FALCON 14 ml Polypropylene
Round-Bottom Tubes, and Titertube® Micro Test Tubes (see Key Resources Table), but not in
Axygen™ Storage Microplates from Fisher Scientific (Catalog no. 14-222-224). Every 24h, 100
µl of each culture was transferred to a flat-bottom 96-well plate, and OD600 was measured with
the Envision plate reader. OD600 for each culture condition was subtracted from the average
blank OD600 for the corresponding polysaccharide. Cultures were grown in duplicate or
triplicate. For each condition, the maximum average OD600 from the 24h, 48h, or 72h time
point was determined and duplicate or triplicate values were used in Figure 4A, 4B, and Figure
S5.

PUL prediction in P. copri MAGs
SusC and susD homologs in P. copri MAGs (Tett et al., 2019) were identified by blastp
(Identity>75% , Bitscore > 300) using susC and susD predicted proteins from the P. copri isolate
genomes. Only MAG contigs containing both susC and susD homologs within 10 gene products
were considered further. For each susC centroid, the PUL operon was extended to include the 10
gene products upstream and downstream of the first and last occurrence of a susC or SusD

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

homolog. Each PUL was checked for CAZy annotations (Lombard et al., 2014) predicted using
HMMSEARCH (version 3.1b2) (Eddy, 2011) against dbCAN HMMs v6 (Yin et al., 2012) with
an E-value < 1e-18 and coverage > 0.35. PULs were predicted by searching for the presence of
CAZymes known to act on known polysaccharides. Predictions are presented as the proportion
of P. copri MAGs containing at least one pPUL out of all P. copri MAGs within each P. copri
complex clade.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
Prediction analysis
For each isolate used in the in vitro polysaccharide growth assay, a one-way ANOVA was
performed on the maximum OD for each polysaccharide. A post hoc Dunnet’s test was
performed with the H2O condition (no carbon source) as the negative control. Isolatepolysaccharide conditions with OD values that were statistically significant compared to the
H2O control were considered positive for growth. Isolate- polysaccharide conditions that were
not significant were considered negative for growth.

Statistical analysis of prediction
Isolate-polysaccharide conditions were separated according to whether growth was predicted: if
a pPUL was present in the genome of an isolate, the isolate-polysaccharide condition was
considered “growth predicted.” If a pPUL was absent in the genome of an isolate, the isolatepolysaccharide condition was considered “growth not predicted.” Isolate-polysaccharide
conditions that were statistically significant as determined by a one-way ANOVA with a post
hoc Dunnet’s test using the H2O condition (no carbon source) as the negative control were given

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

a score of 1 and isolate-polysaccharide conditions that were not significant were given a score of
0. Welch’s t test was performed on the data.

DATA AVAILABILITY
All 16S sequencing data and whole genome sequencing data are available under BioProject
PRJNA559898.

Supplemental Information:
Figure S1. PCR-based screen for P. copri-containing fecal microbiota; related to Figure 1
Eight sets of primers were designed to amplify conserved regions of the P. copri genome. Fecal
DNA from each donor was screened by qPCR using each primer set (Table S1). Stars indicate
individuals from whom P. copri was isolated.

Figure S2. Identification of polysaccharide utilization loci in P. copri isolates; related to
Figure 3
SusC homologs were identified in the genomes and clustered by 90% sequence identity.
Adjacent polysaccharide genes were identified and used to annotate putative PULs from each
susC cluster.

Figure S3. Prevotella 16S V1-V3 sequences; related to Figure 3
Representative isolates were selected and the full length 16S sequence was determined by Sanger
sequencing. 16S hypervariable V1-V3 sequences were aligned with Prevotella 16S V1-V3

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

sequences described in De Filippis, et al. (2016) using Clustal Omega. A simple phylogeny is
shown.

Figure S4. Xylan enzyme distribution in xylan pPULs; related to Figure 3
Xylan pPULs and xylan-degrading enzyme annotations are shown. Presence of each xylandegrading enzyme in each pPUL is indicated by a blue box.

Figure S5. Growth of P. copri isolates on polysaccharides; related to Figure 4
OD600 was measured for indicated isolates and polysaccharides after ~24h, ~48h, ~72h
anaerobic incubation at 37 degrees C. Data represent 2-3 experiments. Each condition was tested
in duplicate or triplicate. Data show the highest OD from 24, 48, or 72h for each condition for
each experiment.

Supplemental Tables:
Table S1. P. copri primers table, related to Figure 1 and Figure S1
Table S2. CheckM summary, related to Figure 2
Table S3. SusC gene clusters, related to Figure 3
Table S4. Polysaccharides used, related to Figure 4

Supplemental Files:
File S1. P. copri 16S SNV sequences, related to Figure 1
File S2. P. copri 16S V1-V3 sequences aligned to P. copri 16S sequences from De Filippis et al.,
2016, related to Figure 3

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

References:
Accetto, T., and Avgustin, G. (2015). Polysaccharide utilization locus and CAZYme genome
repertoires reveal diverse ecological adaptation of Prevotella species. Syst Appl Microbiol.
38(7), 453-461. Published online 2015/09/30 DOI: 10.1016/j.syapm.2015.07.007.
Accetto, T., and Avgustin, G. (2019). The diverse and extensive plant polysaccharide
degradative apparatuses of the rumen and hindgut Prevotella species: A factor in their
ubiquity? Syst Appl Microbiol. 42(2), 107-116. Published online 2019/03/12 DOI:
10.1016/j.syapm.2018.10.001.
Arumugam, M., Raes, J., Pelletier, E., Le Paslier, D., Yamada, T., Mende, D.R., Fernandes,
G.R., Tap, J., Bruls, T., Batto, J.M., et al. (2011). Enterotypes of the human gut microbiome.
Nature. 473(7346), 174-180. Published online 2011/04/22 DOI: 10.1038/nature09944.
Bankevich, A., Nurk, S., Antipov, D., Gurevich, A.A., Dvorkin, M., Kulikov, A.S., Lesin, V.M.,
Nikolenko, S.I., Pham, S., Prjibelski, A.D., et al. (2012). SPAdes: a new genome assembly
algorithm and its applications to single-cell sequencing. J Comput Biol. 19(5), 455-477.
Published online 2012/04/18 DOI: 10.1089/cmb.2012.0021.
Board., I.o.M.F.a.N. (2005). Dietary Reference Intakes: Recommended Intakes for Individuals of
Macronutrients., 1-5.
Bolger, A.M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for Illumina
sequence data. Bioinformatics. 30(15), 2114-2120. Published online 2014/04/04 DOI:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170.
Callahan, B.J., McMurdie, P.J., Rosen, M.J., Han, A.W., Johnson, A.J., and Holmes, S.P. (2016).
DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from Illumina amplicon data. Nat Methods.
13(7), 581-583. Published online 2016/05/24 DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3869.

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Caporaso, J.G., Lauber, C.L., Walters, W.A., Berg-Lyons, D., Huntley, J., Fierer, N., Owens,
S.M., Betley, J., Fraser, L., Bauer, M., et al. (2012). Ultra-high-throughput microbial
community analysis on the Illumina HiSeq and MiSeq platforms. The ISME Journal. 6(8),
1621-1624. DOI: 10.1038/ismej.2012.8.
Costea, P.I., Hildebrand, F., Arumugam, M., Backhed, F., Blaser, M.J., Bushman, F.D., de Vos,
W.M., Ehrlich, S.D., Fraser, C.M., Hattori, M., et al. (2018). Enterotypes in the landscape of
gut microbial community composition. Nat Microbiol. 3(1), 8-16. Published online
2017/12/20 DOI: 10.1038/s41564-017-0072-8.
da Silva, A.E., Marcelino, H.R., Gomes, M.C.S., Oliveira, E.E., Nagashima-Jr, T., and Egito,
E.S.T. (2012). Xylan, a Promising Hemicellulose for Pharmaceutical Use. Products and
Applications of Biopolymers.
De Filippis, F., Pasolli, E., Tett, A., Tarallo, S., Naccarati, A., De Angelis, M., Neviani, E.,
Cocolin, L., Gobbetti, M., Segata, N., et al. (2019). Distinct Genetic and Functional Traits of
Human Intestinal Prevotella copri Strains Are Associated with Different Habitual Diets. Cell
Host Microbe. 25(3), 444-453 e443. Published online 2019/02/26 DOI:
10.1016/j.chom.2019.01.004.
De Filippis, F., Pellegrini, N., Laghi, L., Gobbetti, M., and Ercolini, D. (2016). Unusual subgenus associations of faecal Prevotella and Bacteroides with specific dietary patterns.
Microbiome. 4(1), 57. Published online 2016/10/23 DOI: 10.1186/s40168-016-0202-1.
De Filippo, C., Cavalieri, D., Di Paola, M., Ramazzotti, M., Poullet, J.B., Massart, S., Collini, S.,
Pieraccini, G., and Lionetti, P. (2010). Impact of diet in shaping gut microbiota revealed by a
comparative study in children from Europe and rural Africa. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A.
107(33), 14691-14696. Published online 2010/08/04 DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1005963107.

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Dodd, D., Mackie, R.I., and Cann, I.K. (2011). Xylan degradation, a metabolic property shared
by rumen and human colonic Bacteroidetes. Mol Microbiol. 79(2), 292-304. Published online
2011/01/12 DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2958.2010.07473.x.
Eddy, S.R. (2011). Accelerated Profile HMM Searches. PLoS Computational Biology. 7(10),
e1002195. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002195.
Edgar, R.C. (2004). MUSCLE: multiple sequence alignment with high accuracy and high
throughput. Nucleic Acids Res. 32(5), 1792-1797. Published online 2004/03/23 DOI:
10.1093/nar/gkh340.
El Kaoutari, A., Armougom, F., Gordon, J.I., Raoult, D., and Henrissat, B. (2013). The
abundance and variety of carbohydrate-active enzymes in the human gut microbiota. Nat Rev
Microbiol. 11(7), 497-504. Published online 2013/06/12 DOI: 10.1038/nrmicro3050.
Ferrocino, I., Di Cagno, R., De Angelis, M., Turroni, S., Vannini, L., Bancalari, E., Rantsiou, K.,
Cardinali, G., Neviani, E., and Cocolin, L. (2015). Fecal Microbiota in Healthy Subjects
Following Omnivore, Vegetarian and Vegan Diets: Culturable Populations and rRNA DGGE
Profiling. PLOS ONE. 10(6), e0128669. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0128669.
Gupta, V.K., Chaudhari, N.M., Iskepalli, S., and Dutta, C. (2015). Divergences in gene repertoire
among the reference Prevotella genomes derived from distinct body sites of human. BMC
Genomics. 16, 153. Published online 2015/04/19 DOI: 10.1186/s12864-015-1350-6.
Hayashi, H., Shibata, K., Sakamoto, M., Tomita, S., and Benno, Y. (2007). Prevotella copri sp.
nov. and Prevotella stercorea sp. nov., isolated from human faeces. Int J Syst Evol Microbiol.
57(Pt 5), 941-946. Published online 2007/05/03 DOI: 10.1099/ijs.0.64778-0.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Hehemann, J.H., Correc, G., Barbeyron, T., Helbert, W., Czjzek, M., and Michel, G. (2010).
Transfer of carbohydrate-active enzymes from marine bacteria to Japanese gut microbiota.
Nature. 464(7290), 908-912. Published online 2010/04/09 DOI: 10.1038/nature08937.
Ibrahim, M., Subramanian, A., and Anishetty, S. (2017). Comparative pan genome analysis of
oral Prevotella species implicated in periodontitis. Functional & Integrative Genomics. 17(5),
513-536. DOI: 10.1007/s10142-017-0550-3.
Joglekar, P., Sonnenburg, E.D., Higginbottom, S.K., Earle, K.A., Morland, C., Shapiro-Ward, S.,
Bolam, D.N., Sonnenburg, J.L., Abbott, W., and Koropatkin, N. (2018). Genetic Variation of
the SusC/SusD Homologs from a Polysaccharide Utilization Locus Underlies Divergent
Fructan Specificities and Functional Adaptation in Bacteroides thetaiotaomicron Strains.
mSphere. 3(3), e00185-00118. DOI: 10.1128/mspheredirect.00185-18.
Koren, O., Knights, D., Gonzalez, A., Waldron, L., Segata, N., Knight, R., Huttenhower, C., and
Ley, R.E. (2013). A Guide to Enterotypes across the Human Body: Meta-Analysis of
Microbial Community Structures in Human Microbiome Datasets. PLoS Computational
Biology. 9(1), e1002863. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002863.
Larsbrink, J., Rogers, T.E., Hemsworth, G.R., McKee, L.S., Tauzin, A.S., Spadiut, O., Klinter,
S., Pudlo, N.A., Urs, K., Koropatkin, N.M., et al. (2014). A discrete genetic locus confers
xyloglucan metabolism in select human gut Bacteroidetes. Nature. 506(7489), 498-502.
Published online 2014/01/28 DOI: 10.1038/nature12907.
Li, M., Zhou, H., Hua, W., Wang, B., Wang, S., Zhao, G., Li, L., Zhao, L., and Pang, X. (2009).
Molecular diversity of Bacteroides spp. in human fecal microbiota as determined by groupspecific 16S rRNA gene clone library analysis. Systematic and Applied Microbiology. 32(3),
193-200. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.syapm.2009.02.001.

34

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Lin, A., Bik, E.M., Costello, E.K., Dethlefsen, L., Haque, R., Relman, D.A., and Singh, U.
(2013). Distinct Distal Gut Microbiome Diversity and Composition in Healthy Children from
Bangladesh and the United States. PLoS ONE. 8(1), e53838. DOI:
10.1371/journal.pone.0053838.
Liu, J., Cui, L., Yan, X., Zhao, X., Cheng, J., Zhou, L., Gao, J., Cao, Z., Xinhua, and Hu, S.
(2018). Analysis of Oral Microbiota Revealed High Abundance of Prevotella Intermedia in
Gout Patients. Cellular Physiology and Biochemistry. 49(5), 1804-1812. DOI:
10.1159/000493626.
Lombard, V., Golaconda Ramulu, H., Drula, E., Coutinho, P.M., and Henrissat, B. (2014). The
carbohydrate-active enzymes database (CAZy) in 2013. Nucleic Acids Research. 42(D1),
D490-D495. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1178.
Maeda, Y., Kurakawa, T., Umemoto, E., Motooka, D., Ito, Y., Gotoh, K., Hirota, K., Matsushita,
M., Furuta, Y., Narazaki, M., et al. (2016). Dysbiosis Contributes to Arthritis Development
via Activation of Autoreactive T Cells in the Intestine. Arthritis & Rheumatology. 68(11),
2646-2661. DOI: 10.1002/art.39783.
Martens, E.C., Chiang, H.C., and Gordon, J.I. (2008). Mucosal glycan foraging enhances fitness
and transmission of a saccharolytic human gut bacterial symbiont. Cell Host Microbe. 4(5),
447-457. Published online 2008/11/11 DOI: 10.1016/j.chom.2008.09.007.
Martens, E.C., Lowe, E.C., Chiang, H., Pudlo, N.A., Wu, M., McNulty, N.P., Abbott, D.W.,
Henrissat, B., Gilbert, H.J., Bolam, D.N., et al. (2011). Recognition and degradation of plant
cell wall polysaccharides by two human gut symbionts. PLoS Biol. 9(12), e1001221.
Published online 2011/12/30 DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001221.

35

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Moss, E.L., and Bhatt, A.S. (2018). Generating closed bacterial genomes from long-read
nanopore sequencing of microbiomes. bioRxiv. 489641. DOI: 10.1101/489641.
Nishinari, K., Takemasa, M., Zhang, H., and Takahashi, R. (2007). Storage Plant
Polysaccharides: Xyloglucans, Galactomannans, Glucomannans. (Elsevier), pp. 613-652.
Parks, D.H., Imelfort, M., Skennerton, C.T., Hugenholtz, P., and Tyson, G.W. (2015). CheckM:
assessing the quality of microbial genomes recovered from isolates, single cells, and
metagenomes. Genome Research. 25(7), 1043-1055. DOI: 10.1101/gr.186072.114.
Pruesse, E., Peplies, J., and Glöckner, F.O. (2012). SINA: Accurate high-throughput multiple
sequence alignment of ribosomal RNA genes. Bioinformatics. 28(14), 1823-1829. DOI:
10.1093/bioinformatics/bts252.
Raghavan, V., Lowe, E.C., Townsend, G.E., Bolam, D.N., and Groisman, E.A. (2014). Tuning
transcription of nutrient utilization genes to catabolic rate promotes growth in a gut
bacterium. Mol Microbiol. 93(5), 1010-1025. DOI: 10.1111/mmi.12714.
Rogowski, A., Briggs, J.A., Mortimer, J.C., Tryfona, T., Terrapon, N., Lowe, E.C., Baslé, A.,
Morland, C., Day, A.M., Zheng, H., et al. (2015). Glycan complexity dictates microbial
resource allocation in the large intestine. 6, 7481. DOI: 10.1038/ncomms8481.
Ruengsomwong S, L.-O.O., Jiang J, Wannissorn B, Nakayama J, Nitisinprasert S (2016).
Microbial community of healthy Thai vegetarians and non-vegetarians, their core gut
microbiota and pathogens risk. Journal of microbiology and biotechnology. 26(20), 17231735.
Salyers AA, O.B.M., Kotarski SF (1982). Utilization of Chondroitin Sulfate by Bacteroides
thetaiotaomicron Growing in Carbohydrate-Limited Continuous Culture. J Bacteriol. 150(3),
1008-1015.

36

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Scher, J.U., Sczesnak, A., Longman, R.S., Segata, N., Ubeda, C., Bielski, C., Rostron, T.,
Cerundolo, V., Pamer, E.G., Abramson, S.B., et al. (2013). Expansion of intestinal Prevotella
copri correlates with enhanced susceptibility to arthritis. Elife. 2, e01202. Published online
2013/11/07 DOI: 10.7554/eLife.01202.
Scholz, M., Ward, D.V., Pasolli, E., Tolio, T., Zolfo, M., Asnicar, F., Truong, D.T., Tett, A.,
Morrow, A.L., and Segata, N. (2016). Strain-level microbial epidemiology and population
genomics from shotgun metagenomics. Nat Methods. 13(5), 435-438. Published online
2016/03/22 DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3802.
Shepherd, E.S., DeLoache, W.C., Pruss, K.M., Whitaker, W.R., and Sonnenburg, J.L. (2018). An
exclusive metabolic niche enables strain engraftment in the gut microbiota. Nature.
557(7705), 434-438. Published online 2018/05/11 DOI: 10.1038/s41586-018-0092-4.
Sonnenburg, E.D., Zheng, H., Joglekar, P., Higginbottom, S.K., Firbank, S.J., Bolam, D.N., and
Sonnenburg, J.L. (2010). Specificity of polysaccharide use in intestinal bacteroides species
determines diet-induced microbiota alterations. Cell. 141(7), 1241-1252. Published online
2010/07/07 DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.05.005.
Stamatakis, A. (2014). RAxML version 8: a tool for phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis of
large phylogenies. Bioinformatics. 30(9), 1312-1313. Published online 2014/01/24 DOI:
10.1093/bioinformatics/btu033.
Tan, H., Zhao, J., Zhang, H., Zhai, Q., and Chen, W. (2018). Isolation of Low-Abundant
Bacteroidales in the Human Intestine and the Analysis of Their Differential Utilization Based
on Plant-Derived Polysaccharides. Front Microbiol. 9, 1319. Published online 2018/07/05
DOI: 10.3389/fmicb.2018.01319.

37

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Terrapon, N., Lombard, V., Drula, E., Lapebie, P., Al-Masaudi, S., Gilbert, H.J., and Henrissat,
B. (2018). PULDB: the expanded database of Polysaccharide Utilization Loci. Nucleic Acids
Res. 46(D1), D677-D683. Published online 2017/11/01 DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkx1022.
Tett, A., Huang, K.D., Asnicar, F., Fehlner-Peach, H., Pasolli, E., Karcher, N., Armanini, F.,
Manghi, P., Bonham, K., Zolfo, M., et al. (2019). The Prevotella copri complex comprises
four distinct clades that are underrepresented in Westernised populations. bioRxiv. DOI:
10.1101/600593.
Wattam, A.R., Abraham, D., Dalay, O., Disz, T.L., Driscoll, T., Gabbard, J.L., Gillespie, J.J.,
Gough, R., Hix, D., Kenyon, R., et al. (2014). PATRIC, the bacterial bioinformatics database
and analysis resource. 42(D1), D581-D591. DOI: 10.1093/nar/gkt1099.
Wu, G.D., Chen, J., Hoffmann, C., Bittinger, K., Chen, Y.Y., Keilbaugh, S.A., Bewtra, M.,
Knights, D., Walters, W.A., Knight, R., et al. (2011). Linking Long-Term Dietary Patterns
with Gut Microbial Enterotypes. Science. 334(6052), 105-108. DOI:
10.1126/science.1208344.
Yin, Y., Mao, X., Yang, J., Chen, X., Mao, F., and Xu, Y. (2012). dbCAN: a web resource for
automated carbohydrate-active enzyme annotation. 40(W1), W445-W451. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gks479.
Zhao, S., Lieberman, T.D., Poyet, M., Kauffman, K.M., Gibbons, S.M., Groussin, M., Xavier,
R.J., and Alm, E.J. (2019). Adaptive Evolution within Gut Microbiomes of Healthy People.
Cell Host Microbe. 25(5), 656-667 e658. Published online 2019/04/28 DOI:
10.1016/j.chom.2019.03.007.

38

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Zhu, A., Sunagawa, S., Mende, D.R., and Bork, P. (2015). Inter-individual differences in the
gene content of human gut bacterial species. Genome Biol. 16, 82. Published online
2015/04/22 DOI: 10.1186/s13059-015-0646-9.

39

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 1

A.

B.

Figure 1. Identification of Prevotella copri in human stool. A. Relative abundance of
Prevotella copri 16S SNVs in human stool quantified by 16S sequencing. Percentage of total
reads from 16S rRNA gene sequencing is shown. Stars indicate individuals from whom P. copri
was isolat ed. B. Correlation of P. copri abundance determined by 16S sequencing and qPCR
using each qPCR primer set (Table S1).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

0.6
0.4
0.0

primer set 2

2.0
1.0
0.5
0.0

2.0

P. copri
reference
gDNA

primer set 3

1.5

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

2

P. copri
reference
gDNA

healthy controls

NORA patients

primer
set 5
NORA
patients

P. copri
reference
gDNA

P. copri
reference
gDNA

healthy
controls

NORA patients

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

1

primer set 7

P. copri
reference
gDNA

healthy
controls

NORA patients

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L

5
4
3
2
1
0

primer set 4

healthy
controls

primer set 6

3

0

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

0.0

NORA patients

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

0.5

P. copri
reference
gDNA

healthy
controls

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

1.0

NORA patients

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

1.5

healthy
controls

1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0

primer set 8

P. copri
reference
gDNA

healthy
controls

NORA patients

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

fold change
fold change
fold change
fold change

R
! T
!AQ
! A
AT
!AK
U
!BU
BM
BC
!AP
V
!AA
! K
AS
!BVe
BS
! P
X
Z
!AU
BF
Q
AB
F
B
AD
BT
I
N
H
M
J
AI
AJ
D
Y
O
AZ
AL
S
W
AC
AE
AF
AM
AN
AO
AR
AV
AW
AX
AY
BA
BB
BD
BE
BK
BN
BO
C
L
BQ

0.2

fold change
fold change

primer set 1

0.8

fold change

fold change

Figure S1

Figure S1. PCR-based screen for P. copri-containing fecal microbiota; related to Figure 1
Eight sets of primers were designed to amplify conserved regions of the P. copri genome. Fecal
DNA from each donor was screened by qPCR using each primer set (Table S1). Stars indicate
individuals from whom P. copri was isolated.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 2

22
9
iA6 Q117
iA
615
iAA
17
iAA9
iA624

90
60

40

iA

Q

11

A

individual

Bootstrap support value: 75 -89
Bootstrap support value: 50 - 75
P. copri strains and Isolates
Non-P.copri Isolates

P.salivae

0. 06

AP
K
BVe
AK
T
DSM 18205

0.007

P.bergensis
P.colorans
P.multisaccharivorax
P.dentalis
iAQ1188
iAQ1137
iAQ1187
P.pallens
P.nigrescens
P. intermedia
P.multiformis
P.denticola
P. fusca
P. jejuni
P. melaninogenica
P. scopos
iAQ1173
P. copri DSM 18205 and Isolates

accessory genome

Bootstrap support value: 90 - 100

AQ
A
AA
P
AU
BU

ates
AQ Isol
AP Isolates
iAU3127
iAA108
BU Isolat
es
P Isola
tes
P. co
pri D
SM 1
T Is
8205
olate
s
AK
AK Isolat
e
s
I
BV sola
K e Iso tes
Iso
lat
e
lat
es s

P. ruminicola
P. stercorea
P. oralis
P. loescheii
P. marshii
P. pleuritidis
P.enoeca
P.buccae
P. bryantii

Legend

1
2
3
4
5

18,452 predicted proteins

Paraprevotella xylaniphila
Paraprevotella clara
iAQ11712
P. bivia

P. copri 16S SNV Individual

iAQ1173
iA622
iAQ1179
iA624
iAA917
iAA615
iP54
iP105
size 7 iAQ1174
iAQ1172
iAQ1149
iAQ1144
iAQ1183
iAQ11815
DSM 18205 seq
DSM 18205 ref
iAU3127
iAA108
BU4165
BU41712
BU41813
iAP145
iAP144
iAP1319
iAP146
iAP1412
iAP1411
iAP142
iAP171
iAP188
iAP139
iK21512
iK2152
iK21616
iK21513
iK21614
iK21316
BVe4116
BVe41210
BVe41219
iAK2714
iAK2718
iAK2717
iAK2651
iAK2713
iAK1218
iAK2711
iAK268
iAK279
iAK1214
iAK2617
iAK1219
iAK2617_2017
iAK2716
iAK2716_2017
iAK128
iAK278
iAK2612
iAK2620
iAK263
iAK1213
iAK264
iAK261
iAK2616
iAK2712
iAK266
iAK269
iAK2615
iAK1212
iAK127
iT2117
iT213
iT2515
iT211
iT2213
iT2110
iT2120
iT2510
iT2119
iT257
iT2513
iT257_2017
iT214
iT2113
iT2112
iT255
iT218
iT212

P

AA

AQ

AK

BVe

K

AP

T

AU

P. copri
DSM 18205
BU

73

D.

core genome

20

0

B.

C.

100

Percentage of reads mapping to
the P. copri PanPhlAn database

A.

isolates

Figure 2. Hidden diversity in Prevotella copri whole genome sequences. A. Alignment of
whole genome sequencing reads of each isolate to the P. copri PanPhlAn database. Each point
represents alignment of a single isolate genome. B. Phylogenetic tree based on the 16S rRNA
gene sequences. P. copri isolates are shown in blue. Three Prevotella isolates and one
Paraprevotella isolate that were not P. copri are shown in red. These isolates were excluded from
further analyses. C. Phylogenetic tree based on the concatenated alignment of 30 conserved
ribosomal protein gene sequences. D. Heatmap of P. copri isolate whole genomes showing
presence and absence of predicted proteins, and highlighting susC genes. Predicted proteins
were clustered at 90% amino acid identity. Blue = present; white = absent; orange = susC.
Isolates from the same donor are indicated by color in line 1 above the heatmap, as well as by the
first letters of the isolate name below the heatmap.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3

pPUL substrate

Xylan

Arabinoxylan
Levan/Inulin
Pectin

pectate lyase
pectate lyase + PGA
PGA

Rhamnogalacturonan
Arabinan
Arabinogalactan
Xyloglucan

Beta-glucan
Modified beta-glucan
Starch

Pullulan

Glucomannan
Beta-mannan
Cellobiose
Fucose
Melibiose
Mucin glycan sialic acid
Rhamnose and sulfate
removal
Sulfate removal
Unknown substrate

B.

BD

susC
cluster ID
2
65
100 & 140
3
74
79 & 141
136, 83, & 135
9
88
94
61
71 & 138
106
122
102 & 49
35 & 21
96
136
95
97 & 137
90
91
121
45
17
72
131
19
35
41
37
25
40
39
124
22
7
50
20
64 & 139
99
80
55
34 & 103

C

isolates
A

AQ1173
A622
AQ1179
AA917
AA615
A624
P54
P105
AQ1174
AQ1172
AQ1149
AQ1144
AQ1183
AQ11815
AU3127
AA108
BU41813
BU41712
BU4165
AP145
AP144
AP1319
AP146
AP1412
AP1411
AP142
AP171
AP188
AP139
K21512
K2152
K21616
K21513
K21614
K21316
BVe4116
BVe41210
BVe41219
AK2714
AK2718
AK2717
AK2651
AK2713
AK1218
AK2711
AK268
AK279
AK1214
AK2617
AK1219
AK2716
AK128
AK278
AK2612
AK2620
AK263
AK1213
AK264
AK2616
AK2712
AK266
AK269
AK2615
AK1212
AK127
T2117
T213
T2515
T211
T2213
T2110
T2120
T2510
T2119
T257
T2513
T214
T2113
T2112
T255
T218
T212
DSM
18205

A.

clade:

1.
0

0.
5

132
24
51
85
31
81
9
32
16
78 & 86 & 125
26
114
15
109
128
28
54
104
110
130
113
101
115
111
98
34 & 103
56
29
18
76
73
76

0

67
155 & 127
69
70
134
68
13
93
126
146 & 157
153
92
120
143
38
58
66
89
0
149
123
14
47
42
5
147
8
57
11
52
62
63
1
30
119
46
107
117
108
116
142
118 & 102
36
87
129
105
33
144

-0.
5

-1.
0

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 3. Annotation of polysaccharide utilization loci in P. copri isolates. A. PUL substrates
were predicted for each susC cluster gene group (Figure S2, Table S3, and Methods). Predicted
substrate usage for each isolate or group of isolates is indicated by a blue box. Stars next to
cluster IDs indicate susC genes that have different surrounding enzyme genes in different isolates.
B. Schematic of modified beta-glucan pPULs (polysaccharide source not yet identified). Protein
families are labeled, and specific predicted functions are listed beneath relevant genes.
Hypothetical proteins are unlabeled in black. Genes unlikely to be relevant to polysaccharide
utilization are labeled and colored gray.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S2

Figure S2. Identification of polysaccharide utilization loci in P. copri isolates; related to
Figure 3
SusC homologs were identified in the genomes and clustered by 90% sequence identity. Adjacent
polysaccharide genes were identified and used to annotate putative PULs from each susC cluster.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S3

Figure S3. Prevotella 16S V1-V3 sequences; related to Figure 3
Representative isolates were selected and the full length 16S sequence was determined by Sanger
sequencing. 16S hypervariable V1-V3 sequences were aligned with Prevotella 16S V1-V3
sequences described in De Filippis, et al. (2016) using Clustal Omega. A simple phylogeny is
shown.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S4

Figure S4. Xylan enzyme distribution in xylan pPULs; related to Figure 3
Xylan pPULs and xylan-degrading enzyme annotations are shown. Presence of each xylandegrading enzyme in each pPUL is indicated by a blue box.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure 4

Figure 4. Growth of P. copri isolates on polysaccharides. Isolates were cultured anaerobically
at 37 degrees C in YCFA media supplemented with individual polysaccharides as the sole carbon
source. OD600 was measured at 24, 48, and 72h. Data represent 2-3 experiments, with each
condition tested in duplicate or triplicate. The highest OD from 24, 48, or 72h for each condition for
each experiment is shown. AS: media prepared by Anaerobe Systems. Heatmap (A) shows the
mean of the highest OD for each condition of each experiment. P. copri complex clades are
indicated above the heatmap. Graphs (B) show the highest measured OD on select
polysaccharide substrates. Isolates from the same P. copri complex clade are plotted in the same
color (Tett et al., 2019). C. Growth data were matched to growth predictions based on the presence
or absence of pPULs in the genomes. Growth was considered positive if the OD was statistically
significant, as determined by one-way ANOVA and post hoc Dunnett’s test using the H2O (no
carbon source) as the control (Methods). D. PULs were predicted in P. copri MAGs. Proportion of
P. copri MAGs within each clade containing pPULs for select polysaccharides is shown.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Figure S5

Levan

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

Inulin

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

Pectin

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

Polygalacturonic acid

1.2

1.0

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

0.2

0.0

0.0

0.0

0.0

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

-0.2

Rhamnogalacturonan

1.2

T2112

AK1212

K2152

AK2718

AP188

BVe41210

T2112

AK1212

K2152

AK2718

AP188

BVe41210

AA108

BU41813

P54

AU3127

A624

AQ1149

A622

AA917

AQ1179

AQ1173

P. copri DSM18205

H2O

B. theta

0.2

B. ovatus

T2112

AK1212

K2152

AK2718

AP188

BVe41210

AA108

BU41813

P54

AU3127

A624

AQ1149

A622

AA917

AQ1179

AQ1173

P. copri DSM18205

H2O

B. theta

B. ovatus

T2112

AK1212

K2152

AK2718

AP188

BVe41210

-0.2

AA108

-0.2

BU41813

-0.2

P54

0.0

-0.2

AU3127

0.0

A624

0.0

AQ1149

0.0
A622

0.4

0.2

AA917

0.6

0.4

0.2

AQ1179

0.6

0.4

0.2

AQ1173

0.6

0.4

B. theta

0.6

B. ovatus

0.8

P. copri DSM18205

1.0

0.8

OD600

1.0

0.8

H2O

Heparin

1.2

1.0

0.8

AA108

Arabinoxylan

1.2

1.0

BU41813

Beta-glucan

0.2

P54

OD600

1.0

0.8

1.2

Chondroitin

1.2

1.0

0.8

AU3127

Beechwood xylan

1.2

1.0

A624

Xyloglucan

0.2

AQ1149

OD600

1.0

0.8

1.2

Glucomannan

1.2

1.0

0.8

A622

Corn xylan

1.2

1.0

AA917

Glucose, maltose, cellobiose

0.2

AQ1179

OD600

1.0

0.8

1.2

Pullulan

1.2

1.0

0.8

AQ1173

Arabinogalactan

1.2

1.0

P. copri DSM18205

Glucose, maltose, cellobiose (AS)

0.2

H2O

OD600

1.0

0.8

1.2

Starch

1.2

1.0

0.8

B. theta

Arabinan

1.2

1.0

B. ovatus

H2O

1.2

Figure S5. Growth of P. copri isolates on polysaccharides; related to Figure 4
OD600 was measured for indicated isolates and polysaccharides after ~24h, ~48h, ~72h anaerobic
incubation at 37 degrees C. Data represent 2-3 experiments. Each condition was tested in
duplicate or triplicate. Data show the highest OD from 24, 48, or 72h for each condition for each
experiment.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S1. P. copri primers table, related to Figure 1 and Figure S1
primer set
16S universal primers
for qPCR
P. copri primer set 1
P. copri primer set 2
P. copri primer set 3
P. copri primer set 4
P. copri primer set 5
P. copri primer set 6
Prevotella 16S primer
set 7
Prevotella 16S primer
set 8

description; F/R
Universal 16S Primer
340F
Universal 16S Primer
515R
P. copri F
P. copri R
Pcs_100334080_8_F
Pcs_100334080_8_R
Pcs_100334083_1_F
Pcs_100334083_1_R
Pc_hc_833001_10_F
Pc_hc_833001_10_R
Pc_hc_1400001_22_F
Pc_hc_1400001_22_R
Pc_hc_2179001_6_F
Pc_hc_2179001_6_R
PcCB7_16S_B_2_F
PcCB7_16S_B_2_R
Prevotella 16S F
Prevotella 16S R

sequence 5' --> 3'
ACTCCTACGGGAGGCAGCAGT
ATTACCGCGGCTGCTGGC
CCGGACTCCTGCCCCTGCAA
GTTGCGCCAGGCACTGCGAT
AATAGCTTTGGTGGCGCTTT
AGGTTCCCTCACCGCATACA
TTGGGTCGCCTGATGTTACC
TCTTCAGCAGAAGCGTTGGT
AGGACGTTGACCAGCAGAAG
GCATAGCGGTTTTGGCTGAG
GAGACGGGCTGGAGTGATTT
TCCGTGTGGCTTTCATGGAG
ACCGTAAGGAGCGTGTTCTG
GTCGCGATTCTCTACTCCCG
TTTGGAGACAATGACGCCCT
ACTTAAGCCGACACCTCACG
CACRGTAAACGATGGATGCC
GGTCGGGTTGCAGACC

annealing
temperature
60ºC
60ºC
60ºC
60ºC
60ºC
60ºC
60ºC
60ºC
55ºC

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/750802; this version posted September 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available
under aCC-BY 4.0 International license.

Table S4. Polysaccharides used, related to Figure 4
Polysaccharide
Arabinan (Sugar Beet)
Arabinogalactan (Larch Wood)
Arabinoxylan (Wheat Flour; Low Viscosity ~ 10 cSt)
Beta-glucan (Barley; High Viscosity)
Chondroitin sulfate sodium salt (from shark cartilage)
Glucomannan (Konjac; Low Viscosity)
Heparin sodium salt (from porcine intestinal mucosa)
Inulin (chicory)
Levan (from Erwinia herbicola)
Pectin (from apple)
Polygalacturonic Acid (PGA)
Pullulan (from Aureobasidium pullulans)
Rhamnogalacturonan (Soy Bean)
Starch
Xylan (Beechwood; purified)
Xylan (from Corn Core, TCI America™)
Xyloglucan (Tamarind)

Company
Megazyme
Megazyme
Megazyme
Megazyme
Sigma
Megazyme
Sigma
Megazyme
Sigma
Sigma
Megazyme
Sigma
Megazyme
VWR
Megazyme
Fisher
Megazyme

Catalog number
P-ARAB
P-ARGAL
P-WAXYL
P-BGBH
C4384-5G
P-GLCML
H3393-100KU
P-INUL
L8647-1G
93854-100G
P-PGACT
P4516-1G
P-RHAGN
1.01252.0100
P-XYLNBE-10G
X007825G
P-XYGLN

