bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cockroaches show individuality in learning and
memory during classical and operant conditioning
Cansu Arican1, Janice Bulk1, Nina Deisig1*, Martin Paul Nawrot1*
1

Computational Systems Neuroscience, Institute of Zoology, University of Cologne, Cologne,

Germany
* Equal senior authorship

Abstract
Animal personality and individuality are intensively researched in vertebrates and both
concepts are increasingly applied to behavioral science in insects. However, only few studies
have looked into individuality with respect to performance in learning and memory tasks. In
vertebrates individual learning capabilities vary considerably with respect to learning speed and
learning rate. Likewise, honeybees express individual learning abilities in a wide range of
classical conditioning protocols. Here, we study individuality in the learning and memory
performance of cockroaches, both in classical and operant conditioning tasks. We implemented
a novel classical (olfactory) conditioning paradigm where the conditioned response is
established in the maxilla-labia response (MLR). Operant spatial learning was investigated in a
forced two-choice task using a T-maze. Our results confirm individual learning abilities in
classical conditioning of cockroaches that was reported for honeybees and vertebrates but
contrast long-standing reports on stochastic learning behavior in fruit flies. In our experiments,
most learners expressed a correct behavior after only a single learning trial showing a consistent
high performance during training and test. We can further show that individual learning
differences in insects are not limited to classical conditioning but equally appear in operant
conditioning of the cockroach.

Keywords: classical conditioning, operant conditioning, insect cognition, single trial learning

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
A behavioral syndrome defines a consistent behavior of an individual that is correlated
across time and contexts. Animal personality (Gosling and Vazire, 2002) is expressed in longterm differences among individuals across a variety of behavioral traits such as boldness–
shyness, exploration–avoidance, activity level, sociability or aggression (Dingemanse and
Wolf, 2010; Sih et al., 2004b, 2004a). While consistent behavioral traits have been heavily
studied in vertebrates, literature on individuality and personality in invertebrates is still scarce
(for review see Kralj-Fišer and Schuett, 2014). The small amount of available data on
invertebrate personality may be partly due to the traditional belief that invertebrates express
stereotyped stimulus-response behaviors with little individual differences (e.g. Brembs, 2013).
Invertebrate studies have primarily been conducted in the context of collective behavior in
social contexts and mostly investigated how individual personalities influence the colony
behavior (e.g. in cockroaches: Planas-Sitjà et al., 2018; Planas-Sitjà and Deneubourg, 2018, in
ants: Pinter-Wollman, 2012, spiders: Grinsted et al., 2013; Wright et al., 2014, pea aphids:
Schuett et al., 2011; and crickets: Rose et al., 2017).
At the level of animal cognition, inter-individual performance differences may reflect
variation in cognitive ability independent of animal personality. However, individual cognitive
styles may also inflict personality (Carere and Locurto, 2011). Individuality has been
intensively studied in learning and memory. Learning and memorizing the relevance of
environmental cues is of major importance for the survival of virtually all animals. Individuals
of a species can vary substantially in their learning performances as has been shown for both
vertebrates (e.g. David et al., 2011; Gallistel et al., 2004; Gosling, 2001; Groothuis and Carere,
2005; Kolata et al., 2005; Kotrschal and Taborsky, 2010; Schuett and Dall, 2009) and
invertebrates (for review see Dukas, 2008).
In insects, studies have focused on bumble bees and honey bees. Bumble bees have been
studied in a variety of tasks (Chittka et al., 2003). For example, individual bumble bees, which
learn only a single flower parameter (odor or color) were more efficient in several ways than
those, which had learned two: they made fewer errors, had shorter flower handling times,
corrected errors faster, and transitions between flowers were initially more rapid (Chittka and
Thomson, 1997). It has further been shown that individual bumblebees consistently differ in
their ability to learn to discriminate stimuli from the visual and olfactory modality (Muller and
Chittka, 2012). A systematic analysis of classical conditioning experiments in the honeybee
found that the group-average learning behavior did not adequately represent the behavior of
individual animals. This result was consistent across a large number of datasets including
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

olfactory and tactile conditioning collected from more than 3000 honeybees obtained during
absolute and differential classical conditioning (Pamir et al., 2011, 2014). Gradually increasing
learning curves reﬂected an artifact of group averaging and the behavioral performance of
individuals was characterized by an abrupt and often step-like increase in the level of response
(Pamir et al., 2011), a result that directly matches observation in vertebrates (Gallistel et al.,
2004) but contradicts earlier findings in the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) in which the
group-average behavior has been described to represent the probabilistic expression of behavior
in individuals (Quinn et al., 1974).
In the present work, we asked whether cockroaches show individuality in their learning
performances, both in classical and operant conditioning tasks. Behavioral learning studies that
used olfactory and visual cues demonstrated that cockroaches can be assayed for classical
conditioning tasks while animals are immobilized (Kwon et al., 2004; Lent and Kwon, 2004;
Watanabe et al., 2003; Watanabe and Mizunami, 2006) or able to move freely (Hosono et al.,
2016; Sato et al., 2006; Watanabe et al., 2003). In some experiments, after classical olfactory
conditioning memory tests were performed in an open arena where cockroaches could freely
choose to approach different odors (Sato et al., 2006; Watanabe et al., 2003). Open arenas and
T-mazes have been used successfully for operant conditioning in cockroaches. Balderrama
(1980) demonstrated for the first time that cockroaches could be trained to associate different
odors with either sugar or salt solution in an open arena. Mizunami et al (1998) studied place
memory using a spatial heat maze with and without visual cues. More recent studies by
Mizunami and colleagues (Sakura et al., 2002; Sakura and Mizunami, 2001) confirmed and
extended operant conditioning of cockroaches in the open arena. Barraco et al (1981)
successfully trained cockroaches in a spatial discrimination task using an electric shock to
punish either a left or right turn in a T-maze. Employing stimuli of different modalities, we
show in the present study that cockroaches demonstrate individuality in their ability to learn
and memorize stimuli employing both classical and operant conditioning task.

Material & Methods
Insects
All experiments were conducted with adult male Periplaneta americana. Animals were
kept under a reverse light-dark cycle (12h:12h) at 26°C in laboratory colonies at our rearing
facilities at the University of Cologne. Cockroaches were allowed to drink water and fed on oat
ad libitum. However, water was removed four days before training to increase motivation. All
experiments were conducted in the active phase (scotophase) of the animals.
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Experimental setups
For classical conditioning cockroaches were harnessed in custom-made fixation
cylinders (Figure 1A) after anaesthetization at 4°C. After fixation, only the animals’ head
protruded allowing free movement of the antennae and mouthparts. After habituation in the
experimental room for 16 h, cockroaches were placed in front of a 10 ml plastic syringe
mounted in a holder and an exhaust system behind removing odor-loaded air (Figure 1A). Odors
were diluted in mineral oil (Acros OrganicsTM, Geel, Belgium) and odor concentrations were
adjusted to match the vapor pressure of the odor with the lowest value (trans-cinnamaldehyde).
Dilutions were as follows (in % v/v): isoamyl acetate (99+ %, pure, Acros Organics TM, Geel,
Belgium): 26.27 %, butyric acid (> 99 %, Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany): 2.56 %, as well transcinnamaldehyde (≥ 98 %, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) undiluted. Ten µl of each odor were
given on a piece of filter paper inserted in a 10 ml plastic syringe for olfactory stimulation. A
filter paper without any odor nor the solvent was used as control stimulus testing for mechanical
stimulation (Air). Isoamyl acetate and butyric acid were used as conditioned stimuli (CS+ or
CS-), while trans-cinnamaldehyde served as control odor without any assigned contingency
(reward or punishment). Odors were chosen based on choice behavior of cockroaches in
preliminary tests in a T-maze, in which no preference was found between isoamyl acetate and
butyric acid.
For operant conditioning, a custom-made flexible maze was used. Walls made from
polyvinyl chloride allowed easy cleaning with alcohol between single trials. The maze was
positioned on a ground plate and different tunnel pieces were combined to form a T-Maze
(Figure 1B). Shutters allowed closing the start and target boxes (20 cm x 28 cm x 4 cm). All
experiments with the T-maze were conducted under red light (Figure 1B).

Training and test procedures
First, we established a novel classical conditioning paradigm in the harnessed
cockroach, training the animals to exhibit a specific movement of the maxilla-labia
(mouthparts) as conditioned response behavior. We termed this response the maxilla-labia
response (MLR). When touching the antennae and mouthparts with sucrose solution,
cockroaches start to quickly move and extend their maxillae and labium, the most central
mouthparts, to reach for and suck the solution. When saline solution is presented, animals touch
and taste the solution without ingesting and show clear avoidance behavior (retraction of the
mouthparts). In each single trial the occurrence or non-occurrence of the MLR was recorded as
a binary response (0/1). Only if the MLR was observed within the first three seconds of odor
presentation (before US-onset, see Figure 1C and description below) it was counted as
4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

conditioned response. This novel paradigm for classical conditioning of the cockroach is similar
to the proboscis extension response paradigm used in classical conditioning of honeybees, first
established by Takeda (1961) and later standardized by Bitterman et al. (1983).
For classical conditioning, each block of training consisted of i) one stimulation with a
simple filter paper without an odorant to test for a mechanical response to the air puff (Air), ii)
one CS+ presentation (reinforced conditioned stimulus) paired with 20 % sucrose solution as
positive reinforce (unconditioned stimulus, US), iii) one CS- presentation (punished stimulus)
paired with 20 % saline solution as negative reinforce, as well as iv) one stimulation with a
control odor (cinnamaldehyde, Ctrl), which was not associated to a US (Figure 1C). In each
CS+ or CS- presentation the respective odor (CS) was presented for 15 s. Three seconds after
odor onset, the US was delivered by touching the maxillary palps with sucrose or saline solution
and animals were allowed to drink the respective solutions for 14 s (Figure 1D). In the case of
the negative reinforcer, most animals did not drink the saline solution voluntarily but were
‘forced’ to taste the salt in all trials by touching their mouthparts with the toothpick. We
performed all experiments in two independent groups for which the identities of the CS+ odor
and the CS- was reversed. For retention tests the same pattern of odor presentation as in
conditioning trials was used except that no US were presented.
Three differential classical conditioning experiments were conducted. In each block of
training trials, the two control odors (air, cinnamaldehyde) were separated from the two CSs
with an interstimulus interval (ISI) of 45 s, whereas the ISI between CS+ and CS- was 32 s.
The first experiment was designed to investigate differential learning with an acquisition phase
that consisted of five blocks of trials (each block contained one presentation of air, the CS+, the
CS- and a control stimulation, respectively) with an inter-block interval of 10 min. A retention
test was conducted after 10 min. The second and third experiments were designed to investigate
memory retention after differential learning at two different time intervals (1 h and 24 h). Due
to the length of the experiment, only three training blocks with an inter-block interval of 10 min
were used for these two experiments.
For operant conditioning, each cockroach was allowed to acclimate in the start box for
15 min before training. At the beginning of a training trial, the shutter was opened and the
cockroaches were allowed to walk freely and enter the target boxes. When entering one of the
target boxes for the first time, the shutter was closed and the animal was subjected to a 5 min
light exposure (punished stimulus, US). Whenever an animal entered the same target box again
in a subsequent trial, it was again subjected to the light punishment. All animals which did not

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

start moving within the first 3 min in two consecutive attempts were excluded from the
experiment.
Two different operant conditioning paradigms were used. In the first one, animals were
trained in five blocks of trials with an inter trial interval (ITI) of 35 min and memory retention
was tested after 35 min. In the second, animals were trained in three blocks of trials with an ITI
of 35 min and a retention test was performed 24 h later (Figure 1E).

Figure 1 Experimental design. Sketch of A) the classical conditioning setup and B) the operant conditioning setup.
C) Presentation of one training block in the classical conditioning paradigm. Each block contains an air puff (Air),
the rewarded odor CS+ paired with sugar solution (R), the punished odor CS- paired with saline solution (P) and
the control odor (Ctrl, cinnamaldehyde). D) Time sequence of the conditioned stimulus (CS, odor) and
unconditioned stimulus (US, sucrose or saline solution) in a single training trial for classical conditioning. E)
Operant conditioning protocols I) with five consecutive training trials (C1-C5) and a retention test (RT) after 35
min and II) with three consecutive training trials (C1-C3) and a retention test after 24 h.

Statistics
The results were analyzed with Matlab R2019a (The MathWorks, Natick,
Massachusetts, USA) and IBM SPSS Statistics Version 25.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, New York,
USA) and visualized with Matlab R2019a and Photoshop (Adobe Inc., San José, California,
USA).
We analyzed spontaneous responses to different odors in two groups of animals. We
pooled the behavioral response to odor presentations in the first training trial and before US
presentation across all individuals that had been treated in parallel and under identical
experimental conditions. Chi² tests were used to compare responses to different odors.
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Additionally, we calculated the Phi coefficient to analyze the correlation between odor
responses across individuals.
We analyzed the classical conditioning experiments by dividing them according to
odors that were used as CS+ and CS-. In addition, we pooled all animals with the same
conditioning pattern regardless of the odor that was used as CS+ or CS-. To analyze the
response to CS+ we excluded all animals showing spontaneous responses to the CS+ in the first
trial. For analyzing responses to the CS- we excluded all animals that did not respond to it in
the first trial. This is a common procedure to exclude spontaneously responding animals and to
visualize the learning curve (Giurfa and Sandoz, 2012; Pamir et al., 2011). For the statistical
analysis of the classical conditioning experiments we applied three different statistical tests.
First, one-way ANOVA was used to test the evolution of responses along training trails.
Second, a two-way repeated measure ANOVA was used to compare the reinforcement type
(CS+ and CS-) and the reinforcement type x trial interaction. Although ANOVA is usually not
allowed in case of dichotomous data such as the MLR, Monte Carlo studies have shown that
ANOVA can be used under certain conditions (Lunney, 1970), which all are met by the
experiments reported here. Third, Chi²-tests were used for i) comparison of responses to the
CS+ and CS- in a given trial, ii) comparison of spontaneous responses and retention tests, iii)
comparison of the last training trial and retention tests and iv) comparison between different
retention tests.
For all operant conditioning paradigms, decisions in the forced two-choice tasks were
analyzed with a binomial test, since chance level of choosing one of two directions randomly
was p = 0.5.

Analysis of individuality
To analyze individuality of learning behavior we followed the analyses in Pamir et al.
(2011) and Pamir et al. (2014). For the analyses in the classical conditioning paradigm we only
considered animals that did not show a correct response to either the CS+ or the CS- in the very
first trial and before the US was presented. Two subgroups were formed for training trials and
test trial following the definition in Pamir et al. (2011). For any given trial the first subgroup
included animals that expressed the correct behavior in the present trial and in the previous trial
(previous correct behavior, pC). The second subgroup included animals showing the correct
behavior in the present trial but did not show it in the previous trial (previous incorrect behavior,
pI). The same subgroup definitions were used for the retention test with regard to a correct or
incorrect response during the final training trial. We compared the two subgroups in each trial
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and in the retention test with a Chi²-test at a significance level at α = 0.05. The two subgroups
are represented with upward and downward pointing triangles, respectively (Figures 5&6).
Filled (open) symbols indicate that significance could (not) be established.
Following the analyses in Pamir et al. (2014), we formed separate subgroups of animals
that showed a correct behavior for the first time in the second (or third) trial and tracked the
subgroup behaviors across subsequent conditioning trials and the memory test. This allows to
assess the robustness of the expression of a correct behavior across trials and the transfer of the
behavioral expression during training to the short-term and long-term memory test situation.
Finally, in order to analyze the initiation of correct behavior, we computed for each trial
the fraction of animals that responded correctly for the first time in this trial as well as the
fraction of animals that never behaved correctly (non-learners, Pamir et al., 2014).

Results
Spontaneous response towards different odors
We first analyzed the spontaneous and naive responses to each odor (isoamyl acetate,
butyric acid and cinnamaldehyde) during the very first conditioning trial before the reinforcing
stimulus (US) was presented. Figure 2 shows the group averaged responses to all three odors.
In all experiments approx. 60% of the animals showed a spontaneous MLR in presence of
isoamyl acetate, which was significantly higher than for butyric acid and cinnamaldehyde for
all experiments (Chi2: p < 0.001). The number of spontaneous responses to butyric acid and
cinnamaldehyde was only significantly different in the first experiment (Chi2: p = 0.01) in
which animals responded more often spontaneously to butyric acid. Isoamyl acetate is the main
component of the banana blend and thus strongly associated with food and attractive for
cockroaches (Lauprasert et al., 2006). This is most likely the reason for very high spontaneous
response rates to isoamyl acetate. In addition we found a significant positive correlation
between responses to isoamyl acetate and butyric acid in both experiments (Figure 2: 1) Phi =
0.0258, p = 0.016; 2) Phi = 0.143, p = 0.017). However, there was no significant correlation for
other odor pairings which might be due to the generally low spontaneous response rates to
cinnamaldehyde and butyric acid.

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 2 Spontaneous responses to isoamyl acetate
(ISO), butyric acid (BA) and cinnamaldehyde
(CIN). Analysis of the MLR in the first trial of two
classical conditioning experiments show that ISO
elicits significantly more spontaneous responses
than BA and CIN (Chi2: p < 0.001). The
spontaneous response to BA is only significantly
higher compared to CIN in the first experiment
(Chi2: p = 0.01).

A novel paradigm for classical olfactory conditioning
We established a novel paradigm for classical conditioning in harnessed cockroaches
(Figure 1A). The occurrence or absence of the maxilla-labia response (MLR, see Materials &
Methods) was recorded as the conditioned response (CR) behavior. In this study, we used
different protocols for differential olfactory conditioning (Figure 1 C&D) to investigate the
expression of the CR during learning and memory retention at two different time-points.
In a first protocol we tested whether cockroaches are able to associate an odor with a reward or
punishment during five consecutive training trials (inter-trial interval 10 min) followed by a
retention test (after 10 min). We trained two groups of animals for which the odors isoamyl
acetate and butyric acid were presented as CS+ and CS- with reversed contingencies (Figure
3A&B, respectively). The two odors did not elicit the same level of spontaneous responses (cf.
section 3.1.). Due to the high initial spontaneous response to isoamyl acetate, the average level
of MLR was consistently high and did not significantly increase across the five trials when
isoamyl acetate was used as CS+ (Figure 3A). However, responses to the punished odor (CS-,
butyric acid) decreased significantly (one-way-ANOVA: F4, 260 = 4.23; p = 0.002).
When butyric acid was used as CS+, responses showed a tendency to increase over the
training trials. In this case, responses to isoamyl acetate as CS- slightly decreased, however,
this effect was not significant over the five trials. Animals still showed approximately 30 %
responses to the CS- in the retention test.
Responses to the control odor cinnamaldehyde only decreased significantly when
isoamyl acetate was the CS+ (one-way-ANOVA: F4, 260 = 3.11; p = 0.016), but did not change,
when butyric acid was used as CS+.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Overall, responses to the CS+ and CS- differed significantly when isoamyl acetate was
rewarded (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: F4, 49 = 3.095; p < 0.02). When butyric acid was
rewarded, CS+ and CS- did not differ significantly over trials (Figure 3B).
For further analyses we pooled all animals and excluded those that did not behave
correctly in the first trial respectively. In both cases correct behavior increased significantly
across training trials (one-way ANOVA: CS+: F4, 230 = 8.808; p < 0.001; CS-: F4, 190 = 15.544;
p < 0.001). However, neither the behavior to CS- nor the behavior to the control odor changed
significantly over trials. Moreover, the interaction between trial and treatment was significant
for CS+ (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: F4,

43

= 12.156, p < 0.001) and CS- (2-way

repeated measures ANOVA: F4, 35 = 17.591, p < 0.001) and in both cases the behavior in
retention tests were significantly different from each other (Figure 3 C&D).
In addition, we excluded animals that did not behave correctly respectively to CS+, CSand the control odor. Accordingly, we could see that the effect of increasing correct behavior
over trials was not only due to the exclusion of spontaneous responding or not responding
animals (see Supplementary Figure 2).

Figure 3 Classical olfactory conditioning over five trials with a memory retention test after 10 min. Filled squares
indicate trials in which a significant difference was found between CS+ and CS- (Chi² test). Asterisks indicate that
responses changed for the conditioned stimuli (CS+ and CS-) over trials (2-way ANOVA, repeated measures:

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

treatment x trial interaction *: p < 0.05; ***: p < 0.001). A) When isoamyl acetate (ISO) was the rewarded odor
(CS+, black), the average group response did not increase during training. Responses to the punished odor BA
(CS-, dark gray) decreased significantly over trials (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.002) and odor x trial interaction was
significant (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: p = 0.02). B) When BA was rewarded (CS+, black), responses
increased considerably, however not significantly (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.208). Responses to ISO decreased,
but again, not significantly (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.189). The odor x trial interaction was not significant (2-way
repeated measures ANOVA: p = 0.113). C) When excluding all spontaneous responding animals to the rewarded
odor, response to CS+ increased significantly (one-way ANOVA: p < 0.001). Responses to the CS- decreased over
trials, but not significantly (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.686). The treatment x trial interaction was significant (2-way
repeated measures ANOVA: p < 0.001). D) When excluding all not spontaneous responding animals to the
punished odor the number of animals that behaved correctly to CS- over trials increased significantly (one-way
ANOVA: p < 0.001), while response to CS+ did not change significantly over trials (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.814).
The treatment x trial interaction was significant (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: p < 0.001). Black squares in
A&C indicate the exclusion of animals that did not behave correctly in the first trial.

Expression of short-term and long-term memory after classical conditioning
To test memory retention after differential classical conditioning at a short- and longterm range we conducted a new experiment. A group of cockroaches were differentially trained
during three consecutive trials. The group was then split in half and retention tests were
performed either 1 h after the last training trial or 24 h after. In Figure 4 we show the training
trials as unseparated groups, but the statistical analysis that include the training trials were
conducted with splitted groups, that are shown in Supplementary Figure 1. The experiment was
repeated with reversed contingencies of the odors. Responses to mechanical air stimulation
(filter paper alone) did not vary and always stayed below 1.5 %.
Overall, responses to the CS+ were significantly different from the CS- across three
training trials in both groups (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: Figure 4A: F2, 183 = 9.266, p
< 0.001; Figure 4B: F2, 91 = 13.016; p < 0.001). Responses to the CS- decreased significantly in
both experiments (one-way ANOVA: Figure 4A: F2, 552 = 7.181; p < 0.001; Figure 4B: F2, 276 =
3.291; p = 0.002) while responses to the CS+ did not increase significantly. Responses to the
control odor cinnamaldehyde decreased significantly only when butyric acid was used as CS+
(one-way ANOVA: F2, 276 = 3.291; p = 0.039).
During the 1 h test animals that received isoamyl acetate as CS+ maintained the elevated
response level as group averaged performance, thus the retention test after 1 h was not
significantly different to the response level in the last training trial (Figure 4A, Chi²: p = 0.143).
Interestingly, the response level to isoamyl acetate was significantly higher in the 24 h retention
test compared to the 1 h retention test (Chi²: p < 0.001), as well as in comparison to the response
level at the end of training (Chi²: p< 0.001). When butyric acid was the rewarded odor (Figure
11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

4B), response levels to the CS+ in both memory tests (after 1 h and 24 h) were not different
from each other (Chi²: p = 0.475), nor from the response level at the end of training (Chi²: 1h:
p = 0.826; 24 h: p = 0.149). The response level to the CS- resumed the initial high spontaneous
response levels to isoamyl acetate during 1 h and 24 h retention. All results are summarized in
Supplementary Table 2.
For the next step of analysis, animals that did not behave correctly in the first trial were
excluded and for both CS+ and CS- the percentage of correct behaving animals increased
(Figure 4 C&D, one-way ANOVA: CS+: F2, 537 = 33.537; p < 0.001; CS-: F2, 306 = 43.027; p <
0.001). The only other significant effect was the decrease of correct behavior to the CS- when
all correct responding animals were excluded (one-way ANOVA: F2, 537 = 3.569; p = 0.029).
Moreover, the interaction between trial and treatment was significant in both cases (2-way
repeated measures ANOVA: Figure 4 C: F2, 178 = 46.719; p < 0.001; Figure 4 D: F2, 101 = 39.158;
p < 0.001).
When excluding all spontaneously responding animals, performance in the retention test
stayed at the same level as at the end of training. However, the increase of the CS+ retention
test after 24 h was significant (Chi²: p < 0.001). After exclusion of the nonspontaneous
responders, performance in all retention tests stayed similar compared to the third trial of
training. However, the percentage of correct behaving animals to the CS- decreased after 1h
(Chi²: p < 0.001) and 24 h (Chi²: p < 0.001).

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4 Classical olfactory conditioning over three trials with memory retention tests after 1 h and 24 h. Filled
squares indicate trials in which a significant difference was found between CS+ and CS- (Chi² test). Asterisks
indicate a significant treatment x trial interaction (***: p < 0.001). Letters above the bars indicate significant
differences between retention tests (Chi²). A) When isoamyl acetate (ISO) was rewarded (CS+, black) and butyric
acid (BA) punished (CS-, dark gray), responses significantly decreased for the CS- (one-way ANOVA: p < 0.001),
but did not change for the CS+ (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.155). Overall, the odor x trial interaction was significant
(2-way repeated measures ANOVA: p < 0.001). B) When butyric acid was rewarded (CS+, black) and isoamyl
acetate was punished (CS-, dark gray), responses to the CS+ increased, however, not significantly (one-way
ANOVA: p = 0.06), but decreased significantly for the CS- (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.002). The odor x trial
interaction was again significant (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: p < 0.001). C) When excluding all
spontaneous responding animals to the rewarded odor the response to CS+ increased significantly (one-way
ANOVA: p < 0.001). The response to CS- decreased significantly over trials (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.029). The
treatment x trial interaction was significant (2-way repeated measures ANOVA: p < 0.001). D) When excluding
all not spontaneous responding animals to the punished odor the number of animals that behaved correctly to CSover trials increased significantly (one-way ANOVA: p < 0.001). The response to CS+ did not change significantly
over trials (one-way ANOVA: p = 0.38). The treatment x trial interaction was significant (2-way repeated measures
ANOVA: p < 0.001). Black square in C and D indicate the exclusion of animals that did not behave correctly in
the first trial.

13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Individual learning performance during classical conditioning
To test whether differences in learning performance exist among individual animals we
followed the analyses suggested in Pamir et al. (2011, 2014). Each of the two groups trained in
the five trial classical conditioning experiment (Figure 3C&D) were divided into two subgroups
(cf. Materials and Methods): a) individuals that behaved correctly in two consecutive trials
(previous correct behavior, pC), and b) individuals that did not behave correctly in the previous
trial but started behaving correctly in the present trial (previous incorrect behavior, pI). Previous
correct behaving animals always showed a higher level of correct behavior than the average
correct behavior across all animals (Figure 5, red upward triangles up), while the previous
incorrect behaving individuals always showed lower correct behavior (Figure 5, red downward
triangles).
Next, we analyzed the across-trial behavior of those animals that showed their first
correct behavior already in the second trial (i.e. after only a single pairing of CS and US) and
find that this subgroup showed consistently high rates of correct response across all trials and
during retention with retention scores above 90%, both for CS+ and CS- (dark gray curves in
Fig. 5A&C). Individuals that started to respond correctly in the third trial (after two pairings of
CS and US, light gray curves in Fig. 5A&C) showed lower correct response levels than those
animals that had started in the first trial but, still, these were comparably high considering the
fact that the average response levels (blue and green curve in Figure 5A and B, respectively)
included also the high performance group (dark gray curves). This indicates that fast learners
are also good learners and parallels previous findings in the honeybee (Pamir et al., 2014).
In the histograms of Figure 5B&D we counted for each trial separately, how many
animals responded correctly for the first time in that trial. Most animals behaved correctly for
the first time after a single conditioning trial. The second largest group behaved correctly for
the first time after two conditioning trials. However, a substantial portion of animals never
behaved correctly (black bars in Figure 5B&D) and this group is larger for a correct behavior
towards the CS+.

14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5 Individual learning abilities in classical olfactory conditioning. Data for isoamyl acetate as CS+ and
butyric acid as CS+ were pooled, likewise data for isoamyl acetate as CS- and butyric acid as CS- were pooled.
Correct learning is represented by (A) increasing responses to the rewarded odor in the case of CS+ and (C)
increasing response-suppression to the punished odor in the case of CS-. (A,C) Black squares in A and C indicate
the exclusion of animals that did not behave correctly in the first trial. Upward pointing triangles depict animals,
which correctly behaved in the respective trial and already showed a correct behavior in the previous trial (pC).
Triangles pointing downward depict animals that correctly behaved in the respective trial but did not do so in the
previous trial (pI). Filled triangles indicate a significant difference of subgroups in the respective trials, empty
triangles represent subgroups that were not significantly different (Chi2; α= 0.05). Animals behaving correctly in
trial two, i.e. after a single training trial (dark gray; CS+: N = 15; CS-: N = 16) showed consistently high
probabilities of correct responses in subsequent trials (cf. Pamir et al., 2014). Similarly, high response scores were
observed for animals responding correctly for the first time in trial three (light gray; CS+: N = 11; CS-: N = 11).
(B,D) Proportion of animals behaving correctly for the first time in the indicated trial. A high percentage of animals
expressed a correct behavior already after a single training trial. A substantial proportion of animals never behaved
correctly (black bars).

Individuality in operant learning
We then tested learning, memory retention and individual differences in an operant
conditioning task. Cockroaches were trained to avoid a punishment and were tested for their
memory for up to 24 h. For this, we designed a forced two-choice paradigm where an individual
cockroach is placed in a T-maze during repeated training trials (Figure 1B, cf. Materials &
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods). In each trial, the cockroach was allowed to choose one of the arms and entered a
target box. In the first trial and irrespective of the animal’s choice, it experienced an aversive
bright light stimulus. Whenever the animal chose this same side in subsequent trials, the same
aversive stimulus was elicited. Learning was thus expressed in avoiding the side (left or right)
that resulted in the punishment with the bright light stimulus.
In a first experiment, animals were trained for five consecutive trials and short-term
memory retention was tested 35 minutes after the last trial. In a second experiment, animals
were trained for three trials and a long-term retention test was performed 24 h later (Figure 1E).
Animals in the first group significantly learned to avoid the punished side from the third trial
on (binomial tests: p < 0.01). Animals showed correct memory for the punished side in the
retention test 35 minutes after (Figure 6A). Cockroaches in the second group did not
significantly show learning after two training trials. However, memory for the correct side was
expressed in the 24 h retention test (binomial test: p = 0.014, Figure 6B).
To study individual differences in this operant learning and memory tasks, animals were
again attributed to two subgroups. In the short-term memory experiment, animals in the
subgroup showing the correct behavior in two consecutive trials (pC) always performed better
than the group average while animals in the subgroup pI consistently showed fewer correct
choices in the present trial. Behavioral choices of previous correct deciding animals (pC) and
previous incorrect deciding animals (pI) significantly differed in the third and fourth trial during
training (Chi2: p < 0.05). This difference was not significant in the fifth learning trial, nor in the
retention test after 35 min (Chi²: trial 3: p = 0.161; trial 4: p = 0.186, Figure 6A).
In the long-term memory experiment, the two subgroups (pC and pI) again differed
significantly after two training trials. During the 24 h retention test the subgroup of animals that
had shown a correct decision in the last training trial significantly outperformed those animals
that had made an incorrect decision in the last training trial (Figure 6B: Chi2: p < 0.05).

16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6 Overall group performance and
individual choices during an operant conditioning
task in a T-maze A) over five consecutive trials
and a 35 min retention test (RT). From the third
trial on cockroaches chose significantly more
often the correct direction (**: p < 0.01; ***: p <
0.001). B) Operant conditioning over three trials
and a retention test after 24 h. However, this time
cockroaches did not learn during training but
chose significantly more the correct direction in
the 24 h retention test (*: p < 0.05). Triangles that
point upwards depict animals that chose the
correct direction in two consecutive trials (pC).
Triangles that show downwards depict animals
that chose the correct direction in the present trial
but did not choose it in the previous trial (pI).
Filled triangles differ significantly from each other
within a trial and empty ones do not (Chi2;

α=

0.05).

Discussion
In the present work we show that the adult American cockroach, Periplaneta americana
can solve classical olfactory and operant spatial conditioning tasks. In both cases, animals could
learn to establish a conditioned response to the rewarded stimulus (CS+), and to diminish their
responses to the punished odor (CS-) despite the fact that, in the classical conditioning task,
the two odors were not equally important to the animals (high spontaneous responses to isoamyl
acetate). Overall, training resulted in the successful expression of short term memory and long
term memory (after 24h) in both conditioning tasks. We further show that cockroaches express
individuality in their learning and memory performance in classical and operant conditioning.

Classical olfactory conditioning in the cockroach
For the present study we established a novel classical conditioning paradigm in
harnessed cockroaches that allows to observe the expression (or non-expression) of a discrete
conditioned response behavior, the maxilla labia response (MLR) during learning and memory
retention. The development of this paradigm was inspired by the highly successful proboscis
extension reflex (PER) paradigm in the honeybee (e.g. (Bitterman et al., 1983; Giurfa and
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Sandoz, 2012; Kuwabara, 1957; Menzel, 2012; Takeda, 1961) in which the extension (or nonextension) of the proboscis is observed as a discrete conditioned response behavior.
A number of previous studies have investigated classical conditioning in the cockroach
using training and test conditions that differ fundamentally from our MLR paradigm. In studies
by Watanabe et al. (2003), Sato et al. (2006) and Liu and Sakuma (2013), in the German
cockroach, unrestrained cockroaches were placed in a cylindrical chamber during repeated
conditioning trials with one odor paired with sucrose reward (CS+) and a second odor paired
with salt punishment (CS-). Sato et al. (2006) could prove that beyond simple olfactory
discrimination learning, cockroaches exhibited excellent learning performance in an occasion
setting paradigm in which a visual context defines the contingency between olfactory CSs
(conditioning stimuli) and gustatory USs (unconditioned stimuli). Watanabe et al. (2003)
extended their classical conditioning protocol in unrestrained cockroaches to harnessed
cockroaches that were subsequently tested under freely moving conditions in a test arena where
they could choose between the two previously conditioned odors. This paradigm, however, did
not establish a clear conditioned response observable during training and thus expression of a
conditioned response behavior is only accessible during memory retention and under conditions
different from training. Classical conditioning leads to an increase in response of salivary
neurons to an odor associated with sucrose reward in the cockroach (Watanabe and Mizunami,
2006). After differential conditioning one odor paired with sucrose and another odor without
reward, the sucrose-associated odor induced an increase in the level of salivation, but the odor
presented alone did not, proving classical conditioning of salivation in cockroaches (Watanabe
and Mizunami, 2007). Classical conditioning of salivation has first been shown a century ago
by Pavlov in his famous dog experiments (Pavlov, 1927). Restrained cockroaches were further
used to study spatial (e.g. Kwon et al., 2004) or visual-olfactory associative learning and
memory (e.g. Lent et al., 2007; Lent and Kwon, 2004; Pintér et al., 2005) by quantifying the
antennal projection response (APR) of animals that were tethered in the middle of an arena
(Pomaville and Lent, 2018). The APR is based on the observation that antennal motor actions
can be elicited by different modalities, including olfactory, tactile and visual stimuli (e.g. Erber
et al., 1997; Menzel et al., 1994). Conditioning the APR consists in quantifying directed
antennal movements towards the direction of a rewarded visual stimulus and was inspired by
operant conditioning of bees to extend their antennae towards a target in order to receive a
reward (e.g. Kisch and Erber, 1999; Menzel et al., 1994). The advantage of training
immobilized insects provides a powerful technique for studying the neuronal basis (by e.g.

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

employing neurophysiological and pharmacological techniques) of learning and memory in a
simpler nervous system compared to vertebrates.

Initial response behavior during classical conditioning
Stimuli used for studying olfactory learning and memory in insects mostly employ odors
which are relevant in the natural context, such as communication signals (i.e. pheromones) or
food-related odors. Isoamyl acetate constitutes the most salient compound of the banana blend
and is perceived as the smell of banana (Schubert et al., 2014). This odor is clearly food related
and thus highly attractive for cockroaches (Lauprasert et al., 2006). This likely explains why,
in our olfactory conditioning experiments, we observed a high level of initial responses to
isoamyl acetate in the first trial (Figure 2). Consequently it was difficult to observe learning
(i.e. increasing conditioned response levels) when this odor was paired with a sucrose reward
(CS+) since response levels were consistently high (> ~60%) from the first trial on and
throughout training (Figure 3A). In the 24 h retention test, however, the MLR to isoamyl acetate
was significantly increased compared to the response in the last training trial (Figure 4A),
indicating that a long-term memory had been established. When isoamyl acetate was paired
with salt punishment (CS-) animals learned to suppress their responses during training (Figure
4B). Initial responses to butyric acid were significantly lower (~ 30%) at the beginning of
training in all cases (Figure 2). When associated to sugar, responses increased but never
exceeded 50% even after five training trials. Spontaneous responses to butyric acid were
completely abolished during training and memory retention when paired with punishment
(Figure 3B). Concluding, the two odors employed in our study were not equally attractive to
the animals.

Operant spatial conditioning in cockroaches
A frequently used setup for operant conditioning is a Y- or T-maze, which is extensively
used to study operant learning and decision making in rodents. T- or Y-maze (dual choice)
experiments in invertebrates have been used broadly to study visual or olfactory absolute and
differential learning in free flying bees (e.g. for review: Avarguès-Weber et al., 2011; Giurfa et
al., 1999, 2001; Nouvian and Galizia, 2019; Srinivasan et al., 1998), in ants (e.g. Camlitepe and
Aksoy, 2010; Dupuy et al., 2006) and in wasps (Hoedjes et al., 2012). In cockroaches, operant
learning has repeatedly been studied in open arenas (e.g. Balderrama, 1980; Sakura et al., 2002;
Sakura and Mizunami, 2001). The first work on operant conditioning in cockroaches was
carried out by Balderrama (1980) who trained free moving cockroaches individually in a simple
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

training chamber to associate two artificial odors to sucrose and salt solutions, respectively, and
testing discriminatory learning performance by measuring the odor preference before and after
training. Spontaneous preference for one of the odors before training could be modified already
with one trial and retention lasted up to 7 days. To date, there are only two studies that have
challenged cockroaches in T-maze tasks, the first testing the influence of feces pheromones on
directional orientation (Bell et al., 1973), while the second investigated effects of protein
synthesis inhibiting drugs on learning and retention by training animals to avoid shock on one
of the sides (Barraco et al., 1981). Our reason to perform an operant learning paradigm in the
T-maze was to establish a forced binary choice that can be analyzed during acquisition and
memory retention in a defined trial design. Electric shock as used for a punishing stimulus in
the previous study by Barraco et al. (1981) seems a rather unnatural aversive stimulus that is
unlikely to appear in nature. We decided to use bright light as negative reinforcer since
cockroaches naturally avoid bright light and seek shelter in darkness (Turner, 1912).
Cockroaches started to avoid the side that was punished after a few trials. However,
training results were variable across the two experiments. Previous studies concluded that
cockroaches show unpredicted searching behavior (Balderrama, 1980). Similarly, we could
observe different traits in behavior, which might partly underlie the variance in choice behavior.
For example, some cockroaches show a high explorative behavior, possibly in search for an
exit from the maze, and these did not seem to care much about the reinforcing stimulus while
others stayed almost immobile throughout a trial and moved little. The punishing effect of light
is limited because it has no harming consequence for the animal. They may thus habituate to
the aversive light stimulus. The T-maze experiments in Barraco et al. (1981) using electric
shock as negative reinforcer resulted in surprisingly high correct choice rates. However, a
strong light seems to be repellent for most cockroaches since they normally try to hide in a dark
place when e.g. the light in a room is switched on. In future experiments we want to explore
whether a paradigm for appetitive operant conditioning can lead to higher levels of correct
choice performance in cockroaches.

Individual behavioral expression of learning and memory
Our approach to study individuality in learning performance during classical
conditioning was inspired by two previous studies by Pamir et al. (2011, 2014) that investigated
a large number of data sets on classical appetitive conditioning in the honeybee. The authors
were able to extract from the immense amount of data that honeybees express individual
learning behavior and that a group of animals can be separated into at least two subgroups,
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

learners and non-learners. Both studies by Pamir and colleagues have investigated behavioral
learning and memory expression only towards the CS+. We have extended their analysis
including behavioral learning and memory expression towards the CS- (Figure 5C&D).
As for the honeybee (Pamir et al., 2014), a large fraction of animals (>35%) never
showed the correct behavior to the CS+ odor in any of the learning trials or the retention test
(Figure 5B&D). These animals may be considered non-learners. When taking into account
only those animals that expressed the correct conditioned behavior at least once during the
training session, then we find that those animals expressed this behavior for the first time after
average 1.7 conditioning trials towards the CS+ and after average 1.8 conditioning trials
towards the CS-. Indeed, the largest fraction (50%) of responding animals showed a correct
conditioned response behavior for the first time already after a single conditioning trial (singletrial learning), both towards the CS+ and the CS-. In effect, 86,6 % of learners showed a first
correct behavior to the CS+ or CS- already after the first or second conditioning trial, indicating
rapid learning after a single or two trials. These numbers match closely those obtained in the
honeybee where typically ~50% of individuals in a group of honeybees showed a conditioned
response after a single training trial (Pamir et al., 2014). Moreover, the correct expression of
learned behavior in fast learners is remarkably stable as can be seen when following the acrosstrial CR behavior of the subgroup of cockroaches that showed a correct behavior after a single
conditioning trial (dark gray curve in Figure 5A&C). When looking at short-term memory
retention in those animals (Figure 5A&C), 93.3% and 93.8% expressed the correct behavior
during the test for CS+ and CS-, respectively. Conversely, of the fraction of animals that
showed the correct behavior during short-term memory retention for CS+ and CS-, 95% and
82.8%, respectively, were fast learning individuals expressing the correct behavior after a single
or two training trials. Similarly, Pamir et al. (2014) reported that honeybees that responded
earlier showed a higher long-term memory retention than those responding later. Taken together
our results indicate that (i) individual cockroaches are able to learn efficiently during only one
or two conditioning trials, and (ii) fast learners are also good learners that robustly express the
correct behavior throughout the training session and achieve very high retention scores.
Thus, in line with the results on honeybees reported by Pamir et al (2011, 2014), we
conclude from our results that the gradually increasing group-average learning curve does not
adequately represent the behavior of individual animals. Rather, it confounds three attributes of
individual learning: the ability or inability to learn a given task (learners vs. non-learners), the
fast acquisition of a correct conditioned response behavior in learners, and a high robustness of
the conditioned response expression during consecutive training and memory retention trials.
21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Moreover, we could establish the same general result in an operant learning task in the
cockroach. The latter result is in line with a study in bumblebees (Muller and Chittka, 2012)
observing that some individuals were consistently better than others in associating different
cues with reward or punishment in an operant learning task.
Interestingly, these congruent results in the honeybee and cockroach, two evolutionary
far separated species, are in contrast to the long-standing notion on learning abilities in fruit
flies. An early report on olfactory learning in Drosophila melanogaster by Quinn et al. (1974)
using a meanwhile well-established and heavily used group assay for classical olfactory
conditioning of flies concluded that the expression of behavior in the individual was
probabilistic such that a group of flies can be treated as homogeneous with respect to the ability
to acquire a correct CR behavior. This notion has been challenged by a more recent study
(Chabaud et al., 2010), but awaits further conclusive investigation. We hypothesize that fruit
flies exhibit individual learning performance that are very similar to those observed in the
honeybee and established for the cockroach in this study.

Possible causes for the individual expression of learned behavior
What could be the underlying causes for the observed individuality in behavioral learning
performance? At the neuronal circuit level, learning-induced plasticity has been observed at
different sites within the system. Two studies in honeybees found correlations between the
behavioral performance in individuals and the expression of plasticity in the nervous system.
Rath et al. (2011) performed Ca-imaging in the projection neurons of the antennal lobe. For
their analysis they formed two subgroups of learners and non-learners based on their
conditioned response behavior and reported that, as a result of classical olfactory conditioning,
odor response patterns in the projection neuron population became more distinct in learners but
not in non-learners. Haenicke et al. (2018) performed Ca-imaging from the projection neuron
boutons in the mushroom body calyx of the honeybee and found that the level of neuronal
plasticity correlates significantly with the level of behavioral plasticity across individual
animals in classical olfactory conditioning. Mushroom body output neurons have been shown
to convey the valence of odors following classical conditioning in bees (Strube-Bloss et al.,
2011, 2016) and flies (e.g. Aso et al., 2014; Hige et al., 2015). In bees, the level of observed
plasticity in these neurons after classical conditioning again correlates with the behavioral
performance during the retention test (Strube-Bloss, d’Albis, Menzel & Nawrot, unpublished
data). Thus, individuality in the conditioned response performance during memory retention
has been linked to the underlying plasticity in the neural circuitry.
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In bees, a signiﬁcant correlation between their sensitivity to sucrose concentration and
learning performance during an olfactory task has been reported (Scheiner et al., 2004). Pamir
et al. (2014) re-analyzed data from Scheiner et al., (2001) showing that sucrose responsiveness,
interpreted as a proxy to the state of satiety, correlates with learning performance, both in
olfactory and tactile classical conditioning.
In addition, a number of studies have linked variations in learning abilities with genetic
variation across individuals. In the honeybee, for example, animals which performed well in
olfactory/mechanosensory conditioning also performed well in visual learning. On the other
hand, good and poor learners from strains selected for olfactory conditioning differed
significantly in their visual learning values. Thus, genetic differences exist between different
strains and such genetic variation can account for differences in learning in individuals (e.g.
Brandes et al., 1988; Brandes and Menzel, 1990). Another study on honey bees considering
individual differences in a latent inhibition learning task (learning that some stimuli are not
signals of important events) also proved a genetic predisposition for learning this task (Chandra
et al., 2000). A study on fruit flies that learned to associate a chemical cue (quinine) with a
particular substrate showed that individuals still avoided this substrate several hours after the
cue had been removed, were expected to contribute more alleles to the next generation. From
about generation 15 on the experimental populations showed marked ability to avoid
oviposition substrates that several hours earlier had contained the chemical cue (for review see:
Dukas, 2008; Mery and Kawecki, 2002). Indeed, genetic variation might underlie individuality
in behavior in general and in learning behavior specifically. However, to our knowledge genetic
variation has not been studied in cockroaches in relation to behavioral traits. Unfortunately,
maturation and reproduction cycles in cockroaches are rather long.

Outlook
In the present study we investigated individual learning performance and learning speed in
single learning tasks (classical olfactory conditioning or operant place learning). In future
studies we will extend our analyses of individuality in two directions. First, we will investigate
whether the behavioral performance of individuals is consistent across different learning
paradigms, i.e. whether good and fast learners in one classical conditioning paradigm will also
perform above average in different classical or operant conditioning tasks. To our knowledge
there is only one invertebrate study where something comparable was published with
honeybees (Honegger et al., 2019). Second, we are interested in consistency across days or

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

weeks investigating whether a high/low performance of one individual is equally high/low
during a repetition of the same or similar task at a later point in time.

References
Aso, Y., Sitaraman, D., Ichinose, T., Kaun, K. R., Vogt, K., Belliart-Guérin, G., et al. (2014).
Mushroom body output neurons encode valence and guide memory-based action selection
in Drosophila. Elife 3, 1–42. doi:10.7554/eLife.04580.
Avarguès-Weber, A., Deisig, N., and Giurfa, M. (2011). Visual Cognition in Social Insects.
Annu. Rev. Entomol. 56, 423–443. doi:10.1146/annurev-ento-120709-144855.
Balderrama, N. (1980). One trial learning in the American cockroach, Periplaneta americana.
J.

Insect

Physiol.

26,

499–504.

Available

at:

http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022191080901237.
Barraco, D. A., Lovell, K. L., and Eisenstein, E. M. (1981). Effects of cycloheximide and
puromycin on learning and retention in the cockroach, P. americana. Pharmacol. Biochem.
Behav. 15, 489–494. doi:10.1016/0091-3057(81)90282-3.
Bell, W. J., Burk, T., and Salds, G. R. (1973). Cockroach Aggregation Pheromone : Directional
Orientation. Behav. Biol. 279, 251–255.
Bitterman, M. E., Menzel, R., Fietz, A., and Schäfer, S. (1983). Classical conditioning of
proboscis extension in honeybees (Apis mellifera). J. Comp. Psychol. doi:10.1037/07357036.97.2.107.
Brandes, C., Frisch, B., and Menzel, R. (1988). Time-course of memory formation differs in
honey bee lines selected for good and poor learning. Anim. Behav. 36, 981–985.
doi:10.1016/S0003-3472(88)80056-3.
Brandes, C., and Menzel, R. (1990). Common mechanisms in proboscis extension conditioning
and visual learning revealed by genetic selection in honeybees (Apis mellifera capensis).
J. Comp. Physiol. A 166, 545–552. doi:10.1007/BF00192025.
Brembs, B. (2013). Invertebrate behavior—actions or responses? Front. Neurosci. 7, 1–2.
doi:10.3389/fnins.2013.00221.
Camlitepe, Y., and Aksoy, V. (2010). First evidence of fine colour discrimination ability in ants
(Hymenoptera, Formicidae). J. Exp. Biol. 213, 72–77. doi:10.1242/jeb.037853.
Carere, C., and Locurto, C. (2011). Interaction between animal personality and animal
cognition. Curr. Zool. 57, 491–498. doi:10.1093/czoolo/57.4.491.
Chabaud, M.-A., Preat, T., and Kaiser, L. (2010). Behavioral Characterization of Individual
Olfactory Memory Retrieval in Drosophila Melanogaster. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 4, 1–
24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

11. doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2010.00192.
Chandra, S. B. C., Hosler, J. S., and Smith, B. H. (2000). Heritable variation for latent inhibition
and its correlation with reversal learning in honeybees (Apis mellifera). J. Comp. Psychol.
114, 86–97. doi:10.1037/0735-7036.114.1.86.
Chittka, L., Dyer, A. G., Bock, F., and Dornhaus, A. (2003). Bees trade off foraging speed for
accuracy. Nature 424, 388–388. doi:10.1038/424388a.
Chittka, L., and Thomson, J. D. (1997). Sensori-motor learning and its relevance for task
specialization

in

bumble

bees.

Behav.

Ecol.

Sociobiol.

41,

385–398.

doi:10.1007/s002650050400.
David, M., Auclair, Y., and Cézilly, F. (2011). Personality predicts social dominance in female
zebra finches, Taeniopygia guttata, in a feeding context. Anim. Behav. 81, 219–224.
doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2010.10.008.
Dingemanse, N. J., and Wolf, M. (2010). Recent models for adaptive personality differences: a
review. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 365, 3947–3958. doi:10.1098/rstb.2010.0221.
Dukas, R. (2008). Evolutionary Biology of Insect Learning. Annu. Rev. Entomol. 53, 145–160.
doi:10.1146/annurev.ento.53.103106.093343.
Dupuy, F., Sandoz, J.-C., Giurfa, M., and Josens, R. (2006). Individual olfactory learning in
Camponotus ants. Anim. Behav. 72, 1081–1091. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2006.03.011.
Erber, J., Pribbenow, B., Grandy, K., and Kierzek, S. (1997). Tactile motor learning in the
antennal system of the honeybee ( Apis mellifera L.). J. Comp. Physiol. A Sensory, Neural,
Behav. Physiol. 181, 355–365. doi:10.1007/s003590050121.
Gallistel, C. R., Fairhurst, S., and Balsam, P. (2004). The learning curve: Implications of a
quantitative

analysis.

Proc.

Natl.

Acad.

Sci.

101,

13124–13131.

doi:10.1073/pnas.0404965101.
Giurfa, M., Hammer, M., Stach, S., Stollhoff, N., Müller-Deisig, N., and Mizyrycki, C. (1999).
Pattern learning by honeybees: conditioning procedure and recognition strategy. Anim.
Behav. 57, 315–324. doi:10.1006/anbe.1998.0957.
Giurfa, M., and Sandoz, J.-C. (2012). Invertebrate learning and memory: Fifty years of
olfactory conditioning of the proboscis extension response in honeybees. Learn. Mem. 19,
54–66. doi:10.1101/lm.024711.111.
Giurfa, M., Zhang, S., Jenett, A., Menzel, R., and Srinivasan, M. V. (2001). The concepts of
‘sameness’ and ‘difference’ in an insect. Nature 410, 930–933. doi:10.1038/35073582.
Gosling, S. D. (2001). From mice to men: What can we learn about personality from animal
research? Psychol. Bull. 127, 45–86. doi:10.1037/0033-2909.127.1.45.
25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Gosling, S. D., and Vazire, S. (2002). Are we barking up the right tree? Evaluating a
comparative approach to personality. J. Res. Pers. 36, 607–614. doi:10.1016/S00926566(02)00511-1.
Grinsted, L., Pruitt, J. N., Settepani, V., and Bilde, T. (2013). Individual personalities shape
task differentiation in a social spider. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 280, 20131407–20131407.
doi:10.1098/rspb.2013.1407.
Groothuis, T. G. G., and Carere, C. (2005). Avian personalities: characterization and epigenesis.
Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 29, 137–150. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2004.06.010.
Haenicke, J., Yamagata, N., Zwaka, H., Nawrot, M., and Menzel, R. (2018). Neural Correlates
of Odor Learning in the Presynaptic Microglomerular Circuitry in the Honeybee
Mushroom Body Calyx. Eneuro 5, ENEURO.0128-18.2018. doi:10.1523/eneuro.012818.2018.
Hige, T., Aso, Y., Rubin, G. M., and Turner, G. C. (2015). Plasticity-driven individualization
of olfactory coding in mushroom body output neurons. Nature 526, 258–262.
doi:10.1038/nature15396.
Hoedjes, K. M., Steidle, J. L. M., Werren, J. H., Vet, L. E. M., and Smid, H. M. (2012). Highthroughput olfactory conditioning and memory retention test show variation in Nasonia
parasitic

wasps.

Genes,

Brain

Behav.

11,

879–887.

doi:10.1111/j.1601-

183X.2012.00823.x.
Honegger, K. S., Smith, M. A.-Y., Churgin, M. A., Turner, G. C., and de Bivort, B. L. (2019).
Idiosyncratic neural coding and neuromodulation of olfactory individuality in Drosophila.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 201901623. doi:10.1073/pnas.1901623116.
Hosono, S., Matsumoto, Y., and Mizunami, M. (2016). Interaction of inhibitory and facilitatory
effects of conditioning trials on long-term memory formation. Learn. Mem. 23, 669–678.
doi:10.1101/lm.043513.116.
Kisch, J., and Erber, J. (1999). Operant conditioning of antennal movements in the honey bee.
Behav. Brain Res. 99, 93–102. doi:10.1016/S0166-4328(98)00076-X.
Kolata, S., Light, K., Townsend, D. A., Hale, G., Grossman, H. C., and Matzel, L. D. (2005).
Variations in working memory capacity predict individual differences in general learning
abilities among genetically diverse mice. Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 84, 241–246.
doi:10.1016/j.nlm.2005.07.006.
Kotrschal, A., and Taborsky, B. (2010). Environmental Change Enhances Cognitive Abilities
in Fish. PLoS Biol. 8, e1000351. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1000351.
Kralj-Fišer, S., and Schuett, W. (2014). Studying personality variation in invertebrates: why
26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

bother? Anim. Behav. 91, 41–52. doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2014.02.016.
Kuwabara, M. (1957). Bildung des bedingten Reflexes von Pavlovs Typus bei der Honigbiene,
Apis mellifica. J. Fat. Sci. Hokkaido Univ. 13, 458–464.
Kwon, H.-W., Lent, D. D., and Strausfeld, N. J. (2004). Spatial learning in the restrained
American

cockroach

Periplaneta

americana.

J.

Exp.

Biol.

207,

377–383.

doi:10.1242/jeb.00737.
Lauprasert, P., Laupraset, P., Sitthicharoenchai, D., Thirakhupt1, K., and Pradatsudarasar, A.O. (2006). Food preference and feeding behavior of the German cockroach, Blattella
germanica

(Linnaeus).

J

Sei

Res

Chula

…

31,

121–126.

Available

at:

http://research.sc.chula.ac.th/source/Journal 31_2/paper6.pdf.
Lent, D. D., and Kwon, H.-W. (2004). Antennal movements reveal associative learning in the
American

cockroach

Periplaneta

americana.

J.

Exp.

Biol.

207,

369–375.

doi:10.1242/jeb.00736.
Lent, D. D., Pintér, M., and Strausfeld, N. J. (2007). Learning with half a brain. Dev. Neurobiol.
67, 740–751. doi:10.1002/dneu.20374.
Liu, J.-L., and Sakuma, M. (2013). Olfactory conditioning with single chemicals in the German
Cockroach, Blattella germanica (Dictyoptera: Blattellidae). Appl. Entomol. Zool. 48, 387–
396. doi:10.1007/s13355-013-0199-x.
Lunney, G. H. (1970). using analysis of variance with a dichotomous dependent variable: an
empirical study. J. Educ. Meas. 7, 263–269.
Menzel, R. (2012). The honeybee as a model for understanding the basis of cognition. Nat. Rev.
Neurosci. 13, 758–768. doi:10.1038/nrn3357.
Menzel, R., Durst, C., Erber, J., Eichmüller, S., Hammer, M., Hildebrandt, H., et al. (1994).
The mushroom bodies in the honeybee: from molecules to behaviour. Fortschr. Zool. 39,
81–102.

Available

at:

berlin.de/menzel/Pub_AGmenzel/Menzel-et-al_Chapter

http://www.neurobiologie.fuin

Fortschritte

der

Zool_1994_100dpi.pdf.
Mery, F., and Kawecki, T. J. (2002). Experimental evolution of learning ability in fruit flies.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 99, 14274–14279. doi:10.1073/pnas.222371199.
Mizunami, M., Weibrecht, J. M., and Strausfeld, N. J. (1998). Mushroom bodies of the
cockroach: Their participation in place memory. J. Comp. Neurol. 402, 520–537.
doi:10.1002/(SICI)1096-9861(19981228)402:4<520::AID-CNE6>3.0.CO;2-K.
Muller, H., and Chittka, L. (2012). Consistent Interindividual Differences in Discrimination
Performance by Bumblebees in Colour, Shape and Odour Learning Tasks (Hymenoptera:
27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Bombus terrestris). 1-.
Nouvian, M., and Galizia, C. G. (2019). Aversive Training of Honey Bees in an Automated YMaze. Front. Physiol. 10, 1–17. doi:10.3389/fphys.2019.00678.
Pamir, E., Chakroborty, N. K., Stollhoff, N., Gehring, K. B., Antemann, V., Morgenstern, L.,
et al. (2011). Average group behavior does not represent individual behavior in classical
conditioning of the honeybee. Learn. Mem. 18, 733–741. doi:10.1101/lm.2232711.
Pamir, E., Szyszka, P., Scheiner, R., and Nawrot, M. P. (2014). Rapid learning dynamics in
individual honeybees during classical conditioning. Front. Behav. Neurosci. 8, 313.
doi:10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00313.
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned reflexes. An investigation of the physiological activity of the
cerebral cortex. Oxford, England: Oxford Univ. Press.
Pinter-Wollman, N. (2012). Personality in social insects: How does worker personality
determine colony personality? Curr. Zool. 58, 580–588. doi:10.1093/czoolo/58.4.580.
Pintér, M., Lent, D. D., and Strausfeld, N. J. (2005). Memory consolidation and gene expression
in Periplaneta americana. Learn. Mem. 12, 30–38. doi:10.1101/lm.87905.
Planas-Sitjà, I., and Deneubourg, J.-L. (2018). The role of personality variation, plasticity and
social

facilitation

in

cockroach

aggregation.

Biol.

Open

7,

bio036582.

doi:10.1242/bio.036582.
Planas-Sitjà, I., Nicolis, S. C., Sempo, G., and Deneubourg, J.-L. (2018). The interplay between
personalities and social interactions affects the cohesion of the group and the speed of
aggregation. PLoS One 13, e0201053. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0201053.
Pomaville, M. B., and Lent, D. D. (2018). Multiple Representations of Space by the Cockroach,
Periplaneta americana. Front. Psychol. 9, 1–15. doi:10.3389/fpsyg.2018.01312.
Quinn, W. G., Harris, W. A., and Benzer, S. (1974). Conditioned Behavior in Drosophila
melanogaster (learnin/memory/odor discrimination/color vision). Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
71, 708–712.
Rath, L., Giovanni Galizia, C., and Szyszka, P. (2011). Multiple memory traces after associative
learning in the honey bee antennal lobe. Eur. J. Neurosci. 34, 352–360.
doi:10.1111/j.1460-9568.2011.07753.x.
Rose, J., Cullen, D. A., Simpson, S. J., and Stevenson, P. A. (2017). Born to win or bred to lose:
aggressive and submissive behavioural profiles in crickets. Anim. Behav. 123, 441–450.
doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2016.11.021.
Sakura, M., and Mizunami, M. (2001). Olfactory Learning and Memory in the Cockroach
Periplaneta americana. Zoolog. Sci. 18, 21–28. doi:10.2108/zsj.18.21.
28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Sakura, M., Okada, R., and Mizunami, M. (2002). Olfactory discrimination of structurally
similar alcohols by cockroaches. J. Comp. Physiol. A Sensory, Neural, Behav. Physiol.
188, 787–797. doi:10.1007/s00359-002-0366-y.
Sato, C., Matsumoto, Y., Sakura, M., and Mizunami, M. (2006). Contextual olfactory learning
in cockroaches. Neuroreport 17, 553–557. doi:10.1097/01.wnr.0000209002.17610.79.
Scheiner, R., Page, R. E., and Erber, J. (2001). The Effects of Genotype, Foraging Role, and
Sucrose Responsiveness on the Tactile Learning Performance of Honey Bees (Apis
mellifera L.). Neurobiol. Learn. Mem. 76, 138–150. doi:10.1006/nlme.2000.3996.
Scheiner, R., Page, R. E., and Erber, J. (2004). Sucrose responsiveness and behavioral plasticity
in honey bees ( Apis mellifera ). Apidologie 35, 133–142. doi:10.1051/apido:2004001.
Schubert, M., Hansson, B. S., and Sachse, S. (2014). The banana code—natural blend
processing in the olfactory circuitry of Drosophila melanogaster. Front. Physiol. 5, 1–13.
doi:10.3389/fphys.2014.00059.
Schuett, W., and Dall, S. R. X. (2009). Sex differences, social context and personality in zebra
finches,

Taeniopygia

guttata.

Anim.

Behav.

77,

1041–1050.

doi:10.1016/j.anbehav.2008.12.024.
Schuett, W., Dall, S. R. X., Baeumer, J., Kloesener, M. H., Nakagawa, S., Beinlich, F., et al.
(2011). Personality variation in a clonal insect: The pea aphid, Acyrthosiphon pisum. Dev.
Psychobiol. 53, 631–640. doi:10.1002/dev.20538.
Sih, A., Bell, A., and Johnson, J. C. (2004a). Behavioral syndromes: an ecological and
evolutionary overview. Trends Ecol. Evol. 19, 372–378. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2004.04.009.
Sih, A., Bell, A. M., Johnson, J. C., and Ziemba, R. E. (2004b). Behavioral Syndromes: An
Integrative Overview. Q. Rev. Biol. 79, 241–277. doi:10.1086/422893.
Srinivasan, M. ., Zhang, S. ., and Lehrer, M. (1998). Honeybee navigation: odometry with
monocular input. Anim. Behav. 56, 1245–1259. doi:10.1006/anbe.1998.0897.
Strube-Bloss, M. F., Nawrot, M. P., and Menzel, R. (2011). Mushroom Body Output Neurons
Encode

Odor-Reward

Associations.

J.

Neurosci.

31,

3129–3140.

doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2583-10.2011.
Strube-Bloss, M. F., Nawrot, M. P., and Menzel, R. (2016). Neural correlates of side-specific
odour memory in mushroom body output neurons. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 283,
20161270. doi:10.1098/rspb.2016.1270.
Takeda, K. (1961). Classical conditioned response in the honey bee. J. Insect Physiol. 6, 168–
179. doi:10.1016/0022-1910(61)90060-9.
Turner, C. H. (1912). AN EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF AN APPARENT
29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/825265; this version posted October 31, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

REVERSAL OF THE RESPONSES TO LIGHT OF THE ROACH (PERIPLANETA
ORIENTALIS L.). II.
Watanabe, H., Kobayashi, Y., Sakura, M., Matsumoto, Y., and Mizunami, M. (2003). Classical
Olfactory Conditioning in the Cockroach Periplaneta americana. Zoolog. Sci. 20, 1447–
1454. doi:10.2108/zsj.20.1447.
Watanabe, H., and Mizunami, M. (2006). Classical conditioning of activities of salivary
neurones in the cockroach. J. Exp. Biol. 209, 766–779. doi:10.1242/jeb.02049.
Watanabe, H., and Mizunami, M. (2007). Pavlov’s Cockroach: Classical Conditioning of
Salivation in an Insect. PLoS One 2. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000529.
Wright, C. M., Holbrook, C. T., and Pruitt, J. N. (2014). Animal personality aligns task
specialization and task proficiency in a spider society. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 111, 9533–
9537. doi:10.1073/pnas.1400850111.

Acknowledgements
C.A. receives a PhD scholarship from the Research Training Group Neural Circuit Analysis on
the Cellular and Subcellular Level funded through the German Research Foundation (DFGRTG 1960, grant no. 233886668). Additional funding is received from the German Research
Foundation within the Research Unit Structure, Plasticity and Behavioral Function of the
Drosophila mushroom body (DFG-FOR 2705, grant no. 403329959 to M.N.). We thank Sandra
Mastani for contributions in an early stage of this project. We thank Peter Kloppenburg for
discussion, sharing cockroach facilities and use of animals. We thank the team of our
mechanical workshop headed by Leo Lesson, which designed and manufactured the odor
stimulation devices and the flexible cockroach maze kit.

30

