bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Mechanophenotyping of 3D Multicellular Clusters
using Displacement Arrays of Rendered Tractions
Susan E. Leggett1,2,3,+ , Mohak Patel1,+ , Thomas M. Valentin1 , Lena Gamboa1,4 , Amanda S.
Khoo1 , Evelyn Kendall Williams1,4 , Christian Franck5 , and Ian Y. Wong1,2,*
1 School

of Engineering, Center for Biomedical Engineering. Brown University, Providence RI 02912
Graduate Program. Brown University, Providence RI 02912
3 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering. Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544
4 Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory University
School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA 30332
5 Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison. Madison WI 53706
+ these authors contributed equally to this work
* To whom correspondence should be addressed. E-mail: ian wong@brown.edu
2 Pathobiology

ABSTRACT
Epithelial tissues mechanically deform the surrounding extracellular matrix during embryonic development, wound repair, and
tumor invasion. Ex vivo measurements of such multicellular tractions within three-dimensional (3D) biomaterials could elucidate
collective dissemination during disease progression, and enable preclinical testing of targeted anti-migration therapies. However,
past 3D traction measurements have been low throughput due to the challenges of imaging and analyzing information-rich 3D
material deformations. Here, we demonstrate a method to profile multicellular clusters in a 96-well plate format based on spatially
heterogeneous contractile, protrusive, and circumferential tractions. As a case study, we profile multicellular clusters across
varying states of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition, revealing a successive loss of protrusive and circumferential tractions,
as well as the formation of localized contractile tractions with elongated cluster morphologies. These cluster phenotypes were
biochemically perturbed using drugs, biasing towards traction signatures of different epithelial or mesenchymal states. This
higher-throughput analysis is promising to systematically interrogate and perturb aberrant mechanobiology, which could be
utilized with human patient samples to guide personalized therapies.

Introduction
Collective mechanical interactions between epithelial cells and 3D extracellular matrix (ECM) shape embryonic tissue
development, and their dysregulation can drive cancer progression or other disease states1 . In particular, the epithelialmesenchymal transition (EMT) is associated with weakened cell-cell junctions and increased cell-matrix adhesions, driving
tissue disorganization and dissemination2 . Remarkably, multicellular clusters cultured ex vivo in compliant 3D hydrogels can
exhibit tissue-like form and function3 , representing a promising preclinical testbed for higher-throughput drug discovery and
development4 . However, existing assays for 3D mechanophenotyping have been limited to a few cells per experiment due to
the need for high-resolution optics, labor-intensive image processing, as well as complex readouts of force generation5 . Rapid
biophysical characterization of multicellular clusters in a 3D matrix could enable direct characterization and perturbation of
disease state in human patient samples, informing personalized and predictive therapies6 .
Traction force microscopy (TFM) resolves cell-generated deformations based on the motion of fluorescent tracer particles
embedded within a compliant material7 . Early TFM studies measured cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions of multicellular
epithelial clusters on planar 2D substrates8–13 . More recently, TFM has been extended to 3D hydrogels, but has primarily focused
on individual cells14–24 . Notably, epithelial cell lines exhibit more isotropic, spatially uniform tractions, while mesenchymal
cell lines exhibit highly anisotropic tractions localized at the leading and trailing edge14–16, 18, 20, 22, 23 . Nevertheles, it remains a
formidable challenge to visualize 3D cell morphologies and tractions, particularly in a scalable experimental format25 . Most
traditional TFM approaches require relatively high-resolution data on both cellular morphologies and material deformations,
which poses significant experimental, workflow and computational challenges. This issue is further exacerbated by also
requiring knowledge of the underlying material properties to compute cellular tractions, which continues to be a significant
challenge for fibrous and biologically remodelled extracellular materials7 .
Here, we demonstrate a high content method to profile the spatially heterogeneous matrix deformations of multicellular
clusters in a standard 96 well plate format. We show that clusters exhibit collective tractions with distinct spatial signatures,

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

which we visualize by tracking hundreds of thousands of embedded tracer particles to recover information-rich material
displacement fields. This Displacement Arrays of Rendered Tractions (DART) analysis was validated by inducing EMT in
mammary epithelial cells cultured within a composite 3D hydrogel of silk fibroin and collagen I. Remarkably, we find that
the progression from epithelial to mesenchymal states is associated with a successive loss of protrusive and circumferential
tractions, as well as the formation of highly localized contractile tractions. Indeed, these emergent behaviors cannot be
resolved using conventional spatially averaged TFM metrics developed for individual cells. We further perturb these cluster
mechanophenotypes towards more mesenchymal or epithelial states using drugs that stabilize microtubules (e.g. Taxol) or
inhibit epidermal growth factor receptor signaling (e.g. Gefitinib). Since this approach does not rely on high-resolution 3D
object detection, lower numerical aperture air objectives can be used to rapidly image a multiwell plate for higher-throughput
volumetric image acquisition and analysis. This implementation of 3D TFM on a standardized platform could enable preclinical
screening of human organoids to inform drug development and personalized therapies.

Displacement Arrays of Rendered Tractions (DART)
We designed a new kinematics based approach called displacement array of rendered tractions (DART) metrics for characterizing
the cell-induced matrix deformations without relying on constitutive material model for the 3D biomaterial. We previously
demonstrated mean deformation metrics (MDM) to compute average values associated with the deformation fields of individual
cells21 . However, we observed in these experiments that multicellular clusters applied spatially heterogeneous deformation
fields over large volumes. Thus, the corresponding MDM regressed to null values due to spatial averaging. Moreover, this
spatial averaging resulted in a loss of biologically interesting information associated with highly localized signatures in the
cell-induced deformation field, making MDM unsuitable for analyzing collective deformations.
To compute the DART metrics, the particle displacement (ui ) at positions (xi ) were interpolated on to regularized grid points
(xgrid ) in each image with a general spacing of 12 voxels in the x, y and z directions, which provided good trade-off in terms of
spatial resolution and computational throughput. Let ugrid be the displacement vector at the regularized grid points xgrid . A
linear scattered interpolation scheme was utilized. The DART metrics compute kinematic quantities from the local deformation
field of the cell cluster. Thus, only the displacement ugrid at points xgrid within at distance d = 25 µm from the cell cluster
surface were considered in computing the DART metrics, which was sufficient to capture most of the displacement data around
each cluster. The displacements ugrid at the points outside the search region were set to be zero. At each of the grid points xgrid ,
a unit vector ngrid originating from the centroid of the cell cluster (ro ) to the xgrid was determined. Using the normal vector, the
displacement ugrid was then decomposed into radial urgrid and hoop uθgrid displacement components as,
urgrid = |ugrid . ngrid |
uθgrid = |ugrid − (ugrid . ngrid ) ngrid |.

(1)

From urgrid and uθgrid , the regions where cells applied significant protrusive, contractile and circumferential deformations
were determined. These regions are found by binarizing the 3D matrix of urgrid and uθgrid using thresholding operation with
usignificant as
(
1
u
=
0
(
1
ucontractile =
0
(
1
ucircumferential =
0
protrusive

if urgrid > usignificant
otherwise
if urgrid < −usignificant
otherwise

(2)

if uθgrid > usignificant
otherwise.

The level of usignificant can have significant implications on the computed DART metrics, and was chosen to be at least
five times above the intrinsic displacement noise floor and to produce an optimally even distribution of displacement slices in
the DART control groups. To remove spurious white voxels in uprotrusive , ucontractile and ucircumferential produced from noise in
particle tracking, these 3D matrix were filtered to remove connected white components smaller than our 12 voxels grid point
spacing corresponding to a volume of 106.5 µm3 .
From uprotrusive , ucontractile and ucircumferential the relative localized regions where cells apply protrusive, contractile and
circumferential deformation is computed through DART. Here, the computation of contractile DART is described, but protrusive
and circumferential DARTs are computed analogously. The volume about the center of the cell cluster in ucontractile is divided
2/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

into 16 equal sub-volumes. The volume around each cell in ucontractile is first divided into two, bottom and top, hemispheres.
Each hemisphere is further divided into 8 equal, π/4 apart, regions. Thus, each “slice” in the DART corresponds to a volumetric
region in the real space around the cell cluster. The outer and inner slices in the DART board correspond to the region in the
lower (θel ≥ π) and upper (θel < π) hemispheres of the ucontractile region around each cell cluster. A slice is considered to be
contractile if the corresponding region in ucontractile has at least one white voxel signifying that the cell cluster applies significant
contractile deformation in that region. The contractile quantification within each DART slice is binary. From the contractile
DART, the number of contractile displacement slices is used as a metric to quantify how localized the contractile deformation is
that the cell cluster applies. Similarly, the number of protrusive and circumferential displacement slices for each cell cluster
was computed.
As the final part of our DART approach, a phenotype classifier was built to classify multi-cellular clusters into epithelial,
mesenchymal and transitory phenotypes using the DecisionTreeClassifier class from the Python Scikit library, a commonly used
machine learning tool. For classification, the decision tree utilized the number of contractile, protrusive and circumferential
displacement slices and shape anisotropy factor of a multi-cellular cluster. The decision tree classifier had a maximum tree
depth of 5 and a minimum number of leaf samples of 5. The decision tree model was trained with low tree depth and high
minimum number of leaf samples to prevent training data overfitting. The decision tree was trained on all multi-cellular clusters
used in the analysis of the control DMSO treatment condition. The accuracy of the decision tree on the training data is evaluated
using the normalized confusion matrix. A normalized confusion matrix C is defined such that Ci, j is the proportion of the
observation known to be in the group i and classified in the group j. The confusion matrix of a perfect classifier is equal to the
identity matrix.

Results
DART Visualizes Spatially Heterogeneous Displacement Fields
Collective cell-matrix interactions were characterized by embedding mammary epithelial cells (MCF-10A) in a composite
hydrogel consisting of 7.5 mg/mL silk fibroin and 1 mg/mL collagen I26 on a 96 well plate (Fig. 1a). These hydrogels had
an elastic modulus of 600 Pa and characteristic pore size of 2 µm (Fig. S1), which maintained epithelial cells as spherical
clusters (“acini”) but was also permissive for local dissemination (Fig. S2). These MCF-10A Snail-ER cells were stably
transfected to overexpress green fluorescent protein (GFP) in the cytoplasm, as well as an inducible estrogen receptor construct
for controlled EMT through the Snail transcription factor27, 28 . Cluster-induced deformations of the hydrogel were visualized
using our topological particle tracking algorithm to map the displacement of 80,000-100,000 tracer particles around each
cluster29 , after which the clusters were lysed to define a reference state. This case study focused on clusters cultured for 7 days,
which exhibited distinct morphologies (Fig. S2).
Multicellular clusters typically deformed the surrounding matrix in a spatially heterogeneous manner. For instance, a
representative cluster exhibited inward (“contractile”) tractions around the periphery, but outward (“protrusive”) tractions near
the top (Fig. 1b). Although visually pronounced, this heterogeneity is often averaged out in conventional TFM or kinematic
metrics based on mean deformations around individual cells14, 21 (Fig. S3). In order to profile these spatial patterns, the
displacement vector of a given tracer particle ~u due to matrix deformation was decomposed into radial ur and circumferential
components uθ relative to the center of the cluster (Fig. 1c). These discrete particle displacements were then interpolated onto
a regularized grid in order to optimize computational throughput while maintaining adequate spatial resolution. Next, the
volume around each cluster was subdivided into sixteen equal sub-volumes, with eight regions of equal volume in top and
bottom hemispheres, respectively (Fig. 1d,e). For ease of visualization, we developed the Displacement Arrays of Rendered
Tractions (DART) analyses to map these 3D deformations onto a simpler, 2D representation. In each DART, the inner region of
eight equal slices corresponds to the eight subvolumes in the top hemisphere, while the outer ring corresponds to the bottom
hemisphere (Fig. 1f,g). If the radial particle displacement within a given region exceeded a critical threshold (usigni f icant ) of 0.4
µm (Fig. S4), it was denoted as contractile, protrusive, or both (Fig. 1f). Similarly, if the circumferential displacement within a
given region exceeded a certain threshold of 0.4 µm, it was also noted (Fig. 1g). This DART displacement threshold, usignificant
was chosen to be at least five times above the intrinsic displacement noise floor and to produce an optimally even distribution of
displacement slices in the DART control groups (see Fig. S4). Our displacement noise floor obtained with our topology-based
particle tracking algorithm was 20.5 nm29 . Finally, the spatial heterogeneity of tractions was then quantified from the number
of regions which exceeded the radial or circumferential displacement threshold.
Epithelial, Transitory, and Mesenchymal Clusters Exhibit Distinct Tractions and Morphologies
As a case study, three experimental conditions were characterized with multicellular clusters representing epithelial, transitory,
and mesenchymal mechanophenotypes (Fig. S5). MCF-10A Snail-ER cells were embedded as single cells within silk-collagen
hydrogels and then imaged after 7 days. First, MCF-10A cells were maintained in an epithelial mechanophenotype by
culturing with 0.05% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), matching the concentration used to resuspend drug compounds. Epithelial
3/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the experimental setup and displacement array of rendered tractions (DART) metrics. (a)
Experimental setup for high-throughput imaging to measure cell-induced matrix deformations. Multicellular clusters were
grown inside a silk-collagen matrix with embedded 1 µm red fluorescent tracer particles in a 96 well plate setup. To achieve
high-throughput imaging, clusters were imaged using a spinning disk confocal microscopy with a low numerical aperture air
objective. (b) 3D cell-induced matrix deformations recovered by directly tracking tracer particles. (c) Matrix displacements ~u
were decomposed into radial (ur ) and circumferential (uθ ) components about the center of the cluster. (d) top: Radial
displacements ur of the matrix around the cell cluster. The surrounding volume is partitioned into top and bottom hemispheres,
which were projected onto a two-dimensional representation in the lower left and lower right respectively. (e) top:
Circumferential displacements uθ of the matrix around the cell cluster. The surrounding volume were partitioned into top and
bottom hemispheres, which are again projected onto a two-dimensional representation in the lower left and lower right (f)
Schematic mapping of three-dimensional displacement fields onto a two-dimensional DART representation. (g) Protrusive or
contractile displacements with magnitude larger than usignificant in the surrounding volume were represented by protrusive or
contractile slices in the radial DART metrics. The top and bottom hemispheres map to the inner and outer slice of the DART
respectively. (h) Circumferential DART computed from e analogous to the method described in g.

cells organized into compact, roughly spherical multicellular acini (Fig. 2a). These clusters exerted localized protrusive and
4/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

some circumferential deformations relative to the reference state after lysing, while the spatial distribution of contractile
deformations varied across clusters (Fig. 2b,c). Second, MCF-10A cells were induced to a transitory (EMT) mechanophenotype
by Snail induction with 500 nM 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OHT) after embedding in the hydrogel. These transitory clusters
exhibited significant protrusions (Fig. 2d), analogous to the budding outgrowths associated with branching morphogenesis.
Moreover, these clusters exhibited uniformly distributed contractile deformations across the periphery with some circumferential
deformations, but minimal protrusive deformations (Fig. 2e,f). Third, MCF-10A cells were pre-induced into a mesenchymal
mechanophenotype by sustained treatment with 500 nM 4-hydroxytamoxifen (OHT) for 72 hours before embedding into the
hydrogel27 . These clusters were highly elongated and spindle-like, with slightly decreased sizes due to slower proliferation after
EMT (Fig. 2g). Mesenchymal clusters exhibited highly localized contractile deformations at only a few locations, consistent
with front/back polarity, as well as minimal protrusive or circumferential deformations (Fig. 2h,i).

Figure 2. Representative mechanophenotypes corresponding to epithelial, transitory, and mesenchymal states. (a,d,g)
Morphology of the cell clusters. The cytoplasm of the cell cluster is shown in gray (GFP) and the nucleus of the cells are shown
in red (mCherry-H2B). (b,e,h) 3D radial displacements, ur , about the center of a cell cluster shown for a representative
epithelial, mesenchymal, or transitory cell cluster. (c,f,i) Corresponding 3D circumferential displacements, uθ , about the center
of a cell cluster shown for a representative epithelial, mesenchymal, or transitory cell cluster.
Representative DART analyses for clusters with epithelial, transitory, and mesenchymal mechanophenotypes captured
these qualitative trends, although there existed appreciable heterogeneity across clusters. Epithelial and transitory clusters
exerted spatially distributed contractile displacements over many subvolumes, while mesenchymal clusters exerted localized
contractile displacements over fewer subvolumes (Fig. 3a,b). Next, epithelial clusters applied a significant number of protrusive
displacements, which were considerably lower for transitory and mesenchymal clusters (Fig. 3a,c). Moreover, epithelial
and transitory clusters also exerted significant circumferential displacements, which were much lower for mesenchymal
clusters (Fig. 3d, S6a,b,c). Finally, epithelial and transitory clusters exhibited relatively compact morphologies based on
shape anisotropy, while mesenchymal clusters were very elongated (Fig. 3e) These distinct cluster mechanophenotypes were
compared based on their number of protrusive and contractile slices, revealing that epithelial clusters typically exhibited
spatially distributed protrusive deformations, while the distribution of contractile deformations varied (Fig. 3f). In comparison,
transitory clusters typically exhibited localized protrusive deformations but highly distributed contractile deformations around
the periphery (Fig. 3f). Lastly, mesenchymal clusters exhibit minimal protrusive deformations with a varying distribution of
contractile deformations (Fig. 3f).
Using a decision tree, a commonly employed predictive classifier in computer science and machine learning, these three
distinct mechanophenotypes were profiled based on contractile, protrusive, and circumferential deformations, as well as shape
5/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

anisotropy (Supporting Information). Briefly, this analysis classified clusters based on a threshold number of protrusive slices
(4.5), which was then refined based on shape anisotropy, number of circumferential slices, and contractile slices (Fig. S7).
We assessed and quantified the specificity and predictive capability of our decision tree via the standard machine learning
approach of using a confusion matrix. The classification via the confusion matrix showed 70% agreement between experimental
condition and predicted mechanophenotype (epithelial, transitory, mesenchymal), as shown in the on-diagonal entries of the
confusion matrix (Fig. 3g). Moreover, 15-20% of clusters in each experimental condition were classified in an adjacent state
(i.e. epithelial clusters classified as transitory, transitory clusters classified as epithelial or mesenchymal, etc.), corresponding to
the neighboring off-diagonal entries of the confusion matrix (Fig. 3g). This classification may be be attributed to biological
heterogeneity, since MCF-10A cells can spontaneously undergo EMT, and EMT induction kinetics exhibit some variability30 .
Nevertheless, classification across very dissimilar mechanophenotypes was relatively infrequent at 6-7% (i.e. epithelial clusters
classified as mesenchymal, or vice-versa), corresponding to the entries at the top right and bottom left corners of the confusion
matrix (Fig. 3g). Thus, epithelial, transitory, and mesenchymal clusters exhibit distinct morphologies and patterns of contractile,
protrusive, and circumferential traction, which represent a characteristic “traction signature” or mechanophenotype.

Figure 3. (a) Radial DARTS for twenty randomly selected clusters treated with DMSO, OHT, or pre-treated with OHT. (b)
Boxplot of the number of contractile displacement slices. (c) Boxplot of the number of protrusive displacement slices. (d)
Boxplot of the number of circumferential displacement slices. (e) Boxplot for cell morphology shape anisotropy. The white
dashed line in the boxplot represents the mean value. The symbols *, **, and *** represent p values of <0.05, <0.01 and
<0.001 respectively. (f) Scatter plot of raw data points for number of protrusive and contractile displacement slices (Ps and Cs )
for DMSO treated, OHT treated, or OHT pre-treated clusters. Jitter has been applied to the true positions of the raw data points
to avoid points occlusion. The shaded regions are a guide to the eye to emphasize groupings of epithelial, transitory, or
mesenchymal mechanophenotypes. (g) Normalized confusion matrix for the decision tree classifier utilizing Cs , Ps , number of
circumferential displacement slices (θs ) and shape anisotropy (SA) metrics on the training data.

Microtubule Stabilization with Taxol Enhances Protrusions and Localized Contractility
Cluster mechanophenotypes were perturbed by sublethal treatment with the microtubule stabilizing agent Taxol, which can
induce EMT30 . After 7 days of treatment with a sublethal dose of Taxol (4 nM) and 0.05% DMSO, clusters exhibited partially
elongated morphologies reminiscent of the transitory mechanophenotype with OHT treatment only (Fig. S8abc). Similarly,
6/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

treatment with 4 nM Taxol and 500 nM OHT resulted in highly elongated morphologies reminiscent of the mesenchymal
mechanophenotype after pretreatment of 500 nM OHT only (Fig. S8def). Interestingly, pretreatment with 500 nM OHT and
4 nM Taxol resulted in unique cluster morphologies with slender, neuronal-like extensions (Fig. S8ghi). DART analysis of
the cluster-induced matrix deformations corroborated these qualitative observations (Fig. 4a, S6def). For instance, Taxol and
DMSO-treated clusters exhibited more contractile, fewer protrusive, and more circumferential slices, analogous to the transitory
cluster mechanophenotype (Fig. 4b,c,d), S6d. In comparison, Taxol and OHT-treated clusters exhibited fewer contractile
and circumferential slices, analogous to the mesenchymal cluster mechanophenotype (Fig. 4b,d), S6e. Finally, Taxol and
OHT-pretreated clusters exhibited fewer contractile and circumferential slices and elevated shape anisotropy, also consistent
with the mesenchymal cluster mechanophenotype (Fig. 4b,d,e), S6f. Interestingly, Taxol and OHT treated or pretreated clusters
exhibited more protrusive slices than the comparable transitory and mesenchymal mechanophenotypes. These behaviors may be
attributed to the stabilizing action of Taxol on outward cytoskeletal protrusions, which cannot retract as easily since microtubule
depolymerization is inhibited31 . These trends were apparent on a plot of the contractile and protrusive slices per cluster,
since Taxol and DMSO-treated clusters were shifted rightward with more contractile slices (Fig. 4f) relative to the epithelial
mechanophenotype in DMSO only (Fig. 3f). Moreover, Taxol and OHT treated or pretreated clusters were shifted upwards with
more protrusive slices (Fig. 4f) relative to transitory and mesenchymal mechanophenotype with OHT treatment or pretreatment
only (Fig. 3f). As a consequence, 35% of Taxol and DMSO treated clusters were classified as a transitory mechanophenotype
(Fig. 3g). Similarly, 37% of Taxol and OHT treated transitory clusters were classifed as a mesenchymal mechanophenotype
(Fig. 3g). Finally, 60% of Taxol and OHT pretreated mesenchymal clusters were classified as a mesenchymal (OHT only)
mechanophenotype (Fig. 3g). It should be noted that a significant percentage (24-43%) of Taxol-treated clusters were classified
as epithelial mechanophenotype, likely due to the increased number of protrusive slices (Fig. 3g). Thus, Taxol treatment
biases clusters towards more transitory and mesenchymal mechanophenotypes by redistributing contractile and circumferential
tractions, although protrusive tractions are also aberrantly enhanced relative to the previous experiments without Taxol.
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Inhibition with Gefitinib Increases Heterogeneity of Transitory Clusters
Lastly, cluster mechanophenotypes were perturbed by treatment with the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) inhibitor
Gefitinib, which ordinarily inhibits proliferation in EGF-dependent MCF-10A cells. Nevertheless, EMT induction is associated
with decreased sensitivity to such EGFR (tyrosine kinase) inhibitors32 . After 7 days treatment with 500 nM Gefitinib (also a
sublethal dose), DMSO-treated clusters exhibited compact morphologies consistent with the epithelial mechanophenotype (Fig.
S9abc). In comparison, Gefitinib and OHT-treated clusters exhibited both compact and elongated morphologies, reminiscent of
epithelial and mesenchymal phenotypes (Fig. S9def). Finally, Gefitinib and OHT-pretreated clusters exhibited highly elongated
morphologies, reminiscent of mesenchymal phenotypes (Fig. S9ghi). DART analysis revealed that Gefitinib and DMSO treated
clusters exhibited more contractile, protrusive, and circumferential slices with low shape anisotropy (Fig. 5a-e, S6g), consistent
with a epithelial mechanophenotype. However, Gefitinib and OHT-treated clusters exhibited large variations in protrusive and
circumferential slices relative to the transitory (OHT only) cluster mechanophenotype (Fig. 5a,c,d), S6h. Finally, Gefitinib
and OHT-pretreated clusters exhibited fewer contractile, protrusive, and circumferential slices with slightly increased shape
anisotropy, analogous to a mesenchymal mechanophenotype (Fig. 5a-e), S6i. A plot of contractile and protrusive slices per
cluster showed that Gefitinib and DMSO-treated clusters were located in the top left region associated with the epithelial
(DMSO only) mechanophenotype. Similarly, Gefitinib and OHT-pretreated clusters were located at the bottom of the plot,
associated with the mesenchymal (OHT-pretreatment only) mechanophenotype. In comparison, the Gefitinib and OHT treated
clusters were widely dispersed towards the top and bottom of the plot (Fig. 5f). The decision tree analysis revealed that 73%
and 64% of Gefitinib with DMSO or OHT-pretreated clusters were classified as epithelial (DMSO only) and mesenchymal
(OHT pretreated) mechanophenotypes, respectively (Fig. 5f). Nevertheless, Gefitnib and OHT-treated clusters were mostly
classified as either epithelial (42%) or mesenchymal (42%) mechanophenotypes, with relatively few clusters classified as
transitory clusters (16%). Thus, Gefitinib treatment did not significantly affect the DMSO or OHT-pretreated cluster, which
retained epithelial or mesenchymal mechanophenotype, respectively. However, Gefitnib and OHT treatment resulted in a mixed
population of mostly epithelial and mesenchymal mechanophenotypes, with considerably fewer transitory clusters.

Discussion and Conclusion
The DART analysis established here profiles multicellular cluster mechanophenotypes based on local displacements of tracer
particles embedded in a 3D matrix, as well as cluster morphology. By combining these measurements into a machine learning
decision tree structure, perturbations and transitions from one phenotype to another (e.g., epithelial to mesenchymal) as a
function of drug treatment can be quantified in an automated fashion. This approach leverages previous developments in the
machine learning communities of reducing large, multivariable spatiotemporal data sets and binning them into a more intuitive
scalar metric output.
These purely kinematic measurements do not rely on mechanical or microstructural properties of the matrix, which to-date
7/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 4. (a) Radial DARTS for twenty randomly selected clusters treated with 4 nM Taxol combined with DMSO, OHT, or
pre-treatment with OHT. (b) Boxplot of the number of contractile displacement slices. (c) Boxplot of the number of protrusive
displacement slices. (d) Boxplot of the number of circumferential displacement slices. (e) Boxplot for cell morphology shape
anisotropy. The white dashed line in the boxplot represents the mean value. The symbols *, **, and *** represent p values of
<0.05, <0.01 and <0.001 respectively. (f) Scatter plot of raw data points for number of protrusive and contractile displacement
slices (Ps and Cs ) for DMSO treated, OHT treated, or OHT pre-treated clusters. Jitter has been applied to the true positions of
the raw data points to avoid points occlusion. The shaded regions are a guide to the eye to emphasize groupings of epithelial,
transitory, or mesenchymal mechanophenotypes. (g) Normalized confusion matrix for the decision tree classifier utilizing Cs ,
Ps , number of circumferential displacement slices (θs ) and shape anisotropy (SA) metrics on the training data.

remain poorly understood for biologically-derived materials such as our silk fibroin-collagen I hydrogel. Such fibrous materials
exhibit highly nonlinear and nonaffine responses, which may not be easily captured using classical continuum description
based on bulk rheological measurements33 . As a result, DART in its current form reports cellular traction signatures using
displacement field measures. As appropriate constitutive descriptions of the extracellular matrix become available, DART could
be augmented with mechanical tractions, stresses and forces. Similarly, DART’s predictive power could be further refined by
imaging other subcellular features or biomarkers, which could be incorporated into the decision tree. Finally, it should also be
noted that the reference state was defined at the completion of the experiment by lysing clusters and observing the subsequent
relaxation of the matrix. This reference state does not account for irreversible, inelastic deformations of the matrix, which
may occur due to ECM remodeling or deposition. In future work, complementary measurements using optical tweezers20, 23 or
direct imaging of fibers18 could also be incorporated to address how multicellular clusters are affected by changes in the local
stiffness of the surrounding matrix.
Our classification of multicellular cluster mechanophenotype directly accounts for local spatial heterogeneity in the local
3D matrix deformation patterns. Indeed, we find distinct patterns to these spatial deformations that are sufficient to classify
70% of cluster mechanophenotypes within a given experimental condition based on DMSO treatment, OHT treatment, or
OHT pretreatment. It should be noted that some clusters were classified with a different mechanophenotype than would be
expected from their experimental conditions. For instance, 17% of clusters treated with OHT were classified as an epithelial
mechanophenotype, rather than transitory. Moreover, 18% of clusters treated with DMSO were classified as a transitory
8/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 5. (a) Radial DARTS for twenty randomly selected clusters treated with 500 nM Gefitinib combined with DMSO,
OHT, or pre-treatment with OHT. (b) Boxplot of the number of contractile displacement slices. (c) Boxplot of the number of
protrusive displacement slices. (d) Boxplot of the number of circumferential displacement slices. (e) Boxplot for cell
morphology shape anisotropy. The white dashed line in the boxplot represents the mean value. The symbols *, **, and ***
represent p values of <0.05, <0.01 and <0.001 respectively. (f) Scatter plot of raw data points for number of protrusive and
contractile displacement slices (Ps and Cs ) for DMSO treated, OHT treated, or OHT pre-treated clusters. Jitter has been applied
to the true positions of the raw data points to avoid points occlusion. The shaded regions are a guide to the eye to emphasize
groupings of epithelial, transitory, or mesenchymal mechanophenotypes. (g) Normalized confusion matrix for the decision tree
classifier utilizing Cs , Ps , number of circumferential displacement slices (θs ) and shape anisotropy (SA) metrics on the training
data.

mechanophenotype rather than epithelial. These differences likely reflect inter-cluster heterogeneity, since EMT may occur
slower or faster in distinct clusters, resulting in distinct mechanophenotypes at a given snapshot in time. Interestingly,
circumferential displacements were significant for epithelial and transitory clusters but less pronounced for mesenchymal
clusters. This traction field may occur due to the previously observed orbiting motions observed for epithelial clusters34, 35 ,
which are less likely to occur for highly asymmetric cluster morphologies with weakened cell-cell junctions. These differences
are also observed after treatment with EMT inducing or suppressing drugs, indicative of differences in drug sensitivity. Although
computationally expensive, we envision that time-lapse imaging of clusters and associated tractions could further reveal how
clusters interconvert between mechanophenotypes.
In conclusion, DART establishes a quantitative and scalable framework to profile the heterogeneous matrix deformations of
3D multicellular clusters. Our analyses reveal that collective tractions are spatially non-uniform and cannot be captured by
existing analyses for individual cells that assume isotropic behavior. We show that epithelial mechanophenotypes typically
apply protrusive, circumferential and contractile matrix deformations, while transitory mechanophenotypes after EMT exhibit
mostly contractile and circumferential deformations that are widely distributed, and mesenchymal clusters exhibit localized
contractility in only a few locations. We perturb these behaviors using the microtubule stabilizer Taxol, which biases towards
transitory or mesenchymal mechanophenotype while also enhancing protrusions. In comparison, the EGFR inhibitor Gefitinib
drives clusters towards either epithelial or mesenchymal mechanophenotype in OHT treated conditions, but has minimal effect
9/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

on epithelial (DMSO) or mesenchymal (OHT pretreated) mechanophenotype. Thus, DART captures both intra- and interheterogeneity of multicellular clusters in response to biochemical stimulation. We envision that DART can be implemented
with a wide variety of 3D biomaterials at a 96 well plate scale or beyond, enabling higher throughput mechanophenotyping of
organoids in 3D culture, including preclinical testing of human patient samples with personalized treatments.

Methods
Cell Culture and Matrix Preparation
MCF-10A mammary epithelial cells stably transfected with an inducible Snail expression construct fused to an estrogen
receptor response element were a gift from D.A. Haber (Massachusetts General Hospital)27 . This cell line also overexpressed
fluorescent proteins in the nucleus (mCherry-H2B) and cytoplasm (GFP) for live cell tracking. MCF-10A cells were routinely
cultured in growth media consisting of DMEM/F12 HEPES buffer (Fisher 11330057) supplemented with 5% horse serum
(Fisher 16050122), 20 ng/ml Animal-Free Recombinant Human Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF; PeproTech AF-100-15), 0.5
mg/mL hydrocortisone (Sigma H0888), 100 ng/mL cholera toxin (Sigma C8052), 10 µg/mL Insulin from bovine pancreas
(Sigma I1882), and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin (Fisher MT-30-002-CI).
Silk fibroin solution was extracted and purified from silkworm (B. mori) cocoons (Treenway Silks, Lakewood, CO), as
previously described26 . Composite silk-collagen hydrogels were prepared through sonication-induced gelation initiation of
silk fibroin, followed by the addition and neutralization of collagen I from rat tail tendon (Corning 354249) to achieve a final
hydrogel containing 7.5 mg/mL silk fibroin and 1 mg/mL collagen I (see SI Appendix for details). Briefly, silk fibroin was
mixed into media and then sonicated, 1N sodium hydroxide was added in to achieve a final pH of 7.4, collagen 1 was mixed in
well, followed by the addition of 5% 1µm fluorescent carboxylate-modified beads (Fluospheres, red 580/605) and lastly, a
single-cell suspension in media was mixed in to yield 120,000 cells/mL.
Cells were embedded in 3D silk-collagen hydrogels with three experimental conditions: 1) Cells were cultured in 0.05%
dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, the solvent used to suspend OHT), for 72h in 2D culture then embedded in 3D hydrogels with
DMSO treatment. This condition serves as the negative control and defined the “epithelial” mechanophenotype. 2) Cells were
treated with 0.05% DMSO for 72h in 2D culture, as in (1), then embedded in 3D hydrogels with 500 nM of 4-hydroxytamoxifen
(“OHT”, Sigma H7904). This condition induces Snail expression through an estrogen receptor construct27 and defined the
“transitory” mechanophenotype. 3) Cells were treated with OHT for 72h in 2D culture to induce EMT then embedded in 3D
hydrogels with sustained OHT treatment to maintain Snail expression as a positive control, which defined the “mesenchymal”
mechanophenotype.
Confocal Microscopy and Image Analysis
Multicellular clusters and corresponding matrix displacements were imaged after 7 days of culure using a Nikon Eclipse TiE
fluorescence microscope with spinning-disk confocal head (Crest Optics X-light V2), with light-guide coupled solid state
illumination system (Lumencor Spectra-X3), sCMOS camera (Andor Neo), 20x Plan Apo objective (NA 0.75), GFP/FITC
Filter Set (Chroma 49002), TRITC/DSRed Filter Set (Chroma 49004). For the duration of time-lapse imaging, cells were
maintained in a humidified environmental chamber at 37 ◦ C, 5% CO2 . For matrix displacement measurements, NIS Elements
was used for automated image acquisition with z-steps of 0.6 µm from the bottom of the well to a height of 75 µm under
consistent exposure times, camera gain/gamma control, and aperture. Images were acquired at 4 h intervals over a large number
of wells (n ≈ 48 for each experiment) for a total of 16 h. In these experiments, cell cytoplasm was imaged in GFP and beads in
the RFP channel. At the end of time-lapse imaging, a reference state for the gel was obtained by lysing the cells within the
hydrogels via sodium dodecyl sulfate.
Measuring 3D Cell-induced Deformations via Topology-based Particle Tracking
We utilized our previously developed topology-based particle tracking (TPT) algorithm to reconstruct the cell-induced 3D
displacement fields by tracking individual fluorescent polystyrene microspheres (1 µm) embedded as fiduciary markers in
the silk-collagen matrix. The combination of LED illumination-based spinning disk confocal microscopy and low numerical
aperture objective for low-cost, high-throughput imaging of the 96-well plate setup resulted in diminished signal to noise
volumetric images. A custom image segmentation and filtering routine was developed to allow precise and accurate localization
and tracking using TPT for low numerical aperture confocal imaging stacks (see SI for details).
Cell Cluster Surface Segmentation
The 3D cell cluster surface was segmented from volumetric images of fluorescently labeled cytoplasm intensities (GFP channel).
As a first step, the raw volumetric images were filtered using a median filter with 3 × 3 × 3 voxel window to remove shot noise.
Following the images were filtered with a 3D Gaussian filter with σ = 2.5. The images were then binarized using adaptive
image thresholding based on the local mean intensity (first-order statistics) in the neighborhood of each voxel. The sensitivity
10/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

for the adaptive thresholding was manually set for each image to segment the cell clusters from the background appropriately.
From the binary images, the small connected components having a total number of voxels less than 8000 voxels were set to an
intensity value of 0 in the binary images. Morphological operations were performed to remove holes in the binary images36 .
The volumes of the segmented binary images were increased by 1.6 µm through a distance transform. Due to the large noise
near the top and bottom of the volume, all the voxels in the top and bottom 8 z-slices were set to 0 in the binarized images. The
3D triangulated cell cluster surface was computed from the binary images using MATLAB’s isosurface estimation at a target
voxel value of 0.5. The triangulated cell cluster surface mesh was smoothed using accurate curvature flow smoothing37 .
Statistical Analysis
Experiments were repeated 3 times (external replicates), and a total of at least 40 clusters were analyzed per experimental
condition. To compare DART and shape metrics across phenotype conditions, one–way repeated measures analysis of variance
(One Way RM ANOVA) was used to check if the treatment data satisfied the Shapiro-Wilk normality test with p < 0.05. If the
treatment data failed the Shapiro-Wilk normality test, Friedman repeated measures analysis of variance on ranks (RM ANOVA
on ranks) for comparing treatment differences was used. For all pairwise multiple comparisons Holm-Sidak post-hoc test was
used. The differences were considered to be statistically significant if p < 0.05. The statistical tests were performed using
SigmaPlot 12.0.
In the figures, we use boxplots to visualize the distribution for each metrics. As per convention, boxplots show the data
median, first quartile, third quartile, and data outliers marker through minimum and maximum values. The dots on the boxplot
plot show the raw data values. The white dashed lines on the boxplots show the mean value. In the graphs, a statistically
significant difference between two treatments is shown by a line connecting their boxplot with an annotation for the p-value.
The symbols ∗, ∗∗, and ∗ ∗ ∗ denote p values of < 0.05, < 0.01 and < 0.001 respectively.

References
1. DuFort, C. C., Paszek, M. J. & Weaver, V. M. Balancing forces: architectural control of mechanotransduction. Nat Rev
Mol Cell Biol 12, 308–319, DOI: 10.1038/nrm3112 (2011).
2. Lamouille, S., Xu, J. & Derynck, R. Molecular mechanisms of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol
15, 178–196, DOI: 10.1038/nrm3758 (2014).
3. Simian, M. & Bissell, M. J. Organoids: A historical perspective of thinking in three dimensions. J Cell Biol 216, 31–40,
DOI: 10.1083/jcb.201610056 (2017).
4. Rossi, G., Manfrin, A. & Lutolf, M. P. Progress and potential in organoid research. Nat Rev Genet. 19, 671–687, DOI:
10.1038/s41576-018-0051-9 (2018).
5. Polacheck, W. J. & Chen, C. S. Measuring cell-generated forces: a guide to the available tools. Nat Meth 13, 415–423,
DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.3834 (2016).
6. Drost, J. & Clevers, H. Organoids in cancer research. Nat Rev Cancer 18, 407–418, DOI: 10.1038/s41568-018-0007-6
(2018).
7. Hall, M. S. et al. Toward single cell traction microscopy within 3D collagen matrices. Exp Cell Res 319, 2396–2408, DOI:
10.1016/j.yexcr.2013.06.009 (2013).
8. Liu, Z. et al. Mechanical tugging force regulates the size of cell-cell junctions. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107, 9944–9949
(2010).
9. Maruthamuthu, V., Sabass, B., Schwarz, U. S. & Gardel, M. L. Cell-ECM traction force modulates endogenous tension at
cell-cell contacts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 4708–4713 (2011).
10. Notbohm, J., Kim, J. H., Asthagiri, A. R. & Ravichandran, G. Three-Dimensional Analysis of the Effect of Epidermal
Growth Factor on Cell-Cell Adhesion in Epithelial Cell Clusters. Biophys. J. 102, 1323–1330 (2012).
11. Hur, S. S. et al. Roles of cell confluency and fluid shear in 3-dimensional intracellular forces in endothelial cells. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 109, 11110–11115 (2012).
12. Mertz, A. F. et al. Cadherin-based intercellular adhesions organize epithelial cell–matrix traction forces. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. USA 110, 842–847 (2013).
13. Ng, M. R., Besser, A., Brugge, J. S. & Danuser, G. Mapping the dynamics of force transduction at cell–cell junctions of
epithelial clusters. Elife 3, e03282 (2014).
14. Legant, W. R. et al. Measurement of mechanical tractions exerted by cells in three-dimensional matrices. Nat Meth 7,
969–971, DOI: 10.1038/nmeth.1531 (2010).
11/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15. Koch, T. M., Münster, S., Bonakdar, N., Butler, J. P. & Fabry, B. 3D Traction Forces in Cancer Cell Invasion. PLOS ONE
7, e33476, DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033476 (2012).
16. Steinwachs, J. et al. Three-dimensional force microscopy of cells in biopolymer networks. Nat Meth 13, 171–176, DOI:
10.1038/nmeth.3685 (2016).
17. Gjorevski, N., Piotrowski, A. S., Varner, V. D. & Nelson, C. M. Dynamic tensile forces drive collective cell migration
through three-dimensional extracellular matrices. Sci Rep 5, 11458, DOI: 10.1038/srep11458 (2015).
18. Notbohm, J., Lesman, A., Tirrell, D. A. & Ravichandran, G. Quantifying cell-induced matrix deformation in three
dimensions based on imaging matrix fibers. Integr Biol (Camb) 7, 1186–1195, DOI: 10.1039/c5ib00013k (2015).
19. Schultz, K. M., Kyburz, K. A. & Anseth, K. S. Measuring dynamic cell-material interactions and remodeling during 3D
human mesenchymal stem cell migration in hydrogels. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 112, E3757–64, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.
1511304112 (2015).
20. Jones, C. A. R. et al. Micromechanics of cellularized biopolymer networks. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 112, E5117–22, DOI:
10.1073/pnas.1509663112 (2015).
21. Stout, D. A. et al. Mean deformation metrics for quantifying 3D cell-matrix interactions without requiring information
about matrix material properties. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 113, 2898–2903, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1510935113 (2016).
22. Hall, M. S. et al. Fibrous nonlinear elasticity enables positive mechanical feedback between cells and ECMs. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 113, 14043–14048, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1613058113 (2016).
23. Han, Y. L. et al. Cell contraction induces long-ranged stress stiffening in the extracellular matrix. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
115, 4075–4080, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1722619115 (2018).
24. Nam, S. & Chaudhuri, O. Mitotic cells generate protrusive extracellular forces to divide in three-dimensional microenvironments. Nat Phys 14, 621–628, DOI: 10.1038/s41567-018-0092-1 (2018).
25. Driscoll, M. K. & Danuser, G. Quantifying Modes of 3D Cell Migration. Trends Cell Biol 25, 749–759, DOI: 10.1016/j.
tcb.2015.09.010 (2015).
26. Khoo, A. S. et al. Breast cancer cells transition from mesenchymal to amoeboid migration in tunable three dimensional
silk-collagen hydrogels. ACS Biomat Sci Eng 5, 4341–4354 (2019).
27. Javaid, S. et al. Dynamic chromatin modification sustains epithelial-mesenchymal transition following inducible expression
of Snail-1. Cell Rep 5, 1679–1689, DOI: 10.1016/j.celrep.2013.11.034 (2013).
28. Wong, I. Y. et al. Collective and individual migration following the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Nat Mater 13,
1063–1071, DOI: 10.1038/nmat4062 (2014).
29. Patel, M., Leggett, S. E., Landauer, A. K., Wong, I. Y. & Franck, C. Rapid, topology-based particle tracking for
high-resolution measurements of large complex 3D motion fields. Sci Rep 8, 5581, DOI: 10.1038/s41598-018-23488-y
(2018).
30. Leggett, S. E. et al. Morphological single cell profiling of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Integr. Biol. 8, 1133–1144,
DOI: 10.1039/c6ib00139d (2016).
31. Balzer, E. M., Whipple, R. A., Cho, E. H., Matrone, M. A. & Martin, S. S. Antimitotic chemotherapeutics promote adhesive
responses in detached and circulating tumor cells. Breast Cancer Res Treat 121, 65–78, DOI: 10.1007/s10549-009-0457-3
(2010).
32. Barr, S. et al. Bypassing cellular EGF receptor dependence through epithelial-to-mesenchymal-like transitions. Clin Exp
Metastasis 25, 685–693, DOI: 10.1007/s10585-007-9121-7 (2008).
33. Zhang, Y., Feng, J., Heizler, S. I. & Levine, H. Hindrances to precise recovery of cellular forces in fibrous biopolymer
networks. Phys. Biol. 15, 026001, DOI: 10.1088/1478-3975/aaa107 (2018).
34. Tanner, K., Mori, H., Mroue, R., Bruni-Cardoso, A. & Bissell, M. J. Coherent angular motion in the establishment of
multicellular architecture of glandular tissues. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109, 1973–1978, DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1119578109
(2012).
35. Wang, H., Lacoche, S., Huang, L., Xue, B. & Muthuswamy, S. K. Rotational motion during three-dimensional morphogenesis of mammary epithelial acini relates to laminin matrix assembly. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110, 163–168, DOI:
10.1073/pnas.1201141110 (2013).
36. Soille, P. Morphological image analysis: principles and applications (Springer Science & Business Media, 2013).
37. Desbrun, M., Meyer, M., Schröder, P. & Barr, A. H. Implicit fairing of irregular meshes using diffusion and curvature flow.
In SIGGRAPH 99 Conference Proceedings, 317–324 (1999).
12/13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/809871; this version posted October 21, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Acknowledgements
We thank C.M. Nelson and J.S. Reichner for careful readings, as well as D.A. Haber for the inducible MCF-10A cell lines. This
work was supported by NIH Grants T32ES007272, P30GM110759, R21CA212932, and Brown University (Karen T. Romer
Undergraduate Research and Teaching Award, and Start-Up Funds).

Author contributions statement
S.E.L., M.P., C.F., and I.Y.W. designed research; S.E.L. performed experiments; M.P. contributed new analytic tools; M.P. and
S.E.L. analyzed data with feedback from C.F., and I.Y.W.; S.E.L., T.M.V., L.G., A.S.K., and E.K.W. prepared and characterized
materials; S.E.L., M.P., C.F., and I.Y.W. wrote the paper with feedback from all authors

13/13

