bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

NMR reveals light-induced changes in the dynamics of a photoswitchable
fluorescent protein
N. E. Christou, I. Ayala, K. Giandoreggio-Barranco, M. Byrdin, V. Adam, D. Bourgeois, and
B. Brutscher*
* to whom correspondence should be addressed

Running title: Light-induced changes in PTFP dynamics

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract
The availability of fluorescent proteins with distinct phototransformation properties is
crucial for a wide range of applications in advanced fluorescence microscopy and
biotechnology. To rationally design new variants optimized for specific applications, a
detailed understanding of the mechanistic features underlying phototransformation is
essential. At present, little is known about the conformational dynamics of fluorescent
proteins at physiological temperature, and how these dynamics contribute to the observed
phototransformation properties. Here, we apply high-resolution NMR spectroscopy in
solution combined with in-situ sample illumination at different wavelengths to investigate the
conformational dynamics of rsFolder, a GFP-derived protein that can be reversibly switched
between a green fluorescent state and a non-fluorescent state. Our results add a dynamic view
to the static structures obtained by X-ray crystallography. Including NMR into the analytical
toolbox used for fluorescent protein research provides new opportunities for investigating the
effect of mutations or changes in the environmental conditions on the conformational
dynamics of phototransformable fluorescent proteins, and their correlation with the observed
photochemical and photophysical properties.

Key words
GFP, chromophore, photoswitching, conformational dynamics, NMR spectroscopy,
laser illumination

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Significance
Photo-transformable Fluorescent Proteins (PTFPs) are essential tools for superresolution (SR) microscopy. In practical applications, however, researchers often encounter
problems when using PTFPs in a particular cellular context, because the environmental
conditions (pH, temperature, redox potential, oxygen level, viscosity, …) affect their
brightness, photostability, phototransformation kinetics, etc. Rational fluorescent protein
engineering exploits the mechanistic information available from structural studies, mainly Xray crystallography, in order to design new PTFP variants with improved properties for
particular applications. Here we apply NMR spectroscopy in solution to investigate the lightinduced changes in conformational dynamics of rsFolder, a reversibly switchable fluorescent
protein. The dynamic view offered by NMR highlights protein regions that comprise
potentially interesting mutation points for future mutagenesis campaigns.

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Introduction
The discovery and engineering of photo-transformable fluorescent proteins (PTFPs),
derived either from Aequora victoria green fluorescent protein (GFP) or other fluorescent
proteins from Anthozoa species (corals and anemones), has triggered exciting new modalities
in fluorescence microscopy (1) and biotechnology (2). In particular, PTFPs have become
indispensable tools for modern super-resolution light microscopy techniques that achieve
resolution beyond the diffraction limit (3, 4). At present, a large number of PTFPs have been
discovered or engineered that differ in their specific response to light (photoactivation,
photoconversion, or reversible photoswitching), in the kinetics of this response, in their
photostability and general fluorescence characteristics (brightness, emission color, Stokes
shift, …), as well as in their oligomerization state, folding stability, and maturation efficiency.
Furthermore, these properties are generally dependent on environmental conditions (5). The
requirements for an optimal PTFP marker are different for specific applications, which calls
for further expansion and improvements of the PTFP toolbox.
Understanding at near-atomic resolution the mechanistic features responsible for the
observed photochemical and photophysical properties of PTFPs is a key step to envision the
rational design of new variants optimized for a particular application or experimental context.
Most mechanistic studies on PTFPs reported in the literature have used X-ray crystallography
as the method of choice to determine structures of their different ground-state conformations.
Such structures are essentially static and, as data are typically collected at cryogenic
temperature, they are representative of frozen states. Kinetic crystallography has also been
used in combination with optical spectroscopy and/or molecular dynamics simulations to
decipher the structures of short-lived ground state species such as intermittent dark states (6,
7). Recently, ultrafast time-resolved crystallography using an XFEL source has been able to
image an electronically excited short-lived intermediate state in rsEGFP2 that becomes
populated during photoswitching between a nonfluorescent (“off”) and a fluorescent (“on”)
state (8), shedding some light on the switching dynamics of a PTFP at the picosecond
timescale.
While FPs are generally quite resistant to their environment, an increasing number of
studies have shown that PTFP photophysics are affected by external factors such as pH, redox
potential, oxygen level, viscosity, temperature, etc (5, 9–13). These environmental effects are
difficult to study by X-ray crystallography where structural data are collected in conditions

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

imposed by crystallogenesis that may differ substantially from the conditions found during insitu fluorescence imaging. Moreover, little is known about the conformational dynamics of
PTFPs at physiological temperatures, and their relevance for the observed fluorescence and
phototransformation properties. To address these issues, multidimensional liquid-state NMR
spectroscopy may provide a complementary tool to investigate at atomic resolution the
conformational dynamics of PTFPs in different states, and over a wide range of temperatures
and buffer conditions. However, quite surprisingly, so far only little information on PTFPs
has been obtained from NMR (11, 14, 15), while a few more studies on chromophore
dynamics in conventional GFPs can be found in the literature (16–18).
Here, we introduce a toolbox of multidimensional and multinuclear (1H, 13C, 15N) NMR
experiments specifically tailored to investigate PTFPs structural dynamics. We apply this
toolbox to probe the conformational dynamics of rsFolder, a PTFP that can be reversibly
switched from a stable fluorescent “on” state to a meta-stable nonfluorescent “off” state, and
vice versa, upon illumination with cyan or violet light, respectively. Such reversibly photoswitchable fluorescent proteins (RSFP) are required for a variety of applications, ranging from
super-resolution microscopy (RESOLFT, NL-SIM, pcSOFI, and others) (19–21), optical lockin detection (OLID) (22), multiplexed imaging (OPIOM) (23), up to the development of highdensity optical storage media (2). rsFolder has been genetically engineered as a chimera
between rsEGFP2 (24) and superfolder GFP (25) to facilitate proper folding in highly
reducing environments such as the bacterial periplasm (26). The photophysical properties of
rsFolder have been characterized by optical spectroscopy, and high resolution crystallographic
structures are available for both the “on” and “off” states (26). These structures reveal the
typical 11-stranded β-barrel fold, enclosing an endogenous p-HBI chromophore, formed by
maturation of an Ala-Tyr-Gly tripeptide. Upon light illumination at 488 nm (405 nm), the
chromophore undergoes a cis to trans (trans to cis) isomerization, and protonation
(deprotonation) at the ζ position of the phenol ring. While the β-barrel structures for the “on”
and “off” states almost perfectly superpose (C rmsd = 0.21 Å), slight structural
rearrangements are observed for a few side chains located in the close vicinity of the
chromophore (Figure 1). Our NMR data complement this static picture by adding information
on the changes in local conformational sampling after photoswitching, providing some new
insight toward the long-term goal of better understanding how the photophysical properties of
PTFPs are influenced by different types of local molecular flexibility. This work opens the

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

door to further studies aiming at evaluating how PTFPs conformational dynamics respond to
mutational or environmental changes.

Figure 1. Crystallographic structures of rsFolder in the fluorescent “on” state (green) and the non-fluorescent
“off” state (grey). (a) Superposition of the main chain coordinates highlighting that the overall β-barrel structure
of the protein is identical in the two states. (b) Zoom on the chromophore region of rsFolder showing the change
in chromophore geometry from “cis” to “trans”, as well as some side chain rearrangements in the vicinity of the
chromophore. The most pronounced structural changes upon light illumination are observed for F146, H149 and
V151.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Materials and Methods
Protein samples
Purification of rsFolder was performed as described previously (26). The full-length
rsFolder cDNA was cloned in the ampicillin-resistant expression plasmid pET15b (Addgene,
Teddington, UK), and constructs were designed to bear a six-residue N-terminal His-tag
linked to the protein coding region via a Thrombin cleavage sequence. When considered
necessary, the His-tag was cleaved using a Thrombin protease. Escherichia coli BL21(DE3)
cells were transformed with the plasmid described above for protein expression. An
isotopically enriched minimal medium, containing 15NH4Cl (1 g/L) and

13

C-glucose (2 g/L),

was used to grow the cells until the cultures reached an OD at 600 nm between 0.6 and 0.8, at
which point protein expression was induced by adding IPTG (isopropyl β-D-1thiogalactopyranoside). For uniformely 15N/13C labeled samples, 1mM IPTG was added and
induction was performed overnight at 20°C. The cells were harvested by centrifugation and
subsequently lysed by sonication in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 100 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). The
lysate was centrifuged at 4°C for 30 min at 46 000g. The protein present in the supernatant
was purified using a Ni-NTA column (Qiagen). The protein was eluted by increasing the
concentration of imidazole. The resulting protein was further purified using size exclusion
chromatography with a Superdex 75 column (GE) equilibrated with the NMR buffer (50 mM
HEPES pH 7.5).
In-situ laser illumination inside the NMR magnet
An in-situ laser illumination device similar to that described by Mizuno et al. (15) was
built. It comprises an Oxxius laser box (wavelength combiner L4Cc, Oxxius S.A., Lannion,
France) hosting two lasers of wavelengths 405 nm (LBX-405-180-CSB-OE) and 488 nm
(LBX-488-200-CSB-OE), and an optical fiber (Thorlabs FG105UCA, 0.22NA, 105 μm core
diameter, 2 mm diameter protective cover, 5 m length). The fiber end was left naked and
routinely cleaved when necessary, using a Ceramic Fiber Scribe (Thorlabs CSW12-5). The
fiber was inserted into the plunger of a 5 mm diameter Shigemi tube (Shigemi Co LTD,
Tokyo, Japan). Importantly the Shigemi plunger was filled with water before inserting the
fiber to avoid a sudden change in the refractive index at the air-glass interface, thus reducing
the divergence of the laser beam. The laser power was set and monitored using the Oxxius
Software from a laptop connected to the laser combiner, and the laser output was controlled
either manually using a shutter, or by digital on/off modulation from the NMR console
connected to the laser box via TTL lines. The difference between nominal laser power as
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

displayed by the Oxxius software and the measured output power at the fiber tip was about
30%, suggesting a coupling efficiency of about 70%. For short illumination times (less than 1
minute), the full laser power was used (200 mW nominal), while for longer exposure times
(>> 1 minute) the output was set to 30% of the maximal power to limit the effect of
photobleaching. In order to allow smooth insertion of the fiber-coupled Shigemi tube into the
NMR magnet, the use of 2 Bruker sample holders put on top of each other proved to be
helpful.
NMR measurements
All NMR experiments were performed on Bruker Avance IIIHD spectrometers, at the
high-field NMR facility of IBS, operating at magnetic field strengths of 600 MHz (H/D
exchange), 700-MHz (15N relaxation, NMR assignment), and 850-MHz (LD-EXSY,

15

N

CPMG, H/D exchange, methyl side chain, aromatics and chromophore NMR experiments),
and equipped with cryogenically cooled triple-resonance probes and pulsed z-field gradients.
NMR measurements were performed at 40°C on NMR samples containing 100 - 200 μM [U13

C, 15N]- enriched rsFolder in 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), and 5% (v/v) D2O. The samples were

stored at 4 °C between data recordings, and the sample quality was routinely checked for
possible aggregation and/or degradation by recording 1H-15N correlation spectra. “On” state
data were recorded after short (5 s) illumination at 405 nm in the absence of laser
illumination, while ‘off” state data were acquired after a short (10 s) high-power illumination
at 488 nm, under continuous illumination (488 nm) using reduced (30%) laser power to
prevent on-state recovery by thermal relaxation. Most NMR experiments used in this study
are implemented in the NMRlib pulse sequence library for Bruker spectrometers (27) that can
be

freely

downloaded

from

our

web

site

(http://www.ibs.fr/research/scientific-

output/software/pulse-sequence-tools). NMR data processing was performed using Topspin
3.5 (Bruker BioSpin), while data analysis was done using the CCPNMR software (28).
For sequential resonance assignment of the “on” state, a set of five triple-resonance 3D
BEST-TROSY experiments (29, 30), HNCO, HNcoCA, HNCA, HNcoCACB, and HNCACB,
was recorded. For the “off” state, two LD-EXSY data sets (15N,15N,1H) and (1H,15N,1H) were
recorded to transfer the “on”-state 1H, 15N assignments to the “off” state, and complemented
by 3D BEST-TROSY HNcaCO, HNCACB to extend the assignment to CO, CA, and CB.
Additional side chain assignments of aromatic tyrosine and histidine residues, including the
tyrosine moiety of the p-HBI chromophore, was achieved using a series of specifically

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

tailored 2D correlation experiments as described recently (31). Partial methyl (1H,

13

C)

assignments were obtained by a combination of 3D CcoNH-TOCSY, 3D HccoNH-TOCSY,
and 3D HmetCmetC experiments, complemented by amino-acid-edited SOFAST

1

H-13C

correlation spectra (32, 33)
15

N relaxation experiments (T1, T2, HETNOE) were performed using standard pulse

schemes implemented in NMRlib (27). Relaxation data for 195 “on”-state and 175 “off”-state
backbone amide sites could be obtained at 40 °C, from cross peaks that were well resolved
and of sufficient signal to noise in the recorded

2D 1H–15N spectra, while all others

(overlapping or weak) peaks were excluded from further analysis. The overall correlation time
6𝑇1

has been estimated from the “plateau” T1 and T2 values (34) as 𝜏𝑐 = (√

𝑇2

− 7)⁄4𝜋𝜈𝑁 .

For H/D exchange measurements, lyophilized samples of protonated

13

C/15N-labelled

rsFolder were dissolved in 300 μl D2O (sample concentration of 200 μM), transferred to a
5 mm Shigemi tube with the optical fiber inserted, and quickly put into the NMR
spectrometer for data recording. The decay of amide 1H NMR signals, due to the exchange
with deuterons, was then monitored for about 20 hours by a series of 1H-15N BEST-TROSY
spectra with a time resolution of 2.5 min per experiment. The dead time of these kinetic
experiments due to sample preparation, and spectrometer setup (locking, shimming, …) was
about 5 min. To estimate the accuracy and reproducibility of the measurements, two data sets
were recorded for both “on” and “off” states (at 600 and 850 MHz). In order to obtain more
quantitative data for amide sites that are slowly exchanging in the “on” state, but much faster
in the “off” state, we performed an additional H/D exchange experiment. In this experiment,
the exchange measurement starts with the “on” state, and the sample is switched after a few
minutes to the “off” state using high-power laser (488 nm) illumination.

9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Results
Laser-driven photoswitching
In order to be able to perform a set of time-consuming multi-dimensional (2D and 3D)
NMR experiments for the metastable “off” state of rsFolder, we have adapted a setup similar
to the one proposed by Mizuno et al. (2010) that allows to illuminate the sample in the NMR
magnet during data collection with 488 nm or 405 nm laser light via an optical fiber
introduced into the glass insert of a standard Shigemi tube (figure 2a). This illumination
device is portable, can be used with any high-field NMR spectrometer (figure 2b), and can be
synchronized with an NMR pulse sequence to switch the sample between the “on” and “off”
states on demand.

Figure 2. In-situ NMR sample illumination device. (a) Schematic representation of the insertion of the optical
fiber into the water-filled plunger of a Shigemi NMR tube. The NMR sample is illuminated from the top in a
conic geometry. (b) Photograph of the high-field NMR platform showing the portable setup of the in-situ
illumination device; a laptop is connected to the laser box which is mounted on the mezzanine of the magnet. (c)
Sample of rsFolder: picture with and without light illumination. (d-e) 2D plots of 1D 1H time series. Upon
continuous laser illumination at 488 nm and power levels of (d) 70 mW and (e) 140 mW, the NMR signal of a
methyl 1H in the “on” state decreases while the signal of the corresponding “off” state peak increases.

In order to characterize the efficiency of this illumination device to switch rsFolder
between the “on” and the “off” states, we have performed real-time 1D 1H NMR experiments
under laser illumination. The spectra plotted in Figure 2d and 2e show a decrease of the “on”

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

state population, and an increase of the “off” state population of rsFolder over time when
illuminating the sample at 488 nm. The two NMR resonances visible in this spectral window
correspond to a methyl 1H that is spectroscopically resolved in both states, and thus presents a
convenient probe for such 1D NMR-detected switching kinetics. As expected, the switching
kinetics depend on the chosen laser power, with a measured on-off switching half time of
about 2 s at 140 mW (maximal laser power output, Figure 2e). The lower limit of ~2 s results
from the high optical density of the sample at 488 nm, substantially increasing the time it
takes for the laser light to reach all molecules in the NMR sample. Note that the inverse
switching reaction, from “off” to “on” under 405 nm light illumination (120 mW) is about
twice faster (data not shown).
A superposition of the 1H-15N fingerprint spectra recorded in the absence (“on” state)
and presence of 488 nm light illumination (“off” state) is plotted in Figure S1. Many residues
(amide groups) show significant peak shifts in these spectra, indicating that the change in
chromophore geometry induced by photon absorption has a widespread effect on the amide
1

H and

15

N chemical shifts in the β-barrel (see below). The laser-induced peak shifts are

reversible as illustrated in Figure S2 by the superposition of “on”-state and “off”-state spectra
recorded before and after 1000 switching cycles using alternate sample illumination by cyan
and violet light. We found that photobleaching resulted in a progressive loss of peak intensity
(about 25% after 1000 cycles under the chosen experimental conditions), but did not induce
any noticeable peak shifts in the spectra, indicating that the NMR-observable conformational
“on” and “off” states are not affected by photobleaching. The absence of additional peaks in
our NMR spectra developing over time suggests that photo-damaged rsFolder may form large
aggregates not observable by liquid-state NMR.
The observed peak shifts between rsFolder “on” and “off” states offer the possibility to
quantify a “switching efficiency” that can be related to the fluorescence switching contrast of
importance in microscopy applications. Quantification of the residual peak intensity of “on”
state peaks in the “off” state spectrum provides a measure of the relative state populations.
For rsFolder, we have measured this residual “on” state population to be ~ 3.5 % (Figure S1),
independent of the sample temperature in the range 20° - 40°C. This NMR-derived value
closely matches results from fluorescence spectroscopy (26), where a residual fluorescence
intensity of ~4% in the “off” state at room temperature was obtained, in line with the notion
that the rsFolder “off” state is fully nonfluorescent. NMR also enables the measurement of the

11

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

“off” to “on” back-switching efficiency, which in the case of rsFolder turns out be close to
100% (Figure S1).
Laser-aided backbone resonance assignments and secondary structure
1

HN,

13

α

C ,

13

β

C ,

13

CO, and

15

N resonance assignment of rsFolder at 40°C in the “on”

state was obtained from a series of 3D BEST-TROSY HNC correlation experiments (30).
Almost complete (95%) assignment was obtained for residues 2 – 230, corresponding to the
β-barrel structure. Only 12 non-proline residues (W58, V69, D77, H78, E133, Y144, V151,
K167, I168, K210, D211, and K215) could not be assigned from these spectra. Of those, V69,
V151 and K167 are in direct contact with the chromophore based on crystallographic data.
The 1H-15N correlation spectrum, annotated with the assigned residue number, is shown in
Figure S3.
Recording and analyzing such a set of 3D assignment spectra is a time-consuming task
(typically 1 week of data recording, and another week of data analysis). In order to speed up
the assignment process for the “off” state, we have adapted a different strategy that makes use
of our laser-induced in-situ switching capabilities. The “on” state assignment can be directly
transferred to the “off” state by performing a laser-driven exchange experiment (LD-EXSY),
conceptually similar to SCOTCH experiments (35), proposed in the past to monitor lightinduced chemical reactions. The basic scheme of a LD-EXSY experiment is shown in Figure
3a. During the magnetization recovery time in the beginning of the pulse sequence (typically a
few seconds) a laser illumination (488 nm) switches the proteins in the sample to the “off”
state, allowing to edit either the 1H or

15

N chemical shift for this state. After chemical shift

editing, the magnetization is stored as longitudinal spin order (Nz), and a second laser pulse,
this time at 405 nm, converts the proteins back to the “on” state during a mixing period
(exchange time) of typically a few hundred milliseconds. The remainder of the sequence
allows to edit the 1H and

15

N frequencies in the “on” state. The resulting 3D data set thus

comprises one “off” state (1H or

15

N), and two “on” state (1H and

15

N) chemical shift

dimensions. Figure 3b shows annotated 2D projections of two 3D data sets recorded for
rsFolder, with either the 1H or 15N chemical shift labeled in the “off”-state spectral dimension.
Off-diagonal peaks detected in these spectra originate from protein residues with amide
chemical shifts (1H or 15N) that differ between the two states, while diagonal peaks are either
due to incomplete switching, or chemical shifts that are not affected by photoswitching.
These LD-EXSY spectra thus provide a straightforward and time-efficient way for amide 1H,

12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

15

N assignments in the “off” state. Additional 13C chemical shift information in the “off” state

was then extracted from 3D BT-HNcaCO and BT-HNCACB spectra. This resulted in an
assignment completeness of 93% (residues 2 – 230), with a total of 16 unassigned non-proline
residues (W58, E133, Y144, S148, N150, V151, K157, Q158, N165, K167, I168, R169,
L202, K210, D211, and K215), of which S148, V151 and K167 are in direct contact with the
chromophore based on crystallographic data. Note that in the case of severely line-broadened
amide resonances (see below) no cross peaks were observed in the triple-resonance data, and
assignment was only possible with the LD-EXSY experiment.

Figure 3. Laser-driven magnetization exchange (LD-EXSY) experiment. (a) Schematic drawing of LD-EXSY
pulse sequence including light illumination at 2 different wavelengths; at 405 nm during the recycle delay
(magnetization recovery, 2s), and at 488 nm during the EXSY mixing time (magnetization storage, 600 ms). The
laser sources are coupled to the NMR console via TTL lines, and switched on and off by specific commands in
the NMR pulse sequence code. The resulting 3D spectra have 2 “on” state and 1 “off” state chemical shift
dimensions. (b) 2D projection of a 3D 15N-edited LD-EXSY spectrum. Off-diagonal peaks correspond to
rsFolder residues (annotated) which show 15N chemical shift differences between “on” and “off” states. (c) Same
as (b) but for 1H-edited LD-EXSY.

The assigned NMR frequencies, and in particular the 13C chemical shifts, provide useful
information on the secondary structural elements (α-helix, β-strand) present in rsFolder under
our experimental conditions. In Figure S4, the secondary structural features derived from our
measured chemical shifts using the TALOS-N program are plotted (36). A comparison with
the X-ray structures of rsFolder (PDB files 5DTZ and 5DU0) shows that the -barrel structure
13

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

in solution is almost identical to that observed in the crystal at cryogenic temperature.
Nevertheless, a few slight differences are observed for strand 7 and the two helices (H2 and
H3) inside the barrel to which the chromophore is connected. The 7 strand in solution is
extended by 3 residues at the N-terminal end, helix H2 is shifted by 3 residues towards the Cterminus, and helix H3 has a non-canonical backbone geometry that is not identified as an helix by TALOS. Interestingly, it has been concluded from the hydrogen bonding patterns
observed in the high resolution crystal structure of EGFP (37), an “ancestor” protein of
rsFolder, that helix H2 is composed of a 310 helix (P57 – L61 in rsFolder) followed by a short
regular -helix (L61-L65 in rsFolder), in agreement with our NMR data.
Backbone dynamics in the “on” and “off” states
In order to obtain information on the local backbone dynamics we have performed

15

N

relaxation measurements of rsFolder in both the “on” and “off” states at 40°C. The measured
T1, T2, and HETNOE data are plotted in Figure 4a as a function of the protein sequence, with
the secondary structural elements as identified from TALOS-N plotted on top of each graph.
These data indicate an overall rigid monomeric globular protein, with a tumbling correlation
time of about 10 ns at 40°C. Increased flexibility on the ps to ns time scale (longer T2 and
reduced HETNOE values) is detected in some loop regions, especially the loops connecting
the first helix (H1) and strand β1, and the loop between β-strands 9 and 10. Most
interestingly, there is almost no significant difference in the fast time scale dynamics, as seen
from these 15N relaxation data, between the “on” and “off” states. However, some differences
are observed that can be ascribed to increased conformational dynamics on the µs to ms time
scale in the “off” state of rsFolder. A first observation is the lack of peak intensity for some
amides in β-strands 7 and 8 in the 15N relaxation spectra (turquoise bars in Figure 4b), as well
as reduced T2 values measured for residues C71 and S73 in the non-canonical helix H3. The
reduction in peak intensities for some residues in the “off” state can also be observed in
standard 2D 1H-15N BEST-TROSY spectra, as illustrated in Figure 4b. In order to further
characterize these conformational dynamics we have performed CPMG-type relaxationdispersion experiments. Unfortunately, the signal to noise ratio obtained for the abovementioned residues was too low to perform a quantitative analysis. Only S73 yielded data of
reasonable quality (Figure 4c) that confirm the presence of a conformational exchange
process in the “off” state that leads to a modulation of the chemical shift during the relaxation
period, while no relaxation dispersion is observed for this residue in the “on” state. Due to the
limited experimental sensitivity, we did not attempt to extract kinetic (Kex) or thermodynamic
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

(state populations) information from these dispersion curves. As the exchange contribution to
the transverse relaxation rate is not completely quenched at the highest CPMG frequency of
1000 Hz, we can reasonably assume that the exchange process is faster than 1000 s-1.

Figure 4. Backbone dynamics of rsFolder in “on” and “off” states. (a) 15N relaxation data (T1, T2 and HETNOE)
measured at 700 MHz and 40°C, plotted as a function of protein sequence. Secondary structural elements as
identified from the 13C chemical shifts by the program TALOS-N are plotted on top of each graph. Cyan bars
indicate peptide region for which no peak is detected in the “off” state. (b) 1H-15N BEST-TROSY spectral
regions (red: “on” state, blue: “off” state) zooming on line-broadened “off” state peaks. (c) CPMG-RD data
recorded for residue S73 at 850 MHz in the “on” (green) and “off” (black) states.

Figure 5 summarizes the main changes in NMR observables after light illumination. The
following NMR data have been color-coded on the structure of rsFolder in an open-sheet and
a 3-dimensional representation: (i) unobserved amide resonances in both the “on” and “off”
states (dark blue); (ii) amide resonances undetected in the “off” state only (blue); (iii) amide
resonances with significantly reduced peak intensity in the “off” state as extracted from the
graph of figure S5b, and/or decreased

15

N T2 values (light blue); (iv) significant 1H-15N

chemical shift changes (ΔCS > 2 ppm) as extracted from the graph of figure S5a (orange).
Note that the reported chemical shift changes are not a direct evidence of changes in structure
or conformational dynamics, as part of it may be due to long-range ring-current-induced

15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

chemical shift effects that follow from the change in orientation of the chromophore.
Interestingly, all of these NMR data point towards significant changes in conformational
dynamics in a particular β-barrel region. The missing “on” state peaks for a few residues in β7
(V151) and β 8 (K167, I168) indicates some possible dynamics already present in the
fluorescent state, highlighting a well-known defect in the β-barrel structure and a hotspot for
backbone fluctuations (16, 38, 39). After the cis-trans isomerization of the chromophore, the
conformational dynamics occurring on a s to ms time scale are expanded to a larger region
close to the phenol ring of the chromophore, comprising strands 7, 8, 10, and eventually 11, as
well as helix H3.

Figure 5. Increased conformational dynamics on the μs-ms timescale in the “off” state of rsFolder. The NMRderived information is color-coded on the (a) open-sheet and (b) 3-dimensional representation of the rsFolder
structure as revealed by X-ray crystallopgraphy and NMR (A ‘*’ indicates structural elements only identified by
NMR): (i) undetected/unassigned amides in both states (dark blue), (ii) undetected/unassigned amide peaks in
the “off” state only (middle blue), (iii) strongly line-broadened amide NMR signals in the “off” state (light blue),
(iv) amide 1H-15N with large chemical shift changes between “on” and “off” states (orange). In addition, proline
residues lacking an amide proton are color coded in dark grey.

Fold stability and water accessibility
Complementary information on the conformational dynamics of backbone amides in the
“on” and “off” states of rsFolder has been obtained from hydrogen-deuterium (H/D) exchange
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

measurements. For amide hydrogens engaged in an intramolecular H-bond, H/D exchange is
assumed to proceed via transient opening of the hydrogen bond followed by interaction with a
solvent exchange catalyst (40). Therefore, NMR derived H/D exchange rates provide an
indirect measure of the dynamic fluctuations of the protein backbone leading to transient
breakage of hydrogen bonds. At neutral or acidic pH, the formation of the H-bond after
transient opening is generally much faster than the intrinsic chemical exchange process. In
this so-called EX2 exchange regime, the exchange rate constants provide a measure of the
exchange-competent state population. A second structural parameter that needs to be
considered is water accessibility. Typically, an amide hydrogen surrounded by water has a
higher exchange probability than the same amide hydrogen buried in the interior of a globular
protein. For rsFolder, the available crystal structures for the “on” and “off” states do not
indicate any major change in water-accessible cavities inside the β-barrel as illustrated in
Figure S7. Therefore we consider that changes in the observed H/D exchange rates are mainly
due to a population increase (or decrease) of exchange competent, unprotected conformational
sub-states.
H/D exchange kinetics for hydrogen-bonded amides of rsFolder were measured by
time-resolved 2D 1H-15N NMR. The exchange process was initiated by dissolving the
lyophilized protein in D2O outside the NMR instrument. Typically, unprotected solventaccessible amide sites were fully exchanged during the experimental dead time of about 5
minutes. The exchange process was then monitored for about 20 hours, allowing to quantify
exchange processes with time constants Tex=1/kex spanning a range of 3 orders of magnitude
(5 min < Tex < 5000 min). The measured exchange time constants are color-coded
(logarithmic scale) on the secondary structure (open sheet representation) of rsFolder in
Figure S6 for the “on” and “off” states. Examples of intensity decays extracted from the realtime NMR data for individual amide sites in the “on” and “off” states are shown in Figure 6a.
A first observation from these H/D exchange data is that, while overall the amide protons in
the β-barrel of the “on” state are well protected from solvent exchange, strand β7 is much less
protected due to the lack in hydrogen bonding with the adjacent β8 strand. In the “off” state, a
significant increase in the measured solvent exchange rates is detected for amides in the
neighboring strands β8 and β10, further emphasizing the increased dynamics in this part of
the β-barrel structure upon light illumination, leading to a destabilization of the hydrogen
bonding network. Some local destabilization is also observed for amide hydrogens in strands
β4 and β5, while no significant changes are observed for the remainder of the β-barrel (β1-3,

17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

β6, β11) as illustrated in Figure 6b. The most pronounced changes in protection from solvent
exchange, however, are observed for the two helices (H2 and H3) flanking the chromophore
in the interior of the β-barrel (see Figure 6b), with a decrease in solvent protection ranging
from a factor of 5 up to a factor of 100. These data clearly indicate the presence of
conformational dynamics affecting these helical elements induced by the chromophore cistrans isomerization. Interestingly, while

15

N relaxation and line broadening data already

identified increased dynamics in helix H3, they did not point towards changes in helix H2
dynamics. Our findings highlight the complementarity of NMR relaxation and H/D exchange
data in providing information on local protein dynamics, the latter being sensitive to much
longer time scales and smaller chemical shift changes.

Figure 6. H/D exchange NMR data. (a) Representative intensity decay for individual amide hydrogens extracted
from real-time 2D NMR data recorded for the “on” (green) and “off” (black) states of rsFolder at 40°C and 850
MHz 1H frequency. (b) The derived H/D exchange information is color-coded on the crystal structure of
rsFolder: (i) residues with amide hydrogen exchange time constants Tex < 5 min in both the “on” and off” states
(light blue); (ii) residues for which the hydrogen exchange rate is increased by a factor of 4 -20 (orange); (iii)
residues for which the hydrogen exchange rate is increased by more than a factor of 20 (red); (iv) residues
without a significant change in exchange rate between “on” and “off” states (grey); (v) no information due to
peak overlap, proline, or unassigned residues in one of the two states (dark grey).

Sidechain and chromophore dynamics in the “on” and “off” states
Line broadening effects similar to those already discussed in the context of backbone
dynamics (Figure 4b) are also observed in the 1H-13C correlation spectra of rsFolder in the
“off” state, indicating that a number of protein side chains undergo conformational exchange.
18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Examples of methyl groups (I168and) and an aromatic side chain (H149) that become
severely line broadened in the “off” state are shown in Figure 7a. In order to identify the
protein regions that are involved in conformational side chain dynamics, we have performed
1

H,

13

C resonance assignment of methyl and aromatic side chain moieties in the “on” and

“off” states of rsFolder as further explained in the Materials and Methods section. Figure S8
highlights 1H-13C spectral regions displaying NMR signals that experience either large
chemical shift changes or severe line broadening in the “off” state. The side chains involved
in conformational dynamics are all located in close proximity to the chromophore (Figure 7b),
attached to β-strands 7, 8, 10, and 11 or helices 2 and 3, the same backbone regions that have
been shown to experience conformational exchange in the “off”-state. These data further
support the conclusion that the chromophore itself and/or the surrounding environment
experience significant conformational dynamics in the “off” state leading to chemical shift
modulation on the s to ms time scale.

Figure 7. rsFolder side chains involved in conformational exchange processes in the “off” state as deduced from
extensive line broadening. Examples of peak line broadening observed in the 1H-13C correlation spectra of
rsFolder: on-state (blue), “off”-state (red). (b) Zoom on the chromophore environment highlighting the side
chains which show NMR line broadening in the “off” state (red). In addition, F146 is plotted as it experiences
large chemical shift changes upon light illumination.

NMR also provides information on the dynamics of the chromophore, and its
stabilization in the β-barrel by hydrogen bonding. The exceptional thermal stability of
rsFolder in the “off” state was tentatively attributed to the H-bond that H149 maintains with
the phenol ring of the chromophore in both ‘on’ and ‘off’ states (26), as illustrated in Figure
8a. In order to validate or contradict this hypothesis, we first performed NMR experiments
that reveal the protonation state of H149. In the “on” state, the imidazole ring of H149 is

19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

predominantly in a neutral tautomeric state, protonated at the Nδ1 position (31). In the “off”
state, as discussed in the previous paragraph, the 1H-13C correlation peaks of H149 (Hδ1-Cδ1
and Hε2-Cε2) are severely line broadened, and no correlation peaks are detected in aromatic
HCC-type experiments. Therefore, no conclusions can be drawn on the protonation state of
H149 in the “off” state. Further information on the involvement of H149 in hydrogen bonding
interactions was obtained by a 1H-15N SOFAST-HMQC experiment (32) tailored to the
chemical shifts of histidine side chains. The presence of a hydrogen bond protects the “labile”
imidazole hydrogen(s) from solvent exchange. Therefore, a correlation peak for the
protonated histidine ring nitrogens is expected if the lifetime of the hydrogen is at least a few
hundred milliseconds. Figure 8b shows such correlation spectra recorded for the “on” and
“off” states at different temperatures (15°C, 25°C, and 40°C). At low temperature (15°C), a
total of 6 out of the 10 histidines of rsFolder give rise to a cross peak in the “on” state
indicating their involvement in a hydrogen bond. While 4 of them (H26, H182, H200, and
H218) remain visible also at higher temperature (40°C), no correlation peak is detected for
H149 and H232 at this temperature. Taking H218 as an internal reference, the relative H-bond
stability (peak intensity) decreases by a factor of 2 when increasing the temperature from 15°
to 25°C. Our NMR data validate the crystal-structure-derived hypothesis of H-bond formation
between the Nδ1 of H149 and the phenol ring of the chromophore. However, we can also
conclude that this H-bond is relatively unstable, as compared to other H-bonds involving
histidines H26, H182, H200, and H218. In the “off” state, the same peak patterns and Tdependence is observed, except for H149 that does not give rise to a correlation peak at any
temperature. This observation, however, does not allow to conclude on the absence of a Hbond between H149 and the chromophore in the “off” state, as the protonated phenol ring has
to interact with an unprotonated imidazole ring nitrogen in order to form an H-bond, that is
undetectable in our NMR spectra. Nevertheless, the observed line broadening of the nonexchangeable ring hydrogens of H149, resulting from conformational exchange dynamics,
makes the hypothesis of a stable H-bond in the “off” state very unlikely.

20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure 8. NMR information of the chromophore. (a) Chromophore and His149 side chain conformations
extracted from the available crystal structures of rsFolder in the “on” (cis configuration) and “off” (trans
configuration) states. (b) Temperature series of 1H-15N SOFAST-HMQC spectra of histidine side chains in the
“on” and the “off” states recorded at 850 MHz 1H frequency. The detected cross peaks are annotated by the
residue number. (c) Schematic representation of the chemical structure of the chromophore. Nuclei giving rise to
NMR signals are highlighted by blue letters, and their NMR frequencies are provided in Table 1. (d) Overlay of
2D aromatic 1H-13C Best-HSQC spectrum (31) of rsFolder, recorded without CT 13C editing to achieve highest
experimental sensitivity, in the “on” (blue) and “off” (red) state. NMR signals from the tyrosine moiety (Y63) of
the chromophore are annotated.

We also attempted to obtain some information on the NMR signature of the
chromophore itself. Figure 8d shows the aromatic region of the 1H-13C correlation spectra of
rsFolder in the “on” state (blue spectrum). The chromophore contains 5 C-H pairs (Figure 8c)
in the tyrosine (Y) part of the chromophore that is made up from the A66-Y67-G68 tripeptide
in the rsFolder sequence. The 5 corresponding correlation peaks detected in the spectrum of
Figure 8d were identified and unambiguously assigned by a set of 2D correlation spectra
shown in Figure S9, recorded with pulse sequences that were specifically tailored for tyrosine
side chains (31). These NMR data allowed us to assign all 1H and 13C resonances (except for
CO) of the tyrosine moiety of the chromophore (Table 1). The upfield shifted CZ chemical
shift (178 ppm) is characteristic of an anionic phenol group as expected for a deprotonated

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

chromophore in the fluorescent “on” state. The observation of distinct correlation peaks for
the symmetric CD and CE sites of the phenol ring indicates that the chromophore is
structurally stabilized in the β-barrel with slow ring flip dynamics (kex < 500 s-1) at 40°C.
These slow ring flips are in contrast to all other tyrosine and phenylalanine side chains of
rsFolder for which a single correlation peak was detected for the symmetric δ1 and δ2 (ε1 and
ε2) sites, indicative of fast ring flip dynamics leading to chemical shift averaging. In the nonfluorescent “off” state (red spectrum in Figure 8d), the 4 correlation peaks of the
chromophore’s phenol group disappear, indicative of a significant change in chromophore
dynamics. Only the signal of the HB-CB in the methine bridge of the chromophore remains
detectable in the dark state, with the CB resonance experiencing an impressive 7.6 ppm
upfield shift after cis-trans isomerization of the chromophore. The NMR assignment of the
chromophore in the “off” state could be further extended to the CA and CG (Figure S9b) that
also shift upfield by 3.3 and 4.4 ppm, respectively (see table 1). Our NMR data indicate a
destabilization of the chromophore in the “off” state leading to motion of the phenol ring on
the millisecond time scale. However, whether these motions correspond to increased ring flip
dynamics, local fluctuations around the methine bridge, or both cannot be distinguished from
these data.

22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Discussion
In-situ NMR illumination and time-efficient NMR experiments
Our portable laser illumination device allowed us to perform a large set of 2D and 3D
correlation experiments on a single rsFolder sample. Due to its portability, the setup is
compatible with any high-field NMR instrument and probe, provided that the optical fiber is
long enough for the sample to reach its position in the magnet. Illumination from the top
(fiber placed in the Shigemi plunger) ensures minimal perturbation of the magnetic field
homogeneity, and thus results in close to optimal NMR line shapes. However, relatively high
laser power is required to ensure fast “on” to “off” (or “off” to “on” ) switching, in particular
due to nonuniform illumination and high optical density of the sample. The LD-EXSY
experiment that makes use of fast switching capabilities provides a convenient and timeefficient way to transfer NMR assignments of fast-switching PTFPs from one conformational
state to another. This is of importance as NMR resonance assignment is the most timeconsuming step for investigating the dynamic properties of PTFPs. Once a sufficient level of
resonance assignment has been achieved, NMR provides a unique tool to access local
dynamics in the protein backbone, side chains, and chromophore on a broad range of time
scales, as will be discussed further in the following paragraph(s).
Conformational dynamics in the fluorescent state of rsFolder
The β-barrel scaffold of fluorescent proteins stabilizes the anionic cis conformation of
the chromophore via hydrogen bonding, π-stacking and cation-π interactions, as well as steric
hindrance. This restricts the chromophore’s internal motion observed in free solution, and
prevents radiationless decay upon light excitation, a prerequisite for a high fluorescence
quantum yield. However, this conformational rigidity is somehow in contradiction with the
capability of RSFPs to switch efficiently between distinct conformations, implying local
structural rearrangements, as well as changes in the hydrogen bonding network upon light
excitation. Therefore, a detailed experimental characterization of the structural heterogeneity
and conformational flexibility of the chromophore and its protein environment is important
for understanding and improving the photochromic properties of RSFPs. Such dynamic
information is typically not available from crystallographic structures. In the case of rsFolder,
the available X-ray structures show a well-defined β-barrel fold, and a single chromophore
conformation in both the “on” and “off”-states. Here, we have applied liquid-state NMR
spectroscopy to complement this static picture. Information on the local dynamics over time

23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

scales ranging from picoseconds to about a few hundred milliseconds have been obtained
from a combination of 15N spin relaxation measurements, NMR line width analysis, and H/D
exchange data. Our NMR data point towards a well-known defect in the β-barrel structure of
GFP-derived fluorescent proteins around strand β7 (16, 18, 38, 41) where the H-bonds formed
with the neighboring strands (especially β8), typical of an anti-parallel β-sheet conformation,
are weakened by longer distances and other structural irregularities. This leads to backbone
fluctuations and transient opening of the β-barrel in the fluorescent “on” state of rsFolder as
evidenced by a few unobservable amide resonances (V151, K167, and I168), and fast H/D
exchange rates measured for amide hydrogens in strand β7. Similar observations have been
made previously for conventional GFPs (16, 18). The dynamic “holes” in the β-barrel
between β7 and the neighboring strands have also been identified by MD simulations as
major entry points of water molecules into the interior of the β-barrel (39). Although certainly
not a sufficient condition, such conformational plasticity is likely required for efficient
photoswitching.
The data show clear evidence of an anionic chromophore, with the phenolate oxygen
hydrogen-bonded to the Nδ1 of H149. This finding is in agreement with the crystal structure
(26) that indicates that the chromophore’s phenolate oxygen is involved in 3 hydrogen-bond
interactions with H149, T204, and a water molecule. However, our NMR data show that the
H-bond between the chromophore and H149 is thermally unstable. At physiological
temperature, the bond is constantly broken and reformed on a sub-millisecond time scale. It
has been shown by QM/MM simulations of the RSFP Dronpa (42) that two or three H-bonds
stabilizing the chromophore are required for high fluorescence quantum yields, while less
hydrogen bonding favors photo-switching of the chromophore by a hula-twist mechanism.
We speculate that the weak H-bond observed with H149 in rsFolder is a characteristic
property of RSFPs that have been engineered to obtain reasonable fluorescence quantum
yields combined with efficient switching capability.
Light-induced conformational dynamics in the chromophore and its environment
As for a majority of RSFPs, on-off photoswitching in rsFolder involves a cis-trans
isomerization of the chromophore coupled to deprotonation at the hydroxy group of the
phenol moiety. In our NMR spectra, this photoinduced isomerization results in large upfield
13

C shifts of carbons in the methine bridge (CA, CB, and CG) of the chromophore. As

13

C

chemical shifts are particularly sensitive to the local geometry (torsion angles) of the chemical

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

bonds (43), the methine bridge 13C chemical shifts can be considered a spectral signature of pHBI being in cis or trans configuration. In principle, the protonation state at the
chromophore’s phenol moiety can be inferred from the 13CZ chemical shift, which is expected
to be 175-180 ppm for a phenolate, and 155-160 ppm for a phenol. However, for rsFolder in
the “off” state no NMR signals could be detected for the phenol moiety in the aromatic 1H-13C
spectra, indicative of a chromophore undergoing conformational exchange dynamics on the
s to ms time scale. Similarly, NMR signals of nuclei in the protein side chains H149 and
T204, forming hydrogen bonds with the phenolate oxygen in the “on” state”, become strongly
line broadened in the “off” state. These NMR observations clearly indicate a destabilization
of the chromophore, and the absence of any stable hydrogen bonding interaction with the βbarrel. In the crystal structures of rsFolder, the observed distances between the histidine δ1
nitrogen and the phenol oxygen are only little altered (from 2.8 Å to 2.9 Å) upon photoisomerization of the chromophore (Figure 7). Our findings thus contradict the conclusion
drawn from these structures that H149 remains hydrogen bonded to the hydroxyl group of the
phenol in the “off” state. Most likely, the crystal structure observed at cryogenic temperatures
represents the lowest energy conformation in the “off” state, which at higher temperature is in
exchange with alternate conformations that are separated by low energy barriers. A loss of
hydrogen bonding of the chromophore phenolate with the β-barrel scaffold has also been
observed for other RSFPs, e. g. Dronpa, rsEGFP2, and rsGreen (8, 42, 44, 45). Of note, this
has also been observed recently in the case of a long-lived dark state in the photoconvertible
fluorescent protein mEos4b (7).
The chromophore cis-trans isomerization also induces increased structural dynamics at
the β-barrel side (β7 – β10) facing the chromophore’s phenol group, the two helical regions
(H2 and H3) connecting the chromophore with the rest of the protein, and a number of side
chains attached to these peptide regions, and pointing towards the chromophore. In particular,
all side chains that undergo a structural rearrangement in the “off” state (T63, F146, H149,
V151, and I168), as seen by X-ray crystallography (Figure 1), are heavily line-broadened in
our NMR data (Figure 6) except for F146 that shows large chemical shift changes. These
observations further consolidate the hypothesis that photo-isomerization in rsFolder leads to a
polymorphic and highly dynamic chromophore environment with multiple sub-states
(conformations) of comparable free energy that interconvert on the micro-to-millisecond time
scale. Most likely, the structural fluctuations of the chromophore and surrounding side chains
also effects the backbone regions to which they are attached, thus explaining the observed

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

amide 1H line broadening and increased solvent exchange rates. These data are fully in line
with the notion of a fully nonfluorescent dark state unable to undergo radiative de-excitation
upon photon absorption. Similar findings on changes in backbone dynamics upon photoswitching have previously been reported for the anthozoan-derived RSFP Dronpa (14).
So far, the chromophore connecting helical elements, H2 and H3, have found only little
attention in the field of GFP engineering. Concerning the helical region H3, we know that
L70 is an important residue for the photo-switching properties of rsEGFP2 (24) and rsFolder
(26), while S72 (S73 in rsFolder) has been suggested as one of the ‘hopping’ points of protons
when entering from the solvent onto their way to the chromophore (39). In our NMR data, the
H3 region of rsFolder shows increased conformational dynamics in the “off” state, as
evidenced by line broadening (C71, F72, S73) and faster H/D exchange (L70, C71). It has
also been reported recently using time-resolved serial crystallography at an XFEL that during
photo-switching in rsEGFP2 an intermediate state becomes populated, in which the
chromophore is twisted, and helix H2 is moved downward along the β-barrel axis (8). Here,
we have shown that water exchange for several amide hydrogens (V62, T63, and T64) in H2
is increased by up to 2 orders of magnitude. We may therefore speculate that conformations
similar to those seen in the excited state may be also transiently occupied under equilibrium
conditions at ambient temperature, possibly involved in the thermally induced relaxation
mechanism of rsFolder from the “off” state to the “on” state.

Conclusions
In this work, we have used multidimensional liquid-state NMR spectroscopy coupled to
in-situ sample illumination as a complementary high-resolution tool to study light-induced
changes in the conformational dynamics of the photo-transformable fluorescent protein
rsFolder. Our results add a dynamic dimension to the static view provided by X-ray
crystallographic protein structures. In particular, we identified dynamic hotspots in the
chromophore environment and the β-barrel structure that may suggest future mutation sites to
be probed by e.g. saturation mutagenesis in order to alter the photophysical properties of
RSFPs. Furthermore, NMR spectroscopy provides a unique tool to investigate the influence of
environmental conditions on the conformational dynamics of PTFPs, and correlate them with
their photophysical and photochemical properties. Therefore, including NMR spectroscopy
into the toolbox used for rational fluorescent protein engineering will provide new

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

opportunities for further improving advanced fluorescent markers for a wide range of
microscopy and biotechnological applications.

Author Contributions
DB and BB conceived and directed the research; IA and KG expressed the protein and
prepared the samples; NC and BB performed the NMR experiments and analyzed the data;
VA and MB contributed plasmids, and helped with the experimental setup; NC, DB and BB
wrote the paper. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the
manuscript.

Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Paul Schanda for many stimulating discussions. Financial support from the
CNRS (Défis Instrumentation 2018) is acknowledged. This work used the NMR and isotope
labeling platforms of the Grenoble Instruct-ERIC center (ISBG; UMS 3518 CNRS-CEA-UJFEMBL) within the Grenoble Partnership for Structural Biology (PSB). Platform access was
supported by FRISBI (ANR-10-INBS-05-02) and GRAL, a project of the University
Grenoble Alpes graduate school (Ecoles Universitaires de Recherche) CBH-EUR-GS (ANR17-EURE-0003). IBS acknowledges integration into the Interdisciplinary Research Institute
of Grenoble (IRIG, CEA).

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Tables

Y67

ON STATE

OFF STATE

131.1
137.9 (6.79)
121.2
138.2 (8.34)
141.3 (6.54)
125.5 (6.48)
124.6 (5.84)
179.2

134.4
145.5 (7.05)
125.6
n.d.*
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.
n.d.

NMR SHIFTS
(PPM)

CA
CB (HB)
CG
CD1 (HD1)
CD2 (HD2)
CE1 (HE1)
CE2 (HE2)
CZ
* not detected

Table 1. Chromophore 1H and 13C chemical shifts

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

References
1.

Schermelleh, L., A. Ferrand, T. Huser, C. Eggeling, M. Sauer, O. Biehlmaier, and
G.P.C. Drummen. 2019. Super-resolution microscopy demystified. Nat. Cell Biol. 21:
72–84.

2.

Adam, V., H. Mizuno, A. Grichine, J. Hotta, Y. Yamagata, B. Moeyaert, G.U.
Nienhaus, A. Miyawaki, D. Bourgeois, and J. Hofkens. 2010. Data storage based on
photochromic and photoconvertible fluorescent proteins. J. Biotechnol. 149: 289–298.

3.

Betzig, E., G.H. Patterson, R. Sougrat, O.W. Lindwasser, S. Olenych, J.S. Bonifacino,
M.W. Davidson, J. Lippincott-Schwartz, and H.F. Hess. 2006. Imaging Intracellular
Fluorescent Proteins at Nanometer Resolution. Science. 313: 1642–1646.

4.

Hess, S.T., T.P.K. Girirajan, and M.D. Mason. 2006. Ultra-High Resolution Imaging
by Fluorescence Photoactivation Localization Microscopy. Biophys. J. 91: 4258–4272.

5.

Endesfelder, U., S. Malkusch, B. Flottmann, J. Mondry, P. Liguzinski, P.J. Verveer,
and M. Heilemann. 2011. Chemically Induced Photoswitching of Fluorescent Probes—
A General Concept for Super-Resolution Microscopy. Molecules. 16: 3106–3118.

6.

Adam, V., P. Carpentier, S. Violot, C. Darnault, G.U. Nienhaus, and D. Bourgeois.
2009. Structural Basis of X-ray-Induced Transient Photobleaching in a
Photoactivatable Green Fluorescent Protein. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131: 18063–18065.

7.

De Zitter, E., D. Thédié, V. Mönkemöller, S. Hugelier, J. Beaudouin, V. Adam, M.
Byrdin, L. Van Meervelt, P. Dedecker, and D. Bourgeois. 2019. Mechanistsic
investigation of mEos4b reveals a strategy to reduce track interruption in sptPALM.
Nat. Methods. : in press.

8.

Coquelle, N., M. Sliwa, J. Woodhouse, G. Schirò, V. Adam, A. Aquila, T.R.M.
Barends, S. Boutet, M. Byrdin, S. Carbajo, E. De Mora, R.B. Doak, M. Feliks, F.
Fieschi, L. Foucar, V. Guillon, M. Hilpert, M.S. Hunter, S. Jakobs, J.E. Koglin, G.
Kovacsova, T.J. Lane, B. Lévy, M. Liang, K. Nass, J. Ridard, J.S. Robinson, C.M.
Roome, C. Ruckebusch, M. Seaberg, M. Thepaut, M. Cammarata, I. Demachy, M.
Field, R.L. Shoeman, D. Bourgeois, J. Colletier, I. Schlichting, and M. Weik. 2017.
Chromophore twisting in the excited state of a photoswitchable fl uorescent protein

29

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

captured by time-resolved serial femtosecond crystallography. Nat. Chem. 10: 31–37.
9.

Duan, C., V. Adam, M. Byrdin, and D. Bourgeois. 2014. Structural Basis of
Photoswitching in Fluorescent Proteins. In: Sidney Cambridge, editor. Photoswitching
Proteins: Methods and Protocols, Methods in Molecular Biology. New York: . pp. 177–
202.

10.

Avilov, S., R. Berardozzi, M.S. Gunewardene, V. Adam, S.T. Hess, and D. Bourgeois.
2014. In cellulo Evaluation of Phototransformation Quantum Yields in Fluorescent
Proteins Used As Markers for Single-Molecule Localization Microscopy. PLoS One. 9:
e98362.

11.

Cloin, B.M.C., E. De Zitter, D. Salas, V. Gielen, G.E. Folkers, and M. Mikhaylova.
2017. Efficient switching of mCherry fluorescence using chemical caging. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 114: 7013–7018.

12.

Dedecker, P., and S. Duwe. 2019. Optimizing the fluorescent protein toolbox and its
use. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 58: 183–191.

13.

Kao, Y., X. Zhu, and W. Min. 2011. Protein-flexibility mediated coupling between
photoswitching kinetics and surrounding viscosity of a photochromic fluorescent
protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109: 3220–3225.

14.

Mizuno, H., T.K. Mal, M. Wälchli, A. Kikuchi, T. Fukano, R. Ando, J. Jeyakanthan, J.
Taka, Y. Shiro, M. Ikura, and A. Miyawaki. 2008. Light-dependent regulation of
structural flexibility in a photochromic fluorescent protein. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S.
A. 105: 9227–32.

15.

Mizuno, H., T.K. Mal, M. Wälchli, T. Fukano, M. Ikura, and A. Miyawaki. 2010.
Molecular basis of photochromism of a fluorescent protein revealed by direct 13C
detection under laser illumination. J. Biomol. NMR. 48: 237–246.

16.

Seifert, M.H.J., J. Georgescu, D. Ksiazek, P. Smialowski, T. Rehm, B. Steipe, and T.A.
Holak. 2003. Backbone Dynamics of Green Fluorescent Protein and the Effect of
Histidine 148. Biochemistry. 42: 2500–2512.

17.

Seifert, M.H.J., D. Ksiazek, M.K. Azim, P. Smialowski, N. Budisa, and T.A. Holak.

30

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

2002. Slow Exchange in the Chromophore of a Green Fluorescent Protein Variant. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 124: 7932–7942.
18.

Oltrogge, L.M., Q. Wang, and S.G. Boxer. 2014. Ground-State Proton Transfer
Kinetics in Green Fluorescent Protein. Biochemistry. 53: 5947–5957.

19.

Grotjohann, T., I. Testa, M. Leutenegger, H. Bock, N.T. Urban, F. Lavoie-Cardinal, K.I.
Willig, C. Eggeling, S. Jakobs, and S.W. Hell. 2011. Diffraction-unlimited all-optical
imaging and writing with a photochromic GFP. Nature. 478: 204–208.

20.

Rego, E.H., L. Shao, J.J. Macklin, L. Winoto, G.A. Johansson, and N. Kamps-Hughes.
2012. Nonlinear structured-illumination microscopy with a photoswitchable protein
reveals cellular structures at 50-nm resolution. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109: E135–E143.

21.

Dedecker, P., G.C.H. Mo, T. Dertinger, and J. Zhang. 2012. Widely accessible method
for superresolution fl uorescence imaging of living systems. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 109:
10909–10914.

22.

Marriott, G., S. Mao, T. Sakata, J. Ran, D.K. Jackson, C. Petchprayoon, T.J. Gomez, E.
Warp, O. Tulyathan, H.L. Aaron, E.Y. Isacoff, and Y. Yan. 2008. Optical lock-in
detection imaging microscopy for contrast-enhanced imaging in living cells. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. 105: 17789–17794.

23.

Querard, J., T. Markus, M. Plamont, C. Gauron, P. Wang, A. Espagne, M. Volovitch, S.
Vriz, V. Croquette, A. Gautier, T. Le Saux, and L. Jullien. 2015. Photoswitching
Kinetics and Phase-Sensitive Detection Add Discriminative Dimensions for Selective
Fluorescence Imaging. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 54: 2633–2637.

24.

Grotjohann, T., I. Testa, M. Reuss, T. Brakemann, C. Eggeling, S.W. Hell, and S.
Jakobs. 2012. rsEGFP2 enables fast RESOLFT nanoscopy of living cells. Elife. 1:
e00248.

25.

Tran, T., T.C. Terwilliger, G.S. Waldo, and J. Pe. 2006. Engineering and
characterization of a superfolder green fluorescent protein. Nat. Biotechnol. 24: 79–88.

26.

El Khatib, M., A. Martins, D. Bourgeois, J.-P. Colletier, and V. Adam. 2016. Rational
design of ultrastable and reversibly photoswitchable fluorescent proteins for super-

31

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

resolution imaging of the bacterial periplasm. Sci. Rep. 6: 18459.
27.

Favier, A., and B. Brutscher. 2019. NMRlib: user-friendly pulse sequence tools for
Bruker NMR spectrometers. J. Biomol. NMR. 73: 199–211.

28.

Vranken, W.F., W. Boucher, T.J. Stevens, R.H. Fogh, A. Pajon, M. Llinas, E.L. Ulrich,
J.L. Markley, J. Ionides, and E.D. Laue. 2005. The CCPN data model for NMR
spectroscopy: Development of a software pipeline. Proteins Struct. Funct. Genet. 59:
687–696.

29.

Favier, A., and B. Brutscher. 2011. Recovering lost magnetization: polarization
enhancement in biomolecular NMR. J. Biomol. NMR. 49: 9–15.

30.

Solyom, Z., M. Schwarten, L. Geist, R. Konrat, D. Willbold, and B. Brutscher. 2013.
BEST-TROSY experiments for time-efficient sequential resonance assignment of large
disordered proteins. J. Biomol. NMR. 55: 311–21.

31.

Christou, N.E., and B. Brutscher. 2018. BEST and SOFAST experiments for resonance
assignment of histidine and tyrosine side chains in 13C/15N labeled proteins. J. Biomol.
NMR. 72: 115–124.

32.

Schanda, P., E. Kupce, and B. Brutscher. 2005. SOFAST-HMQC experiments for
recording two-dimensional heteronuclear correlation spectra of proteins within a few
seconds. J. Biomol. NMR. 33: 199–211.

33.

Van Melckebeke, H., J.-P. Simorre, and B. Brutscher. 2004. Amino acid-type edited
NMR experiments for methyl-methyl distance measurement in 13C-labeled proteins. J.
Am. Chem. Soc. 126.

34.

Fushman, D., R. Weisemann, H. Thüring, and H. Rüterjans. 1994. Backbone dynamics
of ribonuclease T1 and its complex with 2’ GMP studied by two-dimensional
heteronuclear NMR spectroscopy. J. Biomol. NMR. 4: 61–78.

35.

Pouwels, P.J., and R. Kaptein. 1993. Diagonal peak suppression in the SCOTCH
experiment, a 2D technique for studying photochemical reactions. J. Magn. Reson. A.
101: 337–341.

36.

Shen, Y., and A. Bax. 2013. Protein backbone and sidechain torsion angles predicted

32

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

from NMR chemical shifts using artificial neural networks. J. Biomol. NMR. 56: 227–
241.
37.

Arpino, J.A.J., P.J. Rizkallah, and D.D. Jones. 2012. Crystal Structure of Enhanced
Green Fluorescent Protein to 1.35 A Resolution Reveals Alternative Conformations for
Glu222. PLoS One. 7: e47132.

38.

Lelimousin, M., M. Noirclerc-Savoye, C. Lazareno-Saez, B. Paetzold, S. Le Vot, R.
Chazal, P. Macheboeuf, M.J. Field, D. Bourgeois, and A. Royant. 2009. Intrinsic
Dynamics in ECFP and Cerulean Control Fluorescence Quantum Yield. Biochemistry.
48: 10038–10046.

39.

Shinobu, A., and N. Agmon. 2015. The Hole in the Barrel : Water Exchange at the GFP
Chromophore. J. Phys. Chem. 8: 3464–3478.

40.

Dempsey, C.E. 2001. Hydrogen exchange in peptides and proteins using NMR
spectroscopy. Prog. Nucl. Magn. Reson. Spectrosc. 39: 135–170.

41.

Wachter, R.M., M. Elsliger, K. Kallio, G.T. Hanson, and S.J. Remington. 1998.
Structural basis of spectral shifts in the yellow-emission variants of green fluorescent
protein. Structure. 6: 1267–1277.

42.

Morozov, D., and G. Groenhof. 2016. Photochromic Proteins Hydrogen Bond
Fluctuations Control Photochromism in a Reversibly Photo-Switchable Fluorescent
Protein. Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 1: 586–588.

43.

Dios, A.C. De, J.G. Pearson, and E. Oldfield. 1993. Secondary and Tertiary Structural
Effects on Protein NMR Chemical Shifts : An ab Initio Approach. Science. 260: 1491–
1496.

44.

Duwe, S., E. De Zitter, V. Gielen, B. Moeyaert, W. Vandenberg, T. Grotjohann, K.
Clays, S. Jakobs, L. Van Meervelt, and P. Dedecker. 2015. Expression-Enhanced
Fluorescent Proteins Based on Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein for Superresolution Microscopy. ACS Nano. 9: 9528–9541.

45.

Andresen, M., A.C. Stiel, S. Trowitzsch, G. Weber, C. Eggeling, M.C. Wahl, S.W. Hell,
and S. Jakobs. 2007. Structural basis for reversible photoswitching in Dronpa. Proc.

33

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/692087; this version posted July 3, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Natl. Acad. Sci. 104: 13005–13009.

34

