bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Cell morphology and nucleoid dynamics in dividing D.
radiodurans
Kevin Floc’h1,4, Françoise Lacroix1,4, Pascale Servant2, Yung-Sing Wong3, JeanPhilippe Kleman1, Dominique Bourgeois1, Joanna Timmins1*
1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CEA, CNRS, IBS, F-38000 Grenoble, France.

2

Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell (I2BC), CEA, CNRS, Univ. Paris-Sud, Université

Paris-Saclay, Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
3

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, DPM, 38000 Grenoble, France.

4

These authors contributed equally.

* Correspondance: Joanna.timmins@ibs.fr

Abstract
Our knowledge of bacterial nucleoids originates mostly from studies of rod- or crescent-shaped
bacteria. Here, we reveal that Deinococcus radiodurans, a relatively large, spherical bacterium,
possessing a multipartite genome, and well-known for its radioresistance, constitutes a valuable
system for the study of nucleoids in cocci. Using advanced microscopy, we show that as D.
radiodurans progresses through its cell cycle, it undergoes coordinated morphological changes at
both the cellular and nucleoid level. D. radiodurans nucleoids were found to be highly condensed,
but also surprisingly dynamic, adopting multiple distinct configurations and presenting a novel
chromosomal arrangement in which oriC loci are radially distributed around clustered ter sites
maintained at the centre of cells. Single-molecule and ensemble studies of the abundant histone-like
HU protein suggest that its loose binding to DNA may contribute to this remarkable plasticity. These
findings clearly demonstrate that nucleoid organization is complex and tightly coupled to cell cycle
progression.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Introduction
In all organisms, genomic DNA is compacted several orders of magnitude and yet must
remain accessible for essential DNA-related processes including DNA replication, repair and
transcription. In bacteria, packaging of genomic DNA is achieved by several mechanisms, including
1

DNA supercoiling

and DNA compaction by nucleoid-associated proteins (NAPs), such as HU

2–4

.

However, recent studies now indicate that additional factors, such as molecular crowding and
depletion forces, also play important roles in determining the volume of the cell occupied by the
nucleoid 5–7, and suggest that cell shape and size may critically influence nucleoid organization 7,8.
So far, a vast majority of the studies of bacterial nucleoids have focused on three model
bacteria, E. coli, B. subtilis and C. crescentus, all of which are either rod- or crescent-shaped bacteria.
Recent developments in single-molecule and genome-wide analytical techniques have started to
shed light on how these model bacteria organize, compact and segregate their chromosomes, three
processes that are intimately connected. Genetic, microscopy and chromosome conformation
capture studies have revealed that nucleoids are organized into micro- and macrodomains 9, the
origins of which are still unclear (reviewed in
arrangement

10

and have been shown to adopt an overall helical

11–13

, which is distributed along the longitudinal axis filling a large fraction of the cell

volume (~70% in E. coli). Mapping of specific chromosome loci such as the origin (oriC) or the
termination sites (ter) have also revealed that chromosomes in model bacteria can be seen to adopt
two stereotypical configurations. Under certain conditions, they may arrange longitudinally, along an
ori-ter axis with the oriC and ter regions located at opposite poles of the cell, or transversally in
which both the oriC and ter are localized at mid-cell and the left and right arms are located on either
sides

2,13–15

.

Although in all bacteria irrespective of their shapes, chromosome organization and
segregation are tightly coupled to the division process, in cocci, the directionality of chromosome
segregation has additionally been proposed to play a key role in positioning the division site 16. The
two most studied cocci are the ovoid Streptococcus pneumoniae and the spherical Staphylococcus
aureus, two major human pathogens. So far, however, the small size of these cocci has largely
restricted the study of nucleoid rearrangements and concomitant morphological changes occurring
during their cell cycle. In contrast, Deinococcus radiodurans is a non-pathogenic, relatively large (~2
µm in diameter) coccus, displaying an outstanding resistance to DNA-damaging agents including
ionizing radiation, UV light and desiccation 17–19. Several factors have been proposed to contribute to
this outstanding phenotype: (i) a highly efficient and redundant DNA repair machinery, (ii) the
presence of numerous antioxidant metabolites 18,20–22 that contributes to an increased protection of
2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

the proteome, and (iii) the unusual properties of its genome. D. radiodurans has indeed been shown
to possess a complex, multipartite genome composed of four replicons each of which are present in
multiple copies ranging from 4 to 10 copies, depending on its growth phase
radiodurans’ genome has been reported to be more condensed

26

23–25

. Moreover, D.

than that of radio-sensitive

bacteria, such as E. coli, and to adopt an unusual ring-like structure 27,28. These unusual features have
been suggested to facilitate genome maintenance and repair 29,30.
Using both spinning-disk time-lapse microscopy and super-resolution imaging, we have
performed a detailed analysis of the morphological changes that occur at the cellular and nucleoid
level as D. radiodurans grows and divides in alternating perpendicular planes. These data reveal that
D. radiodurans nucleoids are indeed highly condensed, while remaining surprisingly dynamic,
adopting multiple distinct configurations as the bacterium progresses through its cell cycle. Studies of
the dynamics of the highly abundant histone-like HU protein, which is the major NAP that coats the
genomic DNA in D. radiodurans 31 reveal that it only associates loosely with DNA, thereby facilitating
the structural rearrangements of the nucleoid. Finally, we followed the choreography of the oriC and
ter loci of chromosome 1 during the various stages of the cell cycle and show that they exhibit very
different distributions within the cell with the oriC loci being radially distributed around the centrally
located ter sites. Taken together, these findings demonstrate that the properties of D. radiodurans
make it particularly well suited for the study of nucleoid organization in cocci, and provide new,
compelling evidence indicating that bacterial nucleoids are complex and dynamic entities that are
tightly coupled to cell shape, cell cycle progression and septal growth.

Results
Morphological changes occurring during the growth of D. radiodurans
To follow the morphological changes occurring during the growth of D. radiodurans, cells
were labelled with the membrane dye Nile Red and deposited on an agarose pad for either timelapse imaging on a spinning-disk confocal microscope or super-resolution imaging using Point
Accumulation for Imaging in Nanoscale Topography (PAINT) microscopy (see Methods and Figure S1
for a comparison of the two imaging systems). All cell measurements presented below were
extracted from super-resolution images (Figure 1A and Figure S2), while the order and duration of
the various stages of the cell cycle were derived from spinning-disk microscopy images and videos.
Exponentially growing D. radiodurans cells cultured in rich medium form diads

32

that

transiently form tetrads before the start of a new cell cycle (Figure 1B). D. radiodurans cells divide
3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

sequentially in two perpendicular planes

33,34

. Starting from an elliptical and largely symmetric diad

(Phase 1), the cells initiate their cell cycle by a phase of cell growth (Phase 2) leading to a slight
invagination at the junctions between the central septum and the cell periphery (Figure 1B and
Figure S2 and S3). This phase ends with the appearance of bright foci corresponding to the start of
the growth of the new septa (Phase 3). These foci appear in the centre of the central septum and in
the middle of the opposite peripheral cell wall. We observed that one foci may appear before the
other in a given phase 3 cell and septal growth in the two cells forming the diad were frequently seen
to be asynchronous (eg. cells with asterisk in Figure 1A). Phase 4 corresponds to cells in which the
growth of the new septa is partial and in Phase 5, the newly formed septum is about to close. Finally,
in Phase 6 septal growth is complete and tetrads are formed (Figure 1B). As the cells progress
through Phases 3 to 6, the invagination at the diad junction becomes more pronounced and the
length of the central septum progressively decreases (Figure S3) until disappearing completely as the
tetrads fall apart to form two diads (Figure 1B and C). In stationary phase cells, the tetrads no longer
separate into diads and the number of Phase 6 cells increases markedly (Figure S4). Moreover, a
substantial fraction of these tetrads engages in a new division cycle, but cell cycle progression is very
slow and only a small number of octads are seen (Figure S4).
Various cell parameters were extracted from our images (Figure S2 and S3) and were used to
determine the average shape, size and volume of cells at each phase of the cell cycle (Figure 1C and
D). D. radiodurans cells were found to grow linearly throughout their cell cycle (Figure S5), as seen by
the progressive increase in cell volume starting from a mean volume of 1.87 ± 0.18 µm3 in Phase 1
until a volume of 3.60 ± 0.34 µm3 in Phase 5 just before cytokinesis (Figure 1D). The change in cell
volume was also accompanied by a change in ellipticity of the cells as they progress through the cell
cycle (Figure S3). Starting from hemispheres in Phase 1, individual cells become quasi ellipsoids by
the end of Phase 5. In contrast, in stationary phase, cell growth arrests and the mean volume of cells
in tetrads decreases to 1.65 ± 0.34 µm3 (Figure S4).

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

A

C

B

E

D

Figure 1: Morphological changes occurring during the growth of D. radiodurans. (A) PAINT imaging
of live D. radiodurans cells stained with the membrane dye Nile Red. Numbers inside each cell
correspond to their growth phase shown schematically in (B). Diads marked with an asterisk are
composed of two asynchronized cells. Scale bar: 2 µm. (B) Schematic representation of the different
phases of the D. radiodurans cell cycle in exponentially growing bacteria. (C) On-scale representation
of the average cell sizes and morphologies at the different phases of the cell cycle colored as in (B).
Phase 6 cells are very similar to Phase 1 cells. (D) Changes in cell volume during the cell cycle (N=185
cells, N>27 for each phase). Data are represented as mean ± SD. Individual values are shown as dots.
Cell volumes were calculated by measuring the cell parameters on PAINT images of exponentially
growing wild-type D. radiodurans stained with Nile Red. The mean cell volume progressively
increases from a volume of 1.87 ± 0.23 µm3 in Phase 1 to a volume of 3.60 ± 0.40 µm3 in Phase 5 just
before cytokinesis. (***: P<0.001, ****: P<0.0001, ns: not significant). (E) Duration of each growth
phase in exponentially growing D. radiodurans cells. Interior annulus: distribution of exponentially
growing cells in the different phases of the cell cycle when observed at a single time point (N=653).
Exterior annulus: duration of phases measured on exponentially growing cells observed by time-lapse
imaging (N=44). Data were collected from 2 independent experiments.

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

To assess the duration of each growth phase in exponential cells, two approaches were used.
Durations were either deduced from the distribution of phases in the population of exponentially
growing cells when deposited on an agarose pad and directly observed under the microscope (the
fraction of cells in each phase reflects the relative duration of these phases, Figure 1E interior
annulus), or by time-lapse imaging of cells (Figure 1E exterior annulus and Supplementary Movie S1).
Very similar results were obtained for the two approaches and the total cell cycle duration measured
in our time-lapse experiments (134 ± 11 min) was close to the doubling time of 130.1 min derived
from our growth curves performed on D. radiodurans cells grown in liquid medium in a shaking
incubator (Figure S5). Cells spend 91% of their time as diads and 9% as tetrads, and septal growth
(Phases 3, 4 and 5) occurs during more than half of the cell cycle. Phases 1, 5 and 6 are the shortest,
lasting between 11 and 15 min, while Phases 2, 3 and 4 are longer and last 25 to 35 min (Figure 1E).

Cell growth occurs in both peripheral and septal cell walls
In bacteria, cell growth is associated with expansion of the cell wall and peptidoglycan (PG)
synthesis and remodelling. We thus investigated whether growth of the cell wall occurs (i) in the
septal regions only, (ii) throughout the septal and peripheral cell walls, or (iii) only in the peripheral
cell walls of D. radiodurans (Figure 2A). For this, cells were pulse labelled with two dyes: BODIPY-FL 3amino-D-alanine (BADA), a green dye that is stably incorporated into the pentapeptide chain during
PG synthesis in the peripheral cell walls only and does not reorganize during the cell cycle, and Nile
Red that diffuses into lipid membranes and thus labels the whole cell wall, including newly
synthesized septa during the cell cycle. The samples were then washed to remove any unbound dye
prior to imaging. The use of two lasers prevented D. radiodurans from growing under the
microscope, so cells were observed shortly after the labelling procedure (T=0) and then again after a
complete cell cycle (T=130 min). The mode of cell wall growth could be deduced from such images by
comparing the lengths of green- and red only-labelled cell walls per cell (Figure 2A) at T=0 with that
observed after a complete cell cycle (T=130 min). If growth is restricted to the septal region (model i),
which is not labelled with the BADA dye at T=0, the length of the green-labelled cell wall should
remain constant after one cell cycle; if growth occurs throughout all cell walls (model ii), the lengths
of both the green- and red-labelled cell walls should increase, and if growth is restricted to the outer
periphery of the cells (model iii), then the red only-labelled cell wall should remain constant (Figure
2A). For ease of analysis, we performed our measurements on Phase 1 cells that displayed complete
BADA (green) labelling of their peripheral cell wall, but only Nile Red staining of their central septum
at T=0 (Figure 2B) and could thus be compared to our proposed models presented in Figure 2A. After
a complete cell cycle, Phase 1 cells clearly displayed an altered labelling pattern (Figure 2B and 2C).
6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Measurements revealed that the lengths of both green- and red-labelled regions had significantly
increased (Figure 2D), thus indicating that cell wall growth occurs throughout the entire cell surface
of D. radiodurans cells including septal regions (Figure 2A), as reported for S. aureus (Monteiro et al,
2015).

A

B

D

C

Figure 2: Cell growth occurs in both peripheral and septal cell walls. (A) Schematic representation of
three possible models of cell wall growth for a cell initially in Phase 1 and undergoing a complete cell
cycle. At T=0 min, only the peripheral cell wall of the mother cell is stably labelled with BADA,
represented in green; the whole cell wall (peripheral and septal) is labelled with Nile Red,
represented in red. Nile Red signal suffers from a poorer signal/noise ratio than BADA, thus the Nile
Red intensity was not adjusted to the level of BADA and the superposition of both colors does not
appear yellow. Considering only the periphery of the new diad after a complete cell cycle (T=130
min), if cell wall growth occurred (i) in the septal regions only, the length of the BADA labelled cell
7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

wall would remain the same while the length of the cell wall labelled only with Nile Red would
increase; (ii) throughout the bacterial cell walls, both the length of the BADA labelled cell wall and
the cell wall labelled only with Nile Red would increase; (iii) only in peripheral cell walls, the length of
the BADA labelled cell wall would increase while the length of the cell wall labelled only with Nile Red
would remain the same. At T=130 min, measurements were made on the peripheral cell walls only,
which were originally labelled at T=0. The newly grown septal regions at T=130 min (grey in panel A,
but stained with Nile Red in panel C) were not taken into account in these analyses. (B)-(C) Examples
of D. radiodurans cells at T=0 (B) and T=130 min (C). Cells marked with an asterisk are examples of
cells in Phase 1 that were used for the perimeter measurements and cell wall growth analyses (D).
Scale bar: 2 µm. (D) Mean lengths of the green- and red only-labelled cell walls at T=0 min (N=53)
and T=130 min (N=40) for Phase 1 cells. Both significantly increase after a complete cell cycle. Data
are represented as mean ± SD. Individual values are shown as dots. (****: P<0.0001). Data were
collected from 3 independent experiments.
Next, we evaluated the position and angle of the newly growing septa relative to the central
septum in exponentially growing cells. In all cells, septal growth was found to occur precisely in the
middle (50% ± 1.5%) at a 90° ± 7° angle to the central septum (Figure S6). Early electron micrographs
of D. radiodurans cells suggested that septal closure occurs through a closing door mechanism and
not as a diaphragm 33. Three-dimensional imaging of Nile Red stained cells confirmed this (Figure S6).
The closing septum grows from both sides of the cells leaving a gap that stretches across the whole
cell.

Nucleoid organization during the cell cycle
To follow the three-dimensional morphology of D. radiodurans nucleoids as a function of
their cell cycle in exponentially growing and stationary phase bacteria, we used spinning-disk
confocal microscopy on live cells. The nucleoids were visualized either by using a genetically modified
strain of D. radiodurans in which the gene encoding the highly abundant HU protein was
endogenously fused to mCherry (Table 1), or by staining the DNA with the Syto9 dye (Figure 3). The
high extent of colocalization observed when double staining D. radiodurans nucleoids with both HUmCherry and Syto9 (Figure S7) confirmed that HU largely coats the genomic DNA. Importantly, the
same nucleoid structures (described below), including the previously described ring-like or toroid
structure, were observed irrespective of the mode of labelling, and all four replicons of D.
radiodurans assembled into a single nucleoid entity. When using Syto9, cell membranes could
additionally be stained with Nile Red in order to distinguish the different phases of the cell cycle
(Figure 3).
Nucleoid conformations were assessed in Syto9 and Nile Red stained wild-type D.
radiodurans cells and representative shapes of nucleoids were retrieved for each phase of the cell
cycle (Figure 3). In addition, time-lapse three-dimensional imaging of either Syto9 stained nucleoids
8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(Movie S2) or HU-mCherry expressing D. radiodurans (Movie S3) was performed during a complete
cell cycle to determine the chronological order in which these different conformations appeared.
These videos clearly highlight the dynamic nature of the nucleoids. In Phases 1 and 2, a majority of
nucleoids (respectively 52% and 42%) adopted toroidal shapes with an average diameter of 0.95 ±
0.10 µm (Figure S2). Additionally, in Phase 1, a substantial fraction (28%) of nucleoids were found to
form condensed, undefined structures, which were seen to be short-lived (minutes) in our timelapses and rapidly became toroids, which appeared to be more stable and long-lasting. Due to the
reduced resolution of the spinning-disk images in the Z axis, we cannot rule out that these undefined
structures may correspond to top views of toroids with an interior ring size below the resolution limit
of the images. In Phase 2, 16% of nucleoids presented a square configuration with bright vertices,
and a significant fraction (21%) also adopted a more open configuration (open ring or crescent). In
Phase 3, these two nucleoid configurations were found to be the most prevalent (respectively 25 and
30%) and the crescent-shaped nucleoids were positioned with their convex sides facing the central
septum of the diad (Figure 3A). The fraction of toroidal-shaped nucleoids decreased significantly in
Phase 3 and instead they were seen to open up to form crescents. In some cases, an intermediary
step was observed in which the toroids became squares with 3 or 4 of their vertices exhibiting strong
fluorescent foci before opening up to adopt a crescent shape. In Phase 4 cells, most of these
configurations disappeared and instead a large proportion of nucleoids were now elongated rods
(54%) with an average length of 1.48 ± 0.25 µm and an apparent full width at half maximum of 0.52 ±
0.08 µm (Figure S2). More complex branched structures (35%) were also observed in Phase 4.
Remarkably, these structures were all positioned with their long axis perpendicular to the future
division axis (Figure 3A). Time-lapse imaging revealed that these elongated structures resulted from
the opening and stretching of the crescent-shaped nucleoids seen in Phase 3. In Phase 5 cells, in
which the formation of the newly dividing septa was nearly complete, nucleoids appeared mostly as
branched, elongated structures (35%), as seen in Phase 4, or as double rings connected by a thin
thread (42%), in which each ring was positioned in one of the two future daughter cells. A clear
constriction was observed around the center of these nucleoids resulting from the two closing septal
segments (Figure 3A). Time-lapse imaging revealed that the rod-like structures predominantly found
in Phase 4 progressively formed more complex, branched structures that eventually formed double
crescents or rings connected by short stretches of DNA. Finally, in Phase 6 cells, chromosome
segregation was complete and the newly formed nucleoids presented similar configurations as those
seen in Phase 1 cells, i.e. condensed, undefined structures (45%) or toroids (45%). These findings are
summarized in a simulated movie that illustrates the principal morphological changes of the
nucleoids observed in exponentially growing D. radiodurans cells as they progress through their cell
9

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

cycle (Figure 3B and Movie S4). Interestingly, as observed previously when characterizing the
different phases of the cell cycle, the two cells composing a diad were not necessarily synchronized
in terms of nucleoid morphology. However, it was clear that the morphological changes at the
nucleoid level were highly coordinated with cell cycle progression and septal growth (Figure 3B).

A

B

C

Non Defined

Toroid

Square

Crescent

Rod

Branched

Double Rings

% of each structure per
phase

100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%

11

22

33

Phases

4
4

5
5

66

Figure 3: Nucleoid organization in exponentially growing D. radiodurans. (A) Array of the
representative shapes of D. radiodurans nucleoids stained with the DNA dye Syto9. Cell membranes
were stained with Nile Red. In each box, the representative shape is seen in the upper cell of the
diad. In the case of tetrads, the representative shape is the cell marked with an asterisk. Numbers in
each box represent the cell cycle phase of the upper cell. Scale: 2 µm. (B) Snapshot and link to an onscale simulated reconstitution of the changes in cell shape and nucleoid structure occurring during
the D. radiodurans cell cycle, illustrating the tight coordination of nucleoid rearrangements with
septal growth (Movie S4). Scale bar: 1 µm. (C) Distribution of the various nucleoid morphologies
observed as a function of the phases of the cell cycle (N=232 nucleoids; N>26 for each phase).

10

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Nucleoid compaction
Three-dimensional images of Syto9- and Nile Red-stained D. radiodurans were also used to
determine the volume occupied by the nucleoid in D. radiodurans as a function of its cell cycle
(Figure 4A; Methods). For comparison, the same procedure was used for analysis of E. coli cells
(Table 1 and Figure S7). Unlike the cell volume (Figure 1C), the nucleoid volume did not increase
linearly throughout the cell cycle (Figure 4A). Instead it was found to remain constant (~0.7 µm3)
during Phases 1 to 3 and then to increase in Phases 4 and 5 to reach a maximum volume of ~1.2 µm3
just before cytokinesis. The newly formed nucleoids in Phase 6 exhibited the smallest volumes (~0.6
µm3). As a result, the fraction of the cell occupied by the nucleoid varied as a function of the cell
cycle from a minimal value of 0.30 ± 0.06 observed in Phase 4 to a maximal value of 0.36 ± 0.06
detected in Phase 1 cells (Figure 4B). In comparison, the mean cell and nucleoid volumes of E. coli
cells were found to be 1.33 µm3 and 0.83 µm3 respectively, corresponding to a cell fraction occupied
by the nucleoid of 0.65 (Figure S7), in agreement with previously reported values

11

. These

quantitative measurements thus confirm that D. radiodurans possesses a highly condensed nucleoid
occupying approximately one third of the cell volume, but also reveal that its level of compaction
varies during its cell cycle. We also determined the mean volume of Syto9-stained nucleoids in D.
radiodurans expressing HU-mCherry, and found that these were slightly higher than that of wild-type
cells (Figure S7), perhaps as a consequence of steric hindrance caused by the mCherry fusion protein.
Exponentially growing D. radiodurans cells have been reported to possess four to ten copies of their
3.2 Mbp genome 25, so the DNA density in an average D. radiodurans nucleoid (~0.7 µm3) should be
in the range of 18 to 46 Mbp/µm3. In E. coli, which possesses one to two copies of a 4.6 Mbp
genome, the DNA density in its nucleoid should be between 5.5 and 11 Mbp/µm3, corresponding to a
density at least 3 times lower than that observed in D. radiodurans cells.

A

2 .0

ns
1 .5

0 .5

F r a c tio n o f c e ll v o lu m e

***

3

N u c le o id v o lu m e (µ m )

B

****

***

ns

1 .0

0 .5

***

**

0 .4

0 .3

0 .2

0 .1

ns

ns
0 .0

0 .0
1

2

3

4

5

6

1

Phases

2

3

4

Phases

11

5

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: Nucleoid compaction as a function of D. radiodurans cell cycle. (A) Changes in nucleoid
volume as cells progress through their cell cycle. Nucleoid volumes were retrieved from the threedimensional signal of Syto9-labelled nucleoids of live, exponentially growing D. radiodurans cells. The
nucleoid volume is relatively constant during the first three phases (~ 0.7 µm3) and then
progressively increases to reach a maximal volume of ~ 1.2 µm 3 in Phase 5 cells just before
cytokinesis. (B) The fraction of the cell volume occupied by the nucleoid was retrieved by dividing the
nucleoid volume of individual cells by their matched cell volume, derived from spinning-disk images
of dual labelled Syto9 and Nile Red stained cells, using the cell measurements presented in Figure S2.
The fraction of the cell occupied by the nucleoid significantly decreases during the first three phases
(from 0.35 to 0.30), and then remains around 0.30 until cytokinesis. After septal closure, the fraction
increases again to 0.34. (A)-(B) Data are represented as mean ± SD. Individual values are shown as
dots. (*: P<0.05, **: P<0.01, ***: P<0.001, ****: P<0.0001, ns: not significant, N=195, N>29 for each
phase).

Finally, Syto9- and Nile Red-stained stationary phase D. radiodurans tetrads were also
analyzed to determine the level of nucleoid compaction in such cells (Figure S4). The average fraction
of the cell occupied by the nucleoid was found to be 0.19, which is significantly lower than the
highest level of DNA compaction measured in exponentially growing Phase 4 cells (Figure 4B).

Nucleoid and HU dynamics
To further characterize D. radiodurans nucleoids in exponentially growing bacteria, we used
super-resolution photoactivated localization microscopy (PALM) to image a D. radiodurans strain in
which the most abundant NAP, HU, was fused to PAmCherry (Table 1). PALM experiments were
performed exclusively on live bacteria because fixation protocols strongly affected the nucleoid
organization (loss of diverse shapes and decondensation of the DNA). Several of the nucleoid
morphologies described above (eg. crescent- and rod-shaped nucleoids) could be seen in the
reconstructed PALM images, but most of the distinguishing features and details were lost (Figure 5A).
Although, PALM provides higher spatial resolution, acquiring a complete dataset in PALM microscopy
takes several minutes on our set-up. The loss of details in our PALM images thus most likely reflects
the dynamic nature of the nucleoids in the second to minute timescale, as confirmed by a spinningdisk microscopy time-lapse experiment in which images of HU-mCherry were acquired in live D.
radiodurans with short interval times (Movie S5). This time-lapse video reveals that even though
most of the nucleoid conformations last for several minutes (Figure 3 and Movies S2 and S3), the
nucleoids are mobile and can be seen to rotate and reorganize in the second timescale.
HU has been shown to play a major role in the compaction and organization of the nucleoid
in D. radiodurans

25,31

and to be essential for viability 35. We therefore wondered whether HU may
12

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

contribute to the remarkable plasticity of D. radiodurans nucleoids. Both single-molecule and
ensemble measurements were carried out to probe the dynamics of HU proteins in live,
exponentially growing D. radiodurans. Single-particle tracking PALM (sptPALM) experiments were
performed on the HU-PAmCherry expressing D. radiodurans strain in which the trajectories of
individual HU-PAmCherry molecules were reconstituted (Figure 5B). Cumulative probability
distribution (CPD) analysis 36 of 1000 individual tracks extracted from several datasets revealed that
only a single population of molecules could be distinguished, which displayed a confined diffusion
(with a confinement radius of ~400 nm; Figure S8) with a mean apparent diffusion coefficient of
~0.32 µm².s-1. This value, which is significantly lower than that obtained for freely diffusing
fluorescent proteins in bacteria (6-9 µm².s-1; 37), but also higher than that of immobile, DNA-binding
proteins (D*<0.2 µm².s-1 38,39), clearly indicates that HU is not tightly associated with the genomic
DNA. Ensemble measurements of HU mobility probed by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching
(FRAP) on HU-mCherry expressing D. radiodurans cells confirmed these findings and revealed that
95% of HU molecules were mobile exhibiting a half-life of 0.75 s (Figure 5C). These data are
consistent with a FRAP study of the E. coli NAP, H-NS 37 and suggest that even though HU coats the
DNA, it most likely only associates transiently with DNA, thereby allowing the nucleoid to rapidly
reorganize as the cells progress through their cell cycle.

B

Number of Tracks

A

2

Diff. coeff. = 0.325 µm /s

C
Norm. Fluo. Intensity

1.5

1µm

1.0

t-half= 0.75 s
Mobile frac: 0.95

0.5

0.0
0

1

2

3

4

Time [s]

13

5

6

7

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 5: Nucleoid and HU Dynamics in live D. radiodurans. (A) Reconstructed PALM image of HUPAmCherry expressing cells (stack of 15,000 frames with 50ms frametime and acquired with constant
1 kW/cm² 561nm laser and increasing 405nm laser power). Several of the nucleoid morphologies
illustrated in Figure 3 can be seen in this image, but without a significative improvement in the
perceived spatial resolution, due to the dynamics of nucleoids in live cells that change conformation
in the minute timescale (Movie S5). (B) Distribution of the apparent diffusion coefficients of single
tracks of HU-PAmCherry measured by single-particle tracking PALM in live, exponentially growing
HU-PAmCherry expressing D. radiodurans. Inset: Mean square deviation (MSD) plot of the HUPAmCherry tracks (Δt = 30 ms). The curve indicates that the molecules are confined with a
confinement radius of 400 nm. The mean apparent diffusion coefficient derived these 1,000 tracks is
of 0.325 µm2/s. (C) Ensemble measurements of HU-mCherry mobility probed by fluorescence
recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) on HU-mCherry expressing live D. radiodurans cells. Left:
examples of HU-mCherry labelled nucleoids used for FRAP experiments. The photobleached region is
indicated with a white box. Scale bar: 1 µm. Right: Analysis of the recovery of the fluorescence signal
of HU-mCherry after photobleaching ~50% of the fluorescence signal. These data reveal that 95% of
HU-mCherry molecules are mobile exhibiting a half-life of 0.75 s. Presented data are the mean values
± SD derived from four independent measurements.

Distribution and choreography of oriC and ter sites during the cell cycle
To follow the choreography of the oriC and ter loci during the cell cycle of exponentially
growing D. radiodurans, we used engineered D. radiodurans strains, GY15787 and GY15800, in which
a heterologous ParABS system is used to fluorescently label respectively the oriC and ter loci of
chromosome 1 (Table 1), allowing them to be detected as bright foci within the cells 25. Three colour
3D spinning-disk images were recorded on such cells in order to visualize GFP-labelled oriC or ter loci,
hydroxycoumarin-amino-D-alanine (HADA)-stained cell walls and HU-mCherry labelled nucleoids
(Figures 6A and D). When analyzing these images, we chose to restrict our analysis to the bright ParBlabelled foci that could unambiguously be discriminated from the background fluorescence. This
most likely explains why a reduced number of foci were counted per cell compared to the original
study 25.
Throughout the cell cycle, the number of ter foci in cells was systematically lower than that
of oriC foci (Figure 6A), as reported previously 25. The number of oriC foci was found to double as the
cells progress from Phase 1 to Phase 5, going from a mean number of 2.25 foci/cell to 4.44 foci/cell in
Phase 5 (Figure 6B). After septal closure, in Phase 6, the number of oriC foci was almost divided by 2,
reaching 2.38 foci/cell. This suggests that DNA replication occurs all along the cell cycle until all
copies of oriC from chromosome 1 have been duplicated. In contrast, the number of ter foci remains
much lower around 1.15 foci/cell and constant for most of the cell cycle until Phase 5 where it
increases to reach 1.5 foci/cell.
14

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

D

Figure 6: Distribution and choreography of ter and oriC loci of chromosome 1. (A) Images of D.
radiodurans strains GY15787 and GY15800 expressing HU-mCherry and a heterologous ParB fused to
GFP (green foci), with multiple copies of its cognate parS sequence inserted nearby chromosome 1
ter (left) or oriC (right) loci respectively (Table 1), and stained with the cell wall HADA dye (blue). For
clarity, the HU-mCherry signal is not included in these images. Scale bar: 2 µm. (B) Number of ter and
oriC foci detected per cell at the different phases of the cell cycle. Data are represented as mean ±
SD. (C) Weighted distribution density of ter (top) and oriC (bottom) foci at the different phases of the
cell cycle. The red cross indicates the centre of the cell. (B)-(C) ter (N=315; N>37 for each phase) or
oriC (N=368; N>36 for each phase) foci were analyzed and data were retrieved from 2 independent
experiments. (D) Examples of ter and oriC foci localization relative to the different nucleoid
conformations of D. radiodurans, expressing HU-mCherry (red) and ParB-GFP (green), and stained
with the cell wall dye HADA (blue). Scale bar: 1 µm.
15

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

We also investigated the localization and distribution of the two loci within the cells (Figure
6C). The ter foci were found to be specifically located to the central region of cells during most of the
cell cycle. It was only in Phases 1 and 2 that the ter foci were found to be slightly off-centre. As the
cells progress from Phase 1 to 3, the ter loci progressively move away from the central septum to
relocate in the centre of the growing cells. In all phases, however, a majority of ter foci were located
along the new division axis and 47% of them were still localized in this region at late stages of septal
closure in Phase 5, just before cytokinesis, indicating a very late segregation of ter. In contrast, the
oriC foci displayed a very different cellular distribution and could be seen throughout the cell
cytoplasm with only a minor fraction localized along the new division axis and in the centre of the
cells. Multiple oriC foci were thus seen to be radially distributed around a single centrally located ter
foci for most of the cell cycle. This was particularly visible in Phases 1 and 6. Interestingly, both ter
and oriC seemed to be excluded from the peripheral region of the cell bordering the cell wall.
No clear correlation could be established between foci localization and nucleoid morphology.
However, particular configurations could be seen (Figure 6D). ter foci could for example be observed
occasionally in the centre of the toroid- and square-shaped nucleoids, i.e. in regions with low DNA
density, devoid of HU-mCherry labelling. In the late stage of nucleoid segregation (Phase 5), ter foci
were also seen to localize on the thin thread connecting the partially segregated nucleoids (double
rings), close to the new division axis and the closing septum. oriC, in contrast, was often seen at the
periphery of the nucleoids, and occasionally at the outer tips of the branched nucleoids observed in
Phase 4 cells.

Discussion
In this work, we have characterized the cell cycles of exponentially and stationary growing D.
radiodurans, enabling us to define 8 distinct phases, and have followed the changes in the cell and
nucleoid morphology occurring during these processes.
We determined that exponentially growing D. radiodurans diads grow throughout their cell
cycle via remodelling of their entire cell surface (peripheral and septal cell walls) and divide in
alternate orthogonal planes. As proposed in an early study of D. radiodurans

33

, our 3D images

confirmed that growth of the dividing septum occurs through a closing door mechanism and not as a
diaphragm as has been reported for ovococci

40,41

. One side of the septum starts growing precisely

from the middle of the central septum, while the other grows from the middle of the opposite
peripheral cell wall, both at a 90° angle to the central septum. This observation is surprising and will
16

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

be the subject of future studies. Septal growth lasts for two-thirds of the cell cycle (Phases 3-6).
Asynchronization of the division process was frequently observed: (i) between two cells that form a
diad, resulting in cells of the same diad being in different phases of the cell cycle, or (ii) within a given
cell, in which one side of the closing septum started growing earlier or faster than the other side,
although overall, no difference in growth speed was observed between the two sides of the closing
septum (Figure S3). In exponentially growing D. radiodurans, once the dividing septum closes (Phase
6), the newly formed tetrads are relatively short-lived, lasting for a dozen of minutes before splitting
into two diads to initiate a new cell cycle (Phase 1). Cytokinesis results from the progressive increase
in the curvature of the central septum (and reduction in its length) until the two diads eventually
separate, creating a small gap between the two adjacent diads (see separating tetrad, bottom left in
Figure 1A). It was recently shown in S. aureus, that the splitting of the diads into single cells occurs on
the millisecond timescale driven by the turgor pressure

42,43

. In D. radiodurans, visualizing this

splitting process was more difficult, since the cells do not undergo any substantial morphological
changes upon cytokinesis. Instead the separation appears to be slower and progressive, most likely
catalyzed by the enzymatic processing of the cell wall in this region of the cell.
In every organism, nucleoid organization and cell division are intimately linked. The present
study presents the first morphological characterization of the nucleoids of a coccus bacterium. The
nucleoids of D. radiodurans were found to display a remarkable plasticity, adopting multiple, distinct
conformations as the cells progress through their cell cycle. Our single-molecule and ensemble
measurements suggest that the dynamic nature of these nucleoids may be facilitated by the loose
binding of the major D. radiodurans NAP, the histone-like protein HU, to the genomic DNA. To our
knowledge, this is the first report of such a wide diversity of nucleoid structures in bacteria. In
addition to the previously reported toroid-shape, the nucleoid was also found to adopt an elongated
branched structure that aligned parallel to the central septum. This arrangement perpendicular to
the newly growing septum provides clear evidence that nucleoid organization and chromosome
segregation are tightly coupled to the cell division process. In many model bacteria including S.
aureus, E. coli and B. subtilis, nucleoid occlusion (NO) systems, typically composed of sequence
specific DNA-binding proteins, play a central role as spatial and temporal regulators of cell division by
preventing the assembly of the divisome over the nucleoid 44. Interestingly, in D. radiodurans Phase 3
cells in which septal growth is starting, three major conformations of nucleoids can be observed:
toroids, squares and crescent-shaped nucleoids formed by the opening of the ring-like structures
prior to their elongation and alignment with the central septum in Phase 4. Changes in the cell
morphology and in particular start of septal growth, thus seem to precede the major rearrangements
of the nucleoid, which suggests that the nucleoid is not the major determinant of the division site in
17

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

D. radiodurans. Although no NO system has so far been identified in D. radiodurans, we cannot
exclude that such a system might also be at play in the regulation of cell division in this organism.
The Min system that prevents the formation of the Z-ring in aberrant locations 45, might be
the main factor ensuring that cytokinesis occurs at midcell in D. radiodurans. Many spatial features
have been proposed as key determinants of pole-to-pole oscillations of Min in E. coli, such as the
highly negative membrane curvature at the poles 46, the longest axis of confinement 47, the longest
possible distance for the diffusion of MinD 48 or the symmetry axes and scale of the cell shape 49. D.
radiodurans diads do not possess any poles per se. In Phase 1, cell ellipticity is close to 1 and cells
possess an infinite number of symmetry planes (i.e. every plane orthogonal to the central septum). It
is only when the cells start growing in Phase 2 (with a major change in the length of the major axis
and no change in minor axis length leading to a decrease in the ellipticity of the cells), that the
number of symmetry planes is reduced to two, both orthogonal to the central septum, one having its
normal vector parallel to the long axis of the cell and the other with its normal vector parallel to the
second short axis. A possible oscillation of MinCDE along the long axis of the ellipsoidal shaped cell,
parallel to the central septum, could be the basis for the precise placement and angle of growth of
the dividing septum, orthogonal to the central septum and along the short axis of the cell. In such a
scenario, the Min system would sense the geometry of the cell and start to oscillate in Phase 2.
As bacterial nucleoids fill a large fraction of the total cell volume, a common hypothesis
suggests that the cell size and shape may play a major role in chromosome positioning and sizing. It
was recently proposed that cell shape and size were ‘sensed’ indirectly by chromosomes via the
pressure exerted by depletion forces induced by cytosolic crowders

8,50

, which would promote the

compact shape and central localization of nucleoids in cells. In the case of D. radiodurans, several
studies have described its nucleoid as being highly condensed

26–30

, but this visual impression is in

part due to the relatively large size of D. radiodurans cells that have a mean volume of ~2.6 µm3. We
therefore assessed the volume occupied by the nucleoids of D. radiodurans and compared them to
that of E. coli, which had previously been reported to occupy ~70% of the cell volume

11

. Our

measurements revealed that the mean volume of D. radiodurans nucleoids is very similar to that of
E. coli (0.7 vs 0.8 µm3), but because of the larger cell volume, the fraction of the cell occupied by the
nucleoid is significantly lower in the case of D. radiodurans and was found to vary from 0.30 to 0.35
depending on the phase of the cell cycle. This fraction even decreased below 0.2 in stationary phase
cells, which are smaller and present highly condensed nucleoids. Such small cell fractions occupied by
the nucleoid suggest either that depletion forces do not play a major role in nucleoid positioning and

18

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

compaction in D. radiodurans or that D. radiodurans cells possess an unusually high concentration of
crowders.
Because D. radiodurans possesses multiple copies of its genome, compared to a single copy
in E. coli, the average DNA density in D. radiodurans nucleoids is thus significantly higher than in E.
coli, thereby confirming the impression that D. radiodurans nucleoids are particularly condensed.
Interestingly, the nucleoids were found to be most compact in Phases 4 and 5, during the final stages
of chromosome segregation. The specific positioning of the nucleoids in the center of cells and
parallel to the central septum, together with their increased levels of compaction during these late
stages of the cell cycle are reminiscent of metaphase chromosomes in eukaryotic cells that align at
midcell prior to segregation of each one of the two chromosomes into the two daughter cells.

A

B
oriC
Chr I
ter
oriC
oriC
Chr II
P1
ter
oriC ter
P2
ter

C

oriC
P1
ter
oriC
oriC
Chr I
ter

P2
ter

oriC

oriC
Chr II
ter

Phase 5

Phase 1

Figure 7: Radial arrangement and segregation of chromosome 1 in D. radiodurans. (A) D.
radiodurans possesses multiple copies (4 to 10) of four replicons (2 chromosomes: Chromosome 1,
Chr1 and chromosome 2, Chr 2, and two plasmids, P1 and P2), each of which possesses an origin of
replication (oriC) and a termination site (ter). For Chr1, the oriC and ter loci are represented
respectively in red and in green. (B)-(C) Proposed arrangement of the multiple copies of Chr1 in
Phase 1 and 5 cells. Typical nucleoid shapes observed in these two phases (Figure 3C) are shown in
pale pink. Chr1 is present in at least 4 copies in Phase 1, and this number doubles by the end of the
cell cycle (Phase 5). The number of ter foci remains constant and close to 1 for most of the cell cycle,
most likely as a result of the clustering of ter loci by an unknown mechanism in the center of the cell.
The oriC loci are radially distributed around the ter loci and are found throughout the cytoplasm with
the exception of membrane proximal regions.
Finally, we compared the number and distribution of the oriC and ter loci of chromosome 1
as a function of the cell cycle. As previously reported 25, there were significantly more oriC foci in cells
than ter sites irrespective of the stage of the cell cycle. This has been proposed to result from
differences in the duration of periods of transient cohesion of the oriC and ter loci from the various
copies of chromosome 1 after replication - this period being longer for ter - and/or a very late
replication of ter compared to oriC 25. Our cartography of the localizations of oriC and ter loci in D.
radiodurans at each phase of the cell cycle also revealed very distinct distribution patterns for the
19

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

two loci and allow us to propose a first model for nucleoid organization and choreography in a coccus
bacterium possessing a complex, multicopy genome (Figure 7). Chromosome arrangement in D.
radiodurans is neither longitudinal nor transversal, but instead radial with oriC sites distributed all
around centrally located ter sites. The ter loci were clearly retained and clustered by a yet unknown
mechanism in the central region of the cells until just before cytokinesis (Figure 7B and C). ter foci
could indeed still be seen in the small gap formed by the closing septal doors in Phase 5 cells.
Segregation of replicated ter loci occurred at a very late stage of the cell cycle (Phase 5; Figure 7C)
and the duplicated ter loci then progressively migrated to the centre of the two new sister cells. In
contrast, oriC loci localized throughout the cell, with the exclusion from membrane proximal regions,
ruling out any direct anchoring of oriC loci to the cell walls as has been observed in some bacteria 51–
53

. Further work will be needed to understand the detailed choreography of this complex genome

and how it relates to the various nucleoid structures observed in this study, but our findings suggest
that cell shape may critically influence both nucleoid organization and chromosome arrangement.
Table 1: Description of strains used in this study.
Strains

Description

Source or reference

fhuA2 lon ompT gal (λDE3) dcm ∆hsdS

Laboratory stock

GY9613

ATCC 13939, R1

Laboratory stock

GY15760

hbs::cherryΩtet

25

GY15787

hbs::cherryΩtet, locus ori::kan-parSc2Bc/pFAP246

25

E. coli
BL21 (DE3)

D. radiodurans

(Pspac-parBc2Bc::drGFP, cat)
GY15800

hbs::cherryΩtet, locus ter::kan-parSc2Bc/pFAP246

25

(Pspac-parBc2Bc::drGFP, cat)
GY17301

54

hbs::PAmcherryΩkan

Methods
Bacterial cultures
All Deinococcus radiodurans strains (wild-type, HU-mCherry, HU-PAmCherry GY17031, and oriC/ter
labelled strains GY15787 and GY15800, Table 1) were grown at 30°C with shaking in TGY2X
supplemented with the appropriate antibiotics. Escherichia coli strain BL21 (DE3) (Table 1) was grown
20

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

at 37°C with shaking in LB medium. For microscopy experiments, D. radiodurans cells were pregrown the day before and then diluted for an overnight growth until reaching exponential (OD650
~0.3-0.5) or stationary phase (OD650 >5). To establish the growth curve of wild-type D. radiodurans
cells, cultures inoculated at different cell densities were measured every 2 h and then combined to
obtain a complete growth curve. The final growth curve corresponding to the mean of three
independent experiments was fitted to an exponential growth curve (Y=Y0*exp(K*X), with Y0
corresponding to the Y value at T=0 and K the growth rate) using GraphPad Prism 6, and the doubling
time was calculated as ln2/K.
Sample preparation for microscopy
General sample preparation: Glass coverslides used for PALM/PAINT imaging of D. radiodurans were
treated in an ozone oven for at least 10 min. 1.75% low-melting agarose (Biorad) pads dissolved in
minimal medium 54 (for PALM) or TGY2X (for spinning-disk microscopy) were poured on a cover slide
inside a frame made with double-faced tape. A glass coverslip was placed on top of the agarose pad
in order to flatten the surface of the agarose while hardening. This coverslip was removed once the
agarose had solidified. For imaging, bacterial cultures were centrifuged 3 min at 3000 x g and were
resuspended in 10 µl of medium or washed in high purity PBS (GIBCO). 1 µl of this cell suspension
was deposited on the pads. The drop was spread over the surface of the pad by rotating the
coverslip. A second coverslip was placed over the agarose pad containing the sample, thereby
immobilizing the bacteria on the pad.
Nucleoid and cell membrane staining: To determine the growth phase and cell volumes, cells were
incubated with Nile Red for 15 min at 30°C, with agitation and then placed on an TGY agarose pad.
For single timepoint images acquired with the spinning disk microscope, the Nile Red was used at a
concentration of 30 µM. For correlative spinning-disk microscopy and PAINT imaging the
concentration was 300 nM. For PAINT imaging alone, the concentration was 15 nM. To determine
nucleoid volumes, cells in exponential phase were incubated with Nile Red (30 µM) and Syto9 (150
nM) for 15 min at 30°C, with agitation and then placed on a TGY2X agarose pad. In all cases, the cells
were rinsed to remove excess dye prior to imaging.
Peptidoglycan labeling: Cells in exponential growth phase were stained with the fluorescent BADA
dye 55 at a concentration of 31 µM, incubated at 30°C with agitation for 15 min. Then Nile Red was
added (15 µM) for another 15 min at 30°C with agitation. The cells were then rinsed in TGY2X at 30°C
in order to remove unbound dyes. Cells were then deposited on TGY2X agarose pads for imaging
(T=0) or returned to the incubator until T=130 min.

21

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Time-lapse imaging: For imaging of the cell growth and division process, cells in exponential growth
phase were incubated with Nile Red (15 µM) for 15 min at 30°C, with agitation. Cells were then
rinsed in TGY2X before imaging. For time-lapse imaging of the nucleoids, exponentially growing HUmCherry expressing cells or Syto9-stained (150 nM for 5 min) wild-type cells were used. In all cases,
cells were deposited on an TGY2X agarose pad designed with air holes to oxygenate the cells 56. The
samples were maintained at 30°C during image acquisition.
Foci acquisition: A saturated pre-culture of oriC or ter labelled HU-mCherry expressing D.
radiodurans cells (Table 1) was diluted 60X in TGY2X supplemented with 3.4 µg/mL chloramphenicol
and grown for a further 5 h until reaching an OD650 between 0.3 and 0.5. Cells were then stained with
HADA (30 µM) for 30 min and deposited on a TGY2X agarose pad.
Image acquisition
PALM/PAINT imaging. Wide-field illumination was achieved by focusing the laser beams to the back
focal plane of a 100x 1.49-numerical-aperture (NA) oil immersion apochromatic objective lens
(Olympus). The intensity and time sequence of laser illumination at the sample were tuned by an
acousto-optical tunable filter (AOTF; Quanta Tech). Near circular polarization of the laser beams was
ensured by inserting a polychromatic quarter-wave plate downstream the AOTF. 8 to 20 cells were
imaged per field of view. Typically, for each sample 2 or 3 fields of view on the same agarose pad
were imaged and at least three independent experiments were performed on different days. Sample
drift was corrected in ImageJ using gold nanobeads (Sigma) deposited on the agarose pads nearby
the bacteria.
Single particle tracking: Data were acquired with continuous 561 nm light illumination, at low power
(130 W/cm²) using a frametime of 30 ms. The Trackmate plugin for ImageJ was used to localize the
particles in each frame and to connect the coordinates into trajectories

57

. Simple LAP (Linear

Assignment Problem) Tracker generated the tracks, with a maximal allowed linking distance set to
200 nm and a maximal frame interval between two spots to be bridged set to 2. Only tracks that
contained more than four points were exported into MATLAB for further processing. The TrackArt
MATLAB software

36

was used to analyze trajectories and determine cumulative probability

distributions and apparent diffusion coefficients. Trajectories shorter than 10 frames or with a
minimal individual mean square displacement (MSD) fit R² values below 0.9 were filtered out.
Spinning disk imaging: Spinning-disk confocal microscopy was performed on the M4D cell imaging
platform at IBS using an Olympus IX81 microscope and Andor iXon Ultra EMCCD Camera with the
laser beams focused to the back focal plane of a 100X 1.49-numerical-aperture (NA) oil immersion
22

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

apochromatic objective lens (Olympus). The intensity and time sequence of laser illumination at the
sample were tuned by an acousto-optical tunable filter. For cell and nucleoid volume analyses, series
of Z-planes were acquired every 100 nm using a piezo stage, whereas 200 nm was used for the
multiplex imaging of oriC and ter labelled D. radiodurans strains. Fluorescence emission was collected
through a quad-band Semrock™ Di01-T405/488/568/647 dichroic mirror and the corresponding
single band emission filters. For Nile Red time-lapse imaging (Movie S1), single plane image sets (2D)
were acquired every 10 min, for a total period of 4 h, using very low 561 nm laser power (few microWatts) and 100 ms exposure times. Nucleoid time-lapse imaging (Movies S2 and S3) was achieved by
acquiring 3D images (Z-planes were acquired every 100 nm) every 10 min for a period of 3 h. An
additional 3D time-lapse video of HU-mcherry was also performed with short interval times (20 sec)
over a period of 10 min (Movie S5).
FRAP measurements: A time-lapse acquisition of the fluorescence channel (mCherry) was performed
for 60 timepoints at the fastest acquisition speed (10 timepoints before and 50 timepoints after
photobleaching). Photobleaching (Andor FRAPPA module) was set at the wavelength used for
imaging, targeting a single point (crosshair) of the analyzed nucleoid. Bleaching was performed using
a low intensity setting (2% of the nominal maximum laser power), for 160 µs dwell time and 12
repeats to achieve a sufficiently small bleached region and with a loss of at least 50% of the original
signal intensity. FRAP analysis was performed using EasyFRAP after measuring intensities using 58, as
described in the original publication 59.
Data analysis
Cell measurements: To calculate the volume of each cell, an ellipse was fitted to the cellular
membrane of Nile Red-labelled cells in 2D images (Figure S2A). Measurements of the shorter (Lshort)
and longer (Llong) axes of these ellipses were extracted from such fits. The distance between the
central septum and the extremity of the exterior of the ellipse along the short axis was measured (P),
to retrieve the distance between the septum and the center of the ellipse along the short axis (w).
With all these values, the total volume of the cell was computed using the equations presented in
Figure S2A with the cells approximated as prolate ellipsoids. The length and width of the elongated
and toroid shaped nucleoids were measured as described in Figure S2C and D.
Cell wall growth analysis: To determine the extent of BADA (green) versus Nile Red (red) staining in
Phase 1 cells, the perimeter of each cell was measured by fitting an ellipse to the Nile Red-labelled
cell membrane. The fraction of cell wall labelled with BADA was then determined by measuring the
two angles as shown in Figure S2B. The perimeter of Nile Red only stained membranes (without any
BADA labeling) for an angle α, is retrieved from the equation (1). The BADA labelled perimeter was
23

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

then determined by computing the lengths of the two sections of cell wall devoid of BADA labeling
and subtracting them from the whole perimeter of the ellipse.
α

𝑙 = ∫ √(𝐿𝑠ℎ𝑜𝑟𝑡 ∗ cos(𝜃))2 + (𝐿𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔 ∗ sin(𝜃))2 𝑑𝜃
0

(1)

Nucleoid volume measurements: Z-stacks of the Syto9 fluorescence signal corresponding to the
nucleoids were deconvoluted in Volocity using 7 iterative cycles and a calculated PSF (488 nm/520
nm). Cropped images in which the fluorescence signal was homogeneous throughout the full field of
view were then exported to the Imaris (Bitplane) software, where 3D objects corresponding to the
nucleoids were created based on the automatic thresholding of the fluorescence signal. The volumes
of these objects were then extracted for further analysis. The same procedure and settings in Imaris
were used to extract nucleoid volumes from all our samples, including E. coli nucleoids.
Foci distribution: Using the Volocity software, Z-stacks of the GFP signal were iteratively
deconvoluted using a calculated PSF (488 nm/520 nm). In the case of ter, Z-projections for each
channel were concatenated into multi-channel stacks. In the case of oriC, the same multi-channel
stacks were assembled, but we also verified that fluorescent foci were not lost by the Z projection.
Fluorescent foci were manually marked in ImageJ to extract their xy coordinates as well as the
dimensions and phase of the cells in which they were found. The number of foci and their
distribution were then automatically determined with respect to the average cell dimension of D.
radiodurans cells at each phase of the cell cycle derived from PAINT imaging.
Statistical analysis: The non-parametric Mann-Whitney tests were performed with GraphPad Prism 6
in order to assess the difference in cell dimensions and nucleoid volumes during the cell cycle. P
values below 0.01 were considered as significant and were indicated with asterisks: **P ≤ 0.01,
***P≤0.001, **** P≤0.0001.

Acknowledgements
We thank Prof. Yves Brun and Prof. Michael Van Nieuwenhze for providing us with the BADA dye.
This work was supported by CEA Radiobiology grant (A-IRBIO-01-19) and the CEA Irtélis program
(PhD grant of KF). This work used the M4D imaging platform of the Grenoble Instruct-ERIC Center
(ISBG : UMS 3518 CNRS-CEA-UGA-EMBL) with support from FRISBI (ANR-10-INBS-05-02) and GRAL
(ANR-10-LABX-49-01) within the Grenoble Partnership for Structural Biology (PSB).

24

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Contributions
KF and JT designed the research. KF, FL and JPK performed the microscopy experiments. PS provided
the genetically modified strains of D. radiodurans. YSW synthesized the HADA dye. KF, FL, JPK, DB
and JT analyzed the data. KF, DB and JT wrote the manuscript and all authors discussed the results
and approved the manuscript.

Declarations of interest
The authors declare no competing interests.

Data availability statement
The data that support the findings of this study are available from the corresponding author upon
reasonable request.

25

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

References
1.

Luijsterburg, M. S., Noom, M. C., Wuite, G. J. & Dame, R. T. The architectural role of nucleoidassociated proteins in the organization of bacterial chromatin: a molecular perspective. Journal
of structural biology 156, 262–272 (2006).

2.

Badrinarayanan, A., Le, T. B. & Laub, M. T. Bacterial chromosome organization and segregation.
Annual review of cell and developmental biology 31, 171–199 (2015).

3.

Dillon, S. C. & Dorman, C. J. Bacterial nucleoid-associated proteins, nucleoid structure and gene
expression. Nature Reviews Microbiology 8, 185 (2010).

4.

Wang, X., Llopis, P. M. & Rudner, D. Z. Organization and segregation of bacterial chromosomes.
Nature Reviews. Genetics 14, (2013).

5.

Jun, S. Chromosome, cell cycle, and entropy. Biophysical Journal 108, 785 (2015).

6.

Pelletier, J. et al. Physical manipulation of the Escherichia coli chromosome reveals its soft
nature. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2012).

7.

Shendruk, T. N., Bertrand, M., Haan, H. W. de, Harden, J. L. & Slater, G. W. Simulating the
entropic collapse of coarse-grained chromosomes. Biophysical journal 108, 810–820 (2015).

8.

Wu, F. et al. Cell boundary confinement sets the size and position of the E. coli chromosome.
bioRxiv 348052 (2018).

9.

Esnault, E., Valens, M., Espéli, O. & Boccard, F. Chromosome structuring limits genome plasticity
in Escherichia coli. PLoS genetics 3, e226 (2007).

10. Dame, R. T. & Tark-Dame, M. Bacterial chromatin: converging views at different scales. Current
opinion in cell biology 40, 60–65 (2016).
11. Fisher, J. K. et al. Four-dimensional imaging of E. coli nucleoid organization and dynamics in
living cells. Cell 153, 882–895 (2013).
12. Le, T. B., Imakaev, M. V., Mirny, L. A. & Laub, M. T. High-resolution mapping of the spatial
organization of a bacterial chromosome. Science 342, 731–734 (2013).
13. Marbouty, M. et al. Condensin-and replication-mediated bacterial chromosome folding and
origin condensation revealed by Hi-C and super-resolution imaging. Molecular cell 59, 588–602
(2015).
14. Umbarger, M. A. et al. The three-dimensional architecture of a bacterial genome and its
alteration by genetic perturbation. Molecular cell 44, 252–264 (2011).
15. Wang, X., Liu, X., Possoz, C. & Sherratt, D. J. The two Escherichia coli chromosome arms locate to
separate cell halves. Genes & development 20, 1727–1731 (2006).
16. Veiga, H., Jorge, A. M. & Pinho, M. G. Absence of nucleoid occlusion effector Noc impairs
formation of orthogonal FtsZ rings during Staphylococcus aureus cell division. Molecular
microbiology 80, 1366–1380 (2011).

26

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

17. Blasius, M., Hübscher, U. & Sommer, S. Deinococcus radiodurans: what belongs to the survival
kit? Critical reviews in biochemistry and molecular biology 43, 221–238 (2008).
18. Makarova, K. S. et al. Genome of the extremely radiation-resistant bacterium Deinococcus
radiodurans viewed from the perspective of comparative genomics. Microbiology and Molecular
Biology Reviews 65, 44–79 (2001).
19. Slade, D. & Radman, M. Oxidative stress resistance in Deinococcus radiodurans. Microbiology
and molecular biology reviews 75, 133–191 (2011).
20. Daly, M. J. A new perspective on radiation resistance based on Deinococcus radiodurans. Nature
Reviews Microbiology 7, 237–245 (2009).
21. Tian, B., Xu, Z., Sun, Z., Lin, J. & Hua, Y. Evaluation of the antioxidant effects of carotenoids from
Deinococcus radiodurans through targeted mutagenesis, chemiluminescence, and DNA damage
analyses. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-General Subjects 1770, 902–911 (2007).
22. Wang, P. & Schellhorn, H. E. Induction of resistance to hydrogen peroxide and radiation in
Deinococcus radiodurans. Canadian journal of microbiology 41, 170–176 (1995).
23. Battista, J. R. Against all odds: the survival strategies of Deinococcus radiodurans. Annual
Reviews in Microbiology 51, 203–224 (1997).
24. Kitayama, S. & Matsuyama, A. Genome multiplicity and radiation resistance in Micrococcus
radiodurans. The Journal of Biochemistry 90, 877–880 (1981).
25. Passot, F. M. et al. Nucleoid organization in the radioresistant bacterium Deinococcus
radiodurans. Molecular microbiology 97, 759–774 (2015).
26. Zimmerman, J. M. & Battista, J. R. A ring-like nucleoid is not necessary for radioresistance in the
Deinococcaceae. BMC microbiology 5, 17 (2005).
27. Englander, J. et al. DNA toroids: framework for DNA repair in Deinococcus radiodurans and in
germinating bacterial spores. Journal of bacteriology 186, 5973–5977 (2004).
28. Levin-Zaidman, S. et al. Ringlike structure of the Deinococcus radiodurans genome: a key to
radioresistance? Science 299, 254–256 (2003).
29. Minsky, A., Shimoni, E. & Englander, J. Ring-like nucleoids and DNA repair through error-free
nonhomologous end joining in Deinococcus radiodurans. Journal of bacteriology 188, 6047–
6051 (2006).
30. Minton, K. W. & Daly, M. J. A model for repair of radiation-induced DNA double-strand breaks in
the extreme radiophile Deinococcus radiodurans. Bioessays 17, 457–464 (1995).
31. Toueille, M. et al. A comparative proteomic approach to better define Deinococcus nucleoid
specificities. Journal of proteomics 75, 2588–2600 (2012).
32. Daly, M. J. et al. Accumulation of Mn (II) in Deinococcus radiodurans facilitates gamma-radiation
resistance. Science 306, 1025–1028 (2004).

27

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

33. Murray, R., Hall, M. & Thompson, B. Cell division in Deinococcus radiodurans and a method for
displaying septa. Canadian journal of microbiology 29, 1412–1423 (1983).
34. Thornley, M. J., Horne, R. & Glauert, A. M. The fine structure of Micrococcus radiodurans. Archiv
für Mikrobiologie 51, 267–289 (1965).
35. Nguyen, H. H. et al. The essential histone-like protein HU plays a major role in Deinococcus
radiodurans nucleoid compaction. Molecular microbiology 73, 240–252 (2009).
36. Matysik, A. & Kraut, R. S. TrackArt: the user friendly interface for single molecule tracking data
analysis and simulation applied to complex diffusion in mica supported lipid bilayers. BMC
research notes 7, 274 (2014).
37. Kumar, M., Mommer, M. S. & Sourjik, V. Mobility of cytoplasmic, membrane, and DNA-binding
proteins in Escherichia coli. Biophysical journal 98, 552–559 (2010).
38. Gao, Y. et al. Charged residues in the H-NS linker drive DNA binding and gene silencing in single
cells. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 201716721 (2017).
39. Stracy, M. et al. Live-cell superresolution microscopy reveals the organization of RNA
polymerase in the bacterial nucleoid. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112,
E4390–E4399 (2015).
40. Touhami, A., Jericho, M. H. & Beveridge, T. J. Atomic force microscopy of cell growth and
division in Staphylococcus aureus. Journal of bacteriology 186, 3286–3295 (2004).
41. Wheeler, R., Mesnage, S., Boneca, I. G., Hobbs, J. K. & Foster, S. J. Super-resolution microscopy
reveals cell wall dynamics and peptidoglycan architecture in ovococcal bacteria. Molecular
microbiology 82, 1096–1109 (2011).
42. Monteiro, J. M. et al. Cell shape dynamics during the staphylococcal cell cycle. Nature
communications 6, 8055 (2015).
43. Zhou, X. et al. Mechanical crack propagation drives millisecond daughter cell separation in
Staphylococcus aureus. Science 348, 574–578 (2015).
44. Wu, L. J. & Errington, J. Nucleoid occlusion and bacterial cell division. Nature Reviews
Microbiology 10, 8 (2012).
45. Lutkenhaus, J. Assembly dynamics of the bacterial MinCDE system and spatial regulation of the
Z ring. Annu. Rev. Biochem. 76, 539–562 (2007).
46. Renner, L. D. & Weibel, D. B. Cardiolipin microdomains localize to negatively curved regions of
Escherichia coli membranes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, 6264–6269
(2011).
47. Schweizer, J. et al. Geometry sensing by self-organized protein patterns. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 109, 15283–15288 (2012).
48. Corbin, B. D., Yu, X.-C. & Margolin, W. Exploring intracellular space: function of the Min system
in round-shaped Escherichia coli. The EMBO journal 21, 1998–2008 (2002).

28

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/582304; this version posted March 20, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

49. Wu, F., Van Schie, B. G., Keymer, J. E. & Dekker, C. Symmetry and scale orient Min protein
patterns in shaped bacterial sculptures. Nature nanotechnology 10, 719 (2015).
50. Jun, S. & Mulder, B. Entropy-driven spatial organization of highly confined polymers: lessons for
the bacterial chromosome. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103, 12388–12393
(2006).
51. Ben-Yehuda, S. et al. Defining a centromere-like element in Bacillus subtilis by identifying the
binding sites for the chromosome-anchoring protein RacA. Molecular cell 17, 773–782 (2005).
52. Thanbichler, M. & Shapiro, L. MipZ, a spatial regulator coordinating chromosome segregation
with cell division in Caulobacter. Cell 126, 147–162 (2006).
53. Yamaichi, Y. et al. A multidomain hub anchors the chromosome segregation and chemotactic
machinery to the bacterial pole. Genes & development 26, 2348–2360 (2012).
54. Floc’h, K. et al. Bacterial cell wall nanoimaging by autoblinking microscopy. Scientific reports 8,
14038 (2018).
55. Pilhofer, M. et al. Discovery of chlamydial peptidoglycan reveals bacteria with murein sacculi but
without FtsZ. Nature communications 4, 2856 (2013).
56. Jong, I. G. de, Beilharz, K., Kuipers, O. P. & Veening, J.-W. Live cell imaging of Bacillus subtilis and
Streptococcus pneumoniae using automated time-lapse microscopy. Journal of visualized
experiments: JoVE (2011).
57. Tinevez, J.-Y. et al. TrackMate: An open and extensible platform for single-particle tracking.
Methods 115, 80–90 (2017).
58. Schindelin, J. et al. Fiji: an open-source platform for biological-image analysis. Nature methods 9,
676–682 (2012).
59. Rapsomaniki, M. A. et al. easyFRAP: an interactive, easy-to-use tool for qualitative and
quantitative analysis of FRAP data. Bioinformatics 28, 1800–1801 (2012).

29

