bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

scSVA: an interactive tool for big data visualization and exploration in single-cell omics
Marcin Tabaka1, Joshua Gould1, Aviv Regev1,2*

Author Affiliations
1

Klarman Cell Observatory, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA

2

Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Koch Institute of Integrative Cancer Research, Department

of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
Corresponding author, aregev@broadinstitute.org

Abstract: We present scSVA (single-cell Scalable Visualization and Analytics), a lightweight R
package for interactive two- and three-dimensional visualization and exploration of massive
single-cell omics data. Building in part of methods originally developed for astronomy datasets,
scSVA is memory efficient for more than hundreds of millions of cells, can be run locally or in a
cloud, and generates high-quality figures. In particular, we introduce a numerically efficient
method for single-cell data embedding in 3D which combines an optimized implementation of
diffusion maps with a 3D force-directed layout, enabling generation of 3D data visualizations at
the scale of a million cells. To facilitate reproducible research, scSVA supports interactive
analytics

in

a

cloud

with

containerized

tools.

scSVA

is

available

online

at

https://github.com/klarman-cell-observatory/scSVA.

1

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The recent progress in the development of high-throughput single-cell methods allows researchers
to study cell types and states of millions of cells, and is expected to further grow dramatically to
hundreds of millions and more cells due to technological advances and the progress of focused
initiatives, including the Human Cell Atlas [1]. Deriving biological insights from such massive
datasets requires a combination of automated analysis algorithms with tools for data visualization
and exploration, where users can gracefully, quickly, and iteratively explore analysis results. While
substantial progress has been made on scaled analysis [2], far less has been done for data
exploration. Indeed, existing tools [2-4] require extensive memory resources to explore and
visualize cells and cell features, and are not scaled to massive data volumes. Here, we introduce
scSVA, a lightweight R package built with Shiny for interactive visualization and exploration of
single-cell omics data at the scale of up to a billion cells.

scSVA addresses common tasks in single-cell data visualization and exploration (Fig. 1a) by (1)
visualizing cells on two- or three-dimensional embeddings; (2) visualizing gene expression values
and gene signature scores on those embeddings, including by specifying a statistic to plot in a
dense region with overlapping cells, such as mean or maximum gene expression value (suitable
for highly or lowly expressed genes, respectively); (3) marking cells by clusters; (4) computing
cell proportions and gene expression statistics for custom defined subsets of cells by polygonal
selection or provided categorical data; and (5) producing high-quality figures combined with their
comprehensive customization and annotation.

scSVA relies on advances from diverse data-heavy areas, especially astronomy, such that most of
its capabilities are scaled to up to a billion cells with real time interactivity. To process cell feature

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

vectors, scSVA uses as a back-end VaeX [5], an optimized python library for data processing on
a grid, developed for visualization of stars brighter than magnitude 20 catalogued by the ESA
space astrometry mission Gaia [6]. Visualizing cells on a grid allows us to effectively handle dense
regions of overlapping cells on a 2D or 3D embedding and gene expression “dropouts”, common
in single cell ‘omics data, especially when a user specifies a statistic to plot, such as mean or
maximum gene expression level for overlapping cells. Grid data with user-specified grid resolution
is visualized using R ggplot2 package (https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org), which produces
aesthetically-pleasing high-quality figures. scSVA provides an extensive support for color palettes
(pre-set and custom) and helps to select colors that are suitable for the color-blind. scSVA comes
as a flexible and interactive Shiny application (Fig. 1b) enabling zooming in and out cells on a 2D
embedding with immediate refreshing of cell positions on the user-defined grid resolution. We
also optimized a new method for computing a single-cell data embedding in 3D which combines
a new efficient implementation of diffusion maps (by optimizing the original algorithm [7]) with
a 3D force-directed layout (ForceAtlas2 algorithm [8]), enabling generation of 3D data
visualizations at the scale of a million cells (Fig. 1c).

To address computational demands, scSVA has efficient memory usage and supports interactive
analytics in a cloud. To reduce memory usage, scSVA supports efficient retrieval of cell features
from massive expression matrices stored on a disk (locally or on a cloud bucket) from compressed
text (using indexing [9]) or HDF5 file formats. This reduces the memory usage by a factor equal
to the number of cell features, for example ~20,000 genes in mammalian single-cell RNA-Seq
gene expression matrices. For interactive analytics in a cloud (currently with Google Cloud
Platform), containerized code of the tool ensures reproducible research [10] and eliminates the

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

need for controlling dependencies between installed packages by target users. Thus, scSVA should
enable users to interact with large datasets and complex analytics to yield novel insights and
discoveries.

The scSVA package with installation instructions and extensive documentation is available online
at (https://github.com/klarman-cell-observatory/scSVA) and can be installed from a source or run
as a Docker container containing all system and software dependencies. Source of single-cell
RNA-Seq datasets visualized in this study: the Immune Cell Atlas dataset of bone marrow immune
cells

(https://preview.data.humancellatlas.org)

and

brain

cells

from

E18

mice

(https://support.10xgenomics.com/single-cell-gene-expression/datasets).

Competing interests
AR is a founder of, consultant to, and equity holder in Celsius Therapeutics and a member of the
SAB of Syros Pharmaceuticals and ThermoFisher Scientific.
Author Contributions
M.T. and A.R. conceived and designed the software. M.T. developed the software. M.T., J.G. and
A.R conceived the 3D data visualization of single-cell datasets. M.T. and J.G. developed 3D data
visualization. A.R. supervised the project.
Acknowledgments
We thank Ayshwarya Subramanian, Christoph Muus, and Bo Li for discussions; Leslie Gaffney
and Anna Hupałowska for comments and help with figures. M.T., J.G, and A.R. are supported by

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Klarman Cell Observatory at Broad Institute and an NHGRI CEGS grant. A.R. is an HHMI
Investigator.

References
1. Regev, A., et al. (2017). Elife 6:e27041
2. Wolf, F. A., et al. (2018). Genome Biol. 19:15
3. Satija, R., et al. (2015). Nat. Biotechnol. 33:495
4. Fan, J., et al. (2016). Nat. Methods 13:241
5. Breddels, M. A. (2016). Proc. IAU 12:299
6. Lindegren, L., et al. (2007). Proc. IAU 3:217
7. Angerer, P., et al. (2015). Bioinformatics 32:1241
8. Jacomy, M., et al. (2014). PloS one 9:e98679
9. Li, H. (2011). Bioinformatics 27:718
10. Boettiger, C. (2015). ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review 49:71

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure legend
Figure 1: scSVA is a tool for interactive visualization and exploratory analysis of big data in
single-cell omics. (a) Overview. scSVA accepts as input (left) an expression matrix and cell
metadata in compressed text and hdf5 file formats. From disk stored datasets, scSVA retrieves
only one-dimensional arrays that are needed for visualizing and exploring cell features of interest.
Cells are visualized on a grid (middle) significantly reducing the number of points to be plotted.
scSVA provides a set of interactive tools (right) for the exploratory analyses and plot
customizations. (b) Interface. A screenshot of the main visualization window of the scSVA
interactive application, showing 1 billion cell profiles, up-sampled for demonstration purposes
from 274,000 human bone marrow cells. (c) 3D embeddings. Containerized code for 3D
embedding can be run on a cloud platform, allowing for visualization of cells at a scale of million
cells in 3D.

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/512582; this version posted January 6, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was not
certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made available under
aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

1. Annotations
2. Creation of color palettes
3. User-provided fonts
4. Multiplots

1. Run locally or as a web server
2. Run in the cloud
3. Interactive analytics by running
containerized tools in the cloud

Containerized tools for single cell
data embedding in 3D

Run tools interactively
in the cloud

3D force-directed layout

Gene
expression matrix

Nearest neighbor graph
3D force-directed layout

Dim 2

Diffusion maps
Dim 3

Dim 1

1.3 million brain cells from E18 mice

