bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

A low-cost and easy-to-use cell preservation reagent for 4C or
room temperature sample storage
Sidharth Shankar¶2, Shreya Roy¶2, Ari Geary-Teeter3, George M. Martin1, and Paula D. Ladd1*
1

Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Microbiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
3
Department of Biology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
2

*Corresponding Author
¶
These authors contributed equally
E-mail: pladd@uw.edu
Abstract

Current biospecimen storage and preservation methods no longer meet the demands of basic
research and clinical diagnostics. Biospecimen preservation methodology has not advanced to
accommodate cutting edge molecular analysis technologies that target single cells and full-length
transcripts. Traditional methods, such as flash freezing and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedding (FFPE),
were designed to provide information on cell structure and spatial relationships in whole tissues. These
methods, however, do not maintain the integrity of proteins and nucleic acids. In this proof-of-concept
study we examine preservation mechanisms utilized in nature for survival during cold seasons or periods
of drought. Plants, brine shrimp, and tardigrades rely on components such as disaccharides or intrinsically
disordered proteins to maintain cellular structure and biological activity in the settings of these
environmental stresses. Our study demonstrates that these reagents aid in mammalian cell preservation for
at least one week when a sample is stored in solution at 4C, or as a dried sample in a low humidity
desiccator.
Keywords: Preservation, EDTA, Intrinsically Disordered Proteins, Trehalose, Desiccation

Introduction
Quality and reliable tissue sample preservation is of
paramount importance in basic biological and
clinical research, as well as for diagnostic and core
life science service laboratories. Variations in
preservation methodology impact downstream
assays, which is of particularly concern in clinical
pathology and diagnosis (1-3). Major considerations
include delays in preservation, length of time the
sample exists in preservation reagents, and
improper storage conditions (4). The most common
preservation methods, FFPE and flash freezing
samples, while in wide use, have significant
limitations (5).

FFPE is a widely adopted preservation
method to preserve proteins and tissue structure and
is nearly ubiquitous in anatomic pathology
laboratories. The basic protocol involves fixing a
tissue sample in formalin and then embedding the
sample in paraffin wax to facilitate dissection into
thin tissue sections for placement on microscope
slides (6). At this point the section can be stained
with reagents to permit highly reliable diagnoses of
a wide range of pathologies. An advantage of FFPE
is that tissue structure is well preserved, and
samples can be stored at room temperature for many
years. Unfortunately, this method requires toxic
chemicals, specialized training, and is sensitive to
individual processing differences. Moreover, a
disadvantage of this method is that it results in
denatured, non-biologically active proteins and

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

degraded genomic DNA and RNA and thus does
not address the growing molecular biological
advances for more precise clinical and research
characterizations
of
pathologic
processes.
Formalin-free methodologies, such as the PAXgene
Tissue system (PreAnalytiX, Switzerland) exhibit
improved nucleic acid quality, but only when
samples are stored at -20C (7). Storage of
PAXgene preserved samples at room temperature is
associated with nucleic acid degradation, much like
with FFPE.
Cryopreservation is another widely used
preservation method; samples are stored in -80ºC
freezers or liquid nitrogen (-196ºC). At these
temperatures, metabolic activity is virtually halted,
and cells can remain stable for decades as long as
low temperatures are maintained. An advantage of
freezing a sample is that proteins can be biologically
active when thawed. Moreover, cryopreservation
requires little training. As for the case of FFPE,
however, delays in freezing can induce considerable
variability in preservation among samples (8). A
major disadvantage of this method is a potentially
crippling reliance on electricity or liquid nitrogen,
placing samples at high risk during periods of
natural disaster (9). Furthermore, cell membranes
are typically damaged in the freeze thaw process,
hindering single cell isolation.
Cryoprotectants are often used to ameliorate
cellular damage during the freezing and thawing
processes (10). DMSO and glycerol are typical
cryoprotectants when cells will be returned to a state
of growth. A reagent designed to enhance RNA
stability is RNAlater, which includes a solution of
saturated ammonium sulfate, EDTA, and a sodium
citrate buffer at a pH of 5.2. The ammonium sulfate
denatures the proteins in the sample, including
nucleases and RNA binding proteins, which then
can remain wrapped around RNA to protect it from
exogenous RNases. An advantage here is that
samples can be stored in this solution for short
periods of time (one week) at room temperature, up
to one month at 4ºC, and indefinitely at -20ºC. The
disadvantage of this method is that, similar to that
of FFPE and freezing, cell membranes and global
proteins are denatured, hindering single cell
isolation. Moreover, numerous users have reported

reduced RNA yields and global transcript biases
(11-13).
Given the disadvantages of FFPE, freezing,
and RNAlater, it is appropriate to consider
alternative methodologies that are not only
compatible with molecular analysis, but also are
easy to use and relatively non-toxic. In search of
innovative approaches to the development of such
improved methodologies, our group reviewed the
literature on Nature’s examples of cryptobiosis, a
reversible pausing of the physiological state used by
a wide range of organisms, including microbes,
plants and animals (14). More specifically we were
interested in a cryptobiosis subtype, anhydrobiosis
(extreme drying). During anhydrobiosis a
protective “glass matrix” is formed to protect the
organism.
One common adaptation essential to some
desiccation tolerant organisms is the use of sugars,
specifically disaccharide sugars, sucrose and
trehalose. These sugars prevent protein
denaturation and protect against membrane
degradation during a dehydrated state, possibly by
water exclusion or water replacement (15).
However, not all desiccation tolerant organisms
express trehalose. Instead, some tardigrade species
utilize intrinsically disordered proteins (IDP) to
protect the organism during extremely dry
conditions (16). Tardigrade specific IDPs form
cytoprotective crystalline amorphous solids during
desiccation and abiotic stress tolerance (17).
To test our hypothesis that mammalian cells
could be preserved in a dry environment, we
selected trehalose and bovine serum albumin
(BSA), which contains several regions with flexible
disordered domains (18). Here, we demonstrate that
we can isolate high quality DNA and RNA from
human diploid fibroblast cells preserved in PBS
containing either trehalose or BSA and
supplemented with a chelating agent, EDTA. We
compared cells preserved for one week in solution
at 4C or desiccated at room temperature to cells that
had been frozen for the same time periods, as well
as freshly harvested samples. Under those
conditions, our reagent is capable of preserving a
sample without significant macromolecular loss and
is very easy to use. We posit that this reagent could
serve as a novel, relatively nontoxic and widely

2

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

accessible means of protecting cellular components
that are likely to become of crucial importance as
pathologists seek to apply newly available tools
resulting from advances in molecular biological
research.
When growing tissue culture cells, it is
common to store cell pellets in a -80C freezer.
These pellets are often used to represent the
untreated population or time zero control samples.
Typically, adherent cells are enzymatically released
from the culture dish, centrifuged to form a cell
pellet, and stored in the freezer. The potential for
variation is high in this multistep process;
prolonged enzymatic treatment alters gene
expression and high centrifugal force damages cell
membranes. Additionally, freezing induces ice
crystals which break cell walls and long-term
storage at -80C is known to fragment both DNA
and RNA (19).

EDTA, a chelating agent that sequesters metal ions
and reduces enzymatic activity of metal iondependent enzymes (21). One of the PBS plus
EDTA reagents also contains Trehalose (Tre), a
disaccharide found in many desiccation tolerant
organisms, while another contains molecular-grade
bovine serum albumin (BSA), a protein with
multiple intrinsically disordered domains (22, 23).
The last reagent is PBS solely supplemented with
EDTA. For the remainder of this paper, the four
reagents described above are indicated as PBS,
PBS+, Tre+, and BSA+, the plus sign indicating the
presence of EDTA.
Results
The preservation capability of each of the four
reagents, PBS, PBS+, Tre+, BSA+, as well as a
commercial reagent, RNAlater (Ambion Thermo
Fisher, Waltham, MA), were compared to RNA
isolated from freshly harvested cells to determine
how well RNA is preserved for one week at 4C.
Global RNA integrity is similar for the freshly
isolated RNA sample and RNA that was preserved
for one week at 4C with each of the reagents,
PBS+, Tre+, and BSA+ (Figure 1B). Visually, we
can see 2-3 times more of the 28S rRNA relative to
18S in the fresh sample as well in the samples
supplemented with EDTA. A high 28S/18S ratio
indicates high quality RNA that has not degraded.
The samples preserved with PBS alone were
either degraded or faintly present (Figure 1B, PBS
lanes and supplemental Figure 1A and C). All of the
samples preserved with RNAlater contained only
trace levels of RNA (Figure 1B, RNAlater lanes and
supplemental Figure 1A and C). Initially, this was a
surprising result, as the RNAlater reagent had been
used by our team multiple times several months
prior to these studies with far better output. This
suggests that the RNAlater reagent has a shorter
shelf life than the PBS-based reagents.
The RNA concentration was similar for all
of the samples preserved for one week at 4C in
PBS+, Tre+, and BSA+ (Figure 1C). No significant
difference was apparent relative to freshly isolated
RNA from equally plated dishes. In this data set, the
average RNA concentration from the Tre+ and
BSA+ preserved cells were 94% and 84% of freshly
isolated RNA, respectively, while PBS+ samples

Preservation of Nucleic Acids in Solution
To determine whether high quality nucleic acids
could be isolated from tissue culture cells stored at
4C instead of -80C, we established a simple
protocol to preserve tissue culture cells. First, the
growth media is removed from dishes of human
diploid fibroblast cells. The cells are rinsed two
times with PBS, and the final wash buffer is
completely aspirated (Figure 1A left most panels).
One of the four preservation reagents, or RNAlater,
is added to each dish and then the dish is stored in a
refrigerator at 4C (Diagram 1A middle panels). A
comparably plated dish is lysed to represent the
RNA present at the time of preservation. After one
week, all dishes stored at 4C are lysed, and RNA
is extracted. This protocol relies on common tissue
culture techniques, namely pipetting, vacuum
removal of media and buffers, and thus can be easily
performed
by
all
laboratory
personnel.
Furthermore, this protocol does not require
enzymatic treatment and the original growth dish
can be used, reducing labelling errors.
Four preservation buffers were selected
based on our crowdfunded project titled:
Developing a new tissue preservation method
inspired by Tardigrades (20). All four preservation
reagents contain phosphate buffered saline (PBS).
Three of the reagents are PBS supplemented with

3

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

were 66%. These results are in sharp contrast to the
PBS samples, which had a concentration that was
less than 33% of the fresh samples. This suggests
that EDTA is a key component in the preservation
of RNA integrity and concentration. Adding
trehalose or BSA appears to have some impact on
total RNA concentration; however, there is no
significant difference between the three
preservation reagents. We can conclude that adding
trehalose or BSA does not have a negative effect on
RNA content.
We also examined whether genomic DNA
(gDNA) could also be isolated from the samples
stored wet at 4C. Here we demonstrate that the
DNA integrity is similar for freshly isolated
samples and samples stored frozen or wet at 4C for
one
week
(Supplemental
Figure
2A).
Unfortunately, DNA concentration was reduced in
all buffer conditions (Supplemental Figure 2B).
This reduction was seen in most of the frozen

samples, suggesting that DNases are active during
the freeze/thaw process.
Overall, this proof-of-concept study demonstrates
that cells stored in solution at 4C for one week in
PBS with EDTA and Trehalose is correlated with
RNA concentration and RNA integrity similar to
RNA freshly isolated from equally plated cell
cultures. This has substantial implication for
researchers who want to transport cellular material
to collaborators or core facilities, as shipping costs
are reduced when dry and wet ice is not needed.
Nucleic Acid Stability after Dry Preservation
To determine whether the same reagents could be
used to preserve diploid fibroblast cells at room
temperature in a dry format, we modified the wet
preservation protocol to include a drying step. After
the preservation reagent is added to a dish of cells,
the dish is placed under a table fan until dry. A 60
mm dish of cells typically dried in 5 minutes or less,
thus requiring little extra effort to preserve a sample

4

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

(Figure 2A). We used a 9-inch diameter fan, so that
all of the dishes could be dried at one time,
eliminating drying variation. Once the dishes were
dried, the samples were placed into a desiccator
with fresh drierite and 30 gram food-grade silica
pouches. A humidity indicator card did not register
any humidity in the desiccator during storage. As a
point of reference, samples with equal cell density
were washed twice with PBS and frozen at -80C
for one week. RNA isolated from the dry preserved
and frozen samples were compared to RNA isolated
from non-preserved cells (Figure 2B and C).
The RNA isolated from dry preserved
samples were similar to RNA from fresh and frozen
samples, but for the most part had an additional
smear within the lane (Figure 2B and Supplemental
Figure 2A and C). In the dry preserved samples, 28S
and 18S are visible, but do not resolve appropriately
in the agarose gel, as if there is something present
in the sample to prevent resolution of 5S RNA
(Figure 2B, Supplemental Figure 2A and C).
Samples preserved in PBS or PBS+ were the most
impacted, though streaking is apparent in some of

the Tre+ and BSA+ samples. This streaking is not
seen in the RNA samples from fresh or frozen cells,
suggesting this is not an artefact of our RNA
isolation and rehydration reagents. It is important to
highlight that the primary difference in the cell
populations from fresh, frozen, or dried preserved
samples was the presence of liquid in the cytoplasm.
In our studies, we did not hydrate the dry preserved
cells prior to lysis as we wanted to first determine if
RNA was intact after dry storage. Perhaps this
streaking artefact is due to salt interaction with the
RNA backbone during preservation in the presence
of phosphate buffered saline. RNA sample dilution
improves gel resolution, suggesting the artefact is
soluble.
In the dry condition, the average RNA
concentration from cells preserved in PBS without
EDTA is nearly as high as RNA from fresh and
frozen samples. This suggests that removing water
from a sample is key to preservation and is
consistent with results that employ lyophilization of
samples. Our protocol requires less training and
equipment than lyophilization, a method of freeze-

5

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

drying for storage at room temperature, thus
benefits laboratories with fewer resources (24, 25).
The RNA concentrations for samples
preserved in PBS+ or in Tre+ are significantly
lower. (Figure 2B, p <= 0.015). This result is
consistent for PBS+ preserved samples, but not for
the Tre+ sample. This difference in reagent
performance in wet and dry preservation conditions
could be due to the sugar coating that formed after
drying. Since we did not solubilize the sample with
water before RNA isolation, the sugar-coating
hindered lysis. We noticed that the Tre+ samples
were particularly difficult to transfer after adding
lysis buffer. We also noticed that the Tre+ samples
were particularly difficult to transfer after adding
lysis buffer, suggesting that sample rehydration
should be examined before concluding that EDTA
and or trehalose are not beneficial for dry sample
preservation in a desiccator.
Genomic DNA can be isolated from dry
preserved samples. In contrast to the RNA samples,
there was a loss of gDNA integrity in samples
preserved with PBS or BSA+ (Supplemental Figure
3A). However, gDNA concentrations were similar
for samples stored dry or in a freezer (Supplemental
Figure 3B). While harvesting DNA from fresh
samples is the most ideal approach, it is not always
an option, such as when collecting field samples.
Furthermore, carrying ice and storage coolers into
the field can be a challenge. Dry storage is an ideal
solution for field scientists, as well as for shipping
samples without needing ice.

not provide any improvement relative to PBS with
EDTA. Thus, when samples are held at 4C, the key
component for nucleic acid preservation is EDTA,
a metal ion chelator. The most plausible explanation
is that EDTA reduces nuclease activity by chelating
cofactors, such as Mg2+, Cu+ and Mn2+.
In the second experimental condition, we
were able to isolate high quality total RNA from
human diploid fibroblast cells that were dried in the
presence of the same preservation reagents, and
then stored at very low humidity in a desiccator at
room temperature. In contrast with the samples
stored in solution at 4C, samples stored in PBS
without EDTA had nearly the same concentration
of total RNA as fresh and frozen samples. However,
the overall RNA quality is impaired in this
condition, with apparent nicking of the RNA
strands and potentially protein aggregation. Adding
trehalose or BSA may mitigate this effect
somewhat, but further investigations of drying
speed and rehydration conditions are needed to fully
understand what will be required for an optimal
technique. Nonetheless, it is provocative that a cell
sample can be air dried at room temperature and
stored in a desiccator for a week. Lyophilisation
typically requires freezing the sample to a very low
temperature and then drying the sample under
vacuum. We have demonstrated that laboratories
with few resources could preserve samples in dry
form, for at least the short term.
In contrast to total RNA, gDNA protection
was not enhanced by the presence of EDTA when
the samples are stored in solution at 4C. This was
an unexpected finding, as DNA is generally more
stable than RNA. A possible explanation is the fact
that not all DNases require Mg2+ ions, thus avoiding
the inhibitory effects of EDTA. As an example,
DNase II, a lysosomal enzyme essential for DNA
waste removal, does not use a metal ion as a cofactor and remains unaffected by EDTA (26, 27).
This enzyme and perhaps others were able to
maintain enough activity during the wet
preservation process to degrade the gDNA within
each sample. It is unclear if this could also explain
the reduced gDNA content in several of the frozen
samples; perhaps there is more to learn about
enzymatic activity during the freeze/thaw process.

Discussion
In this study we have examined sample
preservations in two different contexts. In the first
condition, the sample is stored in solution at 4C,
while in the second condition, the sample is stored
in dry preservation at room temperature and very
low humidity.
We have demonstrated, in the first
experimental condition, that high quality total RNA
can be isolated from human diploid fibroblast cells
stored at 4C in a solution of PBS supplemented
with EDTA. Adding trehalose, a disaccharide
upregulated in multiple cryptobiosis-tolerant
organisms, improves total RNA concentration,
though it is not necessary. Furthermore, BSA does

6

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

When stored dry, gDNA integrity is
compromised for samples dried in the presence of
PBS only or when BSA is present. Here, we can
only speculate whether EDTA is capable of
providing greater protection, as demonstrated by an
increase in gDNA concentration for PBS+ and Tre+
samples. However, this protection did not extend to
the BSA+ samples. Note that in dry conditions,
BSA increases the total protein content of the
sample. Thus, when lysis reagent is added to the
sample, it is plausible that the higher protein content
sequesters gDNA, which is removed with the
precipitated proteins. This is in contrast to the
samples stored in solution at 4C, as the
preservation reagent is removed prior to lysis.
Our dry preservation method does not
mimic preservation found in nature. During the
onset of cryptobiosis, organisms are sensing and
responding to changes in the environment by
altering expression of genes and proteins to induce
endogenous preservation pathways and additionally
degrading transcripts and proteins that are not
beneficial. It is equally crucial that organisms have
the ability to revert these processes to return to their
normal state post-desiccation. Of course, a
preservation technique capable of preserving a
sample in a suspended state and returning it to
normal homeostasis would be a breakthrough in
clinical and pathology laboratories, as well for
transplantation laboratories. Rather than a
permanent halting, a paused state with the potential
for future viability could lead to more detailed
secondary analysis on patient samples, particularly
biopsies, and likely more accurate diagnoses. A first
step in this direction is the maintenance of
physiological pH in our reagent. Reagents such as
RNAlater and DNA/RNA Shield lower the pH, thus
denaturing the proteins, and ultimately preserving
cellular materials in non-physiological pH. Further,
there exist numerous enzymes that are active in
acidic environments perpetuated by these reagents.
By creating a reagent at a physiological pH, we
reduce the activity of these enzymes, and further our
goal of halting all enzymatic and metabolic activity,
without considerable damage to cellular
constituents.
Our study underscores the challenges
researchers face when choosing a preservation

method during the course of a study, as well as in
biospecimen preservation for clinical analysis. In
research studies, consistency is key. When all
samples are preserved in the same manner,
differences between each sample are more
convincing. But in certain situations, such as with
clinical samples where variation is harder to
manage, having a preservation reagent that is easyto-use and that immediately arrests biological
activity is key to specificity and accuracy of a test.
Our preservation reagents have the ability to serve
dual purposes; they may serve as a stand-alone
means of cell preservation or potentially as an
enhancing agent in the pre-preservation of clinical
samples.
Future studies should move from cultured
cells to solid tissues from experimental mammalian
materials, ideally using laboratory strains of mice,
as this would provide the potential to optimize
macromolecular integrity as functions not only of a
wide range of tissues but also from animals of
different ages and with a variety of pathologies.
Conclusion
In this proof-of-concept study, we demonstrate that
a monolayer of fibroblast cells can be stored in
solution for one week at 4C or dried in the presence
of these solutions and stored at room-temperature,
as long as the samples are shielded from humidity.
Full length DNA and RNA can be extracted from
these samples. Humidity is key, as water is a key
component of life. Without humidity/water,
proteins have no (or minimal) activity. There is no
degradation because there is no activity. Our results
indicate there could still be protein aggregation,
demonstrating that adding trehalose and/or BSA
helps to reduce aggregation.
At a time when low input analysis is needed for
clinical diagnostics and monitoring, improved
biospecimen preservation will enhance the
contemporary molecular methodologies that are
being
used
to
understand
genomics,
transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, and
metabolomics.
Materials and Methods
Cell Culture Low passage primary human diploid
foreskin fibroblast cells were used for preservation

7

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

experiments. The cells were cultured in DMEM
(Gibco, ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented
with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% PenStrep (100
U/mL Penicillin /10 μg/mL Streptomycin). The
cells were maintained under standard cultural
conditions at 37C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 and
5% O2 in a Heracell CO2 incubator (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA) (28). Gas phase O2
tensions were controlled by continuous injection of
appropriate amount of medical grade N2 to reach
the target levels of oxygen . Cells were seeded at
equal cell densities in 12-well, 6-well, or 60 mm
dishes for the isolations of protein, DNA, or RNA .

protocol (Qiagen, Germantown, MD). RNA and
DNA concentrations were determined using a
Nanodrop
Lite
Nano
Spectrophotometer
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and
visualized on 1% agarose e-gel Power Snap
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).
Statistical analysis Statistical significance was
determined by the Student t-test.
Acknowledgements
We wish to acknowledge Dr. Jenny Tenlen, PhD,
Biology Department, Seattle Pacific University and
Dr. Silvan Urfer, DMV, Department of Pathology,
University of Washington for their advice and
support of this project. We also want to
acknowledge
all
project
backers
on
Experiment.com/tardigradepreservation.
Many
thanks to Lin Lee for ordering reagents, and
supplies.

Preservation Reagent #1 is PBS, pH 7.4, the base
of all conditions. Reagent #2 is PBS plus 10 mM
EDTA. Reagent #3 contains PBS, plus 10 mM
EDTA and 50 mM Trehalose (ThermoFisher
Scientific, Waltham, MA). Reagent #4A is PBS,
plus 10 mM EDTA and 5% fetal bovine serum.
Reagent #4B contains PBS, pH 7.4 plus 10 mM
EDTA and 5% molecular grade BSA
(ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).
The volume of preservation reagent was
different for each vessel size. 75 l, 100 l, and 150
l of reagents 1-4, were used for 12-well, 6-well,
and 60 mm dishes respectively. A 9-inch oscillating
fan (SMC, China) was used to rapidly dry each dish
of reagent and cells. The dry dishes of cells were
immediately placed in a glass desiccator in a dark
cabinet. Less than 10% humidity was achieved
using drierite anhydrous calcium sulfate (W.A.
Hammond Drierite Co Ltd, Xenia, OH) and food
grade silica packs (Dry & Dry, Silicagel Factory,
Brea, CA).
For each preservation trial, untreated
samples of equal cell densities were frozen at -80C
for the same duration as the dry preservation
samples. Samples for all preservation reagent
conditions were harvested at 1 week, 1, 2, and 3
months. Fresh samples of equal cell densities were
harvested on day zero to represent the starting levels
of protein, DNA, and RNA .

Disclosure statement
Authors have no disclosures
Author Contributions
SS, SR, AG-T, PDL created crowdfunding project,
raised funds, experimental design and execution,
SS, SR, PDL performed data analysis and wrote
draft. AG-T, GMM edited draft.
References
[1]

Mathieson, W., Mommaerts, K., Trouet J.M.,
Mathay, C., Guan, P., Carithers, L.J., Rohrer, D.,
Valley, D.R., Blanski, A., Jewell, S., Moore, H.M.,
Betsou, F., (2019) J Histochem Cytochem, Mar:
67(3): 159-168, DOI: 10.1369/0022155418819967
[2]
Carithers, L.J., Guan, P., Odeh, H., Sachs, M.C.,
Engel, K.B., Greytak, S.R., Barcus, M., Soria, C.,
Lih, C-J., Williams, P.M., Branton, P.A., Sobin, L.,
Fombonne, B., Bocklage, T., Andry, C.,
Duffy, E.R., Sica, G., Dhir, R., Jewell, S.,
Roche, N., Moore H.M., (2019) Arch Path Lab
Med, DOI: 10.5858/arpa.2018-0172-OA
[3]
Haile, S., Corbett, R.D., Bilobram, S., Bye,
M.H., Kirk, H., Pandoh, P., Trinh, E., MacLeod, T.,
McDonald, H., Bala, M., Miller, D., Novik, K.,
Coope, R.J., Moore, R.A., Zhao, Y., Mungall, A.J.,
Ma, Y., Holt, R.A., Jones, S.J., Marra, M.A. 2019,
Nucleic Acids Res., Jan 25;47(2):e12. DOI:
10.1093/nar/gky1142

Nucleic Acids
DNA was extracted using in-house reagents based
on the Gentra-Puregene methods. RNA was
extracted using Trizol, as per the manufacture’s

8

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/745232; this version posted August 23, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-ND 4.0 International license.

[4]

Jones, S.P., Kennedy, S.W. (2015)
Ecotoxicology 24, 55-60, DOI: 10.1007/s10646014-1354-z
[5]
Gaffney, E.F., Riegman, P.H., Grizzle, W.E.,
Watson, P.H., 2018, Biotech Histochem, 93(5):373386. DOI: 10.1080/10520295.2018.1446101
[6]
Canene-Adams, K. (2013) Methods
Enzymology, Vol 533, 225-233,
DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-420067-8.00015-5
[7] Groelz D, Viertler C, Pabst D, Dettmann N,
Zatloukal K (2018) PLoS ONE 13(9): e0203608.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0203608
[8]
Shabihkhani, M., Lucey, G.M., Wei, B.,
Mareninov, S., Lou, J.J., Vinters, H.V., Singer, E.J.,
Cloughesy, T.F., Yong, W.H. Clin Biochem. (2014)
Mar; 47(4-5):258-66.
[9]
Tomlinson, M., Morroll, D., (2008) Human
Fertil, Mar;11(1):33-42. doi:
10.1080/14647270701553280
[10]
Rajan, R., Matsumura, K., (2018) Adv Exp
Med Biol, 1081:339-354, doi: 10.1007/978-981-131244-1_18
[11]
Riesgo, A., Perez-Porro, A.R., Carmona, S.
Leys, S.P., Giriber, G. (2012) Optimization of
preservation and storage time of sponge tissues to
obtain quality mRNA for next-generation
sequencing. Mol Eco Resources 12, 312-322
[12]
Jones, W., Greytak, S., Odeh, H., Guan, P.,
Powers, J., Bavarva, J., Moore, H.M. Sci Rep.
(2019) May 6;9(1):6980. DOI: 10.1038/s41598-01943282-8
[13]
Passow, C.N., Kono, T.J.Y., Stahl, B.A.,
Jaggard, J. B., Keene, A.C., McGaugh, A.E. (2018)
Nonrandom RNAseq gene expression associated
with RNAlater and flash freezing storage methods.
Mol Eco Resources 19: 456-464 DOI:
10.1111/1755-0998.12965
[14]
Leprince, O., Buitink, J., (2015) Planta, Aug;
242(2):369-78. doi: 10.1007/s00425-015-2357-6.
[15]
Erkut, C., Vasilj, A., Boland, S., Habermann,
B., Shevchenko, A., Kurzchalia, T.V. (2013) PLoS
One. Dec 4; 8(12):e82473. doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0082473
[16]
Wright, P.E., Dyson, H.J. (2015) Nat Rev Mol
Cell Bio Jan;16(1):18-29.DOI:10.1038/nrm3920.
[17]
Boothby, T.C. Pielak, G.J., (2017) Bioessays
Nov;39(11). doi: 10.1002/bies.201700119.
[18]
Matsuo, N., Goda, N., Shimizu, K., Fukuchi,
S., Ota, M., Hiroaki, H. (2018) Int J Mol Sci Jan 30;
19(2) piiL E401, doi: 10.3390/ijms19020401

[19]
Gao, H., Liu, Y., Ding, J., Yang, J., Zhang, B.,
Hu, Y., Ge, M., Ye, Q., 2019, Biopreserv Biobank,
17(1):18-26. doi: 10.1089/bio.2018.0041.
[20]
Shankar, S., Roy, S., Geary-Teeter, A., Martin,
G.M., Ladd, P.D. (2019) Developing a new tissue
preservation method inspired by Tardigrades.
Experiment.com, DOI: 10.18258/11614
[21]
Napirei, M., Wulf, S., Eulitz, D., Mannherz, H.
G.and Kloeckl, T. (2005) Comparative
characterization of rat deoxyribonuclease 1
(Dnase1) and murine deoxyribonuclease 1 -like 3
(Dnase1 l3). Biochem J 389:355–364.
[22]
Tapia, H., Koshland, D.E. (2014) Trehalose is a
Versatile and Long-Lived Chaperone for
Desiccation Tolerance. Cur Bio 24, 2758-2766,
DOI: 10.106/j.cub.2014.10.005
[23]
Litus, E.A., Permyakov, S.E., Uversky, V.N.,
Permyakov, E.A. (2018) Cell Biochem Biophys
76(1-2):39-57. DOI: 10.1007/s12013-017-0785-6.
[24]
Wu, Y., Wu, M., Zhang, Y., Li, W., Gao, Y.,
Li, Z., Wang, Z., Lubec, G., Zhang, C., (2012)
Amino Acids, 43:1383-1388, DOI: 10.1007/s00726011-1212-8
[25]
Damsteegt, E.L., McHugh, N., Lokman, M.
(2016) Analyt Biochem, 511:92-96, DOI:
10/1016/j.ab.2016.08.005
[26]
Yang, W., Lee, J.Y., Nowotny, M. (2006) Mol
Cell 22(1) p5-13 DOI: 10.16/j.molcel.206.03.013
[27]
Schafer, P., Cymerman, I.A., Bujnicki, J.,
Meiss, G.(2007) Protein Sci. Jan; 16(1):82-91. DOI:
10.1110/ps.062535307
[28]
Oshima, J., Campisi, J., Tannock, T. C., &
Martin, G. M. (1995). J Cell Physiol, 162(2), 277283. doi:10.1002/jcp.1041620213

9

