bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Extracellular vesicles from therapeutic grade allogeneic
human placental stromal cells induce angiogenesis and
modulate immunity
Martin Wolf1, Balazs Vari1, Constantin Blöchl2, Anna M Raninger1, Rodolphe Poupardin1,
Cristien M Beez3, Anna Hoog1, Gabi Brachtl1, Essi Eminger1; Heide-Marie Binder1,
Michaela Oeller4, Andreas Spittler5, Thomas Heuser6, Astrid Obermayer2, Martina Seifert3,
Christian G Huber2, Katharina Schallmoser4, Hans-Dieter Volk3, Dirk Strunk1
1

Cell Therapy Institute, Spinal Cord Injury and Tissue Regeneration Center Salzburg (SCI-

TReCS), Paracelsus Medical University (PMU), Salzburg, Austria
2

Dept. of Biosciences, Paris Lodron University Salzburg

3

BCRT & Institute of Medical Immunology, Charite - Univeritätsmedizin Berlin, Germany

4

Department of Transfusion Medicine and SCI-TReCS, PMU, Salzburg, Austria

5

Anna Spiegel Center of Translational Research, Medical University, Vienna

6

Vienna Biocenter Core Facilities, Medical University, Vienna

Authorship Contributions:
Conception and design: M Wolf and D Strunk.
Development of methodology: M Wolf, B Vari, AM Raninger, A Spittler, D Strunk
Acquisition of data: M Wolf, B Vari, C Blöchl, AM Raninger, CM Beez, A Hoog, E Eminger,
G Brachtl, T Heuser, M Oeller, A Spittler
Analysis and interpretation of data: M Wolf, B Vari, C Blöchl, R Poupardin, HM Binder, M
Seifert, G Brachtl, D Strunk
Writing of the manuscript: M Wolf and D Strunk
Review and/or revision of the manuscript: K Schallmoser, M Seifert, CG Huber, H-D Volk
Administrative, technical, or material support: R Ofir
Study supervision: Dirk Strunk
Conflict of interest and funding: The authors have declared no conflict of interest. This
work was supported by funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and
innovation program (grant no. 668724 to DS and no. 731377 to KS) and a technology
transfer funding EV-TT (grant no. P1812596) of the Government of the region of Salzburg
(to DS & KS).
1
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ABSTRACT (221 words)
Allogeneic regenerative cell therapy has shown surprising results despite lack of
engraftment of the transplanted cells. Their efficacy was so far considered to be mostly due
to secreted trophic factors. We hypothesized that extracellular vesicles (EVs) can also
contribute to their mode of action. Here we provide evidence that EVs derived from
therapeutic placental-expanded (PLX) stromal cells are potent inducers of angiogenesis
and modulate immune cell proliferation in a dose-dependent manner.
Crude EVs were enriched >100-fold from large volume PLX conditioned media via
tangential flow filtration (TFF) as determined by tunable resistive pulse sensing (TRPS).
Additional TFF purification was devised to separate EVs from cell-secreted soluble factors.
EV identity was confirmed by western blot, calcein-based flow cytometry and electron
microscopy. Surface marker profiling of tetraspanin-positive EVs identified expression of
cell- and matrix-interacting adhesion molecules. Differential tandem mass tag proteomics
comparing PLX-EVs to PLX-derived soluble factors revealed significant differential
enrichment of 258 proteins in purified PLX-EVs involved in angiogenesis, cell movement
and immune system signaling. At the functional level, PLX-EVs and cells inhibited T cell
mitogenesis. PLX-EVs and soluble factors displayed dose-dependent proangiogenic
potential by enhancing tube-like structure formation in vitro.
Our findings indicate that the mode of PLX action involves an EV-mediated proangiogenic
function and immune response modulation that may help explaining clinical efficacy beyond
presence of the transplanted allogeneic cells.

KEYWORDS: Placental-expanded stromal cells (PLX), extracellular vesicles (EV), Therapy,
Immunomodulation, Angiogenesis, regenerative medicine

Acknowledgements: This work was supported by funding from the European Union’s
Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement no. 668724 and no.
731377) and a EVTT funding of the Government of the region of Salzburg.

2
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

INTRODUCTION
Peripheral artery disease (PAD) affects >10% of the European elderly population. Critical
limb ischemia (CLI) is an end stage of PAD resulting in high amputation rates and is
associated with increased risk for cardiovascular events and death. Allogeneic placentalexpanded (PLX) stromal cells are currently evaluated in a clinical phase III trial
(NCT03006770) challenging their efficiency as an advanced CLI therapy [1]. The
regenerative potential of these placental cells is not restricted to CLI as evidenced by their
hematopoietic support activity [2], a capacity to protect from radiation injury [3], and their
current investigation for improving muscle injury regeneration in patients after hip
arthroplasty [4]. Their mode of action has mainly been considered to be due to secretion of
a variety of cytokines and growth factors that can promote angiogenesis, cell recruitment,
migration, proliferation, and differentiation [5]. The general immunomodulatory capacity of
stromal cells has also been hypothesized to exert beneficial effects on the local and/or
systemic immune response [5], [6].
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a heterogeneous family of generally nano-sized membranecoated vesicular structures derived from most if not all cell types [7]. EVs comprise
prototypic endosomal-derived exosomes which are assembled and released via
multivesicular bodies as well as directly cell membrane-derived sub-micron sized so-called
microvesicles and apoptotic bodies [8], [9]. Conceptually, EVs transport their protein, lipid
and nucleic acid cargo to target sites allowing for action also over distance [9], [10].
Address code molecules displayed on the EV surface may contribute to target specificity
[11].
Inspired by the multiplicity of functions EVs can comply within intercellular communication
paving their way towards clinical applicability [8], [12], we hypothesized that PLX cells,
representing a widely applicable allogeneic cell therapy, can secrete EVs that bear the
capacity to contribute to their mode of action. We used conditioned media obtained after
short-term propagation of clinical grade PLX cell products under animal serum-free
conditions to separate EVs from their corresponding PLX-derived soluble factors for
comparative proteomic analysis and to test their influence on endothelial cell (EC) and
immune cell functions (Fig.S1). Results obtained as part of a European funded research
project (http://www.pace-h2020.eu/) indicated proangiogenic and immunomodulatory
potency of PLX-derived EVs.
3
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S1. Hypothetic mode of action of allogeneic PLX stromal cells. Allogeneic
placental-expanded (PLX) cells are considered to be rejected by the host immune system
after local injection. The mode of action may include a temporary direct (cell-cell contact) or
indirect stimulation of endogenous (endothelial or perivascular or interstitial) progenitor cells
as well as immune response modulation by various types of secreted factors eventually
resulting in reperfusion of the ischemic tissue and ideally wound healing. In this study we
focused on extracellular vesicles (EVs) compared to secreted soluble factors as potential
mediators of PLX’s biologic activity.

RESULTS
Physically defined media enable efficient cell-derived EV characterization
4
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

In initial experiments, we compared the particle count of standard media used at our
institution for stromal cell culture to select a suitable medium for PLX cell-derived EV
isolation. Alpha-modified minimum essential medium (-MEM) as well as other
conventional media supplemented with either fetal bovine serum (FBS) or pooled human
platelet lysate (HPL) as published [13] contained mean 4 x 108 – 3 x 109 particles/mL.
Fibrinogen-depleted -MEM (-MEM*) which can be used without heparin, that otherwise
might inhibit EV functions [14], [15], showed even higher particle counts up to 1010/mL. Both
ultracentrifugation (UCF) and tangential flow filtration (TFF) allowed for a significant
depletion of serum- or plasma-derived EVs. We chose TFF in further experiments for better
scalability and time saving purposes because efficient depletion of serum-EVs by UCF
required up to 24 h centrifugation at 100,000 x g [16], [17]. Some but not all tested
chemically defined serum-free media contained less than 108 particles/mL (Fig.S2A).
Culturing PLX cells in regular fibrinogen-containing -MEM/HPL resulted in a significant rise
of EVs on top of the pre-existing HPL-derived EVs within six days. PLX cell culture in TFF
particle-depleted -MEM*/TFF or in defined media resulted in a significantly elevated
particle count after six day culture thus indicating effective release of PLX-EVs under these
conditions (Fig.S2B). Time course analysis confirmed significant production of PLX-EVs
under both -MEM*/TFF and chemically defined serum-free medium conditions for up to six
days (i.e., 3 x 48 h conditioned medium [CM] harvest periods; Fig.S2C). Tunable resistive
pulse sensing (TRPS) size distribution showed a more heterogeneous particle composition
under serum-free defined conditions including measurably larger particles (Fig.S2D). For
reasons of efficiency, we chose fibrinogen-depleted and particle-depleted -MEM*/TFF for
further experiments.
We next devised a standardized high content process for EV production (Fig.1) based on
previous results [18]. Large volumes of fibrinogen-depleted -MEM* (n x 500 mL) were first
depleted for platelet-rich plasma- and serum-derived particles (including EVs) before use in
large-scale PLX culture (Fig.1A). Following protocols previously established for large scale
fully functional bone marrow stromal cell propagation [19]–[22], CM was harvested from cell
factories after 48 h periods in particle depleted -MEM*/TFF (Fig.1B) and subjected to
100x concentration of crude PLX-EVs (Fig.1C). These crude EV preparations, containing
PLX-EVs admixed with concentrated proteins, were separated from the soluble factor
fraction that was obtained as the TFF permeate. Further purification of the crude EV
preparations with another TFF cycle allowed producing purified EVs.
5
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S2: Physically defined media are required for cell-derived EV characterization.
(A) Particle content of selected cell culture media with (left) or without serum (right) was
measured by tunable resistive pulse sensing (TRPS). Media details are given in the
methods section. (B) Comparison of the particle count in fresh and conditioned media after
six-day placental stromal cell culture (PLX+). Particle concentrations were measured from
three independent donors in four different media. (C) Time course of EV production in αMEM*/TFF (see Fig.1) was compared to serum free defined medium. TRPS analysis was
performed for three independent donors in triplicates over six days. (D) TRPS
6
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

measurement of PLX stromal cell-secreted EVs showed (iii) significantly different particle
size distribution in (ii) defined serum-free vs. (i) platelet lysate-supplemented media (TFF
pre-depleted). Triplicate measurements from one representative donor are shown (i, ii).
Data from three donors were analyzed statistically (iii).

Figure 1: Schematic workflow of large-scale EV production from PLX cells. (A) Cell
culture medium α-MEM was supplemented with 10% pooled human platelet lysate (HPL)
7
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

and fibrinogen-depleted, as described, before further use (α-MEM*). To produce particlefree medium by tangential flow filtration (TFF; α-MEM*/TFF) for EV harvest, α-MEM* was
filtered through a 500 kDa cut-off membrane. (B) 70% confluent PLX cells were cultured in
particle free α-MEM*/TFF for one to three 48 h periods to obtain conditioned medium (CM).
(C) Particles were enriched 100-fold by concentration in the TFF system (crude EVs) and
separated from soluble factors (sol. F.). To remove remaining soluble factors/proteins, this
crude concentrate was washed with twice the initial start volume to yield purified EVs
separated from soluble factors.
Transmission electron microscopy showed typical appearance of round shaped vesicles of
about 100 nm size with negative staining (Fig.2A) and characteristic double membranesurrounded vesicles in high-resolution cryo-electron microscopy images that showed more
protein background in crude EV and less in purified EV preparations, respectively
(Fig.2BC).

Figure 2: Crude vs. purified PLX cell-derived EV characterization. (A) Transmission
electron microscopy image of PLX-EVs with negative contrast. (B) Cryo-TEM pictures of
highly magnified PLX-derived crude EVs and (C) purified EVs. Scale bar 250 nm (in A) and
100 nm (in BC). Lower magnification overview insert scale bar 1000 nm (in (A).

Western blots to further characterize EV identity for providing information for studies of
extracellular vesicles [9] showed comparably high CD81 and lower CD9 tetraspanin
expression levels in three representative purified EV preparations from PLX cells of three
individual placentas. Lineage specificity of tetraspanin expression levels was supported by
direct comparison to endothelial progenitor cell-derived lower CD81 and higher CD9 levels
(Fig.3A). Loading corresponding amounts of protein resulted in a significantly enhanced
signal for all three EV associated tetraspanins tested in purified as compared to crude EV
preparations. The membrane raft marker flotillin-1 was found to be significantly enriched in
purified EVs compared to crude EVs.
8
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 3: EV identity and purity determined by western blot. (A) Identity confirmation
for EVs from three individual PLX donors (Lots P15, P25, P27) compared to one endothelial
colony-forming progenitor cell (ECFC) preparation showing lineage specific tetraspanin
9
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

CD81 and CD9 differences. (B) Comparing parental PLX cells (from the same lots P15,
P25, P27 as shown in A) and corresponding EV preparations (crude EV and purified EV
from PLX lots 15, 25 and 27, EV15, EV25 and EV27, respectively) for tetraspanins CD9,
CD63, CD81, compartment specific markers flotillin, calnexin and GRP94, as well as
apolipoprotein A1 (ApoA1) and human serum albumin (HSA). (C) Monitoring of protein and
tetraspanin CD81 enrichment during the concentration and purification process. One
representative preparation is shown of three tested. (D) Densitometric analysis of blots
shown in A-C normalized to total protein/lane. Significant differences (*p < 0.0332, **p <
0.0021 and ***p < 0.0002) were identified based on two-tailed t-test with 95% confidence
level. The complete western blot membranes are shown in a comprehensive Fig. S8.

The endoplasmic reticulum lectin, calnexin, and the golgi membrane stacking protein,
GRP94 were found to be present only in cell-derived protein preparations as to be expected
(Fig.3BD). To assess the purity of EV preparations we probed for apolipoprotein A1 (Apo
A1) as a marker for lipoproteins and human serum albumin (HSA) as a contaminating
protein highly abundant in culture medium. We found an efficient depletion of HSA during
the second TFF purification step and significant enrichment of Apo A1 in purified EVs.
Questioning the performance of our EV purification procedure, we found a continuous
enrichment of a 25 kDa protein band throughout the whole purification process (Fig.3C
top), that was confirmed to represent CD81 after blotting and immunostaining (Fig.3C
bottom). Densitometric analysis of the EV preparations from three independent donors
revealed enrichment of EV specific markers, absence of cell-compartment specific proteins
and efficient depletion of soluble protein as indicated by reduced HSA levels in purified EVs
(Fig.3D).
Using multiplex bead-based flow cytometry [23] for EV surface marker profiling of three
independent purified PLX-EV preparations confirmed high expression of tetraspanins
CD81/CD63 and reduced CD9 expression. We found medium classified expression of the
fibronectin receptor CD49e/CD29 and high/medium expression of the extracellular matrix
interaction molecules CD44 and NG2 as well as the cytokine receptor CD105 (endoglin)
and CD142 (coagulation factor III, tissue factor). The majority of hematopoiesis marker
molecules displayed in this assay were confirmed to be absent on purified PLX-derived EVs
(Fig.4A).

10
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 4: Antibody-based EV marker profiling indicated distinct address code and
low abundance of apoptotic bodies. (A) Heat map showing mean surface marker
expression of crude vs. purified (pur.) PLX-EVs from three individual donors (P15, P25,
P27) as determined by bead-based multiplex flow cytometry (MACSPlex). (B, i) Fluorescent
silica beads (Kisker) were used to adjust small particle resolution in flow cytometry and to
set a size gate <1000 nm for EV detection. (B, ii) Dot plot showing size distribution of a
representative PLX-EV sample. (B, iii) Dot plots showing fluorescence background of
unstained PBS control, (B, iv) calcein-AM and lactadherin-Alexa Fluor 647 stained PBS
control without EVs added (Cal. / Lact.) and (B, v) representative double-stained PLX-EV
plot showing the distribution of calcein+ and lactadherin+ events using a dual fluorescence
trigger. (C) Determination of calcein+ EVs and lactadherin+ presumably apoptotic bodies in
crude vs. purified PLX-EV preparations, depicted as pie chart of marker distribution of the
positive events. Negative events were excluded from analysis because current technology
does not permit precise discrimination between electronic noise and non-fluorescent
11
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

unstained EVs or other undetermined non-particulate non-fluorescent signals notably in the
size range of 100 nm and below [24].

After establishing flow cytometry instrument sensitivity based on silica size marker beads
we defined a gating strategy to enable measurement of nano-particles (sized between >100
nm up to <1000 nm). Negative control phosphate buffered saline (PBS) with and w/o
calcein and lactadherin reagents, respectively, showed only minute unspecific reactivity
(Fig.4Biii & iv). Flow cytometry of crude vs. purified EV preparations showed
predominantly calcein converting EVs (Fig.S3 and Fig.4Bv). Distribution of calcein and
lactadherin fluorescence-triggered events for each EV preparation indicated that ≥ 96% of
detected EVs were derived from intact cells (calcein single positive) and presumably not
apoptotic bodies (lactadherin negative). By back-gating lactadherin and calcein doublepositive events in the size gate (Fig.4Bii, PLX EV plot), the estimated apoptotic bodies
were more apparent in the 500 – 1000 nm size range as described in the literature [25]
(Fig.4C).

Figure S3: Crude vs. purified EV flow cytometry. Dual fluorescence triggering-derived
dot plots based on the gating strategy shown in Fig.4B was used to determine the number
of calcein+ EVs and lactadherin+ presumably apoptotic bodies in three independent pairs of
crude vs. purified PLX-EV preparations from PLX cultures of placenta lots P15, P25 and
P27, respectively. Corresponding pie charts are depicted in Fig.4C.

The EV purification protocol devised in this study allows for efficient high throughput
separation of soluble factors from EVs out of the otherwise protein-contaminated crude EV
fraction after sequential TFF enrichment of CM preparations (illustrated in Fig.5A).
Targeted proteomic pre-analysis using western blot-based arrays for comparing
unconditioned cell culture media vs. soluble factor fractions (derived from CM) and crude

12
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

vs. purified PLX-EVs revealed measurable differences between the four fractions
(Fig.S4A).

Figure 5: Proteomic composition of PLX secretome fractions. (A) Illustration of
different fractions separated by TFF. A graphic symbol legend is shown in Figure 1. (B)
Venn diagram showing the overlap and differences in proteins identified by label-free
proteome analysis in the different secretome fractions (soluble factors, sol.F.; crude EV;
purified EV, pur. EV) from three donors in two independent experiments.

The majority of highly abundant proangiogenic factors was found to be present in both,
crude and purified EVs. We did not find specific factors to be significantly enriched in
purified EVs over crude EV, using this technology (Fig.S4B).

13
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S4: Proteomic characterization of PLX secretome fractions. (A) Antibody arraybased analysis of proangiogenic factors in the different secretome fractions (derived from
one representative donor). (B) Heat map representation of corresponding quantitative
analysis of PLX secretome fractions as indicated. Numbers represent relative luminescence
units.

We therefore performed a more detailed proteome analysis using two different approaches.
We analyzed the protein composition of soluble factors, crude and purified EVs compared
to unconditioned media to identify proteins uniquely present in the different fractions by
qualitative label-free proteomics. Pre-analytics confirmed depletion of total protein content
from crude EVs in the purified EV fractions by the factor of 4.87 – 18.33 accompanied by a
further enrichment of EVs by the factor of 1.34 – 3.30. A total of 401 - 1,168 proteins was
detected in the different donor-derived fractions analyzed by label-free proteomics. (Table
S1). Only proteins detected in the corresponding fractions of at least two different donors
(708 proteins in total) were selected for further analysis. We could identify 258 proteins that
were uniquely present in purified EVs. Many of these proteins were related to either cell
movement, adhesion, immune system regulation or angiogenesis (Table S2). Furthermore,
59 proteins unique to the soluble factors and 18 proteins enriched in the crude EVs were
found; 224 proteins were present in all three fractions. (Fig. 5).
To get deeper insights into differentially expressed proteins present in all fractions, we used
differential proteomics with tandem mass tag (TMT) labels in the different secretome
fractions from three independent donors. Due to higher sensitivity of the TMT method, we
could detect 1115 proteins differentially expressed in all fractions. Heatmap analysis of the

14
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

different secretome fractions revealed a distinct pattern of protein clusters present in every
fraction (Fig. 6A). Volcano plot showing statistical analysis of fold change in proteins
differentially represented in purified EVs vs. soluble factors. Significantly different proteins
were identified to be key molecules involved in immune response modulation, angiogenesis
and cell movement together with EV marker molecules and were over-represented in the
purified EV fraction. These proteins were highlighted according to selected corresponding
GO terms as listed in table S2. (Fig. 6BC; Table S2; Fig. S5). Ingenuity pathway analysis
revealed several canonical signaling pathways differentially over-represented among
proteins in EV preparations compared to the soluble factor fraction (Fig. S6A). Multiple
disease and functional categories related to cell angiogenesis, movement and the immune
response were also classified to be enriched in the EV proteome (Fig. S6B).

15
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

16
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 6: Quantitative proteomic characterization of PLX cell secretome fractions.
(A) Heatmap comparing the proteome of soluble factor fractions (sol. F.), crude EVs and
purified (pur.) PLX-EVs with human platelet lysate-supplemented defibrinized unconditioned
cell culture medium (-MEM*/TFF). (B) Volcano plot comparing protein expression signal
significance to levels of enrichment in sol. F. vs. pur. EV. Functional categories according to
corresponding GO terms as listed in Table 2 are depicted as color coded dots as indicated;
additional highly over-represented proteins marked as open circles (see also Figure S6).
(C) Selected proteins most predominantly over-represented in pur. EVs. Color code
corresponding to (B). Complete proteomics data have been uploaded to PRIDE [accession
N°.: PXD014572]

As a functional readout validating our proteomic results, we analyzed the different vesicular
and soluble PLX secretome fractions for their capacity to stimulate endothelial network
formation on matrigel as an in vitro test for angiogenic potential. We found that crude EVs
as well as purified EVs and soluble factors induced supra-maximum network formation of
endothelial colony-forming progenitor cells (ECFCs) compared to complete angiogenesissupportive medium positive control in a 10,000:1 ratio. Crude EVs had significantly higher
angiogenic potential than purified EVs for the 1000:1 and 100:1 ratio and compared to
soluble factors in the 100:1 ratio only, indicating proangiogenic potential of both EVs and
soluble factors (Fig. 7A). As a second readout, we tested the potential of the different PLX
secretome fractions compared to PLX cells to inhibit mitogen-driven vs. allogenic mixed
leukocyte reaction (MLR)-induced T cell proliferation. PLX cells significantly inhibited both
mitogen-induced as well as allogeneic T cell proliferation in a dose dependent manner with
reaching almost 100% inhibition at a PLX cell-to-PBMC ratio of 1:1. Crude EVs were as
effective in inhibiting mitogen-induced T cell proliferation in a 15,000:1 ratio. Purified EVs
had a significantly reduced capacity to inhibit T cell proliferation at lower ratio. Surprisingly,
PLX-derived soluble factors did not affect T-cell mitogenesis in this assay (Fig. 7C).
Interestingly purified EVs had no inhibitory effect on the MLR response at higher ratio and
even showed a slight boost of the T cell proliferation like the PLX cells at lowest
concentrations (Fig. 7D).

17
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure 7: Angiogenic and immunomodulation potential of EVs: (A) Angiogenic
potential of different PLX secretome fractions was analyzed by endothelial network
formation in a matrigel assay. Total length of the endothelial colony-forming progenitor cell
(ECFC) networks in the presence of crude or purified PLX-EVs at the indicated EV:ECFC
ratio is shown. Volumes of soluble factors (sol. F.) added to the assay were calculated
accordingly corresponding to the EV numbers as described in the methods section. Results
were pooled from three independent donors (***p < 0.0002, ****p < 0.0001). (B)
18
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Representative pictures of ECFC networks in the matrigel assay shown in A. (C)
Immunomodulation by PLX secretome fractions was measured by their capacity to inhibit
PHA-induced T cell proliferation. The percentage of inhibition was calculated relative to the
maximum proliferation induced by PHA. Pooled results of three independent donors
measured at day four (**p < 0.0021, ***p < 0.0002, ****p < 0.0001). (D) Comparison of PLX
cells and purified PLX-EVs for their capacity to inhibit allogeneic T-cell proliferation in a
mixed leukocyte reaction measured at day seven (**p < 0.0021, ***p < 0.0002, ****p <
0.0001).

DISCUSSION
In this study, we devised an efficient isolation and purification strategy suitable for massproduction of EVs for high-content proteomic and functional analysis. Based on previously
established large-scale cell propagation protocols [22], [26], [27], up to one trillion purified
EVs could be obtained from one liter of CM within less than a working day (e.g. 5mL final
TFF concentrate including 2 x 1011 EVs/mL). TFF depletion of starting media or the use of
defined particle-free media permits directed cell-derived EV analysis devoid of serum- or
culture supplement-derived EV or particle contamination [28]. EV identity and purity
achieved with this strategy was confirmed by western blot and flow cytometry according to
MISEV 2018 criteria [9].
The efficacy of PLX cells for the treatment of CLI is currently evaluated in a randomized,
double-blind, multicenter, placebo controlled phase III clinical trial based on preclinical data
indicating systemic activity of soluble factors secreted by the PLX cells and based on a
favorable safety profile in two phase I studies [1], [2]. Taking advantage of the
straightforward separation of soluble factors from EVs out of conditioned media by stepwise
TFF (Fig. 1), we focused in this study on in-depth proteomic analysis. We demonstrated
that proteomes in soluble factor as compared to EV fractions significantly differ. Key
angiogenic factors enriched in purified EVs included platelet factor-4, thrombospondin and
integrins, among others (Fig. 6C) Despite these differences, both crude and purified PLXEV fractions as well as the PLX cells induced supra-maximum vascular network formation
in a dose dependent manner in vitro. This could be explained by the fact that several
proteins involved in vascular remodeling (e.g. serpins, PF4, TSP-1 and angiogenin, Fig.
S4B) were present in the soluble factor as well as EV preparations. Provided, that a
comparable ‘soluble factors plus EVs’ secretome pattern also occurs in patients, our results
19
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

would indicate that PLX cell-derived EVs may be considered to contribute to the therapeutic
effect in CLI. We may speculate that EVs can act over longer periods of time beyond
rejection of the allogenic cells and degradation of secreted factors. A precise assignment of
the various effects rendering different aspects of vascular remodeling and wound healing
induced by PLX cells or their soluble and vesicular secretome fractions in CLI patients
requires additional research that is currently underway in mechanistic side studies
accompanying the ongoing clinical trial (http://www.pace-h2020.eu/).
We identified immunity in addition to angiogenesis as predominantly affected by pathways
that require action of the proteins over-represented particularly in purified PLX-EVs. This
comes not too surprising given the fact that PLX, like many other stromal cells, bear an
immunomodulatory capacity, at least in vitro [4], [6]. In contrast to angiogenesis, an immune
response modulation capacity as determined by inhibition of T cell mitogenesis in a dosedependent manner was assigned only to the PLX cells and their EVs. In this assay, purified
EV were significantly less efficient than crude EV and PLX cells. A more detailed
subtractive analysis is currently underway to better delineate the still ill-defined
immunological aspects of stromal cell-derived EV function. Immune response modulation
by stromal cells and their cell-derived trophic factors so far has been viewed in a rather
simplistic way as immune suppression, because standard readouts commonly measure
inhibition of immune cell proliferation and effector function [6]. Evidence from sepsis models
however favors the view of a peculiar immunomodulatory role of stromal cell therapy being
capable of reducing sepsis mortality [29]. In a recent phase I dose escalation study for the
treatment of sepsis by allogeneic bone marrow stromal cell infusion, no elevation of
circulating cytokines was found [30]. This does not exclude the possibility that soluble
stromal cell-derived factors or EVs act locally or that other factors not included in the test
panel are involved, but it highlights the difficulty to obtain suitable biopsies for biomarker
discovery and for studying the mode of action of therapeutic cells in vivo. It also tempts to
speculate that EVs may be involved in immunomodulation also in sepsis.
The reduced efficacy of PLX cells at low input cell number (i.e. higher ratio) as inhibitors of
the allogeneic MLR (Fig. 7D) is reminiscent of previous results with other stromal cell types
[31], [32], and in accordance with the literature [6]. The complete lack of allogeneic MLR
inhibition by PLX-EV may highlight the need for selecting particularly potent EVs and/or
cells for the treatment of allo-immunity-related conditions, including graft-versus-host
disease [33], [34]. We therefore plan a more detailed analysis, particularly of the immune20
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

related proteomic profile of EVs vs. donor cells vs. soluble factors, and validation of results
in additional experimental models towards rational potency-based selection of cell- and EVbased therapeutics. This will include comprehensive genomic analysis focusing on small
RNA species as initiated previously in a study for monitoring the immunomodulatory
potential of neonatal umbilical cord stromal cell-derived EVs [18]. Our quantitative EV
purification approach will also allow for combining lipidomics, glycomics and metabolomics
for a more broad view on PLX-EV biology using upcoming technology [35]–[37]. EV
characterization can not be limited to key pathways of angiogenesis and immunity. Tissue
factor, which has been described to limit hemocompatibility and thus hamper systemic
transplantability of hepatocytes and Langerhans’ islets [38], was detected at moderate
levels on the PLX-EV surface in this study. Initial experiments already showed a significant
procoagulant capacity of PLX cells and their crude as well as purified vesicles arguing in
favor of a safe local administration (Fig. S7). In particular for systemic applications,
selection of products with sufficient hemocompatibility due to low/absent tissue factor
expression or lack of complement activation may be beneficial as described for cell
transplants [39]. Results obtained in these studies might have an impact on future protocols
for EV manufacturing [40].
This study has certain limitations. The precise position of EV-associated proteins inside
vesicles as compared to a location in a protein corona adjacent to the vesicles still needs to
be determined. The continuous enrichment of EV marker molecules (observed with each
TFF washing step as observed in western blots, Fig. 3C) and the up to 18-fold reduction of
protein contamination throughout the purification process argue in favor of our protocol.
Reaching a higher level of purity is expected to result in more precise information from
future high content omics screening. Understanding the relative contribution of cells vs.
soluble factors vs. EVs to therapeutic efficacy and monitoring the fate particularly of EVs in
vivo will be a major challenge on the way towards rational design of efficient cell- and EVbased therapies [8], [12].

MATERIALS & METHODS
All materials and methods used in this study are summarized in detail in the online section.
21
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

ONLINE METHODS SECTION
Cell culture media and reagents
Serum- or plasma-containing media tested in this study included α-MEM, Eagle’s MEM
(EMEM, both Sigma- Aldrich, USA) and endothelial growth medium (EGM2, Lonza, USA).
Media were supplemented with 10% pooled HPL or FBS as indicated, 5 mM N(2)-L-AlanylL-Glutamin (Dipeptiven, Fresenius Kabi, Austria) in the absence or presence of 2 U/mL
preservative-free heparin (Biochrom, Germany) without antibiotics or with 100 U/mL
penicillin and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin (both Sigma-Aldrich, USA) as indicated in the results
section. For ECFC culture EGM-2 was supplemented with hydrocortisone, hFGF, VEGF,
IGF, EGF and ascorbic acid from the supplied bullet Kit (all Lonza) and FBS was replaced
by an equivalent volume of pHPL [26], [41]. For particle depletion media were prepared by
clotting supplemented -MEM as described without heparin to avoid possible inhibition of
EV function [15], [18], [19], [27], [42]. The collapsed fibrin clot was removed by
centrifugation for 10 min, 3000 x g at room temperature. The resulting precleared medium
was filtered through a 0.22 µm stericup filter (Merck Millipore, USA) and finally particle
depleted using a 1,600 cm² 500 kDa cut off hollow fiber modified polyethersulfone (mPES)
membrane filter column operated on a KR2i TFF System (Repligen, USA).This medium
was termed α-MEM*/TFF. For comparison to TFF, we used ultracentrifugation that was
performed at 100,000 x g for 3h in a Sorval WX80 ultracentrifuge with an T-865 rotor (both
Thermo scientific, USA) as indicated.
Chemically defined and serum-free media included CNT-Prime (CELLnTEC, CH), X-Vivo10, -15 and -20 (Lonza, USA) and MSC NutriStem XF medium (including a proprietary
supplement mix; Biological Industries, Israel). Media were 0.22 µm sterile filtered prior to
use.

PLX cell culture
Cryopreserved clinical grade PLX cell aliquots were obtained from Pluristem Inc. (Israel) as
part of a European funded research project (http://www.pace-h2020.eu/). For this study, we
used PLX cells derived from three individual donors, P150216R01, P250416R05 and
P270114R27 (termed P15, P25 and P27, respectively). For EV production aliquots of 2.5
22
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

million PLX cells were propagated for one to two passages to avoid excess proliferation at
moderate seeding density of 1,000 cells/cm² in 2,528 cm² cell factories (CF4, Thermo
Fisher Scientific, USA) as established previously until approximately 70% confluence [19],
[43]. For EV harvest PLX cells were washed twice with 37°C pre-warmed Dulbecco’s PBS
(Sigma Aldrich, USA) and cultured for an additional 48 h in particle depleted α-MEM*/TFF.

EV quantification
We used TRPS to quantify the particle content in various samples including fresh cell
culture media, conditioned media, crude and purified EV preparations. Samples were
diluted at least 1:1 in Dulbecco’s PBS containing 0.05% Tween 20 that was also used as
measurement electrolyte. Measurements were performed using a qNano Gold (Izon, New
Zeeland) equipped with an NP150 nano-pore for the size range between 70 and 420 nm.
EV enrichment and purification
To isolate and purify EVs from PLX cells cultured in particle depleted medium, the
conditioned medium was harvested after 48 h intervals. First, cells were depleted by
centrifugation at 300 x g for 5 min followed by a 3,000 x g centrifugation step for 10 min to
deplete cell debris. This precleared conditioned medium was first concentrated 100-fold
using a 300 kDa cut off hollow fiber mPES membrane filter column operated on a KR2i TFF
System (Repligen, USA). The particle-free soluble factor fraction was collected as permeate
at this step while the crude EV preparation was kept as ‘retentate’ inside the system as
illustrated in Figure 1. By washing this crude EV fraction with twice the starting volume
NaCl 0.9% buffered with 10 mM HEPES an additional depletion of proteins and other nonvesicular non-particulate content was obtained resulting in the final purified EV fraction
(Fig.1).

EV identity by western blot and flow cytometry
To analyze EV identity and purity aspects we performed western blotting using TGX stain
free gradient 4-20% SDS- PAGE gels run in a mini-Protean system. Samples were loaded
with Laemmli buffer containing 50 µM dithiothreitol (DTT), as reducing agent, except for
tetraspanins CD9, 63 and 81. After transfer using the mini Trans-Blot tank system (all Bio23
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Rad, USA), nitrocellulose membranes were probed with primary antibodies diluted in TBST
with 2% BSA in the dilutions indicated in Table S3.
Detection was performed using horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-labeled secondary
antibodies (rabbit anti-mouse IgG, A27025, Thermo Fisher, USA;, mouse anti-goat 205035-108, Jackson Laboratories, USA; or polymer goat-anti-rabbit, K4002, DAKO EnVision,
Agilent, USA) depending on the host species of the primary antibody and clarity enhanced
chemiluminescence (ECL) substrate. Bands were visualized and quantified using a
chemidoc system and image lab software (all Bio-Rad). Densitometry of specific bands was
quantified after background correction in relation to the total protein content detected with
the stain free technology before transfer as published [44].
In order to obtain a broader overview of markers present on the surface of PLX derived EVs
we applied a bead-based screening assay measured with flow cytometry as described [45].
To standardize the EV input for the assay we loaded 1x10 9 EVs on the MACS Plex capture
bead mix (Miltenyi, Germany)[23] stained with a mix of CD9-, CD63- and CD81-APC
detection reagent mix according to manufacturer’s protocol. Analysis was performed with
an LSRFortessa instrument (BD, USA) equipped with 355 nm, 405 nm, 488 nm, 561 nm
and 640 nm lasers. Raw measurement data were corrected for unspecific binding of the
detection antibody mix to the beads and expressed as relative fold-change of mean
fluorescence intensity (MFI) compared to samples stained with isotype control.
For single EV analysis by flow cytometry crude and purified PLX-EV preparations were
stained with lactadherin-Alexa fluor 647 (CellSystems, Germany), and calcein AM (SigmaAldrich, USA) that were aggregate-depleted by centrifugation at 17,000 x g for 10 min
directly prior to use. Staining with lactadherin was performed for 30 min at 4°C and
subsequently, after 1:10 dilution of the samples, with calcein for 5 min at room temperature.
Samples were further diluted 1:5 in PBS and analyzed on a Cytoflex flow cytometer
(Beckman Coulter, USA). For creating a size-based gate <1000 nm for EV detection we
used 100, 200, 500 and 1000 nm green fluorescent-labeled silica beads (Kisker Biotech,
Germany) as illustrated in Figure 4B [46]–[48]. Based on the separation of fluorescent EVs
from particle background we only recorded fluorescence-positive events using double
fluorescence triggering in the FITC and APC channels. For quantifying calcein+ and
lactadherin+ EV, gating was performed using staining reagents appropriately diluted in PBS
as a negative control. Percentage of calcein, lactadherin and double-positive populations
24
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

was calculated as a part of the sum of all acquired events and were displayed as a pie chart
(Fig.4C).

Electron microscopy
For conventional negative contrast transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 10 µL EV
samples were applied on formvar-coated 100 mesh copper grids (Agar scientific, UK), fixed
with 2,5% glutaraldehyde and stained with uranyl acetate replacement solution 1:10
(Electron Microscopic Sciences, UK) in bi-distilled water. Dried samples were imaged using
an 80 kV LEO EM 910 transmission electron microscope (Zeiss, Germany) equipped with a
Tröndle 227 Sharp Eye digital camera system. For cryo-TEM, EV samples were diluted
1:10 in 0,9% NaCl solution and 4 µl were applied to Quantifoil (Großlöbichau, Germany) Cu
400 mesh R1.2/1.3 holy carbon grids loaded a Cu 400 mesh R1.2/1.3 holy carbon grid
(Leica Microsystems, Germany). Grids were glow discharged for 1 min at -25 mA with a
Bal-Tec (Balzers, Liechtenstein) SCD005 glow discharger and loaded into a Leica GP grid
plunger with the climate chamber set at 4ºC and 70% relative humidity. EV samples were
diluted 1:10 in 0.9% NaCl solution and 4 µl were applied to the carbon side of the grid. After
front-side blotting for 2 - 8 seconds (using the instrument’s sensor function, no pre- or postblotting incubation) with Whatman filter paper #1 (Little Chalfont, Great Britain) grids were
plunge frozen into liquid ethane at approximately -180º C for instant vitrification. Cryosamples were transferred to a Glacios cryo-transmission microscope (Thermo Scientific,
USA) equipped with a X-FEG and a Falcon3 direct electron detector (4,096 x 4,096 pixels).
The microscope was operated in a low-dose mode using the SerialEM software [49].
Images were recorded digitally in linear mode of the Falcon3 camera at magnifications of
5,300 (pixel size: 27.5 Å, defocus: -50 µm, dose: 0.2 e/Å2), 36,000 (pixel size: 4.1 Å,
defocus: -6 µm, dose: 14 e/Å2) and 150,000 (pixel size: 0.98 Å, defocus: -3 µm, dose: 60
e/Å2).

Tandem mass tag proteomics (TMTP) and bioinformatics
Reagents included acetonitrile (≥ 99.9%) and methanol (≥ 99.9%; both VWR, Austria), DTT
(≥ 99.5%), formic acid (98.0-100%), iodoacetamide (≥ 99.0%), sodium dodecyl sulfate
25
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

(SDS; ≥ 99.5%), triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, 1 mol/L) and trifluoroacetic acid (≥
99.0%; all Sigma-Aldrich, Austria), ortho-phosphoric acid (85%; Merck, USA), and
sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega, USA). Deionized water was purified with a
MilliQ® Integral 3 instrument (Millipore, USA).
To determine protein content, samples were adjusted to 5% SDS and 50 mmol/L TEAB (pH
7.55) and incubated at 95°C for 10 min to lyse the EVs. Samples were analyzed by a
Pierce™ bicinchoninic acid protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) according to
the manufacturer´s instructions. S-Trap™ mini columns (Protifi, Huntington, NY, USA) were
utilized for sample preparation and 100 µg of protein were prepared according to the
manufacturer´s instructions with minor adjustments: Lysis of EVs as well as denaturation
and reduction of proteins were performed in 5% SDS and 50 mmol/L TEAB supplemented
with 40 mM DTT at 95°C for 10 min. Cysteines were alkylated by the addition of IAA to a
final concentration of 80 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 min. Proteins were digested
within the S-Trap matrix with trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:10 w/w at 37°C for
18 h. Peptides were eluted and subsequently dried using a vacuum centrifuge. These
samples were re-suspended in H2O + 0.10% FA to a concentration of 3.33 mg/mL. Peptides
of each sample (20 µg) were labeled by a TMT 10-plex™ kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific,
Austria). Labeled samples were pooled and desalted using 100 µl Pierce™ C18 tips
(Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) and dried again using a vacuum centrifuge. These
samples were re-suspended in H2O + 0.10% FA to a concentration of 5 mg/mL.
High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation was carried out on a
nanoHPLC instrument (UltiMate™ U3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific, Germany) at a
flow rate of 300 nL/min and a column oven temperature of 50°C. Separation of unlabeled
samples was performed on an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column (500 mm x 75 µm
i.d., 3.0 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). Samples (3.3 mg/mL; 0.15 µL)
were injected using a microliter pick-up mode (loop volume 1 µL). A multi-step linear
gradient of mobile phase solutions A (H2O + 0.10% formic acid) and B (acetonitrile + 0.10%
formic acid) was applied as follows: 1% - 22% B for 200 min, 22% - 30% B for 40 min, 30%
- 55% for 30 min, 90% B for 20 min and 1% B for 40 min. Each sample was measured
once.
Separation of TMT-labeled samples was performed on a 2000 mm µPAC™ C18 column
(PharmaFluidics, Ghent, Belgium). The sample [5.0 mg/mL; 1µL] was injected using a
microliter pick-up mode (5 µL loop volume). A multi-step linear gradient of mobile phase
26
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

solutions A and B was applied as follows: 1% - 22% B for 500 min, 22% - 40% B for 100
min, 90% B for 30 min and 1% B for 100 min. Five technical replicates were measured.
All mass spectrometry measurements were conducted in positive ion mode on a hybrid
mass spectrometer (QExactive™ Plus benchtop quadrupole-Orbitrap® mass spectrometer)
equipped with a Nanospray Flex™ ion source (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) and a
SilicaTip™ emitter with 360 µm outer diameter, 20 µm inner diameter, and a 10 µm inner tip
diameter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). Mass spectrometric data were acquired with
the following instrument settings: spray voltage of 1.5 kV, capillary temperature of 320°C, Slens, radio frequency level 55.0, MS1 AGC target 3 x 106, m/z range 400-2000, maximum
injection time of 100 ms, resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. Data-dependent tandem mass
spectrometry (ddMS2) was carried out in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD)
cell at a normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28.0 and a resolution setting of 17,500
at m/z 200 for unlabeled samples and at a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 200 for TMT-labeled
samples. For MS2, the top 15 signals were chosen for fragmentation with a 2.0 m/z
isolation window, an automatic gain control target of 15 with a maximum injection time of
100 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 secons. The instrument was calibrated using
Pierce™ LTQ Velos ESI Positive Ion Calibration Solution (Life Technologies, Vienna,
Austria).
All data were evaluated using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) using default settings. A
protein list was obtained from the Uniprot database including both Swiss-Prot as well as
TrEMBL entries for homo sapiens (access: 10.03.2019) and was provided for MaxQuant
searches [50], [51]. TMT-labeled data were further processed using Perseus software
package (version 1.6.1.1)[52]. Only protein groups with 10 quantified channels were
included for analysis, log2-transformed and normalized by subtraction of the median.
Analysis of the TMT-labeled samples was conducted using Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis
(IPA; version 47547484; Qiagen Bioinformatics, Redwood City. CA, USA).
R software (www.R-project.org) was used all further proteomics analysis. For the TMTP
data, contaminants were removed and values were log2 transformed and normalized by
subtraction of the median of each channel. In order to see how samples cluster together, a
principle component analyses (PCA) and hierarchical clustering analysis using Euclidean
distance were conducted on the whole normalized dataset. Then, we conducted differential
expression analysis using limma package [53] and P-values were corrected using
Benjamini and Hochberg multiple testing correction. Proteins were considered significantly
27
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

differentially expressed if the corrected Benjamini and Hochberg P-value was < 0.05 and
absolute log2 fold change > 0.6. Data from the label-free proteomics analysis were used in
order to detect proteins present in specific fractions. Samples were considered detected in
a specific fraction if they were present in all 3 replicates. In order to estimate the biological
process gene ontology (GO) terms enriched in the purified EV fraction, compared to the
soluble factors, we combined the proteins that were significantly enriched in the EV fraction
compared to the soluble factors (in the TMTP analysis) and/or found only in the EV fraction
using the label-free proteomics analysis. Enrichment analysis was conducted using
ClusterProfile R package

[54] and GO were considered significantly enriched if the

adjusted p-value was < 0.01 and the gene count was > 5. Only the most significantly
enriched proteins were shown (fold enrichment > 4).

Angiogenesis, immunomodulation and thromboelastometry
To assay angiogenic potential of different PLX secretome fractions we used a vascular–like
network formation assay on matrigel as previously described [55]. Umbilical cord blood
(UCB)-derived ECFCs were seeded on top of matrigel (angiogenesis assay kit, Merck
Millipore, USA) in an angiogenesis 96-well µ-plate (Ibidi, Germany) at a density of 31,500
cells/cm2. Cells were treated with crude or purified EV preparations in an EV to ECFC ratio
of 10,000:1, 1,000:1, 100:1 and 10:1 or with the volume equivalent of EV-free PLX stromal
cell-derived soluble factors. Completely supplemented EGM-2 (Lonza) served as a positive
control and unsupplemented EBM-2 as a negative control. Images were taken every hour
for 12 hours on an Eclipse Ti inverted microscope (Nikon) equipped with a custom-build live
cell incubation system (Oko Lab, Italy and Nikon, Austria) using a 4x objective. Images
were processed with the NIS Elements Advanced Research package analysis software
(Nikon). Total matrigel areas were cut out of raw images, homogenized (strength 16), and
subjected to intensity equalization over XY. Afterwards, pictures were sharpened slightly
and denoised (advanced denoising 5.0). Finally, lookuptables were adjusted to 3,00013,000 and images were exported as TIFF files. Exported images were cut at the diameter
of 1,300 pixels to remove edges of the plate and the contrast was enhanced. Processed
pictures were analyzed to automatically detect the network structures with Image J using
the Angiogenesis Analyzer plugin and total length of tube-like structures was determined
(https://imagej.nih.gov/ij/macros/toolsets/Angiogenesis%20Analyzer.txt).
28
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

The effect of PLX-derived EVs on the immune response was analyzed using a T-cell
proliferation assay as published earlier [18], [32]. In brief, peripheral blood mononuclear
cells (PBMCs) were isolated and pooled from 10 individual donors before labelling with
carboxyfluorescein succinimidylester (CSFE; Sigma- Aldrich, USA) and cryopreservation in
appropriate aliquots for later use. These pre-labeled PBMCs (300,000 per flat bottomed 96well plate) were than stimulated with 5 µg/mL phytohemagglutinin (PHA, Sigma- Aldrich,
USA) to induce mitogenesis (at day four) or left untreated for seven days to monitor MLR
responses. Assays were incubated with EVs dose dependently at three-fold serial dilution in
a ratio of 15,000:1, 5,000:1, 1,666, or 555:1 for either four or seven days as indicated. The
percentage of proliferating T cell was measured by flow cytometry as the fraction of viable
CD3 positive cells with reduced CFSE staining compared to non PHA-stimulated cells.
Inhibition of T cell proliferation was expressed as percentage relative to maximum
proliferation without EV addition.
Thromboelastometry was determined in the absence or presence of one million PLX cells
or one billion crude or purified PLX-EVs as recently described [39].

Statistics
Statistical analysis of the results was performed using One-Way ANOVA analysis of
variance with a confidence interval of 95% and corrected for multiple comparisons using the
Holm Sidak algorithm in GraphPad Prism version 7.03. Proteomic results were analyzed
using R. A p value of <0.05 was defined as significant.

References:
[1]

L. Norgren et al., “PLX-PAD Cell Treatment of Critical Limb Ischaemia: Rationale and
Design of the PACE Trial,” Eur. J. Vasc. Endovasc. Surg., vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 538–
545, Apr. 2019.

[2]

E. Zahavi-Goldstein et al., “Placenta-derived PLX-PAD mesenchymal-like stromal
cells are efficacious in rescuing blood flow in hind limb ischemia mouse model by a
dose- and site-dependent mechanism of action,” Cytotherapy, vol. 19, no. 12, pp.
1438–1446, 2017.
29

October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[3]

L. Pinzur et al., “Rescue from lethal acute radiation syndrome (ARS) with severe
weight loss by secretome of intramuscularly injected human placental stromal cells,”
J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 1079–1092, 2018.

[4]

T. Winkler et al., “Immunomodulatory placental-expanded, mesenchymal stromal
cells improve muscle function following hip arthroplasty,” J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia
Muscle, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 880–897, 2018.

[5]

T. H. Qazi, G. N. Duda, M. J. Ort, C. Perka, S. Geissler, and T. Winkler, “Cell therapy
to improve regeneration of skeletal muscle injuries,” J. Cachexia. Sarcopenia Muscle,
vol. 49, 2019.

[6]

J. A. Ankrum, J. F. Ong, and J. M. Karp, “Mesenchymal stem cells: Immune evasive,
not immune privileged,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 252–260, 2014.

[7]

M. Riazifar, E. J. Pone, J. Lötvall, and W. Zhao, “Stem Cell Extracellular Vesicles:
Extended Messages of Regeneration,” Annu. Rev. Pharmacol. Toxicol., vol. 57, no. 1,
pp. 125–154, 2016.

[8]

M. Yáñez-Mó et al., “Biological properties of extracellular vesicles and their
physiological functions.,” J. Extracell. vesicles, vol. 4, no. May, p. 27066, 2015.

[9]

C. Théry et al., “Minimal information for studies of extracellular vesicles 2018
(MISEV2018): a position statement of the International Society for Extracellular
Vesicles and update of the MISEV2014 guidelines,” J. Extracell. Vesicles, vol. 7, no.
1, 2018.

[10] G. van Niel, G. D’Angelo, and G. Raposo, “Shedding light on the cell biology of
extracellular vesicles,” Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 213–228, Apr.
2018.
[11] T. Neri et al., “CD18-mediated adhesion is required for the induction of a
proinflammatory phenotype in lung epithelial cells by mononuclear cell-derived
extracellular vesicles,” Exp. Cell Res., vol. 365, no. 1, pp. 78–84, Apr. 2018.
[12] T. Lener et al., “Applying extracellular vesicles based therapeutics in clinical trials An ISEV position paper,” J. Extracell. Vesicles, vol. 4, no. 1, 2015.
[13] K. Schallmoser and D. Strunk, “Preparation of pooled human platelet lysate (pHPL)
30
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

as an efficient supplement for animal serum-free human stem cell cultures.,” Journal
of visualized experiments JoVE, no. 32. pp. 20–23, 2009.
[14] M. Colombo, G. Raposo, and C. Théry, “Biogenesis, Secretion, and Intercellular
Interactions of Exosomes and Other Extracellular Vesicles,” Annu. Rev. Cell Dev.
Biol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 255–289, Oct. 2014.
[15] S. Laner-Plamberger et al., “Mechanical fibrinogen-depletion supports heparin-free
mesenchymal stem cell propagation in human platelet lysate,” J. Transl. Med., vol.
13, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2015.
[16] G. V. Shelke, C. Lässer, Y. S. Gho, and J. Lötvall, “Importance of exosome depletion
protocols to eliminate functional and RNA-containing extracellular vesicles from fetal
bovine serum,” J. Extracell. Vesicles, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–8, 2014.
[17] D. C. Watson et al., “Scalable, cGMP-compatible purification of extracellular vesicles
carrying bioactive human heterodimeric IL-15/lactadherin complexes,” J. Extracell.
Vesicles, vol. 7, no. 1, 2018.
[18] K. Pachler et al., “An in vitro potency assay for monitoring the immunomodulatory
potential of stromal cell-derived extracellular vesicles,” Int. J. Mol. Sci., vol. 18, no. 7,
2017.
[19] K. Schallmoser et al., “Human platelet lysate can replace fetal bovine serum for
clinical-scale expansion of functional mesenchymal stromal cells,” Transfusion, vol.
47, no. 8, pp. 1436–1446, 2007.
[20] A. Reinisch et al., “Epigenetic and in vivo comparison of diverse MSC sources
reveals an endochondral signature for human hematopoietic niche formation,” Blood,
vol. 125, no. 2, pp. 249–260, 2015.
[21] A. Reinisch et al., “A humanized bone marrow ossicle xenotransplantation model
enables improved engraftment of healthy and leukemic human hematopoietic cells,”
Nat. Med., vol. 22, no. 7, 2016.
[22] K. Schallmoser et al., “Rapid large-scale expansion of functional mesenchymal stem
cells from unmanipulated bone marrow without animal serum,” Tissue Eng. - Part C
Methods, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 185–196, 2008.
31
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[23] O. P. B. Wiklander et al., “Systematic Methodological Evaluation of a Multiplex BeadBased Flow Cytometry Assay for Detection of Extracellular Vesicle Surface
Signatures.,” Front. Immunol., vol. 9, no. June, p. 1326, 2018.
[24] A. Görgens et al., “Optimisation of imaging flow cytometry for the analysis of single
extracellular vesicles by using fluorescence-tagged vesicles as biological reference
material.,” J. Extracell. vesicles, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 1587567, 2019.
[25] R. Crescitelli et al., “Distinct RNA profiles in subpopulations of extracellular vesicles:
apoptotic bodies, microvesicles and exosomes.,” J. Extracell. vesicles, vol. 2, 2013.
[26] A. Reinisch et al., “Humanized large-scale expanded endothelial colony-forming cells
function in vitro and in vivo,” Blood, vol. 113, no. 26, pp. 6716–6725, 2009.
[27] N. A. Hofmann, A. Reinisch, and D. Strunk, “Isolation and large scale expansion of
adult human endothelial colony forming progenitor cells.,” Journal of visualized
experiments JoVE, no. 32. pp. 1–2, 2009.
[28] M. Taub, “The use of defined media in cell and tissue culture,” Toxicol. Vitr., vol. 4,
no. 3, pp. 213–225, Jan. 1990.
[29] M. M. Lalu et al., “Evaluating mesenchymal stem cell therapy for sepsis with
preclinical meta-analyses prior to initiating a first-in-human trial,” Elife, vol. 5, Nov.
2016.
[30] K. Schlosser et al., “Effects of Mesenchymal Stem Cell Treatment on Systemic
Cytokine Levels in a Phase 1 Dose Escalation Safety Trial of Septic Shock Patients,”
Crit. Care Med., vol. 47, no. 7, p. 1, Feb. 2019.
[31] A. Flemming, K. Schallmoser, D. Strunk, M. Stolk, H.-D. Volk, and M. Seifert,
“Immunomodulative efficacy of bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
cultured in human platelet lysate.,” J. Clin. Immunol., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1143–56,
2011.
[32] N. Ketterl et al., “A robust potency assay highlights significant donor variation of
human mesenchymal stem/progenitor cell immune modulatory capacity and extended
radio-resistance,” Stem Cell Res. Ther., vol. 6, no. 1, 2015.
[33] L. Kordelas et al., “MSC-derived exosomes: a novel tool to treat therapy-refractory
32
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

graft-versus-host disease,” Leukemia, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 970–973, Apr. 2014.
[34] L. Kordelas et al., “Individual Immune-Modulatory Capabilities of MSC-Derived
Extracellular Vesicle (EV) Preparations and Recipient-Dependent Responsiveness,”
Int. J. Mol. Sci., vol. 20, no. 7, p. 1642, Apr. 2019.
[35] J. Hartler et al., “Deciphering lipid structures based on platform-independent decision
rules,” Nat. Methods, vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 1171–1174, Dec. 2017.
[36] S. Saito, K. Hiemori, K. Kiyoi, and H. Tateno, “Glycome analysis of extracellular
vesicles derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells using lectin microarray,”
Sci. Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 3997, Dec. 2018.
[37] L. Tao et al., “Metabolomics identifies serum and exosomes metabolite markers of
pancreatic cancer,” Metabolomics, vol. 15, no. 6, p. 86, Jun. 2019.
[38] G. Moll et al., Cryopreserved or fresh mesenchymal stromal cells: Only a matter of
taste or key to unleash the full clinical potential of MSC therapy?, vol. 951. 2016.
[39] M. Oeller et al., “Selection of tissue factor-deficient cell transplants as a novel
strategy for improving hemocompatibility of human bone marrow stromal cells,”
Theranostics, vol. 8, no. 5, 2018.
[40] E. Rohde, K. Pachler, and M. Gimona, “Manufacturing and characterization of
extracellular vesicles from umbilical cord–derived mesenchymal stromal cells for
clinical testing,” Cytotherapy, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 581–592, Jun. 2019.
[41] T. Burnouf, D. Strunk, M. B. C. Koh, and K. Schallmoser, “Human platelet lysate:
Replacing fetal bovine serum as a gold standard for human cell propagation?,”
Biomaterials, vol. 76, 2016.
[42] A. Reinisch and D. Strunk, “Isolation and animal serum free expansion of human
umbilical cord derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) and endothelial colony
forming progenitor cells (ECFCs).,” Journal of visualized experiments JoVE, no. 32.
pp. 4–7, 2009.
[43] C. Bartmann et al., “Two steps to functional mesenchymal stromal cells for clinical
application.,” Transfusion, vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1426–35, 2007.

33
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[44] S. C. Taylor, T. Berkelman, G. Yadav, and M. Hammond, “A defined methodology for
reliable quantification of western blot data,” Mol. Biotechnol., vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 217–
226, 2013.
[45] N. Koliha et al., “A novel multiplex bead-based platform highlights the diversity of
extracellular vesicles,” J. Extracell. Vesicles, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 29975, Jan. 2016.
[46] C. Tripisciano et al., “Different Potential of Extracellular Vesicles to Support Thrombin
Generation: Contributions of Phosphatidylserine, Tissue Factor, and Cellular Origin,”
Sci. Rep., vol. 7, no. 1, p. 6522, Dec. 2017.
[47] B. Fendl et al., “Differential Interaction of Platelet-Derived Extracellular Vesicles With
Circulating Immune Cells: Roles of TAM Receptors, CD11b, and Phosphatidylserine,”
Front. Immunol., vol. 9, p. 2797, Dec. 2018.
[48] R. Weiss et al., “Differential Interaction of Platelet-Derived Extracellular Vesicles with
Leukocyte Subsets in Human Whole Blood,” Sci. Rep., vol. 8, no. 1, p. 6598, Dec.
2018.
[49] D. N. Mastronarde, “Automated electron microscope tomography using robust
prediction of specimen movements,” J. Struct. Biol., vol. 152, no. 1, pp. 36–51, Oct.
2005.
[50] J. Cox and M. Mann, “MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates,
individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein
quantification,” Nat. Biotechnol., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 1367–1372, Dec. 2008.
[51] The UniProt Consortium, “UniProt: the universal protein knowledgebase,” Nucleic
Acids Res., vol. 45, no. D1, pp. D158–D169, Jan. 2017.
[52] S. Tyanova et al., “The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis
of (prote)omics data,” Nat. Methods, vol. 13, no. 9, pp. 731–740, Sep. 2016.
[53] M. E. Ritchie et al., “limma powers differential expression analyses for RNAsequencing and microarray studies.,” Nucleic Acids Res., vol. 43, no. 7, p. e47, 2015.
[54] G. Yu, L.-G. Wang, Y. Han, and Q.-Y. He, “clusterProfiler: an R package for
comparing biological themes among gene clusters.,” OMICS, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 284–
7, 2012.
34
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

[55] N. A. Hofmann et al., “Oxygen Sensing Mesenchymal Progenitors Promote NeoVasculogenesis in a Humanized Mouse Model In Vivo,” PLoS One, vol. 7, no. 9,
2012.

Acknowledgements:

35
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table S1: Proteomic analysis sample preparation – pre-analytics.

Table S3: Antibodies and dilutions used in western blots.
Name

Supplier

Clone

Isotype

Concentration

WB dilution

Apolipoprotein A1

GeneTex

polyclonal

IgG

0.66 mg/mL

1:1320

Calnexin

Cell Signaling

C5C9

IgG

26 µg/mL

1:1000

CD9

Invitrogen

MM2/57IVA50

IgG2

1 mg/mL

1:50

CD63

Thermo Fisher

TS63

IgG1

0.5 mg/mL

1:1000

CD81

Bio-Rad

1D6

IgG1

1 mg/mL

1:500

Flotillin 1

BD

Flotillin-1

IgG1

0.25 mg/mL

1:1000

GRP94

Bio-Rad

polyclonal

IgG

0.5 mg/mL

1:2000

Human Albumin

Thermo Fisher

KT11

IgG1

1 mg/mL

1:1000

36
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Table S2: Quantitative Proteomic characterization of PLX secretome fractions.

37
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

38
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Figure S5: Proteins most abundantly over-represented in purified EVs compared to
the soluble factor fraction. Corresponding to proteins marked by open circles in Fig. 6.
Proteins most abundant in purified (pur.) EVs marked in red; most abundant overrepresented in the soluble factor (sol. F.) fraction marked in green. Top 10 hits selected in
the adjacent table including details as identified.

Figure S6: Ingenuity pathway (IPA) enrichment analysis of quantitative proteomics
39
October 17, 2019

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/808808; this version posted October 17, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

of the PLX secretome fractions. (A) Canonical signaling pathways differentially abundant
in EVs versus soluble factors (sol.F.) are shown in a heatmap for three individual donors
(P15, P25, P27) analyzed. Pathways related to movement, the immune system and
angiogenesis are colored green, blue and red, respectively, as indicated. (B) Disease and
function categories from the ingenuity database with the greatest differences in
corresponding protein abundances between EVs and soluble factor fractions are shown in a
heatmap using the same color code for highlighting pathways.

Figure S7: Comparison of coagulation activity of PLX cells vs. PLX-derived EVs. (A)
Clotting time, (B) a-angle and (C) maximum clot firmness of reference plasma in the
absence of cells or vesicles is shown compared to clotting behavior in the presence of one
million PLX cells or one billion crude vs. purified (pur.) corresponding EVs as indicated.
Results represent means of triplicate measurements from three independent donors ± SD.
(D) Representative thromboelastometry curves plotting clot firmness over clotting time are
shown.

40
October 17, 2019

