bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Timing the origin of eukaryotic cellular complexity with ancient duplications
Julian Vosseberg1*, Jolien J. E. van Hooff1*, Marina Marcet-Houben2,3,4, Anne van
Vlimmeren1†, Leny M. van Wijk1, Toni Gabaldón2,3,4,5, Berend Snel1**
1

Theoretical Biology and Bioinformatics, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Utrecht
University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
2
Centre for Genomic Regulation, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology,
Barcelona, Spain
3
Life Sciences Department, Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Barcelona, Spain
4
Mechanisms of Disease, Insitute for Research in Biomedicine, Barcelona, Spain
5
Institució Catalana de Recerca I Estudis Avançats, Barcelona, Spain
*These authors contributed equally to this work
†
Current affiliation: Department of Biological Sciences, Columbia University, New York
City, United States of America
**Author for correspondence: b.snel@uu.nl

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Abstract
Eukaryogenesis is one of the most enigmatic evolutionary transitions, during which simple
prokaryotic cells gave rise to complex eukaryotic cells1,2. The last eukaryotic common
ancestor (LECA) harboured intracellular compartments, including mitochondria. In addition
to mitochondrial endosymbiosis, eukaryogenesis was driven by numerous gene acquisitions3,
inventions and duplications4, which shaped the ancestral eukaryotic traits. While evolutionary
intermediates are lacking, gene duplications allow us to elucidate the order of events by which
eukaryotes originated. Here we reconstruct successive steps during eukaryogenesis using
phylogenomics and show that mitochondrial endosymbiosis was an intermediate episode. We
found that gene duplications roughly doubled the proto-eukaryotic genome, with families
inherited from the Asgard archaea-related host being duplicated most. Importantly, by
relatively timing events using branch lengths we inferred that duplications of archaeal
families occurred throughout eukaryogenesis, both before and after the acquisition of bacterial
genes. Duplications in cytoskeletal and membrane trafficking families were among the
earliest events, whereas most other families expanded primarily after mitochondrial
endosymbiosis. Altogether, we demonstrate that the host that engulfed the protomitochondrion had some eukaryote-like complexity, which further increased drastically upon
mitochondrial acquisition. This scenario bridges the signs of complexity observed in Asgard
archaeal genomes5,6 to the proposed role of mitochondria in triggering eukaryogenesis7,8.
Main text
Compared to prokaryotes, eukaryotic cells are tremendously complex. Eukaryotic cells are
larger, contain more genetic material, have multiple compartments and operate a dynamic
cytoskeleton. LECA already had an intracellular organisation and gene repertoire
characteristic of present-day eukaryotes9, making the transition from particular prokaryotes to
the first eukaryotes – eukaryogenesis – an enigma in evolutionary biology. An endosymbiosis
event that gave rise to the mitochondrion played a major role in eukaryogenesis, with the host
being closely related to the recently discovered Asgard archaea5,6 and the endosymbiont being
related to the Alphaproteobacteria10,11. The timing and impact of this endosymbiosis event in
the evolution of eukaryotic complexity are hotly debated and at the heart of different
scenarios on eukaryogenesis12. Besides the acquisition of genes from the endosymbiont, the
genome of the proto-eukaryotic lineage expanded through gene inventions, duplications and
horizontal gene transfers during eukaryogenesis3,4. Previous work demonstrated that gene
duplications nearly doubled the genome4. Gene families such as small GTPases, kinesins and
vesicle coat proteins greatly expanded, which enabled proto-eukaryotes to employ an
elaborate intracellular signalling network, a vesicular trafficking system and a dynamic
cytoskeleton13–16. Uncovering the order in which these and other eukaryotic features emerged
is complicated due to the absence of intermediate life forms. Duplications occurred during the
transition and are likely to yield valuable insights into the intermediate steps of
eukaryogenesis. In this study we attempt to reconstruct the successive stages of
eukaryogenesis by systematically analysing large sets of phylogenetic trees. We determined
the scale of gene inventions and duplications and how different functions and phylogenetic
origins had contributed to these eukaryotic innovations. Furthermore, we timed the
prokaryotic donations and duplications relative to each other using information from
phylogenetic branch lengths.
To obtain a comprehensive picture of duplications during eukaryogenesis we made use of
the Pfam database17. Instead of selecting a few eukaryotic species beforehand we chose to
take an approach inspired by the ScrollSaw method15, which limits phylogenetic analyses to
slowly evolving sequences and collapses duplications after LECA. We constructed
phylogenetic trees (see Methods) and detected 10,259 nodes in these trees that were inferred

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

to represent a Pfam domain in LECA (‘LECA families’) (Fig. 1a). To include genes having
only small Pfam domains, which were excluded for computational reasons, or no domains at
all, we used a linear regression analysis to obtain an estimated LECA genome containing
12,780 genes (95% prediction interval: 7,463 – 21,886) (Supplementary Fig. 1).
Comparing the number of inferred LECA families to extant eukaryotes showed that the
genome size of LECA reflected that of a typical present-day eukaryote (Fig. 1a), which is in
contrast with lower estimates obtained previously4,18. The multiplication factor – the number
of LECA families divided by the number of acquired and invented genes or domains – was
1.8, approximating the near doubling reported before4. The observed doubling was validated
in an additional data set (Supplementary Table 1), despite a recent study that inferred very
few duplications during eukaryogenesis19. Although on average genes duplicated once, the
distribution of duplications is heavily skewed with many acquisitions or inventions not having
undergone any duplication (Fig. 1b). The enormous expansion of the proto-eukaryotic
genome was dominated by massive duplications in a small set of families (Supplementary
Table 2).
There is a considerable difference between duplicated and non-duplicated LECA families
regarding their functions and cellular localisations. Metabolic LECA families rarely had a
duplication history, whereas LECA families involved in information storage and processing,
and cellular processes and signalling were more likely to descend from a duplication (χ2 =
619, df = 2, P = 3.4 × 10-135; Fig. 1c, Supplementary Fig. 2). Notable exceptions to this pattern
were families involved in cell wall or membrane biogenesis and translation, which were rarely
duplicated. The observed differences in functions were reflected by the differences between
cellular localisations, with proteins in the endomembrane system and cytoskeleton mostly
resulting from a duplication (χ2 = 288, df = 4, P = 4.1 × 10-61; Fig. 1d, Supplementary Fig. 3).
Like duplications, inventions primarily occurred to families involved in informational and
cellular processes (Supplementary Fig. 4-7). For complex eukaryotes to emerge, most
innovations occurred in nuclear processes, the endomembrane system, intracellular transport
and signal transduction, especially due to gene duplications.
For the Pfams that were donated to the eukaryotic stem lineage we identified the
prokaryotic sister group, which represents the best candidate for the Pfam’s phylogenetic
origin (Supplementary Fig. 8, Supplementary Information). Families with different sister
clades varied substantially in the number of gene duplications they experienced during
eukaryogenesis (χ2 = 293, df = 5, P = 2.7 × 10-61; Fig. 2, Supplementary Fig. 9). The
multiplication factor of 2.8 for families inherited from the Asgard archaea-related host
compared with the other groups was strikingly high. Especially duplications related to the
ubiquitin system and trafficking machinery contributed to the relatively large number of hostrelated paralogues (Supplementary Table 2). In contrast, there was a clear deficit of
duplications in families with an alphaproteobacterial sister group (multiplication factor of
1.3). Hence, the endosymbiont marginally contributed to the near doubling of the genetic
material during eukaryogenesis, whereas the host contributed relatively the most.
The striking differences in duplication dynamics between families with different
affiliations could be tentatively explained by differences in timing of these acquisitions and
subsequent duplications. Branch lengths have previously been used to time the acquisition of
genes from the different prokaryotic donors3. Duplications were not included in that analysis.
Although the measure has been criticised for its assumption that rates pre- and post-LECA are
correlated20,21, it did yield correct timings for certain post-LECA events3,22. Shorter branch
lengths, corrected for differences in evolutionary rates across families, reflect more recent
acquisitions. Similarly, duplications can be timed with the length of the branch connecting the
duplication and LECA nodes (Fig. 3a). Using branch lengths to time duplications is a novel

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

implementation of this approach, which we here use to infer the order of events during
eukaryogenesis.
For the timing of acquisitions we obtained similar results as before3, with archaeal stems
being longer than bacterial stems (P = 4.5 × 10-63, two-sided Mann-Whitney U-test; Fig. 3b,
Supplementary Fig. 10). Among the archaeal stem lengths the Asgard archaeal stems were
shortest, as were the alphaproteobacterial stems among the bacterial stems, although these
differences failed to reach statistical significance in both cases (P = 0.31 and P = 0.07,
respectively). Fig. 3b shows that there is a wide distribution of host-related duplication
lengths, with a substantial number of duplication lengths both longer and shorter than
(alphaproteo)bacterial stem lengths. This pattern is independent of the normalisation
(Supplementary Fig. 11). Endosymbiont-related and invented families showed the shortest
duplication lengths. These differences in branch lengths indicate that an increase in genomic
complexity via duplications had already occurred prior to the mitochondrial acquisition.
To make inferences about cellular complexity we categorised the duplications according to
their functional annotations and cellular localisations. A marked distinction in duplication
lengths between different functions can be observed, with duplications in metabolic functions
corresponding to shorter branches (P = 6.6 × 10-7, Kruskal-Wallis test; Fig. 4a, Supplementary
Fig. 12). Moreover, a substantial number of duplication lengths in information storage and
processes, and cellular processes and signalling were longer than the alphaproteobacterial
stem length, including multiple corresponding to duplications assigned to the cytoskeleton
and intracellular trafficking. Duplications in signal transduction and transcription families
mainly had shorter branch lengths, indicating that these regulatory functions evolved
relatively late. With respect to cellular localisation, nucleolar and cytoskeletal duplication
lengths were longest and most duplications related to the endomembrane system had
duplication lengths shorter than the alphaproteobacterial stem length (Fig. 4b, Supplementary
Fig. 13), indicating that the increase in cellular complexity before the mitochondrial
acquisition mainly comprised the evolution of cytoskeletal and nucleolar components.
This large-scale analysis of duplications during eukaryogenesis provides compelling
evidence for a mitochondria-intermediate eukaryogenesis scenario. The results suggest that
the Asgard archaea-related host already had some eukaryote-like cellular complexity, such as
a dynamic cytoskeleton and membrane trafficking. Upon mitochondrial acquisition there was
an even further increase in complexity with the establishment of a complex signalling and
transcription regulation network and by shaping the endomembrane system. These postendosymbiosis innovations could have been the result of the excess of energy allegedly
provided by the mitochondrion7. Our conclusions are in stark contrast with a very recent
study19, which was, however, unable to recover greatly expanded protein families. A
relatively complex host is in line with the presence of homologues of genes functioning in the
eukaryotic cytoskeleton and membrane trafficking in Asgard archaeal genomes5,6,23.
Moreover, some of them, including ESCRT-III homologues, small GTPases and (loki)actins,
have duplicated in these archaea as well, either before eukaryogenesis or more recently5,6.
This indicates that there has already been a tendency for at least the cytoskeleton and
membrane remodelling to become more complex in Asgard archaeal lineages. A dynamic
cytoskeleton and trafficking system, perhaps enabling primitive phagocytosis24, might have
been essential for the host to take up the bacterial symbiont. Molecular and cell biology
research in these archaea, from which the first results have recently become public25,26, is
highly promising to obtain more insight into the nature of the host lineage. In addition to a
reconstruction of the host, further exploration of the numerous acquisitions, inventions and
duplications during eukaryogenesis is key to fully unravelling the origin of eukaryotes.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Methods
Data
The 209 eukaryotic (predicted) proteomes were from an in-house dataset that has been used
and described before27. Prokaryotic proteomes (3457 in total) were extracted from eggNOG
4.528. The prokaryotic dataset was supplemented with nine predicted proteomes from the
recently described Asgard superphylum6.
Pfam analysis
Pfam assignment
We used hmmsearch (HMMER v3.1b229) with the Pfam 31.0 profile hidden Markov models
(HMMs)17 and the corresponding gathering thresholds to assess to which Pfam what part of
each prokaryotic and eukaryotic sequence should be assigned. The domains that were hit were
extracted from the sequences based on the envelope coordinates. If a sequence had hits to
multiple Pfams and these hits were overlapping for at least 15 amino acids only the best hit
was used. If the same Pfam had multiple hits in the sequence due to an insertion relative to the
model the different hits were artificially merged. Since the latter is more prone to errors for
short models and short sequences contain less phylogenetic signal, profile HMMs shorter than
fifty amino acids were not considered for further analysis.
Reduction of sequences
For each Pfam, the number of prokaryotic sequences was reduced with kClust v1.030 using a
clustering threshold of 2.93. Asgard archaeal sequences were excluded from this reduction,
because they are relatively undersampled and are already genetically diverse.
The number of eukaryotic sequences was reduced with a novel method (L.M.v.W. and
B.S., manuscript in preparation) based on the ScrollSaw approach15. For each Pfam an all
species versus all species BLAST31 was performed. Because we were only interested in the
best hit the max_target_seqs option was set to 1. Although this option has raised some
attention recently32,33, we only used it as a proxy for evolutionary distance and our analysis
would not be seriously impacted by this option given the overall small sizes of our databases.
Subsequently, bidirectional best hits (BBHs) between sequences from different supergroups
(Excavata, Archaeplastida + Cryptista, SAR + Haptista, Obazoa and Amoebozoa) or between
Diphoda (first three supergroups) and Opimoda (other two supergroups), which we consider a
likely root of the eukaryotic tree of life34. These sequences were used for phylogenetic
analysis.
Phylogenetic analysis
Multiple sequence alignments were made with MAFFT v7.31035 (auto option) and trimmed
with trimAl v1.4.rev1536 (gap threshold 10%). Phylogenetic trees were inferred with IQTREE v1.6.437 (LG4X model38, 1000 ultrafast bootstraps39). If the consensus tree had a higher
likelihood than the best tree from the search, the first was used for further analysis. Because
inferring trees for PF00005 (ABC transporters) in this way was too computationally
demanding, we used FastTree v2.1.1040 with the LG model to construct trees for this Pfam.
This Pfam was not considered for branch length analysis (see below).
KOG-COG clusters analysis
Selecting sequences
Clusters of homologous sequences were created based on the KOG-to-COG mappings
established by Makarova et al.4. This dataset contains eukaryotic orthologous groups (KOGs)
mapped to homologous prokaryotic orthologous groups (COGs). In many cases, multiple

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

KOGs had been mapped to a single COG, which often reflects a duplication. Furthermore,
KOGs had been clustered if they are homologous to each other but lack a homologous COG.
To assign sequences to the KOG-to-COG clusters, we applied a specific method for each
of the following three species categories: the eukaryotes, the prokaryotes excluding Asgard
archaea, and the Asgard archaea. For eukaryotes, we collected protein sequences from 10
species present in 5 eukaryotic supergroups to obtain a good representation of eukaryotic
diversity: Naegleria gruberi and Euglena gracilis (Excavata), Cladospihon okarmurans and
Bigelowiella natans (SAR+Haptista), Guillardia theta and Klebsormidium flaccidum
(Archaeplastida+Cryptista), Acanthamoeboa castellanii and Acytostelium subglobosum
(Amoebozoa), and Capsaspora owczarzaki and Nuclearia sp. (Obazoa). These species were
selected because they were most often in BBHs in the Pfam sequence selection (see above).
We derived profile HMMs for euNOGs from eggNOG 4.528. The original KOG-to-COG
clusters also contained ‘TWOGs’, candidate orthologous groups. For each TWOG we found
the best matching ‘ENOG’ (‘Unsupervised Cluster of Orthologous Group’) provided by
eggNOG. We combined the profile HMMs of these ENOGs with the KOG profile HMMs and
created a profile database. We performed hmmscan (HMMER v3.1b129) to assign protein
sequences from the eukaryotic species to KOGs/ENOGs. For the COGs present in the KOGto-COG clusters, we obtained all their member sequences. We downloaded profile HMMs of
all COGs from eggNOG and assigned the Asgard protein sequences to COGs using hmmscan.
Subsequently, for all KOGs (and ENOGs, which we collectively refer to as KOGs) and
COGs, we reduced the number of sequences with kClust v1.030, using a score per column of
3.53. We subsequently merged homologous sequences from eukaryotes, prokaryotes and
Asgard archaea according to the KOG-to-COG mapping, resulting in novel KOG-to-COG
clusters.
Phylogenetic analyses
For each KOG-to-COG cluster, we generated phylogenetic trees using an in-house pipeline
also used previously3. The sequences were aligned using MAFFT v6.861b41, option –auto,
and subsequently trimmed using trimAl v1.436 with a gap threshold of 0.1. From these
alignments, we constructed phylogenetic trees using FastTree v2.1.840 with ‘WAG’ as
evolutionary model.
Tree analyses
Removal of interspersing prokaryotes
Trees were analysed with an in-house ETE342 script. We examined whether the tree contained
prokaryotic sequences that probably reflect recent horizontal gene transfers and that might
interfere with our analysis. Prokaryotic sequences from a single genus that were in between
eukaryotic sequences were pruned from the tree. If there was only one prokaryotic sequence it
was kept only if it was an Asgard archaeal sequence, because it has been reported that
sometimes only a single sequenced Asgard archaeon contains a sequence otherwise only
present in eukaryotes6.
Annotation of eukaryotic nodes
For each eukaryotic clade the nodes were annotated as duplications prior to LECA, LECA
nodes, post-LECA nodes or unclassified. Only clades that contained at least one LECA node
were of interest. The node combining the eukaryotic clade with the rest of the tree (if present)
was annotated as acquisition node.
For the annotation of nodes in trees from the Pfam-ScrollSaw sequences the information
from the eukaryotic sequences that were not in the between-supergroup or Opimoda-Diphoda
BBHs were included. To correctly assign in-paralogues we additionally performed an own

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

species versus own species BLAST for each Pfam (max_target_seqs 2). The sequences
belonging to a Pfam that were not in the tree were mapped onto their best hits in the tree
according to the BLAST score.
In order to infer reliable duplication nodes in the tree, duplication consistency scores were
calculated for all internal nodes starting from the root of a eukaryotic clade. This score is the
overlap of species at both sides of a node divided by the total number of species at both sides,
taking both sequences in the tree and assigned sequences (as described above) into account. If
the duplication consistency score was at least 0.2 and both daughter nodes fulfilled the LECA
criteria, this node was annotated as duplication node. A LECA node first had to have both
Opimoda and Diphoda sequences in the clade. Besides, to take care of post-LECA horizontal
gene transfer (HGT) events among eukaryotes and of tree uncertainties, the mean presence of
a potential LECA family in eukaryotic species, weighted so that each supergroup contributes
equally, should be at least 15%. If a node did not fulfil the LECA criteria it was annotated as a
post-LECA node.
The abovementioned thresholds were chosen based on manual inspection of a selection of
trees. Using different thresholds for duplication consistency (0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.3) and LECA
coverage scores (0, 5, 10, 15, 20 and 25%) did not have a large impact on the absolute
numbers and quality measures, such as the fraction of well-supported LECA and duplication
nodes (data not shown). This underlines the robustness of our analysis.
For the annotation of nodes in KOG-COG trees a slightly different approach was followed.
Because of the lower number of eukaryotic species a species overlap criterion of 2 was used
for duplication nodes instead of consistency scores. If both Opimoda and Diphoda sequences
were among the descendants of a node, it fulfilled the LECA criterion.
After this first annotation round all LECA nodes were re-evaluated. If there were
duplication nodes in both daughters, this node had to be a duplication node as well even
though its duplication consistency score was below the threshold. If there were duplication
nodes in only one daughter lineage, the LECA node was annotated as unclassified. It could
reflect a duplication event or a tree artefact due to rogue taxa. If there were no duplication
nodes in either daughter lineages, all LECA nodes in the daughter lineages of this LECA node
were reannotated as post-LECA nodes.
Rooting eukaryote-only trees
For trees with only eukaryotic sequences and trees for which all prokaryotic sequences had
been removed, inferring the root poses a challenge. For these trees duplication and LECA
nodes were called in unrooted mode. The distances between the LECA nodes were calculated
and the tree was rooted in the middle of the LECA nodes that were furthest apart, resulting in
an additional duplication node at this root. If there were no duplications found in this way,
because there were less than two duplications in the tree, rooting was tried on each internal
node. The node that fulfilled the duplication criteria and that maximised the species overlap
was chosen. If none fulfilled the criteria, it was checked if the entire tree fulfilled the LECA
criteria. For Pfams for which we could not infer a tree because there were only two or three
sequences selected, we also checked if this Pfam in itself fulfilled the LECA criteria. These
Pfams correspond to eukaryote-specific families that did not duplicate.
Sister group identification
For each eukaryotic clade in trees also containing prokaryotic sequences the sister group was
identified in an unrooted mode. By doing so, the eukaryotic clade initially had two candidate
sister groups. Eukaryotic sequences in a sister group, if present, were ignored, as they could
reflect HGT events, contaminations, tree artefacts or true additional acquisitions. To infer the
actual sister group it was first checked if one of the two candidate sister groups was more

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

likely by checking if one of them consisted only of Asgard archaea, TACK archaea, Asgard
and TACK archaea, alphaproteobacteria, beta/gammaproteobacteria, or
alpha/beta/gammaproteobacteria. If so, that clade was chosen as the actual sister group. If
both sister groups had the same identity or if both groups had another identity than the ones
described above, the tree was rooted on the farthest leaf from the eukaryotic clade. In many
cases the last common ancestor of the taxa in the sister group was Bacteria, Archaea or
cellular organisms (“LUCA”) according to the NCBI taxonomy. Such wide taxonomic
assignments likely reflect extensive horizontal gene transfers among distantly related
prokaryotes. In these cases it was checked if one of the previously mentioned groups or
otherwise a particular phylum or proteobacterial class comprised a majority of the prokaryotic
taxa to get a more precise sister group classification.
We observed that in a substantial number of cases there was another eukaryotic clade with
LECA nodes in the sister group of a eukaryotic clade. These cases could reflect a duplication
and subsequent loss in prokaryotes but probably reflect tree artefacts. Therefore these clades
were ignored for the branch length analysis. Eukaryotic clades with LECA nodes that were
nested, i.e. they had exactly the same prokaryotic sister group, were merged.
Branch length analysis
Multiple branch lengths were calculated in clades containing LECA nodes. For the stem
length (sl) the distance to the acquisition node – the node uniting the eukaryotic clade and its
prokaryotic sister – was calculated for each LECA node. This distance was divided by the
median of the distances from the LECA node to the eukaryotic leaves (eukaryotic branch
lengths (ebl)) to correct for rate differences between orthologous groups as done before3. In
case of multiple possible paths due to duplications, the minimum of these distances was used
as the sl, since it was closest to sl values from zero-duplication clades (Supplementary Fig.
14, Supplementary Information). To calculate the duplication length (dl) a similar approach
was followed, using the duplication node instead of the acquisition node.
Comparison between Pfam trees based on two and five groups subsampling
As mentioned before, the eukaryotic sequences that were in BBHs between five supergroups
or between Opimoda and Diphoda species were selected for tree inference in the Pfam
analysis. The two collections of annotated trees were compared. Many more duplication and
especially LECA nodes had a higher support value in the Opimoda-Diphoda BBHs trees
(Supplementary Fig. 15). Furthermore, the number of unclassified eukaryotic nodes was
substantially higher in the between-supergroup BBHs trees (2819 and 1716, respectively).
Therefore, we decided to show our findings on the Opimoda-Diphoda BBHs trees.
Combining eukaryote-only Pfam families with prokaryotic donations in their clan
The classification of protein families into Pfams is not based on their taxonomic level. A
Pfam present only in eukaryotes can therefore be the result of a duplication event instead of a
bona fide invention. To distinguish these possible scenarios we used the Pfam clans, in which
related Pfam families are combined. If there were only eukaryote-only Pfams in a clan based
on our analysis, these Pfams were merged into one invention event. If there was only one
Pfam with an acquisition form prokaryotes and for this Pfam there was only one acquisition,
the eukaryote-only Pfams were combined with this acquisition. If there were multiple
acquisitions in a clan, a profile-profile search with HH-suite3 v3.0.343 was performed to
assign eukaryote-only Pfams to an acquisition. Per acquisition in a clan an alignment was
made from the tree sequences in the corresponding eukaryotic clade with MAFFT L-INS-i
v7.31035. Profile HMMs were made of these alignments (hhmake –M 50) and they were
combined in a database (ffindex_build). The eukaryote-only Pfam HHMs were searched

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

against the acquisition HHM database per clan with hhsearch. Each Pfam was assigned to the
acquisition that had the best score.
Functional annotation
Functional annotation of sequences was performed using emapper-1.0.344 based on eggNOG
orthology data28. Sequence searches were performed using DIAMOND v0.8.22.8445.
The most common KOG functional category among the tree sequences of a LECA node
was chosen as the function of the LECA node. If there was not one function most common,
the node was annotated as S (function unknown). For the functional annotation of duplication
nodes a Dollo parsimony approach was used. For this we checked if there was one single
annotation shared between LECA nodes at both sides, ignoring unknown functions. If this
was not the case but the parent duplication node (if present) had a function, this function was
also used for the focal duplication node. In the figures the names of the categories were
shortened for increased readability: Translation/J (Translation, ribosomal structure and
biogenesis), RNA processing/A (RNA processing and modification), Transcription/K,
Replication/L (Replication, recombination and repair), Chromatin/B (Chromatin structure and
dynamics), Cell cycle/D (Cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning), Nuclear
structure/Y, Defense mechanisms/V, Signal transduction/T (Signal transduction mechanisms),
Cell wall/membrane/M (Cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis), Cell motility/N,
Cytoskeleton/Z, Extracellular structures/W, Intracellular trafficking/U (Intracellular
trafficking, secretion, and vesicular transport), Protein modification/O (Posttranslational
modification, protein turnover, chaperones), Energy/C (Energy production and conversion),
Carbohydrates/G (Carbohydrate transport and metabolism), Amino acids/E (Amino acid
transport and metabolism), Nucleotides/F (Nucleotide transport and metabolism),
Coenzymes/H (Coenzyme transport and metabolism), Lipids/I (Lipid transport and
metabolism), Inorganic ions/P (Inorganic ion transport and metabolism), Secondary
metabolites/Q (Secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism), General
function prediction only/R, Function unknown/S.
The same approach was used to assign cellular components to LECA and duplication
nodes, using a custom set of gene ontology terms: extracellular region (GO:0005576), cell
wall (GO:0005618), cytosol (GO:0005829), cytoskeleton (GO:0005856), mitochondrion
(GO:0005739), cilium (GO:0005929), plasma membrane (GO:0005886), endosome
(GO:0005768), vacuole (GO:0005773), peroxisome (GO:0005777), cytoplasmic vesicle
(GO:0031410), Golgi apparatus (GO:0005794), endoplasmic reticulum (GO:0005783),
nuclear envelope (GO:0005635), nucleoplasm (GO:0005654), nuclear chromosome
(GO:0000228) and nucleolus (GO:0005730).
Predicting the number of genes in LECA
We used a linear regression model to predict the number of genes in LECA based on the
inferred number of Pfam domains in LECA. For this, we used the number of sufficiently long
Pfam domains (see Pfam assignment) and the number of protein-coding genes in the
eukaryotes in our dataset. The assumptions of a normal distribution of gene values at each
Pfam domain value and equal variance were reasonably met after log transformation.
Statistical analysis
Overrepresentations of functions and localisations in duplications, inventions and innovations,
and overrepresentations of sister groups in duplications and duplication tendencies were
tested by comparing odds ratios with Fisher’s exact tests (only pairwise comparisons of
functions for inventions and localisations for innovations due to small sample sizes) or χ2
contingency table tests (rest). Differences in branch lengths were assessed with a Kruskal-

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Wallis test, followed by Mann-Whitney U tests upon a significant outcome of the KruskalWallis test, which was always the case. All performed tests were two-sided. In all cases of
multiple comparisons, the p-values were adjusted to control the false discovery rate.
Acknowledgements
We thank K. S. Marakova and E. V. Koonin for sharing their KOG-to-COG protein clusters
with us. We are grateful to T. J. P. van Dam, E. S. Deutekom and G. J. P. L. Kops for useful
advice and discussions. This work is part of the research programme VICI with project
number 016.160.638, which is (partly) financed by the Netherlands Organisation for
Scientific Research (NWO).
Author contributions
J.J.E.v.H., T.G. and B.S. conceived the study. J.V. and J.J.E.v.H. performed the research.
J.V., J.J.E.v.H. and B.S. analysed and interpreted the results. M.M.H. and A.v.V. aided in the
development of the tree analysis pipeline. L.M.v.W. implemented the ScrollSaw-based
method. J.V., J.J.E.v.H. and B.S. wrote the manuscript, which was edited and approved by all
authors.
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
References
1.
Szathmáry, E. Toward major evolutionary transitions theory 2.0. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
112, 10104–10111 (2015).
2.
Dacks, J. B. et al. The changing view of eukaryogenesis – fossils, cells, lineages and
how they all come together. J Cell Sci 129, 3695–3703 (2016).
3.
Pittis, A. A. & Gabaldón, T. Late acquisition of mitochondria by a host with chimaeric
prokaryotic ancestry. Nature 531, 101–104 (2016).
4.
Makarova, K. S., Wolf, Y. I., Mekhedov, S. L., Mirkin, B. G. & Koonin, E. V.
Ancestral paralogs and pseudoparalogs and their role in the emergence of the eukaryotic cell.
Nucleic Acids Res. 33, 4626–4638 (2005).
5.
Spang, A. et al. Complex archaea that bridge the gap between prokaryotes and
eukaryotes. Nature 521, 173–179 (2015).
6.
Zaremba-Niedzwiedzka, K. et al. Asgard archaea illuminate the origin of eukaryotic
cellular complexity. Nature 541, 353–358 (2017).
7.
Lane, N. & Martin, W. The energetics of genome complexity. Nature 467, 929–934
(2010).
8.
Lane, N. Bioenergetic constraints on the evolution of complex life. Cold Spring Harb.
Perspect. Biol. 6, a015982 (2014).
9.
Koumandou, V. L. et al. Molecular paleontology and complexity in the last eukaryotic
common ancestor. Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 48, 373–396 (2013).
10.
Roger, A. J., Muñoz-Gómez, S. A. & Kamikawa, R. The origin and diversification of
mitochondria. Curr. Biol. 27, R1177–R1192 (2017).
11.
Martijn, J., Vosseberg, J., Guy, L., Offre, P. & Ettema, T. J. G. Deep mitochondrial
origin outside the sampled alphaproteobacteria. Nature 557, 101–105 (2018).
12.
Poole, A. M. & Gribaldo, S. Eukaryotic origins: how and when was the mitochondrion
acquired? Cold Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. 6, a015990 (2014).
13.
Jékely, G. Small GTPases and the evolution of the eukaryotic cell. BioEssays 25,
1129–1138 (2003).
14.
Wickstead, B., Gull, K. & Richards, T. A. Patterns of kinesin evolution reveal a

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

complex ancestral eukaryote with a multifunctional cytoskeleton. BMC Evol. Biol. 10, 110
(2010).
15.
Elias, M., Brighouse, A., Gabernet-Castello, C., Field, M. C. & Dacks, J. B. Sculpting
the endomembrane system in deep time: high resolution phylogenetics of Rab GTPases. J
Cell Sci 125, 2500–2508 (2012).
16.
Dacks, J. B. & Field, M. C. Evolutionary origins and specialisation of membrane
transport. Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 53, 70–76 (2018).
17.
Finn, R. D. et al. The Pfam protein families database: towards a more sustainable
future. Nucleic Acids Res. 44, D279–D285 (2016).
18.
Fritz-Laylin, L. K. et al. The genome of Naegleria gruberi illuminates early eukaryotic
versatility. Cell 140, 631–642 (2010).
19.
Tria, F. D. K. et al. Gene duplications trace mitochondria to the onset of eukaryote
complexity. Preprint at https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/781211v1 (2019).
20.
Martin, W. F. et al. Late mitochondrial origin is an artifact. Genome Biol. Evol. 9,
373–379 (2017).
21.
Lane, N. Serial endosymbiosis or singular event at the origin of eukaryotes? J. Theor.
Biol. 434, 58–67 (2017).
22.
Pittis, A. A. & Gabaldón, T. On phylogenetic branch lengths distribution and the late
acquistion of mitochondria. Preprint at https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/064873v1
(2016).
23.
Klinger, C. M., Spang, A., Dacks, J. B. & Ettema, T. J. G. Tracing the archaeal origins
of eukaryotic membrane-trafficking system building blocks. Mol. Biol. Evol. 33, 1528-1541
(2016).
24.
Martijn, J. & Ettema, T. J. G. From archaeon to eukaryote: the evolutionary dark ages
of the eukaryotic cell. Biochem. Soc. Trans. 41, 451–457 (2013).
25.
Akıl, C. & Robinson, R. C. Genomes of Asgard archaea encode profilins that regulate
actin. Nature 562, 439-443 (2018).
26.
Imachi, H. et al. Isolation of an archaeon at the prokaryote-eukaryote interface.
Preprint at https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/726976v2 (2019).
27.
Deutekom, E. S., Vosseberg, J., van Dam, T. J. P. & Snel, B. Measuring the impact of
gene prediction on gene loss estimates in Eukaryotes by quantifying falsely inferred absences.
PLOS Comput. Biol. 15, e1007301 (2019).
28.
Huerta-Cepas, J. et al. eggNOG 4.5: a hierarchical orthology framework with
improved functional annotations for eukaryotic, prokaryotic and viral sequences. Nucleic
Acids Res. 44, D286–D293 (2016).
29.
Eddy, S. R. Accelerated profile HMM searches. PLOS Comput. Biol. 7, e1002195
(2011).
30.
Hauser, M., Mayer, C. E. & Söding, J. kClust: fast and sensitive clustering of large
protein sequence databases. BMC Bioinformatics 14, 248 (2013).
31.
Altschul, S. F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E. W. & Lipman, D. J. Basic local
alignment search tool. J. Mol. Biol. 215, 403–410 (1990).
32.
Shah, N., Nute, M. G., Warnow, T. & Pop, M. Misunderstood parameter of NCBI
BLAST impacts the correctness of bioinformatics workflows. Bioinformatics 35, 1613-1614
(2019).
33.
González-Pech, R. A., Stephens, T. G. & Chan, C. X. Commonly misunderstood
parameters of NCBI BLAST and important considerations for users. Bioinformatics 35, 26972698 (2019).
34.
Derelle, R. et al. Bacterial proteins pinpoint a single eukaryotic root. Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. 112, E693–E699 (2015).
35.
Katoh, K. & Standley, D. M. MAFFT multiple sequence alignment software version 7:

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

improvements in performance and usability. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30, 772–780 (2013).
36.
Capella-Gutiérrez, S., Silla-Martínez, J. M. & Gabaldón, T. trimAl: a tool for
automated alignment trimming in large-scale phylogenetic analyses. Bioinformatics 25, 1972–
1973 (2009).
37.
Nguyen, L.-T., Schmidt, H. A., von Haeseler, A. & Minh, B. Q. IQ-TREE: a fast and
effective stochastic algorithm for estimating maximum-likelihood phylogenies. Mol. Biol.
Evol. 32, 268–274 (2015).
38.
Le, S. Q., Dang, C. C. & Gascuel, O. Modeling protein evolution with several amino
acid replacement matrices depending on site rates. Mol. Biol. Evol. 29, 2921–2936 (2012).
39.
Minh, B. Q., Nguyen, M. A. T. & von Haeseler, A. Ultrafast approximation for
phylogenetic bootstrap. Mol. Biol. Evol. 30, 1188–1195 (2013).
40.
Price, M. N., Dehal, P. S. & Arkin, A. P. FastTree 2 – approximately maximumlikelihood trees for large alignments. PLOS ONE 5, e9490 (2010).
41.
Katoh, K. & Toh, H. Recent developments in the MAFFT multiple sequence
alignment program. Brief. Bioinform. 9, 286–298 (2008).
42.
Huerta-Cepas, J., Serra, F. & Bork, P. ETE 3: reconstruction, analysis, and
visualization of phylogenomic data. Mol. Biol. Evol. 33, 1635–1638 (2016).
43.
Steinegger, M. et al. HH-suite3 for fast remote homology detection and deep protein
annotation. BMC Bioinformatics 20, 473 (2019).
44.
Huerta-Cepas, J. et al. Fast genome-wide functional annotation through orthology
assignment by eggNOG-mapper. Mol. Biol. Evol. 34, 2115–2122 (2017).
45.
Buchfink, B., Xie, C. & Huson, D. H. Fast and sensitive protein alignment using
DIAMOND. Nat. Methods 12, 59–60 (2015).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Acquisition
Invention
Duplication node
LECA node

Eukaryotic orthologous group
Prokaryotic sister clade

Fig. 1: Characterisation of duplications during eukaryogenesis.
a, Density plot showing the distribution of the number of Pfam domains in present-day
prokaryotes (green) and eukaryotes (purple) in comparison with the acquisition, invention and
LECA estimates obtained from phylogenetic trees (see inset). b, Number of acquisitions or

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

inventions that gave rise to a particular number of LECA families, demonstrating the
skewedness of duplications across protein families. c, Odds of duplication for LECA families
according to KOG functional categories. 78% of pairwise comparisons were significantly
different (Supplementary Fig. 1). The poorly characterised categories and functions of very
few families (cell motility, extracellular structures and nuclear structure) are not depicted. d,
Odds of duplication for LECA families according to cellular localisation. 60% of pairwise
comparisons were significantly different (Supplementary Fig. 2). c-d, Numbers indicate the
number of LECA families and dashed lines indicate the odds or fraction of all LECA families
in total.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a

b
Asgard archaeal

Asgard archaeal

859 / 311

Prokaryotic

Prokaryotic

733 / 318

Archaeal (other)

Archaeal (other)

711 / 391

Eukaryotic

Bacterial (other)

5,276 / 3,003

Bacterial (other)

Eukaryotic

2,271 / 1,336

Alphaproteobacterial

Alphaproteobacterial

409 / 317

0.0

0.1
0.2
0.3
Fraction of duplicated acquisitions or inventions

0.4

1.0

1.5

2.0
2.5
Multiplication factor

3.0

Fig. 2: Contribution of different phylogenetic origins to duplications during
eukaryogenesis.
a, Duplication tendency as fraction of clades having undergone at least one duplication. b,
Multiplication factors, defined as the number of LECA families divided by the number of
acquisitions or inventions. These numbers are shown beside the corresponding bar. a, b,
Dashed lines indicate the duplication tendency and multiplication factor for all acquisitions
and LECA families. Prokaryotic: unclear prokaryotic ancestry (could not be assigned to a
domain or lower taxonomic level).

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

a

b

duplication
length (dl) =
min
med

stem length (sl) =
min
med

Fig. 3: Timing of acquisitions and duplications from different phylogenetic origins
during eukaryogenesis.
a, Illustration how the stem and duplication lengths were calculated. Symbols and colour
schemes are identical to Fig. 1a. The phylogenetic distance between the acquisition or
duplication and LECA were normalised by dividing it by the median branch length between
LECA and the eukaryotic terminal nodes. In case of duplications the shortest of the possible
normalised paths was used. b, Ridgeline plot showing the distribution of corrected stem or
duplication lengths, depicted as the additive inverse of the log-transformed values.
Consequently, longer branches have a smaller value and vice versa. For clarity, a peak of
near-zero branch lengths is not shown (see Supplementary Fig. 11). Numbers indicate the
number of acquisitions or duplications for which the branch lengths were included. Groups
are ordered based on the median value.

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

FECA

a

mitochondrion

Chromatin

180

Inorganic ions

221

Signal transduction

458

Lipids

44

Transcription

78

Energy

420

Carbohydrates

161

Secondary metabolites

177

Protein modification

64

Amino acids

94

Cell cycle

64

RNA processing

33

Intracellular trafficking

53

Replication

147

Translation

43

Cytoskeleton

319

-1

0

1

2

3

Corrected duplication length (-log10)
Cellular processes and signalling

Information storage and processing

FECA

b

Metabolism

mitochondrion

Extracellular region

19

Plasma membrane

195

Mitochondrion

255

Endosome

28

Golgi apparatus

42

Vacuole

34

Endoplasmic reticulum

96

Nuclear chromosome

54

Nucleoplasm

158

Cytosol

301

Cytoskeleton

141

Nucleolus

65

-1

0

1

2

3

Corrected duplication length (-log10)
Endomembrane system

Cytoskeleton

Nucleus

Other

Metabolic compartment

Fig. 4: Timing of duplications during eukaryogenesis according to function and
localisation.
a, b, Ridgeline plots showing the distribution of duplication lengths for different functional
categories (a) and cellular localisations (b). The 95% confidence interval of the median of the

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/823484; this version posted November 1, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which
was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is made
available under aCC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license.

Asgard archaeal (FECA) and alphaproteobacterial stem lengths (mitochondrion) are depicted
in grey, indicating the divergence of eukaryotes from their Asgard archaea-related and
Alphaproteobacteria-related ancestors, respectively. Groups are ordered based on the median
value.

