bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Full	  Title:	  Latent	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  infection	  increases	  soluble	  mutant	  huntingtin	  and	  promotes	  
neurodegeneration	  in	  the	  YAC128	  mouse	  model	  of	  Huntington’s	  disease	  
Short	  Title:	  Latent	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  promotes	  neurodegeneration	  in	  HD	  mice	  
	  
David	  W.	  Donley1,2,	  Teal	  Jenkins3,	  Cailin	  Deiter4,	  Reed	  Campbell5,	  Marley	  Realing4,	  Vanita	  
Chopra6,	  Stephen	  Hersch6,	  Jason	  P.	  Gigley7*,	  Jonathan	  H.	  Fox1,2*.	  
	  
1

Department	  of	  Veterinary	  Sciences,	  University	  of	  Wyoming,	  Laramie,	  WY,	  USA	  

2

Neuroscience	  Graduate	  Program,	  University	  of	  Wyoming,	  Laramie,	  WY,	  USA	  	  

3

Washington	  Wyoming	  Alaska	  Montana	  Idaho	  Medical	  Education	  Program,	  University	  of	  
Washington,	  Seattle,	  WA,	  USA	  	  
4

Department	  of	  Zoology	  and	  Physiology,	  University	  of	  Wyoming,	  Laramie,	  WY,	  USA	  

5

Department	  of	  Exercise	  Science,	  University	  of	  Wyoming,	  Laramie,	  WY,	  USA	  

6

Massachusetts	  General	  Institute	  for	  Neurodegenerative	  Disease,	  Charlestown,	  MA,	  USA	  

7

Department	  of	  Molecular	  Biology,	  University	  of	  Wyoming,	  Laramie,	  WY,	  USA	  	  

	  
*Corresponding	  Authors	  
Email:	  jgigley@uwyo.edu	  (JPG),	  jfox7@uwyo.edu	  (JHF)	  	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Abstract	  
Toxoplasma	  gondii	  causes	  a	  prevalent	  neuroinvasive	  protozoal	  pathogen	  that	  in	  immune	  
competent	  individuals	  results	  in	  latent	  infection	  characterized	  by	  intra-­‐cellular	  parasite	  cysts	  in	  
brain.	  	  Despite	  life-­‐long	  infection,	  the	  role	  of	  latent	  toxoplasmosis	  on	  chronic	  
neurodegenerative	  processes	  is	  poorly	  understood.	  Huntington’s	  disease	  (HD)	  is	  a	  progressive	  
neurodegenerative	  disorder	  caused	  by	  a	  dominant	  CAG	  repeat	  expansion	  in	  the	  huntingtin	  
gene	  (HTT)	  that	  results	  in	  the	  expression	  and	  accumulation	  of	  mutant	  huntingtin	  protein	  
(mHTT).	  The	  mutant	  HD	  gene	  is	  fully	  penetrant.	  However,	  there	  is	  significant	  variability	  in	  
disease	  progression	  that	  is	  in	  part	  explained	  by	  as	  yet	  unidentified	  environmental	  factors.	  The	  
kynurenine	  pathway	  of	  tryptophan	  metabolism	  (KP)	  is	  an	  inflammatory	  pathway	  and	  its	  
activation	  is	  implicated	  in	  HD	  pathogenesis.	  KP	  upregulation	  also	  occurs	  in	  response	  to	  infection	  
with	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  suggesting	  that	  the	  latent	  infection	  may	  promote	  HD.	  We	  discovered	  
that	  mice	  on	  the	  FVB/NJ	  background	  develop	  latent	  toxoplasmosis	  following	  infection	  with	  the	  
ME49	  strain	  of	  T.	  gondii.	  This	  finding	  enabled	  us	  to	  address	  the	  hypothesis	  that	  latent	  
toxoplasmosis	  potentiates	  disease	  in	  the	  YAC128	  mouse	  model	  of	  HD,	  as	  these	  mice	  are	  
maintained	  on	  the	  FVB/NJ	  background.	  Wild-­‐type	  and	  HD	  mice	  were	  infected	  at	  2-­‐months	  of	  
age.	  During	  the	  10-­‐month	  follow-­‐up,	  infection	  had	  adverse	  effects	  on	  mice	  of	  both	  genotypes.	  
However,	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  demonstrated	  specific	  vulnerability	  to	  latent	  toxoplasmosis,	  as	  
demonstrated	  by	  the	  presence	  of	  increased	  striatal	  degeneration,	  high	  levels	  of	  the	  blood	  
neurodegeneration	  marker	  neurofilament	  light	  protein,	  and	  elevated	  brain	  soluble	  mHTT.	  Our	  
studies	  have	  uncovered	  a	  novel	  HD-­‐infection	  interaction	  in	  mice	  that	  provides	  insights	  into	  the	  
large	  variability	  of	  the	  human	  HD	  phenotype.	  

Introduction	  	  
Huntington’s	  disease	  (HD)	  is	  a	  progressive	  autosomal	  dominant	  neurodegenerative	  
disorder	  caused	  by	  a	  polyglutamine-­‐encoding	  CAG-­‐repeat	  expansion	  in	  the	  huntingtin	  gene	  
(HTT)	  [1].	  Mutant	  huntingtin	  protein	  (mHTT)	  accumulates	  in	  neurons	  and	  glial	  cells,	  resulting	  in	  
transcriptional	  dysregulation,	  altered	  mitochondrial	  function,	  inflammation,	  and	  oxidative	  
stress	  that	  promote	  neurodegenerative	  processes	  in	  the	  HD	  brain	  [2-­‐4].	  As	  mHTT	  is	  the	  
upstream	  driver	  of	  HD,	  decreasing	  the	  level	  of	  the	  mutant	  protein	  is	  protective,	  and	  increasing	  
mHTT	  levels	  is	  predicted	  to	  promote	  disease	  progression.	  Human	  HD	  is	  characterized	  by	  high	  
variability	  in	  the	  age	  of	  onset	  after	  adjustment	  for	  CAG	  repeat	  length	  size	  [5].	  Environmental	  
factors	  account	  for	  ~60%	  of	  the	  non-­‐CAG	  variability	  in	  the	  age	  of	  onset,	  with	  the	  remaining	  
effect	  explained	  by	  non-­‐HTT	  genetic	  factors	  [5].	  Currently,	  environmental	  factors	  that	  modulate	  
HD	  progression	  are	  unknown.	  	  
Toxoplasma	  gondii	  is	  a	  protozoan	  parasite	  with	  a	  human	  prevalence	  of	  ~20−30%	  in	  most	  
developed	  countries,	  but	  infection	  rates	  are	  up	  to	  80%	  in	  some	  countries	  [6-­‐8].	  The	  acute	  
infection	  is	  characterized	  by	  proliferation	  of	  the	  tachyzoite	  stage	  of	  the	  parasite	  and	  the	  
primary	  immune	  response.	  Even	  with	  an	  effective	  immune	  response,	  the	  parasite	  evades	  
complete	  clearance,	  forming	  a	  latent	  infection	  characterized	  by	  intra-­‐cellular	  cysts	  in	  the	  brain	  
and	  striated	  muscles	  [9-­‐11].	  Seropositivity	  for	  T.	  gondii	  is	  associated	  with	  several	  
neuropsychiatric	  disorders	  including	  schizophrenia,	  depression,	  and	  generalized	  anxiety	  [12-­‐
16].	  However,	  meta-­‐analyses	  and	  broader	  cohort	  studies	  report	  conflicting	  results,	  with	  some	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

studies	  reporting	  strong	  correlation	  with	  neuropsychiatric	  disease	  and	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  in	  
humans,	  and	  others	  finding	  no	  association	  [16-­‐21].	  Similarly,	  in	  mice,	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  
exacerbates	  beta-­‐amyloid	  (Aβ)-­‐induced	  memory	  deficits	  but	  is	  associated	  with	  a	  reduction	  in	  
Aβ load	  and	  decreased	  neuronal	  degeneration	  in	  the	  hippocampus	  [22-­‐25].	  
HD	  patients	  demonstrate	  immune	  activation	  beginning	  early	  in	  the	  disease.	  Pre-­‐clinically	  
there	  is	  microglial	  activation	  in	  brain	  and	  the	  blood	  cytokines	  IL-­‐6,	  IL-­‐8	  and	  TNFα	  are	  elevated	  
[26,	  27].	  Mutant	  HTT	  levels	  in	  monocytes	  and	  T	  lymphocytes	  correlate	  with	  disease	  burden	  and	  
striatal	  atrophy	  in	  human	  HD	  patients	  [28].	  Monocytic	  mutant	  HTT	  impairs	  cell	  migration	  in	  
response	  to	  chemotactic	  stimuli	  [24].	  However,	  whether	  the	  inflammatory	  processes	  in	  HD	  are	  
intrinsic	  responses	  to	  mHTT	  or	  represent	  altered	  responses	  to	  immune	  challenge	  by	  infection	  
are	  not	  known.	  The	  kynurenine	  pathway	  of	  tryptophan	  metabolism	  (KP)	  is	  activated	  by	  
inflammatory	  stimuli	  including	  IFNγ and	  IL-­‐6	  [29,	  30].	  This	  pathway	  is	  implicated	  in	  HD	  
progression	  in	  mouse	  models	  [31-­‐33].	  Additionally,	  KP	  inhibition	  provides	  protection	  in	  HD	  
models	  [34,	  35].	  T.	  gondii	  is	  a	  tryptophan	  auxotroph,	  so	  utilizes	  host	  tryptophan	  for	  growth.	  KP	  
activation	  provides	  protection	  against	  the	  infection	  because	  it	  results	  in	  tryptophan	  depletion	  
[30,	  36,	  37].	  Therefore,	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  activates	  a	  pathway	  that	  is	  linked	  with	  HD	  
potentiation.	  
Whereas	  the	  role	  of	  aseptic	  inflammation	  in	  HD	  and	  related	  protein-­‐misfolding	  diseases	  
has	  been	  well	  studied	  [26-­‐28],	  how	  common	  latent	  brain	  infections,	  such	  as	  with	  T.	  gondii	  or	  
HSV1,	  affect	  this	  and	  the	  underlying	  diseases	  is	  poorly	  understood.	  Interestingly,	  a	  transgenic	  
mouse	  model	  of	  Alzheimer’s	  disease	  has	  an	  enhanced	  inflammatory	  response	  to	  acute	  T.	  gondii	  
infection	  [38].	  We	  have	  previously	  studied	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  in	  N171-­‐82Q	  HD	  mice	  and	  
reported	  premature	  mortality	  compared	  to	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  [39].	  However,	  on	  the	  
B6/C3H	  genetic	  background	  of	  these	  mice,	  latent	  infection	  was	  not	  established,	  and	  the	  mice	  
died	  before	  effects	  on	  HD	  could	  be	  investigated.	  We	  have	  since	  discovered	  that	  FVB/NJ	  
background	  mice	  have	  high-­‐genetic	  resistance	  to	  infection	  and	  establish	  long-­‐term	  latent	  
infection,	  thus	  enabling	  the	  current	  investigation	  in	  YAC128	  HD	  mice.	  We	  now	  report	  that	  latent	  
T.	  gondii	  infection	  in	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  promotes	  striatal	  degeneration,	  increases	  markers	  of	  KP	  
activity,	  and	  increases	  brain	  mHTT	  levels.	  The	  significance	  of	  these	  results	  is	  that,	  in	  contrast	  to	  
being	  designated	  as	  a	  silent	  infection,	  T.	  gondii	  increases	  established	  proximal	  and	  distal	  
markers	  of	  HD	  in	  a	  mouse	  model.	  We	  also	  show	  that	  latent	  toxoplasmosis	  also	  promotes	  
cortical	  degeneration	  in	  wild-­‐type	  mice.	  These	  findings	  are	  relevant	  to	  understanding	  a	  
potential	  link	  between	  latent	  toxoplasmosis	  and	  neurodegenerative	  processes	  in	  HD	  and	  aging.	  	  
	  

Materials	  and	  Methods	  

Mouse	  husbandry	  and	  breeding	  
The	  YAC128	  model	  is	  a	  transgenic	  model	  of	  HD	  that	  expresses	  full-­‐length	  human	  mHTT.	  These	  
mice	  display	  a	  progressive	  phenotype	  with	  mild	  disease,	  including	  behavioral	  deficits	  and	  
neurodegeneration	  present	  before	  1-­‐year	  of	  age.	  They	  develop	  striatal	  and	  neocortical	  
degeneration,	  as	  occurs	  in	  human	  HD	  [40].	  WT	  and	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  (Jackson	  Labs)	  were	  
maintained	  as	  described	  [41].	  Mice	  were	  housed	  in	  OptiMice	  cages	  (Animal	  Care	  Systems)	  with	  
4-­‐5	  per	  cage	  and	  one	  genotype/treatment	  per	  cage	  [39].	  Experimental	  mice	  were	  obtained	  by	  
breeding	  mutant	  HTT	  males	  with	  WT	  females.	  Sentinel	  mice	  were	  evaluated	  every	  6	  months	  by	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

comprehensive	  serology	  panel	  screening	  for	  murine	  infectious	  diseases	  at	  Charles	  River	  
Laboratories	  and	  were	  free	  from	  all	  tested	  diseases.	  All	  mice	  were	  checked	  daily.	  They	  were	  
sacrificed	  using	  B-­‐euthanasia	  solution.	  	  
Ethics	  Statement	  
This	  study	  and	  all	  procedures	  were	  carried	  out	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  National	  Institutes	  of	  
Health	  guidelines	  for	  animal	  welfare	  and	  were	  approved	  by	  the	  University	  of	  Wyoming	  
Institutional	  Animal	  Care	  and	  Use	  Committee	  (UW-­‐IACUC)	  (protocol	  numbers	  
20150929JG00198-­‐03	  and	  20180129JF00292-­‐01).	  
Experimental	  Design	  
Male	  and	  female	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  were	  used	  for	  all	  experiments.	  HD	  and	  WT	  littermate	  mice	  
were	  weaned	  at	  3.5	  weeks	  of	  age	  and	  systematically	  assigned	  to	  experimental	  groups	  to	  
balance	  ages	  and	  minimize	  effects	  of	  litter	  of	  origin.	  HD	  and	  WT	  mice	  were	  dosed	  with	  10	  Me49	  
strain	  T.	  gondii	  parasites	  cysts	  by	  oral	  gavage	  at	  2-­‐months	  of	  age.	  Experiments	  were	  a	  2	  ×	  2	  
factorial	  design.	  For	  all	  studies,	  the	  investigators	  were	  blinded	  with	  respect	  to	  the	  treatment	  
and	  genotype,	  until	  data	  analysis.	  Individual	  mice	  were	  identified	  by	  a	  3-­‐digit	  identifier	  assigned	  
during	  genotyping.	  Experiments	  were	  terminated	  at	  ~1	  year	  of	  age,	  at	  which	  all	  mice	  were	  
humanely	  sacrificed.	  All	  mice	  were	  accounted	  for	  in	  all	  studies.	  Mouse	  deaths	  prior	  to	  sacrifice	  
are	  included	  in	  (S1	  Table).	  
T.	  gondii	  infections	  
The	  Me49	  strain	  of	  T.	  gondii	  was	  harvested	  from	  young	  FVB/NJ	  mice	  infected	  with	  10	  cysts	  by	  
oral	  gavage	  and	  sacrificed	  4−5	  weeks	  post-­‐infection.	  Brain	  cysts	  were	  collected,	  counted,	  and	  
suspended	  in	  cold	  PBS	  at	  a	  concentration	  of	  50	  cysts/ml.	  Experimental	  mice	  were	  infected	  once	  
with	  10	  parasite	  cysts	  (200	  µl)	  by	  oral	  gavage.	  Control	  mice	  received	  PBS	  by	  oral	  gavage.	  
Mouse	  rotarod	  
Performance	  on	  the	  rotarod	  was	  completed	  as	  described	  [41].	  
Neurofilament	  light	  chain	  ELISA	  
Neurofilament	  light	  chain	  (NFL)	  was	  measured	  in	  plasma	  at	  8	  and	  12	  months	  of	  age.	  Blood	  was	  
collected	  from	  cardiac	  puncture	  and	  placed	  in	  a	  tube	  with	  5	  µl	  of	  1	  mM	  EDTA.	  Plasma	  was	  
stored	  in	  liquid	  nitrogen	  until	  analysis.	  NFL	  ELISA	  was	  performed	  according	  to	  the	  
manufacturer’s	  instructions	  (MyBioSource).	  Undiluted	  plasma	  (50	  µl)	  was	  added	  to	  each	  well	  in	  
duplicate	  and	  incubated	  for	  2	  hours.	  NFL	  concentrations	  were	  calculated	  using	  standards.	  
Kynurenine	  pathway	  metabolite	  analyses	  
Plasma	  was	  collected	  from	  the	  retro-­‐orbital	  sinus.	  In	  brief,	  mice	  were	  lightly	  anesthetized	  with	  
an	  intraperitoneal	  injection	  of	  30	  mg/kg	  ketamine	  and	  3.3	  mg/kg	  xylazine;	  one	  drop	  of	  
proparacain	  was	  used	  as	  a	  topical	  anesthetic	  at	  the	  collection	  site	  just	  before	  the	  procedure.	  
After	  collection,	  mice	  were	  placed	  back	  in	  the	  home	  cage	  and	  closely	  monitored	  until	  fully	  
recovered.	  Collected	  plasma	  was	  frozen	  in	  liquid	  nitrogen	  until	  analysis.	  Samples	  were	  diluted	  
1:3	  (v/v)	  with	  methanol	  containing	  2%	  (v/v)	  acetic	  acid	  and	  centrifuged	  at	  12000	  ×g	  for	  5	  
minutes	  at	  4°C.	  Supernatants	  were	  filtered	  using	  a	  Phenomenex	  Phree	  Phospholipid	  extraction	  
column	  and	  a	  0.2-­‐µm	  filter.	  The	  samples	  were	  then	  run	  on	  a	  Waters	  Acquity	  UPLC-­‐MS/MS	  with	  
a	  methanol/2%	  acetic	  acid	  mobile	  phase	  gradient	  on	  a	  2	  ×	  100−mm	  Waters	  BEH	  C18	  column.	  
Each	  sample	  (5	  µl)	  was	  injected	  with	  a	  flow	  rate	  of	  0.3	  ml/minute	  and	  a	  total	  run	  time	  of	  4.5	  
minutes.	  Analytes	  were	  verified	  using	  two	  M+H	  parent-­‐daughter	  transitions:	  tryptophan	  parent	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

m/z	  =	  205.13	  to	  daughter	  m/z	  =	  118.03	  and	  146.07,	  kynurenic	  acid	  parent	  m/z	  =	  190.07	  to	  
daughter	  m/z	  =	  88.96	  and	  116.03,	  kynurenine	  parent	  m/z	  =	  209.04	  to	  daughter	  m/z	  =	  
94.02and146.03,	  and	  3-­‐HK	  parent	  m/z	  =	  224.98	  to	  daughter	  m/z	  =	  110.04	  and	  162.05.	  
Concentrations	  were	  quantified	  using	  QuanLynx	  (Waters)	  software	  from	  serial	  dilutions	  of	  
standards.	  	  
Quantitative	  neuropathology	  
Anaesthetized	  mice	  were	  perfused	  with	  4%	  (w/v)	  paraformaldehyde	  as	  described	  [17,	  41].	  Fixed	  
brains	  were	  sectioned	  at	  40	  µm	  using	  a	  freezing	  microtome,	  and	  serial	  sections	  were	  collected	  
in	  12-­‐well	  plates.	  Every	  6th	  section	  was	  mounted	  and	  stained	  with	  thionin.	  The	  Cavalieri	  and	  
optical	  fractionator	  methods	  in	  StereoInvestigator	  (MicroBrightField)	  software	  were	  used	  to	  
determine	  brain	  region	  volume	  and	  neuronal	  estimates,	  respectively.	  The	  optical	  fractionator	  
method	  was	  applied	  to	  the	  striatum	  as	  described	  [42],	  whereas	  application	  to	  the	  neocortex	  
used	  a	  550	  ×	  550−µm	  grid	  size	  and	  27	  ×	  27	  ×	  10-­‐µm	  counting	  frame.	  Cortical	  and	  striatal	  
evaluations	  were	  completed	  on	  every	  twelfth	  serial	  section,	  and	  hippocampal	  evaluation	  was	  
completed	  on	  every	  sixth	  serial	  section.	  Striatal	  and	  hippocampal	  analyses	  were	  performed	  on	  
the	  entire	  structure,	  whereas	  the	  cerebral	  neocortex	  was	  quantified	  from	  the	  most	  rostral	  
aspect	  of	  the	  lateral	  ventricle	  and	  terminated	  at	  the	  rostral	  hippocampus.	  
Functional	  assessment	  of	  CD8+	  T	  lymphocytes	  ex	  vivo	  
Assessment	  of	  antigen-­‐specific	  IFNγ	  production	  from	  CD8+	  T	  cells	  was	  performed	  as	  described	  
[39].	  Flow	  cytometry	  data	  were	  collected	  using	  Guava	  easyCyte	  HT	  flow	  cytometer	  (Millipore).	  
Data	  were	  analyzed	  using	  FlowJo	  v9.3	  software.	  Cell	  gating	  and	  the	  compensation	  strategy	  
were	  determined	  from	  no-­‐stain,	  single-­‐color,	  and	  fluorescence-­‐minus-­‐one	  controls	  for	  each	  
antibody.	  
Quantitative	  real-­‐time	  PCR	  analyses	  
Total	  RNA	  was	  extracted	  from	  cerebral	  cortex	  and	  striatum	  using	  phenol/chloroform	  and	  then	  
purified	  using	  a	  column-­‐based	  method	  (RNAeasy,	  Qiagen)	  with	  on-­‐column	  DNase	  I	  digestion.	  
mHTT	  was	  amplified	  using	  forward	  (5’-­‐GTGCTGAGCGGCGCCGCGAGTC-­‐3’)	  and	  reverse	  (5’-­‐
GGACTTGAGGGACTCGAAGGC-­‐3’)	  primers	  that	  specifically	  target	  the	  mutant	  gene	  according	  to	  
a	  previously	  reported	  protocol	  [43].	  Expression	  was	  quantified	  using	  SYBR	  Green	  Master	  Mix	  
(Life	  Technologies)	  and	  was	  normalized	  to	  β-­‐actin	  using	  the	  Applied	  Biosystems	  Taqman	  gene	  
expression	  primer/probe	  combination	  Mm00607939_s1.	  Expression	  analyses	  of	  SAG1,	  BAG1,	  
and	  the	  T.	  gondii	  actin	  gene	  were	  performed	  as	  described	  using	  SYBR	  Green	  Master	  Mix	  and	  the	  
Pfaffl	  method	  [44].	  SAG1	  and	  BAG1	  expression	  is	  reported	  as	  a	  ratio	  relative	  to	  parasite	  actin.	  
Gene	  expression	  was	  determined	  using	  20	  ng	  of	  cDNA	  per	  reaction	  for	  mHTT	  and	  40	  ng	  of	  cDNA	  
per	  reaction	  for	  SAG1	  and	  BAG1.	  Amplifications	  used	  a	  Bio-­‐Rad	  CFX	  real-­‐time	  thermal	  cycler.	  T.	  
gondii	  burden	  was	  determined	  by	  quantitative	  PCR	  on	  genomic	  DNA	  using	  DNA	  standards	  as	  
described	  [39].	  Reactions	  were	  carried	  out	  with	  400	  ng	  of	  genomic	  DNA	  purified	  brain	  
homogenate	  using	  a	  Qiagen	  DNeasy	  Kit.	  	  
Soluble	  mutant	  huntingtin	  
Soluble	  mHTT	  was	  measured	  by	  time-­‐resolved	  fluorescence	  resonance	  energy	  transfer	  (TR-­‐
FRET)	  using	  antibodies	  targeted	  specifically	  to	  the	  N-­‐terminal	  region	  of	  the	  mutant	  protein.	  
Measurements	  were	  completed	  as	  described	  [45].	  	  
Statistical	  analyses	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

All	  data	  were	  analyzed	  using	  SAS	  software	  version	  9.2	  (Cary,	  NC).	  Generalized	  linear	  modeling	  
was	  used	  for	  single-­‐time	  point	  analyses,	  and	  the	  mixed	  procedure	  was	  used	  for	  repeated-­‐
measures	  analyses.	  Assumptions	  of	  normality	  and	  equal	  variance	  were	  verified	  for	  each	  
experiment.	  We	  investigated	  all	  main	  effects	  and	  interactions	  in	  the	  initial	  statistical	  model,	  and	  
then	  performed	  pre-­‐planned	  pairwise	  comparisons.	  Data	  that	  were	  not	  normally	  distributed	  
were	  log	  transformed	  before	  analysis.	  These	  transformed	  data	  are	  presented	  as	  the	  mean	  ±	  
95%	  confidence	  interval	  (CI).	  P	  <	  0.05	  were	  considered	  significant.	  
	  

Results	  
Latent	  T.	  gondii	  exacerbates	  HD-­‐induced	  neurodegeneration	  
	  
Preliminary	  evaluation	  of	  ME49	  strain	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  at	  2	  months	  in	  FVB/J	  mice	  
resulted	  in	  the	  fortuitous	  finding	  that	  the	  mice	  established	  a	  persistent	  latent	  (sub-­‐clinical)	  
infection	  without	  overt	  disease	  or	  death	  up	  to	  12-­‐months	  of	  age.	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  are	  
maintained	  on	  this	  line	  enabling	  us	  to	  evaluate	  how	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  impacts	  HD	  in	  this	  
mouse	  model.	  Subsequent	  experiments	  described	  here,	  where	  mice	  were	  infected	  orally	  with	  
10	  T.	  gondii	  cysts	  at	  2	  months,	  corroborate	  these	  findings	  as	  we	  did	  not	  detect	  any	  differences	  
in	  mortality	  due	  to	  infection	  or	  genotype	  up	  to	  12-­‐months	  of	  age	  (Table	  S1,	  Fig.	  S1).	  	  
Neurofilament	  light	  chain	  (NFL)	  is	  a	  blood	  marker	  of	  active	  neurodegeneration	  in	  HD	  
[46,	  47]	  and	  is	  also	  elevated	  in	  other	  neurodegenerative	  disorders	  [48].	  We	  quantified	  blood	  
NFL	  at	  8	  and	  12	  months	  of	  age	  to	  determine	  the	  effects	  of	  both	  infection	  and	  HD.	  NFL	  levels	  
were	  increased	  by	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  (F(1,25)	  =	  35.5,	  p	  <	  0.0001)	  and	  HD	  (F(1,25)	  =	  12.83,	  p	  =	  
0.0014)	  at	  8	  months.	  Similarly,	  at	  12	  months	  NFL	  was	  also	  increased	  by	  both	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  
(F(1,50)	  =	  18.7,	  p	  <	  0.0001)	  and	  by	  HD	  (F(1,50)	  =	  10.2,	  p	  =	  0.0024).	  Infected	  HD	  mice	  had	  
significantly	  increased	  NFL	  compared	  with	  both	  infected	  wild-­‐type	  and	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  
(Fig.	  1A).	  We	  then	  completed	  comprehensive	  quantitative	  neuropathology	  studies	  in	  12-­‐month-­‐
old	  mice	  to	  assess	  neurodegeneration	  directly	  (Fig.	  1B-­‐H).	  Brain	  weights	  were	  significantly	  
decreased	  by	  infection	  (F(1,54)	  =	  71.25,	  p	  <	  0.0001)	  and	  HD	  (F(1,54)	  =	  12.15,	  p	  =	  0.001);	  there	  was	  
also	  a	  significant	  genotype-­‐infection	  interaction	  (F(1,54)	  =	  4.8,	  p	  =	  0.0329)	  (Fig.	  1C).	  The	  striatum	  
preferentially	  degenerates	  early	  in	  HD	  models	  and	  human	  HD.	  Therefore,	  we	  quantified	  striatal	  
volumes	  and	  estimated	  the	  number	  of	  striatal	  neurons	  (Figs.	  1D-­‐E).	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  (F(1,40)	  =	  
4.96,	  p	  =	  0.0316)	  and	  HD	  (F(1,40)	  =	  30.64,	  p	  <	  0.0001)	  both	  significantly	  decreased	  striatal	  
volumes	  (Figs.	  1B,	  D).	  We	  also	  found	  a	  significant	  HD−T.	  gondii	  interaction	  (F(1,40)	  =	  6.2,	  p	  =	  
0.017),	  demonstrating	  that	  infected	  HD	  mice	  had	  significantly	  smaller	  striata	  compared	  with	  
infected	  wild-­‐type	  and	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  (Fig.	  1D).	  Consistent	  with	  this,	  unilateral	  total	  
striatal	  neuronal	  estimates	  were	  decreased	  by	  T.	  gondii	  (F(1,40)	  =	  4.23,	  p	  =	  0.0462)	  and	  HD	  (F(1,40)	  
=	  5.37,	  p	  =	  0.0257).	  Infected,	  versus	  non-­‐infected,	  HD	  mice	  had	  significantly	  fewer	  striatal	  
neurons	  (Fig	  1E).	  Cerebral	  cortex	  undergoes	  extensive	  degeneration	  in	  HD	  models	  and	  human	  
HD.	  We	  determined	  both	  neocortical	  volume	  and	  neuronal	  estimates	  (Figs.	  1F-­‐G).	  Interestingly,	  
T.	  gondii	  promoted	  neocortical	  atrophy	  (F(1,39)	  =	  7.21,	  p	  =	  0.0106)	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice	  combined.	  
Pair-­‐wise	  comparisons	  were	  not	  significant	  however	  (Fig.	  1F).	  Consistent	  with	  this,	  T.	  gondii	  
infection	  resulted	  in	  loss	  of	  neocortical	  neurons	  (F(1,39)	  =	  13.46,	  p	  =	  0.0007)	  in	  both	  WT	  and	  HD	  
mice	  (Fig.	  1G).	  To	  address	  the	  specificity	  of	  the	  infection	  to	  HD	  vulnerable	  brain	  areas	  we	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

assessed	  hippocampal	  volumes	  as	  the	  hippocampus	  does	  not	  degenerate	  early	  in	  HD.	  There	  
were	  no	  significant	  differences	  between	  the	  four	  groups	  (Fig.	  1H).	  
To	  determine	  if	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  affects	  HD-­‐associated	  phenotypes,	  we	  measured	  
motor	  performance	  and	  body	  weight.	  As	  expected	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  demonstrated	  
declines	  in	  performance	  as	  compared	  to	  non-­‐infected	  WT	  mice.	  Further,	  T.	  gondii	  infected	  WT	  
mice	  demonstrated	  declines	  in	  motor	  endurance	  from	  9-­‐months	  of	  age	  (Fig.	  2A).	  YAC128	  HD	  
mice	  are	  reported	  to	  gain	  weight	  in	  adult	  life	  compared	  to	  WT	  controls	  [49].	  Consistent	  with	  
this	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  gained	  weight	  compared	  to	  WT	  controls.	  Infection	  decreased	  body	  
weight	  gains	  in	  HD	  mice,	  but	  had	  no	  effect	  on	  weight	  in	  WT	  mice	  (Fig.	  2B).	  	  
YAC128	  HD	  mice	  do	  not	  have	  a	  defect	  in	  parasite	  control	  or	  immune	  response	  
Differential	  infection-­‐induced	  brain	  atrophy	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  YAC128	  mice	  could	  result	  
from	  differences	  in	  parasite	  control.	  To	  address	  this	  we	  evaluated	  brain	  parasite	  cyst	  burdens	  
(Fig.	  3)	  and	  immune	  responses	  to	  infection	  (Fig.	  4).	  At	  8-­‐months	  of	  age	  there	  were	  no	  
differences	  in	  brain	  regional	  cyst	  burdens	  (Fig.	  3A)	  or	  the	  number	  of	  parasite	  genomes	  (Fig.	  3B)	  
between	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  T.	  gondii	  has	  two-­‐life	  stages,	  a	  more	  virulent	  tachyzoite	  phase,	  
which	  is	  characterized	  by	  rapid	  proliferation	  and	  expression	  of	  SAG1,	  and	  the	  bradyzoite	  phase,	  
during	  which	  the	  parasites	  slowly	  replicate	  and	  express	  BAG1.	  Even	  though	  total	  parasite	  
burden	  was	  not	  changed,	  we	  assessed	  whether	  HD	  mice	  had	  more	  tachyzoites,	  which	  would	  
potentially	  induce	  more	  inflammation	  and	  injury.	  However,	  there	  were	  no	  differences	  in	  
relative	  expression	  of	  life-­‐stage	  markers	  between	  infected	  WT	  and	  HD	  mouse	  brain	  regions	  at	  
8-­‐months	  of	  age	  (Fig.	  3C-­‐D).	  Further,	  at	  12-­‐months	  of	  age	  there	  were	  also	  no	  differences	  in	  
cerebro-­‐cortical	  brain	  parasite	  cyst	  numbers	  (Fig.	  3E),	  or	  expression	  of	  BAG1	  (Fig.	  3F)	  and	  SAG1	  
(Fig.	  3G).	  Therefore,	  greater	  parasite	  burdens	  in	  HD	  mice	  were	  not	  found.	  
To	  evaluate	  immune	  T.	  gondii	  control	  we	  first	  determined	  the	  absolute	  number	  of	  
splenic	  CD4+	  and	  CD8+	  T	  cells	  in	  12-­‐month-­‐old	  mice.	  As	  expected	  T-­‐cell	  numbers	  were	  
increased	  by	  chronic-­‐latent	  infection	  in	  WT	  mice.	  HD-­‐infected	  mice	  showed	  the	  same	  response	  
T-­‐cell	  responses	  (Fig.	  4A-­‐B).	  IFNγ	  is	  critical	  for	  control	  of	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  [50].	  We	  therefore	  
measured	  T-­‐cell	  IFNγ	  production	  in	  12-­‐month-­‐old	  mice	  (Fig.	  4C-­‐H).	  Percentages	  (F(1,20)	  =	  9.66,	  p	  
=	  0.0055)	  and	  absolute	  numbers	  (F(1,20)	  =	  24.15,	  p	  <	  0.0001)	  of	  splenic	  CD8+	  IFNγ+	  T-­‐cells	  were	  
increased	  infected	  mice	  (Fig.	  4C-­‐E).	  However,	  there	  were	  no	  differences	  in	  response	  between	  
WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  We	  also	  quantified	  splenic	  IFNγ-­‐producing	  CD4+	  T-­‐cells	  as	  these	  are	  also	  
important	  for	  long-­‐term	  control	  of	  T.	  gondii	  [51,	  52].	  Similar	  to	  CD8+	  cells,	  CD4+	  T-­‐cells	  had	  
increased	  frequency	  of	  IFNγ	  production	  (F(1,20)	  =	  15.34,	  p	  =	  0.0009)	  and	  increased	  total	  numbers	  
of	  splenic	  CD4+	  IFNγ+	  cells	  (F(1,20)	  =	  78.15,	  p	  <	  0.0001),	  but	  there	  were	  no	  differences	  between	  
WT	  and	  HD	  mice	  (Fig.	  4F-­‐H).	  Therefore,	  differences	  in	  critical	  long-­‐term	  immune	  responses	  to	  T.	  
gondii	  infection	  were	  not	  found	  between	  WT	  and	  YAC128	  HD	  mice.	  
Altered	  peripheral	  kynurenine	  pathway	  metabolism	  in	  WT	  and	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  with	  T.	  
gondii	  and	  HD	  in	  mouse	  brain	  
The	  kynurenine	  pathway	  of	  tryptophan	  degradation	  (KP)	  is	  implicated	  in	  HD	  progression	  
[31,	  32].	  Furthermore,	  immune	  responses	  to	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  include	  activation	  of	  tryptophan	  
metabolism	  as	  a	  means	  to	  limit	  this	  amino	  acids	  availability	  to	  the	  parasite,	  which	  it	  cannot	  
synthesize.	  To	  investigate	  a	  potential	  role	  of	  the	  peripheral	  KP	  in	  latent	  T.	  gondii−induced	  
neurodegeneration,	  we	  measured	  KP	  metabolites	  in	  blood	  at	  2,	  5,	  8	  and	  12	  month	  time	  points	  
(Fig.	  5).	  Tryptophan	  levels	  were	  not	  altered	  by	  infection	  or	  HD	  (Fig.	  5A).	  However,	  there	  was	  a	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

time-­‐dependent	  increase	  in	  kynurenine	  with	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  (F(3,114)	  =	  7.85,	  p	  <	  0.0001),	  and	  a	  
HD−T.	  gondii	  interaction	  (F(1,114)	  =	  8.08,	  p	  =	  0.0053)	  on	  kynurenine	  levels	  (Fig.	  5B).	  The	  toxic	  
metabolite	  3-­‐hydroxykynurenine	  was	  increased	  by	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice	  (F(3,114)	  
=	  3.82,	  p	  =	  0.012)	  at	  8-­‐months	  (Fig.	  5C).	  However,	  neither	  infection	  nor	  HD	  resulted	  in	  changes	  
in	  kynurenic	  acid	  levels	  (Fig.	  5D).	  Therefore,	  infection	  resulted	  in	  different	  peripheral	  KP	  
metabolism	  responses	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  	  
T.	  gondii	  increases	  soluble	  mHTT	  in	  YAC128	  HD	  brain	  
Mutation	  of	  the	  huntingtin	  gene	  (mHTT)	  is	  the	  proximal	  cause	  of	  HD	  and	  results	  in	  
expression	  of	  mHTT	  protein.	  Mutant	  huntingtin	  protein	  exists	  in	  equilibrium	  between	  soluble	  
and	  aggregated	  forms	  [28];	  however,	  soluble	  species	  are	  more	  toxic	  [53-­‐55].	  Therefore,	  we	  
investigated	  the	  possibility	  that	  the	  parasite	  could	  promote	  HD	  by	  increasing	  mHTT	  gene	  
expression	  or	  mHTT	  accumulation	  (Fig.	  6).	  We	  quantified	  mHTT	  mRNA	  in	  three	  brain	  regions	  at	  
8	  and	  12	  months	  of	  age	  in	  infected	  and	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  and	  found	  no	  differences	  (Fig.	  
6A-­‐B).	  We	  then	  measured	  soluble	  mHTT	  in	  cerebral	  cortex	  of	  HD	  mice	  at	  12-­‐months	  of	  age	  and	  
found	  that	  soluble	  mHTT	  was	  significantly	  increased	  by	  infection	  (F(1,13)	  =	  7.32,	  p	  =	  0.0180)	  (Fig.	  
6C).	  
	  

Discussion	  
The	  age	  of	  onset	  of	  human	  HD	  is	  inversely	  proportional	  to	  the	  extent	  of	  CAG	  expansion,	  
such	  that	  individuals	  with	  small	  expansions	  develop	  late-­‐onset	  disease	  whereas	  large	  
expansions	  result	  in	  childhood	  onset	  [56].	  The	  extent	  of	  CAG	  expansion	  explains	  50−70%	  of	  the	  
variance	  in	  the	  age	  of	  HD	  onset,	  and	  the	  remaining	  variance	  is	  explained	  by	  environmental	  and	  
non-­‐HTT	  genetic	  factors.	  In	  a	  large	  Venezuelan	  study	  of	  HD	  patients,	  unknown	  environmental	  
factors	  were	  estimated	  to	  contribute	  ~60%	  of	  the	  variance	  in	  age	  of	  onset	  after	  controlling	  for	  
CAG	  mutation	  size	  [5].	  Therefore,	  evidence	  suggests	  that	  environmental	  factors	  are	  significant	  
modifiers	  of	  HD,	  although	  these	  modifiers	  are	  poorly	  understood.	  Chronic	  latent	  CNS	  infections,	  
with	  agents	  such	  as	  T.	  gondii	  and	  HSV1,	  are	  putative	  modifiers	  of	  neurological	  disease.	  They	  
promote	  low-­‐grade	  inflammation	  that	  is	  needed	  to	  maintain	  control	  of	  the	  pathogen,	  and	  last	  
for	  the	  post-­‐infection	  life	  of	  the	  host.	  Mice	  are	  naturally	  infected	  with	  T.	  gondii,	  so	  they	  provide	  
a	  suitable	  system	  for	  modeling	  the	  human	  infection.	  To	  study	  potential	  interactions	  between	  
HD	  and	  T.	  gondii,	  we	  developed	  a	  model	  in	  which	  mice	  develop	  chronic	  latent	  infection	  to	  
approximate	  the	  human	  infection,	  as	  occurs	  in	  immunocompetent	  individuals.	  We	  found	  that	  
mice	  on	  the	  FVB/NJ	  background	  developed	  fully	  latent	  infection,	  enabling	  us	  to	  study	  the	  
effects	  in	  YAC128	  HD	  mice.	  We	  then	  demonstrated	  that	  latent	  parasite	  infection	  significantly	  
increased	  neurodegeneration	  in	  HD	  mice	  and	  elevated	  toxic	  soluble	  mHTT.	  These	  changes	  could	  
not	  be	  attributed	  to	  reduced	  parasite	  control	  or	  an	  altered	  immune	  response	  in	  HD	  mice.	  We	  
did	  not	  observe	  decreased	  motor	  endurance	  in	  infected-­‐HD	  mice.	  However,	  body	  weight	  
differences	  confound	  motor	  endurance	  testing	  in	  HD	  mice	  [57]	  and	  the	  infected-­‐HD	  group	  had	  
significantly	  lower	  weights	  compared	  to	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  (Fig.	  2).	  Therefore,	  our	  data	  
provide	  proof	  of	  principle	  that	  a	  latent	  brain	  infection	  can	  promote	  progression	  in	  a	  mouse	  
model	  of	  HD.	  	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

T.	  gondii	  seropositivity	  is	  associated	  with	  increased	  risk	  of	  psychiatric	  disorders	  including	  
schizophrenia	  and	  depression	  [58-­‐60],	  but	  the	  nature	  of	  this	  relationship	  is	  debated	  [13,	  18].	  
The	  current	  findings,	  and	  an	  earlier	  study	  [39],	  show	  that	  HD	  mice	  respond	  differently	  to	  
infection	  with	  the	  moderately	  pathogenic	  ME49	  strain	  of	  T.	  gondii,	  as	  compared	  with	  control	  
mice.	  We	  found	  that	  latent	  infection	  also	  had	  adverse	  effects	  in	  control	  mice	  but	  that	  there	  is	  
preferential	  susceptibility	  to	  the	  infection	  in	  HD	  mice.	  It	  is	  currently	  unclear	  how	  these	  findings	  
relate	  to	  individuals	  with	  HD,	  who	  would	  be	  predicted	  to	  have	  toxoplasma	  infection	  prevalence	  
rates	  that	  are	  similar	  to	  those	  of	  the	  general	  population.	  Because	  of	  differences	  in	  lifespan,	  
humans	  may	  be	  infected	  for	  decades	  with	  T.	  gondii,	  providing	  more	  time	  for	  the	  effects	  of	  low-­‐
grade	  inflammation	  to	  manifest.	  However,	  although	  our	  mice	  were	  infected	  with	  only	  10	  tissue	  
cysts,	  brain	  tissue	  burdens	  were	  notably	  higher	  than	  that	  which	  occurs	  during	  human	  latent	  
toxoplasmosis.	  Therefore,	  direct	  extrapolation	  of	  our	  findings	  to	  human	  HD	  is	  not	  possible.	  
Human	  studies	  are	  needed	  to	  determine	  whether	  latent	  toxoplasmosis	  is	  an	  environmental	  
modifier	  of	  HD	  progression.	  Despite	  this	  caveat,	  our	  study	  provides	  proof	  of	  principle	  that	  
chronic	  latent	  toxoplasmosis	  in	  HD	  mice	  potentiates	  established	  markers	  of	  HD	  progression.	  
Interestingly,	  a	  recent	  study	  reported	  that	  early-­‐life	  infection	  with	  T.	  gondii	  alters	  a	  wide	  array	  
of	  human	  genes	  and	  pathways	  implicated	  in	  the	  pathogenesis	  of	  neurological	  disorders	  
including	  HD,	  Alzheimer’s	  disease,	  and	  seizure	  disorders	  [61].	  In	  humans,	  the	  prevalence	  of	  T.	  
gondii	  increases	  with	  age	  [6,	  62].	  Therefore,	  a	  major	  question	  is	  how	  quickly	  T.	  gondii	  can	  
induce	  persistent	  neurological	  changes	  and	  whether	  early	  infection	  is	  required	  for	  exacerbation	  
of	  neurological	  diseases	  that	  manifest	  later	  in	  life.	  	  
	  
Chronic	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  resulted	  in	  similar	  amounts	  of	  cortical	  atrophy	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  
mice.	  These	  effects	  are	  consistent	  with	  reports	  of	  motor	  impairment,	  memory	  deficits,	  and	  
olfactory	  dysfunction	  resulting	  from	  human	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  [63-­‐66].	  They	  are	  also	  consistent	  
with	  a	  report	  in	  humans	  that	  T.	  gondii	  reduces	  cortical	  grey	  matter	  volume	  [67].	  Cortical	  
atrophy	  in	  WT	  mice	  shows	  that	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  can	  result	  in	  neurodegeneration.	  Importantly,	  
however,	  striatal	  volume	  and	  estimation	  of	  the	  number	  of	  striatal	  neurons	  demonstrated	  
significant	  potentiation	  of	  HD	  neurodegeneration	  by	  infection,	  consistent	  with	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  
being	  specifically	  vulnerable	  to	  the	  effects	  of	  infection,	  rather	  than	  showing	  an	  additive	  effect	  
of	  infection	  and	  HD.	  This	  interpretation	  is	  supported	  by	  our	  important	  finding	  of	  elevated	  
cortical	  mHTT	  in	  infected	  HD	  mice.	  In	  addition,	  increases	  in	  NFL,	  a	  marker	  of	  active	  
neurodegeneration	  [47,	  48],	  were	  greater	  in	  HD	  mice	  than	  in	  WT	  mice	  after	  infection.	  Given	  
that	  differences	  in	  parasite	  burden	  were	  not	  present,	  our	  results	  suggest	  an	  increased	  
vulnerability	  to	  the	  presence	  of	  T.	  gondii	  or	  to	  the	  associated	  inflammatory	  response	  in	  this	  
mouse	  model	  of	  HD.	  
T.	  gondii	  infection	  amplified	  degeneration	  that	  is	  characteristic	  of	  HD,	  namely	  striatal	  
atrophy.	  The	  vast	  majority	  (~95%)	  of	  striatal	  neurons	  are	  GABAergic	  medium	  spiny	  neurons.	  
Recently,	  it	  has	  been	  reported	  that	  T.	  gondii	  alters	  presynaptic	  localization	  of	  GAD67,	  a	  marker	  
for	  GABAergic	  neurons,	  which	  indicates	  that	  infection	  affects	  GABAergic	  synapses	  and	  thus	  
could	  exacerbate	  HD-­‐induced	  dysfunction	  in	  striatal	  medium	  spiny	  neurons	  [68].	  In	  HD,	  
glutamatergic	  cortico-­‐striatal	  circuits	  are	  dysfunctional	  [69,	  70].	  During	  T.	  gondii	  infection,	  there	  
is	  elevated	  extracellular	  glutamate	  caused	  by	  downregulation	  of	  the	  glutamate	  transporter,	  
GLT-­‐1	  [71].	  HD	  patients	  and	  mice	  also	  display	  reduced	  glutamate	  uptake	  and	  decreased	  GLT-­‐1	  
expression	  [72-­‐74].	  These	  findings	  therefore	  suggest	  that	  one	  potential	  mechanism	  of	  HD	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

potentiation	  by	  T.	  gondii	  involves	  promotion	  of	  dysfunction	  and	  glutamate	  and	  GAGAergic	  
synapses.	  	  
Mutant	  HTT	  activates	  microglial	  cells	  and	  mHTT-­‐expressing	  monocytes	  have	  an	  altered	  
response	  to	  LPS	  treatment	  [27,	  75].	  HD	  mice	  also	  have	  increased	  microglial	  activation	  in	  
response	  to	  peripheral	  LPS	  challenge	  [76].	  One	  potential	  mechanism	  by	  which	  inflammation	  
may	  alter	  HD	  is	  through	  activation	  of	  the	  kynurenine	  pathway	  (KP).	  HD	  patients	  have	  increased	  
3-­‐hydroxykynurenine,	  which	  is	  produced	  as	  a	  result	  of	  kynurenine	  monooxygenase	  (KMO)	  
oxidation	  of	  kynurenine,	  the	  second	  step	  in	  the	  KP	  [32,	  77].	  In	  our	  study,	  we	  also	  observed	  
elevated	  kynurenine	  and	  3-­‐hydroxykynurenine	  in	  blood	  of	  T.	  gondii−infected	  mice	  earlier	  than	  
these	  metabolites	  were	  elevated	  in	  HD	  mice	  without	  infection.	  Activation	  of	  the	  KP	  coincided	  
with	  more	  pronounced	  neurodegeneration	  in	  HD	  mice.	  We	  propose	  a	  model	  whereby	  mHTT	  
alters	  the	  initial	  responses	  to	  inflammatory	  insult	  resulting	  in	  an	  altered	  trajectory	  of	  the	  
disease	  through	  KP	  activation	  and	  other	  mechanisms.	  Future	  studies	  will	  investigate	  the	  
relationship	  between	  peripheral	  and	  brain	  KP	  metabolism.	  
Cytokines	  including	  IL-­‐6	  and	  TNFα,	  that	  are	  characteristic	  of	  neuroinflammation,	  reduce	  
the	  clearance	  of	  misfolded	  proteins	  such	  as	  Aβ	  and	  tau	  [44,	  78-­‐80].	  T.	  gondii	  infection,	  which	  
also	  results	  in	  elevated	  IL-­‐6	  and	  TNFα,	  induces	  Aβ	  deposition	  and	  tau	  hyperphosphorylation	  
that	  are	  associated	  with	  behavioral	  deficits	  in	  mice	  [25,	  38].	  Interestingly,	  one	  mechanism	  by	  
which	  T.	  gondii	  evades	  clearance	  is	  by	  inhibiting	  autophagy	  [81,	  82],	  and	  suppression	  of	  
autophagy	  is	  sufficient	  to	  induce	  neurodegeneration	  [83,	  84].	  Therefore,	  as	  these	  cytokines	  are	  
also	  elevated	  in	  HD,	  environmental	  factors	  that	  increase	  neuroinflammation	  such	  as	  T.	  gondii	  
could	  impair	  clearance	  of	  mHTT.	  Macroautophagy	  is	  critical	  for	  clearing	  mHTT,	  but	  these	  
pathways	  are	  also	  dysfunctional	  in	  HD	  [63,	  85,	  86].	  Promoting	  autophagy	  is	  protective	  in	  HD	  
models,	  and	  polymorphisms	  in	  autophagy-­‐related	  genes	  are	  associated	  with	  earlier	  age	  of	  
onset	  in	  HD	  [85,	  87,	  88].	  We	  found	  that	  mHTT	  mRNA	  expression	  was	  unchanged	  by	  T.	  gondii.	  
However,	  an	  important	  finding	  of	  our	  work	  is	  that	  there	  was	  increased	  soluble	  mHTT	  in	  infected	  
HD	  mice.	  Therefore	  neuroinflammation,	  which	  alters	  the	  clearance	  of	  misfolded	  proteins,	  may	  
represent	  a	  key	  mechanism	  by	  which	  latent	  infection	  exacerbates	  HD	  progression	  by	  inducing	  
accumulation	  of	  toxic	  soluble	  mHTT.	  Of	  note,	  kynurenine	  is	  reported	  to	  activate	  the	  mammalian	  
target	  of	  rapamycin	  (mTOR)	  in	  T	  cells,	  which	  decreases	  autophagy	  [89].	  Therefore,	  increased	  
mHTT	  accumulation	  in	  our	  study	  is	  consistent	  with	  elevated	  KP	  activation	  resulting	  from	  both	  
latent	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  and	  HD.	  Based	  on	  our	  studies,	  more	  work	  is	  needed	  to	  understand	  
how	  inflammation	  and/or	  KP	  activation	  resulting	  from	  latent	  brain	  infections	  affects	  mHTT	  
expression,	  aggregation,	  and	  clearance.	  	  
In	  conclusion,	  we	  established	  a	  novel	  system	  for	  studying	  the	  interaction	  between	  latent	  
toxoplasmosis	  and	  HD,	  a	  monogenetic	  protein-­‐misfolding	  disease.	  Our	  findings	  corroborate	  
other	  studies	  showing	  that	  latent	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  has	  adverse	  effects	  on	  the	  aging	  brain	  in	  
WT	  mice.	  We	  additionally	  demonstrated	  that	  YAC128	  HD	  mice	  demonstrate	  specific	  
vulnerability	  to	  this	  infection	  with	  promotion	  of	  key	  disease	  markers.	  This	  study	  provides	  a	  
framework	  for	  understanding	  how	  neuroinvasive	  infections	  may	  promote	  neurodegeneration	  in	  
HD	  and	  related	  neurodegenerative	  diseases,	  as	  well	  as	  brain	  aging.	  	  

	  

Figure	  Legends	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure	  1.	  T.	  gondii	  exacerbates	  neurodegeneration	  in	  YAC128	  mice.	  Mice	  were	  infected	  at	  2-­‐
months	  of	  age.	  Blood	  was	  collected	  at	  indicated	  time	  points	  for	  NFL	  analyses,	  and	  
neurodegeneration	  evaluated	  at	  12-­‐months	  of	  age.	  A.	  Plasma	  NFL	  is	  increased	  by	  T.	  gondii	  and	  
HD	  at	  8	  and	  12	  months.	  Data	  are	  shown	  as	  the	  mean	  ±	  95%	  CI;	  n	  =	  6−9	  and	  10−15	  at	  8	  and	  12	  
months,	  respectively.	  B.	  Representative	  mouse	  brains	  (top)	  and	  thionin-­‐stained	  sections	  
(bottom).	  Scale	  bars	  =	  1	  mm.	  C.	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  decreases	  brain	  weights	  in	  wild-­‐type	  (WT)	  
and	  YAC128	  mice.	  D.	  Non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice	  demonstrate	  striatal	  atrophy	  compared	  with	  non-­‐
infected	  WT.	  T.	  gondii	  promotes	  striatal	  atrophy	  in	  HD,	  but	  not	  WT	  mice.	  E.	  T.	  gondii−infected	  
HD	  mice	  have	  fewer	  striatal	  neurons	  compared	  to	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  and	  infected	  WT.	  n	  =	  6.	  F.	  
Neocortical	  volume	  is	  decreased	  by	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice	  (main	  effect	  of	  
infection	  p=0.0106).	  G.	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  decreases	  cerebral	  neocortical	  neuron	  estimates	  in	  
WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  H.	  HD	  or	  infection	  do	  not	  significantly	  impact	  hippocampal	  volumes.	  B-­‐H.	  
n=9−12.	  Data	  are	  shown	  as	  means	  ±	  SE.	  *p	  <	  0.05,	  **p	  <	  0.01,	  ***p	  <	  0.001.	  
Figure	  2.	  T.	  gondii	  induces	  progressive	  motor	  dysfunction	  and	  reduces	  body	  weight	  gain	  in	  
YAC128	  HD	  mice.	  Mice	  were	  infected	  at	  2	  months	  of	  age.	  A.	  Mouse	  motor	  endurance	  was	  
tested	  using	  a	  rotating	  rod.	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  and	  HD	  lead	  to	  progressive	  declines	  in	  motor	  
performance.	  B.	  T.	  gondii	  prevented	  weight	  gain	  in	  HD	  mice	  at	  12-­‐months	  of	  age.	  n=18−24.	  
Data	  are	  shown	  as	  means	  ±	  SE.	  **p	  <	  0.01,	  ***p	  <	  0.001.	  
Figure	  3.	  Equivalent	  T.	  gondii	  parasite	  load	  in	  WT	  and	  YAC128	  mice.	  Mice	  were	  infected	  at	  2	  
months	  of	  age	  and	  parasite	  loads	  determined	  at	  8	  (A-­‐D)	  and	  12	  (E-­‐G)	  months	  of	  age.	  A.	  Brain	  
regional	  toxoplasma	  cyst	  counts	  are	  equivalent	  in	  infected	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  n=6−9.	  B.	  
Toxoplasma	  genome	  equivalents	  do	  not	  differ	  between	  infected	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  n=6−9.	  Data	  
are	  shown	  as	  means	  ±	  95%	  confidence	  intervals.	  C-­‐D.	  Bradyzoite-­‐specific	  BAG1	  (C)	  expression	  is	  
equivalent	  in	  infected	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  n	  =	  7.	  D.	  Tachyzoite-­‐specific	  SAG1	  expression	  is	  
equivalent	  in	  infected	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  n	  =	  7.	  E.	  Cerebral	  cortical	  toxoplasma	  cysts	  counts	  are	  
the	  same	  valent	  at	  12	  months	  of	  age.	  n=13	  WT	  and	  18	  HD	  mice.	  F-­‐G.	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice	  
demonstrate	  equivalent	  cerebro-­‐cortical	  bradyzoite	  (F)	  and	  tachyzoite	  (G)	  parasite	  loads.	  n	  =	  7.	  
A-­‐D,	  Hipp=hippocampus.	  Unless	  otherwise	  indicated	  data	  are	  shown	  as	  the	  means	  ±	  SE.	  	  
Figure	  4.	  HD	  does	  not	  alter	  CD8+	  and	  CD4+	  T-­‐lymphocyte	  responses	  to	  T.	  gondii.	  Mice	  were	  
infected	  at	  2	  months;	  analyses	  were	  completed	  at	  12-­‐months	  of	  age.	  A.	  Spleen	  CD4+	  and	  CD8+	  
T	  cells	  quantification.	  Representative	  flow	  cytometry	  contour	  plots	  of	  CD4+	  (y	  axis)	  and	  CD8+	  (x	  
axis)	  populations.	  B.	  Total	  CD4+	  and	  CD8+	  spleen	  cells	  increases	  in	  infected	  mice.	  n	  =	  6.	  C.	  
Representative	  flow	  cytometry	  plots	  of	  IFNγ	  production	  by	  splenic	  CD8+	  T	  cells.	  D.	  Percentages	  
of	  IFNγ-­‐producing	  CD8+	  T	  cells	  are	  increased	  by	  infection	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  E.	  Total	  numbers	  
of	  CD8+IFNγ+	  T	  cells	  are	  increased	  by	  infection.	  F.	  Representative	  flow	  cytometry	  plots	  of	  IFNγ	  
production	  by	  splenic	  CD4+	  T	  cells.	  G.	  Percentages	  of	  IFNγ-­‐producing	  CD4+	  T	  cells	  are	  increased	  
by	  infection	  in	  WT	  and	  HD	  mice.	  H.	  Total	  numbers	  of	  CD4+IFNγ+	  T	  cells	  are	  increased	  by	  
infection.	  A,	  C	  and	  F:	  top	  left	  =	  non-­‐infected	  wild	  type,	  top	  right	  =	  non-­‐infected	  HD,	  bottom	  left	  
=	  infected	  wild	  type,	  bottom	  right	  =	  infected	  HD.	  n	  =	  6.	  Data	  are	  shown	  as	  means	  ±	  SE.	  *p	  <	  
0.05,	  **p	  <	  0.01,	  ***p	  <	  0.001.	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Figure	  5.	  T.	  gondii	  and	  HD	  alter	  the	  peripheral	  kynurenine	  pathway	  in	  mice.	  Mice	  were	  
infected	  at	  2-­‐months	  of	  age,	  and	  blood	  analyses	  completed	  at	  2	  (pre-­‐infection),	  5,	  8	  and	  12	  
months	  of	  age.	  A.	  Tryptophan	  levels	  are	  not	  different	  between	  groups.	  B.	  Age-­‐dependent	  
increase	  in	  kynurenine	  in	  infected	  (WT	  and	  HD),	  and	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  mice.	  C.	  T.	  gondii-­‐infected	  
WT	  and	  HD	  mice	  D.	  Kynurenic	  acid	  levels	  are	  not	  different	  between	  groups.	  n	  =	  8−11.	  Data	  are	  
shown	  as	  mean	  ±	  SE.	  *p	  <	  0.05,	  **p	  <	  0.01,	  ***p	  <	  0.001.	  
Figure	  6.	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  increases	  soluble	  mHTT	  in	  YAC128	  HD	  mice.	  Mice	  were	  infected	  at	  
2	  months	  of	  age.	  A-­‐B.	  T.	  gondii	  infection	  does	  not	  significantly	  alter	  mHTT	  at	  8-­‐months	  (A)	  or	  
12-­‐months	  (B)	  of	  age.	  Transcript	  was	  quantified	  in	  cerebral	  cortex,	  striatum	  and	  hippocampus.	  
n	  =	  6.	  C.	  Soluble	  mHTT	  measured	  by	  the	  FRET	  ratio	  between	  two	  antibodies	  targeted	  to	  the	  N-­‐
terminal	  region	  of	  the	  protein.	  T.	  gondii	  significantly	  increased	  soluble	  mHTT	  at	  12	  months	  of	  
age	  in	  the	  cerebral	  cortex.	  n	  =	  7	  non-­‐infected	  HD	  and	  8	  infected	  HD	  mice.	  Data	  are	  shown	  as	  the	  
mean	  ±	  95%	  CI.	  **p	  <	  0.01.	  
	  

References	  
Supporting	  Information	  
Age	  
Sex	  

Genotype	   Treatment	   (months)	  

Age	  
Sex	  

Genotype	   Treatment	   (months)	  

Female	  

HD	  

INF	  

3	  

Female	  

WT	  

INF	  

6	  

Male	  

WT	  

INF	  

3	  

Male	  

WT	  

CON	  

7	  

Male	  

HD	  

CON	  

3	  

Male	  

WT	  

INF	  

7	  

Male	  

WT	  

INF	  

4	  

Male	  

HD	  

CON	  

7	  

Female	  

WT	  

INF	  

4	  

Male	  

WT	  

CON	  

7	  

Male	  

WT	  

INF	  

4	  

Female	  

HD	  

CON	  

7	  

Male	  

HD	  

INF	  

5	  

Male	  

WT	  

INF	  

8	  

Female	  

WT	  

INF	  

5	  

Female	  

HD	  

CON	  

8	  

Female	  

HD	  

INF	  

5	  

Male	  

HD	  	  

CON	  

8	  

Male	  

WT	  

INF	  

5	  

Male	  

WT	  

CON	  

8	  

Female	  

HD	  

INF	  

5	  

Female	  

WT	  

CON	  

10	  

Female	  

WT	  

CON	  

6	  

Male	  

WT	  

CON	  

11	  

Male	  

WT	  

CON	  

6	  

Female	  

HD	  

INF	  

11	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

Male	  

HD	  

CON	  

6	  

Female	  

WT	  

INF	  

11	  

Male	  

HD	  

INF	  

6	  

Female	  

HD	  

CON	  

11	  

Male	  

HD	  

INF	  

6	  

Female	  

HD	  	  

CON	  

11	  

Male	  

HD	  

CON	  

6	  

Male	  

HD	  

CON	  

11	  

Male	  

HD	  

CON	  

6	  

Male	  

WT	  

CON	  

11	  

Female	  

WT	  

INF	  

6	  

Female	  

WT	  

CON	  

11	  

Female	  

WT	  

INF	  

6	  

Male	  

HD	  

INF	  

12	  

	  
Table	  S1.	  Mouse	  deaths	  in	  reported	  studies.	  Listed	  are	  all	  mouse	  deaths	  or	  exclusions	  across	  all	  
studies	  used	  to	  generate	  the	  data	  in	  this	  manuscript.	  Exclusion	  occurred	  only	  in	  response	  to	  
mice	  that	  were	  fighting.	  CON	  =	  vehicle	  treated,	  INF	  =	  T.	  gondii	  infected.	  
Figure	  S1.	  No	  differences	  in	  mouse	  mortalities	  among	  groups.	  Histogram	  shows	  the	  total	  
number	  of	  spontaneous	  deaths	  that	  occurred	  across	  studies.	  There	  were	  no	  significant	  
differences	  among	  the	  groups	  with	  respect	  to	  survival	  times.	  
	  
References	  
	  
1.	  

2.	  
3.	  
4.	  
5.	  

6.	  
7.	  

8.	  

9.	  

HDCRG,	  A	  novel	  gene	  containing	  a	  trinucleotide	  repeat	  that	  is	  expanded	  and	  unstable	  on	  
Huntington's	  disease	  chromosomes.	  The	  Huntington's	  Disease	  Collaborative	  Research	  Group	  
(HDCRG).	  Cell,	  1993.	  72(6):	  p.	  971-­‐83.	  
H.P.,	  J.A.,	  et	  al.,	  Frequency	  of	  nuclear	  mutant	  huntingtin	  inclusion	  formation	  in	  neurons	  and	  glia	  
is	  cell-­‐type-­‐specific.	  Glia,	  2017.	  65(1):	  p.	  50-­‐61.	  
Labbadia,	  J.	  and	  R.I.	  Morimoto,	  Huntington's	  disease:	  underlying	  molecular	  mechanisms	  and	  
emerging	  concepts.	  Trends	  in	  Biochemical	  Sciences,	  2013.	  38(8):	  p.	  378-­‐385.	  
Wright,	  D.J.,	  et	  al.,	  Huntington's	  Disease:	  Pathogenic	  Mechanisms	  and	  Therapeutic	  Targets.	  Adv	  
Neurobiol,	  2017.	  15:	  p.	  93-­‐128.	  
Wexler,	  N.S.,	  Venezuelan	  kindreds	  reveal	  that	  genetic	  and	  environmental	  factors	  modulate	  
Huntington's	  disease	  age	  of	  onset.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  National	  Academy	  of	  Sciences	  of	  the	  
United	  States	  of	  America,	  2004.	  101(10):	  p.	  3498-­‐3503.	  
Jones,	  J.L.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Infection	  in	  the	  United	  States:	  Seroprevalence	  and	  Risk	  
Factors.	  American	  Journal	  of	  Epidemiology,	  2001.	  154(4):	  p.	  357-­‐365.	  
Wilking,	  H.,	  et	  al.,	  Prevalence,	  incidence	  estimations,	  and	  risk	  factors	  of	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  
infection	  in	  Germany:	  a	  representative,	  cross-­‐sectional,	  serological	  study.	  Scientific	  Reports,	  
2016.	  6:	  p.	  22551.	  
Pappas,	  G.,	  N.	  Roussos,	  and	  M.E.	  Falagas,	  Toxoplasmosis	  snapshots:	  Global	  status	  of	  Toxoplasma	  
gondii	  seroprevalence	  and	  implications	  for	  pregnancy	  and	  congenital	  toxoplasmosis.	  
International	  Journal	  for	  Parasitology,	  2009.	  39(12):	  p.	  1385-­‐1394.	  
Kamerkar,	  S.	  and	  P.H.	  Davis,	  Toxoplasma	  on	  the	  Brain:	  Understanding	  Host-­‐Pathogen	  
Interactions	  in	  Chronic	  CNS	  Infection.	  Journal	  of	  Parasitology	  Research,	  2012.	  2012:	  p.	  10.	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

10.	  
11.	  
12.	  
13.	  
14.	  
15.	  
16.	  
17.	  

18.	  

19.	  

20.	  

21.	  
22.	  
23.	  
24.	  

25.	  
26.	  
27.	  

28.	  
29.	  
30.	  

Dubey,	  J.P.,	  1	  -­‐	  The	  History	  and	  Life	  Cycle	  of	  Toxoplasma	  gondii,	  in	  Toxoplasma	  Gondii.	  2007,	  
Academic	  Press:	  London.	  p.	  1-­‐17.	  
Montoya,	  J.G.	  and	  O.	  Liesenfeld,	  Toxoplasmosis.	  The	  Lancet,	  2004.	  363(9425):	  p.	  1965-­‐1976.	  
Flegr,	  J.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasmosis	  –	  A	  Global	  Threat.	  Correlation	  of	  Latent	  Toxoplasmosis	  with	  
Specific	  Disease	  Burden	  in	  a	  Set	  of	  88	  Countries.	  PLoS	  ONE,	  2014.	  9(3):	  p.	  e90203.	  
Suvisaari,	  J.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  infection	  and	  common	  mental	  disorders	  in	  the	  Finnish	  
general	  population.	  J	  Affect	  Disord,	  2017.	  223:	  p.	  20-­‐25.	  
Torrey,	  E.F.,	  J.J.	  Bartko,	  and	  R.H.	  Yolken,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  and	  other	  risk	  factors	  for	  
schizophrenia:	  an	  update.	  Schizophr	  Bull,	  2012.	  38(3):	  p.	  642-­‐7.	  
Cook,	  T.B.,	  et	  al.,	  "Latent"	  infection	  with	  Toxoplasma	  gondii:	  association	  with	  trait	  aggression	  
and	  impulsivity	  in	  healthy	  adults.	  J	  Psychiatr	  Res,	  2015.	  60:	  p.	  87-­‐94.	  
Campos-­‐Carli,	  S.M.d.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  infection	  and	  chronic	  schizophrenia:	  is	  there	  any	  
association?	  Archives	  of	  Clinical	  Psychiatry	  (São	  Paulo),	  2017.	  44:	  p.	  145-­‐148.	  
Berggren,	  K.L.,	  et	  al.,	  Neonatal	  iron	  supplementation	  potentiates	  oxidative	  stress,	  energetic	  
dysfunction	  and	  neurodegeneration	  in	  the	  R6/2	  mouse	  model	  of	  Huntington's	  disease.	  Redox	  
Biology,	  2015.	  4:	  p.	  363-­‐374.	  
Sugden,	  K.,	  et	  al.,	  Is	  Toxoplasma	  Gondii	  Infection	  Related	  to	  Brain	  and	  Behavior	  Impairments	  in	  
Humans?	  Evidence	  from	  a	  Population-­‐Representative	  Birth	  Cohort.	  PLOS	  ONE,	  2016.	  11(2):	  p.	  
e0148435.	  
Alvarado-­‐Esquivel,	  C.,	  et	  al.,	  Lack	  of	  association	  between	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  exposure	  and	  
depression	  in	  pregnant	  women:	  a	  case-­‐control	  study.	  BMC	  Infectious	  Diseases,	  2017.	  17(1):	  p.	  
190.	  
Pearce,	  B.D.,	  D.	  Kruszon-­‐Moran,	  and	  J.L.	  Jones,	  The	  Relationship	  Between	  <em>Toxoplasma	  
Gondii</em>	  Infection	  and	  Mood	  Disorders	  in	  the	  Third	  National	  Health	  and	  Nutrition	  Survey.	  
Biological	  Psychiatry,	  2012.	  72(4):	  p.	  290-­‐295.	  
Lanchava,	  L.,	  et	  al.,	  No	  Evidence	  of	  Association	  between	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Infection	  and	  
Financial	  Risk	  Taking	  in	  Females.	  PLoS	  ONE,	  2015.	  10(9):	  p.	  e0136716.	  
Mahmoudvand,	  H.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Infection	  Potentiates	  Cognitive	  Impairments	  of	  
Alzheimer's	  Disease	  in	  the	  BALB/c	  Mice.	  Journal	  of	  Parasitology,	  2016.	  102(6):	  p.	  629-­‐635.	  
Möhle,	  L.,	  et	  al.,	  Chronic	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  infection	  enhances	  β-­‐amyloid	  phagocytosis	  and	  
clearance	  by	  recruited	  monocytes.	  Acta	  Neuropathologica	  Communications,	  2016.	  4:	  p.	  25.	  
Jung,	  B.-­‐K.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Infection	  in	  the	  Brain	  Inhibits	  Neuronal	  Degeneration	  and	  
Learning	  and	  Memory	  Impairments	  in	  a	  Murine	  Model	  of	  Alzheimer's	  Disease.	  PLOS	  ONE,	  2012.	  
7(3):	  p.	  e33312.	  
Torres,	  L.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  alters	  NMDAR	  signaling	  and	  induces	  signs	  of	  Alzheimer’s	  
disease	  in	  wild-­‐type,	  C57BL/6	  mice.	  Journal	  of	  Neuroinflammation,	  2018.	  15:	  p.	  57.	  
Sapp,	  E.,	  et	  al.,	  Early	  and	  progressive	  accumulation	  of	  reactive	  microglia	  in	  the	  Huntington	  
disease	  brain.	  J	  Neuropathol	  Exp	  Neurol,	  2001.	  60(2):	  p.	  161-­‐72.	  
Björkqvist,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  A	  novel	  pathogenic	  pathway	  of	  immune	  activation	  detectable	  before	  
clinical	  onset	  in	  Huntington's	  disease.	  The	  Journal	  of	  Experimental	  Medicine,	  2008.	  205(8):	  p.	  
1869-­‐1877.	  
Baldo,	  B.,	  et	  al.,	  TR-­‐FRET-­‐based	  duplex	  immunoassay	  reveals	  an	  inverse	  correlation	  of	  soluble	  
and	  aggregated	  mutant	  huntingtin	  in	  huntington's	  disease.	  Chem	  Biol,	  2012.	  19(2):	  p.	  264-­‐75.	  
Yadav,	  M.C.,	  et	  al.,	  IFN-­‐γ	  induced	  IDO	  and	  WRS	  expression	  in	  microglia	  is	  differentially	  regulated	  
by	  IL-­‐4.	  Glia,	  2007.	  55(13):	  p.	  1385-­‐1396.	  
Fujigaki,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  L-­‐tryptophan-­‐L-­‐kynurenine	  pathway	  metabolism	  accelerated	  by	  Toxoplasma	  
gondii	  infection	  is	  abolished	  in	  gamma	  interferon-­‐gene-­‐deficient	  mice:	  cross-­‐regulation	  between	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

31.	  
32.	  
33.	  
34.	  
35.	  
36.	  
37.	  

38.	  
39.	  

40.	  
41.	  
42.	  

43.	  
44.	  

45.	  
46.	  

47.	  

48.	  
49.	  
50.	  

inducible	  nitric	  oxide	  synthase	  and	  indoleamine-­‐2,3-­‐dioxygenase.	  Infect	  Immun,	  2002.	  70(2):	  p.	  
779-­‐86.	  
Beal,	  M.F.,	  et	  al.,	  Kynurenine	  pathway	  measurements	  in	  Huntington's	  disease	  striatum:	  evidence	  
for	  reduced	  formation	  of	  kynurenic	  acid.	  J	  Neurochem,	  1990.	  55(4):	  p.	  1327-­‐39.	  
Guidetti,	  P.,	  et	  al.,	  Early	  kynurenergic	  impairment	  in	  Huntington's	  Disease	  and	  in	  a	  transgenic	  
animal	  model.	  Neuroscience	  Letters,	  2000.	  283(3):	  p.	  233-­‐235.	  
Guidetti,	  P.,	  et	  al.,	  Neostriatal	  and	  cortical	  quinolinate	  levels	  are	  increased	  in	  early	  grade	  
Huntington's	  disease.	  Neurobiology	  of	  Disease,	  2004.	  17(3):	  p.	  455-­‐461.	  
Campesan,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  The	  kynurenine	  pathway	  modulates	  neurodegeneration	  in	  a	  Drosophila	  
model	  of	  Huntington's	  disease.	  Curr	  Biol,	  2011.	  21(11):	  p.	  961-­‐6.	  
Zwilling,	  D.,	  et	  al.,	  Kynurenine	  3-­‐Monooxygenase	  Inhibition	  in	  Blood	  Ameliorates	  
Neurodegeneration.	  Cell,	  2011.	  145(6):	  p.	  863-­‐874.	  
Notarangelo,	  F.M.,	  et	  al.,	  Evaluation	  of	  kynurenine	  pathway	  metabolism	  in	  Toxoplasma	  gondii-­‐
infected	  mice:	  implications	  for	  schizophrenia.	  Schizophr	  Res,	  2014.	  152(1):	  p.	  261-­‐7.	  
Pfefferkorn,	  E.R.,	  Interferon	  gamma	  blocks	  the	  growth	  of	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  in	  human	  
fibroblasts	  by	  inducing	  the	  host	  cells	  to	  degrade	  tryptophan.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  National	  
Academy	  of	  Sciences,	  1984.	  81(3):	  p.	  908-­‐912.	  
Montacute,	  R.,	  et	  al.,	  Enhanced	  susceptibility	  of	  triple	  transgenic	  Alzheimer’s	  disease	  (3xTg-­‐AD)	  
mice	  to	  acute	  infection.	  Journal	  of	  Neuroinflammation,	  2017.	  14(1):	  p.	  50.	  
Donley,	  D.W.,	  et	  al.,	  Huntingtons	  Disease	  Mice	  Infected	  with	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Demonstrate	  
Early	  Kynurenine	  Pathway	  Activation,	  Altered	  CD8+	  T-­‐Cell	  Responses,	  and	  Premature	  Mortality.	  
PLOS	  ONE,	  2016.	  11(9):	  p.	  e0162404.	  
Slow,	  E.J.,	  et	  al.,	  Selective	  striatal	  neuronal	  loss	  in	  a	  YAC128	  mouse	  model	  of	  Huntington	  disease.	  
Human	  Molecular	  Genetics,	  2003.	  12(13):	  p.	  1555-­‐1567.	  
Berggren,	  K.L.,	  et	  al.,	  Neonatal	  Iron	  Supplementation	  Induces	  Striatal	  Atrophy	  in	  Female	  YAC128	  
Huntington's	  Disease	  Mice.	  J	  Huntingtons	  Dis,	  2016.	  5(1):	  p.	  53-­‐63.	  
Dodds,	  L.,	  et	  al.,	  Characterization	  of	  Striatal	  Neuronal	  Loss	  and	  Atrophy	  in	  the	  R6/2	  Mouse	  
Model	  of	  Huntington’s	  Disease.	  PLoS	  Currents,	  2014.	  6:	  p.	  
ecurrents.hd.48727b68b39b82d5fe350f753984bcf9.	  
Liu,	  W.,	  et	  al.,	  Does	  the	  mutant	  CAG	  expansion	  in	  huntingtin	  mRNA	  interfere	  with	  exonucleolytic	  
cleavage	  of	  its	  first	  exon?	  Journal	  of	  Huntington's	  disease,	  2016.	  5(1):	  p.	  33-­‐38.	  
Bhadra,	  R.,	  et	  al.,	  Control	  of	  <em>Toxoplasma</em>	  reactivation	  by	  rescue	  of	  dysfunctional	  
CD8<sup>+</sup>	  T-­‐cell	  response	  via	  PD-­‐1–PDL-­‐1	  blockade.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  National	  
Academy	  of	  Sciences,	  2011.	  108(22):	  p.	  9196-­‐9201.	  
Weiss,	  A.,	  et	  al.,	  Single-­‐step	  detection	  of	  mutant	  huntingtin	  in	  animal	  and	  human	  tissues:	  A	  
bioassay	  for	  Huntington’s	  disease.	  Analytical	  Biochemistry,	  2009.	  395(1):	  p.	  8-­‐15.	  
Soylu-­‐Kucharz,	  R.,	  et	  al.,	  Neurofilament	  light	  protein	  in	  CSF	  and	  blood	  is	  associated	  with	  
neurodegeneration	  and	  disease	  severity	  in	  Huntington’s	  disease	  R6/2	  mice.	  Scientific	  Reports,	  
2017.	  7(1):	  p.	  14114.	  
Byrne,	  L.M.,	  et	  al.,	  Neurofilament	  light	  protein	  in	  blood	  as	  a	  potential	  biomarker	  of	  
neurodegeneration	  in	  Huntington's	  disease:	  a	  retrospective	  cohort	  analysis.	  The	  Lancet	  
Neurology,	  2017.	  16(8):	  p.	  601-­‐609.	  
Bacioglu,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Neurofilament	  Light	  Chain	  in	  Blood	  and	  CSF	  as	  Marker	  of	  Disease	  Progression	  
in	  Mouse	  Models	  and	  in	  Neurodegenerative	  Diseases.	  Neuron,	  2016.	  91(1):	  p.	  56-­‐66.	  
Pouladi,	  M.A.,	  et	  al.,	  Full-­‐length	  huntingtin	  levels	  modulate	  body	  weight	  by	  influencing	  insulin-­‐
like	  growth	  factor	  1	  expression.	  Hum	  Mol	  Genet,	  2010.	  19(8):	  p.	  1528-­‐38.	  
Suzuki,	  Y.,	  et	  al.,	  Interferon-­‐gamma:	  the	  major	  mediator	  of	  resistance	  against	  Toxoplasma	  
gondii.	  Science,	  1988.	  240(4851):	  p.	  516-­‐8.	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

51.	  
52.	  

53.	  

54.	  
55.	  
56.	  

57.	  

58.	  
59.	  
60.	  

61.	  
62.	  
63.	  

64.	  

65.	  

66.	  

67.	  

68.	  

Cohen,	  S.B.,	  et	  al.,	  CXCR3-­‐dependent	  CD4(+)	  T	  cells	  are	  required	  to	  activate	  inflammatory	  
monocytes	  for	  defense	  against	  intestinal	  infection.	  PLoS	  Pathog,	  2013.	  9(10):	  p.	  e1003706.	  
Gazzinelli,	  R.,	  et	  al.,	  Simultaneous	  depletion	  of	  CD4+	  and	  CD8+	  T	  lymphocytes	  is	  required	  to	  
reactivate	  chronic	  infection	  with	  Toxoplasma	  gondii.	  The	  Journal	  of	  Immunology,	  1992.	  149(1):	  
p.	  175-­‐180.	  
Fox,	  J.H.,	  et	  al.,	  Cysteine	  Oxidation	  within	  N-­‐terminal	  Mutant	  Huntingtin	  Promotes	  
Oligomerization	  and	  Delays	  Clearance	  of	  Soluble	  Protein.	  Journal	  of	  Biological	  Chemistry,	  2011.	  
286(20):	  p.	  18320-­‐18330.	  
Ratovitski,	  T.,	  et	  al.,	  Mutant	  Huntingtin	  N-­‐terminal	  Fragments	  of	  Specific	  Size	  Mediate	  
Aggregation	  and	  Toxicity	  in	  Neuronal	  Cells.	  Journal	  of	  Biological	  Chemistry,	  2009.	  284(16):	  p.	  
10855-­‐10867.	  
Arrasate,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Inclusion	  body	  formation	  reduces	  levels	  of	  mutant	  huntingtin	  and	  the	  risk	  of	  
neuronal	  death.	  Nature,	  2004.	  431(7010):	  p.	  805-­‐10.	  
Michael,	  A.J.,	  et	  al.,	  The	  Relationship	  Between	  CAG	  Repeat	  Length	  and	  Age	  of	  Onset	  Differs	  for	  
Huntington's	  Disease	  Patients	  with	  Juvenile	  Onset	  or	  Adult	  Onset.	  Annals	  of	  Human	  Genetics,	  
2007.	  71(3):	  p.	  295-­‐301.	  
Kudwa,	  A.E.,	  et	  al.,	  Increased	  Body	  Weight	  of	  the	  BAC	  HD	  Transgenic	  Mouse	  Model	  of	  
Huntington's	  Disease	  Accounts	  for	  Some	  but	  Not	  All	  of	  the	  Observed	  HD-­‐like	  Motor	  Deficits.	  PLoS	  
Curr,	  2013.	  5.	  
Emelia,	  O.,	  et	  al.,	  Seroprevalence	  of	  anti-­‐Toxoplasma	  gondii	  IgG	  antibody	  in	  patients	  with	  
schizophrenia.	  Trop	  Biomed,	  2012.	  29(1):	  p.	  151-­‐9.	  
Khademvatan,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Exposure	  and	  the	  Risk	  of	  Schizophrenia.	  Jundishapur	  
Journal	  of	  Microbiology,	  2014.	  7(11):	  p.	  e12776.	  
L.,	  S.A.,	  et	  al.,	  Beyond	  the	  association.	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  in	  schizophrenia,	  bipolar	  disorder,	  and	  
addiction:	  systematic	  review	  and	  meta-­‐analysis.	  Acta	  Psychiatrica	  Scandinavica,	  2015.	  132(3):	  p.	  
161-­‐179.	  
Ngô,	  H.M.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  Modulates	  Signature	  Pathways	  of	  Human	  Epilepsy,	  
Neurodegeneration	  &	  Cancer.	  Scientific	  Reports,	  2017.	  7(1):	  p.	  11496.	  
Alvarado-­‐Esquivel,	  C.,	  et	  al.,	  Seroepidemiology	  of	  infection	  with	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  in	  healthy	  
blood	  donors	  of	  Durango,	  Mexico.	  BMC	  Infect	  Dis,	  2007.	  7:	  p.	  75.	  
Gulinello,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Acquired	  infection	  with	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  in	  adult	  mice	  results	  in	  
sensorimotor	  deficits	  but	  normal	  cognitive	  behavior	  despite	  widespread	  brain	  pathology.	  
Microbes	  Infect,	  2010.	  12(7):	  p.	  528-­‐37.	  
Hermes,	  G.,	  et	  al.,	  Neurological	  and	  behavioral	  abnormalities,	  ventricular	  dilatation,	  altered	  
cellular	  functions,	  inflammation,	  and	  neuronal	  injury	  in	  brains	  of	  mice	  due	  to	  common,	  
persistent,	  parasitic	  infection.	  Journal	  of	  Neuroinflammation,	  2008.	  5(1):	  p.	  48.	  
Ihara,	  F.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Infection	  in	  Mice	  Impairs	  Long-­‐Term	  Fear	  Memory	  
Consolidation	  through	  Dysfunction	  of	  the	  Cortex	  and	  Amygdala.	  Infect	  Immun,	  2016.	  84(10):	  p.	  
2861-­‐70.	  
Vyas,	  A.,	  et	  al.,	  Behavioral	  changes	  induced	  by	  <em>Toxoplasma</em>	  infection	  of	  rodents	  are	  
highly	  specific	  to	  aversion	  of	  cat	  odors.	  Proceedings	  of	  the	  National	  Academy	  of	  Sciences,	  2007.	  
104(15):	  p.	  6442-­‐6447.	  
Horacek,	  J.,	  et	  al.,	  Latent	  toxoplasmosis	  reduces	  gray	  matter	  density	  in	  schizophrenia	  but	  not	  in	  
controls:	  Voxel-­‐based-­‐morphometry	  (VBM)	  study.	  The	  World	  Journal	  of	  Biological	  Psychiatry,	  
2012.	  13(7):	  p.	  501-­‐509.	  
Brooks,	  J.M.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Infections	  Alter	  GABAergic	  Synapses	  and	  Signaling	  in	  the	  
Central	  Nervous	  System.	  MBio,	  2015.	  6(6):	  p.	  e01428-­‐15.	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

69.	  
70.	  
71.	  

72.	  
73.	  
74.	  

75.	  
76.	  

77.	  

78.	  
79.	  

80.	  
81.	  
82.	  
83.	  
84.	  
85.	  

86.	  
87.	  

Miller,	  B.R.	  and	  I.	  Bezprozvanny,	  Corticostriatal	  circuit	  dysfunction	  in	  Huntington’s	  disease:	  
intersection	  of	  glutamate,	  dopamine	  and	  calcium.	  Future	  neurology,	  2010.	  5(5):	  p.	  735-­‐756.	  
Joshi,	  P.R.,	  et	  al.,	  Age-­‐Dependent	  Alterations	  of	  Corticostriatal	  Activity	  in	  the	  YAC128	  Mouse	  
Model	  of	  Huntington	  Disease.	  The	  Journal	  of	  Neuroscience,	  2009.	  29(8):	  p.	  2414-­‐2427.	  
David,	  C.N.,	  et	  al.,	  GLT-­‐1-­‐Dependent	  Disruption	  of	  CNS	  Glutamate	  Homeostasis	  and	  Neuronal	  
Function	  by	  the	  Protozoan	  Parasite	  Toxoplasma	  gondii.	  PLOS	  Pathogens,	  2016.	  12(6):	  p.	  
e1005643.	  
Arzberger,	  T.,	  et	  al.,	  Changes	  of	  NMDA	  receptor	  subunit	  (NR1,	  NR2B)	  and	  glutamate	  transporter	  
(GLT1)	  mRNA	  expression	  in	  Huntington's	  disease-­‐-­‐an	  in	  situ	  hybridization	  study.	  J	  Neuropathol	  
Exp	  Neurol,	  1997.	  56(4):	  p.	  440-­‐54.	  
Hassel,	  B.,	  et	  al.,	  Glutamate	  uptake	  is	  reduced	  in	  prefrontal	  cortex	  in	  Huntington's	  disease.	  
Neurochem	  Res,	  2008.	  33(2):	  p.	  232-­‐7.	  
Estrada-­‐Sanchez,	  A.M.,	  et	  al.,	  Glutamate	  toxicity	  in	  the	  striatum	  of	  the	  R6/2	  Huntington's	  disease	  
transgenic	  mice	  is	  age-­‐dependent	  and	  correlates	  with	  decreased	  levels	  of	  glutamate	  
transporters.	  Neurobiol	  Dis,	  2009.	  34(1):	  p.	  78-­‐86.	  
Crotti,	  A.,	  et	  al.,	  Mutant	  Huntingtin	  promotes	  autonomous	  microglia	  activation	  via	  myeloid	  
lineage-­‐determining	  factors.	  Nature	  Neuroscience,	  2014.	  17:	  p.	  513.	  
Franciosi,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  Age-­‐dependent	  neurovascular	  abnormalities	  and	  altered	  microglial	  
morphology	  in	  the	  YAC128	  mouse	  model	  of	  Huntington	  disease.	  Neurobiol	  Dis,	  2012.	  45(1):	  p.	  
438-­‐49.	  
Sathyasaikumar,	  K.V.,	  et	  al.,	  Assessing	  and	  Modulating	  Kynurenine	  Pathway	  Dynamics	  in	  
Huntington’s	  Disease:	  Focus	  on	  Kynurenine	  3-­‐Monooxygenase,	  in	  Huntington’s	  Disease,	  S.V.	  
Precious,	  A.E.	  Rosser,	  and	  S.B.	  Dunnett,	  Editors.	  2018,	  Springer	  New	  York:	  New	  York,	  NY.	  p.	  397-­‐
413.	  
Quintanilla,	  R.A.,	  et	  al.,	  Interleukin-­‐6	  induces	  Alzheimer-­‐type	  phosphorylation	  of	  tau	  protein	  by	  
deregulating	  the	  cdk5/p35	  pathway.	  Exp	  Cell	  Res,	  2004.	  295(1):	  p.	  245-­‐57.	  
Yamamoto,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Cytokine-­‐mediated	  inhibition	  of	  fibrillar	  amyloid-­‐β	  peptide	  degradation	  by	  
human	  mononuclear	  phagocytes.	  Journal	  of	  immunology	  (Baltimore,	  Md.	  :	  1950),	  2008.	  181(6):	  
p.	  3877-­‐3886.	  
Chang,	  R.,	  K.-­‐L.	  Yee,	  and	  R.K.	  Sumbria,	  Tumor	  necrosis	  factor	  α	  Inhibition	  for	  Alzheimer’s	  Disease.	  
Journal	  of	  Central	  Nervous	  System	  Disease,	  2017.	  9:	  p.	  1179573517709278.	  
Lee,	  Y.-­‐J.,	  et	  al.,	  Proliferation	  of	  Toxoplasma	  gondii	  Suppresses	  Host	  Cell	  Autophagy.	  The	  Korean	  
Journal	  of	  Parasitology,	  2013.	  51(3):	  p.	  279-­‐287.	  
Muniz-­‐Feliciano,	  L.,	  et	  al.,	  Toxoplasma	  gondii-­‐Induced	  Activation	  of	  EGFR	  Prevents	  Autophagy	  
Protein-­‐Mediated	  Killing	  of	  the	  Parasite.	  PLOS	  Pathogens,	  2013.	  9(12):	  p.	  e1003809.	  
Komatsu,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Loss	  of	  autophagy	  in	  the	  central	  nervous	  system	  causes	  neurodegeneration	  
in	  mice.	  Nature,	  2006.	  441(7095):	  p.	  880-­‐4.	  
Hara,	  T.,	  et	  al.,	  Suppression	  of	  basal	  autophagy	  in	  neural	  cells	  causes	  neurodegenerative	  disease	  
in	  mice.	  Nature,	  2006.	  441(7095):	  p.	  885-­‐9.	  
Sarkar,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  Trehalose,	  a	  Novel	  mTOR-­‐independent	  Autophagy	  Enhancer,	  Accelerates	  the	  
Clearance	  of	  Mutant	  Huntingtin	  and	  α-­‐Synuclein.	  Journal	  of	  Biological	  Chemistry,	  2007.	  282(8):	  
p.	  5641-­‐5652.	  
Martinez-­‐Vicente,	  M.,	  et	  al.,	  Cargo	  recognition	  failure	  is	  responsible	  for	  inefficient	  autophagy	  in	  
Huntington&#39;s	  disease.	  Nature	  Neuroscience,	  2010.	  13:	  p.	  567.	  
Metzger,	  S.,	  et	  al.,	  Age	  at	  onset	  in	  Huntington's	  disease	  is	  modified	  by	  the	  autophagy	  pathway:	  
implication	  of	  the	  V471A	  polymorphism	  in	  Atg7.	  Hum	  Genet,	  2010.	  128(4):	  p.	  453-­‐9.	  

bioRxiv preprint doi: https://doi.org/10.1101/550624; this version posted February 15, 2019. The copyright holder for this preprint (which was
not certified by peer review) is the author/funder. All rights reserved. No reuse allowed without permission.

88.	  

89.	  

	  

Cortes,	  C.J.	  and	  A.R.	  La	  Spada,	  The	  many	  faces	  of	  autophagy	  dysfunction	  in	  Huntington's	  disease:	  
from	  mechanistic	  pathways	  to	  therapeutic	  opportunities.	  Drug	  discovery	  today,	  2014.	  19(7):	  p.	  
963-­‐971.	  
Perl,	  A.,	  et	  al.,	  Comprehensive	  metabolome	  analyses	  reveal	  N-­‐acetylcysteine-­‐responsive	  
accumulation	  of	  kynurenine	  in	  systemic	  lupus	  erythematosus:	  implications	  for	  activation	  of	  the	  
mechanistic	  target	  of	  rapamycin.	  Metabolomics,	  2015.	  11(5):	  p.	  1157-­‐1174.	  

